(...) QVESTIONS, Dog^^^icall OBSERVATIONS, A^^ Evangelicall ESSAYS, UPON THE
GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST, ACCORDING TO St. MATTHEW.

WHEREIN, About two thousand six hundred and fifty necessary, and profitable
Questions are discussed; and five hundred and eighty special points of
Doctrine noted; and five hundred and fifty Errors confuted, or Objections
answered: together with diverse Arguments, whereby diverse Truths, and true
Tenants are confirmed.

By RICHARD WARD, Sometimes STUDENT in the famous UNIVERSITIES Of CAMBRIDGE In
ENGLAND: St. ANDREWS In SCOTLAND:
And Master of Arts of both the Kingdoms; And now a Preacher in the famous City
of LONDON.

Si in Scriptura sacra tantum essent quae facillime intelligerentur, nec
studiose quareretur, nec suaviter inveniretur veritas. August^ de vera
religione.

^on potentus in verbis Scripturarum esse Evangelium, sed in sensu: Non in
superficie, sed in medulla: non in ser^^num foliis, sed in radice rationis.
Hier. in Epist. ad Ephesians.

So they read in the Book, in the Law of God distinctly, and gave the sense,
and caused them to understand the reading, Nehem. 8.8.

LONDON, Printed for PETER COLE, and are to be sold at his shop in Cornhill, at
the sign of the Glove and Lion, near the Royal Exchange. M.DC.XL.

THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE SCRIPTVRES.
BEing about (by the grace of God) to clear some difficulties, and to collect
a few observations from some verses of this Gospel written by St Matthew it
will not be amiss, first of all, to resolve a general question or two. Our
first question then shall be this.



Scripture, and canonical books are known to be such by these proofs;
properties, and infallible marks. Romans 10.8. This is the word of Faith which
we preach. Romans 10.8.


Secondly, the purity and perfection of Scriptures Psalm. 19.8, 9.
Psalm. 19.8.9. First pure, they being a doctrine according to holiness, a rule
to direct our ways in righteousness, all the exhortations and examples
therein tending thereto. Secondly, they are perfectly holy in themselves, and
by themselves; whereas all other writings are profane, farther then they draw
holiness from these, which yet is never such but that their holiness is
imperfect, and defective ( Prove. 8.8. and 30.5. Psalm. 12.7.) But the Scriptures
are perfectly profitable in themselves to instruct unto salvation. James 1.21.
All other writings are utterly unprofitable thereunto, any further, then they
draw from them: yea they contain full and perfect Doctrine, for the pacifying,
settling and directing of the conscience in all things. Many Histories show us
the heavy wrath of God upon man for sin: but the Scriptures only show us
Morbu^^, medicin^^, and medic^^^. That is both the sickness, the physic,
and the Physician to cure it.

by whom, the places where, the times when, and matters whereof they have been
written. Acts 26.22.
There may seem some contradiction amongst the writers of holy Scripture, but
indeed there is none, but a perfect harmony. And therefore when we see the
heathen history, or Apocryphal books contradicting the holy history, we
should stand for the holy Scripture against them: but when we see any
appearance of contradiction in holy writ, we should labor to reconcile it.
When Moses saw an Egyptian and an Israelite striving together, he killed the
Egyptian, and saved the Israelite, Exodus 2.12.
but when he saw two Israelites striving together, he labored to reconcile
them, saying, Ye are brethren, why do ye strive. So when we see heathen
History, to contradict the Scriptures, we should kill the Egyptian, and save
the Israelite: as for example, Jacob cursed Simeon and Levi for murdering of
the Sichemites Genesis 49.7.
But Judith blessed Simeon for killing of them, Judith 9. So Jeremiah says,
They shall return in the third generation. Ierem. 27 7.
But Baruch says, They shall return in the seventh generation, Baruch 6.
Here let us kill the Egyptian, but save the Israelite: but when we see any
appearance of contradiction in the holy Scriptures, we should labor to
reconcile them, because they are brethren. Weemse.

Fourthly, the antiquity of it: the Scripture Tempus (...), a hid and unknown
time: there being no humane Historyes of any thing before the flood: but the
Scriptures begin at the beginning of the world, and continue the History of
the world, unto the flood. Again, from the flood to the Olimpi^ds of the
Grecians (which began but in the days of Vzziah) was unto the heathen tempus
(...) a fabulous time, and all their Histories of Hercules Prom^thine, and the
rest being but lying and forged tales: but the Scriptures go on, setting down
unto us the History of the Church, from the stood even unto the coming of
Christ. Thus we see how far Gods word exceeds humane writings in
antiquity: it begins with the world. Luke ^
As he spa^^ by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which have been since the
world began) and ends with it. 1 Pet. 1.25.
For the world of the Lord endures for ever.

Fifthly the Majesty of it in plainness of speech; the Scriptures seem at the
first view, to be ^ Cor. 1.17, 18.21.24. and 2.15. 1 Timothy 5.21.
Thus their plain and clear manner of setting down things shows them to be
Divine. Esa. 8.1.
Take a great roll and writ in it with a man's pen, Behhoret Enosh, that is
clearly that the simplest among man may understand it, so Deu. 30.11.
This Commandment which I command thee this day is nor hidden from thee,
neither is it far off, In the Hebrew it is Lo niphleeth, non separatum a te. i.
e. It is not separated from thy knowledge, that thou can not understand it:
neither is it far from thee, those things which are obscure, which we cannot
take up, are said to be far from us, and those things which we understand are
said to be near us. Romans 10.8.
Sixthly, the power and Faelix tremble, and the most stubborn with the
soldiers cry out, Men and brethren what shall we do to be saved? Although it
be contrary to man's corrupt nature, yet has it in all ages won some unto it,
wheresoever it came: and by an admirable force inclining their hearts from vice
to virtue. The Spirit in us lusts after envy, but the Scriptures gives more
grace (...) 19.7. Hebr. 4.12
that is the Scriptures offer grace and ability to do more, then nature can
do: Nature cannot heal a spirit that lusts after envy, or after money, or
after uncleanness: James 4.5, 6.
but the Scripture offer more grace to overcome any of these sins, be they
never so strong.



pure and entire: Thus God by his especial care of them, shows them to be no
other, then his divine Oracles.

Luke 11.22.
and persecutes with war, hatred, and rage, only The woman and her seed, Apoc.
12.13.15.17.
who conform themselves according to the will of God manifested unto them in
his word.







Thirteenthly, the evi^ence of Gods Spirit, 2 Pet. 1.9.1.
We have a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto you do well that ye take
heed, etc.

Again, The books of Scripture contain

Again, a reconciliation of Justice and Mercy Justice (as it were) in a sort
giving place unto Mercy.

Again, the heavenly order set down and Ordo naturae, 2. ordo coniugalis
thori, 3. ordo historia, and 4 ordo dignitatis: An order of nature, of
marriage, of history, and of dignity; all which orders the Scripture marks, and
for sundry reasons sets one before another, first in setting down the
Patriarchs, it observes the order of nature, as they were borne: As first
Reuben, then Simeon, then Levi, then Judah, etc.

Secondly, there is Ordo coniugalis thori, according to their birthes; and so
the children of free women were set first. Thirdly there is Ordo dignitatis, so
Sem is placed before Iaphet for dignity, although he were younger: So in this
Gospel, Saint Matthew observes this order ( Mat. 13.) He brings forth new
and old; New is first in dignity, although old first in time: so Ephesians. 2.
Apostles and Prophets. Fourthly, there is an order of History observed also by
Scripture: as in the first verse of the Gospel, The book of the Generation of
Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham. Why is Abraham put last
after David? because the history is to begin at him. So 1 Chronicles. 3.5. Solomon
is placed last amongst his brethren, because the History was to begin at him:
yea, if we shall mark the heavenly order that is amongst the Evangelists, they
will show us that the Scriptures are divine. Saint Mark begins at the
works of Christ: Saint Matthew ascends higher, to the Birth of Christ: Saint
Luke goes higher, to the conception of Christ: and John goes highest of all,
to the Divinity of Christ, and his eternal Generation.

Lastly, a constant and perpetual testimony of the Catholic Church, which
we call Ecclesiastical Tradition: the Church in all ages allowing of these
Books, as truly Canonical, or as sure, certain, and infallible rules of
direction for our lives and conversations; yea, although the Papists themselves
dispute of the authority and perfection of the Scriptures (whether they be
perfect, and of themselves sufficient unto salvation, without Tradition; or
whether they have authority from themselves, and witness in themselves, or
from the Church; and how we without the consent and testimony of the Church,
know them to be Scriptures) yet (to my knowledge) there is no learned Papist
does question the question in hand, viz. whether these Books of the Old and
New Testament be the divine word of God or no? neither is there any
controversy betwixt us and them in this particular, they with us agreeing,
that the Old and New Testament, and every book in either, were written by holy
men of God, as they were inspired by the Spirit of God. 2 Pet. 1.
And thus much for this first general question. The second follows.

Moses. 2. Into the lesser and latter Prophets. 3. Into the Books which the
Grecians call (...), holy Writings. The Canonical Books of the New Testament
are also divided, 1. Into Books Historical. 2. Epistles. 3. Prophetical, as
the Apocalypse.

Fourthly, the last division of all the Canonical Books both of the Old and
New Testament, is taken from the sum of the whole Scriptures, and that is
into the Law and Gospel Zanch de sacra script. f. 22
. Having to handle this question elsewhere more largely, I pass here thus
briefly by it. Thus much for this second general question. We now come to
consider of this Gospel, and first of the Title, The Gospel according Here
first it may be demanded, Gospel? Answer. For the true and full understanding
of this question, we have two things to consider of, viz. the Name and the
Nature of the Gospel: of which not apart, or severally, but together. For the
Name shows the Nature, Convenient rebus nomina sape suis. The Name is (...),
that is, a good and joyful message Bullinger. s. Luke 2.10.
and is attributed and ascribed unto many things. 1. Sometimes to a peculiar
message, Ecce, Luke 2.10. (...), etc. Behold, I bring you glad tidings. 2.
Sometimes to the preaching of the Gospel, as (...), according to my Gospel
Romans 2.16. and 1 Cor. 4.15. 2 Cor. 8.18. and
, that is, my preaching of the Gospel. 3. Sometimes to holy doctrine, or the
preaching of Christ Mat. 24.14. and Esa. 61.1.
, This Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached unto all Nations, etc. 4.
Sometimes this word Gospel is taken for the Evangelicall Books, Matthew. 26.1^.
Wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached, there shall also this which this
woman has done, be told. Now the Evangelical Books are of two sorts, to
wit, Either Forged and false, as the Gospel of S. Peter, S. James, S. Clement,
and diverse others, which the Papists cosen the world withal: Or True, which
are the four of S. Matthew, Mark, Luke and John: and are called Gospel,
(...), after a more singular manner, because they bring unto us both true
news, and the best news that ever we heard Luke 2.10.13, 14.
: Behold, (says the Angel) I bring you glad tidings, tidings of great joy,
which shall be unto you, and to all people, etc. Now the truth of this
appears thus, First, The Gospel is the power of God unto salvation Romans 1.16.
and 1 Cor. 1.18.
. Secondly, it is a glass, wherein as with open face (the veil being taken
away) we may see the glory of the Lord, and be transformed into the same
image, from glory to glory 2 Cor. 3.18.
.


Thirdly, it shows unto us, Luke 2.14.
Gods good will unto mankind, and man's reconciliation unto the Lord of glory.

Fourthly, it shows unto us the will and pleasure of the Lord more clearly and
plainly than was made known unto the Fathers in and under the Law Ephesians. 3.4,
5.
.

Fifthly, the Gospel is such a blessed message, that woe be unto him that
either Neglects to preach it, being called thereunto; We unto me if I preach
not the Gospel 1 Cor. 9.16.
. Or Brings any other Gospel than this; let him be accursed that brings any
other Gospel Gal. 1.8, 9.
. Or, Rejects this, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah at the
day of judgment, than for those that despise this Gospel Mat. 10.14, 15.
.


And thus much for this question.

Another question here will arise: Why the truth might remain and be known,
for and unto all ages. The Lord would have us remember what Christ did for us,
and what he undertook, and underwent for our Redemption: and therefore he
commandes that those things which are to be remembered should be written,
least otherwise the memory of them should perish. The Lord would have our
memories to retain Truth, not lies, and therefore commands the Gospel to be
written that the truth may not be corrupted. Luke 1.4, 5.


I answer again, the Gospel was written for from Father to Son; in process
of time, we should have questioned the truth of it, and so our faith would have
been the more shaken, and less sure: to redress which, the Lord commends all
these things to writing, that so our faith might be firm and working, not
frail, and wavering. If the Gospel had been related unto us by others, not by
the Apostles, we should have been prone to have called the truth and certainty
of it in question: as the Sadduces, who will neither receive nor embrace any
other Scripture, but only the Pentatench, or five books of Moses, because
none were written by him, but them: and therefore the Lord will have the Gospel
written, and the Canon and Rule of faith taught, confirmed, and sealed by his
Apostles, who were eye and ear witnesses, of what they wrote, 1 John 1.3.
that we might the more undoubtedly believe the infallible truth of it.

Joh. 20.21.
. Secondly, the sum also of all those things, which are to be believed as
necessary unto salvation. 2 Timothy 3.16.
And therefore 1. they are to blame that say, the Scriptures are corrupted, and
falsified by Heretics. 2. the Patrons and setters up of those (...),
Unwritten traditions. II. What is to be learned from the Scriptures? First, the
doctrine of faith: Collo 3.16.
and therefore 1. Papists are much to blame, who hold some things as articles
of their faith, for which they have no warrant from the word of God, as is
proved by Sir Humfrey Linde in his via tuta. 2 Ignorant persons also are here
very faulty, who will not study the Scriptures, that thereby they may be
enabled to give an account of their faith, to every one that shall demand a
reason of it 1 Pet. 3.15.
. 3. They also are blame worthy, that refuse to be Catechized and instructed
in the principles of Religion, grounded upon, and taken from the holy
Scriptures.

Secondly, the truth of History is to be learned from the Scripture; because
that is the foundation of faith: and therefore it is necessary to hear, read,
confer, and accustom our selves unto the study of holy writ: because for
this end God commanded them to be written, that we by the frequent and daily
meditating thereof, might understand what is necessary to be known, and what
to be believed unto salvation. And thus much for the first word of the Title,
viz. Gospel.

Matthew was? Alphens, by name also called Levi, and it is probable, that he
was the brother of James the less, Mat. 10.9.
.

I answer again: for his function he was a Publican, or a Tole-gatherer; a
calling very odious Zacheus himself does intimate, when he says Luke 19 8.
If I have taken any thing from any man unjustly, etc. And hence Christ exhorts
Publicans Luke 3.13.
to exact no more then that, which is appointed unto them.

Lastly, I answer; for Saint Matthewes pains, Gualt. ^
that he preached the Gospel as far as Aetheopia. Secondly, that he sealed
with his blood, Matthewes calling it will be questioned, why does God use
sinners for the publishing of the Gospel? as here Matthew who was a Publicane;
and afterward Paul, who was a persecutor, Acts. ^. 1 Timothy 1.12.13
and Onesim^s, who was disobedient Phil. 1^
? I answer, it is very profitable, and behovefull, for the patient or sick
person to have a Physician, who has had experience of his quo^dam, or
sometimes sinners, to preach unto those that yet are wicked, because they know
best the nature of sin, and how to apply fit corrosives and salves to every
sinful soul. Again, I answer: this the Lord forgive, he does also forget:
when once we turn unto God by repentance never to be repented of, he does
as wholly put our sins out of his remembrance, as though we never had
offended him at all, Ezekiel. 18 22. Act. 17.30.
.

Again, God does this to encourage sinners to turn unto him, that having such
presidents, they may be certainly assured that he who is

Lastly, God does this to demonstrate his great Sinners, he can make great
Saints: of oppressing Publicans, faithful Apostles; and of cruel Persecuters,
constant Professors and Preachers.

Concerning the time of this Gospel, Matthew? I answer, before any of the other
three, within 8 or 9 years from the Ascension, Athanasius.
.

Concerning the Author, it will be demanded, Matthew was not the Author, but
the Hand: for the holy Spirit was the Author: and therefore Castalion erres,
who thus entitles this book, The Gospel by the Author Matthew, for it is more
rightly called by (...), According to Saint Matthew Sic Tertul. and Cyprian.
; or, the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ according to Matthew Vet. Interp.
, as it is plainly expressed Mark. 1.1. The Gospel of Jesus Christ the Son
of God.

Idiome, it will he enquired, in what language this Gospel was written?
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin, Athanasius and Epiphanius, all of them giving the
forenamed reason, that Saint Matthew being an Hebrew, writ in Hebrew unto the
Hebrews; and Jerome to confirm this, tells us, that he found an Hebrew Copy
in the Caesarian Library: and Syrus the Interpreter is so confident herein,
that he prefixeth this Title to this Book, The Gospel which Saint Matthew
preached in Hebrew in the Region Palestina.

Emmanuel, Matthew. 1.23. does show, that either first Matthew did not write in
Hebrew, for then he would not have expounded Emmanuel, which is an Hebrew word:
or secondly, that he wrote both in Hebrew and Greek: or thirdly, that he wrote
this Gospel in Hebrew, and that this addition unto Emmanuel (that is, if it be
interpreted, God with us) was added by some Greek Interpreter. Now which of
these is the certain truth, in truth is uncertain. Indeed the Fathers were
not so confident that it was written in Hebrew; but Erasmus, and other learned
Interpreters, do as much question it, and their reasons for the contrary
opinions are these: First, because, if this Gospel were written first in
Hebrew, then who translated it into Greek? for none certainly can be produced
to have done it: the maintainers of this opinion not agreeing herein among
themselves. Theophilact thinks that John the Evangelist translated it: but
Athanasius ascribes it to James the Apostle. The second reason is, because all
the other Penmen of the holy Scriptures, both Apostles and Evangelists, writ
in Greek, which was the most vulgar and known tongue then, in those parts
where they lived; and therefore it is not likely that only Matthew would use a
diverse idiome, or language. The third reason is, because the proof alleged by
the Fathers, proves not their opinion: their proof is, Matthew wrote in Hebrew,
because he was an Hebrew, and wrote to Hebrews. This follows not, because the
rest of the Apostles were Hebrews, and yet they wrote and preached in Greek:
They are Hebrews (says Saint Paul 2. Cor. 11.22.
) and so am I. The fourth reason is, because if we should grant, that this
Book was written by Saint Matthew in Hebrew, we must grant also, that we have
not the Fountain of this Gospel, but a stream only flowing from the
Fountain, and derived unto us (as Maldonate says) by some uncertain Author:
Now it is not to be admitted or granted, that this Translation which comes we
know not from whom, should be coupled with the rest of the Evangelists, and
Epistles, whose fountain (it is granted) we have, that is, as they were
written by them, and not translated by others. The fifth reason is, because the
Hebrew words which Saint Matthew (for some causes) does retain in this
Gospel, he does interpret, not into other Hebrew words (which is very likely
he would have done, if he had writ in Hebrew) but into Greek words, as
Emmanuel, i. e. God with us. Eli, Eli, lammasabachthani, i. e. my God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me: Golgotha, i. e. the place of a skull: Abba, which
is, my Father Pareus s.
. I add a sixth and last reason, which is taken from these words Math. 5.18.
, one jot, or iota of the law shall not pass away, etc. Now Iota is the least
letter the Greeks have, and Iod the least of Hebrew letters: and therefore it
being said there, not the least Iod, but the least Iota, seems (if not a
convincing, yet) a probable argument, that this Gospel was written in Greek,
not in Hebrew. These reasons considered, I had rather think and conclude, that
this Gospel was written by Saint Matthew in Greek, and not at all in Hebrew.
Thus much may suffice to be spoken concerning the Author, Saint Matthew.

Concerning the name of this second volume Testament? Answer. For the
understanding, and better resolving Testament has a diverse signification, viz.
I. First it signifies a Covenant: so with the Hebrews, Berith (which signifies
a Covenant, derived from Barath, which signifies to conclude, or make a
Covenant) is taken for a Testament. So also the Greeks for this word
Testament, have (...), or (as Aquila has it) (...), which signifies an
Agreement, or Covenant: so the Latins, they either call it Testamentum, or
Pactum, a Testament or Covenant indifferently. II. Secondly, this word
Testament signifies sometimes the will of the dead: where a Testament is, there
must of necessity be the death of the Testator Heb. 9.16.
. Sometimes again it signifies, the covenant of the living, and in this latter
sense the Scripture is called a Testament, because it is a Covenant of mercy
and grace, which God made with Adam, Noah, Abram, Moses, David, and all his
elect people. III. Thirdly, this word Testament does ordinarily signify a body
of Books, containing the History of those people who were received by God
into Covenant, that is, principally the Books of the Law and of the Prophets.
IV. Fourthly, Testament sometimes signifies the bare promises which God made
unto Abraham, and thus Saint Paul seems to understand the word Gal. 3.15.16.
. V. Fifthly and lastly, most commonly this word Testament signifies the body of
all Canonical Books, wherein is contained the Doctrine concerning Christ, who
was exhibited and given for a Redeemer of Mankind Aretius. s
.

I answer again; these Books are called by Testament for this cause, I.
First, because they describe unto us a Covenant whereby we are reconciled unto
God, which is not a legal covenant of works; but an Evangelicall covenant of
faith in Christ. II. Secondly, because in these books are truly expressed,
the last Will and Testament of the Son of God, which he would have us to
perform after his death; and which is plainly expressed, totidem verbis, in
the institution of the Lords Supper; Eat and drink ye all of this, for this
is my blood, (...), of the New testament, which is shed for many, for the
remission of sins. Mat. 26.27.18.
III. Thirdly, because all things which are required in a solemn Will and
Testament, are here in these books to be found: for the clearing whereof
observe. A Will is either written by the hand, or direction of the Testator in
his life time, or it is unwritten, and is called by the Lawyers; Testamentum
nuncupativum, a Will declarative and such is the Will and Testament of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ; wherein there are principally these four things.
First, a Testator, which is Christ the Son of God, the author of this New
Testament. Secondly, an Heir or joint-heires, which are all the elect of all
ages: and hence the Scripture often calls the Saints Heirs and Coheires of
Christ Tit. 3.7. Romans 8.17. 1 Pet. 3.7.
. Thirdly, Legacies, or goods given to the Heirs by the Testator, which are
life eternal, remission of sins, the gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost,
whereby we are enabled to perform (in some good measure) the Will of Christ,
as to live holily, to adorn our profession, to be liberal toward the poor,
to love one another, to believe in God faithfully, and to call upon him
fervently, and the like. Fourthly, witnesses of the Will, and these were; I.
First, the Apostles, and Disciples of Chrst, who are by Christ called his
Witnesses, and they themselves are not ashamed to be so called. Luke 24.48.
and Act. 1.8. and 2.32.
II. The holy Martyrs are Christ witnesses also, because they suffered their
blood to be shed for the confession of this Testament. III. Thirdly, all good
Ministers, who are interpreters of this Testament and propound the excellencies
thereof unto the world, are likewise Christ's witnesses. IV. Fourthly and
lastly, all the Godly, who labor to perform and fulfill the contents of this
Will in their lives and conversations, are witnesses also of this New Testament.

New; The new Testament, seeing that the substance of this volume is contained
in the other, commonly called the Old Testament? I answer, these books are
called New, for these reasons. I. First, in regard of the time wherein they
were written, because in time they were later written then those of the other
Testament: so we call those things new which in time are nearer unto us, and
those things old which are further distant from our memory and age. II.
Secondly, they are called New, in regad of the promises of a new kingdom which
they contain: for in the Old Testament, almost I say almost, not altogether.
1. because the promises of the New Testament are in the Old, and those of the
Old in the New; though the old has them satis involute, and in Typis, but the
New revelate satis. 2 Because this Almost, serves to escape the foul error of
the Sadduces ( apud Hugonem Gro^ium de verit. Relig. Christ. page 64.) And of
Servetus (apud Calvin. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 10. page 102. 105. and 172.) And of
some other Pseudo-Theologues in these times, domi forsan and for as.
all the promises respect the kingdom of the earthly Canaan, and that upon
these conditions, that they should dwell safely, securely, and prosperously in
that land, so long as they lived holily before the Lord; but the land should
spue them out if they forsake the Lord. But this New Testament, has the
promise of a new kingdom, the kingdom of heaven, as also of the abolishing of
death, of eternal life, of bestowing righteousness upon us, and renewing our
humane nature in us, for, and by, and through the merits and mercies of Jesus
Christ. III. Thirdly these books are called New, for a new adoration or
worship of God which is herein prescribed: In the Old Testament they were
confined unto a place: they must worship at Jerusalem, in the New Testament God
promises to be every where present and propitious unto all those that call
upon him faithfully, John 4.23. IV. Fourthly, they are called New, because they
speak with a new tongue, in a new language: the Old Testament was written in
the old Hebrew tongue, the New Testament in a new, i. e. in the Greek tongue;
for this was a new thing, and never before accustomed, to have the Oracles of
God divulged in any other language than Hebrew. There were three languages
consecrated in the Title of Christ's Cross, which was written by Pilat, the
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin tongue and therefore in this regard also these Books
are called New. V. Fifthly, they are so termed also, because of a new
Testator, or Mediator of this Testament, which was not Moses, but Christ. VI.
Sixthly, they are also so called, in regard of their new witnesses, the Apostles
and Disciples of Christ. Thus much for the Name, Author, and Title. Diverse
other general questions might be raised, both from this Gospel, as also from
the New Testament, which willingly I omit, for these three causes. First,
because some of them (God willing) I shall handle elsewhere: And secondly,
because Doctor Mayor has handled many in his learned Animadversions upon the
whole New Testament: And thirdly, because neither my parts, nor wea^e
abilities, nor learning, nor library, nor leisure ^^n raise up, or conjure
down all questions and difficulties, which may be made. I have also (in a
manner) wholly omitted the objections, the childish and quarrelling exceptions,
and impious wrestings of the Rhemists upon the New Testament, because both
reverend Fulke, and C^^twright, are to be had in English, who answer them
sufficiently. I come now to clear and observe some things in particular from
some particular verses of the first Chapter.

THEOLOGICAL QVESTIONS, DOGMATICAL OBSERVATIONS, AND EVANGELICALL ESSAYS,
UPON THE GOSPEL OF OUR SAVIOVR CHRIST, ACCORDING TO St. MATTHEW.
CHAPTER I.
VERSE 1. The Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the
son of Abraham.


I Will (according to the method of our holy Evangelist) first speak a word or
two of the Genealogy of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; his genealogy
being registered; to let us see that Jesus is THE CHRIST: the agreement of the
four Evangelists do greatly confirm the same. Two of the four, viz. Saint
Matthew, and Saint Luke record Christ's genealogy unto us: hence a question
arises.

diverso sed non adverso modo, diversely but not contrarily; whose diversity
makes up the sweeter harmony: for where Saint Matthew reckons from the Fathers
downward; Saint Luke reckons from Matthew does from the Fathers to the
children. 1 From Adam to Noah. 2. From Noah to Abraham. 3. From Abraham to
David. 4. From David to Zorobabel. 5. From Zorobabel to Christ himself. In the
first and second Saint Luke runs alone, Saint Matthew not meddling with the
Genealogy of Christ further then Abraham. In the third section from Abraham to
David, Saint Matthew and Saint Luke go together. In the fourth from David to
Zorobabel they take different courses, for Saint Matthew descends from David by
Solomon, but Saint Luke by Nathan, and both meet in Salathiel: where going on
two steps together, they part again, and the one takes his course from
Zorobabel by Rhesa to Mary: the other from Zorobabel by Abia to Joseph.

It will be questioned again, How Saint Matthew Luke can agree in the last
example, according to our Evangelist (verse 16.) and the first according to
Saint Luke Luke 3.23.
Saint Matthew affirming Joseph's father to be Jacob; Saint Luke, Elie? I
answer, Jacob was the natural Father of Joseph: Eli was the natural Father of
Mary, and so by the contract of those two, Eli was Joseph's Father in law Eut.
1. l. 1. Cap. 10.
.

It will be further questioned, why Saint Matthew and Saint Luke have both of
them described Joseph, not of Mary. I answer first, for the convincing of the
Jews, to whom Saint Matthew wrote. Secondly, Joseph and Mary were contribules,
both of one Tribe, and therefore it was all one whether of them were described;
but of this more by and by.

The Book of the generation:] hence another Genesis 5.1. This is the Book of the
generations of Adam, etc.

It will be hence demanded further, why does Matthew meddle at all with
Genealogies, seeing Saint Paul forbids them 1 Timothy 1 and Tit^^ 3. Answer.
I answer, there is a double use of Genealogies: 1. First, a profane use, for
ostentation, pride, boasting, or ambition; and this the Jews were too much
addicted unto: and this is that which Saint Paul forbiddes; namely, a vain
pride, and glorying in their ancestors. 2. Secondly, there is a holy use of
Genealogies, which is three fold. 1. For the observing of judicial Laws. 2.
For the distinguishing of the Church from those that were without: and these
second uses of genealogies belong not now unto us. 3. For the declaration or
setting forth of the pedigree, race, or lineage of the Messiah: and this
continued for and with us, and is that which Saint Matthew here intends, who
fearing, least it should be thought that Christ were some obscure, or private,
or secret, person like Melchizedech, who was a Pater without Father or Mother,
does therefore show forth unto us his generation, that we might observe and
know it to be double, viz. First, natural and known, coming from David by
this line and descent. Secondly, divine and ineffable.

Luke proceeds unto Adam, and Matthew begins but at Abraham; seeing they both
intend one and the same thing, viz. the genealogy of Christ

For the Gentiles and for all men, and that in a double regard. First, by the
sufficiency of that Redemption, which was wrought by Christ. Secondly, by a
general offer of conditional grace, which was made unto all.


Abraham's faith) by effectual Redemption.

But I rather think the reason to be this in short: Saint Matthewes chiefest
regard in the reckoning up of this genealogy, was to move the Jews to embrace
the Gospel: and therefore he begins with David in this verse, because then
it was most common in the mouths of all men, that the Messiah should be the
son of David: but Saint L ke (as testifies Eusebius Eccles. Hist. lib. 3.
cap. 4.
) by birth a Gentile, borne in Antiochia, learned in Physic, and now a
Proselite, truly converted, does write his Gospel to convert others: and
therefore shows to the comfort of all believing Gentiles, that Christ is a
Savior also unto them, even which are of the posterity of Adam: The promise of
the Messiah was tied to the families of David, and Abraham Genesis 22.18. 2 Samuel
7.12.
and therefore Matthew proving Christ to be the son of David and Abraham
according to the flesh needs go no further: But Luke writes unto the Gentiles
(for he was Paul's companion, who was the Apostle of the Gentiles) and therefore
he proceeds unto Adam the Father of all Nations.

David and Abraham here named? Abraham, Genesis 12.3. and 22.18. Secondly, to
David 2 Samuel 7.12. 1 Chronicles. 17. Psalm. 89.37. Esa. 37.35. and 53.3. Ier. 13.13.
22.4 30.23.5.

Abraham (in this verse) Abraham being David were more clear and illustrious,
and later; and therefore better known unto the people: as appears by the
blind man, who cries unto Christ, thou son of David have mercy upon me; and
so the common people call the Messiah the son of David. Secondly, I answer,
David should be placed before Abraham: for the Catalogue of the persons is to
be drawn from the first to the last or to begin with the eldest first, and so
proceed downwards: and therefore being to begin with Abraham, as he does verse.
2. he first names David, then subjoynes Abraham, verse. 1. that so the second
verse may depend immediately upon the first. Thus much for the questions. One
objection we have further to resolve. Matthew making no mention at all in this
his Genealogy, of the lineage of the blessed virgin Mary, gives Salmeron the
Jesuit occasion to allege this place to prove, that the virgin Mary was
without sin at all: and that we should not consider her to have sprung from
sinners, lest she should thereby have incurred the guilt of original sin
from them: but we must conceive of her, as the elect and gracious mother of
Christ, and consequently exempted from all sin: and for this cause (only
says he) she is described as Saint Paul describes Melchizedech, without Father
or Mother, or genealogy; and as we understand an other person (i. e. Christ)
figured in Melchizedech: so the blessed Mother of Christ, must be imagined to
be without Father or Mother, that so we may understand her to be without the
least stain of sin. The Jesuits argument being something confused, we will
draw it to this form. Major. Whosoever is described without father or mother,
or genealogy, is altogether void of sin. Minor. But the blessed virgin Mary
is such a one, described without father or mother, or genealogy. Therefore she
is altogether void of sin.

First of all, we deny the Major or first proposition: Melchizadech is
described in Scripture, to be without father or mother, or generation: and yet
neither Papists, nor any other, go about to prove, that he was free from all
sin. Secondly, we answer, that the confirmation Mary is described like
Melchizedech, (...), without any genealogy, or generation; therefore as
Melchizedech signifies Christ, so Mary was free from all stain of sin: this
is a Sequitur, a baculo ad angulum, as we say in the Schools. Thirdly, the
Minor, or second proposition Mary is not described like Melchizedech, (...);
for his parents, none at any time, or any where, has named in Scripture; yea,
he is so obscurely brought in, that we have no argument to prove, that he was
borne, but only that general argument, which is taken from the nature of man:
But Mary was not only borne after the nature of other men and women, but also
her Genealogy is named in Scripture. For, I. First, she is called the Cosen of
Elizabeth, from whence necessarily one genealogy must be common to them both.
II. Secondly, she is showed to be the daughter of David and Abraham, because
Christ was borne of her, verse. 20. and he is said to be the son of David
and Abraham, verse. 1. And therefore the Genealogy of the Son, must needs
appertain unto the Mother. III. Thirdly, this same Genealogy, which is
described both by Matthew and Luke, is both the Genealogy of Mary, and
described for Mary's sake, and not for Joseph's; because it is described to show
the descent and lineage of Christ, who came not of Joseph, but of Mary only:
and therefore if this Genealogy belong not unto her, it belongs not unto
Christ Chamierus Tom. 3. f. 115. Sect. 18.19.20.21. Verse. 2. Observa.
.

VERRS. 2. Abraham begat Isaac.] Isaac was a type of Christ in 3 things. First,
in his nativitie, which was in a manner, and in nature almost impossible Romans
4.19.
, Abraham's body being dead: so Christ was wonderful in his birth. Secondly, in
his obedience unto the death, making no resistance against his Father Abraham,
Genesis 22. So Christ was also obedient to the stroke of death Phil. 2.8.
. Thirdly, he was the son of promise, and the promised seed, Genesis 21.12. and
so was Christ, Gal. 3.16.

Boaz of Rahab.] It may here be demanded, why in the Genealogy of our
descended of them, because he descended from heaven for them Hier. s.
. Christ for the comfort of poor penitent sinners, assumed that nature which
once was sinful, that he might separate it from sin. Secondly, another
reason, why they are reckoned up and named, and neither Sarah, nor Rebecca, is
to repress the arrogancy of the Jews, who

Salmon begat Boaz of Rahad: and Boaz Obed of Ruth.] Here it will be
questioned, to what end are these set down, for they seem not pertinent to
the matter in hand. Rahab was an harlot, and yet her husband took her unto
himself, although she was such: so Christ has married himself unto the
Gentiles, who were spiritual fornicators, through sin Chrysostom Hom. 3. op.
imperf.
. Secondly, Ruth was a stranger, and very poor, yet Boaz did not despise her
for her poverty, nor abhor her for the wickedness of her Country: no more
does Christ despise us, being most poor and beggarly, through the want of
goodness, and worthy to be abhorred for the wickedness of our lives.
Thirdly, to teach us, that as Ruth left her country, and her fathers house,
and all her kindred, and then was ennobled by this marriage: so we must
likewise leave our old Conversation, that so we may be be joined in marriage
unto Christ. Psalm. 45.10. Ambr. in. Luke 3. Verse. 8.


VERSE. 8. Ioram begat Ozias.] From these words diverse doubts arise. First, what
manner Ioram did not beget Ozias. I answer, it is true, Ioram did not beget him;
but yet Ozias came from him, as appears thus. I. Ioram had many brethren, as
we may find, 2. Chron. 21.2. but them he slew, verse. 4. II. Ioram had also
many children; but the Aethiopians slew them all, as we read, 2. 2 Chronicles.
21.17. and 22.2. excepting one, which is called Iehoahaz, 2. Chron. 21.17. but
Ahazias, and Azariah, 2. Chron. 22.1.6.7. III. The children of Iorams children
were slain by Iehu, 2. Chro. 22.8. even 42. persons, 2. King. 10.13. IV.
Ahazias had many children, 2. King. 10.13. who (their father being slain by
Iehu) were all slain by their mother Athaliah, 2. Chron. 22.10. except only
Ioas, verse. 11. whom Iehoiada crowns, 2. Chron. 23.1. etc. V. Ioas had a son
called Amaziah, 2. Chron. 24.27. VI. Amaziah had a son whose name was Vzziah,
or our Ozias (mentioned in this verse) 2. Chron, 26.1. And thus we see, that
although Ozias was not the immediate son of Ioram, yet he was of his lineage,
and descended from him, as appears plainly by that which has been said, but
more briefly by the Margent. Joram whose son was Ahazias, whose son was Ioas,
whose son was Amaziah, whose son was Ozias


Secondly, it will be said, Was not Ioas, the Ozias, the son of Nathan? for
so it is generally thought: and if so, then he came not from Ioram, as is
affirmed by the former question: but he was the legal son only, and came
from Nathan, and not the natural son of Ahaziah, of the stock of Solomon? I
answer, It has been affirmed by diverse, Ioas was the son of Nathan, but
without any solid ground at all: And the contrary (that Ioas was the natural
son of Ahazias) does evidently appear from these places, which I persuade my
reader to observe, 2. King. 11.2. and 13.1. and 14.13. 1. Chron: 3.11. and 2.
Chron. 23.11. and 23.3.

It may yet from hence further be questioned, Matthew here omits these three
Kings, Ahazias, Ioas, Amaziah, seeing they came between Ioram and Ozias? and
why he omits these three rather than others? First, hereunto some say, because
these three descended Ahab, whose posterity God commands Iehu to destroy.
Secondly, Pareus s.
rather think fit to give over the Quare, and leave it as a secret, than to
dive into it. Thirdly, although it be true, that the kind. vit. to dive into
the depths that only the Lord can sound) four reasons may be given why these
three, and only these three are here omitted.

The first is, because S. Matthew for the help of memory has propounded to
reckon up 3 series, or orders of the progenitors of Christ, every one of them
consisting of 14. persons, as in the 17. verse of this chapter: and for this
cause he is enforced to (...) many.

The second reason is this because the Evangelist would not so precisely stick,
or ^herein the enumeration of Christ's forefathers, but hastens unto the ma^^^
scope he has propounded unto himself, and that is the demonstration of
Christ, not those from whom he came, according to the flesh, any further, than
the ma^^er in hand necessarily requires.

The third reason may be this; the series of Christ's progenito^s from I^ram to
Ozias, might easily be known by the simplest, from those plain places of
Scripture, cited before, quest. 1. and therefore the Evangelist troubles not
himself to reckon them up.

The last reason why he omits these 3 Kings, rather than others, is for these
causes. I. First, because the kingdoms were wickedly governed under them, and
therefore they were not thought worthy to be named. II. Because these 3. were
most miserably killed: and thus St. John Apoc. 7.5.6.7.8. does not reckon up
the tribe of Dan amongst the tribes of Israel, for her singular, and exquisite
impiety.

Josias begat I^c^^ias and his brethren, about the time, they were carried away
into Babylon.]

Josias was not the Father of I^c^^iah, but his Grandfather. Secondly, Josias
begot not these sons. I^c^^iah and his brethren, Josias begat I^c^^ias and his
brethren, inregard only of a legal succession, because they succeeded him. I.
I^b^as succeeded, whom the King of Egypt carried captive. II. Ieb^iach^^, whom
the King of Babylon carried away. III. His son Ie^^iachim, who in like manner
was captivated by the King of Babylon: and these were they, against whom the
Prophet Jeremy denounces all his threatenings, Ier. 22.18. etc. IV. Zedochias
the son of I^sias.

Henry Stephen (although Beza attribute it to Robert Stephen. Beza. s.)
thinking that the Father Ieh^iachim was here omitted, amends it thus, Josias
begat Ioachim, and Ioachim begat I^ch^nias and his brethren: But this
correction is not to be allowed; for first, knots must not be out, when they
should be untied, we must not add or diminish from the Scriptures, when we
cannot reconcile them. Secondly, no Greek examples or copies, have it thus,
and therefore no such addition is to be permitted. Thirdly, Ioc^nias Zedochias
the younger, and therefore by Brethren (in this verse) is not to be understood
the immediate natural brethren of I^ch^nias. I answer therefore (with Beza and
Hier s.) that there was a double I^conias, to wit, the father I^hoi^^im, and
also the son Ieh^^achin, who were both so called, (it being ordinary with
the Hebrews, to have two names, and sometimes termed by the one, and
sometimes by the other) and of the father it is here said, I^sias begat
I^coniah (that is I^h^ia^i^) together with his brethren. Now the brethren he
had were th^ee, viz. Ie^^as, Shallum, and Ma^^^^as, or Zed^chias (although some
there be that conjecture Ieh^as and Shallum to be one and the same.) But
against this, Josias beg^t them in the Babylonian captivity? I answer B^^h is
put for La^^d, i. e. about the time of the captivity. Again, the Captivities
to be Josias, i. e. these words in the Text, (...), in the captivity, are not
to be referred to the word (...), beg^t, but unto the children which he begot,
in whose time a threefold successive captivity came to pass under their Kings.
1. Under Iech^nias the father, whom the Hebrews call Ieb^^achi^ (as Hierome
says by H and K,) or as others Ie^^iaq^^s by Q II. Under Ioc^nias the son,
whom the Hebrews call I^^^iachi^^, by Chapter and N. III. Under Zedechia, who
reigning, the carrying into captivity, was consummate, and finished: which
transportation Saint Matthew here remembers, as though it were but one alone:
so that the meaning is not, that I^sias in the Babylonian captivity begot the
children, for being prevented by death, long before the Captivity he could not:
But that his posterity was brought into that Babylonian exile: for the words
are to be read thus: Josias begat I^conias and his brethren, (...), i. e. who
were in the time of the transportation into Babylon: And thus in the 17. verse
of this Chapter the same words signify, T^ri^i^um, non t^mporis durationem.

V. 12. I^che^iah begat Salathiel, Salathiel is called elsewhere 1 Chro. 3 17.
Reconciliation.
Sh^^ltiel, and he is conceived to be the common term of the stock of
Solomon and Nathan: for whereas he is called the son of Iaconiah 1 Chro.
3.17.
, we must understand it not, to be his son by nature, because he had no
son that reigned after him I^^^. 22.30.
, but his legal son, he being of the stock of Nathan Luke 3.27.
. And thus these two places are reconciled, to wit, Ierem. 22.30. and this
verse: the first speaking of a natural son, the other of a legal Tremellius.
. It will here be objected. Salathiel Luke 3.27. is called the son of Neri:
but in this verse, of Ioconias. Answer. Reconciliation.
He was the natural son of Neri, and the legal son of Ioconiah: so
called, because he succeeded him in the kingdom: And thus in the genealogy
of Christ, Luke follows the natural order, and Matthew the Legal. See Parou^
upon this verse, where this question is further prosecuted.

VERSE. 13.14.15. And Abind begat Eliachim, and he Az^r, and he Zadoc, and he
Achim, and he Eliud, and he Eleazar, and he Matthan, and he Jacob.] The
Papists object these verses for their humane traditions thus. The Evangelists
(both Matthew in these verses, and Luke 3.) name many of Christ's progenitors,
whose names are not found in the Old Testament, but are borrowed only from
Tradition: and therefore Traditions Scripture, yet it follows not hence, that
the Evangelists had them from humane tradition, but from the dictating of the
Spirit of God, who did inspire them, Papists, to build those their Traditions
upon, which concern (as they say) our faith unto salvation. Abraham and David;
therefore this genealogy is written, and that in Scripture, that we may know
it, and believe it; and therefore the Papists are not to obtrude any Tradition
upon us, but such as are in the Scriptures, as the forenamed examples are; for
we believe that Christ came of these, and although we know not, from what
histories or authors the Evangelists were taught it: yet now, because it is
taught unto us by an Evangelist (who in the writing hereof was directed by an
infallible spirit of truth) we therefore confidently assent unto it.

Of whom was borne Jesus.] If any (Jesus) which is given to the true Messiah,
Tract. 6. f. 623, 624.
let him read Illyricus de nomine Jesus, where he shall find it confirmed by
eight reasons, that Jesus comes from the verb (...) Jascha to Save: and is the
same with Iehoshua a Savior: where also diverse arguments are confuted, by
which Ofiander would prove, that Jesus comes from Jehovah, or from Ieheschuh.

Jacob begat Joseph the husband Concerning these two holy persons, Joseph and
Mary, much might be spoken, but I will only observe a word or two. First it
may be inquired, jure, another re, one thing by right of inheritance, another
by present condition: By right they were successors of the Kingdom of Israel,
as is proved by many writers: but for the present, they were poor, he being a
Carpenter, and she but mean in regard of temporal possessions, and her present
condition. Hence it will be questioned again,

Heb. 12.3.4. Secondly, because worldly abundance and plenty is not so fit or
convenient for them, as shall afterward be showed. Thirdly, that he may crown
them with future blessings more abundantly: thus Job was robbed; and Abraham
was to forsake all, that the Lord might double all their losses unto them.
Fourthly, God hereby would let us see, how careful he is of us, when we are
in need, either by comforting of us in our affliction, or by avenging himself
upon those that injure us, or by giving us contented hearts willing to endure,
or undergo whatsoever our God lays upon us: And this last was fulfilled in
Joseph, who although that he were a great Heir, yet he was contented with
his poor, low, and present condition, being herein a pattern and president
unto us, that as he (which was supposed to be the father of Christ, and was
indeed the right* Heir unto the kingdom of Israel) was content with that lot
of the things of this life, which God allotted and measured forth unto him: so
all they, that suppose themselves to be the children of Christ, Joseph was) to
maintain life. Hic labor, hoc opus est, this is durus sermo, a very had task,
because in this regard it is hard to descend, and a bitter thing to be brought
from plenty to poverty, from honor to a low estate; and therefore how or whereby
may we be strengthened thus to submit our selves, to what estate or condition
soever the Lord shall call us unto, with this contentedness of mind, that was
in holy Joseph, and blessed Mary? I answer. victum and amictum, food and
raiment, thou have enough, and therefore having that, be contented 1 Timothy 6.8.
. Secondly, remember this is the work of God; art thou from plenty brought to
poverty with Job, this is Gods work: or art thou brought from a high estate to
a low, as Joseph here? remember the Lord has a hand in it, and therefore
murmr not against him, but rather be contented. Thirdly, remember God ^ries
thee hereby, (as he did Job) to see whether thou will serve him in adversity,
when he crosses thee, as well as in prosperity, when he blesses thee, as
did Job: and therefore be content, and patient, and quit thy self, like a
man. Fourthly, remember all the children of God are made partakers of some
affliction or other, either in body or mind, or estate, or children, or
friends, or good name; and therefore be thou contented with thy cross
whatsoever it be. Solamen misaris, semper habere pares: thou art no worse than
others, yea, thou have many copartners in misery, and therefore thou may
bear thy burden the more cheerfully. Fifthly, remember, if thou be crossed and
afflicted in temporal things, it is an argument of thy filiation or adoption
into the fellowship of sons: they being bastards, and no sons that are are
afflicted with no stripes, Heb. 12.8. And therefore thou should rejoice when
thou art afflicted; much more be content with it. Sixthly, remember, the way
unto heaven and glory, is by poverty, adversity, sickness, patient enduring of
wrongs, injuries, losses, crosses, and the like: and therefore (these things
considered) there is great reason to be content with our condition, although
we be brought with Joseph, from heirs apparent of a Crown, to poor
handy-craftsmen.

Jacob begat Joseph, the husband of Mary.] Joseph here declared, Christ being
not borne of him, but only supposed so to be? This question is urged by all
the Jews and Pagans, against this our Evangelist, as unanswerable, arguing
thus; either Jesus was the natural Son of Joseph (that is naturally begotten
by him) and then he is not God ( for whatsoever is borne of the flesh, is
flesh: Ioh. 3.6.
or else, Christ is not the natural son of Joseph, and then Joseph's
genealogy does neither appertain unto Christ, nor at all prove Christ to be
the Son of God.

Joseph were only the supposed Father of Christ, and not the natural, yet
Joseph's genealogy does prove Jesus to be the son of David; because Mary also
was of the same Tribe of Judah, and family of David: This they prove thus;
Joseph was a just man, and one that feared the Lord, and therefore marries one
of his own Tribe and family according to the Law; Numb. 36.8, 9.
every daughter that possesses an inheritance, in any tribe of the Children of
Israel, shall be wife unto one of the family of the Tribe of her Father, etc.
If this probation were solid, the whole argument were solved: but I find,
that this law is not universal, but limited and restrained, pertaining only
to those daughters, who were left alone in their family, together with their
fathers inheritance (as were the daughters of Zelaphead Number. 26.33. and 27.7.
and 36.2.6.
and therefore before this probation will be allowed, it must first be proved
that Mary the B. Virgin was such a one, left alone in her family with her
Fathers inheritance: which cannot be proved from scripture; but rather the
contrary, that her condition was poor and mean, and low in regard of
temporal possessions: And therefore seeing this answer does not satisfy; nor
solve the doubt, we will produce another from the Scriptures.

Matthew here does plainly demonstrate two things. First, that Jesus was not
begotten by Joseph, but borne of Mary (verse 18. before Joseph and Mary came
together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost.) Secondly, that Jesus was
the son of David and Abraham, verse. 1. and therefore Jesus of necessity must
be the son of David, either by Father or Mother. i. e. Joseph or Mary: but
not by his Father Joseph (as is showed, from verse 18.) but by his Mother, who
therefore must needs be the daughter of David. Again, Luke 1.31. the Angel
sent unto the Virgin Mary, does call Jesus (the child that is to be borne of
her,) the son of David: but David was not the Father of Jesus by Joseph, but
by Mary: and therefore Mary was the daughter of David. So also in diverse other
places of Scripture, Christ is called the son of David, and of the seed of
David Romans 1.3. and 2 Timothy 2.8. and Apoc 22.16.
: which he could not be, but by the Mother: And thus these places do firmly
prove, that Joseph and Mary were both of the same Tribe, and family of David.

But here another question does arise, If it be Joseph, why then does not the
Evangelist here rather reckon up the genealogy of Mary, then of Joseph. To
this first some answer, that Saint Matthew does ex opinione vulgi, because he
would observe that common opinion, that was of Christ, to wit, that he was the
son of Joseph: but this is false, for verse 18. he testifyes that Joseph was
not his Father, but that she was found with child of the Holy Ghost, before
Joseph and she came together. I answer therefore, the cause Matthew was a Jew,
and herein observes the custom of the Hebrews, who reckoned or recorded only
the genealogy of men not of women.

4. VERSE 16. The husband of Mary.] say nothing, saving only this, that the
Papists say too much; striving manibus pedibusque, with tooth and nail, to
prove that she was without original sin: the arguments whereby they
endeavor to prove it, I shall (God enabling me) consider of in their due
place: I will here only produce one example, they bring to prove it, whereof I
will say no more but this, recitare est confutare, it needs no better Argument
to confute it, then barely to cite it. Baralet to prove the Virgin to be
without sin, Fable.
tells us this story (si credere fas est) that there was one Mr. Alexander
Niccham, who having given it out three sundry times, that he would prove that
she was conceived in sin, was prevented by sickness, so that he could not
perform his promise; but afterward renewing his purpose, the night, before
he was to prove his assertion he fell into a great disease: and in his agony
calling upon the B. Virgin, she came presently unto him, and said, hanc
infirmitatem pateris pro ^o, quod, me esse conceptam in peccato originali,
prebare niteris, i. e. this punishment is inflicted upon thee, because thou
wentst about to prove, that I was conceived in original sin: and having so
said, took a knife, and therewith cut out a piece of rotten flesh out of his
side, and with a needle, and a silk thread sewed it up again, whereupon he did
not only renounce that damnable opinion, but wrote a great book, for the
confirmation of the contrary.

4. VERSE. 18. Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise; when as his
Mother Mary was

The first and maine question here will be Joseph? I answer. First, Hier. s.
for the honor of Matrimony: g the patronage of wedlock does take away the
infamy of is to be preferred before dishonorable whoredoms: and that for
these causes, First, because adultery and fornication are forbidden (by God)
unto all men, of all times, in all places, and is allowed unto none at any
time, or upon any occasion. Secondly, because God has Hier. s.
lest that he should plot or practice some mischief, either against the
blessed virgin, or her more blessed infant. This answer Pareus (upon these
words) does justly reject, upon these two grounds. I. Because there is no
probability, that those things which the Angel had openly revealed to Joseph
and Mary, should be concealed from the Devil. And II. Because from the very
nativitie of Christ, the Devil begun to lay a thousand trains for the
destruction of Christ, both by Herod and the Herod should by cruelty seek his
life Hier. s.
. II. Secondly, that there might be one, who should take care for the
education and nourishing of Christ, in providing for him whatsoever was
needful in regard of his humanity. III. Thirdly, that the blessed Virgin
might have one, from whom she might receive both comfort and aid, in the time
of Christ's infancy. A fourth answer Pareus. s.
which is, That Mary might have a domestical witness of her immaculate
virginity: for none was better able to testify Joseph. It is answered again,
Heir. advers. Helvidium.
Mary was espoused to Joseph, that by his genealogy (to whom Mary was allied)
the original also, or progenitors of Mary, might the better be demonstrated.

Dion. Carthus. s.
. Secondly, for the avoiding of death, which was allotted by the Law unto such
Deuteronomy. 22.21,
. Hier. s. Thirdly, to avoid infamy, if she had not been betrothed unto a
husband, she would have incurred the name of a harlot: teaching us carefully to
avoid every occasion of infamy Pro. 22.1. Eccles. 7.3.
.

But hence a question is considerable; Why should we be thus careful of our
credit and good name, does it not savor too much of is as a precious ointment.

Hence another question will be demanded; evil fame, which is twofold, viz.
first with evil men, who seek fame, male agendo, by wicked works, as
Herostratus burned the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, to get a perpetual fame:
and some also, by drinking others under the table, or by patronage of
wicked-men. Secondly, with good men, who defend often that which is amiss, and
excuse all their imperfections, lest otherwise it should tend to their
disgrace; both these are ordinary, but neither of them good: and therefore
Fame is not thus to be sought for. II. There is a good Fame, which is likewise
twofold: first, bonum faciendo, when a man gets a good name, by doing that
which is good. Secondly, offensionem cavendo, by avoiding and shunning all
occasions of evil: a man gets a good name, by carefully avoiding all evil,
and eschewing giving of offense unto all. Now offenses arise three manner of
ways. First, mala agendo, by doing that which is evil: and therefore he that
covets Fame, must only employ himself in good actions. Secondly, dubia
agendo, by doubtful actions, which may justly be suspected: and therefore he
that desires a good report among men, must eschew all appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. that is, all those actions which are of evil report, or may be
ill interpreted. Thirdly, bona agendo, sed non cum cautela, by doing that which
is good for the matter of it, but undiscreetly for the manner of it: and
therefore unto a good name are required good actions, performed with prudence
and discretion. And by these ways it is lawful to acquire fame.

When Mary was espoused.] The Papists do Mary the Joseph, and continued so all
her life time after: (for this we willingly grant) but also that she vowed or
purposed virginity, before the message of the Angel was brought unto her: and
from her example ground their opinion of votaries, or vows of chastity, or
abstinence from marriage.

But this assertion is rashly, without Scripture, When Mary was betroched to
Joseph, before they came together: therefore there was a meaning to come
together, if she had not in the mean time been found to be with child of
the holy Ghost: for otherwise it would seem to have been a mockery on Mary's
part, or behalf, to promise marriage to Joseph without, any purpose to
perform the duty of marriage. And if it were done with both their consents,
then mocked they with God, who instituted marriage for some end and purpose,
which could not be attained out of marriage: for if there had been a vow of
continency upon them, they should neither have married for avoiding of
fornication, which are the two chief ends of marriage: as for the third, which
is mutual comfort, it Bellarmine (li. 2. de Monach. Cap. 22.) answers
hereunto, that Mary's vow was no hindrance to their marriage, because she knew
by revelation, that Joseph would not exact marriage duties of her.



Peter Lombard (li. 4. distinct. 30. b.) thinks that Joseph also had purposed
virginity, which if so, then it was a mocking of the ordinance.

Thomas Aquinas thinks, that Mary made not an absolute vow, before her
espousall; but Scotus affirms, she did.

Mary had any such revelation before her espousall (as they affirm) because the
Angels salutation and message (which he brought after her contract) was so
strange and rare. Luke 1.28.


Before they came together.] What is meant by this Coming together?

Calvin) this may be understood of cohabitation, or dwelling together.

Muscul. Erasm. Gualt.) de Coitu, of Wedlock duties.

Mary was married unto Joseph long before, but as yet was not known carnally
of him, because they abstained by a mutual vow, as the Papists think. ( Sup..
2.) 2. Of those who think Joseph not as yet carnally to have known her, but
afterward did. Both these are to be exploded, because the Holy Ghost speaks
of the time Bypast, that as yet Mary was not conjoined unto Joseph, either by
cohabitation, or copulation. Not to come, as though he did know her
afterward: But of this afterward. verse 25.


She was found with Child.] It may here be questioned, Mary to be with child?

Mary her self, who presently after the Angels message unto her, Luke 1.31.
perceived a strange motion, and a conception within her, as women do, when
they first quicken.

Secondly, her parents in whose house, and

Thirdly, Joseph also her husband perceived it;

1. VERSE. 19. Then Joseph her husband being a just man, and not willing to make
her a public Hence it may first be demanded;

1. Joseph's righteousness here made mention of?

I answer, Dilemma: he was (as it were) betwixt the Bulls horns, and knew not
which way to lean: he was in a Straight, or Labyrinth, that he knew not how
to wind himself out of: and in a Maze, that he scarce knew how to tread: for
first, he was just, and therefore he will not Not punish sin; Justice
requires, that sin should be punished. Receive an adulterous wife, such as
he conceived her to be.
for although he were righteous, yet he hated this wrong in her, adultery
being odious to the best men.

Secondly, he was merciful, and therefore he would not be so extreme unto
her, or rigorous toward her, as to make her a public example.

. 2. Was minded to put her away privily.] not willing to make her a public
example; that is so publicly to punish her, that she might be an example unto
others: but this I pass by. Secondly, the thing it self; he desires to spare
her, and not at all to inflict any punishment upon her: and hence a double
question springs up.

Why would not Joseph punish her?

Some say, because he was no Magistrate; this

I answer therefore, this was done, because of

Again, because of the fame, and rare estimation,

Lastly, because it was a private fault: and

It will be hence demanded again, how was Joseph a just and upright man, when
he would not (...) make an adultrous wife a public example, seeing the law
condemned her; and it is the part of a righteous man, to observe the law?

To this first I answer; he suspected her to be lust man, he would not be too
rash in punishing. Secondly, the law of charity commands our brethren: and such
this offense was, or seemed to be; for indeed it was no sin of
uncleanenesse which the innocent and immaculate Virgin had committed, which was
the cause of this suspicion in Joseph: but he so conceived of it, and
therefore her fault not being as yet publicly divulged, he would not make her
a public example.

Joseph was a righteous man, loving in himself, and in others that which was
good, and hating that which was evil, although he did not punish this fault
according to the tenor of the law: for justice is not contrary unto equity,
neither does always persuade to use the utmost rigor of the law; and therefore
Joseph might be a just man, and yet show this mercy, he did unto Mary.

But while he thought on these

While he thought on these things.] That is pondered them with himself.

Joseph had within himself?

clam sine clamore, privily, without making any word of it. Or 2. he thought,
that it might be she was defiled, after she was contracted unto him: but
this thought he presently recalles, charity not being suspicious; rather
believing that she was seduced, when she was a maid, then when she was a
wife, rather simple fornication then adultery, and therefore will secretly put
her away. 3. he thinks with himself, that though it should be so, that she
had played the adulteress, yet he resolves that another shall punish her, and
not he: for, for his part (if it be so as he suspects) he will neither free
her nor persecute her: he will neither excuse nor accuse her: he will neither
justify nor condemn her. And thus before he will determine any thing, or
execute any thing,

Joseph, or should we thus deliberate of our actions, before they are effected
or performed?



Secondly, because rashness is a forerunner of sorrow and punishment: the
people of Israel rashly go up to the hill top, and are discomfited by the
Amalekites Number. 14 44, 45.
. Nabal answers David's servants inconsideratly: which had likely to have
occasioned the ruin both of him and his. 1 Samuel 35.10.13.
Rehoboam, unadvisedly (or at least not well advised) answers Jeroboam and the
Israelites; wherefore ten Tribes revolt from him 1. King. 12.8.16.
. Thus we see all these were punished for want of due and mature deliberation
in their actions: and so the Lord threatens that he will scatter Israel,
Because they are a nation void of counsel, neither is there any understanding
in them Deuteronomy. 32.28.
. Thirdly, because at the least the fruit of rashness is repentance, as it was
in David's inconsiderate numbering of the people 2 Samuel 24.10.17.
: and Peter's denying of his Master Mat. 26.75.
. Hence a third demand may be made; whether deliberation and delay, or
procrastination,

They differ thus, First, deliberation is before resolution, delay or
cunctation is after resolution is fixed.

Secondly, deliberation is an act of reason contrary to affection: delay is is
an act of the affection contrary unto our knowledge: and therefore Abraham will
not be overcome by affection Genesis ^ 23. and 3.
: nor Paul consult with flesh and blood Gal. 1 16.
: lest that affection had procured delay: And thus Joseph deliberates against
his love unto Mary, what to do in this case with her, and unto her; and after
this deliberation, without any further deferring had thought, privily to put
her away. verse 19. Had he not been forewarned the contrary by the Angel, in
this verse.

Hence a further doubt may be raised: If all consult and take counsel before
they execute their actions?

I answer, No; for proof hereof, David toward Nabal 1 Samuel 25.13.
, and toward Ziba 2 Samuel 16.4
; These are rash persons. Secondly, some consult weakly and childishly of
their actions, as R^h^boam 1 King. 12.12.
, and Nabal 1 Samuel 25.10.
; these are foolish persons. Thirdly, some consult with reason, but captivated
by affection, thus David toward Absalom 2 Samuel 18.5.
; these are weak persons, being overswayed by affection, not directed by
judgment. Fourthly, some consult with reason not subjected unto religion; thus
did Pharaoh Exodus 1.10.
, and Jeroboam 1 King. 12.28.
, These are wicked persons: and all these four forts either err for want of
consultation, or through weak and wicked consultation. Fifthly, some co^sult,
but are not able to understand, or find out that which they desire: and
although they use all endeavors, yet cannot penetrate into those things which
are hid from them: thus did David Psalm. 73.15.
, and of this Paul forewarned us Romans 1^.33.34.
, because herein we are always in danger to err, either by thinking amiss:
and such was Joseph's consultation, who had, notwithstanding all his
deliberation, punished an innocent person, if by the Angel he had not been
admonished to the contrary, in this verse.

. 2. The Angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream.]

dreams?

dreams are messengers from God, according to his promise, your young men
shall dream dreams Joel 2.2^. Act. 2.17.
: and we have many instances of such dreams, as for example, Joseph. Genesis 37.
Pharaohs baker. Genesis 40. Pharaoh himself. Genesis 41. and Joseph in this verse.
dreams are to be believed. Secondly, dreams in times past were more ordinary
1. Sam. 28.6.15.
, but the light of the Gospel has now dispersed and expelled them; signs
belonging to unbeleevers. Thirdly, Dreams now are always doubtful, of
dreams l thus: every dream is either first, Natural, or secondly Spiritual,
Creg. Moral. 8. s. Job. 7.
or thirdly Diabolical.

Natural dreams either proceed from causes Internal to wit either From the
temper or temperature of the body: as fullness, emptiness, or some change
wrought in the humors of the body by sickness. This the first cause. Or, From
abundance or diversity of thoughts: Eccles. 5.2.
as when our friend is absent, we dream that he is dead, or returned, or the
like. This is the second cause.
External, proceeding from abundance of employments. This is the third cause.
Spiritual dreams are divine admonitions, and are of two sorts, either Simply
divine, as this Dream of Joseph's, which was a divine admonition merely from
the Lord. This is the fourth cause. Or Mixtly divine: that is when our dreams
are spiritual, but mixed with some thoughts of our own Job. 7.14
. This is the fifth cause.

There are diabolical, wicked, and unclean thoughts, or such dreams arising
from such thoughts. And this is the sixth and last cause of Dreams.

Dreams have their significations, either first, as signs, or secondly, as
causes.

Dreams have their significations, as Signs, and that either first, of things
present, as dreaming of meat or drink, argues hunger or thirst, etc. Or,
secondly, of things to come; this is called a prediction, and is threefold;
either First, Natural and divine, as Galen tells of one (Crus lapideum balneo
lotus, etc) who dreamed that bathing himself, his legs, and thighs were
metamorphosed from flesh to flint.

Or, secondly, Diabolical and wicked; the devil sometimes forewarning of
things to come, to gain credit and belief with men. Or thirdly, Divine, and
these are to be observed, and marked; and of this kind was Joseph's dreams
Matthew. ^:13.
and the dream which was dreamed by the wise men. Matthew. 2.12.

Again, dreams have their significations as causes, and that either, By
illusion of Satan. Or, By revelation from God and that either Commanding, as
in this verse, and Matt. 2.19.22. Or, Forbidding, as Genesis 31.24.



Deuteronomy. 13.1. etc.

Lastly, all dreams do either First promise something, Or Secondly, terrify
and affright us, Or Thirdly, declare or show something unto us. Fourthly, or
admonish and advise us: and these are not altogether to be slighted, but to be
weighed and pondered, observing therein these conditions, viz.


First, do not wholly believe them, but only suspect, that they may be true.

Secondly, Procura, ne cura; if we can provide against what we doubt and
dream of, do it, but be not careful of the success, nor fearful for any
dream.

Thirdly, do nothing upon a dream, either against thy general calling as
thou art a Christian, or against that particular calling, wherein God has
placed thee. More plain and particular signs of divine dreams we shall
consider of (God willing) in another place.



Exposition.
From the words it evidently appears, that Christ is the true Son of God, or
the only begotten Son of the true God. Not

First, only man by nature, and Quasi Deus, as it were a God by grace, as the
Arrians, Nestorians and diverse others would have it. Nor

Secondly, only God, and made Quasi homo, as it were a man, as the Maniches,
Marcionites, and diverse others falsely imagine. Nor

Thirdly, true God, and true man, but having the humanity created of nothing;
as the Valentinians and Wittcham hold, that Christ took not flesh of the
Virgin Mary; and Servetus, that the body of Christ was compacted of three
uncreated Elements ( Beza. epist. 8. confess. Gal. art. 14) But

Fourthly, that in Christ are two natures united by a hypostaticall
conjunction: being Man of the flesh of his Mother, without a Father, and God of
God his Father without a Mother. Now hence diverse Quares may be made, of which
briefly.

First, why was it necessary that Christ should

I. Because man alone could not do that which was requisite for our Redemtion
viz.

First, satisfy Gods justice. And secondly, overcome and conquer death. And

II. Because neither could an Angel save us, or perform that which was to be
done, before we could be ransomed: that is,

First, an Angel could not dye. Nor, secondly overcome temptation for us. Nor
thirdly, make us the children of God.





(Thom.) wherefore God cannot merit.





the Character, and engraven Image of the Father (Heb. 1.3.) was most fit to
restore and repair again the Image of God in us.









Perkins.

VERSE. 21. She shall bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name JESUS:
for he shall save his people from their sins.
Thou shall call his name JESUS.



Joseph, not Mary; for the Angel does not say, vocabit, Mary shall call his
name, but vocabis, thou shall call his name Jesus. Hence some observe, that it
belongs unto the Father to name the child. Chrysostom. Op. Imper.


What must Joseph call this child?

Jesus; Thou shall call his name Jesus.

Jesus?

Messiah and Physician of our souls. Others derive it from (...), or (...), and
(...), to save or preserve in safety; from which comes (...), a Savior, or one
who is the author of salvation.

Secondly, these derivations are true in regard of the office of Christ, which
was to save us; but are not according to the literal and grammatical
derivation of it, which is this. Jesus comes from Iashang, or in Hiphill from
Hosheang, which signifies to save; and hence in this verse the Angel first
Propounds the name [Thou shall call his name Jesus.] And then secondly,
expounds it, for he shall save his People from their sins.

Is this name Jesus proper unto Christ?

First, no; for it was given unto others, three Chron. 24. another, 2 Chronicles.
31. and a third, the Author of the book of Ecclesiasticus; for he is called
Jesus the son of Sirach. There were two more also almost of the same name,
Ioshuah that brought the People into the promised Land, and Ioshuah, who
together with Zerubbabel brought the people back from Babylon 1 Esdr. 2. For
Ioshuahs name has in it only one letter more, and signifies the salvation of
the Lord.

Secondly, this name is given unto Christ

. 2. Jesus shall thou call him.

Some observe that diverse deep and profound Jesus, P. Galat. lib. 3. c. 20.
many whereof I omit, referring the studious Reader to Petrus Galatinus k
considering briefly of one or two only. Jesus is a Triptote, declined only
by three terminations, Jesus, Iesum, Jesus, signifying thereby the three persons
of the B. Trinity, in unity ever to be worshipped. Again the first case ends
in S. JESUS, the second in M. JESUM, the third in V. JESU, to teach us, that
Christ is Summus, Medius, and Vltimus, the beginning the midst, and the ending,
the first, and the last, yea all in all. Coloss. 3.11.

The Papists affirm that Antichrist shall be one particular man, Bellarm. de
Antichrist. Cap. 10. et Rhemist. s. Apoc. 13.. 10.) And they argue from this
verse thus: Antichrist shall have a name, as Christ had: but it is not
necessary to be known, otherwise then Christ his name was; which was described
by the Sybils by the number of eight hundred eighty, eight, l 10 e 8 s 200 o 70
u 400 200 888
as Antichrist is by six hundred sixty six: yet was not Christ's name Jesus,
perfectly known before his coming; neither therefore is it necessary, that
Antichrists should, before that time. Jesus in Greek letters, thus, (...)
makes as you see eight hundred, eighty, and eight.

First, they must prove Antichrist to be one Christ, was, and then seek out
his name, for the arguments of our men to the contrary are not yet answered.

Secondly, Non est par ratio, the Sybils prophecies, parallelled, John having
his Revelation from heaven, and the Sybils their predictions by a spirit of
divination.

Jesus has some evidence out of the Prophets; for Jesus and Iesua, are all
one, and both of them signify a Savior; but Iesua we have mentioned Zachar.
3. it being the high Priests name, who was a type of Christ, and bare his name,
verse. 5. upon whose head is set a Diadem, which must needs be understood of
JESUS CHRIST our high Priest. Again, JESUS is called HOSANNA Ioh. 12.13. Read
D. Willet Synops. f. 230.
, which signifies the same that JESUS, and is derived from the same root;
translated SAVE US: and this name we find Psalm. 118.25. And therefore the
name of CHRIST may be deduced from the Prophets.

Jesus Christ, were revealed to Sybilla, an heathen prophetess, how can it be
that the Prophets of God were ignorant of it? Therefore by their own argument,
seeing CHRIST'S names were known before his coming, why should not Antichrists
in like manner, if he should be one singular notorious man, as they affirm?

Thou shall call his name Jesus.] Having observed something of the name Jesus,
I come now to consider of the imposition of the name, and the reason of it. A
question will here be propounded:

Why is the Messiah called Jesus?

I answer, he will save his people from their sins: where we see, that his
name is taken from his office; he must be called a Savior, because he will
save his people: Observa.
teaching us that names should be imposed upon infants, with reason and
discretion: that is, it were fit that significant names should be given unto
them.

How many sorts of names are there?

Some divide names into three ranks,

Personal names are either, 1. changed after they are imposed. or 2. once
imposed, and never changed. I. Names formerly given are sometimes changed, and
that two manner of ways. First, by taking away the old names, as Saul was
called Paul, and Abram, called Abraham. Secondly, by adding of new names unto
the old, and that in a foure-fould regard; namely either

1. In respect of the Body, so we call some men long, some thick, some fat,
according to their shape. Or II. in respect, of the mind, and so it is
twofold, either in regard of Vices, when men are named from their vicious
natures, as Brutus, Biberius Mero (for Tiberius Nero) Sardanapalus, Helbrand
for Pope Hildebrand, Or, Virtues, and that for a double cause Either by reason
of some praise, or praiseworthy virtue observed in them, as Philadelphus. Or
By reason of some admonition given to some virtue, as Peter. Boanerges. Or




III. In respect of some atchivements, or deeds that are, or have been done,
as Africanus, Scaevola. Or,

IV. In regard of fortunate, or unfortunate success in our enterprises; as
Faelix, Faustus, Mara. Ruth. 1.20.


2. Names are sometimes imposed, and always retained, being never either left
or changed: And herein observe these two things.

First, when these names are given.

Secondly, why or how they are given.

First consider when these names are given that are never changed. 1. Sometimes
before the birth; hereof we have examples both in The old Testament as Ishmael
Genesis 16.11. Isaac. Gen 17.19. Josiah 1 King. 13.2. And New Testament; as Jesus
in this verse and John Baptist. Luke 1.13


II. These names are sometimes given after the birth, both by heathens and
Christians.

First, this is observed by heathens, who give names to their infants, some few
days after their birth: the Grecians the seventh day after they are borne: the
Athenians the tenth: the Romans, if a boy the ninth, if a girl the eight,
Plutquaest. cent. romans qu. 102.
and all these in their solemnities, did use some lotions, and some manner of
purging of the infant, who was to be named Rhod. e festo Pomp
.

Again, this is observed by Christians, who at the Sacrament impose some name
upon the Child to be baptized; yea, it is fitting, that the name should be
imposed upon the Child, non cum natus, sed cum renatus Muscul. s. Genes.
, not when he is first borne, but when he is borne again, that is in
Baptism, it being the Sacrament of our regeneration, and initiation into the
Church.

Secondly, consider we now, how these names, which are not to be changed, are
imposed upon children.

I answer. First, sometimes they are given casually, without any solid ground
at all: this is too too ordinary: for, so the child have a name, we care not
what it be.

Secondly, sometime they are imposed with reason, and judgment, and that three
manner of ways. Either I. by reason of Distribution, or Distinction, that
several children may be distinguished by several names. II. Or by reason of
Notation, of body, as Rufus, Simon, Sylla, Longimanus, etc. III. Or by reason
of Recordation, or Remembrance. And this is twofold. First of Men. And
secondly, of Things.

Sometime names are imposed for the remembrance of men, and this is twofold:
either Politic, which is either Or Evil, for vainglory, as Scanderbeg, Or
Lawful, for the remembrance, either Of kindred, now living Luke 1.61
, Or Of predecessors, now dead. Or Of friends, whether alive or dead.

Religious, which remembrance is for the imitation of the Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, or holy men, etc.


Sometimes names are imposed for the remembrance of Things. and that either,
First, by-passed, as Evah, Enosh, or the children of Joseph Genesis 49.
, and Naomi, who changed her name into Mara, in regard of her former losses and
miseries. Or secondly, to come, and that either of Hope, as Benjamin, or of
Office and Direction.

Direction in names is two fold, to wit, Imponendo, in the imposition of names:
here thou may direct and dispose of the name according to thy own wishes and
desires: and this is the office and part of the parent, to name his child,
after what Patriarch, or Apostle, or Saint, he will. Recordando, this belongs
unto those that are named, they must remember that their names, are for this
end, that they may strive to imitate the virtues of those whose names they
bear.


I have omitted to explain the names here above mentioned, for these three
causes. First because it would have swelled this question to too great a bulk:
and tediousness (especially in these things which are less needful unto
saving knowledge) I desire to avoid. Secondly because to the vulgar Reader,
they are not so necessary to be known. Thirdly, because of the understanding
Reader, which is but meanly Conversant in Histories, they are well enough
understood.

He shall save his people from their sins. Hence it will be objected,

Romans 8.1.
. Secondly, from the Kingdom of sin; because it shall not reign in, nor
over those that are in Christ Romans 6.14.
. Thirdly, and this freedom from the power and punishment of sin, is our
justification and salvation: And thus Christ here is said to save his people
from their sins.



From their own proper sins: for these only are they that condemn us.





qua Jesus, as he is our Savior, is that which is here expressed, to take away
our sins; part of which power the Pope and Papists ascribe unto Saints, to
the Virgin MARY, and to themselves: Nay, the Pope does shoulder for the whole
power, and does usurp as much himself, as Christ can do in that kind: for
this is all, Christ can do, to forgive his people all their sins fully and
perfectly. And Pope Paul the fifth did say, he would do as much Iubil. Paul. 5.
anno 1620.
. Nay, they say, the Pope has done more than Christ did: For Pope Clement the
8th, An. 1592
gave indulgentiam plenaria^, and remissione^ omnium peccatorum, tam culpa quam
poenae, a full forgivenes of all their sins, both in regard of the guilt, and
of the punishment thereof: the last whereof they deny, that Christ has done,
in the doctrine of Satisfaction. Yea, the Pope has done more than ever Christ
did indeed, if all be true which they say: Gregory by his prayer did recall the
soul of the Emperor Trajane from Hell Revel. Briget. li. 4. ca. 13.
; Christ never did the like. And thus we see in regard of this principal
blessing, (the forgiveness of sins) which we receive from Christ, Christ is
opposed by the Pope: and therefore he is rightly termed 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
, (...), the Adversary Squire s. 2 These. 2.4. f. 152.
.

Again, this verse serves to prove, that the Virgin Mary is not excepted from
the common nature of men, neither free from original sin, thus: Bellarmine
himself can say Li 4. de amiss. gra. cap. 16.
, Inter Catholicos convenit beatam virginem per Christi sanguinem vere fuisse
redemptam, etc. The Papists do generally among themselves agree upon this, and
assent unto it, that the blessed Virgin was truly redeemed by the blood of
Christ; and that which the Apostle says (2. Cor. 5.) Christ dyed for all men,
is universally to be understood, without excepting of any.

But here they give us a testimony of their subtle Sophistry, saving men
already fallen into sin and condemnation: or else for sustaining and preserving
them from falling: and in this sense only he was a Savior to the Virgin
Mary, who was preserved only from sin by Christ, not saved from her sins,
which she had not Franciscani Fox. page 801.
.

To this we answer, Christ is called JESUS, a Savior, in this sense only,
because he should Savior unto Mary, or not at all; but her Savior he was, as
she her self confesses Luke 1.47.
, therefore he saved her from her sins.

contra naturam pene est, ut aliquis fine peccato sit De^ret. part. 1. did.
25. ca. 3. Gloss.
. It is a thing against nature for a man to be without sin. No man or woman
then was ever yet so preserved from sin; wherefore in that sense Christ is
not a Savior, but that he saves, that is, delivers us from sin D. Willet.
Synops f. 1321.
.

VERSE. 22. Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken
of the Lord by the Prophet.


Joseph: for in the message he brings, are two things observable. 1. the matter
or substance of it, and that is the maine and chiefest doctrine of religion, to
wit, our salvation by Christ: and therefore it was necessary that it should be
confirmed from the Prophets: the principles of religion being to be grounded 2 Timothy 3.16.
upon Scriptures. 2. The manner of it, and that was miraculous in a double
respect; both in regard of the appearing of the Angel, and also in regard of
that divine conceptio^, which he preadmonished Joseph of: and therefore to avoid
all deceit which Joseph might imagine to be in this vision: the Angel cites the
Prophecy, that so Joseph might the more certainly give credit unto it:
Miracles are to be confirmed by Scripture: thus the Angel does here confirm
his message from Esaias 7.14. and again, he confirms his message unto Zachary,
Luke 1.17. from Malach. 4.6. both which were miraculous.

miracles to be proved by Scripture?

miracles may be wrought by Satan: Read these places. Iannes and Iambres
wrought miracles. Exodus 7.11.22. and 8.7. so 2 Timothy 3.8. Deuteronomy. 13.1, etc.
Antichrist shall come with signs and lying wonders. Mat. 24.20. and 2 These.
2.9. and Revel. 13.14. and 16.14.

omnis confirmatio a fortioribus, every confirmation must necessarily be
drawn from the greater, stronger, and more undeniable principles: but unto the
faithful there is nothing more strong then the word of God, and the holy
Scriptures; whom they will rather believe, then one that should rise from the
grave unto them: True it is, that the Apostels confirmed the Scriptures by
Miracles unto unbeleevers Cor. 14.2^.
: but the Angel here (unto faithful and holy Joseph) confirms his miraculous
message by the Scripture: for unto believers. Religion is not to be proved by
Miracles, but Miracles by Religion.

VERSE. 23. Behold a Virgin shall be with child,
This verse is a recitation of a prophecy, Exposit.
from Esaias 7.14. the scope of which prophecy is this, Achaz fears, Esai
comforts him, and for the further strengthening of him offers a sign, which
Achaz refuses: the Prophet, disdaining this his obstinacy, does repeat a
general sign, verse 14. adding a particular sign verse 14.16.

First, they will not grant, that it is to be understood Hezekiah; or
secondly, of Shearjashub, the son of Achaz. Isa. 7.3. of thirdly, of some
other of Achazes sons, which was not as yet borne.

But to this I answer,

Secondly, they object further, It is not likely Mary could not be a sign unto
Achaz, to whom it was promised and made, seeing it fell out 800. years at the
least after Achazes death.

It is answered, first, the Prophet does not Vide Iunii Parall, fol. 8.
.

Thirdly, This sign was not promised unto Achaz, that wicked King, that would
not ask of God a sign, ( Esaias 7.) but unto the house of David, which
continued unto the time that Christ was borne of the Virgin Mary; as appears
by the genealogy of Christ's drawn from David and Abraham, by Saint Matthew
unto Joseph, and consequently unto Mary, as has been aforesaid Pareus s.
.

The Jews object again, The following Achaz, verse 15.16.

I answer those two verses do not belong to this child: for the proof of
this, Iunij Paarell. fol. 8.

They further object, the word Halma does

I answer, it signifies always in Scripture a Prove. 30.19. where Halma is
taken not for a pure Virgin, but for a Virgin in show, or outward appeareance,
as verse 20.

I add one answer more, which may serve as a general solution of all these
objections; That we have the testimony of the holy Spirit in this verse,
confirming from heaven unto us, that this prophecy is meant only of Christ
the true Messiah.

question is not questioned amongst Christians, as also because others Mayer s.
and Pareus s.
handle it something largely, I therefore prosecute it no further.

Behold a Virgin shall be with child, etc.] A Virgin in Hebrew is Halma,
Exposit.
derived from the root Halam, which signifies to hide, because Virgins were
wont warily to be retained, and detained in their Fathers house, until they
were espoused:

Some hence may question, why are they so charily to be kept? filia bonae spei,
very hopeful; virtue shows it self in them, and therefore what need is
there to keep them like Lions in a grate, or birds in a cage? we hope we may
safely suffer them sometimes to run and fly abroad.

I answer first; Casta est quam nemo rogavit, persuasion from all cords of
vanity, that draw on iniquity Esa. 5.18.
, that is all occasions that may provoke unto sin.

Secondly, Nature is flexible, and youth easily

Thirdly, Virginity is a Jewel never to be

. 3. His name shall be called Emmanuel, which

Three things may be observed from these words. Observa.
1. There is none so pure, but malice can deprave, no truth so infallible, but
the perverse brain of man will object against it. 2. This verse evidently
proves the deity of Christ, because this name Emmanuel given unto Christ, does
testify that in the person of Christ, God is with us. i. e. united with our
flesh. 3. yet there are some who dare oppose the truth of it.

Eniedinus, a Samosatenian Heretic does here Emmanuel. 1. because many are
said to be that which they are not. 2. Many have been called Emmanuel, who
were not Gods.

Joseph and Christ by a false name, which is blasphemy to utter.

Secondly, Other Emmanuels have nomen sive re, nomen et re^^: others are only
so called, but unto Christ the name does truly agree, he having this name
given unto him, to express the nature of his person: he being (...) as the New
Testament does ever and anon confirm: as; the word became Flesh, and God was
manifested in the Flesh, and the like phrases: And therefore he only is the
true Emmanuel.

It is very doubtful (says the same heretical Emmanuel or not: because
neither the Angel nor the Evangelist do call him Emmanuel, but Jesus.

I answer, First, if he be Jesus the Savior,

Secondly, God called Christ Emmanuel, not for Esa. 7.14.) says that in regard
of his person he shall be called Emmanuel, but his proper name shall be Jesus:
Thou shall call his name Jesus, verse 21.

VERSE. 25. And Joseph knew her not,
He knew her not Donec, until, etc. that is, Exposit.
he never knew her at all, for so Donec signifies; as it is said, Samuel saw
not Saul, until the day of his death 1. Sam. 15.35.
, that is, he never saw him after: the words here used are Greek, but the
phrase Hebrew, for this is frequent in the Old Testament, as Michal had no
child until the day of her death. 1. Sam. 6.23.
i. e. she had no more children at all afterward.

That Joseph never knew Mary at all, the Church has always held, and that for
these reasons.

First, because it does establish an Article of out faith, natus ex Virgin,
that is, of one who was a Virgin, when he was borne (and this is of absolute
necessity to be believed) yea continued a virgin all her life time after; and
this we are verily persuaded of.

Secondly, because the Fathers with an unanimous consent, have both always
called her Virgin, and also held this opinion: condemning those for heretics
that thought the contrary, as may be seen in Epiphanius, Augustine, Hierom,
and diverse other Fathers.

Thirdly, some of the Fathers, and Gualter (upon these words) for the proof of
this opinion, have argued from the Prophet; saying: Ezech. 44.2.
This gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened, and no man shall enter in by
it, because the Lord the God of Israel has entered in by i^ therefore it shall
be shut: But this reason ser^^^^ not of much weight, that place not bearing it,
without allegorizing the place, as shall (God willing) be showed else where.

Fourthly, it is not likely, that Joseph being a just man would know her, whom
he knew to be the Mother of his Lord: or expose to a common use, that vessel
which the Lord had thus sanctified; especially considering that he was of the
age of 80. years when he was contracted to her, as says Epiphanius.

Helvi^^us, Nestorius, Ievinianus, and diverse others object many things.

(he took unto him his wife.)

Hereunto I answer, There may be matrimony without carnal knowledge: this
appears most plainly from the law Deuteronomy. 22 23.24.
. If a Damsel, that is a Virgin be b^tr^^^ec^ unto a husband, and a man find
her and lie with her, he shall be stoned to death, because he has humbled his
neighbors Wife: Besides, Marriage is not congressu^ carnis, but cons^nsus
voluntatum August.
, not the conjunction of the flesh, but the mutual consent of wills.

first borne, implying thereby that Mary had more children afterward.

priu^^genitus, the first borne, but primogenitus i^^e, that first borne, to
wit, of God Gualter.
.

Secondly, primogenitus, the first borne, is one before whom none was before,
not one after whom some others were borne Danaeus e Iustiniano, and Hier contra
Helvid. Reply.
. Primogenitus est, non post quam alij, sodante qu^m nullus alius genitus est.
But they instance here, This Until is a relative word, and therefore cannot
go alone, a man cannot properly be called a first borne son, and an only
son.

esse, and in posse, in entity (or being) or in possibility: thus the child
that first opens the womb is called Pri^^g^nitus, the first borne because
although there be in being, but one, Possibility there may be more.

Again from hence they object, He knew her not Until she had brought forth
etc. this Until implies

First, it may be answered, Cogn^stere est i^^elligere mysterium Gualt. ex
Epiphanio.
, to know is to understand the mystery revealed unto him by the Angel, that is
until Christ was borne, he did not truly and fully understand this wonderful
and profound mystery.

Secondly, Donec, until, does deny the time foregoing, not imply the time
following: it does exclude all time bypast, but not include the time to come:
he knew her not until she had brought f^^^h her first borne; this does
plainly prove that he knew her not before, but not infer that he knew her
afterward: for Do^^^ is often a note of perpetuity, as donec pona^ inj^^co^
scabell^^ Psalm. 110.^.
, until I have made t^ine enemies thy f^^^st^^le. i. e. for ever. I am with
you (says our Savior) usque ad sinem secu^^ Matthew. 28.20.
, until the end of the world, that is, in seculum seculorum, World without end.

The Papists very well like and allow of this exposition, of Donec, ^^^ill, and
therefore I would entreat them not to urge that Donec in the parable so
vehemently, as they do Matthew, 5.26.
. Thou shall not come out, Donec, until thou have paid the utmost furthing:
the Papists urge this Donec against us for the proof of Purgatory, in the
same manner, that Helvidius, Nestorius, and their adherents do both against us
and them urge Donec here, to prove that Joseph carnally knew Mary: And
therefore it is not fit for them, to make of the Scripture a nose of wax. But
I shall consider of that in his proper place.

The forenamed Heretics object again, from Joseph knew Mary Danaeus. Answ.
.

To this I answer, Clavus clavo pellendus; we have more of the ancients that
deny this, then affirm it: And therefore if their Testimony be of value, it
will be concluded on our side.

Further they object, Christ had brethren, James and Ioses, Simon and Jude: and
it is said unto Christ, thy brethren seek thee: therefore, Joseph afterward
knew his wife.

I answer first, the Scripture usually calls Cosen Lot is called the brother of
Abraham, and so James was the son of Mary Cleophas: And thus Joseph's
brothers, or sisters children, or Mary's sisters children are the brethren of
Christ.

Secondly, others answer, that Joseph married Mary, and that the sons he had
by that wife were called Christ's brethren: of this opinion is Danaus De haeres
f. 166.
. But if Joseph were (according to Epiphanius) 80 years old, when he was
contracted unto Mary, who was alive when Christ was crucified, 34 years after,
it is not probable that he married or had children, Danaeus de haere. f. 224.


Thirdly, others think (to which I rather subscribe) that Joseph had another
wife before Mary, by whom he had fix children.

Lastly, they object, Joseph took her home in stead of a wife, verse 24.
therefore it is likely,

I answer, he took her not home for carnal copulation: but first, that he
might defend her, both from the lash of tongues and humane laws. Secondly,
that he might provide for her and the infant, as is foreshewed verse 18.

And therefore I conclude this verse, Chapter and controversy, That although
it be not Determined by Scripture, yet because first there is no Scripture
against it. Secondly, because there is (in a manner) a general consent and
agreement of Fathers for it: And thirdly, because it is very agreeable unto
reason; it is not therefore lightly to be denied or gainesayed by any.

CHAPTER II.
VERSE. 1. When JESUS then was borne at Bethlehem, in Judea, in the days of
Herod the King, behold, there came wise men from the East to Jerusalem.
Joseph and Mary before, the Holy Ghost to Elizabeth, and John Baptist in her
womb; the Angels to the Sheepheards, the star to the Wisemen, and they to
the Jews, presently after he was borne.



Secondly, that the Jews, the people of God, might be admonished of it: the
Messiah long before was promised unto them; and therefore by the testimonies of
many, God will have them to know, that now he is come.

Thirdly, that all might be left without excuse, seeing that it was so
plentifully confirmed.

Fourthly, this was done for the comfort and consolation of those, who did
expect the Messiah, as Simeon Luk 2.25.
, and Anna Luke 2.36.


In Bethlehem.] Why was Christ born in Bethlehem?

Historical, that they might be taxed Luke 24.
, Joseph being of the lineage of David, comes to Bethlehem, the City of David
to be taxed. The second cause is Allegorical, because Bethlehem signifies the
house of bread Genesis 35.19. and 48.7.
, and Christ is the true bread from heaven Hier. and Haymo.
. The third cause is Prophetical, that the prophecy might be fulfilled, which
was delivered concerning Christ the Messiah Mich. 5.2.
.

In the days of Herod the King.] Hence

Herod, who now ruled over them, was a stranger, coming thus unto the
kingdom. The Maccabees held a certain kingdom, unto the time of Hirca^us,
the son of Alexander, who contending with his brother Aristobulus, he calls
one Antipater unto his aid, which Antipater, being the Father of this Herod,
mar^ies him to the daughter of Aristobulus: Hircanus being overcome, and taken,
Herod assumes the kingdom, as his Vicegerent, or Deputy. After a while
Nicanor returns into Judea, whom Herod peaceably receives, but secretly
slayes, and then obtaines the kingdom for himself, of the Romans.

Now this time, I say, was unto the Jews a miserable time in a threefold
regard. I. Because their Kingdom was taken away. II. Their Priesthood was
corrupted; there being two high Priests alive at once, as we shall show
afterward. III. They were now become tributaries unto the Romans, which
confirms Christ to be the true Messiah, and promised Shilo, because the
Lawgiver was now gone from Judah Genesis 49.
.

Hence it may be asked; Why does God

This was done for these causes: First, Psalm. 30.7.8. and 7328.
. And this was the principal cause of their great captivity: in prosperity
they run away from God, and will not be subject unto him: therefore the Lord
suffers them to be afflicted, that they may learn to draw nearer unto him,
that so he might draw near unto them.

. 4. Came Wise men from the East.] It may

I answer, First, the word is ambiguous and

Secondly, I answer, There are four kinds of the stars, and is called
Astrology; and these two I here omit. Thirdly, Diabolical, which is the Art
used by Magitians, Witches, and Sorcerers, and is called Goeteia, and Theurgia,
in which I might observe these double terms, I. Terminus aqua, from whence
this Magic came. viz. 1. From the Devil, the author of it. 2. From divine
worship corrupted, or from the worship of false Gods. II. Terminus ad quem,
whereunto this Magic tends, to wit, 1. unto Physic, Medicines, and the
knowledge of Plants. 2. Unto the vanity of the stars, this divellish Magic
leading unto forbidden Astrology. 3. Unto divellish practices: experience
showing, how that Magic leads unto all manner of lewdness, profaneness, and
wicked enterprises, both against God and our neighbor; but all these, God
willing, I shall handle more largely in another place.

Fourthly, there is a Moral and Divine Magic, which consists in the study
of wisdom, and divine knowledge. Amongst the Heathens, they that were
zealous, and learned, and studious in this learning, had diverse names given
unto them, the Persians called them Magos (and such were these in this verse
mentioned) the Assyrians, Chaldaeos: the Indians, Brachmanes, or
Gymnosophistas: the Egyptians, Prophets, or Priests: the Grecians, (...): the
French, Druydas: the Latins, Wise men; (and so these Magi are called in this
place by all our Interpreters) and the Jews called them Scribes Rhod. and
Plin. 30.1.
.

I answer again, that there is much question, little certainty of the number
and quality of these wise men. First, some say, they were only three in
number; who were wise men, and great Scholars, in all the learning of the
Persians, but were no Kings. Secondly, others think, there were fourteen of
them Calvin. s.
. Thirdly, others think, that they descended of the stock of Balaam Hier. s.
, from Balaams prophecy, Numb. 24.17.
of which by and by. Fourthly, others think, that they were three Kings,
called Gaspar, Melchior, Balthazar, who first were buried in their own
Countries. Secondly, translated from thence, by Helena (the Mother of
Constantine the great) unto Constantinople. Thirdly, carried thence, by a
Bishop, to Millaine: and fourthly, by the Emperor Henry, transported to
Colleine Legenda.
. Now after so many opinions, and translations, we may conclude, that all
these are false, or at least, that it is most uncertain, which of these is
true. And therefore, I. The adoration of the bones that are showed at Colleine,
is but ridiculous Idolatry, like the worshipping of the wood of Christ's Cross.
II. That also is but impious Magic, which is taught by some of them likewise,
who prescribe these three names, Gaspar, Melchior, Balthazar to be written in
parchment, with the sign of the Cross, and hung about the neck, as a sure
salve, to cure all sores, and diseases whatsoever.

Ca^^^ wise m^n, saying, etc.] Here it will be objected, Matt. 1.25.) says
that the divine Mysteries were bid from the wise: and Paul says, God has not
chosen them, 1 Cor. 1.26. And here wise men are foremost, and forwardest to
s^^^e our Christ.

I answer, First, the Apostles speech is not universal, he not saying, that
God has chosen none, but few, 1. Cor. 1.26.

Secondly, Ioh. 9.40.
our Savior speaks not of those that are truly wise, but of the presuming
Jews, who boasted of their knowledge.

To Jerusalem.] Here it may be questioned, Why they came unto Jerusalem,

First, some say, that the wise men came hither, that they might be witnesses
against the Jews, both for the present, and also at the day of judgment: or
that the Jews might be the more inexcuseable: but this is not likely to be
the intent of their coming thither, and therefore I leave it.

Secondly, I rather think, they came hither, because it was the Metropolis,
and therefore they hoped to find the King of the Jews

Thirdly, they came hither also, to be instructed of the Priests, as those who
perfectly knew, where the Messiah was to be born: for the star not appearing
unto them, they knew not of themselves, how to direct their course, and
therefore repair unto those, whom they thought were able to instruct them.

VERSE. 2. Saying, Where is the king of the Jews,
This verse may admit a double sense: First, Allegorical: Literal.

This verse may be Allegorized, two manner of ways: First, frivolously, and
foolishly. Secondly, fruitfully and profitably.

The Monks ridiculously allegorize this Star: We have seen his star. Five
stars are seen, say they, First, a Material star, which is that here
spoken of. Secondly, a Spiritual star, which is faith. Thirdly, an
Intellectual star, that is an Angel. Fourthly, a Natural star, which is
the Blessed Virgin. Fifthly, a Supersubstantiall star, which is Christ.
These, as mere fancies, I omit.

This verse may be commodiously allegorized thus. First, the star signifies
Religion, because as the star shines, so does Religion, and so ought the
Religions Matthew. 5.16. Phil. 2.15.
. Secondly, the East, wherein the star arises, signifies Youth Eccles. 1.5.
, and therefore Religion and Repentance are not to be deferred unto old age
Eccles. 12.1.
. The Jews were enjoined to offer up unto God, a Lamb of a year old, to
Star (only) here directs Ioh. 6.44.
, as we have an example in Lydi^, the Lord having opened her heart, she heard
the Disciples of Christ willingly Act. 16.14.
. But against the truth of this, some things are objected.

Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word. See also Ephesians. 1.13. After ye
heard the word of truth, ye believed. So likewise, 2. Pet. 1.19. Ye have a
sure word of prophecy, which shines as a light in a dark place. In these
texts faith is attributed to the preaching of the word, and not to heavenly
illumination.

Matthew. 13.15. and Romans 11.8.
. Spiritual things are spiritually discerned; and neither the natural man,
nor the nature of man can aright understand those things, that are of God 1
Cor. 2.14.15.
.

Star, by whom we are brought unto him (he being the bright and Morning
star Rev. 22.16.
,) and therefore not the illumination of the Spirit of God.

star, and that bright Morning star (Apoc. 22.16.) called also Lucifer, or
the Day star 2. Pet. 1.19.
, etc. yea more than a star, the Sun, which gives light unto all the
stars Malach. 4.2.
. And therefore there is an order to be star, which obscurely admonishes, and
moves; this is the internal (but common and general) motions of the holy
Spirit: as after Peter's Sermon, being pricked in their hearts, they cry out,
What shall we do to be saved Act. 2.37.38.
? These general motions and commotions a man may have within himself for a
time, and yet not be brought home unto Christ; and without these, we cannot (at
least ordinarily) be brought unto him: and therefore prayer is necessarily to
be adjoined to the hearing of the word, that so we being assisted (in the
hearing thereof) from above, the power of God unto salvation 1 Cor. 1.18.21.
, as we see by experience even from the word of God. Philip preaches, and then
the Eunuch understands, and believes Act. 8.35.37.
. Peter preaches, and Cornelius, and all with him, receive the holy Ghost Act.
10.5.54.
. And therefore we must not expect Enthusiasmes, or divine revelations, and
neglect the word, but we must have recourse to the Law, and to the Prophets,
that they may direct us unto Christ. True it is, that the word does not work in
us, or upon us, either ex opere operato, by the bare preaching of it, or
incantative, by way of enchanting, or charming of us: yet we must confess and
acknowledge (yea expect and long for) the operation of God in his own
ordinance, the word, which therefore is called, the word of reconciliation 2
Cor. 5.19.
, God by the word reconciling us unto himself: and without whose gracious
assistance, the word will become altogether unprofitable Mich. 3.6.7.
. Thirdly, there is a Sun, or a bright and shining Morning star, which is the
testimony of the Spirit of Christ within us, enabling us boldly and confidently
to call God Rom 8.15. and Gal. 4.5.6.
, which is called a Sun, Malach. 4.2. and resembled thereunto in regard of a
threefold property it has. First, in regard of his firm, fixed, and apparent
light Esa. 60.1.
, we thereby beholding, as with open face, the glory of the Lord 2 Cor. ^.18.
assuring us of an interest in Christ, and of salvation by him. Secondly, in
regard of his fervent heat, making us zealous of good works, and enflaming all
the affections of the soul, with an ardent desire to obey God in whatsoever he
requires, and to approve our selves unto him, by true holiness, and unto
others by equity, righteousness, and unblameable lives Esa. 60.3 and Tit. 2.14.
. Thirdly, in regard of solid joy, which it brings unto us: when the Sun
begins to rise, then the birds begin to sing, and most creatures delight in
the sight thereof: for this internal evidence of the Spirit of God does work
in us joy unspeakable and glorious, Read Isai 60.19.20. Apoc. 21.23. and 25.5.
and 1. Pet. 1.8.

Thus much for the Historical sense of this

In the historical sense of this verse,

The Papists to prove, that the Pope has both Regal, and Sacerdotall power,
argue thus: That power which was in Christ, the head of the Church, when he was
upon earth: is now in the Pope, his Vicar general upon earth: but Christ had
both Regal and Sacerdotall power. i. e. was both a Priest and a temporal
King, when he was upon the earth: Therefore the Pope is such; both a Priest
and a Prince, having power Temporal and Spiritual over people and Princes.
The whole argument I meddle not withal, referring the Reader to the learned
Frenchman Camierus Tom. 2. lib. 15. cap. 4. Sect. 1.2, 3. de Temp. Papa potes.
, I will only prosecute one particular of the Minor proposition.

We deny that Christ was a temporal King upon earth, and therefore although
the Pope were his Vicar (which is not yet proved by them by any unanswerable or
unanswered arguments) yet has he not Regal power given unto him. That Christ
was a temporal King, some of them Carerius
prove from this verse: the Oriental Kings, or wise men of the East, ask,
where is he that is borne King of the Jews: therefore they confess he was a
King, and they honor him as a King, by presenting gifts unto him.

To this I answer, first, it cannot be denied, King.

Secondly, but whether they call him a temporal Carerius proves it not: but
others witness Chrysostom hom. 6. in Matthew.
that they came unto Christ as unto God; and then certainly they do not
enquire for him, as a temporal King.

Again, it is most probable, and agreeable King, not an earthly, as may
appear thus; If these wise men had acknowledged no other thing in Christ, but
only that he was the temporal King of the Jews, that is a King of a very
small people; then had they had no cause to have undertaken this long journey,
for the sight of him, but rather cause, not to have moved a foot out of the way
for him; the earthly King of the Jews not belonging at all unto them.

Opus imperf. in Matthew. hom. 2. and Salmeron. Tract. 38. Tom. 3. and Anselm. s.
and cyprian. sermon. de stella and Magi, and August. sermon. 29. de tempore. Diverse
questions from this verse may be made, concerning this STAR, I will only
propound those which I conceive to be of most weight, and of greatest
necessity to be known.



star; they confess at Jerusalem, we have seen his star, and they
conclude that a new star does portend a new King.

star: seeing that he was so revealed unto the Israelites: an Angel from
heaven (totidem verbis) even in plain terms telling them of his nativity Luke
2.10.11.
?

Balaams Prophecy Numb. 24.17.
That a star should rise from Jacob: but this is false, for the Prophet
speaks there of Christ himself, under the type of David, who should tame the
Moabites, and all his enemies.

For out of Zion went the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem Esa. 2.3.
. Yea to the Jews only were committed the divine oracles of God Romans 3.9.
, and from them flowed salvation unto the Gentiles Ioh. 4.22
.

Thirdly, the Jews were more worthy then star Haymo s.
.

Greg. s. Matthew. 2. ^ 349.
.

star, for a twofold admonition. viz. I. That they might be admonished of
the person of Christ: that this Jesus, who was borne at Bethlehem, was that
King, to whom (as the latin Church sings) both sun and moon, and stars
and air do chante by turns, or unto whom every thing that has breath should
sing praise Psalm. 150. verse. last.
.

II. This was done, that they might be admonished of the benefits they should
receive by Christ: viz. that by a true and lively faith in this King, a new
star of the true acknowledgement of God should arise in the hearts of the
faithful, which should diffuse his light, and send forth his bright beams
into the obscure world: for where the understanding is enlightened, and the
affections by a true zeal thoroughly enflamed, there is light and brightness
in the life and conversation.

Sixthly and lastly, I answer, the Wise Men star Chryos. and Calvin, supra.
, where we may observe two things, first God makes Christ known, to the
Israelites, to the Priests, to the Persians, and to Herod.

Secondly, he makes Christ known unto these, by things best known unto every
one of them, and most credited. Christ was manifested to the Israelites by an
Angel (Luke 2.10) to the Persians by a star: to the Priests and Herod, by the
Priests and Magi of the Persians in this Chapter.

Thirdly, it may be demanded what manner star it was, by which Christ was
revealed unto the Wise Men?

Many grossly and ridiculously answer this we have seen his star. II. Others
say, this was the Holy Ghost, who in the shape of a Dove was seen of the
Jews, when he descended upon Christ Ioh. ^.32.
. III. Others say it was that Angel which appeared unto the Sheepherds Luke 2,
9.10.
, of which opinion was Chrysostom: But the Angels never appeared unto any, but
they speak unto those to whom they appeared; now this star was mute, and
therefore it was no Angel.

IV. Others say, it was the star that was foretold of by Balaam: and some
tell us, Op. imperf. s. Matthew.
that 12 men every year were appointed perpetually, and carefully to watch for
this star: which they imagined should have the form of an infant bearing a
cross upon his shoulders. V. The Priscillianists dream, that to every man as
soon as he is borne, is borne a star, wherein his fate and destiny may be
seen and known: and this star (say they) was such an one, being created
just at the nativity of Christ, and fatal unto him. All these I reject, and
pass by, coming to more probable conjectures.

Some answer that this star was a Comet in what a comet is, Secondly the
names of a comet. Thirdly, the signification of a comet. Fourthly, wherein and
how this star differed from a comet. A comet is by some Brul. did. 14. q.
12. li. 2.
described thus: It is an earthly exhalation, of a dry, warm, gross, clammy
or viscous nature, who having his parts well compacted together, and being
elevated unto the highest region of the air, by reason of his vicinitie unto
the elementall fire, and his own gross and tough nature, is inflamed, and so
becomes luminous or shining.

A Comet has four names given unto it, first, it is called a Comet, secondly
a Blazing Star, thirdly, a bearded star, and fourthly, a long tailed star.

According to the Philosophers a comet has diverse significations. First, it is
a sign of a dry and barren season to come. Secondly, it is a sign of much
wind, and great winds. Thirdly, it is a sign of foreign wars. Fourthly,
it is the sign of domestical sedition, or jarres within the bowels of a land.
Fifthly, it is a sign of the death of some prince Arist, lib. de Meteor.
.

This Star here observed by the Wise Men, was no vulgar comet, as may appear
by these differences. First, it differed from a Comet in splendour; this star
was seen in the day time, but comets vanish, when the Sun appears.

Secondly, in apparition, this star was seen only of and by the Wise Men,
but comets of whole towns, cities, and for the most part by the whole land.
Thirdly, in the motion of it, sometimes this star moves, sometimes it stands
still, it walks along with them, it directs them as a guide to the place,
where they would be, and then stands still over the place where Christ was,
none of which things are proper to a vulgar or ordinary comet.





Fourthly, there is a miraculous star created ignis fatuus, or of Castor and
Pollux: this is conjecturall and therefore I leave it; concluding according to
the Evangelists mind and meaning, that there was a new light, placed either in
the air (as is most probable) or in the firmament (less likely) by the
providence and appointment of God, to be a guide and directer for the Wise
Men, to bring them unto Christ.

How did this star differ from the fixed stars? Dormisecur. de Tempore, sermon
71. s. Matthew. 1.2
this star differed from others in form, because it bare the form of a child,
carrying a cross upon his shoulders: this opinion is borrowed from Balaams
history, which Chrysostom told us before, and which, as a legende I leave.
III, It differed from others in splendour, all the other stars not being able
to direct the Wise Men, as this did. This is also the former Friars opinion,
and I leave it to the readers judgment; because to my weak understanding, it
seems of no great force; the star not appearing to them by night, when other
stars give their light: but by day, when the Sun gave them light, not the
star. IV. It differed from the fixed stars in place or situation; they
being fixed in the firmament, but this in the air; and as it is probable near
unto the earth, because otherwise it could hardly so punctually direct the Wise
men, as it did. V. This star differed from the other in office, for their
office is to manifest the night: we know night is at hand when stars appear,
and that the sun is set: but this star shows, that now it is day, and that
the Sun of Righteousness does shine in the world.

Fifthly, why did not the Star accompany

First, some say because they that seek humane

Secondly, some say, because signs belong unto Greg. s. Matthew. 2. f. 349.
therefore the Star leaves them, when they come thither.

Thirdly, I answer, the star left them for this end, that this their
questioning with the Jews

Fourthly, This was done principally that the

Sixthly, it may be demanded, how do the wise men by the star conjecture,
that Christ is borne?

Balaams tradition, ( Numb 24.17) they being of the lineage of Balaam (according
to some) as we said before.

Sybilles prophecies, some whereof Suetonius mentions.

Balaam although a worldling was taught and directed by God in his prophecies.
2. Because Satan sometimes speaks true, as Acts 16.17. but this is always
for some wicked end, the devil being that wicked one: but this manifestation
was for the good of many; a good message unto all nations, and therefore was
not revealed by Satan. 3 The devil certainly knew where Christ was borne,
and therefore if he had revealed unto them his birth, he would also have
revealed the place of his nativity.



Fifthly, they were very learned men, and therefore Daniels weeks; or 2. by the
Scepter, which was taken away from Judah.

Sixthly, some say that they knew of the nativity Calvin indeed confesses,
that they were very skillful in that art, but yet I cannot think that they did
this way come to the understanding of it, and that for these causes. 1. Because
this star was some stupendous thing against nature Dionys, Areopag.
, being neither planet, nor comet, nor constellation, nor star, as is
aforesaid; and confirmed largely by others Vide Senens. 6.10 and Tert. 620. D.
. 2. Because this star did tell of a particular King of the Jews, which does
exceed all art.

Seventhly, Although they did not wholly Calvin says) for the understanding
whereof, take notice, that there are two sorts of observations.

to wit either Ordinary, and those by aspects and constellations, either by
Astrology, or Astronomy. Extraordinay and they are either Metaphysicall, and
supernatural, as are the vulgar and ordinary Comets. or Antiphysicall and
contrary to nature, and such Was the Eclipse. Matthew. 27.45. of which in his
proper place. Was this Star, in this place.




And therefore Astrologye could say, first negatively, that this star was
against nature. And secondly in general that it did portend some great thing:
And thus far their astrology led them, and here left them.

Balaam, Nebuchadnezzer, Balthazar Bezas. and Scult. Idea. conc. f. 87.
. And this is most probable, and likelye to be truest.

That we may worship him.] It may be here asked,





Herod, for the only sight of him. 2 It had been a thing not beseeming the
gravity and wisdom of such men, as they were to have undertaken so long a
journey (though there had been no danger in it) to have seen a child, that
was no more then a man. 3. It had been derogatory to the estimation and credit
of the Persian Kings, for them that were Persians, to have come so far to
worship the King of the Jews. And therefore we may conclude, that this
proceeds from faith, and from some knowledge they had revealed unto them of
Christ the Messiah and Savior: but of this something more in the 11. verse.

. 1. VERSE. 3.
Why was Herod troubled?

For two things, First, Antonius after he had slain Hircanus, Nicanor, and
the High Priest Joseph. Antiq. f. 421.
. II least he should have been expelled and deposed, or thrown from his
throne, he had committed many murders. 1. f. 426.
he slew innocent Aristobulus his wives brother. f 425. f. 413. 480
2 Alexandra his wives Mother. 3 Mariamne his own wife, whom he loved so
extremely, that he grew extreme jealous of her. 4. Joseph his own Fathers
brother. 5. f 415. 465 f. 426.
Alexander, and Aristobulus, and Antipater, his own sons. 6. f. 479.
The innocent Friends of his son Alexander. 7. The Idumeans who were his own
friends, viz. Castabarus, Lysimachus, Antipater, and Dosithe^s. 8. The whole
Sanhedrim of the Pharisees. 9. The chief of the Jewish nobility: these he
slew intentionaliter, for he caused them to be kept together in a place called
Hyppodramus, secretly giving in charge to his sisters Salome, and Alexa, that
so soon as he was dead, they should cause them all to be slain: because he
thought that the Jews hating him for his tyranny would rejoice at his death,
but by this means they should be enforced to sorrow all over the kingdom
Joseph. 479. and Macrobius
.

quocunque fugis, teipsum non fugis August. s. Ioh.
, fly whether thou will, thou can not fly from thy conscience. Secondly, as
the conscience is always present, so is it always prepared to accuse it
self, as Joseph's brethren did, when they were roughly handled by Joseph, they
say it is just upon them, for their cruelty showed toward their brother Genesis
42.21.
: so Herod the less, when he hears of Christ, he says, this is no other then
John whom I have beheaded Mark. 6.
. Yea thirdly, this is the just judgment of God ( quisquis habet ultorem
sceleris Ambros.
) that every wicked man should have both a Judge and a hangman; an accuser and
condemner within himself: and thus had this Herod: when he hears tidings of a
King of the Jews, he being but a wicked usurper, and cruel tyrant, presently
fears his own downfall.

And all Jerusalem with him.] Hence it may be demanded, Herod has no part in
the Messiah, and therefore no marvel if he fear: but Christ was promised
unto the Jews, and they daily expect him, and therefore why are they troubled
at this news?

First, some say, the Jews were troubled only Calvin, but afterward disliked
it.

Secondly, others answer that either they loved Herod, or at least they
flattered him: (Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis) And therefore seeing,
he was troubled in deed, they are troubled in show: but Herod so inhumainely
tyrannising over them as he did, makes me that I cannot imagine this to be the
cause of their fear.

Thirdly, wickedness was so rooted in their hearts, and they accustomed to all
manner of nolumus hunc regnare, we will not have this man to rule over us.

Fourthly, they were troubled because they fear, that this message will
exasperate Herod's

Fifthly, I answer, they were now at peace, (although a base peace, conjoined
with slavery Caesar; and therefore will not acknowledge Christ, as we may see
clearly by a place or two: The Jews perceiving the extraordinary miracles
that Christ wrought, gather together, and take council thus. If we let this
man alone, then all will believe in him, and the Romans will come and take
away, both our place and Nation Ioh. 11.48.
. And afterward Christ being accused to Pilate, and he desirous to remitt him,
the Jews cry out unto him, If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's
friend, for whosoever makes himself a King, speaks against Caesar Ioh.
19.12.
. And therefore for their parts they utterly deny Christ, protesting that they
have no King but Caesar Ioh. 19.15.
. And thus they are troubled when they hear of the King of the Jews, fearing
least hereby the Romans should be incensed against them, and so their peace
disturbed, and their misery renewed.

. 1. VERSE. 4. And when Herod had gathether all the chief Priests and Scribes
of the people together, be demanded of them,
We may observe hence, that the Scripture is three manner of ways handled.

1. By the Scribes, who read and study the Scriptures, that they may
understand them, Joseph's feasting of his brethren Genesis 43.34.
, whereby it is said they drunk and were merry, or drunk largely; and of
Christ's turning water into wine at the marriage John 2.
, where it is said, and when men have well drunken, then the worst wine will
serve, for the justifying or excusing of drunkenness. Thus others excuse their
lying by Abraham's and the Mid-wives examples: Heretics they also study
Scripture, that they may either thereby overthrow Scripture, by finding some
contradictions and falshoodes in them, as they falsely suppose: or at least and
best that they may find some (medium) midst, whereby they may defend their
errors, by wresting and forcing the Scriptures to speak on their side. Both
these are wicked Gospellers, that study the Word of God, only for table talk,
and the informing of the mind, as the Scribes did: or who study the Scriptures
for some direct wicked end as Herod did. 3. The Scripture is handled by the
Wisemen, for this end, that knowing the truth, they may follow it: they desire
in sincerity of heart to know where Christ is, that they may run unto him,
fall down before him, and with their souls and hearts truly worship him: And
these only are wise Gospellers, who desire to know the will of God, that they
may zealously endeavor to do it.

He gathered together the chief Priests and It may here be questioned, who
these were? High Priest, did belong to the prime and chiefest sacerdotall
office, which office, 1. was vital, and continued for term of life Numb. 3.25.
; 2. now it was become annual, and continued but for a year Ioh. 11.49. and
18.13.
; 3. This office was now divided betwixt two as it is said; Annas and Cajaphas
being the High Priests Luke 3.2.
. 4. High Priests, or as here Chief Priests in the plural number, signify
either those that are of the stock of Aaron, or Eleazar, or those who have
borne the office formerly, for a year: or those who were governors of the
Sanhedrin.

Secondly, Scribe is the name of one of the seven sects that were amongst the
Jews: for Epiphan. and Danaeus.
. The Scribes they were interpreters of the law; and hence (in this verse)
Herod called both the Governors of the Sanhedrin the Chiefe-Priests, and also
those that were skillful in the law, the Scribes: that so it might be a
lawful Council: and yet the end of this Convocation or convocated Council
was for the ruin and overthrowe of Christ: teaching us that a true Council
may err: Council, were the lawful Rectors and Doctors of the people of God,
the Jews. Thirdly, the consultation was about a maine question of Religion,
the true Messiah: and yet notwithstanding all this was done for a wrong, and a
wicked end.

Hence it may be doubted, If a lawful Council may err concerning religion
who then

First, I and thou, or every particular man: now this is to be exploded; that
is, when one private man's opinion or exposition shall cross all that has
been before, it is lightly to be waved, or not much to be weighed: and yet
there have been such, who have spoken truth: as for example, Saint Hierome
expounding those words. The God of this World has blinded their eyes 2 Cor.
4.4.
, by the God of this world he understands the devil; which exposition was
called inventum Hicronymi, Hieronymies phansy or inventio^, because they that
were before him expounded it of God the Lord; and yet we see, that his
interpretation is true, and all the other mistook the place, by an unanimous
consent of all our now Interpreters. I might give instance likewise of
Augustines invention (as they called it) concerning the creation of the Angels;
but I pass it by, concluding, that a private and particular man's exposition,
which thwarts all that has gone before it, as it is not rashly to be believed,
and admitted of, so it is not to be adjudged to the fire, nor wholly rejected,
till it have been examined by other Scriptures and the analogy of faith.

Secondly, the second interpreter of the Scriptures are the Fathers, and
Counsels of the Church; these are venerable, highly to be prized, and much
esteemed: but yet not wholly and absolutely to be adhered unto, or admitted,
without examining of them by Scriptures.

Thirdly, the last and best interpreter of Scriptures, is the word of God it
self, and this interpretation is to be admitted, accepted, and received: nil
difficile quod non alibi planum August.
, In fundamental points absolutely necessary unto salvation, that which is
obscure in one place, is more plain and easy unto the understanding, in
another: And thus every exposition of holy writ, is to be examined, whether it
do cross, or contradict any other plain place of Scripture or no: for the
whole Scripture is as one truth, and therefore that cannot be the true sense
of one place, that belies another.

. 3. Herod demanded of them, where Christ

It may here be doubted, whether Herod did well in asking counsel of the
Chief Priests concerning Christ, or no?

First, I answer, to take counsel of them, and Oracles of God, and therefore
the Gentiles in these cases were to repair unto them, and all the Proselites
were instructed by them.

Secondly, I answer, that this was not well done of Herod to advise with them
upon an hypocritical pretexte: Teaching us, Malach. 2.7.
that is, First, to teach men, what things are to be believed, and known.
Secondly, to lead and draw men unto those things, that are to be obeyed and
done: the Scriptures being given for this end, to make a man perfect in
knowledge, faith, and obedience, unto salvation 2 Timothy 3.16.
. Thirdly, to admonish, advise, persuade, and exhort 1 Timothy 4.13. and 2. Tim.
2.25.
, whence we are called dispensers Cor. 4.1.
, that give unto all, that are hungry, good and wholesome meat, and that in
due time: and therefore although it be blameworthy, to do as some do, to
question with the Ministers of God, and desire to be resolved by them of some
scruples, for this end that they may entrappe them in their talk, or ensnare
them, as the Jews did with Christ: yet it is according to the ordinance and
appointment of God, that those that are in doubt, should have recourse unto his
messengers for comfort, consolation and direction.

Hence it may be demanded quomodo, and quatenus,

First, if the holy City become an harlot, and own pomp, and glory, and
covetousness, etc. then they are not to be believed.

vox Dei, the voice of the Lord, we must not then hear, nor believe them.

chief Priests, and Scribes (as Herod in this verse) but then examine by the
Scriptures what they teach unto us: for this Christ commands Ioh. 5.39.
, Search the Scriptures: and Paul commends in those noble Bereans Act. 17.11.
, that searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so, that were
preached unto them. And this we see, is the present practice of this present
Council holden at Jerusalem, the Magi they repair unto the Church at
Jerusalem, Herod he repaires to the Priests, and they to the Scriptures.

VERSE. 5. And they said unto him, in Bethlehem of Judea, for thus it is written
by the Prophet.
Joseph was constrained to fly? Could not the Lord first have admonished the
wisemen not to have come to Jerusalem at all, or have blinded the understanding
of the Pharisees, that they should not know where Christ was born, seeing Herod
desired not the knowledge of it for good., but formischiefe?

there is no forcerie against Jacob, nor enchantment against Israel: yea, that
all his Fox-like craft and subtlety cannot avail him, but that maugre his
malice, God will preserve this infant (the news whereof does so trouble him)
from his rage, tyranny, and cruelty.



Hence a quaere will be made.



2 Timothy 4.17.
.

Quanta voluptate jamdiu carui (said Dionysius, when he was thoroughly hungry,
before he could have any thing to eat) no meat tastes so well, as that which
is eaten with hunger sauce: and hence it is, that the Lord permits his children
to fall into affliction, that their joy may be the more complete, when they are
delivered.

. 1. VERRS. 6. And thou Bethlehem in the land of Judah, art not the least among
the Princes of Judah: for out of thee shall come a Governor, that shall rule my
people Israel.
This verse is cited out of the old Testament, Micah 5. Chapter. Reconcil.
verse. 2. But thou Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands
of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be Shepherd
in Israel.

It will here be demanded,

I answer first, here seems indeed, I confess, Micah 5.2. 1. Though thou be
little. 2. Among the thousands of Judah. 3. That shall be shepherd in Israel.


Mat. 2.6. 1. Thou art not the least. 2. Among the Princes of Judah. 3. That
shall rule my people Israel.


Secondly, the particle of the Prophet is adversative: I am small Psa. 129.141.
, and despised, yet do I not forget thy law. i. e. Although I am small and
despised, etc. So again, Many are my persecutors and enemies, yet do I not
decline from thy testimonies Psa. 119.157.
. i. e. although my enemies be many, yet, etc. So else where, the blind man
says, This is a mavelous thing, that ye know not from whence he is, and yet
he has opened mine eyes Ioh. 9.30.
. i. e. Although he has opened my eyes, yet, etc. So here the sense is,
Although thou be little, oh Bethlehem, in regard of the Princes of Judah, yet
notwithstanding out of thee shall come a Governor, that shall rule my people
Israel.

Thirdly, what Saint Matthew says, the Micah insinuates: that is, Out of thee
shall come one, who shall not be the least.

Fourthly, Micahs words may be read thus, Art thou the least of the rulers?
thou art not: as Job says, Will thou draw the Whale with a book? That is,
thou can not Job. 40.30.
.

Fifthly, Saint Matthew has respect unto the Bethlehem should have after the
nativity of Christ therein Bezas.
.

Sixthly, the Evangelist does not change the Herod Iunii Parall.
.

Lastly, although not the Pharisees, but the real change. but only verbal;
because he shows the true sense in other words: viz. thou art the least in
regard of thy self, but in this respect thou art not the least Calvin. s
. And therefore the phrase is prudently changed in regard of the time, when it
was altered, because now Bethlehem was become a noble and a royal City, Christ
the Messiah being now borne there Tremel s Mich. 5.2.
. So that from the premises, the sense of the verse seems to be this, that
the City Bethlehem amongst the families of Judah was the least, but now by the
birth of Christ there, it is become to be a thrice noble City.

And thou Bethlehem Judah.] There were two Bethlehems, Zabulon Josh. 19.15.
, and this Bethlehem was in Galile Musc. and Gualt. s.
. Secondly, in Judah Judge. 19.1.
. And this is is called Bethlehem Ephrata. Genesis 35.19. and 48.7. So named from
Ephrata one of Calebs wives 1 Paral. 2.19.
. This is the opinion of Tremell. s. Micah 5.2. as also of Lyranus e Rabbi
Solomone, that hence it was called Ephrata, after which name, was added
Bethlehem for the abundance of corn that it brought forth after that great
barrenness that was in the days of Elimelech Ruth. 1.
. Thus think the forenamed authors. But I cannot admit of this for these two
causes. First, because that Caleb, who had so many wives dyed before Moses: and
Caleb the son of Iephuneh it was not ( Numb. 14. Josh. 14.) Secondly, the
name Bethlehem was known to Moses (because it is mentioned in Genesis) and
therefore it was not brought into the land of promise after his death.



Answer, because the promise of the Messiah was made to David, and Bethlehem
was a City of David 1 Samuel 16.1.
and therefore it is called the City of David, by the Evangelists Luk 2 4. and
Ioh. 7.47.
.

VERSE. 7.Then Herod, when he had privily called the Wise men, enquired of them
diligently, what time the star appeared.
Herod call the Wise men secretly?



Counsel, that they may the better hurt the religious Pro. 1.11 Object.
.

It may be objected, it is lawful for a man to hide his Counsels: Solomon
says, He that is of a faithful spirit concealeth the matter Pro. 11.3
.



First, some hide their Counsels, least they themselves should be harmed of
others, by the revealing of their Counsel: this is prudence and good
providence, both allowable and lawful, for a man to be cautelous and wary of
revealing his secrets unto others, least so he bring himself into danger.

Secondly, some hide their counsels and conceal their secrets, least their
friends should be hurt by the revealing of them: this is honesty, and that
which Solomon speaks of, in the place objected Pro. 1.13
.

Thirdly, some hide their counsels, that they may harm others; this is wicked,
and the practice of wicked men: and it is twofold 1. Vindicando, inferendo
mala: when they desire to be avenged, and to bring some mischief and evil
upon some one or other: and this was Herod's intent in this place. 2.
Supplantando, auferendo bona, when they have a purpose to supplant some one or
other, by some bargains, or deprive them of some thing they possess, or to
wrong them by some means in their estates: Now this third sort of hiding and
concealing counsels is altogether forbidden, for these causes.

First, because it argues a wicked man: the truth fears not the light, but the
sun is an enemy to him that does evil Ioh. 3.20.
. Secondly, because it argues a distrust in the providence of God, and a
confidence in a man's own wicked prudence: thinking, God has forgotten him
Psalm. 10 10.
and therefore he must trust to himself, and his own carnal wisdom.
Thirdly, because this is a deed full of danger, a practice very perilous: the
Lord having threatened to Judge these wicked secrets Romans 2.16.
yea, to punish them: One speaks peaceably to his neighbor (says the Lord)
with his mouth, but in his heart he lays wait: shall I not visit for these
things, and be avenged of such transgressors Ierem. 9.89.
? Fourthly, because it is a foolish thing, and argues him to be a fool that
does it Pro. 10.18.
. It is a foolish thing (I say) for a man to hide his counsels (that he may
the sooner hurt his neighbor) in a double respect. 1. Because the time will
come, when this thy counsel shall be laid open, and made manifest unto the
whole world: and therefore it is but a folly now to hide it Luke 8.17: and 12.2.
. 2. Because even now when thou most closely concealest thy counsel, it is most
apparent unto three, who will be both witnesses against thee, to accuse thee,
and Judges also to condemn thee. It is a great folly for a man to hide a
murder from his neighbor and dearest Friend, and commit it in the sight of
the Judge, Jury, and his most deadly enemies: So here wicked Herod, and other
wicked men in this kind, hide their bloody intents, treacheries and
mischievous practices from others, when in the mean time, they are clearly
seen and known, first to their own conscience, which will be more clamorous
then a thousand witnesses against them. Secondly, to the Devil, who will
accuse them Eccles. 10 20.
. Thirdly, to God, who is greater then the Devil, or their own Consciences,
and will both accuse and condemn them 1 Ioh. 3.20.
.

. 1. VERSE. 8. And Herod said unto the Wise men, go and search diligently for
the young child,
We may observe here, that although the wicked men, wicked man goes about to
abuse them, by making them instruments and co-workers with him in his
wickedness: they must search out the child, and finding it, bring him word
that he may slay it. Teaching us that oftentimes the righteous are in great
danger to be abused by the wicked unto wickedness 2 Samuel 15.11. etc.
, and that for these three causes.

First, because familiar friends can scarce deny, what they are entreated: as
Iehoshaphat said unto Ahab, I am as thou art, and my people as thy people 1
King. 22.4.
: And hence oftentimes they consent, through their friends importunity to that
which is evil. Secondly because wicked men are crafty, like unto the Lapwing,
crying most, when they are farthest from their neasts, hiding their hearts from
him, whom they mean to deceive: yea under good actions they can hide and cover
wicked intentions, as Herod did here both with the Wise men, Chief Priests,
and Scribes. Thirdly, because charity is not suspicious, but always hopes the
best, and therefore oftentimes is most quickly deceived.

That I may come and worship him: It may here be asked, Herod say, venit,
eamus, come let us go, but I prae, sequar, go before, and I will follow after?







Observa.
. That I may come and worship him.] We see Herod pretends one thing, but
intends another, Praetendit cultum, praeparat cultrum, he says, he will come
and worship him, but the Fox intends to come, and worrie him.

Hence it may be demanded, Dissimulation evil, or not?

To this it is answered, First, Dissimulation is

Secondly, Dissimulation is a kind of lying, mentiri est contra mentem ire
August.
, to lie is to speak against a man's knowledge: but dissimulation is, contra
mentem ire, to speak or pretend outwardly, that which our heart neither
thinks, nor intends; and therefore it is no other thing than lying 1 Pet. 2.1
. Thirdly, a Christian man's mind should one tongue, and one heart, that we
should not be double-tongued, nor double-hearted 2 Cor. 1.12. and 11.3.
but we must be (...) Phil. 2.15.
, sincere, and of single hearts, and therefore all dissimulation is to be
avoided.

Fourthly, the end of dissimulation is deceit,

It may be objected; Sometimes certainly it is August.
, Aliquando bonum est verum celare, nunquam falsum dicere, although we are
never allowed to speak an untruth, yet sometimes it is convenient to conceal
part of the truth, which is nothing else but a kind of dissimulation, and
therefore all dissembling is not forbidden.

Dissimulatio, Dissembling; which is committed either Loquendo by speaking
deceitfully, and this is a lie, as Herod here promises to worship him, but
purposes no less. Tacendo, by silence, and holding ones peace: or a hiding of
a man's own counsel, and this is lawful Pro. 29.11
, that is, if thou do it well, viz. that thou may conceal Thine anger, Prove.
12.6. The sins of others, Prove. 17.9. But this silence is not lawful, if
thou do it only to hide thy malice, and desire of revenge, etc.


Simulatio, counterfeiting of that which is not, or a mere pretense: and this
is altogether unlawful.


It may be here replied, Pretenses are lawful, and allowable; and therefore
all are not forbidden.

False, and this is palpable fraud, and no less than lying, being lawful to
none at any time, upon any occasion: and this was HEROD'S fault, a mere false
pretense. True and that is either Conditionally true, as our Savior made, as
though he would have gone further Luke 24.28
, and certainly so would, if they had not entreated him to stay with them.
Partly, but not totally true; and this sometimes is lawful, as Zedechiah the
King bids Jeremiah the Prophet, if the Princes shall ask him what he said unto
the King Ierem. 38.26.
, he must answer, that he entreated the king, that he might not return to
Ionathans house, to dye there. This he said unto the King, but this was not all
he said unto him; so that it was partly, but not totally true, it was verum,
but not veritas, that which he told the Princes was true, but that was not all
the truth.



I will therefore thus conclude this question, I. All verbal Dissimulation is
evil. II. All counterfetting of that which is false, is evil. III. All
dissimulation unto evil, is fraudulent; yea, IV. All counterfeiting and
feigning also, if it be for an evil end.

. 4. That I may come and worship him.] The Magi came from far to seek
Christ, and from their hearts desire to find him: Herod pretends the same
outwardly, though the news touch him to the quick.

Hence a question may be propounded, How may hypocrites, and the enemies of
Christ,

I answer, By these notes,

First, they are wary, crafty, and wickedly prudent and politic, as we see
here in Herod.

Secondly, they are diligent and industrious, compassing sea and land to effect
their purposes, as Herod, both in this verse, and afterward verse 16.

Thirdly, they are false in their words, not sticking, by lying and
counterfeiting, to bring to pass their projects, as we see Herod does in this
verse.

Fourthly, they counterfeit friendship, that they may kill with more freedom
and safety: And thus does Herod also in this place.

Fifly, they suborne others to assist them: vis unita fortior, that many forces
being conjoined together, they may the easilier prevail: and thus Herod
subtly, would have had the wise men to have had a hand in this cruelty, and
to have assisted his bloody purpose by their information.

Sixthly, they are cruel, breathing nothing but threatenings, slaughters,
bloodshed, and cruelty: and thus did Herod, verse. 16. when he was crossed of
his information, and intelligence from the wise men.

Seventhly, they are no better than Atheists, thinking that they can kill,
Christ, (as Herod did here,) or at least prevail against him and his. Thus
although many outwardly profess a love unto Christ, the Gospel, and true
Religion, yet if they be inwardly enemies, they may be discerned and unmasked,
at one time or other, by some one of these marks or other.

. 1. VERSE. 9. When they had heard the king, they departed, and lo, the star
which they saw in the East, went before them, till it came, and stood over,
where the young child was.
all the people being troubled, verse. 3. Fourthly, no man accompanies them,
when they prosecute the quest and search of Christ: yet all these do no whit
discourage or dis-hearten them from their former intent and purpose: God,
notwithstanding all hindra^nces whatsoever.



Labor omnia vincit; be not weary, but be industrious, and thou shall prevail;
for conanti aderit Deus; God has promised to be graciously assistant to every
one, that in sincerity of heart desires, and endeavors to serve him.

Secondly, many are discouraged, because the way of Religion is not liked by
the world, neither the professors thereof loved, but rather despised and
scorned: neither this should hinder us from the service of the Lord, although
others be offended with thee, because thou seem by thy purity and splendour,
to eclipse their credit and estimation, yet be not discouraged, but remember,
Christians must be principally careful to please God, not men Romans 12.3.
, both because we are the servants of the Lord, not the servants of men; and
also, because we shall be judged by God, and not by man at the last day.

Thirdly, some are withheld from the zealous profession of Religion, by reason
of the paucitie of companions, that trace that path; there are but few truly
religious, and therefore they dislike the practice of it: but we should be
here most resolute, saying, as Peter said, Although all men should forsake
Christ, yet we will never forsake him Mark. 14.29.
, though none should accompany, or associate us in the work of Religion, yet
this should not dismay us; but with resolute Joshua, we should resolve, let
others do as they will, we will serve the Lord Josh. 24.15. and 1 King. 19.10.
, calling to mind these two things, I. vivimus legibus, non exemplis, God does
not command us to follow Presidents, but to follow precepts. II. If thou
desire, presidents as well as precepts, remember then, that thou have many
examples in this kind to imitate both in the Old, and New Testament, yea, Even
compassed about with a cloud of witnesses Read Hebr. 11. the whole chap. and
1^.1.
; and therefore follow not a multitude unto evil, but a multitude of good men
unto good. Thus let us be like these Wise men, constant in the labor of the
Lord, and in the course of holiness all the days we have to live, not being
either hindered, or turned back, or diverted, by any impediments whatsoever.

. 2. The star which they saw in the East, went

This star may be considered, either tropologically, Allegorically, or
historically.

Some Haymo s. Epiphan.
expound this star tropologically thus: Herod is the devil, and the star
is the grace of God: and therefore when the Wise men go unto Herod, and while
they are with Herod, the star forsakes them: teaching us, pure Spirit of God,
will not come unto a polluted soul.

This star may be considered of Allegorically; the star signifies the light
of faith in the heart: and therefore although the Wise men have the word of God
delivere^ unto them by the Chief Priests, which teaches them, where Christ is
to be borne, yet they cannot find him, nor come unto him, until the star of
faith does arise in their heart Muscul. s.
: Teaching us, that the knowledge of the Scriptures, without the light of faith
is insufficient to bring us to Christ: as the Apostle says, the word profits
not, when it is not mixed with faith Heb. 4.1.
.

Historically this star may also be interpreted; star was not seen, when
they were in Jerusalem; but as soon as they are upon their journey, and want a
guide, it appears unto them: Teaching us, that the Lord will never be absent
from his children in an acceptable time: Or, whenever the children of God
stand in need of his help, by reason of any necessity or danger, he will be
present with them, if not by and by, yet certainly at length. Hence a question
may be propounded.





First, labor for a pure and immaculate conscience both toward God, and
toward man, lest otherwise we be plagued for our just deserts, and plunged
into some gulf of danger for our sins committed.

Secondly, labor that our faith may be without wavering Iam. 1.6.
, that we do not call the mercy, or truth, or love, or power of God in
question, but boldly walk by faith, when we cannot by sight 2 Cor. 5.7.
.

Thirdly, although these two rules be observed, yet thou must not expect such
mercy, or help, or deliverance as thou would have, but such as the Lord
sees and knows to be behovefull, and beneficial unto thee; for, Deus non
semper audit ad voluntatem, vel voluptatem, ut semper exande^t ad salutem
Isidor. lib. 1. cap. 3. de sum. bono.
. faith does not assure us of any particular temporal blessing, or freedom
from any particular outward cross, but only in general, that whatsoever the
Lord knows to be good for us, in his appointed time he will give us.

VERSE. 10. When they saw the Star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy.


Thirdly, they go to Jerusalem, hoping there to find Christ, but they cannot
meet with him there, for there he is not: yet this journey is not lost, but
well spent; for 1. they are confirmed by the prophecy concerning Christ; and
2. they are taught the City and place, where he is to be borne.

Fourthly, they had lost their guide, the Star, as they came to Jerusalem:
but 1. there was no need of it there, as is showed before: and 2. when they
stood in need of it, it appeared again unto them, as in this verse:





I answer,

First, consider, what thou have deserved justly at Gods hands, and what thou
have received mercifully from his hands; and compare these two together, and
thou shall find, that God has dealt graciously with thee, and far above thy
deserts: yea it will make thee then confess with Jeremy, that it is of the
Lords mercy, that thou art not consumed Lam. 3.22.
.

Secondly, consider what thou have, not what thou want; and thou shall find
that thou art at the least equal, that is, thou have as many blessings, as
thou want.

Thirdly, look upon those that are below thee; not those that are above thee,
and thou will say, jam sumus ergo pares, that there are as many in a worse
condition then thou art, as are in a better; and therefore thou have no cause
to complain, but a great deal of reason to bless God, for that estate and
condition wherein thou art, and to be abundantly contented with it.

. 1. VERSE. 11.
It may here be asked, How or in what manner

I answer, Saint Luke gives a conjecture, Luke 2.7.12.16.
.

It may be demanded again, Why did the Lord preadmonish the wise men, of the
birth of

I answer,

It will be questioned further, The Lord admonishing

I answer first, because God would hereby

Secondly, because the Lord would hereby

Thirdly, because the Lord hereby would have I am not ashamed (says the
Apostle Romans 1.16.
) of the Gospel of Christ: as if he should say, out religion seems to him
that looks upon it with an earthly and carnal eye, to be worthy of shame, and
to deserve a blush, and that in all regardes.

1. If we respect religion it self, that is foolishness 1 Cor. 1.18.
, and a stumbling block 1 Cor. 1.24.
.

2. If we respect outward Churches, or visible societies, professing this
religion, we shall find them, in regard of heathenisme, but a very little
flock Luke 12.32.
.

3. If we respect the outward worship, or external exercises of religion: we
shall find that, First the religion of the heathen is more pompous. Secondly,
that the preaching of the Gospel seems but foolishness 1 Cor. 1.18. and 2.1.
etc.
, in regard of that pomp, which was in the Jewish ceremonies.

4. If we respect the stones of this Church, the men, or the professors of
religion, we shall perceive them to be many times of the inferior sort 1 Cor.
1.26.
; Great men being hardly drawn from their pleasures.

5. If we consider the outward estate of true professors, we shall find them
for the most part, to be the scumme of the world (in the worlds esteem) yea
the of scouring, and laughing-stocke of men and Angels 1 Cor. 4.9. etc.
, and the most miserable also of all men 1 Cor. 15.19.
. And thus we often see, that in no respect outwardly is the true religion
pompous or stately.

And they fell down and worshipped him.]

worship Christ?

worship Christ after the Persian manner: but this is false, as follows by
and by.

worship a young babe, that by reason of his infancy understands nothing,
except they did believe some divine thing to be in him? and therefore not the
childhood, but the divinity in the child was worshipped by them Chrysostom. s.
.



King though in a cottage, and a God though in a cradle; and therefore as unto
a God they fell down and worshipped him.

And they presented unto him gifts, frankincense, and myrrh.







Hebr. 13.15.
; but of this more largely else where.



Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh.

Why do they offer these unto Christ?

I answer first, these were in times past offered politic end: they offered
unto their Kings, 1. Gold for their expenses, or for the maintaining of their
state and pomp Psalm. 72.15.
. 2. Frankincense, for their sacrifices: 3. Myrrh, for the splendour, and
ornament of their sepulchers Muscul. s.
.

Secondly, for a moral end; they offered unto their Kings, 1 Gold, that they
might learn to be of golden manners. 2. Frankincense, that they might learn
to sacrifice unto the Gods. 3 Myrrh that they might remember their mortality
Gualt. s.
.

Secondly, these three, the Wisemen offer gold as a King, Frankincense as a
Priest, and Myrrh as a Redeemer. or Secondly, in regard of his nature, and
then they offer unto him gold as a King, Frankincense, as a God, and Myrrh, as
a man. Or Thirdly, they offer them all unto him as a King according to the
Persian manner, as is showed in the former answer: Or Fourthly, by these they
enrich Christ, that he might be furnished and provided, for his flight into
Egypt. Or Fifthly, they present these unto Christ, because the Persians and
Arabians abounded with these three things Carthus. s
. Or Lastly, they offered these three in regard of the present estate and
necessity: that is, because they saw the poverty of the Mother, the
tenderness of the child, the nastinesse, and noysomnesse of the place, wherein
Christ was (the Stable) therefore they offer unto him these things for the
releeving of these necessities: they present him with gold, for the releeving
of his Mothers poverty; with Frankincense, for the expelling of all noisome
smells; and Myrrh for the consolidation of the infants joints Carthus. s
.

What benefit may we reap or learn by these

I answer, nosmet, our selves, secondly, nostra, our substance.

First we must offer up our selves unto Christ, giving our selves wholly unto
him, and devoting our selves wholly unto his service Romans 12.1.
, because he has bought, ransomed, and redeemed us for this end, and purpose
Luke 1.75. and 1 Cor. 6.18.19.20.
.

Secondly, we must offer our estates or substance unto God, that is, offer
unto him, 1 Gold, 2 Frankincense, and 3 Myrrh.

First present God with thy Gold, that is, 1 Temporal gold, by alms,
charity, liberality, and hospitality, for such as are rich in goods, must be
rich in good works 1 Timothy 6.18
. 2 Spiritual gold, viz. 1 a true and a lively faith, for this is more
precious then gold, to trust confidently in God. 2 a pure and unblameable life:
for this is more esteemed by God, then the Gold of Ophir, the pure in life
being precious in his eye sight; and this is more excellent in regard of our
selves, for riches avail not in the day of wrath, but righteousness
delivers from death Pro. 11.4.
. And thus by true charity toward others, by true faith in God, and purity of
life in our selves, we offer unto God Gold: and we build with Gold, which
will endure the fire 21 Cor. 3.12.
.

Secondly, we must offer unto God Frankincense: that is faithful, pure, and
fervent prayer.

Thirdly, we must offer unto God Myrrh, and that is either 1 Good works; or 2
Mortification, and that first external, by suffering affliction, and willingly
undergoing, whatsoever the Lord is pleased to lay upon us. Secondly, or
internal, by mortifying our members Col. 3.5.6.
, that is, all corrupt, and carnal affections, which are in our mortal
bodies, because they war against the soul 1 Pet. 2.11.
.

. 1. VERSE. 12. And being warned of God in a dream, that they should not
return unto Herod, they departed into their own country another way.
dream this was,

Dreams are either, 1 natural, which the mind causes of it self, but upon
some occasion or beginning, either external or internal: or 2. they are
somnia immissa, dreams which the mind of it self procures not, but are sent
unto it, or wrought upon it, by some other power: and these are of two sorts,
either first (...), sent of God, (and such was the dream of these Wisemen) or
(...), sent of evil spirits.

Dreams are such, as God offers to the mind, and these dreams 1 Sometimes
are showed to the faithful, or to those that are in the visible Church, and of
the invisible, as to Jacob, Joseph, Daniel: Sometimes to those who are neither
in the visible Church, or of the invisible, as to Laban, Genesis 31. to Pharaohs
baket. 40. to Pharaoh himself. 41. 3 Sometimes these divine dreams are showed
to those, that are not in the visible Church, but yet of the invisible: and
such was this dream: it was sent by God, unto the Wise men, who were not Jews
(and therefore not of the then visible Church) and yet (I hope) of the true
Church of Christ.

Dreams are all (...), that is, containing some divination of things hid and
secret, and afterward to come to pass: and these are of two sorts. 1 nuda
(...), naked visions, simply, and plainly, expressing the meaning, scope and
purpose of the dream; and such was this dream: or else 2. they are (...)
mystical dreams, folded up in types and figures, which cannot be understood
without some signification: such were Pharaohs dreams of the seven fat and
lean kine, and of the seven full and thin and lancke ears. Genesis 41.

That they should not return unto Herod.



Muscul. s
.



Thirdly, God does this because he would not have these Magi made instruments
of Herod's

Fourthly, the Lord does this, because he will

It may here further be enquired, Why does promised Herod, that when
certainly they had found out the place of Christ's abode, they would give him
notice of it, and in this verse God does prohibit it?

The Lord does this to show, performance of humane promises: the will of man is
to give way to the will of God; and the commandment of God does nullify and
make void all humane promises: for the full understanding of this resolution
and question, two things are carefully to be taken notice of: First, promises
oblige in themselves. Secondly, God commanding, promises are to be violated.

First, promises oblige and bind in themselves, and that jure divino, by the
law of God, and that whether they are made With an oath. Or Without an oath.


Promises that are bound with an oath, bind a man unto the performance of that
which he has promised: it being a note of an upright man, and an heavenly
citizen, not to change his promise, although he have sworn unto his own
temporal hurt Psalm. 15.4
; when the law of an oath was given in Sina, the whole world shook (say the
Rabbines Vide Pet. Mart. fol. 238.
) because an oath is stabilimentum orbis, the stay and proppe of the world, and
if promises and oaths were not observed, how should men trade, or buy, or
sell, or live in the world? an oath is for the confirmation of the truth, and
for the end of contention; and therefore all falsehood of wicked men in their
Promises, is much to be reprehended: whether committed by Heathens, or
Christians.

I. Many Heathens slight promises though bound by oaths: the Turks say,
children are to be deceived with apples, and men with oaths: so lightly do
they value and oath. Lingua juram (said one Ennius
) I swear it only with my tongue. This is a most wicked practice, thus to
slight an oath, in any whosoever.

II. Some Christians are faulty also here, and they are the Papists, who make
no conscience of breaking an oath made unto any, whether Christians or
Heathens, that are not sworn servants and vassailes to the Pope, as they are:
It is an ordinary phrase at the Court of Rome, Mercatorum est, non Magistratuum
stare juramente: it is the part of a Merchant, not of the Pope, or any placed
in authority by him, to keep his oath i. So John Husse, and Hierome of Prage,
were promised by an oath, from the council of Constance, safe conducte, and
yet contrary to promise and oath were killed Sleydan.
.

Promises though made without an oath, yet bind: omnia quasi jurata Hier. ad
Caelant.
; all promises are half oaths, or promises (in a manner) do partake of the
nature of an oath: Now the reason, why promises bind although not bound with
an oath, is this; because fidelity is a part of truth, and a promise is a
greater part, then an affirmation: and therefore promises are are not to be
violated, either 1 Lucri causa, for gain, as one says Plautus.
, Lingua rei servandae, etc. I made a promise with my mouth, that I might save
my purse, but Eadem lingua jam nego, with the same tongue that I made the
promise, with the same, I refuse to keep it, because it is not for my profit
to perform it: as if a man should promise a thief to send him to such a
place, twice so much money, as he has about him: if he will but spare him
that which now he carries, because he has undertaken some urgent affairs,
which cannot be accomplished, if now he should be robbed: In this case I say,
a man ought not for lucres sake to violate his promise. Or, II. Hostilitatis
causa, promises are not to be violated, no not unto our enemies: this the Lord
reproves Ezech: 17.13.15.16.
; and Peter Martyr f 364.
from Augustine and Ambrose proves, that the faith, and faithful promises
which are plighted unto our enemies are to be observed.

Secondly, although promises oblige in themselves (as is already showed) yet,
God commanding, it is lawful, and behoveful to violate them: and the reason
hereof is, because God is by no means to be disobeyed; Disobedience being as
the sin of Witchcraft 1 Samuel 15.23.
. Yea he must be obeyed without any delay when he commands. Here we must
consider, what promises are unlawful, and in that regard to be broken: then
how promises come to be unlawful.

First, we are to consider what promises are unlawful, or the causes, why
promises become to be unlawful: the causes are either, 1. conjecturall, or,
2. true.

Peter Martyr f. 364.
does propound many causes, why promises are made unlawful: viz. I. If the
promise be impossible to be performed. Or II. contrary to the will of God, or
the good of Gods Church. Or III. If it be evil for him to perform, who has
promised it. Or IV. If it were extorted by deceit and fraud: Or V. If the
promise were forced by violence and fear, then these promises are not to be
observed.

The true causes of the violation of promises are two, Ordinary, Extraordinary.

The Ordinary causes of the violating of promises are these, First, if the
promise be impossible to be performed; for then of necessity it must be
broken: yet two things are here to be observed.

I. If the thing promised were impossible to be performed before the promise
was made, then is he no better then a deceiver, that made that promise: yea if
a man be not certain, that it may be performed, he sins, because he ought
to take heed least he should offend with his tongue Eccles. 5.4.5.
and therefore every one must beware of promising those things, which are
either impossible, or may prove impossible to him afterward, as single life,
because the gift of continency is not given unto all.

II. If the thing promised were in thy power to perform, when the promise was
made, but after the promise becomes impossible unto thee to perform; then thou
art freed from thy promise, because God has hindered thee from the performance
of it. And this is the first ordinary cause.

Secondly, the second ordinary cause of the violation of promises is this, if
the promise made be unlawful to be performed, that then it is not to be
observed.

A promise is made unlawful in a double regard, either in respect of the
Action promised to be performed: thus some promises are unlawful. In
themselves, the substance of the promise being wicked, Matthew. 14.9. Mark. 6.26.
like Herod's promise: and this promise is not to be kept. And the reason of it
is this, because the first vow and promise of obedience which we made unto God
(and which we are principally obliged to perform) does contradict this. This
promise is twofold, I. When being first made, it is known to be unlawful:
this is sinful. And herein David sinned toward Nabal 1 Samuel 25.22.
. II. Or when the thing becomes unlawful, after the promise is made, and then
it is not to be observed. As for example, if a man promise upon such a day to
lend his friend armor and weapons; and before the day comes, his friend proves
a traitor, and a rebel, or mad and distracted; he is not then to keep his
promise: And the reason is this, because he is not changed that made the
promise, but he to whom the promise was made, is changed from what he was. In
regard of some circumstances, that is, when the thing promised may be performed
in regard of the substance or matter of it, but some circumstances do make it
unlawful. As for example. I. If that which is promised tend to the scandal of
thy brother, which being contemptuously and freely performed, (without any
coaction by superiors) is evil; but not so, if it be commanded or enjoined by
lawful authority. II. If the promise tend to the impunity of sin: for this is
good, if it be done in mercy (as David toward Shemei 2. Sam. 19.23.
) but evil, if by negligence and remissness, because the Magistrate should not
hold the sword for naught, but for the punishment of offenders.
Time when the promise is to be performed: and thus some promises are
unlawful, either by Promise, the time being altogether unlawful, for the
performance of the promise; as if a man should promise his friend to plow his
ground upon the Lords day. Or, Some subsequent alteration, as if a man should
promise his friend, to come and feast with him, and make merry with him such a
day, and in the mean time, upon some urgent public necessity, it is
proclaimed a day of solemn fasting and humiliation, as in Niniveh Jonah 3.4.5.
.



Besides these ordinary causes of violating of promises, there are
extraordinary, and that is the commandment of God, when God forbids the
performance of the promise, as in this verse, the Lord forbids the wise men to
go back unto Herod according to their promise: so also the Israelites
borrowed of the Egyptians eare-rings, and jewels, and the like, with promise
(without doubt) to restore them again; but God forbids them to return them
Exodus 3.22. and 11.2. and 12.35.
. Now this we must observe, that these are not to be imitated, without a
particular command from the same Spirit of God.

Thus we have seen what promises are unlawful, and the causes why promises
are not to be performed: we are now to consider how promises are made
unlawful, which may briefly be showed, first affirmatively, secondly
negatively.

I. Promises are violated, and not performed, by a man's own impiety and
wickedness: as for example, a man persuades his friend to promise him, that he
will neither meddle with himself, nor any weapon he has; and when the promise
is made, (the other dreaming of no such thing at all) he goes about to hang
himself, or to stabbe himself: this promise otherwise lawful, is made
unlawful to be performed by his desperate enterprises.

II. Lawful promises are not made unlawful by an Episcopal absolution: but
here observe, A Bishop may absolve, first declarative, by a power declarative,
as a Levite, or an interpreter, and expounder of the law of God; that is, he
may show from the word of God, what promises are not to be kept, and by virtue
of the power and authority given unto him by Christ, may absolve and acquit
them. But secondly, not positively, as a Lawgiver, or as one that has power to
dispense with the Law of God: for they must do nothing against the truth, but
for it. And therefore, I. the Pope erres here, that will not suffer a wicked
promise to be broken, without a faculty, or leave from his holiness. But, II.
he erres worse, in breaking promises and oaths, which are lawful: as freeing
subjects from the oath of allegiance unto their Sovereigns; husbands from
their promises made to their wives in marriage: and the contrary, with diverse
the like, which (the Papists say) he can dispense withal, and absolve from.

And they departed into their own country We may observe here the admirable
obedience of these wise men: for they might here have objected many things, as
first, that it is a shame to return home by another way, because this is is a
kind of flight. Secondly, that it is a great shame to break the promise,
which they have made. Thirdly, that it is dangerous to double with kings, for
they have long arms, and their anger is heavy. Fourthly, cannot the Son of
God protect himself? how shall we believe, that he can save others (much
less be the Savior of the world) that cannot save himself? These things
flesh and blood might have alleged; but they object nothing at all, but in all
things obey: Teaching us, that our obedience unto God, ought to be absolute,
and ready, without murmuring, without disputing Phil. 2.14.
, without consulting with flesh and blood Genesis 26.19. and Act. 26.19
, and without procrastination, and delay Genesis 12.4.
.

Why did these wise men, or why should we thus presently obey God?

I answer, this is required of us,

First, it is required of us absolutely and readily to obey God, in regard of
the Lord himself, and that for these causes: First, because God requires the
obedience of the mind, and of the inward man, that our minds should always be
prepared to obey the will of God: and therefore as soon as ever the Lord gives
any command unto us, we must obey it, with all readiness and cheerfulness.

Secondly, because God deserves at our hands, that we should do whatsoever he
requires of us, be it never so unpleasing or unprofitable unto our selves: yea
it is a great indignity offered unto the Lord, either to dispute or indent
with him concerning any thing, that he commands us.

Thirdly, because the will of God is the rule of good, just, profitable, and
convenient, that is, we only know things to be good, just, holy, and
welbeseeming, because they are agreeable unto the will of God, and therefore to
doubt of that which God requires, is to contradict either his prudence or
justice, and therefore it is by and by, yea in all things carefully to be
obeyed.

Fourthly, because, if we obey God, when he commands, he will accept of our
obedience, as performed in subjection unto his will: but not so, if we obey him
at our own leisure.

Secondly, it is required of us, presently and willingy to obey God, in regard
of our selves, and that for these two causes, first, because it shows in us a
willing mind, which God loves.

Secondly, because now, when God commands, we may obey, but afterward
(perchance) we shall not be able, God withdrawing his grace from us.

. 4. They went to their own country another

It may here be asked, why does not the Lord

First, the Magi would not go unto the Jews, state of their Church Muscul.
.

Secondly, God would not suffer them to go unto the Jews, because they
refusing, or at least



. 1. VERSE. 13. And when they were departed, Joseph in a dream; saying, Arise,
and take the young child, and his mother, and fly into Egypt, and be thou
there, until I bring thee word: for Herod will seek the young child, to
destroy him.
Some observe Hierom. s. Observa.
, that when Joseph took Christ and his mother, that he might fly with them
into Egypt, he took them by night, when it was dark, but when he returns
into Judea, neither night nor darkness is mentioned in the Gospel: to teach
us, that there is nothing but palpable darkness with us, when Christ leaves
us, but when he comes unto us, then comes true and clear light.

Take the young child and his mother.] It may here be asked, Joseph thought to
have put Mary away, because she was with child, the Lord calls her his wife
(Chapter 1.20.) Fear not Joseph, to take unto thee Mary thy wife: why
therefore does the Lord now call her the child's I answer, First, because they
had now both of them agreed upon her perpetual virginity, as is probable, she
asks, and he grants, that she should remain an unspotted virgin all her life.

Secondly, because by a most forcible argument, Joseph to have a special care
of her, remembering, that she was the Mother of Christ.

Joseph, that Mary was more to be respected, loved, tendered, and esteemed for
the childs sake, than for marriage sake.

And fly into Egypt.] It will hence be Joseph and Mary may be shaken, why
therefore does the Lord command it?

I answer, God hereby would show two things unto these two pious persons:

It will be objected again, This flight derogates Sodomites. Genesis 19. and
Elisha the Aramites 2 King. 6. Or thirdly, he could destroy them, as he did
Sennacherib. And therefore seeing Christ was able to defend himself, why does
he flee?

I answer first, the sins of Herod were not as

Secondly, God hereby will show, that Christ's

Thirdly, God hereby will show, that Christ

Fifthly, this was done, that Christ hereby that in Judea was God known Psa.
76.1
, and that he dwells in Jerusalem Psa. 135: 21.
, but Christ breaks down the partition wall Ephesians. 2.14.
, accepting the Gentiles into favor, sending the Gospel unto them, and causing
them to receive it.

Sixthly, this was done, that Christ might show

Lastly, this was done for our instruction, that

. 4. And flee into Egypt.

Why is Joseph commanded to carry Christ into Egypt?

I answer,

First, there may be these three natural reasons rendered, why Christ was to
go into Egypt. First, because it was near unto Judea. Secondly, because it
was a safer place then any part of Judea, Herod having no command, nor power
there. Thirdly, others add Carthus. s.
because the Egyptians were of old (in the time of Joseph) well willers unto
the Israelites, and therefore Joseph hopes and expects favor and kindness
from them.

Secondly, there may be these five Spiritual reasons given of this fleeing
into Egypt.

First, that hereby might be signified, that Christ was offered unto the
Jews, and given unto the Gentiles.

Secondly, that the prophecy might be fulfilled, which was given by the
Prophet Hosea.

Thirdly, because God will hereby show, that his anger lasts not for ever: and
therefore although in time past, in his wrath he wounded the Egyptians, yet
now in the fullness of time he sends a Savior unto them, to cure all their
maladies, and heal all their infirmities.

Fourthly, because Egypt is a type of the world, and therefore Christ was
carried thither by Joseph, to show that by the preaching of the Apostles,
Christ was carried unto the whole world Carthus. s.
.

Fifthly, the last reason is, because Egypt of all countries was most
corrupted with Idolatry, and therefore for the more magnifying of his mercy, in
the conversion of this country, and making it most famous for piety, the Lord
was carried thither Chrysostom. Hom. 8.
.

Be there until I bring thee word.]

Joseph a set time, but leaves him in uncertainties, with a Donec until I
bring thee word?

Joseph to depend upon his providence: Remembering, first, that not to wait
Gods leisure, is not to believe his providence. Secondly, that the providence
of God is most prudent, it knows every article of time. Thirdly, we are
ignorant, what may prove good hereafter for us, and therefore God would have
us to depend upon his gracious providence.

Because Herod seeks the young Child to destroy him.

Joseph of this danger?





Psalm. 25.14.
.

. 1. VERSE. 14. When he arose, he took the
Ille excitatus, when he arose, that is, by and by, as soon as ever he was
awaked out of sleep:

Joseph obeyes every charge and several injunction given unto him by God,
notwithstanding the many great impediments and lets which he had to the
contrary: for he might have thought or argued thus with himself: First, the
child is none of mine. Secondly, why should I then offend my King for his
safeguard. Thirdly, by betraying the child, and delivering of him into Herod's
hands, I shall gain honor and riches. Fourthly, my journey will be full of
peril. Fifthly, the Mother of the child, is very tender, and scarcely able to
undergo such a journey. Sixthly, I shall loose all the substance, I enjoy by
this my flight. Seventhly, I know not but Egypt may be as dangerous unto me
as Israel is: These things Joseph might have objected unto him self, but he
does not: but is still ready pressed to perform the will of God: to go when
God bids him, to come back again when God calls him, and to obey God when and
how he pleases: Teaching us, that that obedience of God, which is truly
pleasing unto him, ought to be performed with readiness, willingness, and
cheerfulness of heart.

He took them by night.

Why does Joseph flee in the night?

I answer, because it was most safe: he does not say, God has commanded me to
go to Egypt,

Secondly, Joseph departed toward Egypt in

Hence it may be doubted, whether in general Joseph did well, and warrantably
in thus flying by night for fear of danger?

I answer, First yes, because he had no calling 1 Ioh. 5.14.
. And therefore Joseph did well in fearing to stay there, seeing God had called
him away.

Secondly, God does not kill and wholly destroy Joseph did not amiss in fearing
to abide in Bethlehem.

It may here be demanded, whether do our

I answer, Shame makes us blush for sin: fear makes us wary: anger makes us
zealous of the credit and good name of our neighbor, and of the glory of God:
Loftiness of mind, makes us constant and resolute in our callings and duties,
both divine and humane: Praise makes us more prompt and ready to obey virtue,
it being cos virtutis virtues whetstone.

. 3. And departed into Egypt:] Egypt was Pompeius was slain there: Julius
Caesar was in danger of treachery when he was there; and it was a fatal place
to Antonius.

Secondly, they were persecuters of the Israelites, and God makes that great
deliverance of his people, from them, the Preface of the law Exodus 20.1.
. And hence it is that God forbids them to return any more into Egypt, but
rather to go to Babylon, and submit themselves to the Chaldean captivity, as
Jeremiah the Prophet often persuades.

Thirdly, the Egyptians were most bitter and cruel enemies of religion,
abounding in all manner of superstition; and this is that which most grieves
the children of God, to be among those that are lovers of superstition, and
haters of religion Psa. 120.5.6.
. And yet notwithstanding all this, Joseph being commanded by the Lord to go
thither, does neither refuse it (as the Jews did when they were bidden by the
Prophet to go to Babylon) neither does he fly into some other place (as
Jonas did, who would have fled to Tarsus, when he should have gone to Nineveh)
but goes presently when, and punctually whether the Lord bids him.

. 1. VERSE. 15. And was there until the
A man in the ford ready to sink, catches at every thing he feels or sees
(which he can reach) hoping that it will help to keep his head above water:
so Papists snatching every occasion for the confirmation of their religion,
lay hold upon this verse to ground their unwritten traditions upon, Canon of
Scripture which now we have is not sufficient: the Antecedent they confirm
from Chrysostom Hom 9. s. Matthew.
who says, the Jews lost some of their sacred and canonical books by
negligence and carelessness, and some of them have been burnt: and therefore
these Books could never be repaired or written again by Esdras, seeing that
they were no where extant: they give us examples of this, as this verse, Out of
Egypt have I called my son, and verse 23. he shall be called a Nazarite,
which words are not at all to be found in the Old Testament: And therefore the
Scriptures are insufficient without ecclesiastical or humane Traditions.





Chrysostom being ignorant of the Hebrew tongue; follows the translation of
some interpreters, who has not these two sentences, which are in this verse
and the 23. verse: but St. Hierom, learned in the languages affirms Lib. de
opt. genesis interp.
, that they are both to be found in the Hebrew Text, that is, this verse, in
Hos. 11.1. and verse. 23. in Judge. 13.5. and Isa. 11.1. Yea both these sentences
are to be found in the vulgar translation, which the Papists hold only
authentical of all other translations.

Bellarmine himself proves Lib. 2. de verbo Dei.
and others are verily persuaded of Scharpius curs. Theog. 137.
.

That it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet.

Exposit.
The scope of that place Hos. 11.1. Is to commemorate the deliverance of Israel
from Egypt, by way of reproach and upbraiding of the Jews who were so
unthankefull, and disobedient unto God, who had done such great thing for them.

Hence a principal question offers it self to be discussed, which is this:
How is it said here, This was done that it might be fulfilled, etc. Is this the
scope of Hoseas prophecy?

I answer first, a Prophecy is fulfilled three

I. When that which is foretold come to pass, as Samuel foretold Saul that his
kingdom should not continue 1. Sam. 13.14.
because God had rejected him 1 Samuel 15.23.
, which was shortly after fulfilled in David, to whom the crown was given.

II. When a thing is foretold of one time in general, which may often come to
pass: or when a Prophecy is given, which seems to aim at some one time, but
the substance of it is accomplished many times: as the Prophet Esaias Prophesies
of the Jews, they shall hear but not understand, see but not perceive Esa.
6.9.10.
. Which is daily accomplished whereresoever the Gospel is preached.

III. When not that numericall thing comes to pass, which is foretold, but
some thing like thereunto: and thus some say, the Prophets prediction is
fulfilled in this place Muscul. s
.

But because it may be replied, although something fulfilled: I will therefore
give a second answer, and that is, Prophecies have many senses, as may appear
by a fivefold explication of them, viz. Historical, Moral, Allegorical,
Tropologicall, Anagogicall, of which I shall speak (God enabling me) plainly
else where.

But because it may yet be replied, that this is full of danger [seeing 1
Origin, and some others have turned all Historical narrations into Allegories:
and 2. because the Anabaptists do deny the very truth of the History of the
Scriptures, embracing only Allegories, and excluding all Historical truths,
as Ixion embraced a cloud in stead of Iuno] I will therefore produce Perkins
answers de unica rat. concionandi.
. This is not so plain nor clear unto the understanding, and therefore I add
a fourth answer; That certainly there is a double sense of this

I. In regard of the Persons mentioned, which are Israel Christ
Therefore there must necessarily be a double sense, which may be applied to
both the persons:

II. In regard of the things spoken of, and mentioned, which are The Jews
deliverance out of Egypt. Christ's calling from Egypt.


III. In regard of the scope of the prophecy It speaks of Isreal's deliverance
out of Egypt, which is past, by way of reproach. It is a prophetical
prediction of Christ, hereafter to be accomplished: And therefore it
necessarily requires a double sense.


semel, once, as it was foretold unto Abraham that after 400 years his
posterity should enjoy deliverance, and freedom from Egypt; which prophecy
was only once fulfilled: so it was foretold Eli, that upon one day his two
sons Hophni and Phinehas should both be slain 1 Samuel 2 34.
, which was once accomplished 1 Samuel 4 17.
; so it was foretold unto Jeroboam, that Josiah should be borne which should
reign over Israel 2 King. 13.1:2.
, which was once fulfilled 2 King. 23.17.
.

Secondly, these prophecies which are mentioned in express words, are
sometimes fulfilled saepius, oftentimes, as it was prophesied of the Jews,
that for their obstinacy, they should see, but not perceive, they should
hear, but not understand Esa. 6.8.9.
: this prophecy was truly accomplished in the time of the Prophet, although
it be often repeated else where Matthew. 13 14. and Acts 28.26. and Romans 11.8.
: so it was foretold, that the Jews would draw near unto God with their lips,
while their hearts were far from him Esa. 29.13.
; which was truly fulfilled in the Prophets time, although it be repeated in
the New Testament Matthew. 15.8 and Mark 7.6.
, yea accomplished also in our days, and in all times of the Gospel, because
there will be hypocrites and formal professors always in the Church.

Some Prophecies are mentioned in the holy Scriptures in figurative words,
which According to the literal sense Cannot be understood, and that in a
double regard, sometimes For the impossibility and falsehood in the thing it
self, as it is said, that there shall be no end of the kingdom of David, but
it shall continue for ever Esa. 9.7.
; which cannot literally be understood: Let the reader but diligently consider
of all these places, where he may plainly see prophecies propounded, which
are impossible literally to be accomplished. Esa. 11.6. and 14.28. Ier. 30.9.
Ezech. 34.23.24. and 37.24.25. Hosea. 3.5. Mal. 4.5. Matt. 11.14. Luke 1.17.
For some circumstance in the Prophecy, let but the reader (though of a mean
understanding) mark well the prophecies expressed in the places following, and
he shall see some circumstances which hinder them from a literal
interpretation. Esa. 9.6. Psalm. 2.8. and 16.10. which place Saint Peter
expoundes, of Christ. Acts 2.27. and so also Saint Paul. Acts 13.35.
May be understood, but yet so, that some further thing may be drawn from
those tipes, which has some analogy either in The things themselves, the one
being a type of the other: as the Paschall Lamb, was a type of Christ: and
therefore that which was said literally of the Lamb, above of it shall not be
broken Exodus 12 46.
, was applied, and said to be accomplished in the Lamb of God Ioh. 19.36.
: so David was a type of Christ, and therefore that which he said literally of
himself (expressing his affliction) they gave me gall to eat, and vinegar to
drink Psa. 69.21.
: it is said to be fulfilled in Christ Ioh. 19.29.
: so also David says, it was my friend that lay in my bosom: and they divided
my garments Psalm. 22.18.
, which are applied unto Christ. Or at least in the words: David praying
against his enemies, says, Let another take his office Psa. 119.8.
, which is said to be fulfilled in Judas. Acts 1.20. there being some
resemblance in the words: And thus Hoseahs prophecy is fulfilled in this
place; there being some analogy between the Israelites deliverance out of
Egypt, and Christ's calling from thence.





First, consider the scope of the place, and mark well, what the mark is that
the Holy Ghost aims at.

Secondly, consider the circumstances of paralleld places, or Scriptures like
unto that which thou desire to understand.

Thirdly, observe the analogy and proportion of faith; allegorize not one
place to overthrow another.

Fourthly, let us have the testimony, and the warrant of the holy Scriptures:
those places that may literally be understood, but are allegorized by the Holy
Ghost, we may by the warrant of Scripture also allegorize (as Gal. 4.22. etc.
Agar and Sina are allegorized) but without this guide the journey is dangerous:
and without the president of the Scripture, we must be very fearful to draw
it from his true, natural, and germane sense.

. 1. VERSE. 16. Then Herod when he saw that he was mocked of the Wisemen, was
exceeding
When he saw that he was mocked.

I answer, First, because it is intended against Psalm. 2.2.4.

Secondly, the Lord does this, because thereby he would show us two things. viz.

I. That he is faithful in all his promises, now he has said that he will
infatuate all the counsels of the wicked, therefore he will do it: and hence
it comes to pass, that the wicked ever err, or fail, or are over-seen in
something, as Herod here might have wrought wiselier then he did, for he might
have enjoined some of his servants to have accompanied the wise men, in this
quest of Christ: or he might have sent some of his actendance to have brought
the infant to the court, but the Lord be-fooles him: so Pharaoh, when he might
by himself have destroyed the Israelitish children, makes use of the women who
deceive him.

II. The Lord hereby would teach us, that he is careful over his children,
neither sleeping, nor slumbring, but vigilantly watching over all his, to
preserve them from all their enemies.



I answer first, if the wicked do prevail, it is by the permissio^ of God, not
by their own malice Act. 3.18. and 4.28.
.

Secondly, God does this for the greater and Pharaoh oppressing Israel is
plagued with many plagues, and at length both he and the pride, and prime of
Egypt miserably drowned in the Red Sea: so Hamans plot is likely to succeed
according to his wishes against the poor Jews, but this proves only fatal
and mortal to himself. The Persians get a decree against Daniel, and
prosecute it home, until he was cast into the den of Lions, but thus only
they wrought their own ruin. Dan. 6.
Pope Alex. 6. prepares poison for Cardinal Adrian, but by a mistake it was
drunk by himself, and his son Caesar, which cost the Pope his life Benno Card.
. And thus the Lord lets the wicked for a time prevail, for their greater
judgment

. 2. He was exceeding wroth: We have here an history of a wonderful cruelty,
which is (in Herod's anger, from whence these questions may be propounded.

de origin, from whence anger comes?

I answer, from the Devil Ephesians. 4.27. from hell. James 3.9. but meekness
comes from Christ. Mat. 11.29. from above. James 3.17. and therefore is rather
to be embraced.

de natura, what is the nature of anger?

charity is not angry 1 Cor. 13.5.
and therefore all charity is extinguished, when a man is transported with
anger.

anger is carnal, it is a work of the flesh Gal^ 5.20.
and it argues him to be carnal, at least guilty, that will not suffer
himself to be touched or crossed.

de effectis, what are the fruits and effects of anger.

In regard of our neighbor, and In regard of our selves.


I. Mischievous are the effects of anger, in regard of our brethren: for first,
it stirs up contention; anger is the bellows that kindles brawles, strifes
contentions, seditions, duels, cursed speeches, blasphemies, and the like Pro.
15.18. and 29.22.
. Secondly, it is more heavy then a stone, yea, more po^drous then sand, not to
be supported, not to be undergone Prove. 27.3.4.
. Thirdly, it makes us forget all the former respect we have borne our
neighbors, or favors, received from them; as they of Nazareth, who admire
Christ Luke 4.22.
, but when they are angry with him, they would stone him Luk 4.28.
. Fourthly, anger will teach us causeless causes to be avenged of our
brethren: as Piso who in his anger slew three soldiers, the first, because he
came home without his fellow (he having given them a charge both to come
together, and before such a day) the second because he came home after the day
limited: and the third because he would not hang up the first, at the first
bidding: And thus anger which is but a kind of frenzy and madness for the
time, did teach Piso to give reasons, for this his extreme and reasonlesse
cruelty. Fifthly, it hurries a man into most horrible cruelties, as Herod in
this verse, and Caine against his brother Genesis 4.5.8.
, and Nebuchadnezzar against the three Children; Because his anger waxed hot
against them, he caused the furnace to be heated seven times hotter then
ordinary Dan. 3.19
. Yea sometimes it produces treasons, as might be proved by many examples
from humane stories.

2. Many and miserable are the effects of anger, in respect of our selves, and
that in a manifold regard, first, in regard of the mind, secondly, in regard
of the calling, thirdly, in regard of the reputation, fourthly, in regard of
the body, fifthly, in regard of the soul.

The effects of anger, in regard of the mind are these, First it blindes the
mind so, that it can understand nothing: as the clouds hinder us from the
aspect of the sun, so anger darkens and obscures the understanding, and makes a
man often with the dog to bite at the stone, that is thrown at him.

Secondly, it hinders our prayers 1 Timothy 2.8. 1 Pet, 3.7.
, and therefore we should always remember, that meekness prepares a man to
prayer, by humbling the heart, but anger makes the heart altogether unfit to
pray.

Thirdly, anger makes a man more prone unto many other vices; Ira crescit fell,
augmento ejus ad iram proniores sumus August.
, by anger the gall increases, and by the increase of the gall, a man is more
prone unto anger: Vinegar being long time kept spoils the caske, so anger
August, s. Psalm. 54.
: Imo inveterata parit odium, illa festuca, haec trabs est. Old and long
continued anger begets inveterate hatred, the moate thus increasing to a beam.

4ly, The effects of anger in regard of the calling or emploime^t, are these,
it distracts a man in his affairs: when he is angry, he is unfit to buy or
sell, or cast up his accounts, or write his letters, or do any thing else aright
so long as he is angry: like a disordered lock which will neither lock nor
unlocke, without turnings and wrestings, and hurting either the lock or key:
or like a ship in a tempest, which is carried with the waves and wind hither
and thither; and is not able by all the skill of the Pilot to steer a right,
steady, and direct course; or like a drunken man, who being overcome with wine,
is unable to go, or stand, or speak, and unfit for any employment until the
vapors of the liquor be evapourated.

The effects of anger in regard of Reputation are two. First, it makes a man a
fool, and to be esteemed foolish Pro. 14. chapter 17.19. verse. and Eccles. 7.11.
Ira ab omni confilio ac mente deturbat, ut insanire videatur Hier. ad Demetr.
an angry man seems for the present a frantic man, being distracted and
disturbed both in his counsels and consolations: and therefore the angry man
should consider, that howsoever he may please himself in his peevishness and
wrath, yet by others he is judged both a fool and a mad man.

Secondly, anger shows a man to be but base metal, and of a dunghill
disposition, it not being so incident to generous spirits: Anger rebounds from
a noble mind, as a ball from the wall: the highest heaven never stoops to the
clouds, and heavenly tempers shun anger which is of an earthly nature, as we
showed before, quest. 2. on the contrary, he that is slow to anger, is better
then he that takes a City Pro. 16.32.
, and therefore if a man did but respect his own reputation, he would avoid
anger.

The effects of anger in regard of the body are two. First, it oppresses the
body, and hurts both the agent and patient, him that is angry, and with whom he
is angry, but it more pernitiously hurts him that is angry, then the other,
because it comes from the mind of the one and from within, but reflects only
outwardly upon the other: yea, experience shows that anger often brings men to
Fevers and dangerous sicknesses, as is to the life pourtraied by a great
historian and general scoller Guevara, familiar Epist. fol. 114. 115.
.

Secondly, it weakens and enfeebles the body, making it thereby daily more and
more infirm, and consequently the life to be the less comfortable, and the
more short; anger being like worldly sorrow wihch causes death 2 Cor. 7.10.
, and therefore a man (at the least) should take pity of himself and his own
life, in not giving way to wrath.

Anger does easily subdue a man's self to the craft of his enemies, for by
provoking him unto anger, they can lead him whether they will: for an angry
man is easily incensed, and once incensed, he is easily ensnared, being
quickly entrapped in his talk, he as then not being compos mentis, in his
right wits.

The effects of anger in regard of the Soul are these, First, it displeases
God Iam. 1.20.
but meekness is much valued by him 1 Pet. 3.4
, and therefore Fathers are forbidden to be angry with their children Ephesians.
6.4. and Col. 3.21.
, and Masters with their servants ( Ephesians. 6.9. Philem. 16.) and therefore do
not displease God, when thou may please him, but remember, that howsoever
anger may please thy distempered temper, yet it does not please God, and
therefore ought carefully to be eschewed.

Secondly, it provokes the anger of God Pro. 19.19. Matthew. 5.22.
, who is incensed unto wrath against the angry man, because he is not in
charity; the nature of anger, being to be void of charity as I showed before:
and therefore remember, he that is angry with his brother, God will be angry
with him.

. 3. And slew all the children that were in Herod seeing himself to be mocked
of the Wisemen, converts his craft into cruelty, and that extraordinary.

It may here be asked, what manner of cruelty

I answer, there is a threefold cruelty, viz. First,

First, there is crudelitas paenae, a Cruelty of Punishment toward inferiors;
certainly Correction is commended and commanded Pro. 23.13.14.
, and therefore they are to blame, who blame the Magistrates correction,
because he is not to hold the sword for naught: but here three rules may be
given to Magistrates, for the avoiding of their cruelty of punishment.

First, let it be magna causa, punish not but for a weighty cause: here is a
vulgar error to be reformed, damages are always thought heavy and worthy of
punishment, but sins are thought light (as blasphemy, lying, swearing,
fornication, drunkenness, and the like) and scarce deserving correction.

Secondly, when the cause is weighty, and truly worthy of correction, yet parca
manu, punish with a gentle and sparing hand: parvuns supplicium satis est patri
Seneca.
, a little correction suffices a father to give, and Superiors are Fathers;
Magistrates must punish as the Lord punishes, not for revenge against the
person, but for the amendment of the offender: This rule needs not be
enlarged, because for the most part Magistrates offend more by remissness, and
too much lenity, then by too great severity.

Thirdly, if the cause be weighty that justice exacts a severe punishment, and
that correction be laid on with a heavy hand, yet amante cord, let it be
inflicted with a pitiful, and commiserating heart, not as an enemy, or
tyrant, who punishes with anger, hatred, and delight, but as a mother, with
tears.

Secondly, there is crudelitas legis a cruelty of the law, this consists in
suits, and contentions, wherein the most part of men are too faulty: going to
law one with another for every trifle. In going to law we should observe the
same rules, that before are prescribed to Magistrates in giving correction.
First, magna causa, men should not sue one another but in case of urgent
necessity, or great wrongs, not for every cause, and petty wrong, as now adays
men ordinarily do. Secondly, when there is just cause of suites, yet they must
be parca manu, not with the utmost extremity, for summum jus, summa injuria,
to prosecute men to the utmost as far as law will extend is seldom or never
lawful. Thirdly, though suits in law be great, and concern thy livelihood,
yea thy life, yet they should be in charitate, prosecuted in love, which is
very hard to be done.

Thirdly, there is crudelitas sanguinis, a cruelty of blood, when men seek the
precious lives one of another; and that either first, rashly, and in the heat
of blood, occasioned sometimes by playing, sometimes by drinking, sometimes
through whoring, sometimes by the lie given, or some distasteful words. Or
Secondly more deliberately, and in cold blood, and that either I. privately by
duels, (which is thought a part of fortitude, for a man to murder his brother
by the law of a Duel, a divelish law, that does either teach or allow men, to
shed the blood of a Christian, and so deface Christ's image) or II. publicly,
and that by edicts, as Herod in this verse, and other (like him) bloody

. 4. Of two years old and under.] We may observe hence Herod's arrogant folly.
First, Christ was expected by the Jews and Samaritanes Ioh. 4.25.
. Secondly, he was foretold of by the Prophets. Thirdly, his coming is now
revealed, and declared. Fourthly, It is by the Star and the Wisemen confirmed:
yet notwithstanding all these, Herod hopes to meet with him, and kill him,
either by Fraud or Force. If the oracle by Herod be Believed, why does he
oppose himself? Not believed, why does he slay so many innocents?
For Herod might thus have reasoned with himself: If it be true that Christ
the Messiah and heavenly King of the Jews, that has been so long since
promised and expected, be now come, it is in vain for me to strive with him,
because so I shall be but (...) a fighter against God, and I can expect no
other event, then that which the Giants had, who warred against heaven, their
arrows returning upon their own heads. On the contrary, If there be no such
thing, but that this is a mere fiction, like many other of their Rabbinicall
conceits, why should I then either trouble my self, or trouble Israel, in
murdering so many sweet innocent babes. Thus (I say) Herod might have thought,
and deliberated within himself, but he does not: True it is that he thinks,
the prophecies concerning Christ to be true, that he must come, and believes
also the report that he is come; yet hopes to dash all their hopes, and to
falsify all these divine truths, by prevailing against Christ. Teaching us
that wicked men most wickedly imagine, that they can prevail against God: as
Pharaoh said, who is the Lord, that I should obey him, I know him not, neither
will I at his command let Israel go Exodus 5.2
, as if he would say; mauger all his power, I will still keep them: so in
diverse other plain places, we may see this truth confirmed 2 Ring. 18.34. and
19.10. Dan. 3.15. and Ier. 43.2.
. This arrogant branch, that thus thinks to top the heavens, sprouts from
these three roots: First from those desires which are too importunate and
boundless, unde habeat, quarit nemo, sed oportet habere: when men have not
learnt to want, nor to bridle their ambition, but are infected with the itch of
honor, then they run on in a violent course, to obtain their desires,
either by right or wrong: thus hoping in despite of God (as Pope Julius said)
to obtain and effect their purposes. This was Herod's fault, who being blinded
with ambition, and desire of reigning, hoped by his craft and policy to cut
Christ short.

Secondly, this hope, that wicked men have to prevail against Christ, arises
from the confidence, they have in their own power and strength: wicked great
men think nothing hard for them to do, and therefore dare wage open battle
against Gods religion, and his children. Thus does Herod; and, because none
dare gainsay him, he hopes to prevail. This hope arises from forgetfulness,
they remember not oftentimes the hand of the Lord, but look upon things as
merely ordered and governed by second causes James 4.15.
, they consider not the eye of the Lord, that sees all, nor the hand of the
Lord that swayes all; or they presume, God will take no notice of them; or they
dare violate the truth, and yet hope to escape punishment, as Adam and Evah
eat the apple, and yet hoped they should not dye, although God had positively
without any If or and (for that peradventure Genesis 3.3.
was of Evahs adding) affirmed the contrary Genesis 2.17.
; and thus does Herod hope to prevail against Christ, although God himself
had most plainly said the contrary Psalm. 2.
. And therefore every one should learn 1. to restrain his bottomless desires,
and be content with whatsoever estate or condition the Lord shall call him unto,
or settle him in. 2. Every one must remember, that he can do nothing of
himself, because in God we live, and moove, and have our being Act. 17.28.
, yea because preferment comes neither from the East, nor from the West, but
from the Lord, and therefore when we endeavor against the will of God, we do
but strive against the stream. 3. All must learn, not to forget either the
eye, or hand, or power, or truth of God; but remember all things are ordered by
a divine hand of providence, and therefore let us not put forth our hands to
use any wicked or unlawful means, either for the procuring of any blessing,
or the preventing of any evil: for in doing so, we prove our selves to be like
wicked Herod, that thinks he can prevail against Christ, the only begotten
son of God.

VERRS. 17. Then was fulfilled that,
Then was fulfilled,] We see here how careful the Lord is, that every word
of his should be accomplished?

Certes it shall, Esa. 55.11. my word (says the Lord) shall be fulfilled, and
not one jot or jota thereof shall perish Matthew. 5.18.
: for if the Lord speak it, he will also do it. 1 Pet. 1.24.

Secondly, Why shall every word of God be fulfilled? why is the Lord so
careful to bring to pass whatsoever he has spoken?

I answer, First, because God is truth it self. John 14.6. and the truth of
the word does depend upon the truth of God; and therefore the Lord will fulfill
whatsoever he has spoken, least an aspersion of falsehood should be cast in his
face

Secondly, because God is infinite in knowledge, he knows from the beginning,
what shall Gal. 6.7.
, and hence it is, that the Prophets do so often speak of things which are to
come, as though they were present, yea sometimes as though they were bypast. I.
Sometimes they speak of things, which shall not be for many years after, as
though they were already present, as Mal. 3.1. and Mark. 1.2.
the Prophet from the Lord says concerning John Baptist, Behold J send my
messenger, who shall prepare the way. II. Sometimes they speak of things, that
are to come diverse hundred y^^res after, as though they were already past; as
it is said of Christ Esa. 9.6.
, for unto us a child is borne, and unto us a son is given; as though he were
then already borne and given: Now the reasons of their thus delivering
ther-prophecies, was because they were as sure of the event and accomplishment
of that, which by them from the Lord had been spoken, as though it were
already present or past.

Thirdly, because God is omnipotent, able to effect whatsoever he has
promised or threatened; Esa. 55.11.
. If the Lord should not accomplish, what he either promises or threatens, men
would believe that he were not able to do it, and therefore being jealous of
his honor, he is careful to fulfill whatsoever he has spoken.

Fourthly, God will fulfill every word of his, Iam. 1.17.
: for 1. he is never disturbed with affection, nor transported by passion, he
does all things upon mature deliberation, with infinite wisdom, and most
calm affection. 2 His will is never changed, he is to day and to morrow, and
for ever the same, and therefore he certainly fulfilles whatsoever he speaks.

To sum up all this whole question in few words; If the Lord did not fulfill
or perform what he promises, and threatens, it were for some of these causes:
either first, because he is not true, or not a God of his word: Or secondly,
because he knew not, what would come to pass, some thing thwarting or crossing
him, which he did not foresee nor know: Or thirdly, because he is not able to
perform what he has spoken: Or fourthly, because he is mutable, and of
another mind to day, then he was yesterday: Now all these are blasphemously
derogatory from the Majesty of the Almighty, and therefore least men should
thus conceit of him, he fulfills all his prophecies and predictions, that they
may see and know, that he is infinite in truth, power, knowledge, and also
immutable.

Against this it will be objected, God threatens all sinners, that none of
them shall escape, but Psalm. 9.17.
, the sinner shall be cast into hell; that is, every sinner; an indefinite
proposition being equipollent to an universal, and yet many Publicanes and
Harlots have come unto heaven, how then is every word fulfilled?

I answer first, all the threatenings of God are conditional, and therefore if
the condition required be fulfilled, then they shall not come to accomplished,
then they shall certainly perish that are threatened Ezech. 18.22.26.
.

Secondly, threatenings sometimes have a double sense; first, Literal, and this
sense is always Allegorical, and this sense is always true: as for example,
Jonah goes through Niniveh, and cries, yet 40 days and this city shall be
destroyed Jonah 3 4.
: the literal sense of which commination was conditional, that is, if Niniveh
repent her not, then within 40 days after this denunciation she should be
destroyed: but they repent, and are therefore spared. The Allegorical sense of
this Prophecy was true, because about some 40 years after this (they returning
unto their former wickedness) the city was overcome and destroyed.

Thirdly, it is most certain, that all sinners shall be cast into hell, but
not all that are or have but qualis vita, finis ita, as they have lived in
sin, so they die in iniquity without true and unfeigned repentance. And thus
all the threatenings of God rightly understood shall be fulfilled.

It may be objected again, God threatens to bring many temporal plagues and
calamities Psa. 73.


I answer first, certainly God spares wicked si quoties peccant homines, sua
fulmina mittat Iuppiter, for if he were as ready to punish, as men to offend,
who could escape: and therefore he forbeares a long time for these two causes.
I. That thereby he may lead sinners to repentance Romans 2.5.
. And II. That he may gloryfie his long suffering and patience, according to
his own proclamation of himself Exodus 34 6.
. He spared the old world after he took notice of their impieties, 120.
years Genesis 6.3.
, which is called the great long suffering of God 1 Pet. 3.20.
.

Secondly, though God spare wicked men long, he will awake as a giant
refreshed with wine, and smite his enemies Psa. 78.65.
. Pharaoh was ten times admonished, but at length utterly overthrown: God
expects until their sins come unto maturity, and then punishes.

Thirdly, though these general threatenings are

Fourthly, God denounces diverse and sundry judgments against al wicked men,
that all might Tunc tua res agitur, paries cum proximus ardet, when the Lord
threatens all, and corrects one wicked man, he would have every one to remember
that they have deserved to be thus punished, and that the threatenings of God
are denounced against them, as well as others, and therefore they had need to
fear, need to beware, need to look about them, need to prevent the storm
that is coming, need to kiss the son before he grow angry with them, and so
they perish by his just wrath Psa. 2.11
.

And this is one of the chief ends of Gods temporal menaces, to make all men
fearful to offend him, and careful to please him: and therefore every
threatening according to the ^o^ Ghosts meaning shall be accomplished in Gods
appointed time.

Psa. 34.10. and 37.25.
, that they shall be protected from all temporal evils Psa. 91.10.11.
, Righteousness having a promise, both of this life, and of the life to come 1 Timothy 4.8.
and yet notwithstanding all these, we see that for the most part they are
under the cross, and miserable calamities 1 Cor. 4.11, etc.
.



Romans 8.17.
, and that reward shall abundantly recompense all their afflictions Romans 8.18.
and. 1 Cor 4.17
.

Thirdly, in the mean time, they shall not be left destitute. 2. Cor. 4.4. but
shall be helped one Re, delivered from their affliction, as Jobs adversity was
turned into prosperity yea, greater then ever he had before: so Daniel was
pulled out of the Lions den, and the three Children out of the fire, and raised
unto honors. Or II. Consilio, God will afford unto them prudence and patience
in their affliction, he will strengthen and support them to undergo whatsoever
he lays upon them, and it is all one thing whether the burden be taken away
from the shoulders, or the shoulders strengthened without any harm to undergo
and bear the burden. Or III. Solamine, God will afford unto them internal
comfort and peace of conscience, and joy in their sufferings Romans 8.37.
. And thus the Lord does perform his promises unto his children, either by
delivering them from dangers, or relieving their wants, or strengthening them by
his grace to undergo his hand, or by the internal comforts of the holy Spirit.

. 1. VERSE. 18. In Rama was a voice heard, mourning
It may here be asked where Rama was?

I answer first there was Ramathaijm in mount Ephraim, as may be seen 1 Samuel
1.1. and Judge. 4.5.

Secondly, there was Ramah in Nephthali, Josh.

Thirdly, there was Rama in Benjamin, Josh. 18.25. Judge. 19.13.

Fourthly, hence some will not have Rama Ramah, do expound these words in this
manner, in Rama, that is in excelsis on high was a voice heard.

But Fifthly, Rama is here to be taken for that Ramah which was in Benjamin, and
near unto Bethlehem.

. 2. Rachel weeping (...) her children.]

Who is meant here by Rachel? Rachel?

I answer first, Rachel was one beloved of God,

Secondly, but Rachel was now dead, and therefore Mayer upon this verse)
Teaching us that in the study of divine things, Hyperius, Erasmus, Melancthon,
Perkins, and diverse others: but of this more largely else where.

. 1. VERSE. 19. And when Herod was dead behold an Angel of the Lord appears
unto Joseph
It may here be doubted, Herod died a natural death, or if he went out of the
world (after so many bloody cruelties) without some remarkable judgment? It
should seem he did, because the Scripture makes no mention of any thing, but
that only he died, neither expressing when nor how.

I answer first, that he dyed about two years

Secondly, as his life was short (after this unheard Joseph. lib. 2. de Bell.
Iud. cap. 22.
as may appear by this description of it: He first was stricken with an
extreme burning heat within, which so fast consumed his meat, that he had
continually a most greedy desire to feed, but could never be satisfied; his
intrails rotted in his body, he was tormented with most cruel pangs in his
genitals, and his feet were greatly swollen. To all this was added a putrefying
of his privy parts crauling with worms, and a most horrible stinch proceeded
from him: in which miserable loathsome case he continued some weeks and then
dyed.

Herod is sin, and as long as he lives and reigns, Christ does absent
himself, and will not come unto his people: Herod must dye before Christ will
return: sin must be mortyfied before Christ will come unto the soul:
whence it may be questioned.



I answer first, because the Holy Spirit will not come into a polluted vessel,
God and Mammon Matthew. 6.24.
, one Temple cannot hold the Arc and Dagon. 1 Samuel Non been convenient, nec in
una sede morantur, sin and grace, Satan, and Christ will never be immates, or
cohabitants in one, and the same heart, at one and the same time; and therefore
sin must be expulsed, before Christ will be entertained.

Paul says, how can he that is dead in sin live therein Romans 6.2
? A man cannot be alive and dead at one instant, in one sense: and therefore we
cannot partake the spiritual life of grace and Christ, until sin dye 1 Cor.
15
Christ will rather continue an exul in Egypt, then come into Israel so long as
this Herod (sin) is alive; and therefore if we desire the fruition, and
possession of Christ in the soul, we must labor to fight against 1 Pet. 2.11.
and to mortify Col. 3.5.
all carnal affections in us, putting off this old garment of sin, and
casting it from us, that so we may be clothed with that new man Christ Jesus
Romans 13 12.13.14.
.

. 1. VERSE. 20. Saying, arise, and take the babe,




Secondly, that in regard of that estate of humanity,

Thirdly, this was done, that Christ hereby

And go into the land of Jsrael.

Joseph return with Christ into Israel?

Observa.
where was the law of God, and the true Church of God; teaching us, that
parents should be very careful of the pious education of their children, that
they may have both good instruction, and discipline, and also good example? Now
there is a threefold good education, the I. Learned, this is good for those
that are able, to allow unto their children, some learning, that they may be
the more capable of religion. The II. Is sober, to teach them humanity, and
humility toward all, and sobriety and temperance in themselves. The III.
Pious and holy, and this is required (as well as the former) of all parents, to
endeavor by Catechizing, instructing, and godly example to educate their
children, in the fear and nurture of the Lord.

Secondly, this was done also that it might be

Thirdly, this was done for Joseph's and Mary's

. 3. Because they are dead, who sought the babes life.

Here it may be demanded, who were they

First, Hierome thinks it was the Pharisees Hiero. 1.
, and he is moved to this opinion for these reasons, I. Because it is spoken in
the plural number, mortui, not mortuus, they are dead, not he is dead. II.
Because they were troubled, as well as Herod, verse. 3. and (as Hierome thinks)
consulted also with Herod against Christ. III. Because they were slain by
Herod, as we showed before, verse. 3. Some Gualt ^
deny S. Hieromes second reason, affirming that the Parisees did neither lie in
wait for the life of Christ, nor consult to kill him.

Secondly, this is certain, from this verse, Phil. 1.8.9.
, and therefore they that spurn at him, do but kick against the pricks.
Hence a question may be propounded.

Who are they that oppose themselves against Person, 2. in his Power, 3. in his
Preaching: all such being (...), sighters against Christ, and which shall never
go unpunished Matthew. 21.44. and Act. 3.23.
.

First, in Persona, they oppose Christ that persecute him in his person: the
person of Christ taken largely, consists of an Head, and a Body, and therefore
they are opposers of Christ, that I. persecute him in Capite, that blaspheme
Christ, or refuse to be subject unto him (as many do in all places, where
Christ is preached) or directly oppose Christ himself, as Herod did here, and
the Jews afterward, when they persecuted him, and crucified him: all these
sin against their own heads, this their opposition being treason in the highest
degree. II. They are opposers of Christ in his person, that persecute him in
membris, in his body; that is, they that persecute the true professors of the
Gospel of Christ, or the children of God.

Secondly, they oppose Christ, that persecute him in potestate, in his power,
as, I. traitors do, that imagine and practice evil against Kings, the Lords
Vicegerents, as the Pope does, that sometimes opposes Kings, sometimes
deposes Kings, sometimes interdicteth and excommunicateth Kings, sometimes
freeeth their subjects from the oath of allegiance, and either by secret
policy, or open power, labors to murder those Protestant Princes, that
will not be subject to his Antichristian power; yet this should no whit dismay
any of the Lords Vicegerents, upon earth: for although they be crafty,
fraudulent, malicious, cruel, and bloody, yet they need not fear them,
because they oppose themselves against Christ, in opposing themselves against
Christian Kings; and they shall not prevail against them, God having promised
to protect his Vice-royes, who are defenders of the true faith, and has
graciously performed his promise to our late dread Sovereigns of famous and
blessed memory, King James, and Queen Elizabeth, against whom, none of the
plots or practices of the Jesuits, or Seminaries (seedsmen of mischief) ever
took effect. These, I say, are opposers of Christ, and therefore shall be
destroyed Psa: 2.4.5.6.
: yea, many are the examples that might be produced of Gods heavy judgments
inflicted upon those that have opposed Protestant Princes; but I refer the
Reader to Doctor Beard his Theater of Gods Judgments sol. 541:
.

II. There are others that oppose Christ in his Power, besides Papists, and
those are Anabaptists, who deny obedience unto all Christian Magistrates: and
although the Apostle positively says, that they are ordained of God Romans 13
1.2.
, yet these Separatists do deny all superiority and Magistracy, amongst
Christian people, as shall be showed more largely elsewhere.

Thirdly, they are opposers of Christ, that persecute, or oppose him in
Praedicatione, in his preaching; and that either, I. By the patronage of sin,
or sinners, many delight to support and uphold wicked men in their wickedness;
but such must remember, that herein they oppose Christ, which opposition will
bring destruction at last. Or, II. by an obstinacy in sin, transgressing
with an high hand, and will not be reclaimed by the Ephesians. 4.19.
preaching of the word: some will sin, let the preacher say what he will,
stat pro ratione voluntas, their own will shall be their law, not the will of
God published by the Minister: some would leave some sins, if Christ did not
forbid them: that is, because the preacher reprehends them, therefore they will
not amend, to vex him. Or, III. Those that hate the preachers of the Gospel,
and endeavor that all preaching were left. These must beware, because this is a
direct opposition of Christ, as appears most clearly by this one example: Paul
breathes out threatenings against the Disciples of the Lord, persecuting and
prosecuting them to the uttermost of his power Act. 9.1.2.
, to whom Christ from heaven calls, Oh Saul, why persecutest thou me Act. 9.4.
, and fore-warnes him of it, as a Scylla, that will suddenly dash him to pieces
Verse. 5.
. And therefore all these must take heed of Herod's sin, (in opposing
themselves unto Christ) lest that Herod's punishment (mentioned before, verse.
19.) be their portion: for none are stronger than Christ 1. Cor. 10.22.
, none are able to prevail one ^ot-against him; but he is able to throw both
the bodies and souls of all those into everlasting burnings, that, like Herod,
set themselves against him, either in his person, or in his power, or in his
preaching.

. 4. Return, for they are dead that sought the We may observe here, that as
soon as ever they are dead, which sought the childs life, Joseph was called
back again: the cause of his going into Egypt, was the preservation of Christ,
and as soon as this storm was blown over, and this danger past, he is
reduced, and brought back again. Hence it may be asked,

Why does the Lord remove the affliction from his children,

I answer, First, because his mercy is infinite,

Secondly, he does not afflict his children

Thirdly, because the Lords end in the affliction Joseph, and Mary in this
verse: when their enemies are dead, then they are called home again.

. 1. VERSE. 22.
It may here first be questioned. Why Joseph went into Galilee, and Nazareth?

I answer, First, because Herod Antipas was Archelaus, as may thus appear, I.
This Herod hears John Baptist preach, Mark. 6.20. etc. II. Unwillingly he
slayes him, verse 26. and III. His respect unto those that sat with him, verse.
26. shows that he was of a soft temper, non possum adversari meis Terent.
.

Secondly. the King of the Jews was not expected Joseph goes thither, as the
safer place.

Thirdly, it is very probable, that the Lord did

Hence further it may be asked, Why Joseph this?

I answer, First, because Galilee was the safer will securely, and safely
provide for his children, and that for these two causes, I. Because God loves
them, and always cares for them, yea, ordained the whole world for their good
Romans 8.28.
. II. Because he is infinite in wisdom, and only knows what is truly
profitable for them.

Archelaus, but he does this for our Joseph, and all the Godly hereby to use
the means, and then refer the success unto God: as Ioah did. 2 Samuel
10.10.11. and as Hezekiah did. 2. Chron. 32.34. and Nehem. 4.9.



I answer first, If we must not use the means Job. 7.1.
.

Moses prayed, Israel prevailed, but when he ceased praying then Amalek gets
the upper hand Exo. 17.11.
: so Elisha promises (from the Lord) unto Ahab rain, but obtaines it not
without prayer 1 king. 18.42
. II. Sometimes the Lord ordaines and blesses external means also; and hence
the Prophets of God used the means, when they could have wrought miracles;
thus Elisha uses salt, 2 King. 2.10. and meal (4. 41.) and wood, (6. 6.) yea
Christ makes clay, (John 9.6.) and the Angels comfort Christ Luke 22.43.
. And all this was to show us, that in all our necessities, both external and
internal, corporal and spiritual, we must use those means which the Lord
has ordained in his word, for our ease, help and succor.

He turned aside into Galile.] In Galile, Infamy and contempt, the Jews held
it an infamous, or at least a base place; and therefore they say, no Prophet
arises out of Galilee Ioh. 7.52.
And Nathaneel thinks it strange Joh. 1.46.
that any good thing should come out of Nazareth. So Julian the Apostate when
he warring against the Persians, was mortally wounded with a dart from heaven,
cried out (his breath being ready to expire with that black and blasphemous
mouth, vicisti Galilaee, oh Galilean (calling Christ so in disdain and
contempt, as a word of disgrace) thou have now prevailed and got the mastery
over me: yet notwithstanding this, Christ disdaines not to dwell in Galilee,
and that for these causes. 1 Because he refused nothing for our sakes: for us
he humbled himself, taking upon him the form of a servant Phil. 2.7.
, yea came into the world that he might serve Matthew. 20.28.
, and refused not that servile office, to wash his Apostles feet Ioh. 13.9
. Galilee, which was of small note, or account in regard of the cities of Judea.

Secondly, the second thing observable in Galilee, is Profaneness: for as it
was a base and contemptible place, so (which is worse) it was held a wicked,
profane, and irreligious place: hence it is called Galilee of the Gentiles
Matthew. 4.15.
, that is frequentissima Gentibus Iunius s.
being situated near unto Tire and Sidon, and frequented continually by the
Gentiles, and abounding with them: and hence (as is conjectured) it was that
Solomon gave unto Hiram 20 cities in Galilee 1. King. 9.11.
and Galilee being thus peopled with Gentiles was just like unto Israel, where
the Syrians dwelt 2 King. 17.24.
, so Tetrachia ah Ethnarchia separatur (says Josephus) the Tetrachie of
Galilee was separated from from the Principality of the Jews, as is plain by
the Evangelist Luke 3.1.
. Yea it is evident, that the Gentiles first did inhabit those cities, because
after that Hiram had restored those cities to Solomon, he repaired them and
then caused the Jews to inhabit them 2 Chro. 8.2.
, and yet notwithstanding all this Christ dwells in Galilee.

Hence no small question will arise:

I answer it is, Lot dwells in Sodom, David in Gath, Joseph with Pharaoh,
Jeremy in Babylon.

Against this it will be objected: Esa. 52.11. 2 Cor. 6.17. Revel. 18.4. Ephesians.
4.11. David complains that he is constrained to abide amongst them, Psalm.
120. verse 6. so also Deuteronomy. 7.2. and Exodus 23.33. and 34.12. In which places
we are commanded to come out from infidels, to separate our selves from them,
and the like phrases, and therefore it is not lawful: The Argument
syllogistically is this, That which is prohibited by God is unlawful, but
cohabitation or conversation with infidels is prohibited by God, and therefore
is not lawful.

I answer here to the Minor or second proposition, consent, when a man living
amongst them, learnes their ma^ners: as Solomon, with Pharaohs daughter 1 King.
11.4.
; this is dangerous and forbidden, and is the meaning of all the places
objected, that we must take heed of learning the vices and wicked customs of
unbeleevers.

2. Of necessity, and thus Lot, David, Jacob, Joseph, were by a kind of
enforcing necessity urged and compelled to dwell with with heathens: and this
is tolerated and allowed; whether first it be absolute for life, necessity
thereunto constraining: or secondly, whether it be respective, only for a
time, in regard of our present, pious, and lawful calling, as our Factors
amongst the Turks.

3. Of Office, as a Physician, and thus Christ dwells among the Galileans Esa.
^2.1
. Thus Christ eats with Publicanes Matthew. 9.12. Luke 7.14.
, and this conversing with infidels is commended; but here two cautions are to
be observed. First consider what calling thou have to do it, for it is
dangerous adventuring without a calling, and little better then presumption:
Christ was not only sent to the lost sheep of Israel, but also to be a corner
stone, to join Jews and Gentiles in one in him Col. 3.11.
, and therefore he had a warrant from God and a particular calling to do this.

Secondly, consider thine own strength, least in stead of converting of them,
thou be perverted by them: they had need of strong men in grace, that
undertake to cure the wicked, least that themselves be seduced: Thus Christ
was a lamb without spot, in him was no sin found, and therefore having a
calling he might safely dwell, and converse, and eat with sinners.

. VERSE. 23. And he came and dwelt in a city


Chrysostom. Theophil. Muscul.
that the book is lost, wherein this Prophecy was contained; because many
sentences are recited in the New Testament, which are no where extant in the
Old: and this came (as they think) through the envy and malice of the Jews:
but this reason seems weak; for if any such books were in the Apostles time,
and were by them received as the divine and infallible oracles of God, it is
not likely, that now they are lost, they being neither envious nor negligent:
but of this we have spoken in the fifteenth verse.

Iunius s
, that Christ is here said to have been thus spoken of by the Prophets, He
shall be call a Nazarite, because he is by them set forth by the name Netzer,
a branch, which appellation howsoever it was not understood any otherwise, but
as setting forth a branch coming out of a Kingly stock, yet mystically
withal is intimated thereby, in what place he should be brought up. Others to
this purpose Weemse Christ. Synag. f. 49.
read this verse thus, he shall be called a Netzerit, not a Nazarit, because
he is called Netzer Zach. 6.12.
, a branch; the Evangelist thus expounding the Prophet in sense, though not in
words, because Christ was not a Nazarit: and thus this author would interpret
Saint Matthewes words, he shall be called a flower, or a branch. Thus (I say)
these think, that Christ's name was not Nazareus, but Netzer, which signifies a
Branch Esa. 11.1. and Zach. 3.19. and 6.12
. And the reason they give for this is, because it is said, dictum per
Prophetas, in the plural number, as it was said by the Prophets Hierom. and
Iunius s.
This reason is altogether disliked by learned Beza, upon a double ground, the
first is because although this Testimony be found but in one of the small
prophets, yet it is said to be spoken (...) by the Prophets, because all these
12. small Prophets were joined in one book.

Secondly, because this verse is quoted from the book of the Judges, which
book was written by diverse several Prophets; and therefore it may be
understood thus, dictum per Prophetas that is written in that book, which was
p^nned by diverse Prophets.

The most part answer, that this verse is taken Judge. 13.5.7. The child shall
be a Nazarite unto the Lord.) for 1. Sampson is called a Nazarite. 2 he was a
type of Christ. 3 therefore Christ is called so spiritually. 4 therefore, that
which they will not acknowledge, God has thus brought to pass, viz. that they
shall call him a Nazarene. Here then we must diligently observe, how Sampson
was a Type of Christ. First, in his birth, which I. was prophetically foretold
Judge. 13.5.
. II. from his birth he was prepared: in that same verse. III. ordained for the
good of Israel: in that same place also. Thus the birth of Christ was foretold
Esa, 9.6.
, himself also prepared and ordained to save his people Matthew. 1.21.
. Secondly, in his life, 1. he was full of strength, and employed it for the
protection of the Jews: so Christ is a strong rock, stronger then Satan and
all his instruments, and therefore will protect his children Luke 11.22.
. 2 Sampson marries a Gentile, so Christ marries the heathens, receiving them
into an everlasting covenant. 3 he overcame the Lion, and drew honey from him:
so Christ overcame Satan that roaring Lion, that he might give liberty, and
life, and salvation (which is sweeter then honey) unto his servants. 4 Sampson
for the love of an harlot exinanivit se, suffered himself to be emptied,
stripped, disrobed and deprived of his strength: so Christ disrobed himself of
glory, and took the lowly shape of man upon him, for man's sake who had played
the harlot with many lovers Romans 5.6.7.
.

Thirdly, in his death, 1 Sampson was slain by his enemies, so was Christ. 2
he revenged himself more in his death then in his life, Judge. 16.30.
so Christ by his death overcame death, hell, and the devil Heb. 2.14.15. 1
Ioh. 3.8
. And thus we see from whence this verse is gathered by the Evangelist.

. 2. He shall be called a Nazarene.] We Nazarite.

First, for the explication of the word, I propound And he came and dwelt in
Nazaret, that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken by the Prophet, he shall
be called a Nazarit unto the Lord.

How were these two accomplished in Christ, to be called both a Nasarit, and a
Nazarit?

He was Nazarens voto, Nazarenus habitatione: he was a Nazarene by habitation
or dwelling, because he dwelt there; he was a Nazarit, the true branch of the
root of Iesse, in regard of his humanity: and he was a Nasarit truly separated,
and set apart to the Lord: thus he is called (...), holy unto the Lord, and
(...), one belonging to Nazareth.

What is meant by Nasarit?

I answer, two of them are Theological. Heretical.



The first sort of Nasarites (which are the first Theolgicall) are of the old
Testament, and are those that were separated, and set apart only unto God,
either, I. ordination and vow Numb. 6.2.
or, II. By the commandment of God, as Sampson was Judge. 13.4.
.

The second sort of Nasarites (which are the second Theological) are of the
New Testament, and they are those who were borne or brought up in Nazareth,
because Nazareth in the old Testament is never named: and thus these words are
ever interpreted, (...), Matthew. 26.71. Mark. 1.24. and 10.47. and 14. 67. Luke
4.34. and 24.19. John 19.19. Acts 2.22.

The third sort of Nasarites (which are the first Heretical) are of some of
the Jews, who acknowledging the Patriarchs (until Ioshuahs time) reject the
Scripture, boasting that they have other writings, of more worth than these
are. Danaeus (in Epiphanio) calls these Nasahaeos.

The fourth sort of Nasarites (which are the second heretical) are of the
Christians, borne in Pella, in the year of Christ 37. who would have all the
ceremonies to be observed, and that for these two causes, I. Because the
Apostles themselves observed them for a time, II. That so they might avoid
persecution, Gal. 3.



I answer. It may be applied, either unto Christ, or into our selves.



Christ is a Nazarite, I. Literally, according to the second sort of Nazarites,
because he was brought up there. II. Spritually, according to the first sort of
Nazarites; but not one of those, who were separated and set apart unto God, BY
VOVV, but by the Ordination, and appointment of God.



I answer, We, as the members of Christ, ought also to be Nazarites unto God.
Nazar signifies one that is separated, Joseph amongst his brethren, and diverse
others, Genesis 49.26. and Deuteronomy. 3.16. and Lament. 4.7. and Amos 2.11. that is,
first, in general we must be separated from the world Romans 12.2. and 1 Ioh.
2.15.
. Secondly, particularly, I. First, cut not the hair, let no razor come upon
your heads; this has a double signification, first, it signifies fortitude and
strength: teaching us three things, 1. To be constant and resolute in our
obedience, that nothing may divert, or hinder us from the service of God. 2. To
fight manfully, even unto blood, against sin, Hebr. 12.4. 3. To be constant
in the profession of the truth, even unto death, as the three children Dan.
30.17.
were.

Secondly, it signifies a certain neglect of outward ornament, or bodily
adorning: Teaching us to mortify our affections unto the world, to labor that
the world may be crucified unto us; and that we may look upon it as a dry
branch, and a withered stock, wherein there is no beauty, nor comeliness,
that we should desire it.

II. Secondly, abstain from wine; this signifies temperance: and therefore let
us learn to mortify our affections in all worldly things, using the world, as
though we used it not. 1 Cor. 7.30.32.
Principally take heed of Drunkenness, this breaks our vow of a Nazarite unto
God.

III. Thirdly, touch no dead carcass, that is, leave all mortified affections:
the lusts that are killed, let them never be revived; the sins that are left,
let them never be learned Romans 6.2.
, put off sin for ever, and take heed of turning with the Dog to his vomit,
or the Swine that is washed, to the wallowing in the mire, lest that the latter
end be worse than the beginning. 2 Pet. 2.20.21.


CHAPTER III.
. 1. VERSE. 1. And in those days John the Baptist came, and preached in the
wilderness of Judea.
Monastical Vows; arguing thus, John Baptist lived from a child in the
wilderness: therefore it is lawful for young ones to profess Monkerie. John's
example was extraordinary, as his office and calling was singular; and
therefore he is no more to be imitated, and followed in his solitary life, than
in his diet of Locusts and wild honey: he sprang also in his mothers womb,
which I think Monks and Eremites do not.

John entered into the wilderness: for he was thirty years old when he came
and preached in the wilderness, as follows afterward Willet. Synops. f. 343.
.

In those days.] Here diverse questions may be propounded.



Tiberius, and in the 30. year of Christ, as appears by another of the
Evangelists Luke 3.1.23
.



Anna, and Simeon, and of the Sheepheards, and the consultation of the Priests,
were all private.





Luke 2.4^.
. Thirdly, this obedience unto his parents, Luke 2.51. Fourthly, his growth and
increase in Spirit and Grace, Luke 2.40. Stature of Body, Luke 2.52.
Fifthly, and many things were done in this interim, which are not mentioned at
all.

This was done to teach us, that the holy regula recti, the true rule of
equity.

What days or times were these to the Jews?

I answer, Miserable, and full of calamity: for first, they were in subjection
under the Romans. Secondly, Pilat was governor, who had mingled their blood
with their sacrifices Luke 13.2.3.
. Thirdly, Herod their King was lascivious and cruel. Fourthly, the Scribes
and Lawyers were divided into diverse Sects; the Pharisees were proud and
superstitious; the Sadduces profane and Atheistical: the Esseenes few and
despised. Fifthly, the Priests were covetous, corrupting all things their
sacrifices were polluted, their government changed, having two high Priests at
once. Sixthly, the common people were contumacious, and on all sides afflicted;
and in diebus illis, in those days comes the preaching of the Gospel unto
them: Teaching us, that affliction strowes the way to mercy: adversity being
unto mercy, Observa.
as the foil unto the Diamond; the greatness of mercy not being perceived,
until we want it: and therefore the Lord afflicts, that mercy may be the
more sweet and acceptable unto us.

What times and days were these to John who now began to preach the Gospel?

These were the days when he was called to preach the Gospel, Luke 1.80.
: whence two things are very observeable: First, the Baptist does not undertake
to preach the Gospel, until he be called, although he were (...),
sanctified, and replenished with the Spirit of God from the womb: Teaching us,
Ier. 14.14.
. Secondly, when once he is called, he delays it not, although it were a
work not only full of labor, but also full of danger: Teaching us, that all
things are to be undertaken when we have a calling from God, willingly and
readily, although they may seem laborious and perilous.

Exposit.
. 3. Came John Baptist.] John signifies Gracious, and Baptist one that
administers the Sacrament of admission, and entrance into the Church of Christ:
Exo. 19.18. and 20.18.
, and the transgression of the Law was most severely punished, as may appear
by these examples, I. The people of Israel committing fornication with the
daughters of Moab, there were slain of them four and twenty thousand Numb.
25 9.
. II. For the Calfe they made, there died three thousand ( Hierome reads
30000: of which in his place Exo. 32.28.
. And yet notwithstanding this he threatens, that he will yet further visit
this their sin Verse 34.
. III. For their murmuring, First, they were punished with a vehement fire,
which consumed the utmost part of the Host Numb. 11.1.
. Secondly, with a vehement plague Verse 33
. Thirdly, with fiery Serpents, Numb. 21 6. IV. Corah with all his company
swallowed up, Numb. 16. and 14000 of the Host beside, v. 49 V. Yea, all were
destroyed, and cut off, before they came to the promised land, that were above
20 years of age Numb. 14 29.
, to wit, 601730. six hundred and one thousand, seven hundred and thirty Numb.
26.51.65.
. Thus severely were the transgressions of the Law punished. But the Gospel is
a time of grace, and the Lord will not regard our former bypast life, if now,
when Christ is offered, we will but leave our sins, and lay hold upon him.

. 4. In the wilderness.

It may here be askeds why did John preach in

I answer first, to teach them that the Church wilderness, and that there was
a certain desolation of piety, they being now altogether careless of the true
worship, and service of God.

Secondly, because he taught them, that Christ wilderness (the Gentiles) to
plant his Church in.

Thirdly, because he would show thereby, wilderness. That is not by pleasure
and ease, but by labor and industry, hereby Teaching us that Christ and the
graces of God, are to be sought industriously,

Some will say here, I would refuse no pains,

I answer, First, thou must labor in the hearing First, that thou may
understand it in thy mind. Secondly, that thou may retain it in thy
memory. Thirdly, that thou may assent unto it (as true and good) in thy
judgment. Fourthly, that thou may love it, and delight therein in thy
affections. Fifthly, that thou may practice and obey it with all willing
submission in thy life and conversation.


First, that thou may hate it, and that it may be a burden unto thee.
Secondly, that thou may strive manfully against it, fighting even unto blood,
in resisting of sin. Hebr. 12.4.




How long Lord, how long, holy and true, do thou defer thy coming Rev.
6.10.
yea with the Bride, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly Rev. 22.20.
.

Fifthly labor in piety; the Kingdom of Heaven to enter in at the straight
gate, because without striving thou can never enter, as follows Chapter. 7.
verse 13, 24.

. 1. VERSE. 2. Saying, repent, for the Kingdom
Repent.] It may here be doubted whether inward repentance, or some outward
penance be by Saint John here understood?

I answer, certainly that inward repentance is here signified, as may appear
by these reasons. John is said, to preach the baptism of repentance, for the
remission of sins Luke 3.3.
, that which he preached, the people practiced: but we read not of any outward
penal works they did, but only of contrition and confession for their sins
Matthew. 3.6.
.

Secondly, Baptism is in the name of Christ; penance is a work of man,
whereby satisfaction is made unto God, as they teach how then can it be the
baptism of penance: for Christ to satisfy, and man to satisfy, are two
contrary things.

Thirdly, John also says, bring forth fruits of repentances: worthy and meet
for repentance; outward penal acts then are the fruits of repentance, and not
repentance it self.

. 2. Repent. The Papists object this place for penance, and one of them Greg.
Martin.
more particularly undertakes to prove it by four Arguments.

The first Argument is drawn from the circumstances of the place: Saint John
here exhorts sackecloath and ashes: as this same Evangelist says, If the
works done in thee had been done in Tire and Sidon, they had ere this repented
in sackcloth and ashes Matthew. 11.21.
, so the Ninivites repented in sackcloth and ashes Iona. 3.5.6.
, so here (...), agite poenittentiam, does signify some external penance.

external penance but because they repented not: And he began to upbraid the
Cities, because they repented not Matthew. 11.20.
II. This repentance which our Savior requires in these Cities, and the want
whereof he reproves in them, can be no satisfactory, nor sacramental penance,
because it was before Baptism, which is truly called the initiall or first
Sacrament of the Church.

Gregory Martins position is false, so is also his collection: for although to
their repentance were adjoined humiliation, the signs whereof are sackcloth and
ashes, yet these are not repentance, but the adjuncts of repentance, neither do
they satisfy the justice of God for our sins: saccus juvat ad panitentiam,
quia signum est humiliationis Basil. s. Psalm 29.
. Sackcloth and ashes help unto repentance, because they are the signs of
humiliation.



Resipiscentiam, a change of the mind afterward: Resipiscere est mentem quasi
ad insania recipere Lactant. de vero cultu. li. 6, 24.
to repent is to grow wise again, that is, both in the reforming and amending
of bypast sins, and in the avoiding of future temptations: and this is the
true signification of the word; but more of this in both the following
arguments.

agite panitentiam, that is (says our Objecter) do penance.

Lindanus condemns him as one not much skilled in the latin tongue Fulk. 13.
Sect. 7. cont. Greg Mart.
yea as one that erres egregiously in many things as for example, there was a
woman who had lost a groat, and in stead of everrit, he reads evertit, that
is, in stead of sweeping her house, she overturned her house: If the studious
Reader desire to see more examples of barbarous interpretations in the vulgar
latin Bible, I refer him to our worthy Whitakers Whitak. de sacra Script.
qu. 2 ca. 9 arg. 8. fol. 107.
and Willets synops. f. 30.31.

Secondly, the vulgar translation is none of Hieromes work, but of some
unknown Author; as is largely proved by our renouned Whitaker, de sacra
script. qu. 2. ca. 6. and Willet synops. f. 23.

Gregory Martin does) as may appear by these reasons, first, because he takes
else where in another sense both (...) and poenitentia, as Acts 5.31. God has
exalted our Savior: Ad dandam penitentiam Israeli, to give repentance (not
penance) to Israel Act. 11.18. When they heard these things, they glorified God
saying, then has God given Gentibus paenitentiam ad vitam, unto the Gentiles
repentance unto salvation. So also 2. Timoth. 2.25.

Secondly, because the author of that vulgar translation, takes the phrase,
agendi paenitentiam, in another sense, then doing of penance: as 1 Kin. 8.33.
If thy people Israel shall fly before their enemies, et agentes paenitentiam
and confitentes, and shall confess their sins and repent (not do Penance)
then forgive, etc. So verse. 35. If heaven shall be shut, that it rain not. Et
orantes isto loco paenitentiam egerint nomini tuo, and they shall pray unto
thee and repent, then be merciful, etc. But most plainly, verse. 47. Et
egerint paenitentiam in cord suo: If they shall repent in their heart, when
they are in captivity, etc. This cannot be meant of an external satisfactory
sacrament, because the words express clearly an internal and cordial
repentance.

Thirdly, because he makes these words, paenitemini and agite paenitentiam
synonyma, as both signifying one and the same thing; for sometimes this word
(...), is rendered by him, agite paenitentiam, as Matthew. 3.2. and 11.21. and
Act. 26.20. Sometimes paenitemini. Mark. 1.15. and Luke 10.13. and Act 3.19.
Fourthly, he attributes this phrase agendi paenitentiam to those whom Gregory
Martin himself will confess, did no external satisfactory penance; as 1.
this phrase is given to the Israelites for Benjamin. Judge. 21.15. and all
Israel was very sorry: Et egit paenitentiam, and repented them for the
destruction of that Tribe; they were sorry for what had happened, but they did
not do penance for it. 2. This phrase is given to the damned spirits. Wisdo.
5.3. Tum egerint paenitentiam, then they shall change their minds, not do
penance. 3. This phrase is given to God himself. First negatively. 1 Samuel 15
29. He is not like man, ut agat paenitentiam, that he should repent Secondly,
affirmatively, as Ierem. 18.8.10. if that nation which I have threatened do
repent, agam and ego penitentiam, then will I also repent, etc. Now unto the
Lord, neither the Rhemists, nor Gregory Martin, (I hope) dare attribute
external penance.

His fourth Argument is, because all the latin agite paenitentiam, do penance.

I answer first, Basil interprets it otherwise, as Lactantius expounds it
otherwise, as aforesaid also, so Tertullian (contra Marc) in graco s^no vox
panitentiae, non a confessione, sed a mentis mutatione: this word (...),
repentance, according to his true and germane signification, is so called from
an internal mutation of the mind, not from an external confession of the
tongue.

Secondly, this word Poenitentia is expounded two manner of ways, 1.
Grammatice, and 2. Translatitie. First this word Poenitentia (repentance) may
be expounded Grammatically, and that two manner of ways, first simply, pro
mentis in melius mutatione, for the change of the mind from evil to good; and
thus it is most usually taken in Scripture, as Acts 5.31. and 11.18. and 2 Timothy
2.25. and in this verse also, and Matthew. 4.17. and in all those places where
repentance is preached absolutely. Secondly, complicate, for repentance
testified by outward signs, whether 1. by sorrow and mourning, as the
Corinthians did 2 Cor. 7.10.
. or 2. by sackcloth and ashes, as the Ninivites did Iona 3.5.
. and they of Tire and Sidon would have done, had they had those means which
Corazin and Bethsaida had Matthew. 11.21.
: and this is the same repentance formerly spoken of, to wit, a true change of
the mind expressed by some outward signs of humiliation, but not as
satisfactory penance.

Secondly, this word poenitentia may be expounded Translatitie, and that two
manner of ways. First, orthodoxe truly, for repentance testified by the signs
of sorrow and shame publicly and solemnly being imposed by the Church: and
thus Augustine and many both Greek and Latin Fathers take the word: this is
true, but this word (...) is not found in this sense in all the Scriptures.
Secondly, haeretice falsely, for satisfaction imposed secretly in auricular
confession: in which sense the word is never used by the Ancient Fathers, and
therefore I may conclude that this penance enjoined by the Church of Rome for
the satisfying of the justice of God, is merely erroneous, and is built upon
no authority of Scripture at all.

Repent.] John's preaching is repentance, that is, the renovation of the mind,
which is the one half of the Gospel, the sum whereof consists in these two,
Repentance and Faith: and therefore I entreat the reader (without
tediousness) to suffer both me and himself to dwell a little longer, then
ordinary in this verse.



Jacobs ladder by which we mount unto heaven; the first whereof is sorrow, the
second is shame, the third is labor and industry: But this is an abuse of
repentance, these being not the parts of it, as else where more largely shall
be showed.









I answer, in two things viz. 1 Dejectione. 2 Erectione.
cordis. That is,

First, this preparation consists Dejectione cordis, in the dejecting and
humbling of the heart, here it may be asked, What necessity is there of

I answer, to rend our hearts, and to turn unto the Lord Joel. 2.12.
: because without this rending there is no true repentance: our hearts must be
plowed up before the seeds of grace can be sown Ierem. 4.4.
, because the spirit of bondage begets the spirit of adoption Romans 8.15.
.

Hence it will be inquired, wherein does this

I answer,

First, the beginning of this humiliation is a serious examination of our
selves, our estates and conditions: for when we examine our selves by the rule
of the law, and find how many and how mighty our sins are, which we have
committed, and which we are never able to satisfye for, then our peacockes
plumes and Pharisaicall conceits are laid aside.

Hence a question may be propounded: What

Three things, 2 Cor. 13.5.
? whether thou art truly and perfectly regenerated, or seduced by the spirit
of slumber and presumption? thou must examine, ubi fuisti, es, eris, non es
Greg. Mor. 23.
: what have thou been? what art thou? what shall thou be after this life,
happy or miserable? what art thou not? what is wanting in thee which thou
should have? Thus we should examine our selves whether we grow in grace at
all or not? and how the strength of sin decreases, and the strength of grace,
and of the spirit of God does increase in us.

Secondly, examine thy sins, consider what they are, whether oppression, or
adultery, or blasphemy, or drunkenness. or profaneness; and deal herein
faithfully with thy self, not deceiving thy own soul: speak truly as thou
would do to thy Lawyer or Physician, hide none of thy sins least they be
not pardoned; keep none of them back with Ananias and his wife, least (as
they did) thou perish thereby: for this is the true way unto humiliation to
labor to find out, and fully acknowledge al our transgressions whatsoever:
s^se ignorare caeteris natura est, homini autem vitio Boethius consol. l, 2.
. It is natural for other creatures not to know themselves, but for men to be
ignorant of their estates, or the sins they commit, is most shameful: and
therefore it is very necessary that we should examine our ways, works,
words, and thoughts, that so we may attain to the knowledge of our selves and
sins.

Thirdly, examine how thou may avoid thy sins, and be freed from them:
remember how often thou have been displeased with thy self, how often thou
have condemned thy self, how often thou have resolved to leave thy sins; and
yet how often thou have returned with the dog to his vomit: hence consider
how difficult a thing it is to leave our beloved sins, that knowing it, we
may be more careful to avoid them, and more diligent in the enquiring after
the remedies against them. And thus much for the beginning of our humiliation,
which is the examination of our estates and sins.

Secondly, the end of this examination, is the loathing of sin, and a desire
to leave it: we must examine what we are, that so what is amiss may be
amended; we must examine our sins, that finding them out, we may the better
detest, and endeavor to leave them: the way unto repentance is the hatred of
sin, and as long as sin is loved, so long the Lord is neither regarded nor
served: and therefore, that we may the better learn to hate sin, let us
remember these four things.

First, that our nature is wholly corrupted both within and without, viz. our
cogitations, actions, words, members, and all the faculties of the soul, the
best things in us being but a polluted ragge, our whole man overspread with the
leprosy of sin, and no better then painted sepulchers, or dead carcasses, who
stink in the nostrils of the Lord by reason of our transgressions.

Secondly, remember that thou art so ensnared and envassailed unto sin and
corruption by nature, that thou art no more able to help or free thy self,
then a Leopard, is to leave his spots, or a black moore to change his hew:
thou may in some measure know the wickedness of thy nature, but thou art
not able to redress it.

Thirdly, remember the many dangers and evils we are subject unto, only by
reason of sin, viz. 1. Temporal miseries, as poverty, sickness, diseases,
casualties, which we are not worthy to be protected from, by reason of our
iniquities. 2. Spiritual evils, as obstinacy in sin, to be given over to a
reprobate sense, hardness of heart, and final impenitency: all which we have
plunged our selves into, by giving way unto sin, and which we of our selves are
not able to redress. 3. Eternal death and destruction both of body and soul
for ever and ever Romans 2.7.
.

Fourthly, these things considered, remember whether we have cause to hate our
sins or not, be they never so dear unto us? that thus pollute us, that thus
provoke the Lord against us, that thus captivate and inthrall us, yea thus
subject us unto evils temporal, spiritual, and eternal?

And thus much for the first part of our preparation unto repentance, the
dejection and humiliation of the heart: the second follows.

The second part of our preparation unto Repentance, is the erection or raising
up of the heart, for except the heart be comforted and cherished, this
DEIECTION will prove DESPERATION.

It may here be asked, whence this comfort

I answer, dejected sinner may argue thus, he that is truly humbled and
contrite for his sins committed, and is truly careful to find out all his
transgressions, desiring also and endeavoring to leave and loath every thing
that is evil, he may hope and expect mercy from God, in and through Christ,
because Christ has called such unto him, and God has promised to receive
such: But I am such an one, I sorrow for my sins, and desire with the prodigal
child, to return unto my father Luke 15.18.
, and therefore I know God will receive me, as he did him; and pardon me, as
he did Paul 1 Timothy 1.13.
, in and through the merits and mercies of Christ. Thus the heart is to be
cherished by the comfortable promises of the Gospel, least otherwise our
humiliation drive us to despair: and on the contrary, this sweet music is
unprofitable, before the heart be truly dejected, and teaches us to presume:
and therefore to avoid presumption as well as despair (as the more usual and
dangerous) we must remember that the promises of mercy belong only unto the
truly penitent, and therefore until we be such, as are spoken of before, we
have no right nor interest in these promises at all.

And thus much for the first general part of Repentance which is Preparation.

The second part of repentance is RESOLUTION: Here a question may be propounded.

Wherein does this our Resolution consist?

I answer in three things, first, deplorando, devovendo, in forsaking our
sins. Thirdly, implorando, in imploring the assistance of God for strength
against our sins.

First, our Resolution does consist Deplorando, in the deploring and bewailing
of our sins, or in the confession of the filthynesse and errors of our
former life: and here begins (...), the true change and renovation of the
mind. Hence it may be demanded.

Why is the confession of our sins necessary

I answer first, because all promises of pardon Solomon prays, If thy people
shall return unto thee and say, we have sinned and have done perversely, we
have committed wickedness: then he thou oh Lord gracious unto them 1 King.
8.47.
; and again, the same Kingly Preacher from God prophecieth, that he that
covers his sins shall not prosper: but who so confesses and forsakes
them, shall have mercy Prove. 28.13.
.

Secondly, because we cannot aright determine

Thirdly, because our repentance is not a bare should be made unto him: thus
David confesses his sin. I have sinned 2 Samuel 12.2.
, and he promises that he will do thus, so often as he offends his God,
because otherwise he cannot be assured of pardon Psalm. 32.5.
: this was the practice of the Publicane, Lord be merciful unto me a sinner
Luke 18.13.
: and of the Prodigal, I have sinned against heaven, and against thee Luke 15.
, and am not worthy to be called thy child.

confession of sin argue a true change of the mind? or if not, then what
confession does?

I answer, that confession of sin which begins this (...), ingenuous confession
of our sins, judging and condemning our selves for our iniquities 1 Cor, 11 32.
, not denying them as some do, or excusing them as others do, or extenuating,
mitigating or lessening them as a third sort do, but truly acknowledging both
the evil of sin, and the evil of punishment deserved for sin.

Secondly, it is an humble confession, not shaming to confess sin as some do,
but in humility of soul and spirit confessing our transgressions unto the
Lord.

Thirdly, it is a contrite, and a sorrowful confession: because we are
destitute of all hope in our selves, and we have not deserved any favor or
mercy from God, because we have thus wickedly, and wretchedly provoked him by
our iniquities: thus Ezra and Daniel with wet eyes and blushing cheeks
confess their sins, and the sins of the people unto God Ezra 9.6. and Dan.
9.3.
. Confession without Contrition, neither pleases God nor profits man; but
where they are conjoined, there is a promise of mercy: the Lord having assured
such, that he will dwell with the^ for ever Esa. 66.2
. Confession is the speech of the tongue, Contrition is the speech of the
heart: now it is the heart that God requires, together with the tongue, not the
lips alone: my son (says God) give me thy heart Pro. 23.26.
: for I care not for those who draw near unto me with their lips, if their
hearts be far from me Mark. 7.6.
.

Secondly, our Religion does consist Devovendo, in vowing and solemnly
promising something unto God; and this perfects and finishes (...) this true
change and renovation of the mind.





First, we must promise unto the Lord, to abstain from sin for term of
life: and if he will be pleased to pardon our former sins, that we will
offend him no more: This is true repentance, praeterita plangere, and plangenda
non iterare (so Ambrose.) or non perpetrare, (so Gregory.) to bemoane and
lament our bypast sins, and never to iterate, or again commit those sins
that are thus bewailed: yea without this forsaking of sin, there is no right
repentance, and hence our Savior exhorts unto this, go thy ways and sin no
more Ioh. 8 11
: yea this is the seal of God, by which we may know whether his stamp be
upon us or not 2 Timothy 2.19.
, if we depart from iniquity: yea without this forsaking of sin, we cannot
please God: sin pollutes, and therefore the vessel must be purged from it,
before God will come unto the heart 1 Thessalonians. 4 4.
: and therefore unto true repentance these things are required. First, leave
thy dear and beloved sins, those sins that hang so fast on; and cleave so
fast too Heb. 12.1.
, for this is our warfare, these are our enemies, and therefore resist them
even unto blood Heb. 12.4.
. Secondly, leave all sins: Many men are content to leave many sins, but
not all: some seem as little as Zoar did unto Lot Genesis 19.18.
, some are as precious and dear as Herodias was unto Herod Mark. 6.
; but if we desire truly to repent, and surely to receive pardon, we must
forsake all, both small and great, public, and private, external and
internal, letting the time suffice us which is already past, to have been
spent in sin 1 Pet. 4.3.
, and while it is said to day, turn from whatsoever is evil, never to turn
unto it any more: because this is our first promise and vow unto God.

Secondly, we must solemnly vow and promise newness of life unto the Lord,
that henceforth we will serve him in new obedience, and an active life, all
the days that we have to live: we must bequeath and devote our selves wholly
unto the Lord, as new creatures 2 Cor. 5, 17.
, and that for these three causes.

First, because nothing else can assure us of eternal mercies, neither
circumcision, nor uncircumcision, nor any thing else availing unto salvatition
but a new creature Gal. 6.15. Romans 6.4.19.22.
.

Secondly, because negative obedience does not please God; nil agere est male
agere, not to do good, is to do evil: if the husbandman sow not good seed,
tares will come up, though he sow them not.

Thirdly, because these two are always coupled by the blessed Spirit, to show
that they should never be separated in us: David that Kingly Prophet,
exhorts us to eschew evil and to do good Psalm. 34.14.
. The Prophet Esai of Kingly race, advises us to cease to do evil, and to
learn to do well Esa. 1.18.19.
. So Saint Paul entreats, that we would not be conformed to this world, but
transformed, by the renewing of our mind Romans 12.2.
, and afterward, abhor that which is evil, and cleave to that which is good
Romans 12.9.
: and again, Romans 13.13.
we must walk honestly, not dishonestly: we must put off the old man, and put
on the new Ephesians. 4.22.23. Col. 3 9 10. Observe.
. Thus to forsake sin, and to obey God, are always united by the spirit of
God: to teach us that although they are two distinct things, as are heat and
light in the fire, yet they cannot truly and really be separated one from the
other, any more then these, which are the inseparable properties of the fire.

Here it may be demanded, Wherein does new obedience consist?

I answer, in these three things. First, sanctity toward God, by purging the
inward man from profaneness, and all love of sin: by clensing the outward man
from all profanation of the name, worship, and day of the Lord: by having our
inward man filled with holy thoughts, desires, purposes, and meditations, and
our outward man abounding in the work of the Lord. Secondly, in the works of
equity and uprightness toward man, as reverence toward superiors, love
toward inferiors, truth, justice, and love toward equals, mercy toward
offenders, charity toward the poor, and such like. Thirdly, in the works of
sobriety, not giving our selves unto pride, or a high conceit of our selves;
nor unto the contempt of others, nor unto prodigality, or drunkenness, or
gluttony, or fornication and uncleanenesse: but unto humility, moderation,
temperance, sobriety, and urbanity toward all, as becomes new men in Christ
Jesus. Thus much for the second part of our Resolution, consisting in promises
and vows made unto the Lord.

Thirdly, our Resolution consists in Implorando, in imploring the aid and
assistance of God against sin. This is not an essential part of repentance,
although it be a necessary part, in regard of the weakness of our nature, we
not being able either to leave sin, or abstain from sin, or overcome sin
by our own strength, and therefore our repentance is to be corroborated by
invocating the divine help of God: hence it is that we are commanded to pray
continually Eccles. 6.18.
, and always 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
to watch in prayer 1 Pet. 4.7.
and to be fervent in prayer Romans 12.12.^
lest we enter into temptation Matthew. 6.12.
. Prayer unto God, being our only Delphian sword, wherewith we defend our
selves against all temptations. And thus much for the second general part of
Repentance, that is, Resolution.

Thirdly, the last part of Repentance is Execution, when a man labors
faithfully to perform promised and resolved. Hence a question will be asked.
What is a man to performed for the finishing and perfecting of repentance?

I answer, four things, first, our repentance must be true, secondly, it must
be timely, thirdly, it must be constant, fourthly, it must be crescent.

true?

negative and an affirmative obedience, that is carefully to perform
whatsoever God requires of us to do, and to shun and avoid whatsoever he
forbids us, as appears thus: first, this is the beginning and and of all
Eccles. 12 13.
. Secondly this is that, which makes us truly happy: so says our Savior, if
ye obey my words, happy are ye John 13.17.
and his Apostle, that man which is a door of the law, shall be blessed in his
deed Jam. 1.25.
.

Thirdly, the end of all both legal and evangelicall precepts, is that we
might glorify the Lord, which is done by obedience, as we see by our Saviors
command, Let your light so shine before men, that they seeing your good works
may glorify your heavenly Father Matthew. 5.16.
. Fourthly, we are called unto obedience, and the work of the Lord: to be
laborers, and not idle, in the Lords-Vineyeard Matthew. 20.1.2.
.

Fifthly, without this serious and sincere obedience, all other things are
nothing: that is neither 1. the compunction of the heart, without the obedience
of the heart and life, is pleasing unto God; for this was in Balthazar, His
knees smote one against the other, and his heart was troubled Daniel 5.
: this was in Esau, he wept sore Genesis 27.38
yet obtained no mercy Heb. 12.17.
because obedience was wanting.

II. Neither the confession of the tongue is acceptable unto God without
service in the life: for Cain could confess his sins to be great Genesis 4.13.
, and Saul acknowledge his iniquity unto the Prophet with a peccavi 1 Samuel
15.24.
I have sinned: yea Judas does confess his particular transgression, for which
he is sorry in these words, I have sinned in betraying of innocent blood Matthew.
27.4.
: but yet none of these received either benefit or comfort by this their
confession, because it was not accompanied with obedience.

III. The external humiliation of the body availes nothing without this
neither: for Ahab humbled himself in dust and ashes 1 King. 21.27.
, and yet was slain not long after 1 King. 22.35.
IV. Affection unto religion without zealous obedience is not grateful unto
God: for Agrippa was half persuaded to become a Christian Act. 26.
and Herod in practice as well as affection was half a Christian, for he
hears John Baptist gladly, and does many things, and abstaines from some
sins Mark. 6.
like the stony ground that sends forth a blade and grass Matthew. 13.
yet all this profits them not, so long as true repentance and sincere
obedience is wanting in them. And thus our repentance must be true.

Secondly, our repentance must be timely and mature, begun betimes without
procrastination or delay, while it is said to day, while we have life, while we
have hope in regard of Gods gracious invitations: remembering that repentance is
not in our power, we cannot turn unto God when we will: yea the longer we
delay it, the more unfit we are to perform it, Nam qui non hodie, cras minus
aptus erit, he that is not in fit case to repent him to day, will be more unfit
to morrow; and therefore call upon God, while thou may be heard, approach
unto him while the door is open Matthew. Object.
.

It may here be objected, Deliberandum est diu, quod statuendum est semel:
nothing is to be done rashly, and that which is but once to be done, had need
be undertaken with a great deal of deliberation: festina lent, make not too
much have, is a good rule. Relapses are dangerous, and therefore men had need
beforehand to beware: sat cito si sat been, if we repent truly at any time, we
tepent soon enough: a King must not wage war with a Potent Foe, but upon
mature deliberation, neither is a man to lay the foundation of a building,
until seriously in his thought he have considered how he shall be able to
rear up the edifice and therefore Repentance being a weighty work of great
importance, it is not so suddenly to be undertaken.

I answer first, there is a great difference between

Secondly, deliberation concerning repentance may be two fold. First, an
poenitendum, whether thou must or ought, or shall repent or not? now this is
not to be doubted of, and therefore there needs no deliberation (but rather a
quick and speedy determination) in the particular, because without repentance
there is no hope of mercy, or remission, or eternal salvation.

Secondly, quomodo poenitendum? the second deliberation is how we must repent?
and this is twofold. 1. First, quibus viribus, by whose power thou must repent?
there is no need of deliberation here, neither art thou at all to doubt of
this, because all sinners must acknowledge these two things: first, that of
themselves they have no power to repent, and this is necessary to be
confessed, least otherwise they presume that they can repent when they will,
and therefore may procrastinate the work. Secondly, that repentance is wrought
in them by God alone, who is able to convert, when and whom he pleases: this
we must undoubtedly acknowledge also, least otherwise the sight of our sins,
and the sense of our own insufficiencies cause us to despair: thus the
Prophet (praying for the people) frames his petition, turn thou us oh Lord
unto thee, and then we shall be turned Lam. 5.21.
; as if he should say, we are not able of our selves to repent, and therefore
it thou (oh Lord) leave us unto our selves, we shall never be converted: but
thou art able to work true repentance in our hearts, and therefore if thou will be pleased to take the work in hand, then we are certainly assured
that we shall be truly turned. 2. Secondly, quibus laboribus? we must
consider what is required unto true repentance; and here only Deliberation is
seasonable and needful, for this is indeed seriously to be considered of: we
must observe the requisite conditions unto conversion, that we may be the more
careful stare pollicitis, to perform our promises, and to keep the conditions
required of us. The conditions of this obligation made between God and us in
Repentance are these. First to deny our selves, and confess our selves wholly
and only subject to the will and command of the Lord. Secondly, to take up our
cross of what nature or kind soever, that is, patiently to endure, and
undergo all afflictions that the Lord shall please to exercise us with all,
whether in body, or goods, or good name. Thirdly, not to esteem our lives
dear unto us, when God calls for them, whether by a natural, or a violent
death. Fourthly, to persevere in the service of the Lord unto our lives end.
Fifthly, to oppose our selves unto Satan, the world, and the flesh, and to
strive against all sin, always, even unto blood Heb. 12.4.
. And thus therefore I conclude this objection; the Thesis is to be granted
that we must repent, and that by and by without delay: the Hypothesis is to be
considered and meditated of, but ut muniaris, non ut cuncteris, that is, thou
must not so deliberate upon the work that thou delay it, but so seriously
consider of it, that thou may the more carefully arm thy self, both to
overcome all impediments that might hinder thee from the perfecting of it, and
also to accomplish what the Lord expects from thee, and what thou have resolved
to put in execution. And thus our repentance must be mature and timely, as well
as true.

Thirdly, our repentance must be constant, for it is not true, except it endure
unto the end, and therefore we must be perseverant Ephesians 6 18.
.

Here a question may be made, why must

I answer, First, because otherwise it shall not Matthew. 24.13.
; finis coronat opus, the end proves the truth of the work, and therefore he
that looks back, and proves retrograde is not worthy of this reward Luke 9.62.
.

Secondly, because it is dangerous to relapse, to be cut off Romans 11.22.
, and to be so severely punished, that it had been better for them not to have
repented at all 2 Pet. 2.21.
; because they grow worse after their relapse Matthew. 47.
, seven spirits worse then the first, entering into their hearts, and because
there remains nothing but a horrible expectation unto such, as fall back
after repentance Heb. 10.26.
.

It may here prudently be demanded, how

I answer,

First, we are to mark and observe, difficultatem perseverandi, how difficult
and hard a thing it is to persevere in this negative and affirmative obedience,
which true repentance requires of us, because our enemies are many and mighty,
which herein continually oppose us. Our first enemy is the Devil, who is, I. A
strong enemy, a strong man armed Luke 11.21.
; yea, a roaring Lion 1 Pet. 5.8.
, that is bold and courageous, and dare affront the stoutest Christian
champion, none being so good, that they shall escape his temptations, as we
may see by diverse examples; he tempted David (2. Sam. 11.) he assaults Job,
(chap. 1.) he sifts Peter, (Luke 22.31.) he buffets Paul, 2. Corinthians. 12.8.)
he accuses the godly, he persecutes the woman, though she be the spouse of
Christ, (Apocalypse. 12.4.) he contends with Michael, (Revelat. 12.7.) yea so
insolent is he, and overweening of his own strength, that he dared to
assault Christ himself, (Matthew. 4.) although he were God: all which shows
plainly unto us, that the Devil is a strong adversary. II. He is a crafty
enemy, and as subtle as strong, being able to transform himself into an
Angel of light 2 Cor. 21 14.
and will fit his temptations according to our tempers: if we be young, he
will embolden us to sin; if we be old, he will make us blush to blame or
condemn our former lives: If we be young, he will show us pleasures; if we be
old, he will show us profit: if we be young, he will make us delay to amend; if
we be old, he will make us so froward, that we shall not endure to be
reproved: if we be profane, he will make us secure, if we be religious, he
will strive to make us proud or superstitious, or hypocritical: thus
cunningly, and craftily, applying himself to every man's disposition, and
natural constitution, as the Fisher fits his bait according to the fish he
angles for, and according to the month he angles in: as Paul became all things
to all men, that he might win some, so Satan also becomes all things to all
men, that he may wound some.

Our second enemy is the World, tempting us by allurements, which are but the
Devils baits: yea many are the occasions unto evil, wh ch are objected unto us
by the world, in every action, in every place.

Our third enemy is the Flesh, which rebels in us, like an inbred traitor,
laboring to destroy us. And therefore considering, that these three strong,
subtle, and malicious enemies, labor daily, with all their strength and
might, to retain us in the chains of sin, and in the service of Satan; and
to detain us from serving the Lord, in true obedience, we may safely
conclude, that it is a very difficult, and hard thing to persevere and continue
unto the end in true repentance.

Secondly, together with the observation of the Difficulty, must go along the
Remedy; because, although it be hard, yet it is not impossible, as appears by
the daily perseverance of the Saints unto the end. Now the remedy is, to war
against these enemies, to put on the whole armor of a Christian Ephesians. 6.13.
, and to fight a good fight of faith 1 Timothy 1.18.
.





1 Pet. 5.9.
.

Thirdly, pray continually, that God would under thy feet Romans 16.20.
: yea, that the Lord himself would be pleased to be thy protector and
defender, delivering thee both from evil, and that evil one.

quench all the fiery darts of the wicked Ephesians. 6.16.
. And thus our repentance must be True, and Timely, and Constant. The last
follows.

Fourthly, our Repentance must be Crescens, increasing; we must labor, that
we may daily grow up and increase more and more in Repentance, grace being
given unto us, not to hide it in a napkin, but to profit withal 1 Cor. 12 7.
, that from babes we may grow up to men of ripe years 1 Pet. 2.^.
.

Here it may be asked, quatenus, quando desistendum? non ultra, when we must
grow and increase no longer?

I answer, Never in this life, 1 Cor. 4.20.
, that is, labor that we may be absolute and perfect men in Christ Jesus 2 Timothy 3.17.
, which we cannot be, so long as we are in the body, because we carry
continually a body of sin about us Romans 7.24.
, we must endeavor to be as perfect as our Master Luke 6.40.
, yea, as our Father Matthew. 5.48.
, which we can never be, because we are imperfect, both knowing, obeying,
believing, and loving only in part 1 Cor. 13.10.
, and therefore so long as we live, we must labor to grow up unto perfection.

. 4. For the kingdom of heaven is at hand.] It kingdom is here

I answer, kingdom of the other world, nor the terrene kingdom of the Jews;
but the coming of the Gospel, or the kingdom of grace, by the coming of
Christ: so that the sense is, the Church of the old Testament is now abolished,
and the Church of the New Testament is ready to take place, by Christ's coming,
and therefore repent*

It may be asked again, Why is it called the Heaven?

I answer, for these two causes, negative, and belongs unto the Jews, left
that they should any longer expect an earthly kingdom: they thought, that when
Christ came, they should be made free from their Roman bondage, as the
Samaritane woman said, when the Messiah comes, restaurabit omnia, he will
restore all things Ioh. 4.25.
; but Christ does contradict this, positively affirming, that his kingdom is
not of this world Ioh. 18.36.
.

The second cause is affirmative, and belongs unto us that we might know the
state and dignity of the Evangelicall Church: as if holy John here would say,
I call you not unto the Roman or Chaldean, or Egyptian, or Assyrian, or Persian
Kingdom: I invite you not unto a frail, wavering, earthly, mortal, and
momentary Kingdom; but unto a celestial, the Kingdom of heaven: Teaching
us, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man, which sowed good seed in his
field Matthew. 13.24.
. And again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an house-holder
Matthew. 20.1.
. And again, he that is least in the kingdom of heaven, is greater than John
Baptist Matthew. 1^.11.
.

Here a doubt may arise.

How does it appear, that the Gospel of

I answer, of ways. First, by the King thereof. Secondly, by the People
thereof. Thirdly, by the state of the Kingdom.

First, the Gospel appears to be an heavenly Kingdom, Rege, by the King
thereof, which is Christ an heavenly King Esa. 9.6.7. Zach. 9.9. Heb. 1.8. and
2.9.
.

Secondly, the Gospel appears to be an heavenly kingdom, Plebe, by the
People, because the subjects hereof ought to be heavenly,, according to that
of the Apostle, the Christians conversation should be in heaven Phil. 3.20.
, and that in a double regard, both extra, and intus, in the life, and in the
heart. First, extra, in the outward man, our life must be pure and Angelical,
immaculate, and unblameable in the sight of the world Phil. 2.15.
. Secondly, intus, in the heart, and inward man, and that in a twofold
respect, both, I. in the judgment, the veil being taken away from our minds,
and understandings 2 Cgr. 3.16.
, we hereby being made more able to discern between those things that
differ, not being now children in understanding; but men 1 Cor. 13 12.
. And, II. in the affections, when they are set upon those things that are
above, not upon those things that are beneath Col. 3.1.^.
, hungring and longing in our souls, to be made partakers of them, rather
than all temporal treasures: with Saint Paul, desiring to be dissolved Phil.
1.23.
, that we may be clothed with our house, which is in heaven 1 Cor. 5.2.
. Thus the Subjects of this kingdom should learn and labor to know what is
good and heavenly, to love what is good and heavenly, to do what is good and
heavenly, because they are subjects of a kingdom which is heavenly.

Thirdly, the Gospel appears to be an Heavenly kingdom, ex regni statu, by the
state of the kingdom that is first by the present state thereof, because now it
is spiritually governed, by the holy Spirit, and the Ministers of the Gospel:
and secondly by the future estate thereof, because it leads and brings unto
heaven, and the heavenly kingdom, to that immortal inheritance, and eternal
happiness which we cannot be deprived of Luke 12.32. and 1 Pet. 1.4.
. And for these causes and considerations, it is most aptly called the Kingdom
of heaven.

Is at hand.] It may here be demanded, how does this kingdom approach?



Secondly, affirmatively, it draws nigh unto the Gospel of the kingdom. Mat.
4.23. and 9.35. and Mark. 1.14. and that in a double regard. First because it
is the means of regeneration: We being begot by this incorruptible seed, the
Word of God 1 Pet. 1.23.
and without holiness and purity the fruits of this regeneration there is no
salvation Hebr. 12.14.
secondly, because it begets faith, for that comes by hearing, and hearing by
the word Romans 10.14.
and without this faith we cannot please God Heb. 11.6
.

. 1. VERSE. 3. For this is he that was spoken of by the Prophet Esaias, saying,
the voice of one
. 1. Prepare ye the way. preparation, seeing that Christ is already

I answer first, Christ is not to be expected Corporally, but Spiritually, for
although he be in heaven, where he shall remain until the last day, when
he comes unto judgment, yet notwithstanding he comes daily unto us, both by
his word and by his Spirit, seeking an habitation and dwelling with us: I stand
at the door and knock (says Christ) to see if any will open unto me, that I
may come in to him, and sup with him Apoc. 3.20.
And therefore seeing that he thus comes unto us, it is necessary, that we
should prepare to entertain him.

Secondly, there is great need that we should prepare to meet and receive
Christ, in regard of our natural condition, which is this, that unless we
be totally changed, we can have no communion either with God, or our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, for he is Righteousness it self, Truth it self,
Wisdom it self, Goodness it self, Holiness it self, yea Perfection it
self: but we are transgressors, liars, foolish, profane, wicked, yea
altogether sinful, and therefore before there can be any communion between
our Christ and us, there must be a change wrought in us; wherefore it is
necessary that we should prepare and purge both our hearts and lives, that so
he may be pleased in mercy to come unto us.

Secondly it may be demanded wherein does

I answer, from the Prophet, Every valley must be exalted, and every mountain
and hill be made low: and the crooked paths must be made straight, and the
rough places plain Esa 40, 4.
. That is first, we must prepare to meet Christ by the valleys, that is by
humiliation, for the conscience of sinners being wounded are so depressed with
a true sense of their sins, that they dare not lift up their eyes unto
heaven, as we see in the Publican Luke 18.13.
and unto such unworthy ones in their own conceit, Christ has promised to
come, and to exalt these lowly valleys. Secondly, we must prepare to meet
Christ, by laying low the mountains and hills: these high places that are to
be levelled are either those that are 1. proud by nature, or 2. that abound in
honor and riches, and in all affluence in worldly things, by which they grow
haughty, exalting themselves, contemning others, and trusting in this lofty
condition and abundance: or 3. those that are transported with a persuasion of
their own righteousness, as though they stood in no need of divine mercy:
these are dangerous hills, and therefore they must be made low, that is we
must 1. be humble in our selves and toward all. 2. Not trust in any arm of
flesh or worldly thing whatsoever. 3. Not place any confidence in our own
merits, or righteousness at all, but have our affiance only in the mercies of
God through the merits and righteousness of Christ Jesus, and this is our
second preparation.

Thirdly, we must prepare to meet Christ, by making crocked ways straight;
by crooked paths are meant all transgressions on the right hand, as Heresies,
errors, superstitions, hypocrysie and the like; these must all be rectified,
that is, reduced unto the rule of God, and the Gospel of Christ, he being the
way, the truth, and the life; and his word the true way unto life, and the most
perfect rule of truth. Fourthly, we must prepare to meet Christ, by making
rough places plain: by these rugged places are meant all errors on the left
hand, as impiety, injustice, intemperance, and all other vices and obliquities
of the life, which being walked in casts a man headlong into destruction. And
therefore all these must be left, before Christ will come unto us.



the voice of the crier Esa. 40.3.
the word being the means of regeneration, and the seed of faith: and
therefore all the Ministers of the word of God, should be industrious herein,
laboring to bring the people of God, first to a true sense of their sins,
and sorrow for them. Secondly, to true humility, mortification,, self denial,
and a sure confidence in the only mercyes of God, and merits, and
righteousness of Christ. Thirdly, to reduce them from all hypocrisy,
superstition, heresies, and errors. Fourthly, to reform and reclaim them
from all sins, vices, and enormities whatsoever.

Make his paths straight.] Paths (...), Here it may be demanded how these two
(...) and (...) paths and ways are distinguished?

viae but semita not ways wherein God sometimes walks, but paths wherein he may
walk continually; that is religion must have his continual residence in the
heart and soul, without any dispensation at all. The occasions of the exercise
of religion are always given, and therefore if the heart be true they will be
always taken, and exercises of religion frequently practiced: and not like
some, who never think of God or religion, but upon the Lords day.

. 3. Make straight his Paths.] Rectificate.

I answer, Saint Luke shows that there are four things to be made straight
Luke 3.5
Valleys, Mountains, Crooked and sharp ways: some thing has been spoken
of these before. 1. I add a word or two. first Valleys (...), Pracipitium,
this signifies a vacuite of grace: these valleys are to be filled, and this
emptiness to be replenished and enriched with the grace of Gods Spirit Apoc.
3^ 15.
.

Secondly, Mountains (...), and (...), summitas and clivus, which signifies
humane pride, and is to be humbled, as aforesaid. 1. Thirdly, crooked ways,
(...), tortuosa, which signifies an obstinacy in sinning; and this path must
be made (...), right and straight, that is, our steps must beee reduced into
the ways of God, and therein must we walk with all humble submission night
and day. Fourthly, sharp ways, (...), salebrosa, this is taken either 1. for
sin, in general: or 2. for contention which breaks the bond of peace, and
rends the seamlesse coat of Christ, or 3. for the thorns of worldly cares and
coveteousnes; and these are to be made smooth, i. e. sin is to be left,
contention to be laid aside, and the love of the world to be mortified in us.

1. VERSE. 4. And the same John had his raiment of camels hair, and a leatherne
girdle about his loins, and his meat was locusts and wild honey.
. 1. His meat was wild honey.] The Papists John was an Eremite, John Baptist
lived in the desert, fared coursely, and was barely apparelled, he eat locusts
Bellar. de Monach. lib. 2. cap. 39.
and wore a garment of Camels hair, and therefore he was a true pattern of a
right Eremite.

I answer first, John's life was not so austere as

Secondly, we deny not but John lived an austere and had a singular office to
prepare men for the coming of Christ: therefore his calling being
extraordinary, he cannot be an author of an ordinary calling among Christians.



Bellar. de Indulg. l ^. c. 2. prop. 4.
. John (say they) was of a most innocent life, and was subject scarce to the
least sin, and therefore he had no need of his fasting, austere life,
imprisonment, death, to satisfy for himself: and therefore these remain for
the satisfaction of others.

John was an holy man, and endued with great grace, yet not without his sins
and corruptions; and therefore he himself confesses, that he had need to be
baptized of Christ, which was for remission of sins.

David acknowledges that his virtues were increased by Gods gracious
correcting admonitions Psa. 119.67.
.

Thirdly, we must needs conclude with the John, and of all others (excepting
Christ that did no sin) that God has shut all under unbeleefe, to have mercy
on all, and therefore none has either suffered more then their sins deserved,
or done more good then was their duty to do.



The life of John Baptist was a continual fasting, he not only abstaining
from dainties in general, but in special from all meats and drinks
whatsoever, except Locust and wild honey, in this verse.

John's fasting is not described in these words, neither is it true, that his
whole life was a continual fasting: but only here is expressed his
extraordinary austerity from sundry dainties, so long as he preached in the
wilderness: for Saint Matthew says plainly here (...) alimentum ejus, or
esca ejus, his food, or his meat was Locust and wild honey, which phrase
signifyes not fasting, but rather feeding.

John did thus, therefore we must do thus, is a palpable non sequitur; for
this was peculiar unto John in regard of his peculiar and extraordinary calling.

Thirdly, John abstaines from diverse meats (we grant) but that he was
forbidden them as

Fourthly, these words (his food was locusts and does not signify that he
never did eat any thing else besides these, or that he eat these only upon
Wednesdayes and Frydayes, but that this was his ordinary food for the most
part: for though some Papists deny that ever he eat bread, yet some others
make no great scruple to grant it.

. 2. His raiment was of Camels hair.] Was John clothed with camels skins?

I answer no, Camels hair, which they were wont to wear that dwelt in
mountanous places, and did not much frequent cities.

Why did John who was Christ's forerunner

Because, he would show hereby,

Whether is there any analogy or resemblance

I answer, there is, for first, John was called and appointed by God to
sustain great labor, and to serve men by preaching unto them, and baptizing
of them.

Secondly, the Camel is neither armed with John came not to injure or damage
any, but only to prepare them for the receiving of Christ.

Was there any resemblance between John garment?

I answer, there was, John's doctrine seemed not so splendidious at first view,
as the doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees, but yet it was firm and
perpetual.

. 3. His food was Locusts.] What were these

First, some say they were the tops of certain Zaga Zabo an Aethiopike Bishop,
thinks, that John lived only of herbs.

Secondly, some say that they were certain Iordane, as unclean meat: but it
is not like that John would eat any meat unclean by the law.

Thirdly, Epiphanius (lib. contra Ebionitas)

Some object that the Text in this verse is certainly corrupted, because it is
not probable, that

wild choke pears: others think this to have been the mistake, (...)
Locusts, for (...) crab-fishes: But what need is there of this niceness,
seeing by Moses law they were allowed to eat of Locusts, called Arbeh for the
multitude of them Leuit. 11.22.
.

Pliny writes, that they which did usually eat Locusts lived but forty years
Plin. lib. 6. cap. 30.
: and Galen writes, that the birds called Seleucidae in Asia, do void the
Locusts whole, which they had eaten, and seem to be little nourished thereby.

Secondly, Locusts are unwholesome food (according to the opinion of some) the
eating thereof making men lean, swart colored, short lived, and full of lice
Cardan. lib. de subtilitate Scalig. exercit. 91 Answ.
.

I answer, it is not likely that either Locusts did afford so small nourishment
to nature, or were so unholsome as these authors affirm; for First, Galen upon
Hippocrates his Aphorisms Lib. 2. cap. 18.
, avoucheth that Locusts eaten, have great force to nourish. Secondly, Pliny
says Lib. 11. cap. 28.
that among the Parthians they were counted a pleasant meat, and were very
usually eaten. Thirdly, Dioscorides Lib. 2. ca. 44.
says, that the people called Alphei did ordinarily eat of Locusts, although
they had store of other meat, which argues that they were neither fruitless
not obnoxious to the feeders upon them. Fourthly, Strabo Lib. 16. Geograph.
makes mention of a certain people that lived wholly of them; and therefore it
is not likely that they were unholsome. Fifthly, Bellonius Lib. 2. Observat.
cap. 88.
, from the report of some authors testifies, that in Africa they were eaten as
dainties, not for Physic, but even for nourishment; thereby proving it a
thing not incredible, that John Baptist should eat Locusts. Sixthly, Diodorus
Siculus, most fully of all other Lib: 4.
declares this, telling us of certain Aethiopians called (...), that is
Locust eaters, who neither eat fish, nor cattle, but only Locusts continually:
which at the spring time of the year they get in great abundance, and salt
them up to preserve them for meat. Seventhly, it is not likely, that the Lord
would have prescribed any unholsome meat unto his own people, as he did these
Locusts Levit. 11.22.
. Eighthly and lastly, this may be granted, that Locusts were a base and course
kind of meat, used only of the vulgar sort, because it was a food common and
easy to be had, as learned Beza shows Beza s.
.

Hebrews, in remembrance of the plague brought upon Egypt by the Locusts, and
therefore it was not only eaten of the vulgar sort:

VERSE. 5. Then went out to him Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the region
round about Jordan.
John Preached, and they go out to hear him preach: his preaching is not in
vain, although it be in the wilderness, for many run unto it and are won
by it.

It may here be demanded, Why is the preaching

I answer first, because it is Gods own ordinance, a fire, because it melts
the leaden and dull heart, and warmes the cold heart: it is called a hammer,
because it breaks in pieces the flinty and hard heart Ierem. 23 29.
, it is called a seed, because it begets us unto God Matthew. 13.19.
, it is called a sword, because it divides between the affections and sin,
striving to divorce us from sin, and to estrange our hearts from all iniquity
Heb. 4.12.
; and thus it comes to be so effectual, wheresoever it comes.

Secondly, as it is Gods ordinance, so the the power of God unto salvation Romans
1.16.
.

Thirdly, God has some elect servants every 1 King. 19.18.
: and hence the word of God is not confined unto any one place 2 Timothy 2 9.
; yea, even in superstitious and idolatrous Athens, some are converted by
preaching, Acts 17.32.

It may further be asked, Who they were, John's preaching?

I answer, the common sort, and Publicans,

Why are the Plebeians more prone and ready

I answer, The causes hereof are, 1 Cor. 1.26,
: Or, secondly, in regard of us, and that in a double respect. I. Because they
that are less wise, are more docible, and willing to be taught. II. Because
they that are high and exalted in the world, for the most part, are so proud,
that they contemn to be taught.

VERSE. 6. And were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins.
Whether are infants to be baptized, or not? for John, baptized none, but such
as

I answer, thing, therefore it is reason they should have the sign: the
children of the faithful are within the covenant, and therefore the seal of
the covenant, belongs unto them 1 Cor. 7.14.
.

Secondly, Christ loves them, and blesses them Matthew. 10.14.
, and is angry with his Apostles who would have kept them from him, and
therefore they are to be admitted unto this holy Sacrament, least otherwise we
provoke the Lord unto anger against us.

Thirdly, Baptism is the ordinary entrance into Noah's arc, the symboll and
means of salvation, and type of the Church of Christ: and therefore it were a
deed very uncharitable to exclude them from it.

Fourthly, it was prefigured by Circumcision; and therefore belongs unto
infants now as well, as that did then.



necessariu^ est quod non potest se aliter habere (says Aristotle) that is
called absolutely necessary unto a thing, without which it cannot be, and thus
the Baptism of the Spirit is necessary, because without that we cannot be
saved Ioh. 3.5
, but the Baptism of water is not thus necessary, because children may be
saved without it. Circumcision was not before the eighth day, and yet
certainly many dyed before that time, all which we must not exclude from
heaven and eternal happiness: Abraham was justified before he was circumcised
Romans 4.11.
, and therefore the lack of that Sacrament should not have debarred him from
perpetual peace, if he had dyed without it. Job (as I conceive) was not
circumcised at all, and yet none (I hope) will deny salvation unto him,
considering that rare testimony that God gave him; that he was a perfect and
upright man, one that feared God, and eschewed evil; not having his fellow
upon earth, and holding fast his integrity even in the midst of his trials,
and Satan's assaults Job. 1:18. and 2.3.
. In the primitive Church they Baptized only twice in the year, at Easter and
Pentecost, before which times came about, it cannot be denied, but many were
taken away by death; which the Church would never have permitted, if they had
been of this belief, that without Baptism there had been no salvation: And
therefore these things considered, our Church does not hold it of absolute
necessity unto eternal life.



Ceremonies and rites used in Baptism, necessary unto the essence of the
Sacrament or not?

I answer, no; the people here are Baptized Philip does baptize the Eunuch in a
river Acts 8.36.
, which is not according to the manner used now with us.

Secondly I answer, that there are three things ad esse sacramenti, and is so
necessary, that without it there is no sacrament. Secondly, the convenient and
fitting circumstances, they belong ad been esse sacramenti, to the decency of
the Sacrament. Thirdly, there are superstitious rites, and these are to be
abolished.

Which are these superstitious rites, that are

I answer,

It may be doubted here, if our ceremonies used Baptism be not superstious
also, and therefore to be abolished: for we have our Font, our Surplice, and
the Cross used in Baptism also, as well as the Papists?

I answer first, some ceremonies are necessary Paul desires, that all things
may be done decently and in order.

Secondly, those ceremonies that offend may Hezechias did the Serpent, when it
was abused unto Idolatry 2 King. 18.4
.

Thirdly, no ceremonies used in or by our

It may here be objected, why do our Canons

I answer, not for necessity, but for uniformity,

How many sorts of Baptismes are there?

First, some Damasc. l. 4. cap. 1.
answer, that there are eight John: the fifth is the Baptism of Christ, that
is, that baptism which Christ daigned to receive from John, sixthly, the
baptism of repentance, or penitential tears; seventhly, the baptism of
blood or martyrdom, and the eighth of fire and the spirit.

Secondly, others Dion. Carthus. s.
say there are five sorts of Damascens three first they comprehend under one,
which they call baptismum figurativum, typical baptism: and the baptism
which John gave, and Christ received, are both one. The first then of these
five kinds (according to Carth^sian) is figurative baptism, such was the
passage of the Israelites over the Red Sea, and their corporal washings,
lotions, and purifications in and by water, according to the Mosaicall law.

The second he calls praeparatorium preparatorie baptism, this was (says he)
the baptism of John which made way for, or ushered in the baptism of Christ.
The third is called purgativum, purifying baptism, whereby we are regenerated
by water and the holy Spirit; and purged from all our sins. The fourth is
called supererogativum, a supereregatory baptime, which is the baptism of
blood and martyrdom: the fifth is quotidianum, a continual baptism and that
is of tears

Thirdly, others T. Aquin
say that there is but only one baptism properly so called, which is
celebrated in water, with a certain and determinate form of words prescribed
by our Savior unto his Apostles, Go (says he) and teach all nations
baptising them in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

The like figure whereunto even baptism does now save us, (not the putting
away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward
God) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ 1 Pet. 3.21.
. In which words are clearly expressed a double baptism, external and
internal, a washing with water, and with the Spirit of God.

Dionyfius Carthusian in his second answer to the former question, says, John's
baptism was but a Preparatorie Baptism, not the same with Christ's; and
because we deny this, Bellarmine Bellar. li. 1. de bapt. cap. 20.
takes the quarrel in hand, and undertakes to prove it thus: The baptism of
John had not the

John: as appears thus; Christ came unto John to be baptized, God the Father
spoke from Heaven, God the Son was in the water, and God the Holy Ghost
descended in the likeness of a Dove, so plainey else where Ioh. 1.33
John himself says, He that sent me; to baptize with water (here is the
authority of God the Father in John's baptism) said unto me: upon whom thou
shall see the Spirit come down, he it is that baptiseth with the Holy Ghost:
Here is the name and authority of God the Son and God the Holy Ghost.

Bellarmine Lib. 4. did. 3. g.
. Tunc invocato nomine Trinitatis institutus est in Iordaene baptismus, etc.
Then in Jordan the name of the Trinity being invocated, baptism was
instituted, when the mystery of the Trinity appeared.

John used the same form in baptising, which the Apostles did; they baptized
in the name of the Lord Jesus Act. 2.38
, and so did John Acts 19.4.
and Saint Ambrose Li. 1. de spirit ca. 3.
affirms that John baptized in the name of Christ: and therefore it is not
unlike, but that John baptized in the name of the Trinity, as the Apostles did:
for although the name of Jesus only be expressed, yet thereby is signified the
end and scope of baptism for remission of sins, not an exact and precise
form of baptism.

Whether do the Ministers in baptism confer

I answer,

Secondly, because the Prophets ever and anon prove that it is God that washes
us, and not man: Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse thou me from
my sins Psa 51.2
, and again; purge me with hyssope, and I shall be clean, wash me, and I
shall be whiter then snow: Thus David Psa. 51.7
. Again the Prophet Esaias desires, that the Lord would wash away the filth of
the daughter of Zion, and purge away the blood of Jerusalem Esa. 4 4.
.

Thirdly, because Christ says plainly, that it is he (that is he alone) that
gives that water (that is spiritual grace and life) Whereof who so drinks
shall thirst no more for ever Ioh. 4.
.

As the Dyer by the touching only of the cloth cannot give a color unto it,
so neither the Minister of the baptism by himself, without the operation of
the Blessed Trinity, in that holy ordinance can give any divine grace, or
heavenly tincture unto the scule

Again, if the Church of God be a Vineyard, then the Ministers are but tillers,
and it is God that is the Lord and Master of the family, and therefore all
spiritual gifts are given by him.

Lastly because (as one says Optatus li. 5. cont. Parmen.
) Saint Paul shows, that this whole Sacrament of baptism does belong unto
God, while he says, I have planted, and Apollos watered, that is I have made
one of a pagana (...), from a mere heathen that had no knowledge of God, I
have brought him to some understanding of him, and of the principles of
religion: and Apollos he has baptized him that I have thus taught and
instructed: but it is the Lord only that must cause to grow and increase what
I have thus planted and Apollos watered 1 Cor. 3 6.
.

. 2. Confessing their sins.] The Papists Rhemist Object.
) John did not induce the people to a general acknowledgement only, that they
were sinners, but also to utter every man his particular sins.

To this we answer first of all there is no mention John's ear.





John alone to hear all those, which they could have made confession of,
especially never having before made confession of their sins in the whole
course of their life Sic Ca^twright. s. Matthew. 3.6 where this is amplified.
.





Secondly, we may say, that they confessed particularly these sins unto John,
wherewith their consciences were most pressed, that so they

It is questioned sometimes amongst Protestants, Whether we be not too
remiss in exacting

For answer hereunto it is fit first to agree upon the terms, to wit,

First, consider we, what is meant by confession: there are diverse sorts
thereof, Bishop Jewel has three sorts: and Chemnitius has nine degrees; but
we may thus plainly distinguish them.

Confession is either unto God which is frequent in Scripture: I confessed my
sins unto thee, said David Psa. 32.5.
. or Man either Public, either in General terms, as the people did by the
leviticall law. Particular acknowledgement of sin to the Congregation.
or private to our Brother either Being offended with us; thus our Savior
commands confession and reconciliation Matthew. 5 24.
In private conference: thus Saint James bids us to confess our sins one to
another Iam. 5.16.
.
or Pastor in cases Extraordinary as when Some sins burden the conscience.
In some act which we have done, we being doubtful whether we have done Well or
ill.

or Ordinary, either More lawful which must be Or The requiring the
confession of some sins only, which daily prevail against us, and which we
cannot conquer or overcome. Uoluntary, and free, without any compulsion or
constraint.
Unlawful to wit, the requiring the confession Of all sins and circumstances
which we have committed. And that once a year at the least. Yea enjoined upon
necessity to salvation.







Exaction may be understood two ways. First, of constraint, as of necessity.
Secondly, of persuasion only, as profitable.

Now this question 1. is not of confession to God: nor 2. Publicly to the
congregation: 3. to one another: but 4. to the Pastor only: and 5. not that
which is enforced of necessity, unto a particular enumeration of all acts and
circumstances; but that only which is done by the Confitent willingly and
freely; and by the Pastor at the most, but persuaded as profitable, not
enjoined as simply necessary. And therefore I say, as that auricular,
universal, general, peremptory Confession is justly condemned, and exploded
by our Church (as shall be showed else where:) so of the other there may be
godly use, as shall be proved in another place.

Thirdly, consider that Protestants may be taken two manner of ways: First,
for private Ministers in the practice of their preaching: here I confess
ingenuously, and am verily persuaded, that the holy and sober use of
confessing, (upon diverse weighty occasions) might by Gods blessing be the
instrument of much good among his people (as shall God willing else where be
proved:) this caution or admonition observed, that a thing which may be either
perniciously or profitably used (as confession of sins to the Pastor may)
should neither be too far pressed, or too wholly neglected, according the
saying of Charles the Emperor. Confessio neque nimis laxanda, neque nimis
astringenda.

Secondly, by Protestants may be meant the doctrine of our Church: and in this
sense Protestants are not too remiss in the doctrine of confession of sins;
for our ever precious Jewel says, private confession (abuses set apart) we
condemn not: Bishop Morton (a present principal pillar of our Church) allows
it also, so it be free and not exacted Appeal. 2 4 Sect. 5.
: and Chemnitius Part. 2. 5.
says plainly. Ea qua conscientiam gravant, exponere consulit ecclesia nostra
instructionis and consolationis gratia: that is, our Church does advise men, to
acknowledge those sins that trouble and oppress their consciences, if they
desire either counsel or consolation See also Bishop Usher, in his answer to
the Irish Jesuit. Page 81.
: yea we may make our adversaries our judges in this particular, for Bellarmine
himself De paenit. 3.1.
confesses, that our men, (naming Chemnitius, Melancthon, and Calvin) allow of
confession.

Lastly, our Communion book (in the end of the second exhortation unto the
Lords Supper) says, if there be any that through the sight of their sins
cannot quiet their own conscience, but require further comfort or counsel,
then let him come to me, or some other Minister of Gods word, and open his
grief, etc.

And in the visitation of the sick, the Rubrique says, the sick person shall
make a special confession, if he feel his conscience troubled with any
weighty matter. For conclusion of this question, as our Church allows of
private confession of sins unto Ministers; so it behooveth to have good
consideration, as well of the persons, and of the manner of doing, as of the
fitness of the particulars to be revealed.

VERRS. 7. But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Saduces come to his
Baptism, he said unto them, O Generation of Vipers, who has warned you to
flee from the wrath to come.
The Pharisees and Sadduces: these were both most wicked sects. 1 the Saduces
were profane denying the immortality of the soul. 2. the Pharisees were
hypocrites, making a show of that which was not in them: and yet both these
come to John's Preaching: from whence it Matt. 13.47.
?

Trumpet Esa. 58.1. and 1 Cor. 14.8.
, and therefore awakens all. 2 it is a sword, and therefore it wounds all Heb.
4.12.
. 3 It is like the Angel in Bethesda, and therefore moves, troubles, and
persuades all: the word makes wicked men often sigh and tremble in the hearing
of it, Ioh. 5.4:
and hence it works some effect or other (for the most part)

Secondly, this comes from the instability of our nature, and moveablenesse of
our dispositition: est natura hominum novitatis avida, we are naturally like
the sand in the water, moved and stirred with every wave: like reeds shaken
with the wind: noveltie often makes us run unto the word, as the Sadduces and
Pharisees here, we being naturally like the Athenians that desire to hear new
things, having itching ears.

mixed with faith it availes not Heb. 4.2. Answ.


I answer, certainly the word preached profits not all, but yet it moves all:
the seed works something in the stony and thorny ground, as well as in the good
ground, although not so much nor so profitably: the water being moved and
troubled, the clay and sand arises, although presently that which is heavy
sinkes down again to the bottom: Thus, many come unto Christ Luke 5.1. and
12.1.
, but for a diverse end, first some for novelties sake, that they may see him,
because they hear rare things of him: Secondly, some that they may see his
miracles and hear him preach. Thirdly, some that they may be fed by him:
Fourthly, some that they may be cured by him: Fifthly, but very few that they
might hear his word, to keep and observe it. And thus many come unto the word
for diverse ends, and are sometimes awakened by it, although the most part fall
to the sleep of sin again.

Why is the coming of the profane Sadduces John, here mentioned?

To teach us that there is no order or calling so desperately wicked,

First, from the Pharisees; the Gospel calls Nicodemus Ioh. 3.1.
and Gamaleel Act. 5.34.


Secondly, from the Senators and great and rich men, it calls Joseph of
Arimathea Matthew. 27.57
and Sergius the Proconsul. Acts 13.

Thirdly, from the soldiers; it calls the Centurion Matthew. 8.5.8.13.
, and Cornelius, Acts 10.

Fourthly, it calls the Keeper of the prison. Acts 16.

Fifthly, from the harlots, it calls Mary Magdalen and diverse others.

Sixthly, from the thieves, it calls one.

Seventhly, from the Idolatrous, and superstitious Athenians it calls
Dionisius, and Damaris and some others Acts 17.34.
.

. 2. Come unto his Baptisme] Wherein does Baptism excel circumcision, John's
Baptism?

I answer, some Peter. s. Genesis 17.
say, there is a threefold preeminence

. 3. Oh generation of Vipers.] Why does John call the Pharisees and Saduces
Vipers?

First, some say, for their ingratitude; it being Oh Serpents, and generations
of Vipers, how can ye escape the condemnation of hell Matthew. 23.33.
? But this does not seem to be the reason of this phrase, in this verse.

Secondly, as the Viper has his teeth buried Plin. lib. 11. cap. 37.
, so that one would think it were a harmless beast, and could not bite; so
also had these deceitful hypocrites their secret corners and conveiances,
wherein they so cunningly couched their wickedness, that they were taken of
all other to be the most innocent.

Pliny says, immedicabile venenum, there is no antidote to expel the poison
of a Viper, nor medicine to cure him, whom it has stung; and therefore the
inhabitants of Melita Act 28.4.5.6.
1 attribute murder unto Paul, they said, he was a murderer, because the
Viper fastened on his hand. 2 they say vengeance will not suffer him to live,
because now there was no hope to escape death, being thus stung. 3 although he
had thrown the Uiper into the fire, yet they expected when he should have
swollen, and fallen down dead suddenly; as if it were in vain to use any
means to prevent the venom of this serpent. 4 when they saw he had no harm,
they said he was a God and not a man: thus mortal was the venom and poison
of a Uiper esteemed: And thus Saint John by this Phrase shows unto the
Pharisees and Sadduces, that by nature they were Uiperlike having first no good
thing in them at all any more then the Uiper: but secondly, that they had in
them the gall of bitterness, and an incurable evil.

John know what these Pharisees and Sadduces were, that he passes this sharp
censure upon them?

Matthew. 23.4.
. Muscul. s


John knew it by their bypast conversation; but this is not likely, because
John was in the wilderness, and therefore how could he know what their life
had been?

John knew it by asking the people what they were: but it is not likely, that
upon the report of the common multitude, John would thus bitterly have reproved
them.

John knew by the revelation of the Spirit of God: thus Calvin. sup.

John did not certainly of himself know what they were, why does he so
quickly reprehend them? or why does he thus astonish or affright them?

I answer, because the Holy Ghost had taught him, that they stood in need of
reprehension.



I answer it is, for Saint Paul commands Timothy, to rebuke them that sin 1 Timothy 5.20.
.





sanus non eget medico, the whole needs not the Physician, but the sick
party; the wounded stands in need of a Chyrurgeon, and where the wound is
festered, there is need of corrasives.

How far may Ministers reproove those that sin?

I answer First, it has been lawful to reproove Paul reprooved Hymeneus, 1 Timothy 1.20. Philetus, 2 Timothy 2.17. Phygellus and Hermogenes. 2 Timothy 1.15.
Alexander, 2 Timothy 4.14. and the incestuous person. 1 Cor. 5. But our Canons now
forbid this.

Secondly, it has been lawful to reproove Elijah reproves Ahab, saying, it
is thou that troublest Israel, and thy fathers house 1 King. 18.18.
: thus Nathan reprooves David, saying plainly unto him, thou art the man. 2 Samuel 12.7. thus Christ calls Herod Fox. Luke 13.32. But these reproves were
extraordinary, and therefore as extraordinary examples are not to be imitated.

Thirdly, it is lawful for Ministers to reproove lift up their voices, and
tell his people of their sins Esa. 58.1
. and he is able to defend them.

What sinners are Ministers most sharply to

I answer, John 9.41. and the Pharisees and the Sadduces in this verse.

Why are these more sharply to be reprooved

I answer First, because they sin more hainously Ananias did, Acts 5.
they so long deceive men with their false shows and outward appearances, that
at length they think they can deceive God himself.

Secondly, because they are not moved with Ioh. 9.41.
; wherefore it is necessary that such either be privately admonished or
particularly reproved.

VERSE. 8.
This verse is like Golias sword, sometimes it fights for us, sometimes it
seems to fight against us, for First the Papists object this place to prove,
Bring forth fruits worthy of repentance: here Saint John preaches satisfaction
by doing worthy fruits of penance, as fasting, prayer, alms and the like.

To this we answer first, fruits worthy of repentance,

Secondly, in this place mention is made of every tree that brings not forth
good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire: wherefore if by worthy
works, they understand satisfactory works, then will it follow, that
fatisfaction may be made, not only for temporal, but for eternal punishment.

Bellarmine says, we may satisfy for the temporal punishment of sin, ex
propriis, of our own, ad aequalitatem, to an equality, ex condigno, worthily:
Now this verse neither proves equality nor condignitie, nor a property of
our own satisfaction; which all three are against the Scripture: For, I. there
is no equality, we c ^ot answer God one of a thousand Job 9 3.
. II. There is no property 1 Cor. 4.7.
, If thou have received it, why rejoycest thou, as though thou had not
received it? III. There is no condignitie Luke 17.10.
: when we have done all that is commanded, we are but unprofitable servants.

Bring forth worthy fruits of repentance: by these works testifying
repentance, men do fly from the wrath to come, verse. 7. and the tree that
brings not forth these fruits, is cast into the fire, verse. 10. This is the
everlasting wrath of God, and a fire, which we do not satisfy for, but
prevent by these fruits. so these are works to be performed by the living,
they pertain not unto the dead: they prevent everlasting destruction through
faith in Christ, for the which they themselves confess, our works do not
satisfy.









First, we say, good works are necessary to be done in regard of God, and
that in these respects, First, that his commandments may be obeyed, and that
his will may be done: for the will of God is, that we should be holy, that is,
abstain from sin, and do that which is good 1 These. 4.3.
. Secondly, that hereby we may show our selves to be obedient children to God
our Father: in doing that which he bids us, in eschewing that which he forbids
us 1 Pet. 1.14.
. Thirdly, that thus we may show our selves thankful unto God for our
redemption by Christ; he redeeming us for this end, that we might serve him
in righteousness and true holiness Luke 1.74.75.
Fourthly, lest otherwise we grieve the Spirit of God, which we are
preadmonished carefully to take heed of Ephesians. 4.30
and rather to endeavor to walk according to the direction of the same Gal.
5.22.
. Fifthly, that God, by our good works, may be glorified Matthew. 5.16.
. Sixthly, that we may be good followers of God Ephesians. 5.1.
, thus imitating him in holiness and uprightness 1 Pet. 1.15.
.

Secondly, we say good works are to be done in regard of Men, and that in
these respects, First, that our neighbor may be helped in worldly things Luke
6.38.
, thus the works of righteousness, mercy, pity, and charity are to be
performed, because our brethren are helped and comforted by them in outward
things.

Secondly, that thus by our example of holiness, he may be won unto
godliness 1 Pet. 2.12.
. Thirdly, that we may prevent in our selves the giving of offense 1 Cor. 10.32.
we must be careful not to give offense unto any, which is done by a
constant course of uprightness and holiness: yea by doing good, the mouth of
the enemy is stopped.

Thirdly, and lastly, we say, good works are necessary in regard of our
selves, and that in these respects.

First, that hereby we may show our selves to be new creatures 2 Cor 5.17.
for with such, old things are left, and all things are become new. Secondly,
that thus we may walk as the children of light Ephesians. 5.8.
.

Thirdly, that hereby we may have some assurance of our faith, and of our
salvation: for holiness is the way to heaven 2 Pet. 1.8.10.
and faith is showed by works Iam. 2.17 18.
that is, a dead and counterfeit faith is discerned from a true, only by true
holiness and uprightness in our lives and conversations.

Fourthly, that thus faith and the gifts of God may be exercised and continued
unto the end 2 Timothy: 1.6.
, we must labor daily to exercise the grace of God in us, that so it may
daily grow stronger in us.

Fifthly, that the punishments of sin both temporal, and eternal, may be
prevented: the Lord has threatened that if we break his statutes and keep not
his commandments, that then he will visit our sins with the rod, and our
iniquity with stripes Psa. 89:31.32.
, and therefore to avoid these heavy punishments, it is requisite that we
labor to abound in good works.

Sixthly, that the reward may be obtained, which GOD freely in mercy has
promised to men for their good works Gal. 6.9.
let us (says the Apostle) not be weary in well doing: for in due season we
shall reap if we faint not: good works having a promise both of this life
and of the life to come 1. Tim. 4.8.
.

It may from this verse be further demanded, John here persuades unto

For the resolving of this question, worthiness. First, an exact proportion
and adequate worthiness of a thing: when a man is in every respect worthy of
that which he does enjoy: Saint John speaks not of this. Secondly, worthiness
sometimes signifies a certain convenience and decency, which takes away
repugnancy but does not infer absolute condignity, or worthiness: and thus
it is taken in this verse, Bring forth fruits (...), that is, convenient,
befitting, and beseeming (not contradicting or repugning) repentance which ye
profess: as if Saint John would say unto them, you seem to repent and to be
sorry for your former sins, learn therefore hereafter so to live, as becomes
those that do truly repent indeed.

VERSE. 9. And think not to say within your selves,
John, either we are the children of Abraham, or none are. To this the Baptist
answers, Deus potest, that God can raise up children unto Abraham even of
stones: and therefore there is no such necessity, that they must needs be the
sons of Abraham.

God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham.



Abraham, and so more true and more noble sons than they were, who were his
natural children, but not spiritual.

Abraham, even of the Gentiles; who although for the hardness of their hearts
and stolidity, and gross idolatry they are called stones, yet the mercy of God
can make them holy and spiritual men, and consequently worthy to be called the
children of Abraham.



Adam. Secondly, he makes man of man, without woman, thus he made Evah.
Thirdly, he makes man of woman, whithout man, and thus he made Christ.
Fourthly, he makes man of man and woman, according to the common course of
nature, and thus he makes all us the natural sons of Adam. Fifthly, Deus
potest, God could make children and sons even of stones, as in this verse.

. VERSE. 11. I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance, but he that
comes after we is mightier then I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear, he
shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire.
John was of another kind then Christ's baptism was Bellar. li de bapt. ca.
20.21.
, and they prove it from this verse thus, John himself says, I baptize you
with water, but he shall Therefore John's Baptism and Christ's was not all one.
John's baptism not giving the Holy Ghost as Christ's did.

We answer,

But they object again, John does not say, John by his Spirit Bellar. cap. 21.
.

We answer, John here speaks of Christ in the future tense, so the same John
speaks else where of Christ in the present tense Ioh. 1.33.
1. saying, this is he, which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost; therefore, Christ
did both then baptize with his Spirit, and afterward also more manifestly,
when the gifts of the spirit began to be shed forth more plentifully upon men.
2. The same John speaking of Christ, says, Behold the Lamb of God, that
takes away the sins of the world Ioh. 1.29.
, he even then when John baptized, did take away sins. 3. John testifies of
Christ, that of his fullness we have all received Ioh. 2.16.
, and therefore even then Christ baptized with the Spirit, which was signified
by receiving of his fullness.

Against these three proofs they object three

To this we answer first, if Christ then only Ioh. 4.2.
, as St John the Evangelist says, that Jesus himself baptized not, but only
his Disciples.

Secondly, that Christ at that instant baptized John's words Ioh. 1.33.
. He that sent me to baptize, said unto me, upon whom thou shall see the
Spirit come down, etc. that is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost: Christ
then immediately, at the coming down of the Spirit, baptized with the Spirit:
unless they will say he received the Spirit in vain.

Against the second proof they object, Christ

To this we answer, David says Psa 32.1.2.
, Blessed are they whose sins are for given: whence it is plain, that even
under the law by faith in Christ to come, they found remission of sins.

And thus much for the resolution of their objections.

It may now be questioned, how does it appear that John's baptism was the
same with

I answer, by these reasons. ab absurdo, because a threefold absurdity would
follow from the denial of it. First, this would give occasion to the
Anabaptists more to enforce their doctrine of Rebaptization. Secondly, if John's
baptism were only a preparation unto another baptism, why then was it not
received by all men? Thirdly, if it were only for the sanctifying and
consecrating of the water, why was any more baptized then Christ? for he was
baptized for this end to sanctify this ordinance; as follows verse. 16.

The second reason is, because the Baptist baptizeth unto the remission of
sins Mark. 1.14.
, and there is no remission sealed unto us, but only by the Sacraments of
Christ; and therefore it was the same baptism.

The third reason is, because John's baptism was the Sacrament of his doctrine:
and therefore if his doctrine were the Gospel, then his baptism was the
Sacrament of the Gospel, and so the same with Christ.

The fourth reason is, because otherwise Christ and his Apostles were not
rightly baptized: for Christ was himself baptized of the Baptist, ver. 16. and
the Apostles were not baptized of Christ, because he baptized none, and
therefore it is most probable that the most of them (at the least) if not all
were also by John baptized.

The fifth reason is, because Christ was circumcised and baptized, that he might
be united both to the Church of the Jews, and of the Christians, by the
Sacraments of them both, that is, to the Jews by circumcision, to the
Christians by Baptism; but if John's baptism were not the same with the
baptism of the Christian Churches, then Christ was not thereby united unto
them.

The sixth reason is, because there is but one Baptism Ephesians. 4.5.
, and therefore John's was the same with the baptism of Christ.

The seventh reason is, because we are all baptized into one body 1 Cor. 12.13.
, and therefore those that were baptized by John, were united unto Christ.

The eight reason is, because John's baptism was from heaven Matthew. 21.25. and
Ioh. 1.33.
.

The ninth reason is, because Christ permits John still to baptize after he was
baptized, and begun to preach Ioh. 3.23.
.

The tenth reason is, because Apollos learned the way of Christ, and yet was
not rebaptised; as the Holy Ghost says of him, he was instructed in the way of
the Lord, he was fervent in spirit, he was diligent in preaching Christ, and
yet knew only the Baptism of John Act. 18.25.
. And thus although the Papists say, that the baptism of John did conduce
nothing at all, either unto repentance or the remission of sins, being only
a preparation unto another baptism: yet I hope by that which has been
spoken, the contrary will evidently appear to any indifferent Reader.

John's baptism were again rebaptised Acts 19 4, 5.
: and therefore John's baptism is not the same with Christ's. We shall consider
(God willing) more amply of that place when we come unto it; in the mean time.

I answer, first, that all those that were baptized John's baptism were not
rebaptised, as appears by Apollos named before.

Secondly, the difference here was in the graces Confirmation.

It may be hence farther demanded, is there John and Christ?

I answer first, some state this difference betwixt John's baptized unto Christ
who was shortly to be revealed; we now the Ministers of Christ baptize unto
Christ already revealed.

Secondly, some state this difference, that John baptized only in the name of
the Messiah, not of the Trinity, but this is uncertain.

Thirdly, the true difference is twofold, first, John was but Christ's
forerunner, Christ was the true Messiah; and therefore they differed in their
person, as do the Master and the servant. Secondly, between the Sacrament
external and internal, and this is the principal thing that John means in
this verse, when he says, I baptize with water, but Christ with the Holy
Ghost, that is, I am not the author of this Sacrament, but only a servant
appointed to celebrate it: My part is to administer water, and the outward
ordinance, but it is Christ only that gives grace. For the full understanding
whereof, observe that the scope of the Baptist in this place (I baptize with
water) is twofold. First general. Secondly, particular. First, John's general
scope hereby was, to remove the admiration of the people from himself unto
Christ:

Secondly, John's particular scope hereby was this, to show that his Baptism
had no efficacy, nor power in it from him at all, but only from Christ.

2. Whose shoes I am not worthy to bear.] Here Matthew: 11.11.
, yet he thinks himself unworthy (not as the Proverb is to carry his books
after him, but) to carry his shoes, or to untie them. Teaching us that
humility becomes the chiefest of the Saints; and the best of Gods children.
prefer one before another Romans 12 10.
, we must not mind high things, but condescend to men of low estate Romans 12 16.
, we must be lowly and meek Ephesians 4.2
, in humility of mind esteeming others better then our selves Phil. 2.3
.

Why should we thus labor to be humble?

I answer first, because thus we shall show our selves not to be of the world,
or to be contrary unto the world: the ordinary custom and practice of the
world is for great ones to Lord it over the poor, but it shall not be so among
you, says our Savior Matthew. 20 26.
: the Pharisees being proud, loved to be called Rabbi, but (says Christ unto
his Apostles) be not ye called Rabbi, for ye are brethren Matthew. 23.7.8.
.

Paul when he was a Pharisee was most strict Acts 22.3.
, and in his life unblameable Phil. 3.6 8. etc.
, but when he was a Christian, an Apostle of Christ, yea a Saint upon earth,
then he thought himself the greatest of sinners.

David was humble, his heart was not haughty, nor his eyes lofty; but his soul
was as a weaned child Psa. 131.1.2.
. The Blessed Virgin was lowly, and therefore God regarded her Luke 2.48 52.
yea Christ himself was humble, taking upon him the form of a servant Phil.
2.7.
, and meek, commanding us to imitate him therein Matthew. 11.29.
.



First, that whatsoever good is in us, is not of us, or from our selves, but
from Christ from whom comes both the will and the deed Phil. 2.13.
. Secondly, that the good that is in us is not according to the measure of that
depth of obedience which we owe unto God; but comes far short of what we
ought to pay, and perform unto the Lord: and therefore we should not be proud
of any thing we do, but rather confess, that we are but unprofitable
servants Luke 17.10.
. Thirdly, we must remember that all our honey is mingled with gall, our wine
with water, our silver with dross, our good with evil, our obedience mixed
with many infirmities, because in many things (as S. James says) we all sin:
And therefore our black feet should more humble us, then our fair plumes
pride us: the conscience of our sins should trouble us and deject us, not so
much for fear of the anger of God, as through grief of the offense committed
against him.







Civil, secondly, Spiritual. First there is a Civil humility, and this is
threefold, First, Vulpina a Fox-like humility, when men seem humble that they
may the better draw others into their net: this was in Absolon toward the
people, that so he might steal away their hearts: this was likewise in Ioab
toward Amasa; but is odious unto God in whom-soever it is. Secondly, Asinina,
there is an Asse-like humility, atising from stoliditie, pusillanimitie, or
cowardlinesse; because a man is faint-hearted, therefore he cannot raise up
himself as others do: for the most part, we see, that He that wants a heart,
is dejected, He that abounds in heart, is proud.


Now this humility is not praiseworthy neither, nor pleasing unto God, that
arises only from the faintness of the heart, the want, or defect of the
spirits, or the cowardlinesse of the disposition.

Thirdly, Columbina, there is a Dove-like humility, which is in him, who
neither is ignorant of himself, nor of his place, nor of his parts, nor of his
right: neither seeks them; that is, although he be endued with many rare
parts far above many others, and ^n eminent place, yet vaunteth not himself,
is not puffed up, does not behave himself unseemly, seeks not his own, is
not easily provoked 1 Cor. 13.4.5.
, This humility is pleasing unto God, when found in the way of religion; but
(although a rare moral virtue, yet) not acceptable, if not accompanied with
saving grace.

Secondly, there is a Spiritual humility, and this is best of all, viz. when
a man comparing himself with God, or with Christ, does abhor himself, as
vile, considering that he is but earth, as Job lays his finger upon his
mouth, and dares not speak unto the Lord, because he is but dust and ashes
Job. 39.37.
. But here observe two things, First, men do easily confess, that they are
inferior to God and Christ in general: but yet in the mean time, cease not
to rejoice in themselves: as the proud Pharisee, that justified himself unto
God Luke 18.11.
. Secondly, observe, that true spiritual humility consists in this, in
ascribing all good things wholly unto God Ier 9.23.24. Job. 42.2
, that although formerly we have thought our selves more worthy than others,
more holy than others, much better than others, yet now we see the
hollownesse, vacuitie, and vanity of our own hearts, how that in us, that is,
in our flesh, dwells no manner of thing that is good Romans 7.18.
, we not being able of our selves, to think a good thought 2 Cor. 3.5.
, yea, whatsoever grace is bestowed upon us, comes from the mere favor and
good will of God, according to that of the Apostle Christ is made unto us,
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, that he which
glories, might glory in the Lord 1 Cor. 1.30.31.
.

. 3. He shall baptize you with the holy Ghost, and That which Saint John means
figuratively, the Abysseni take literally; when they baptize their children,
they power water upon them, and mark them with an hot Iron, as we do our
lambs.

The Papists object this verse for the proof of Purgatory, because this
baptism of fire,

I answer first, the consequence is false, viz. there is a purgatory fire: for
this is a ridiculous conclusion.

Matthew has nothing at all which can be justly applied unto Purgatory fire.

Sadeel. f. 262.
.

VERSE. 12 Which has his Fan in his hand, and will make clean his floor, and
gather his Wheat into his garner, but will burn up the chafe with
unquenchable fire.
Cornu copia unto the Papists, serving them at many assayes, as we may perceive
by the many several erroneous tenants which they build upon it.



I answer, Saint John preaches of repentance, and the purging away of sin in
this life; Chemnitius.
: but of the true signification and exposition of this verse by and by.



First, we answer to the matter, or substance internal and invisible, which
consists only of the elect, and true believers: and the true church of Christ
but external, and visible, which has many reprobates admixed with it. Now the
internal and invisible church, is the church of Christ, in regard of the true
faith, which the citizens are endued withal: and the external and visible
church, is the true church of Christ in regard of the profession of true
religion maintained therein.

Barn Floor, is understood the visible church, which is known by the
public preaching of the word, and right administration of the Sacraments: and
we deny not, but wicked men may be in the church, bur not of it: yea, they may
be members of the visible church for a time, but cannot be truly ingrafted
into the body of Christ Fulk. s. Ioh. 15. Sect. 1.
.

From this verse the Papists object again, true faith may be separated from
good works, or the fruits of sanctification: Bellarmine frames his argument
thus, In the church there is chafe and wheat, that is, good and bad: and
therefore there may be faith without obedience: he proves the consequence
thus, Those that are in the church are faithful: now, if these become evil,
or disobedient, then it follows necessarily, that faith (from whence they are
called faithful) with sin (from whence they are called wicked) may be
conjoined and stand together.

We answer hereunto first, the Argument is

Secondly, the consequence is faulty, There non sequitur, as will appear first
by the like argument, which I will frame thus. In the Barn floor is chafe,
altogether destitute and void of any good substance, or sustenance: therefore
there is neither any good substance, or sustenance in the wheat which is in the
Barn floor. This argument Bellarmine himself will say, is an absurd one; and
therefore he must give me leave to say as much of his, they being both cast in
one mould. Secondly, the ill consequence of the argument appears by this
reason, because all those who are in the Church, have not that true and
justifying faith (which is in controversy betwixt us and them) but only a
false faith, which consists either in an historical assent, or an external
confession only, which in no respect can be called justifying faith.

2. He will purge his floor: What is understood floor?

First, some say, that by the floor is meant

Secondly, some say the Church of the Jews, Esa. 10.22. Romans 9.2^
; and of this opinion is both Musculus and Gualter upon these words.

Thirdly, some understand it of the whole not excluding the former exposition
of the Judaicall Church.

Whose Fan is in his hand.] What is understood by this Fan?





These. 2. that is, his word: I think it is to be understood of all, because
both the word of God, and the rods of God (afflictions) do ay what we are.

He will purge his floor.] What is meant purging?



Ioh. 8.47. and 10.26.
: or secondly, in the life to come by vengeance and the eternal wrath of God.
Certainly none of these are to be excluded, because the words are
indefinitely to be expounded.

Thirdly, for the full understanding of these he will purge his floor, we
must observe that the Phrase is figurative, or a similitude taken from the
practice of husbandmen: As husbandmen fan the chafe from the corn, gathering
the corn into their garner, and burning up the chafe: so God by his word and
afflictions will purge his Church, separating the gold from the dross, and the
wheat from the chafe, receiving the one (who approve themselves as gold tried
in the furnace) into everlasting mercies: and plunging the other, who had
nothing but a mere outside of religion in them, into everburning Tophet. And
thus by this Metaphore Saint John shows us,

Come cannot grow without earth, and therefore

In the world there are 2 sorts of grounds, Wild, or unhusbanded, and that
either Barren, as the sand, that bears no fruit: these are Atheists. Fruitful
and that In evil fruits; these are first wicked: Secondly Idolaters. In
foolish works, as idle flowers neither sweet not profitable; these are
natural Philosophers, and worldly wisemen.

Enclosures or manured which is the Church wherein are Tares, that is, wicked
men in the Church. Wheat wherein is The stalk: these are proud men, or great
ones in the Church. The chafe; these are Hypocrites, and formal professors.
The grain of wheat: and these only are true members of the Church.




field of wheat, or a corn field?

field, it cannot till it self: so it is the Lord only that rules the Church,
and makes it by his tillage and manuring to bring forth fruit.

Secondly, the husbandman takes all the pains with his ground for the corns
sake, that he may have bread: so the Lord hedgeth and husbandeth us, that we
might be a new lump of unleaven^d br^ad unto himself 1 Cor. 5.7.8.
.

Thirdly, the chafe and the wheat spring both from one and the same seed: so
1. the same word of God begets both the righteous and hypocrites: and 2. both
the true professors and orthodoxe, and heretics and schismatikes, ground their
opinions upon the word.

Fourthly, the chafe though springing from the seed, shows not the nature of
the seed; but the grain of corn bears his form, and shows his nature: so
hypocrites and heretics, show not the true, solid, and sincere fruit of the
word, but like the Jews, who were of the seed of Abraham: but did not the
works of Abraham: So only the true seed of Abraham show forth the fruit of
Abraham's says.

Fifthly, the chafe and the wheat are both nourished by one and the same juice,
and humor, watered also with the same rain, and warmed with the same sun:
so hypocrites and the children of God, are made partakers of the same
spiritual meat, and drink Cor. 10.1.2.
, that is, they have both of them first the word of God, whereby they are
informed in their judgment. Secondly, the motions of the Spirit of God,
whereby their understandings are more enlightened: and thirdly, the holy
Sacrament.

Sixthly, the wheat and chafe do both increase alike in the beginning, when
they are but grass, but by and by may easily be distinguished: so believers
and hypocrites for a time can hardly be distinguished, but after a time the
true practitioner may be discerned from the formalist; if not here, yet
certainly at the last day.

Seventhly, the ear, and stalk, and chafe are profitable unto the corn,
while it is growing: so hypocrites and wicked men, sometimes support, and
sometimes comfort the children of God for a time.

Eighthly, the greatest part of the corn which springs up in the field is straw
and chafe, and in regard of that there is but a little wheat: that is, the
straw bears a greater bulk by much, then the wheat: so in the Church of
Christ there are but a few good in comparison of the bad Matthew. 7.13.14. and
20.16.
.

Ninthly, the chafe and wheat are not separated until they be threshed: so
hypocrites are discerned from true professors, when affliction or the fiery
trial of persecution comes, which is here intimated by purging.



I answer by fire: thus says the Prophet, who shall abide his coming, for he
is like a refiners fire Malach. 3.2.
. And Saint Peter says, God will try our faith with fire 1 Pet 1.7.
.

By what fire will the Lord purge his Church?



I will make my word fire, and this people wood (says the Lord) and it shall
devour them Ier. 5.14.
: and again, Is not my word as a fire says the Lord? Ier. 23.29.

Secondly, by the fire of affliction: thus the Apostle says, the fire shall
try every man's work of what sort it is 1 Cor. 3.13.
; that is, the fire of affliction, called by Saint Peter, the fiery trial 1
Pet. 4.12.
.

Thirdly, by the fire of the last judgment; according unto that of the
Prophet, Tophet is ordained of old, the pile thereof is fire and much wood Isa.
30.33.
. and thus our Savior in his description of the last day, the wicked shall be
cast into everlasting fire. Matthew. 25.


Why does Christ purge his Church by the fire of affliction?

without spot or wrinkle. Ephesians. 5 25.

Secondly, because his Church does continually

How may we know, whether we be wheat we shall be gathered into Gods
garner, or burnt with unquenchable fire?

I answer by these marks. First, the wheat is not perceived when it is in the
ear,

Secondly, although outwardly it shows not it self, yet within it is full of
fine meal and flower: that is, faith and sanctification: so we must labor to
be full of good works* and to grow and increase therein day by day 1 Cor.
15.58. and Col. 1.10. and Iam. 3.17.
.

Thirdly, the wheat is stable and solid, and being shaken goes to the bottom
and abides there, and is not like chafe blown away: thus we must be rooted,
grounded, and established, in the faith of Jesus Christ Col. ^.26. and 2.7.
.

VERSE. 13. In those days came Jesus from Galilee to Jordan, unto John to be
baptized of him.
In those days.] In what days or times was this coming of Christ?

John was baptizing in Jordan, Mat. 1.9. when the people were baptized, Luke
3.21. he did not come before the Baptist, least he should have come in
darkness and obscurity: neither long after him; but as the Sun who rises
when the day star ascends, so when there were many gathered unto John's
preaching, and were baptized by him, then comes Christ.

Why did Christ come at this time expressed in the former question, that is
not, until many John, and taught by his preaching.

I answer, for two causes, the first Allegorical. The second Historical.

The fifth cause hereof was Allegorical, to teach us that Christ will not come
unto us, Acts 2.38. and 3.19.
. Thirdly, the ordinary means of working repentance in the heart is the
preaching of the word: as the Lord says unto Jeremy, go and preach these
words unto the North, and say repent, etc. Ier. 3.12.13.
.

The second cause is Historical, that Christ might be made known and
manifested to the whole people: that is, first, that all might see him.
Secondly, that all might here the testimonies concerning him, viz. ^. the
testimony of John (I have need to be baptized of thee.) 2. of the opening of
the heavens: 3. of the Dove lighting upon him: 4. and of the voice of God from
heaven, saying, This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased.

Thirdly, that all those who were not as yet baptized might the more readily
embrace and receive it, seeing he was baptized that had no evil in him at all.

. 2. Came Jesus from Galilee.] Why was John Baptist in two several places?

I answer first, least they should seem to have

Secondly, because Jordan was a type of Baptism, Cor. 10.4.

Thirdly, because the Prophets had thus foretold Nazari^^ and a Galilean, but
the Baptist should be brought up in Iud^^.

Why does the Master come unto the servant? Messiah unto the Messenger.

I answer first, Christ does this that he might John 13.14.

Secondly, that he might teach us, that the

Thirdly, this Christ did for the greater dignity

. 3. To be Baptized of him.] Why was Christ Baptized, seeing he was that Lamb
unspotted?

that he might fulfill all righteousness, (as in the next verse) that as he
was borne for us, so he would also be baptized for us.



Aaron was: for all things should be done according to our callings, which are
termed vocations, quia vocamur non quia intrudimus, because we are called
thereunto, and not because we intrude our selves thereinto.

externally, by approving of that of John's; and therefore although the Papists
do extenuate it, yet we dare affirm that either Christ and his Apostles were
baptized by John or by none Joh. 4.1.
; And Secondly, Internally, by his flesh sanctifying of Jordan, and all other
waters for this purpose appointed; confirming also the efficacy of the
Sacrament by the presence of the blessed Spirit. Christ was baptized, ut nobis
secundae nativitatis consecraret lavacrum Bedas.
: that he might sanctify for us the laver of regeneration or of the new birth.
Lavatus est Christus flumine Iordani non mundari volens sed mundare Ambros. in
Luke 3.
, Christ was baptized in Jordan, not that therewith he might be cleansed, but
that he might consecrate it for us, as an effectual sign of admission into
the Church: for we are baptized into one body 1 Cor. 12 13.
, yea by baptism we put on Christ Gal. 3.27.
.



Acts 2.38. and hence it is called the seal of the righteousness of faith.
Romans 4.11.

John 3.5. whence it is called the laver of regeneration. Tit. 3.5. In the new
birth there are two things, both which are attributed unto Baptism; First
mortification and a dying to sin: according to the Apostle Saint Paul, as
many as were baptized into Christ, were baptized into his death Romans 6.3.4.
, and therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into death Coloss. 2.12.
.

Secondly, vivification or a living unto God: Be baptized (says Saint Peter)
and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost Acts 2.38.
, and else where it is said, that by the washing of water he has sanctified
and cleansed his Church.

he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved Mark. 16.16.
, Baptism being typified by Noah's Arc, wherein he and his were saved. 1 Pet.
3.20.21.

VERSE. 14. But John forbad him saying,
. 1. Whether did John well in forbidding

I answer, No;

But it may be objected,

I answer,

It may here further be doubted, if John erred

I answer, Sce^is, Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but what are ye Acts 19.15.
. Secondly, his personal dignity, this is not to be regarded: as appears I.
by our Savior, who denounces many woes against the Scribes and Pharisees, and
yet in that same Chapter admonishes his own Apostles, to observe and do
whatsoever they bid them, because they si^ in Moses chair Matthew. 23.2.3.
. II. Against the Papists our Church affirms, that the efficacy of the
Sacrament does neither depend upon the intention of the Minister, nor upon the
sanctity and purity of his person: and therefore they are to be reprooved,
that refuse to communicate with a weak and infirm Minister: Paul knows that
some preach Christ of envy, and yet he does not forbid them Phil. 1.
. But here observe a distinction necessary to be known.

Some refuse a Profane and wicked Minister Simple and unlearned Minister
either as Unlawful, these err as appears by that which has been already
said. Inconvenient: and this is not condemned, if choice may be had: that is,
although the Minister be neither endued with piety nor such parts and
abilities as some are, yet this does not prove his Ministry unlawful: but if
it be in a man's choice to dwell and settle himself where he pleases, then it
is commendable for him to seat himself under a pious, painful, and prudent
Pastor.


I have need to be Baptized of thee.] We may observe hence, that John does
acknowledge Christ to be not only a Prophet, but also the Messiah, because to
him he attributes the baptism of the Spirit.

John know this?



John confess this his unworthiness, seeing that amongst the sons of men
there were none greater then himself Matthew. 11.11.
?

Paul when he said unto the Corinthians, was Paul crucified for you 1 Cor.
1.13.14.
? and again, let the Lord be true, but all men liars Romans 3.
; yea to do otherwise, viz. to preach a man's self, and to labor to draw
Disciples after him, is a brand or mark of a false Apostle. And therefore the
Papists show what they are, that so insolently derogate from Christ. First, in
the merit of works. Secondly, in preferring the Popes pardons before the blood
of Christ. Thirdly, in preferring their own laws and ordinances before the
laws and institutions of Christ: as I. unclean single life before holy
marriage, although Christ's own Apostle have said, It is better to marry then
to burn.

II. In denying the Cup in the Sacrament to the laics, although Christ
commanded both bread and wine to be used.

III. In worshipping of Images against the second commandment; and the like.

VERRS. 15. And Jesus answering, said unto him, suffer it to be so now: for
thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness: then he suffered him.
It becomes us to fulfill all righteousness.]

righteousness?

I answer, our Savior understands hereby the obedience of the law of God:
because that is true righteousness, to fulfill the commandment

What does our Savior mean in saying, it becomes, or it is necessary? was
the Sacrament

I answer First, it was necessary in regard of the original of it, the
commandment of

Secondly, it was necessary in regard of one end of Baptism, to wit, the
admission into the Church; because Christ came that he might be

Thirdly, it was necessary in regard of another end of Baptism, that is, the
remission of sins: for although it was not necessary that Christ should be
Baptized in regard of himself, seeing he had no sin in himself to be
forgiven or pardoned; yet it was necessary in regard of us, because he carried
our sins: and therefore he was Baptized, to seal unto his children the
remission and forgiveness of them.

What does Christ mean by all righteousness?

I answer, he means, pro forma, for fashion sake: but all the precepts of the
word are infallibly true in themselves: necessary and of importance unto us:
and commanded by God to be observed, and that seriously, as appears by the
promises and threatenings annexed thereunto.

But it may here be demanded; Are not those all righteousness, to be blamed
and condemned as Puritanes?

I answer first, certainly they that are curious, in externis in outward rites
and ceremonies stumble in plain way, and see but a very little at high noone.

Secondly, those that separate themselves by

Thirdly, but those that desire to be strict in the obedience of God, and
endeavor thereunto, to fulfill all righteousness.

. 2. And he suffered him:] We produce this John: then it would follow that we
are Baptized now with another Baptism, then Christ himself was, for he
received John's Baptism: but this were very absurd to say, that there is not
the same Baptism of the head and members of Christ and his Church: therefore
John's Baptism is all one with Christ's.

Bellarmine answers hereunto, John's Baptism then his own, least he should
have been thought himself to stand in need of regeneration.

To this we answer First, John also Baptized John's Baptism.

Secondly, Christ was not Baptized for any cause simply in himself, but to
give an example became him to fulfill all righteousness: not to prescribe
laws to others, whereof he had not been the first practiser himself. Willet.
Synops. f. 585.


VERSE. 16. And Jesus when he was Baptized, went up streightway out of the
water: and lo, the Heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God
descending like a dove, and lighting upon him.
And lo, the heavens were opened unto ] How were the heavens opened?

First, some say, non reseratione sed oculis fidei Hier. s.
, Stephen did Acts 7. but not truly and really opened.

Secondly, others say the contrary Gualt. s.
that they

Calvin s.
to whom I rather subscribe and assent; answer, we hear that the heavens were
opened, and therefore we believe it; but we hear not how they were opened,
and therefore we leave to inquire after it, as not much tending unto
edification.



First, some say this was an Allegory unto us, Oper. imperf. sup.
. Again, as many see heaven which see not God, so many carnal eyes see the
Scriptures, which see not Christ Gualt. s.
.

Tropologice, to show 1. that heaven is opened unto us by the Baptism of the
Spirit: or 2. that heaven is opened unto all those that are spiritual: for,
for this cause are all graces given unto us, that we may be made partakers of
the kingdom of heaven.

What graces are given unto us by the Spirit

I answer First, the grace of light, knowledge 1 Cor. 2.14.15.
.





And the Spirit of God descended like a Dove. s. Act. 17. ^ect. 5.
and Bellarmine produce this place to prove that it is lawful to paint the
Blessed Trinity, viz. God the Father, like an old man with the world in his
hand; Christ as he walked upon the earth; the Holy Ghost in likeness of a
Dove: Arguing thus, To paint the Trinity, or any one of them, as they appeared
visibly, is no more inconvenient, then it was undecent for them so to appear.

We answer First, this does flatly control

Secondly, God expressly declares, that he would not appear in any visible
shape when he Deuteronomy. 4.15.
.

Thirdly, the argument follows not: for

Fourthly, though the argument be admitted,

Fifthly, if when such apparitions were seen, Willet. Synops. f. 457.
.

Why did the Holy Ghost descend?

I answer First, for the dignity of the person

Secondly to show the nature of Christ's Kingdom,

Thirdly, to show the nature of Christ's office:

Teaching us, Ioh. 3.5. and 7.37.39. and 1 Thessalonians. 4.8.
. Hence the Spirit is called 1 Arrha, an earnest 2 Cor. 5.5.
. 2 a seal. Ephesians. 1.13. and 4.30. 3 an holy action, 1 John 2.20.27. And
therefore whatsoever we be in other things, if we be Christ's, we are happy
and blessed: if we be poor, yet God will love us, if we be simple God will
teach us: if we be infants God will increase us unto maturity and ripenes: and
in the mean time ordain praise unto himself out of the mouths of babes and
sucklings: if we have been sinners, he will pass by our former sins Act.
17.30.
, and give his Spirit unto us, if we belong unto Christ.

Whether did the Holy Ghost here make use Dove, or only (as the Angels were
wont to appear) did show himself in the shape of a Dove.

I answer First, the phrase seems to imply like a Dove, and so also Mar. 1.10.
and (...) in a bodily shape like a Dove upon him, says Saint Luke Luke 3.22.
.

Secondly, Calvin warily and wisely dares conclude too narrowly, and therefore
I leave it.





First, the Holy Ghost descended upon Christ in the shape of a Dove, for the
fulfilling of the type; because the Dove was the messenger of peace in times
past unto Noah Gen 8.11.
: and Plutarch and Coelius Rhod. affirms that it was also to Deucalion: the
Holy Ghost hereby teaching us, that Christ came, that he might reconcile us
unto God, according to the testimony of the Apostle, we have peace toward God
through Jesus Christ our Lord Romans 5.1.
; and again, when we were enemies, we were reconciled unto God, by the death
of his Son Romans 5.10. and 2 Cor. 5.19.20.
.

What necessity was there of this Doves coming?





Secondly, Christ comes to cure this deluge, to dry up this water, and to take
away our sins; whence he is called the Lamb of God which takes away the
sins of the world John 1.
.

Thirdly, and therefore most fitly comes this dove at this time: that as Noah's
Dove came with an olive branch Gen, 8.11
, as a token of peace: so the holy Spirit in the likeness of a Dove, is a
sign of that peace and reconciliation which is wrought by Christ between our
God and us.

All are not reconciled unto God by Christ,

I answer, meditate seriously, and frequently upon these things: Adam Romans 5.12.
, and that in many things we all sin daily: and he is a liar who says
otherwise 1 Ioh. 1.8.
.

Secondly, remember that by sin we are guilty of death, death having passed
upon all for sin Romans 5.12.


Thirdly, meditate what death we are liable unto? it is not the effusion of
our blood; not a depriving of us of sense: not such a sorrow as we can
understand or conceive of: not such a torment of the mind, as we know or have
felt: not a torture which shall have an end: but torments which are perpetual,
from which we shall never have ease; torments which are eternal, from which we
shall neve have end. Torments that are intolerable which shall never be
endured with any patience, and yet must be endured with excessive pain:
torments that are so unspeakeable, that the heart is not able to conceive, nor
the tongue to express them.

Fourthly, remember there is no way, means, or remedy to avoid this death,
but only by Christ: he being our only Mediator, and our alone Savior, Acts
4.12.

Fifthly, remember this Mediator and Blessed Peacemaker has been long offered
unto us, long despised by us: call to mind how often our ears have heard,
what it is that God requires of us, if we desire to be made partakers of
Christ, and how we have altogether neglected to obey it.

Sixthly, remember it may be for any thing thou know to the contrary, that
thy glass is run, thy thread drawn out, thy life at his period, and
therefore vel nunc aut nunquam, thou must either lay hold upon Christ now or
never.

Sevently, remember that although the date of thy life be longer, yet thou
know not whether ever the Lord will call upon thee, or offer Christ unto
thee any more: it may be his next message will be, to send soldiers to kill
thee for thy contempt Matthew. 22.7.
. Consider thou have sinned, and God has admonished thee: thou have heard his
admonitions, and yet not taken warning by them: he does still hold forth his
white flag offering peace unto thee in and by Christ, and thou yet neglects it:
And therefore do no longer presume but fear, laying hold upon Christ, and
accepting the conditions of peace, least that the day of salvation become unto
thee the day of vengeance. Thus much for the first general cause, why the Holy
Ghost descended in the liknesse of a Dove.

Secondly, the Holy Ghost descended in the shape of a Dove, for the expressing
of the nature Apoc. 5.5.
, ruling them with an iron scepter Psalm. 2.9.
; yet to his children he is mild and meek, not calling them servants, but
friends: but of this copiously afterward. Matthew. 11.29.

Thirdly, this the Holy Spirit did for our imitation: teaching us, that our
lives should be Matthew. 10.16, I will here therefore briefly resolve two short
questions.

Why must we be like Doves?

I answer First, because humility and godly Abraham must offer a Dove, Genesis
15.9. and the people of Israel must offer Doves for a burnt offering, Levit.
1.14. and for a trespass offering, Leviticus 5.7. and 12.8. and for purging
from leprosy, Levit. 14.22. a menstruis, Levit. 15.14. and to purge him that
had touched the dead, Numb. 6.10.

Secondly, because the Church of Christ is resembled Cant. 1.14. and 2.14. and
4.1. and 5.3.

Wherein must we be like Doves?

I answer our manners, Gualter says, the Dove is a most innocent creature,
free from fraud, wanting gall, and entirely loving his mate. Others Gloss. s.
Cant. 1.14
say, the Dove has no bill to hurt; no talents to tear, and buildes in the
holes of the rock; seeing others wander, does reduce and bring them home;
remains always near to the rivers; in stead of singing, sets forth a
mournful note: flies in flocks; and feeds upon no unclean or impure food.
Others say Hier. s.
, the Dove is the messenger of peace, the type of simplicity, pure by nature,
fruitful in young ones, unmindfull of injuries, naturally fearful, and
seldom secure or safe, but when she is in the hole of the Rock. These
properties of the Dove, the Reader may easily apply unto himself: but if any
desire my assistance for the true illustration of them, I refer him to
chapter 10. verse. 16.

VERSE. 17. And lo, a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased.
. 1. This is my beloved Son.] God has

I answer, First, we are the Sons of God by grace, in and by Christ; but he
is the only Son of God by nature, by himself.

God according to His Deity always: for there can be no moment of time
imagined, when Christ was not thus the Son of God: he being in this regard
coequall with the Father, and coeternall Symb. Athanas.
. His humane nature, and that either By Predestination: and thus Christ was the
Son of God from the beginning of the world: read for the proof hereof, 2.
Tim. 1.9. Titus 1.1.2. and 1. Pet. 1.20. Or, Now in time, both because now The
mystery is revealed, Romans 16.25. Ephesians. 3.9. Coloss. 1.26. He is given unto the
world, Ps. 2.7. Act. 13.33




The sense then of these words is, This is the man whom I have begotten, that
he might be the Son which was of old time promised: or this man now by John
baptized, is the promised Son of God, which is given for sinners, that they
by him might be adopted into the fellowship of the Sons of God Gal. 4.4 5.
Ephesians. 1.5. 1 Ioh. 5.20.
.



by faith, according to Saint Paul, Ye are all the children of God, by faith
in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.26.

spiritual life; For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the
sons of God: and by that spirit are enabled to cry, Abba Father, Romans
8.14.15. These two are the principal ways, whereby we are made the children
of God: but under these, more are included, viz. these which follow.



Be blameless and harmless as the sons of God, without rebuke Phil. 2.15.
.

Love your Neighbor, yea your Enemy, that ye may be the children of your
Father which is in heaven Matthew. 5.43.45.
.

in whom I am well pleased.

Cyprian, (lib. 1. Testim. adv. Iud.) expounds these words, Thou art my
well-beloved Son, whom I think well of: But this interpretation is not so
fit, and therefore I leave it.





complacere, and acquiesescere, to please and to delight in: and these
significations are found in profane authors, and therefore we must go a
little further.

Fifthly, although this word, (...) be a Greek Behold my servant whom I uphold,
mine elect, in whom (Ratsah naphshi) Ratsah is rendered by the 70. (...), and by
Hierom. complacere, to please very well: but properly, it signifies placare, to
appease, pacify, and reconcile, according to the Prophet Psa. 85.1.2.
, Ratsitha Jehovah artseca, etc. O Lord, thou art pacified and reconciled unto
thy people: for thou have forgiven their iniquity, and covered their sin: so
here (...) signifies not only acquiescere, to delight in; or unice amare, to
love above all other; or been sentire, to think well of; or approbare, to well
approve of, or complacere, to please exceedingly: But thou art my dearly
beloved Son, in quo complacui, and placatus sum, that is, first, in whom I am
well pleased with for thy self: and secondly, for whose sake I am quieted and
attoned unto those that belong unto thee. And this does agree to the
Sacerdotall office of Christ, as a Priest by offering sacrifice for us, to
reconcile us unto God, who by sin were become his enemies, and odious unto
him.

It may here be objected, If God were pleased he is is not like man, that he
should repent, or change his mind 1 Samuel 15.29.
, yea that in him there is no shadow of mutation James 1.17.
.

I answer, First, the will of God is the same which always it was, to wit, to
repair and restore We are reconciled by the death of Christ, unto God, are
not thus to be understood (quasi jam amare incipiat, quos ante oderat, sed
diligenti reconciliamur, cum quo tamen inimicitias prius habuimus August. s
John.
;) as though the Lord now began to love those whom formerly he hated, but that
we are reconciled unto God, who loved us, with whom we have had farres: for
God by sending of Christ, does commend and prove his love unto us Romans 5.8. and
1 Ioh. 4.9.
; and therefore he did not hate the elect before Christ came, as we shall see
by and by.

Secondly, I answer, that between God and Ioh. 9.31
, yea if they repent not, he will reward their sin with death Romans 6.23.
; and not pardon their sin, until they are reconciled unto him by the
sufferings of Christ.

Love and Reconciliation; he loved his from the beginning, but was not
reconciled until their sins were satisfied for: when we hated God, and all
goodness, the Lord loved us after a wonderful manner: Novit enim in unoquoque
and odisse quod feceramus, and amare quod fecerat August. s. Ioh.
, the Lord knows how to distinguish between what we have done, and what he
has done; and to hate that which is evil in us, and wrought by us, and to love
that which is his own work.

Fevardentius (page 469.) holds, that Christ had no sense or feeling of his
Fathers wrath in his soul (contrary to the tenet of our church) and proves it
from this verse thus: Christ was always the beloved Son of God, as it is in
this verse, therefore God did not change, in turning his love into hatred.



. 3. In whom I am well pleased.] Is God well

First, certainly the Lord was well pleased Henoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses,
David, etc.

Secondly, God says unto none of them

Thirdly, this therefore is uttered by the Adam was expulsed the earthly
paradise, and Lucifer the heavenly: and this seems to have been objected unto
Christ by the Jews, when they said, he trusted in God, let him deliver him
now, if he will have him: for he said, I am the Son of God Matthew. 27 43.
: Teaching us, that Christ was made Man, not through the anger of God toward
himself; but through the love of God toward us Ioh. 3.16.35.
. II. Secondly, in respect of us; because first, of old God was angry with us
for our sins Romans 1.18.
: but secondly, now he is reconciled unto us by Christ Col. 1.15.20.
.

CHAPTER IV.
VERSE. 1. Then was JESUS led up of the spirit into the wilderness, to be
tempted of the Devil.
led aside of





Word Ioh. 15.3.
, he was taught and instructed in his minority. Secondly, the Baptism of
Water Matthew. 3.^7.
. Thirdly, the Baptism of the Spirit, which was fulfilled when the holy Ghost
descended upon him. Fourthly, the Baptism of Fire, that is, of Temptation
Psalm. 66.10.1^.
. Fifthly, the Baptism of Death, as our Savior says, I have a baptism to be
baptized with, and how am I straightned until it be accomplished Luke 12.50.
! Christ already had undergone three of these, the Baptism of the Word, Water;
and Spirit; and therefore he does out of hand undertake the fourth, that he
may be prepared for the fifth.

Secondly, this was done in regard of us, to Matthew. 13.25.
: as soon as Elijah was called to his office, he is called to suffer 1 King.
19.3.
: and so also the Patriarchs Heb. 11.38.
.

Whence comes it, that our trials and temptations

First, this comes from God, who has not but that we should fight the battles
of the Lord manfully, against Sin, Satan, the World, and the Flesh; because
these are enemies unto Christ, whose colors we bear, under whose banner we
fight, and whose Soldiers we are. A valiant Champion is not armed from head to
foot, to fit at home, or rest him upon the bed of case, but that he may be
prepared for the battle: so the Lord first arms us, and then brings us into
the lists.

Secondly, this comes from the Devil, because manibus pedibusque, with all his
might, and the utmost of his strength. While we were his vassailes he kept us
in peace Luke 11.21.
but when once we have entered into a league and covenant with Christ, then he
does resist us with all his policy, power, craft, subtilty, and strength.



woe be unto him that does the work of the Lord negligently Ier. 48.10.
.

Secondly, we must go when God calls, not Acts 22.16.
.

The first is cherefulnesse, readiness, willingness; now procrastination and
delay, argues unwillingnesse in us: when a man delays to do that which God
requires, it is a sign that he has no stomach thereunto. The second is,
fear and an awful respect of his sacred Majesty: for the Lord requires that
we should serve him with fear Psa. 2.11.
, now delay argues a direct neglect of God; he that deferres from day to day,
to do that which God strictly commands him, does plainly testify that he
does not fear nor care at all to offend God. And therefore let us labor by
and by to put on Christ in newness of life, meditating continually of these
five things.


First remember the necessity of the work; how necessary it is that thou
should lead a new life: it is the end of thy creation, it is the only way
unto salvation; and therefore what will it profit thee to gain the whole world
and loose thy soul?

Secondly, remember the Lords acceptance, so thou shall please the Lord, and
otherwise thou can not: we study often, yea upon every occasion to please
great ones, but we should rather study to please the Lord, who is a King of
Kings, and a Lord of Lords.

Thirdly, remember the danger of neglect; it is no less then the perdition of
thy soul, to defer to put on Christ by the Baptism of the Spirit; for if
once thy day be past, and Gods appointed time be neglected, be sure the door
will be shut against thee, and thou damned to the pit of hell.

Fourthly, remember how long thou have already neglected to serve the Lord in
newness of life: how often with the crow thou have cried, cras cras, to
morrow to morrow thou will serve and obey him; how long like a bad debtor thou
have put off God from day to day, from year to year, yea all thy life time
until this present hour.

Fifthly, remember how little time remains behind, and how uncertain thy life
is: that the remembrance hereof may make thee the more careful by and by to
purpose, resolve, and endeavor to give thy self wholly up unto the service of
the Lord, in new obedience, and true sanctification, although presently
hereupon thou be led aside by the Spirit to be tempted of the devil, as Christ
here was.

Why does God permit us to be more tempted

I answer for these causes; First,

Secondly, that we might be the more comforted in knowing, that God has
enriched us with gifts and graces, because otherwise the devil would never be
so hostile against us. The children of God in these temptations may thus argue
with themselves; if God had not bestowed new graces upon us, the devil would
not thus war against us ( for he keeps his own in peace Luke 11.21.
) and if the Lord had not endued us with new strength, we could never have held
out so long against the strong temptations of Satan, but long ere this had
been overcome.

Thirdly, that we might acknowledge the strength that God has girded us
withal, and use it, that by the use and exercise thereof it may increase, and
we be made stronger and stronger for the work of the Lord.

Fourthly, that we might be held in aequilibrio in an equal balance: when the
balance is unequal one scale is carried up, and the other down: so when we
are burdened with afflictions and temptations, and not sensible of the grace of
God sustaining and upholding us, we are with the weight of our burden pressed
down to the ground: On the contrary when we look with a full sight upon the
gifts and graces, which God has bestowed upon us, and whereby we excel many
others, and are not sensible of any temptations or trials in us or upon us,
then we are exalted and lifted up: And therefore because the Lord would have
us kept in an equal balance, and neither raised up too high with the sight of
our gifts; nor depressed too low with the sense of our afflictions, he does
ballaste both the seals; the one with grace and strength, the other with
temptations and trials, external and internal.

. 2. Then was Jesus led aside, etc.] Why was

First, this was that in all things he might be like unto his brethren.
Hebrews 4.15.

Secondly, this was that he might destroy the 1 John 3.8.

Heb. 2.18.

Pet. 1.6.7. Hence a second question may be propounded, which is this.



Peter commends unto the Jews in these words, Think it not strange concerning
the fiery trial, as though some strange thing had happened unto you 1 Pet.
4.12.
.

Secondly, remember God has promised to free us from our afflictions and our
temptations in his due time: this is also St. Peter's encourageme^t; be of good
cheer (says he) for the Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of
temptations 2 Pet. 2.9.
.

Thirdly, remember God has enabled and enriched us to endure these trials with
patience and contentation: affording that internal consolation unto us, that
we can rejoice in tribulations Romans 5.3. and Iam. ^ 3.
, and not fear them at all Apoc: 2.10.
.

Fourthly, remember God has promised to reward us, if courageously we resist
temptation, and constantly endure tribulation: thus our Savior encouraged his
Apostles, when he said, ye are they which continued with me in my temptations:
and therefore I appoint unto you a kingdom Luke 22.28.29.
: yea so sure were the Apostles of the accomplishment of this, that Saint James
dares pronounce that man happy that endures temptation; and also promises
him a crown of life Iam. 1.12
.

Fifthly, remember Christ himself was tempted and tried, shall not we therefore
be content to bear the crown of thorns? If we suffer with him, we shall be
glorified with him Rom, 8.17.
; and therefore let us with Jesus endure the cross and despise the shame, for
the joy that is set before us Heb. 12.2.
. He suffered for our sins, and therefore we may well suffer for our own:
he was tempted for us, and therefore we should the more patiently undergo
temptation in our selves and for our selves.



Chrysostom. super.
; but the devil dare do any thing, and therefore I cannot imagine this to
have been the reason hereof.



Thirdly, some say this was done least God

Fourthly, the place where John and the people

. 3. That he might be tempted of the Devil.] Tentare (to tempt) signify?

I answer (...) come from (...) which signifies first an endeavor. Secondly, a
trial, Tentare (I say) first signifies to endeavor or to try in general:
thus Ahaz says, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord Esa. 7.12
; that is, I will not try, neither make experiment by any sign, what the Lord
will do for me. Secondly, it signifies to prove and try faith theologically,
and thus some Gualt. s.
understand the word in this place: But God in this sense does often tempt us,
trying our faith, as he did the faith of Abraham, in commanding him to offer up
the promised seed; and therefore I dare not thus understand the word.

Thirdly, Tentare signifies to allure unto sin; and thus tempting is properly
taken in this place: for tento comes from tendo, tempting, is as much as
endeavoring to entrap or ensnare: and in this sense Saint James prohibites any
man to say, that he is tempted of God, for in this sense God tempts no man Iam.
1.13.
.

How could Christ be tempted? for to be

I answer first, it became Christ to put on our

Secondly, it is no more opposite unto his to take our natures upon him, and to
submit himself to the form of a servant Phil. 2.7
.

Thirdly, whatsoever Christ in his nature did,

Whether may temptation be without sin

I answer first, Christ was tempted in whom Heb. 4.15.

Secondly, Temptation is (as was said before)

First, temptation is said to be without sin either Imputatione, by way of
imputation, because the fault is remitted, (as Austen says, non ut non fit,
sed ut non imputetur) and the sin shall not be laid unto the offenders
charge. Revera, in very deed, because there is no fault nor guilt in it at
all: and thus the temptation of Christ was without sin.


Secondly, observe again, Temptation has a double original, or beginning,
viz. either first ab extra, from without; or secondly, ab intra from within.

First, there is a temptation which has his beginning, ab extra, from without,
when neither the mind, nor thought, nor delight, nor affections, nor
meditations, nor suggestions go along with the temptations; but the soul or
the party tempted is merely passive.

And thus tempts Man often; as the wife of Potipha^ thus tempts Joseph many
a time Genesis 39.7.
, and Job also is thus tempted by his wife Job. 2.9.
, and the three children were thus tempted by Nebuchadnezzar unto Idolatry Dan.
3.15.
. And thus often one man tempts another unto that which he has not so much as a
thought of, or any love unto at all. Now this temptation is sin In the party
tempting. Not In the person tempted.
Satan, but scarce at any time: for when he tempts, for the most part he
exciteth and enflameth our concupiscence, which being stirred up, becomes an
active instrument within us unto evil, and consequently is sin, as follows
in the next particular.


Secondly, there is a temptation which has his beginning ab intra, from
within, when a man is tempted and allured by his own innate corruption, and
this is sin: according to Saint James, every man is tempted when he is drawn
aside of his own lust, and entised Iam. 1.14. and Romans 7.7.
: and therefore the Papists are to blame who deny our first concupiscence to be
sin.

Here they object, there is a double concupiscence,

I answer, the first is a less sin,

They object again, this first concupiscence Paul did, It is no more I, but
sin that dwells in me Romans 17.17.20.
.

I answer, Suggestion, and Reluctation: now if Reluctation be good, then must
Suggestion needs be evil: for that is the nature of concupiscence Iam. 1.14
. And herein is the difference between our temptations and Christ's: First in
us we have naturally these things, 1 Suggestion and Concupiscence: 2
Meditation or a ruminating of this wicked suggestion. 3 Delectation or a
delighting in these wicked thoughts, etc.

Secondly, in Christ, there is 1 no Delectation in any wicked thing. 2 there is
no meditation or rumination of any wicked thing, but by and by he repels and
beats it back; yea 3 in him there is no evil concupiscence at all, but all
his temptations were ab extra from without.

Why would Christ be tempted?

I answer first, Himself, to show his Deity and power in conquering Satan. Us
and that either To overcome and put our enemies to flight: which otherwise
would have been difficult, yea impossible for us to have done. Or To teach us
these 3 things, to wit First the nature of temptation: that it is not a sign
of the anger of God, 1 because it may be without sin, as was showed in the
former question, and 2 because Christ was tempted, with whom God was not angry.
Secondly, the nature of the te^pter, that is, First his Malice, he is our
enemy, as follows afterward. Secondly, his weakness, that now being
conquered by Christ, he may be overcome of those who are Christ's. Thirdly, the
manner of overcomming him; and that is by the word of God, as follows by and
by.
Thirdly, the readiness of his help and assistance: for he was tempted, that
he might be able to succor those that are tempted Heb. 2.18
.




Secondly, the principal and particular causes why Christ was tempted were
these two; First,

First, the Hostility of Satan appears in this, that he tempts all Gods
children, and dares give the onset unto the best of them.







with greediness, Ephesians. 4.19. is not tempted: he unto whom sin is pleasant,
and to wallow in the puddle of iniquity, is delectable, is not tempted,
because he runs headlong of himself, unto wickedness and sin. Secondly,
those that are puffed up with an hypocritical pride, thinking themselves to be
Saints, because they seem so unto men, are assaulted with a strong temptation,
which prevails against them: yet they cannot be called Soldiers, because
they fight not, neither struggle against this temptation; but willingly give
way unto it. Thirdly, those that desire to serve God, but do it negligently,
being neither wary, nor circumspect in their lives and actions, but are tempted
by pride, anger, the cares of the world, and too great a presumption of the
mercies of God, and yet see none of these things in themselves, because they
do not carefully watch over their ways, these fight not lawfully 2 Timothy 2.5.
, according to the Apostles opinion, who says, If a man also strive for
masteries, yet he is not crowned, except he strive lawfully. Fourthly, he
that faithfully devotes himself unto the Lord, but is not able to do or
eschew what he should, complaining continually with Saint Paul, that the good
which he would do, he cannot, and the evil which he would not do, he
daily commits Romans 7.^8.
, because the flesh wrastles, and strives, and struggles against him Gal. 5.17.
so strongly, that in the anguish of his heart he cries out, O wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me Romans 7.24.
? And with that holy Apostle being pressed with the burden of sin, and the
weight of some present and strong temptation, prays thrice, that is, many
times, that the buffets of Satan may be taken away from him 2 Cor. 12.8.
, and strength of grace given unto him, whereby he may be able to quell and
subdue all his corruptions. Although this man to himself seem a miserable
man, yet to me he seems a very happy, and blessed man; because, I. God by
thus exercising of him, shows, that he loves him: and, II. The Devil by
these strong assaults, shows that he fears (maugre all his might) he shall
loose him.

Secondly, the other principal and particular cause, why Christ was tempted,
was to show the power of Christ in the victory and conquest of Satan;
according to Saint Paul: And having spoiled Principalities and Powers, he made
a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it Col. 2.15.
, that is, in the Cross.

It may here be asked, What did Christ triumph

I answer, First, over our sins, and guiltiness, so that now sin shall
have no more dominion over us Romans 6.14.
. Secondly, he triumphed over death, O death, I will be thy death, O grave, I
will be thy destruction, said the Prophet; of Christ Hosea 13.14.
, to whom the Apostle agrees in these words, Christ has abolished death, and
brought life and immortality to light 2. Tim. 1.10.
. Thirdly, he triumphed over Satan, not only in his resurrection, but also
in his temptations, the Devil being always put to the worst. Hence we see,
that the Devils could not go into the Herd of swine, until Christ gave them
leave: thus also the unnamed Author of the Hebrews says, That Christ came to
destroy him that had the power of death, that is the Devil Heb. 2.14.
, and Saint John 1 Ioh. 3.8.
testifies, that for this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he
might destroy the works of the Devil. And thus Christ triumphed over Satan
in this place.

. 4. Of the Devil.] Are all temptations from

I answer, temptations are two fold: viz.

How does God tempt man?

I answer, Abraham by that heart-wounding message (every word whereof was a
sword in his bowels) Take thy son, thy only son Isaac, whom thou love,
and go offer him up unto me Genesis 22.2.3.
. Thus the Lord tries Gideon, whether he dare with only three hundred men bid
battle against the Host of the Midianites and the Amalekites Judge. 7.7.
, and thus he tempted Job, to see if he would continue in his integrity.

Secondly, there are Diabolical temptations,

How does the Devil tempt man?

I answer by these ways and means: First, sometimes he calls the truth of
Gods Precepts in question, that we might give the less credit thereunto, and
the more unto him: And thus he tempted Evah. Ye shall not dye at all, but
shall be like God Genesis 3.4.5.
knowing good and evil.

Secondly, sometimes he calls the truth of Gods promises and threatenings in
question, because often they that do ill succeed well; the Prophet gives us a
president of this in the perverse Jews. Ye have said, it is in vain to serve
the Lord, and unprofitable to keep his ordinances; yea the proud are happy,
they that work wickedness are set up, and they that tempt God are even
delivered Malach. 3.14.15.
. This is the devils malice thus to tempt us, that so we might the less care
for, or fear, or regard, either the consolations, or comminations of the word.

Thirdly, sometimes he makes the word of God seem hard unto us, that so,
although we assent unto the truth of it, yet we cannot consent unto the
practice of it; because it is displeasing to our nature, or contrary to our
disposition, or requires more pains then we can endure to take; and this made
the Jews cry out upon the doctrine of Christ, because it was a hard saying
(not a false saying) and they could not endure it (not, they could not lawfully
obey it) and therefore they reject both Doctor and Doctrine Ioh. 6.60.
, Preacher and Sermon.

Fourthly, sometimes the Devil teaches us to abuse Scripture unto the
patronage of impiety, and thus he abuses it himself in this Chapter,
laboring by the false alleging of Scripture to persuade Christ to tempt Gods
providence: thus he teaches others to abuse the parable of the talents unto
Usury; and those words, the Sabbath was made for man, unto the profanation of
the Sabbath; arguing thus from thence, It was made for man, therefore if man
have any occasions, he may ride his journeyes, or may buy and sell upon that
day.

Fifthly, sometimes the devil propounds the inticements of the world unto us,
thereby frequently bewitching and insnaring of us. Sixthly, sometimes he spurs
forward the desires of our nature and flesh, and enflames our appetites unto
unlawful lusts and delights.

Seventhly, sometimes he urges the examples of wicked men unto us, that thereby
we might be the more emboldened to sin, by their president and pattern.

Lastly, sometimes he tempts us by others, exasperating the world against us by
hatred, or derision, or contempt, or persecution, or wicked counsel, or the
like.

VERSE. 2. And when he had fasted forty days, and forty nights, he was
afterward an hungered.




First, Christ fasted in regard of his function which he was to undertake, that
he might be the better prepared for it: this reason is given by some, but I
omit it, because the text seems to point at the next.

Secondly, Christ fasted in regard of his temptation, which he was to undergo,
that he might be prepared thereunto.

How many sorts of fasts are there?

I answer five, First, there is a necessary fast, when men abstain because
they have nothing natural fast, Hippocrates says, senes facilius jejunant,
old men are easily persuaded to fast. 2 from some sickness, which has taken
away the appetite, and made all meat loathsome unto the stomach. Thirdly, there
is a civil fast, which is two fold, either 1 commanded by the Magistrate for
some civil end, as victory or the like: thus Saul commands the people to fast
until night, least otherwise they should have been hindered from the pursuit
of their enemies. Or 2 this fast is undertaken without a command for some
civil respect, that so nothing may hinder the intended purpose: thus certain
Jews vow, they will fast, until they have killed Paul Acts 23.12.
.

Fourthly, there is a miraculous fast: such was the fast of Moses upon the
mount. Exodus 34.28. and of Elias in the wilderness, 1 King. 19.8. and of
Christ in this place. This fast is supra nos, not to be imitated, but admired
by us; and therefore although it be the fast here expressed, yet I pass by it
also, and only enlarge the next. Fifthly, there is a religious fast, instituted
for a religious end; and of this only something amply.

How manifold is this religious fast?

I answer, the religious fast is diversely divided.

First, in respect of the mooving causes thereof, into an ordinary and an
extraordinary fast.

Secondly, in respect of the authority, into a voluntary, and an enjoined or
commanded fast.

Thirdly, in respect of the persons fasting, into a public and a private fast.

Fourthly, in respect of the duration or continuance thereof, into an absolute
and a respective fast. All these I let slip in this place.

Fifthly, a religious fast is divided, first into a false fast. Secondly, into a
true fast.

First, there is a false religious, or a Popish fast, which is an Idol of the
true, and obtruded upon the Church by the devil, for the deceiving of men:
which is not only unprofitable unto the Agents, but also displeasing unto God,
yea provoking his Majesty against us, as may appear by these places of
Scripture, Esa. 58. Ier. 14.12. Zach. 7.5. Ma^t. 6.16.

Wherein does this false fast of the Papists consist?

For the true resolving of this doubt,

First, the first error in the false fast observable, is in the Merit thereof:
and that first because they expect a merit or a deserved reward for it, as it
is a good work: but yet this is not all, for they expect the same for every
good work they do, whatsoever it be.

Secondly, there is another fault here in the merit, and that is this, they
think an outward fasting it self a good work: or that the abstinence from
flesh only, or the outward works of fasting is in it self pleasing unto God.
But to eat, or to abstain from meat, is an indifferent thing, and therefore
the outward work is not acceptable unto the Lord.







Secondly, the second error in the Papists fast shows it self in the Object
thereof.



Excess, that is in the difference of meats; and in a general prohibition of
flesh. Defect, in approving and allowing of dainties and delights both in
First, Quality. Secondly, Quantity.



First, they err in a general abstinence from some certain meats only: that
this is an error, appears thus, First, the true fast ought to be a total
abstinence (for the time of the continuance of the fast) from all meats
whatsoever: as may appear by the Jews fast Hester. 4.16.
, and Ninivehes fast Iona. 3.7
, who forbad the tasting of water: except necessity urge and enforce the
contrary; and that either I. by reason of the weakness of the person fasting:
or II. by reason of the extension or length of the time fasted.

Secondly, for these causes amongst the Ancients, the Respective fast was more
frequent then the Absolute; wherein they did eat something, and that with some
choice making, or difference.

Thirdly, they did make no choice of meats, or put a difference in meats
according to the kinds of them, as though there were a holiness in meats; for
they knew that all the creatures of God were lawful in themselves to be used,
and are made unlawful unto us in these regards (to which the Papists
themselves subscribe) viz. First, in respect of the body: those meats, which
overthrow the health of the body are not to be eaten. Or secondly, in respect
of the substance or estate; those dainties which cannot be had without
exhausting of the treasure, or profuse wasting of the estate, or diminishing of
our charity, and liberality unto the poor; are not to be procured but
forborne. Or thirdly, in respect of the Magistrate; those meats which are
prohibited by superiors for some uivill end, are to be abstained from, and the
Magistrate to be obeyed by virtue of the fifth Commandment: but this belongs
not unto the tie of the conscience, neither makes us fear or tremble, to touch,
taste, or handle Coloss. 2.17.18.
, that which the civil Magistrate for a politic end has forbidden. Or,
Fourthly, in respect of Charity, if a Christian brother be offended, we must
abstain, after Saint Paul's president, who had rather eat no flesh so long as
he lives, than do it with offense unto others 1 Cor. 8.13.
. But this is in respect of weak brethren, who are not thoroughly instructed,
not of obstinate persons, who refuse to be otherwise taught. Or, V. in respect
of the Soul, those meats which inflame, excite, and provoke unto lust, are to
be avoided: and this respect is truly religious. I conclude therefore, that
thus to forbear some meats, is warrantable, and commendable, because the end
of fasting, is to help and further the soul unto the performance of
spiritual duties: wherefore those dainties, and Cates, which corroborate evil
concupiscence, are to be laid aside: And in these regards (as was said before)
the Papists, with us, acknowledge that lawful meats become unlawful. But in
making a distinction, or difference of meats, we and they disagree in two
things, viz. First, in Lege, in the law of Fasting. Secondly, in Praxi, in the
practice of fasting.

First, we and the Papists differ in the law of fasting: Here observe, First,
the Thesis, or the general law, that we should fast, is prescribed in the word
of God. Secondly, the Hypothesis, or particular law, how we should fast, (that
is, upon what days, or how long, or from what meat we should abstain) is not
found amongst the Fathers: nusquam invenio, said Augustine Aug. ad Casulan.
epist. 86.
, the manner how we should fast, I cannot find prescribed. So Primasius s.
Romans 14.
, quomodo unusquisque, etc. How every man is bound to fast, I cannot by the
Fathers express: quum praceptum nemo ostendere potest, perspicuum est,
Apostolos permisisse liberum, said Socrates Soc 5. 2^.
, seeing that none can produce a precept for fasting, it is apparent that the
Apostles left it free. And the first Lawgiver, or Lawmaker for fasting, was
Montanus the heretic, whom Apollonius taxes for it Eusebius. 5.17.
. Now the Papists prescribe a law of fasting, upon pain of damnation; but we
deny any such positive law to be given by God.

Secondly, we and the Papists differ in praxi, in the practice of fasting: for
first, they will eat of some kind of meats, not of others. Secondly, they
abstain from some meats, propter genera; we, propter operationem: they
abstain from some meat merely for the kind of it; but we, not for the kind
thereof, but for the operation thereof: they abstain from flesh, because
flesh; not because it kindles the flame and fire of lust: for they eat and
drink those things that are more provoking thereunto, than flesh is; and
therefore their fasting is superstitious, as follows in the next. Thus the
Papists err in the object of their fast, in the Excess: consider we now, how
they err in the Defect, and that first in the quality: secondly, in the
quantity.

First, they do not forbid the delights of meats, it so be they be fish, but
think all dainties, and daintiness of lawful meats (that is, any thing but
flesh, and that which comes thereof) lawful, we hold the contrary, laying
down our opinion in this plain proposition: In fasting, we must abstain
from all delicates and dainties: Or, a fast celebrated with dainties, is an
hypocritical fast. For the proof whereof, observe these particulars. First,
Daniel fasting, abstaines from these three things Dan. 10.3.
, First, pleasant bread: secondly, flesh: thirdly, wine: so others when they
fasted, ate nothing but herbs Romans 14 2.
, and John Baptist, Locusts, a course food, as was showed before. Saint Matthew
only roots and herbs Clem Alex. Paed. 2.1.
; and Saint Peter for the most part pulse. (Nazien. orat. de amore paup.)
Secondly, all the Ancients in their fasts, abstained from wine. Timothy forbear
wine 1 Timothy 5.
, and Saint James abstained from flesh and wine Eusebius. 2.22.
. Thirdly, the Fathers abstained in their fasts, from all strong drink: thus
also did John Baptist, who drank neither wine nor strong drink Luke 1.15.
.

Thirdly, these two, strong drink, and dainties, the Fathers reprove in
fasting. Read Aug. de Mor. Eccles. 2.13. and Hier. ad Nepot. And therefore we
may safely say, that Papists are enemies unto fasting in their practice, that
place it in junkets and dainties: affirming first, that it is the kinds of
flesh, and that which proceeds from flesh, which is only forbidden in fasting,
not any sorts of fish. Secondly, they forbid not wine in their fasts to be
drunk: yea, Bellarmine De bon oper. 2. 5. Sect. ad ^illam.
disputes the necessity of wine in fasting, because their regions and
countries are cold. And Hallensis says, that it is necessary they should
drink wine with fish Chemni. p. 4. 127. 6
. Where it is not unworthy observation, that when we accuse the Romanists for
their Stews, which are openly maintained, permitted, and tolerated, in
mystical Babylon; Harding answers, their countries are hot: and therefore if
Brothell-houses were not suffered, the people would fall either to Sodomie, or
bestialitie, or incest, or rapes, or adulteries: but when we blame them for
the use of wine in their fasts, then Bellarmine tells us, the countries are
cold, and therefore both their stomachs and healths require it.

3dly, their daily practice shows, that in their fasts, they allow of all
dainties, fruits, wines, sweet meats, and all kind of banqueting stuffes, and
therefore there is no great fear, that their fasting will empaire their
health, except it be with surfeiting upon their delicates.





Thus we see how the Papists in their fasts err in qualitate, in the quality
of meats, we now proceed to show their failing in quantitate, in the quantity:
And for the clearer opening hereof, I lay down this proposition: In the Popish
fasts, abstinendum a quali, non a quanto: they must abstain altogether from
meat held by them unlawful, but the immoderate use of those which are
allowed, violates not their fast: that is one bite of flesh, or one spoonful
of broth wherein flesh has been boiled, disanulls their fast; but to eat
fish, or drink wine though unto the stretching out of the belly does not
break their fast at all. Thus Alex. Hales Chemni. p. 4. 117. 6
says, Excessus in quanto non solvit jejunium: Excess in the quantity of the
meat eaten violates not the fast: And Bellarmine Bell. de bon. oper. 2. 4.
Sect. quare.
traceth the same path almost in the same words, Immoderatus usus piscium nulla
lege jejunij prohibetur, an immoderate use of fish is forbidden by no law of
fasting. For the finishing therefore of this particular, I conclude: First, the
Papists are enemies and opposite unto Antiquity in their fasting, as appears
thus. First, they now use wine, which the Fathers did not. II. They now use
Dinners ordinarily, which were seldom (or rather never) used by them, that is,
the Ancients in their solemn fast days. III. The Papists exceed in their
eating, but the Fathers were very sparing in that, which they did eat upon
those days; and therefore howsoever they brag of Antiquity, yet they have not
so much as a shadow of the customs of the Ancients in their fasts.

Secondly, the Papists are enemies unto true Fasts, as appears thus: In a true
Fast there should be an abstinence, I. from flesh, II. From wine and sweet
wine. III. From strong drink. IV. From dainties. V. From an excessive and
immoderate use of any meat or drink. Now they only observe the first, that
is, forbear flesh: why? that they may stuff themselves with fish, or better
dainties.

Thus we have showed how the Papists err both in the Merit, and Object of
their Fast. It now remains to show, how thirdly they err in the omission of
the adjuncts of a Fast, they only observing the bodily exercise, which profits
nothing 1 Timothy 4. (...).
, their fasts not being accompanied with those holy duties, which they ought to
perform: neither such an abstinence as may help them to a religious
performance of those pious duties, which God requires of them. But the truth of
this will most clearly appear in the sequent particular, wherein we have to
explain the nature of a true Fast, the false and hypocritical being thus
briefly run over.

Secondly, there is a true Fast, which is pleasing unto God; wherein many
things are observable.

What is this true Fast?

I answer, It is described thus: Fasting is a forsaking, and refusing of all
those things, which are pleasing and delightful unto our natures, accompanied
with humiliation, and sorrow of the mind, that thereby we may obtain divine
clemency, or mercy, and favor from God Muscul. s
.

Whence it appears, that it is not an outward action only, as some would have
it: for qui in sola abstin^^tia collocat, maxim vitup^rat Chrysostom s.
, he that places fasting in a bare abstinence from meat, does most of all
disgrace it. As the keeping of the Sabbath is not only to forbear working,
but to serve God in his Temple: so fasting require something else than a mere
forsaking of meat, it being a mixed action.



external; or secondly, mixed: or thirdly, internal.

First, there are external actions required unto a true Fast, viz. First, an
abstinence from meat, wherein three things are to be considered, first, the
time, or continuance of this abstinence, ut duret jejunium quousque durat
exercitium Calvin. s.
, this abstinence from meat must be continued, so long as the time set apart
for fasting does endure. Secondly, the quantity, if any thing be received
within that time, it must be very sparingly taken, that is, neither, I. too
much of any thing; neither, II. too often P. Mart.
, but first, one refection, or refreshing only; secondly, a supper, not a
dinner. Thirdly, the quality, all dainty things that day must be omitted,
that is, both gorgeous attire, and dainty food. And this abstinence of meat is
the first external action.

Secondly, the second external action required in a true Fast, is a cessation
from labor, and our daily and ordinary employments.

Thirdly, reconciliation with our brethren: for all jarres, contentions,
strifes, and debate, are then to be laid aside, lest otherwise we do as the
Jews did, Fast with debate Esa. 58.4
, Carnem non comedis, sed comedis fratrem, thou will not touch flesh, but thou will bite and devour thy brother, even upon the fast day, said Saint Basil.
apud Anthon. S. de Iejun.

Fourthly, an other external action required unto a true Fast, is Alms, and
that which we spare from our selves, to spend upon the poor: This is the fast
that I have required, says the Lord, to deal thy bread to the hungry, and to
never the naked Esa. 58.7
.

Secondly, unto a true Fast are required mixed actions, which are partly
external, and partly internal, viz. First, Mourning and sorrow, as we may
see in all these examples: the Israelites being twice overcome by the
Benjamites, they fast and weep Judge. 20 26.
the people of Israel being gathered together to Mizpeh, weep and fast 1 Samuel
7.6.
. Read also these places, 2. Chron. 20.3. Nehem. 9.2. Joel. 1.14.15. and 2.13.
where we shall see, that fasting is still accompanied with sighs and tears;
godly sorrow being the true way unto repentance, never to be repented of 2
Cor. 7 10.
. Secondly, Prayer unto God, is to be adjoined unto true fasting, read all the
former places, and thereunto add these, Jonah 3.8. Nehem. 1.4. Luke 2.37. Acts
13.3. and 14.23. In all which we shall see this practice observed. Now in
prayer must be these three things. First, the confession of our merit, that
we have deserved the severest of Gods judgments for our sins. Secondly, the
begging of pardon for those sins, which we have committed, and for which we
have deserved these plagues. Thirdly, the deprecating of those judgments which
we have justly deserved for our iniquities. And all these are to be uttered
with strong cries unto the Lord. Now these two, Mourning and Prayer, are called
mixed actions justly, because the sorrow of the heart is expressed by the
sadness of the countenance; and the desires of the soul are made known by
the words of the tongue; for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks.

Thirdly, there are internal actions required unto a religious Fast, viz.
First, humiliation, Rend your hearts (says the Prophet) in your fasts Joel.
2.13.
and not your garments; where he does not prohibit outward mourning, but does
exhort to add thereunto internal humiliation, and the sorrow of heart.

Secondly, preparation unto prayer, to wit, I. Meditation, and examination of
the conscience. II. Repentance, as in Ninives fast, every man was charged to
turn from his wicked ways Iona. 3.8.
, and to the Jews God gives the same lesson, in their fasts, to loose the
bands of wickedness Esa. 58.6
.

So that hence we may learn, which is a complete fast, and wherein it
consists, viz.

First, an abstinence from meat for the time of the fast, as far as thy
strength and health will permit. Secondly, and from all mirth and delight. And
thirdly, from all labor and work, that thou may the better intend
spiritual duties. Fourthly, that which is saved in thy family that day by thy
fasting, give it unto the poor. Fifthly, examine thy heart and life, and
meditate upon thy sins. Sixthly, repent thee seriously, and solidly of all thy
sins, purposing not only to leave them for ever, but also to loath them with
a perfect hatred. 7ly, go unto the house of God, and there implore the throne
of grace, that God would graciously be pleased, I. to enable thee to serve him
aright, to worship him with spiritual worship and to obey his word, which
either by reading, or preaching, is taught unto thee. II. That he would work
true repentance in thy heart, turning thee from sin unto himself. III. That
he would be pleased to bestow upon thee that grace, for which thou fastest,
whether it be the enjoying of some blessing, as yet wanting, or the removing of
some judgment which lies upon thee.

What is the use or end of this true religious

I answer, either first Ordinary; or secondly, Extraordinary.

First, the ordinary end of fasting is twofold; First, to subdue the flesh, I
beat my body (says Paul) and (by fasting) bring it into subjection 1 Cor.
9.27.
: whence we may observe, that there is often need of fasting, because Satan
is strong, and we are but weak; and therefore those that are tempted, must
pray against temptation; and if prayer prevail not, then fast; if the buffet
of Satan yet remain, then persevere in fasting: for God will come at the
last, as he did unto the Israelites; who, although they were twice
overthrown, yet continuing in prayer and fasting, at last they give the
Benjamites a mortal overthrow Judge. 20.
: yea until God give us victory over those corruptions which struggle against
us, his grace shall sustain and support us 2 Cor. 12 9.
, if we but persevere in fasting and prayer.

Secondly, the other ordinary end of fasting, is to corroborate and strengthen
the Spirit, First unto Prayer Dan. 9.3.
. Secondly, unto spiritual Meditations. Thirdly, unto the hearing of the word
of God. Prayer is the end of fasting, and fasting is the means unto prayer;
and therefore it does not consist in an abstinence from meat only, but
thereunto is to be added prayer, and pious meditations, and the hearing of the
word (if it may be had) that the Lord may vouchsafe to hear and help us, in
that which we desire.

Secondly the extraordinary end of fasting, is either for -- The removing of
evils, and that either from Our selves, which are either Temporal, and that is
either That we might be humbled, if the evil be past already. That we might
be freed, if the evil be either Present upon us. Or, Threatened to be brought
upon us. Or Hanging over our heads, and feared by us.

Spiritual, that is, the peril, danger, and pollution of sin.
Others, and that Temporal; Or, Spiritual.

The procuring of good things, which are either Civil Religious, and that either
The remembrance of those things which are bypast. Or, The corroboration of
those things which are desired, viz. Of the preaching of the word. Of the
administration of holy things.





That this may be the better understood, we will explain it more particularly.

Evils are either Temporal, Or, Spiritual.


Temporal evils are removed from us by fasting, two manner of ways,
Humiliando, Nosmet. Liberando. Nosmet.


First, by humbling of our selves truly, if the evils be bypast: and this is
performed, and practiced for a double end. The first is Religious, and this is
twofold. I. That the sin may not be laid unto our charge: thus a Father
ought to humble himself for some notorious offense committed by his child.
II. That the remembrance of sin may be the more deeply imprinted in the
mind, and we learn thereby to hate it so much the more. Thus we may conceive
that David fasted, when the young man brought him word that he had slain Saul:
For first, it is said, David fasted, and mourned, and then he said unto the
man, how wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thy hand against the Lords
anointed 2 Samuel 1.12.14.
? This pious Prince hereby showing, both his sorrow for the fact, and his
detestation of it.

The second end is Civil, to wit, that we may condole with those that are
afflicted, or mourn for those that are dead: Thus the men of Iabesh Gilead
fasted for the death of Saul, and Jonathan his son 1 Samuel 1.31.13.
; but ne quid nimis, this mourning must be moderate.

Secondly, temporal evils are removed from us, Liberando nosmet, and that
three manner of ways; either first by removing the evil which is present: or
secondly, by withholding the evil which is threatened: or thirdly, by averting
that evil which we fear, although it be not particularly threatened. First,
sometimes some temporal evil lies upon us, as Famine, Plague, the Sword, and
the like. Now these are to be removed (according to Gods own ordinance) by
fasting, as may be proved by all those Scriptures mentioned before. And thus
the Pope himself advised Decret. liber
. Si evenerit fames, pestis, deprecemur Dominum jejuniis, elermosynis and
obsecrationibus: that is, if dearth or pestilence afflict us, we must give our
selves to almesdeeds, prayer and fasting for the removal of them. When the
City Hippo, wherein Saint Augustine was, was by the Vandals besieged, he gave
himself frequently to fasting and prayer Possidonius c. 29.
.

Secondly, sometimes God threatens, for sin, to bring some temporal judgment:
and one principal remedy to withold it, is fasting: and therefore David,
when God had menaced the child with death, he gives himself to fasting 2 Samuel, 12.16.
. Thus God having threatened the Ninivites (by Jonah) to destroy them within
forty days, they prevent it by fasting Jonah. 3.5.6.


Thirdly, sometimes our sins committed, and Gods threatenings against sin in
general, makes us to fear some particular judgment, or temporal evil,
although the Lord have not definitely threatened it: now one chief remedy to
remove these evils (which hang over our heads, or which we have some cause to
fear) is fasting. Thus King Iehoshaphat being afraid of the children of Moab
and Ammon, that came against him, proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah 2 Chronicles. 20.1.3.
So Ezra being in fear of the enemy that lay in his way, proclaimed a fast
Ezra 8.27.23.
. And the Jews being afraid of Hamans decree, proclaimed a fast Hest 4.16.
and were delivered.

Seventhly, there are spirtuall evils, to wit, our sins, hardness of heart,
obstinacy, and the like, which are removed by repentance, prayer, and fasting:
for the proof hereof read these places. 1 Samuel 7.6. Nehem. 9.1. etc. Joel
2.12. etc. And this is the chiefest end of fasting, that our prayers might be
corroborated and strengthened for the appeasing of God, who is angry with us for
our sins; and for the purging of our souls by repentance; for both which,
the prayer of him that fasts aright, is very prevalent, and of great efficacy.

Thus we see, how temporal and spiritual evils may be removed from our
selves: we may now, in a word, consider how profitable fasting is, for the
removing of evils from others: and that first Temporal, thus Nehemiah fasts
for the removeall of the miseries which were in Jerusalem Nehem. 1.4.
, and David for the afflictions of his neighbors Psa. 35.23.
.

Secondly, Spiritual; thus Daniel fasts for the pardon of Isreal's sins Dan.
9.3
.

As we fast for the removeall of evils both Temporal and Spiritual, both from
our selves and others; so also for the procuring of good things, whether they
be I. Civil; or II. Spiritual.

First, sometimes we fast for the obtaining of some civil or politic
blessing, as for example, either 1 that just judgment may be administered,
thus wicked Iezabel upon an hypocritical pretense, commands a fast to be
celebrated, when Naboth was falsely to be accused 1 King. 21.9.
. Or 2 that Parliaments may succeed to the good of the commonwealth, to the
furtherance of religion, and to the glory of God. Or 3 that victory may be
obtained in war* thus Saul commanded the people to fast until the evening,
least that the pursuit of their enemies had been hindered 1 Samuel 14.24.
.

Secondly, sometimes we fast for the obtaining of some Spiritual blessing, or
grace, which we desire; to wit, first the preaching of the word; thus the
Apostles fasted, that the Gospel might be by the mercies of God, the more
published Acts 13.2.
. Saint Peter being to contend with Simon Magus before the Emperor, the Church
in Rome did fast for his good success Aug. Epist. ad Casulan.
. Saint John refused to write against Ebion the Heretic, except the whole
Church would fast Hierom. prolog. s. Matthew.
.

Secondly, we fast for the helping and furthering of the celebration of holy
duties. thus the Apostles when they ordain Pastors and Elders fast Act. 13.3.
and 14.23.
, that the duties which are required of them, and which they are to administer,
may be performed in the evidence of the Spirit. And therefore fasting were
requisite, and very convenient, first for Ministers in the preparation unto the
Lords day, that their prayers unto God might be the more effectual for
assistance in delivering of his word. And secondly, for people, that they might
the more earnestly implore the aid of God in the hearing of his word. And
thirdly for Fathers and Godfathers, the day before the Baptizing of the infant,
that their prayers may be the more fervent unto God for the infant, that it
may be baptized with water, and with the holy Spirit.

And fourthly, it is requisite for all the day before the celebration of the
Lords Supper; because the work which is to be performed is great, and of much
weight (being a covenant or contract between God and us) and because the
benefit is great if worthily performed; therefore it should not be undertaken
without the preparation of fasting and prayer. A man that is to come into great
bonds, is very wary (before he signs and seals them) to overlooke carefully
all the writings, to consider thoroughly of the purchase, to enquire diligently
into his own abilities, about the performance of the obligation, to consult
seriously with others of the title, whether that be good? and not rashly to do
any thing. Thus should every one do before the receiving of the Lords Supper,
carefully remembering these four things. First, it may be that which thou art
about to do, will tend to thy condemnation and destruction: for he that eats
and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation 1 Cor. 11.13.
.

Secondly, remember, that the condition of this obligation made betwixt God and
thee, is the delivering up of thy sins: and therefore how can thou perform
covenants with the Lord, if thou know not what thy sins are, nor where
they are, nor wherein thou offendest? which things are very hardly known
without prayer, fasting, meditation, and examining of out ways, works, words,
and thoughts. Thirdly, remember, it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the living God Heb. 10.31.
, because he is a consuming fire Heb. 12.29.
: And therefore what will become of thee, if thou hold not touch with him, and
be very careful, exactly to perform covenant. And Fourthly remember, that
these things considered, thou had better neglect all things (when thou art to
come unto the Lords Table) then thy preparation thereunto: And therefore the
day before thou come thither, give thy self to examination, meditation,
supplication and fasting. For the better taking up and understanding of this,
observe that there is a threefold fast; I. There is lejunium publicum, a
public and general fast: this is not altogether so convenient for our
examination and preparation unto the Lords Supper, but yet were fit enough, if
authority should enjoyne it. II. There is Iejunium privatum, a private and
particular fast, this is requisite for every man before he comes to partake
this holy Sacrament. III. There is private-publicum jejunium, private-publike
fast, and that is, when a Father of a Family sets the day of preparation unto
the holy Communion apart, both for himself, and all those within his gates,
who are to communicate, that so he may the better examine, how they are fitted,
and not suffer them to run into the danger of eternal death, by unworthy
receiving.

The last question here will be, Why we

To which I answer first, because it is profitable,

First, fasting is profitable unto the Body, because it increases and
continues health: the Fathers before the flood ate only herbs, and fruits,
and roots, and were long livers; the Essaei were very temperate, and lived
until they were very old Hist. Scolast.
, yea experience teaches us that cattle are more healthful, then men, because
they will not eat to excess (except it be a dog) but only for the satisfying
of nature.

Secondly, fasting is profitable for the Mind, as appears by these three
things. I. it inlightens the understanding. II. it strengthens the Mind unto
prayer. III. it availes unto Faith.

First, fasting cleares the eyes of the Mind, a man is more apt and better able
to understand, when he is fasting then when he is full, as may be proved by
these four reasons.

The first is Natural, the mind follows the temperature of the body; now
fasting begets more pure Spirits, feasting more troubled and gross: hence we
say, Aurora Musis semper amica meis, it is the best studying in the forenoone.

The second is Civil, the mind distracted by no employments, can discern of
a thing more clearly, and quietly; now (as was said before) when we fast, we
must forbear our ordinary and painful callings, that we may the better give
our selves to the examination of our selves and sins, and therefore fasting
helps the Mind to understand.

The third is Spiritual, because our affections are not then inflamed with the
fire of concupiscence and lust (as in feasting) neither is our judgment so
corrupt; but we can more clearly discern of the nature of sin, and virtue.

The fourth is Celestial, because God gives grace to those that fast aright,
as Daniel when he fasted, saw visions. And therefore if they be any thing
difficult, which we cannot understand, we must sharpen the Mind upon the
whetstone of Fasting; yea if we be weak in grace, and desire to be
strengthened, let us give our selves to those prevalent means of fasting and
prayer.

Secondly, fasting strengthens the Mind unto prayer, wherefore the Apostle
conjoynes them 1 Cor. 7.^.
. And therefore when upon any extraordinary occasion we desire that our prayers
might prevail with God, we must strengthen them with fasting.

Thirdly, fasting availes unto faith: read Matthew 17.19.20.21. where our
blessed Savior himself expressly lays down this double conclusion unto his
Apostles, first that they cannot cast out devils without faith; and secondly,
that this faith cannot be had, without fasting and prayer.

Fourthly, fasting is profitable for the Soul in these regards. First, it
obtaines pardon and forgiveness of sin at Gods hands, as we see in the
Ninivites fast Jonah 3.8.10.
, for although fasting and humiliation be not a satisfaction for sin, yet it
is a testimony of sincerity, that we both abhor our bypast sins, and
desire to leave them. Secondly, fasting weakens the power and rebellion of the
flesh, and does with more ease withstand the assaults of Satan, yea overcome
him. Thus we see that fasting is profitable.

Secondly, we must fast because it is necessary, and that in these two regards:
first, because it Levit. 16.2^ and 23.27. and Numb. 29.7. and 30.14. and Joel
1.14. and 2.15. and Matt. 6.16. and 9.15. In all which places we are commanded
to humble our selves by fasting, and therefore it is necessary that sometimes
we should fast. Secondly fasting is a part of Gods worship: and therefore the
Pharisee, boasting of his service, amongst other duties, reckons up fasting
Luke 18.11
: And thus Anna is said to worship God by fasting and prayer Luke 2.37.
; and thus Paul would have all good widows do 1 Timothy 5 5.
, that is, a pure and absolute fast, accompanied with prayer, repentance, and
other holy duties, is a part of Gods worship, and therefore unto the Soul of
him that fasts, is very profitable.

Thirdly, we must fast, because we have such Israel, Iosaphat, Ezra, Nehemiah,
Hester, Mordecai, David, Jeremy, Paul, yea (in this verse) Christ himself.
And therefore there is great reason, that sometimes we should fast, seeing it is
both profitable and necessary, and has been practiced by such bright and
clear lights.

VERSE. 3. Then the tempter came unto him,
. 1. Tunc, then, as Saint Luke has it, Luke

What did Christ in the wilderness all these

To this I answer; first, this is a curious question, Augustine: What did God,
before the creation of the world, to whom he answered, that he made hell for
such curious ones.

Secondly, it is likely, yea most certain, that

Thirdly, some Bunting.
say, that in those forty days, Arabia Petraea, and went unto the mount
Olivet, where the law was given, that there he might begin the conflict with
Satan.

Fourthly, in that time he was tempted by the Evangelist verse 1. Jesus was led
into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil. And Saint Mark plainly,
Jesus was there in the wilderness forty days tempted of Satan Mark. 1.13.
,

Hence arises a second quaere, How does Matthew agree with himself, and with
his fellow Evangelist Saint Mark, for Matthew Chapter 4 verse 1 says, Jesus
was led aside into the wilderness, to be tempted of the devil: and Saint
Mark says, Jesus was there in the wilderness tempted, etc. But Saint Luke,
Chapter 4.3. and Saint Matthew in this third verse in sense says, Tunc, then
(when Christ's 40. days fast was finished) came the tempter unto him.

Mark did not think that Christ was tempted before the forty days were
expired, but afterward: but this me thinks can scarcely agree with the word
there used (...), (although reverend Beza be of this mind) because it is not a
participle of the pretertense; and besides it does denote the place where he
was first assaulted by Satan, rather then the time when he began to be tempted.

Mark says) but not with these temptations mentioned by Saint Matthew in this
place; till after the 40. days were finished Beda s. and Camara. qu. 208.
, but because some yet may doubt, how the Evangelists agree, Saint Luke say^ng,
that Christ was forty days tempted of the devil in the wilderness Luke 4.1.2.
; and Saint Matthew implying in this verse, that the devil came not unto
Christ, until after the expiration of the forty days?

Mark 1.13. and Saint Luke 4.2. means: but after the 40. days were ended, he
comes visibly unto him, tempting him with those temptations which are expressed
by Saint Matthew in this Chapter.

Then the tempter came unto him:] The devil comes armed against Christ with a
threefold dart; the first is of the belly or gluttony; the second of fame and
credit; the third of gain and profit. The I. is the concupiscence of the
flesh: the II. is the pride of life: the III. is the lust of the eyes.

Satan's first temptation is in the desires of the belly, which is both most
present (because meat must be had) and most powerful and strong, because
venture non habet aures, the belly will take no denial, but like the
horsleeches daughter cries, give, give: where we may observe how he begins
with the second Adam, as he did with the first, at the Belly.

he was hungry) If they be lawful, why then does not Christ satisfy them by
making stones bread?



If thou be the son of God:] Why does

Chrysos. sup.
say because he doubted whether he were or not: for first, he knew the Angels
message unto Mary, Luke 1. and unto the shepherds Luke 2. and the journey of
the Wisemen, the disputation and determination of the Doctors, the testimonies
given of him in his Baptism, both by the dove alighting upon him, and of John,
and of the voice of God from heaven; and therefore he thought that he was the
Son of God. But secondly, on the other side he saw him poor, and perceived
him to be hungry, and therefore doubting whether he were or not, he says, If
thou be the Son of God.

Secondly, the devil did this, because he would Son of God or not; seeing
that having fasted now so long, and being at the present hungry, yet nothing
was provided for him:

How does the devil tempt us hereunto?

First, sometimes by our selves, making us Job in those words, although the
Lord kill me yet will I trust in him Job. 13.15.
; seems to imply that he fears God will kill him. Thus David cries out my
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me Psa. 22.1.2 and 88.1.2.
.

Secondly, sometimes the devil tempts us hereunto by others, using them as
instruments Job was tempted by his wife when she said unto him, Do thou
still retain thine integrity? curse God and die Job. 2.9.
. Thus David was tempted, many saying unto him that there was no help for him
in his God Psa. 3.2. and 22.7.8.
: yea the heathen reproaching him, and saying, where is now thy God Psa. 115.2.
; Thus Senacherib tempts Hezekiah to distrust God, Esa. 36.7.10.15.18.

. 4. Command that these stones be made bread.]

What is meant by these words?

First, some say they have an Allegorical sense Abraham.

Secondly, the scope of the words is Historical,

Seeing the action, the devil persuades unto is lawful, why does not Christ
do it? that it stony rock for his children the Israelites; and out of the jaw
bone of an Ass, for the refreshing of Sampson; he fed Elias with Crows and
with meat from heaven: he satisfied hungry Israel with Manna; and Christ with
bread and fish. John 21.19.

II. Because Christ himself else where does as much, as the devil here tempts
him unto; for he changes water into wine Ioh. 2.7.
, and therefore why not stones into bread?

Christ would not do this both for the Counselor; he would not believe, or
obey the Devil. Counsel; and that both in General, because that which may
be lawful in Thesi, in regard of the substance, may be unlawful in
Hypothesi, in the circumstances thereof. Particular, and that both because He
was not led aside by the Spirit into the wilderness, to work miracles, or to
demonstrate his Deity, but his humanity rather. His hunger was to be overcome
by suffering, not by eating.




Christ would not turn stones into bread, because he would not obey or believe
the Counselor that gave the advice: Mark. ^. 34. and Luke 4.41.
, neither would Paul brook it, that the maid possessed with the Devil, should
testify of him, that he was the servant of the true God Act. 16.18.
.



good Angels ministering Spirits for the comfort of his children Heb. 1.7.
, but not the evil Angels; never making use of them, except first it be to,
or for the destruction of some, as Christ suffers them to go into the Herd of
Swine, who thereupon were drowned: yea hence the eternal fire of hell is
called the condemnation of the Devil (in Scripture) because the Lord uses him
as an instrument, to torment those that would not obey him.

Or secondly, the Lord makes use of Satan to delude and deceive those that are
obstinate in wickedness; thus the Devil deceived Achab 1 King. 22.21.
and 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
does daily Antichrist and his followers 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
.

Or thirdly, the Lord makes use of the Devil for the trial of his children:
thus he suffers him to tempt holy David, to see whether he would number the
people, or not 2 Samuel 24.
. Thus he suffers him to try whether holy Job will continue in his integrity,
notwithstanding his stupendous afflictions Job. 1. and 2.
. Thus he sifts Peter, Luke 22.31. and buffets Paul, 2 Cor. 12.7. Thus the
Lord uses him always as an enemy, never as a counselor to advise, or a
Doctor to teach and instruct; and therefore we must never believe him, but
always suspect him.

Lying Spirit, (1. King. 22.21.) an old lier, and the Father of lies Ioh. 8.44
, who is crafty to deceive, being able to transform himself into an Angel
of light 2 Cor. 11.14.
. And whatsoever he does or says, he does it, that he may deceive.



bona da^do, by giving good things unto us, that thus he may the more speedily
gain us unto himself: he promises temporal gain unto us, that he might
gain our precious souls: ditat in mundo, ne ditemur in coelo Chrysos. s.
: he does enrich us with earthly blessings, lest we should be enriched with
heavenly mercies: he oftentimes cures bodies, that he may kill souls.

Secondly, sometimes the Devil deceives, vera dicendo, by speaking the truth:
thus he deluded the Pharisees by a false collection, he taught them, that
they must love their brethren and friends; and this was a truth taken from the
law Lev. 19.18.
: but from that ground, by the rule of contraries, he teaches them to hate
their enemies Matthew. 5.43.
, and this was contrary unto the Law. The Sabbath must be kept and observed;
so says the Law, Exodus, 20. therefore the works of mercy must not be done
upon that day: this is the Devils deduction. Blasphemy it is to make a man
equal unto God, this is truth; but that Christ was a blasphemer, because he
made himself equal with God, was one of the Devils slanders Ioh 5.18
. Satan is said to be a liar from the beginning, because he began with the
first man at this weapon: Ye shall know good and evil, (says Satan)
therefore ye shall be like God himself: this was a lying conclusion. And
therefore as Aristotle was wont to say of a liar, so says Chrysostom of the
Devil, Non credendum Satanae, licet verum dicat, trust him not, though he
speak the truth; but learn to stop our ears against all his enchanting
persuasions, that although he charm never so wisely, yet we may be like deaf
Adders, not listening at all to his bewitching songs.

How does the Devil come unto us, how does

I answer, He does not come unto us, external, or internal. First, the
Devil has external allurements to entice us by; as for example, one has
lost a Gold Ring, or a Silver Spoone; another has his son sick, or his
horse or hog sick: here the Devil persuades to go unto a Witch, who can
help the sick, and restore the thing lost: but let us remember, that there is
a God in Israel, and therefore let us give our selves unto him, and seek aid
and succor of him, and not from the Devil.

Secondly, the Devil has internal enticements, to allure us: viz. First our
own evil concupiscence, so long as sin is pleasing unto us and therefore
let us fight against this lust, which wars against our soul 1 Pet. 2.1^.
. Secondly, our own wisdom; for reason dictates and teaches many things unto
us, contrary unto Gods word, yea often times those things which are not false
principles, but false consequences from true antecedents; as for example, the
Sabbath was made for man, therefore man may lawfully break the Sabbath. By
lying we may help our brethren, or save our selves from danger, therefore it
is lawful to lie in such a case. Usury is profitable for a Commonwealth,
therefore it is by no means to be abolished. Thus as Christ can bring light
out of darkness, and good out of evil: so the Devil can suck evil from
good; and, with the Spider, change wholesome juice into mortal poison.

Secondly, Christ would not turn Stones into Bread, because the counsel given
was inconvenient, and therefore though the thing in it self might have been
done, yet in regard of the circumstances, it might become unlawful: Teaching
us, that that thing, which is lawful in general, may in the circumstances be
unlawful. It was lawful for the Israelites to offer sacrifice unto God, and
yet some circumstances made their sacrifices execrable and abominable unto him
Esa 66.3
. It was allowed also unto them by God, Esa 1.13.14. Amos 5.21.
. It is lawful for Christians to eat flesh, but if it do offend a weak
brother, it becomes unlawful unto us to do it, if it be in our power or
choice to do it, or not to do it.





The second rule is Charity, we must not offend a brother for whom Christ
died, by that which we do.

The third rule is decency or comeliness, which is described by the holy
Scriptures in three words. The first is (...), Comely 1 Cor. 11 13.
. Judge you (says the Apostle) if it be comely for a woman to pray uncovered.
Wherein he teaches us to do those things which becomes us, and our
profession, we being called unto a holy calling Ephesians. 5.3.
, and women must do the^ works which become women professing the Gospel 1 Timothy 2.10.
. And Titus must speak those things which become sound Doctrine Tit. 2.1.
; which places teach us, that we must not only do those things which are
good, but also which are comely, and beseeming us.

The second, word is (...), honestly, or de^^^ly: Let us walk decently, as in
the day Romans 13 23.
, and honestly toward them that are without 1 Thessalonians. 4.12.
.

The third word is (...): let all things be done (...), decently and in order 1
Cor. 14.40.
, for it is a cause of rejoicing unto the righteous to see this, as Saint Paul
said, I rejoice beholding your order Col. 2.5.
. And thus things lawful in themselves may become unlawful unto us, if either
first we do them not well for the manner of them, but for some base or by
end; or if secondly we offend our brethren when we need not by any impulsive
command; or thirdly, when we do those things which are undecent, uncomely,
disorderly, or not beseeming our places, or persons, or professions. And
therefore it is not sufficient to say (as some do) this is not a sin; for
although it be not in the substance, yet it may be so unto thee, in regard of
the circumstances thereof; wherefore we must examine our actions by these three
rules, Faith, Charity, Decency. First, examine what thou do by the rule of
Faith; and herein observe these two things An Bonum sit. An Been fiat.
First examine, whether that which thou do be good or not, and that out of
thine own knowledge, for nothing must be done with a doubting faith Romans
14.22.24
for that pollutes and defiles the conscience 1 Cor. 8.7.
. And therefore remember, if it be not certain, that thou may lawfully do
that which thou desire, it is most certain thou may lawfully abstain from
doing it: as for example; if thou be not certainly assured of the lawfulnes of
Usury, or of recreations, upon the Sabbath day, or of going to law with thy
brother; thou may be assured that it is lawful to abstain from these; and
therefore rather forbear that which is certainly lawful; then do that which
is disputable, controverted, and consequently uncertainely lawful. Secondly,
examine, whether that which thou do be well done or not; And herein search
into these two things, I. In general, if thou do it Sincere, with a sincere
heart. Deus remunerat adverbia Bern.
, God does not always reward Bonum a thing which is good for the substance of
it, or good materially; but always, been, that which is formally good, done
well, and with a sincere heart. If a Justice of Peace, or a Judge upon the
Bench, execute Justice, with anger, or hatred or revenge; it is bonum, a good
thing to execute just judgment, but not been thus to execute it. If an
hypocrite pray, that he may the better devour widows houses; this prayer
shall not be rewarded, because although to pray be bonum, yet thus to pray is
not been.

II. In particular, examine if thou do that which thou do Secure safely; to
wit, if thou do not tempt God in the doing thereof, by approaching too near
the gates of sin. There are certain cords of vanity, which draw on iniquity
as with cart-ropes Esa. 5.18.
from which all ought to abstain, but principally those that are infirm and
weak; and it becomes every particular person, to acknowledge his infirmities,
and consequently to avoid all the occasions of sin.

Secondly, examine what thou do, by the rule of Charity; and here three
things are to be enquired into. First, Vtrum ad perniciem, will not this which
thou do tend to the destruction of thy brothers soul? Do thou not lay a
stumbling block in his way Romans 14.13.
, and so become the occasioner of his fall 1 Cor. 8.9.10
: Thou know (or at least think) that to be lawful which thou do; but
another is not certain, that it is lawful, and yet does it because of thy
example, whence thou becomest a murderer unto thy brother Romans 14.15. and 1
Cor. 8.11.
.

Secondly examine, utrum ad scandalum; will not this which thou do offend thy
brother? This thou must be very careful of, To give no offense either to the
Jew, or to the Greek, or to the Church of God 1 Cor. 10.32. and ^. last verse.
and Romans 14.20.
.

Thirdly, Vtrum ad da^^^um; will not this which thou do tend to thy brothers
damage and loss? A man must not burn his own house, that his neighbors may
be fired also.

Thirdly, examine what thou do by the law of Decency, whether it becomes thee
to do it, or not, either in regard of thy person or place? As for example,
First, does it beseem thee as thou art a Christian, and a professor of the
Gospel: Stems sprung from princely stocks should not bear any base fruit;
Kings Sons should not like poor boys take in the Chanells; and true
Christians who are the children of God should not do any base or unbeseeming
thing, applying themselves to gather the thick clay of this world together,
but should have their affections heightened and exalted unto heavenly things.

Secondly, does that, which thou do, become thee, as thou art a Magistrate;
thou art called to govern others, and therefore thou must be magnanimous,
grave, and unblameable. Thirdly, or as thou a Pastor; sound doctrine becomes
such, and not fables or needless trifles. Fourthly, or as thou art a Father of
a family; thou governest privately others, and therefore thou must so govern
thy self, that thou give no evil example to thy Children or Servants. Fifthly,
or as thou art a wife, a child or a servant; thou must be subject, and
obedient. Sixthly, or as thou art an old man: thou must be an example of
gravity, sobriety, and piety unto others, and not wa^^on, or light, or vain,
making thy self by that means, either a reproach or a laughing stock unto
others. Whosoever in that which he does, transgresses either the law of
Charity, Faith, or Decency, is condemned by the Apostle. Romans 14. 1 Cor. 8.

Some here object, if circumstances may make a good thing evil, then a good
intention will justify an evil action, by the rule of contraries; for
contrarierum cadem est ratio.

The reason here is not alike, as appears thus, First, a pari from the like
instance, the touch of a polluted thing (under the leviticall law) polluted the
toucher, but the touch of a sanctified or holy thing did not sanctify the
person touching it Hag. 2.13.
.

Secondly retione, by this reason, because Bonum a good thing is a positive
word, not a comparative, and therefore is to be predicated absolutely, not
relatively or comparatively: but Malum an evil thing, is a privative word,
contradictory to Bonu^ good: Bonu^ quod omniu^ bonu^, at Malum quod aliqua
part malum: that is called good which is altogether and in every respect good,
but that is called evil, which is in any regard, or in any part thereof evil:
as for example, that is called wholesome which is altogether such, but that is
called unwholesome, which is so only in part. A spoonefull of poison will spoil
and infect a whole flaggon of wine, but a spoonefull of wine will not purge
from all infection, and harm, a pot of poison: yea whether wine be powered into
the poison, or poison into the wine, both are alike mortal.

Thus we have seen how that Christ would not turn stones into bread, because
he would not obey or believe the Counselor (the devil) as also because that,
which was lawful in general might prove sinful in the circumstances: I
proceed therefore to the next.

Christ would not change stones into bread, because he was not led aside of
the Spirit in the wilderness to work miracles: he had a calling to help
others by his miracles, but not himself in this place: to teach us that we
must not undertake or enterprise any thing without a calling: but of this
before, and therefore I omit it, coming unto the last particular, which is this.

Christ would not command the stones to be made bread, because Satan and his,
hunger was to be overcome by patience and quiet suffering, not by signs and
miracles Chrysostom. sup.
; teaching us hereby ordinary means, not upon miracles: or in those things,
wherein we are destitute of ordinary means, we must be patient, and contented,
because this is the object of patience.

Why may we not have recourse to indirect means (when direct and lawful are
wanting) for the relieving of our necessity and supplying of our wants?

First, because it is the decree of God thus to try thee: nothing can come into
thee without the divine and special providence of God, and therefore thou must
do as David did who durst not avenge himself upon Shemei, because God bad him
curse and revile him 2 Samuel 16.10.
; remembering also that thou art called to suffer Phil. 1.2^.
, and therefore thou must not labor to remove away thy sufferings by unlawful
means.

Secondly, because the use of the means alters nothing: the neglect of
lawful means accuses thee, but it does not change the decree of God Acts.
3.1^
: And therefore seeing we cannot resist the will of God, or make void his
immutable decree by any thing we do, we should not at any time, or upon any
occasion fly unto the use of unlawful means.

Thirdly, we are never destitute of lawful and therefore never should use
unlawful: to say that in our necessities, dangers, distresses, and streights
we are deprived of lawful means, were to say, that God were unfaithful in
his promises, who has said, I will never fa^le thee, I will never forsake
thee; and therefore this is not so much as to be whispered. For the confirming
of the truth of this answer, observe, that in all our necessities we have a
double help, or means to use and fly unto for succor.

First, fasting and prayer which is a very forcible and effectual remedy,
against either temporal or spiritual dangers and evils.

Secondly, hope of the divine aid and assistance of God; and that both in
rewarding thy sufferings hereafter, and in enabling thee here to undergo what
he lays upon thee, and in his due time removing the evil from thee 1 Cor.
10.13
.



Necessitas rerum, a necessity of riches, or an estate, or of the things of
this world: thus tradesmen say, they cannot live and gain, except they
deceive, and lie: thus poor men say, they must steal and pilfer, otherwise
they and their little ones must starve: but these must know that there is no
necessity of sinning: better gain little, then loose the soul; better starve
then steal.

Secondly, there is Necessitas vitae, a necessity of life: Thus some, if their
children be sick, repair to the wisards and witches: thus subjects rebel
against tyrants, persecuting both their persons and profession: but those must
remember, that their children had better dye, then live by the devils help:
and these must know, that they owe obedience unto superiors, either active or
passive, and to rebel is contrary to the practice of the primitive Church Lege
Apolog. Justin. and A Tertul.
. Certainly, it is lawful to rise up against, and withstand invaders (as the
Machabees did) but not against lawful Kings, though they, forgetting the
office of Kings should tyrannize over their subjects.

Thirdly, there is Necessitas animae, a necessity of the soul, to preserve it
from sin; or to free it from concupiscence: Thus Lucretia murdered her
self, because Tarquin had ravished her: and some kill themselves rather then
they will be defloured: But these must remember, that they pollute the soul by
one sin, while they shun the pollution of another: yea it is themselves
that contaminate their souls which were not defiled by an others fault: it was
no sin in Lucretia to be forced violently against her will, (for that was
Tarquius fault that ravished her, and in him a heinous sin) but it was in her
a notorious sin, to kill her self. To conclude, Vincit qui patitur,
affliction is to be borne, temptations are to be withstood, I. by prayer. II.
by watchfulness in them, and against them. III. by hope and expectation of the
divine help and assistance of God: but IV. never by the use of wicked or
indirect means.

VERSE. 4. But he answered and said, it is written,
. 1. It is written.] Christ fights against Satan

Why did Christ this?

I answer First, because this is the best and most Ephesians. 6.17.
, able both to defend us, and offend our enemy Heb. 1.3.
, it being the sword of Gods mouth, 2 These. 2. able to confound the adversary
thereof, and make the obedient thereunto wise unto salvation.

Secondly, Christ did this, to teach us, that nothing Heb. 4.12.
; Adam had figleaves to cover his shame, and never was truly awakened, until
the word of the Lord comes unto him saying, Adam where art thou Genesis 3.7.
?

Who in such like cases use any other weapons?

I answer,

Secondly, some persuade themselves, that they can drive away the devil by
their exorcismes, conjurations or the like. Thus the Papalins use these
remedies against the devil. I. their sacramental consecrated wafer cakes. II.
holy water. III. the sound of consecrated belles. IV. the sign of the cross.
V. the Gospel of Saint John hung about their necks. VI. the name of God, or of
Christ. VII. verses, per crucis hoc signu^, etc. and diverse other ridiculous
things, which are too foolish or frivolous to overcome or expel Satan: the
devil seems to fear these, but he does but feign, that he may deceive the
users of them; for it is only the word of God, that he fears, the weapons
wherewithal our Savior foiles him.

But the Papists may here object, it is the word John's Gospel, and the name of
God, etc. are the word of God, and therefore a warrantable remedy against the
devil,

The word of God profits us, if we use it aright that is, First, it profits
not, Scheva Act, 19.
, they adjure the devil by Jesus, whom the Apostle preached, but he obeyes
them not, but wounds them to their hurt. Secondly, it profits, when it is
applied by faith; for thus this strong man is overcome 1 Pet. 5.9.
.


Who are enemies unto this weapon of the word of God?





Deuteronomy 6.7, 8.
, and to be diligently studied night and day Psalm. 1.2
, and to be read to all the people, as Josias did 2 Chronicles. 34.30.
, and Nehemias also, Chapter 8. These are contrary to Christ's practice here,
and to his precept elsewhere, commanding to search the Scriptures John 5.39.
. These are not like those noble Bereans, whom Saint Paul commends, that turned
over their books, to see whether the Apostle taught them according to the
Scriptures or not Act. 17.11.
.

But here the Papists object, the Scriptures

Origin.

Elephant may swim, and shallow places, where a Lamb may wade over: yea all
necessary truths are plainly expressed.

necessary darts, yea, the principal darte against Satan. Yea why does the
Church of Rome thus prohihite the Scriptures? because they are dangerous, that
is, because there is indeed great fear and danger, that the reading of this
divine truth will detect, and lay open the Popish errors, which they cannot
endure should be disclosed.

1 Cor. 2 14.
. Or secondly, because although thou understandest, what thou hear and
read, yet thou love the world better then God; thy body better then thy
soul, and thy pleasure, more then thy eternal bliss. Or thirdly, this is
because thou can not brook or endure the reproves of the word of God: it
does not praise thee, but blame thee, and therefore thou hate it, as Ahab did
Michai^h. But thou must consider, that if thou would not sin, the Minister
would not reprehend thee for sin; and if thou would abound in good works,
he would praise thee: In the mean rhyme he must take care of thee, and not be
wanting in reproves, until thou be reformed, because that is the profitable
balm, to cure thy sick soul. And therefore, hear, read, learn, and obey
the word, yea labor, that thou may be rich in the knowledge thereof Colos.
3.16.
, that so thou may be made wise unto salvation, and surely armed against all
the fiery darts of Satan.

. 2. Man lives not by bread alone:] Satan Man lives not by bread alone?

First, that he might show that he was a man, obedientia ejus, obedientia
hominis Chrysostom
, the obedience of Christ, was the obedience of man.

Secondly, that he might teach us that his

. 3. But by every word that proceeds out of ] that is, by any thing, that God
in his good pleasure wills to be our food: or by any thing else besides bread,
whatsoever God shall think good.

Hence observe two things; First, things in

Secondly, observe God is not tied to the second

Secondly, God sometimes works with ordinary, but those weak and insufficient
means in the order of nature: thus Asa believes, that it is nothing with God
to help, whether with many, or with them, that have no power 2 Chro. 14.11.
; yea examples we have hereof in the book of God, as when the figs healed
Hezekiahs sore 2 King. 20.7.
; when Jacobs rods, made the sheep bring forth party-colored lambs. Genesis
30.37.38. when the wind brought quails. Exodus 16.30. etc. when Gideons 300.
soldiers got the victory Judge. 7.22.
, and Jonathan and his man. 1 Samuel 14.6. when Elijah went in the strength of
h^s meat forty days 1 King. 19.^.
. All these were wrought by ordinary means, but the means in themselves were
altogether ineffectuall for the effecting of such great works, as these were.

Thirdly, God sometimes works by means altogether unusual and unwonted, such
as was Manna in the Desert: so without the Sun he caused light to shine
forth, either out of the whole Chaos, or else out of the element of fire, at the
first creation: so without rain at the same time, the earth was fruitful: And
thus with the noise of Rammes-bornes the walls of Jericho fell down.

Fourthly, God sometimes works with quite contrary means: as Christ healed
the blind man's eyes with clay and spittle Ioh. 9.6.7.
, and Jonas is saved by being in the whales belly Iona. 2.10.
.

VERSE. 5. Then the devil takes him up into the holy city, and sets him on
a pinnacle of the Temple.
Then the devil takes him up:] It is questioned here, Musculus thinks, that
these things are not curiously to be enquired or searched out: yet (I hope) we
may safely answer; Origin in times past, and the Anabaptists at this day.

Chrysostom (oper. imperf.) answers, that it was easy for him to do it by the
power of Christ: for if Habakkuck could be transported from Judea into Babylon,
and seen of none, then why not Christ?

Cum audis ductum, ne cogita potentiam Sathana, sed patientiam Christi: in
Domino non infirmitas sed patientia; in Sathana non virtus sed superbia
Chrysostom. oper. imperf. s.
: when thou hear, that Christ was taken up by Satan, think not of the
power of the devil, but of the patience of Christ, for in him is no weakness
but patience; and in the devil no power but pride, who thought that he did
this by his own power, because Christ did not resist him at all herein.

Into the holy City.] What City was









Why is the Church called holy, when she is

First, because she is consecrated to holy uses; Romans 3.2.
, and religion is professed there, wherefore she is called holy Dan. 9.24.
.

Secondly, because she ought to be such, the Pet. 1.15.

Thirdly, because God accepts of our weak,

VERSE. 6. And says unto him,
. 1. If thou be the Son of God.] Before (verse 2.) the Devil seems to
doubt, whether thou art the Son of God. Where we see before he tempted him
unto Diffidencie, and distrust, and would have had Christ to make trial,
whether he were the Son of God, or not: now he tempts him to Confidence and
assurance, the opposite of diffidence, that because he is certainly the Son
of God, he may therefore safely throw himself from the pinnacle, for he
cannot be endangered thereby.

Why does Satan allure us unto contraries,

First, not because he is opposite unto himself;

Secondly, because vice is not only opposite

Thirdly, because often our minds change, which being observed by Satan, he
changes we are puffed up, and grow proud of our performances. Thus as Polypus,
for his own advantage, can take upon him the color of a fish, or of a rock,
so this enemy of mankind, Polypus and Protens like, can change himself into
every shape, and suit himself unto every disposition.

For it is written.] The Papists object this place for the proof of the
necessity of humane traditions,

Christ, our Savior does not forsake the word, and fly unto Traditions, but
still uses this weapon, until he have conquered his enemy the devil. The
devil objecting here, it is written, etc. Christ does not answer him, Traditum
est, but Scriptum est, it is written, and not delivered by tradition: And
therefore by our Saviors example we are not to leave the Scriptures, but
cleave the more close unto them, because the devil and wicked men abuse them.

It is written.] The Devil uses no Scripture,

Secondly, he repaires not unto the Scripture; until he be so straightned,
that he knows not how otherwise to unwind himself. Thus oftentimes do wicked
men, pervert the sense of the scripture, when otherwise they cannot maintain
their practices. Thirdly, to patronise and defend sin, by the word of God, is
to make God a patron and defender of sin, which is a monstrous impiety.



We are saved by grace (said the blessed Apostle Ephesians. 2.9.
) therefore we may sin that grace may abound, say these wicked ones Romans 6.1
2.
.

Ex veris nil nisi verum, from true propositions,

falso citando, by corrupting and false citing of them, and this is done one of
these two ways, either first Addendo, by adding to the word of God as Evah
said, fortee, lest perhaps ye die, whereas God had said Morte morieris,
positively, thou shall die the death. Thus the Pharisees, add unto the word of
God; the law says, thou shall love thy neighbor; therefore (say they) thou
shall hate thy enemy. Or Secondly, this is done Omittendo, by omitting some
thing, as the Devil does here, It is written (says he) God will give his
Angels charge to keep thee, that thou dash not thy foot against a stone; but
he leaves out the maine thing, in vijs tuis Psa. 91.11.
to keep thee in thy ways, now he tempted Christ to an unwarrantable
tempting of Gods providence, and therefore would have had him thus to go out
of his way, wherefore fraudulently, he keeps back that particular, in thy
ways.

Secondly, this may be done, falso explicando, by a wrong sense and
interpretation; or by a false explication of the words. Thus Usurers abuse the
parable of the talents; and Papists falsely explicate these Scriptures; He gave
to every man a penny, Mat. 20. And he shall not come out until he have paid
the uttermost Farthing. And behold here are two swords. And avoid an heretic,
and diverse others, of which (God assisting me) in their proper places.

Thirdly, this is done falso applicando, by a false application of the
Scripture, or by a wrong deduction, by a begging of the question: Thus the
Papists abuse Daniel, God is called by him, the Ancient of days, therefore
they may paint him like an old man: the Jews say, it is blasphemy for man to
equal himself with God, therefore Christ blasphemes: Who can recko^ up the
genealogy of the Messiah, but they ca^ reckon up Christ's (as Matthew and Luke
do) both by Joseph and Mary, and therefore he is not the Messiah. Thus errors
may be built upon the Scripture by a false application of them. And therefore
we had need be very wary, and cautelous, both how we read and hear, and
expound, and apply the Scriptures; and when any false teachers, or Satan, or
our own corrupt heart would teach us to find out Scripture for the
strengthening or maintaining of sin, or error, let us say as old Isaac said,
this is Jacobs smooth voice, but Esaus rough hands? The words are Gods, but
this sense, explication, and application is the Devils.

. 3. He will give his Angels charge ever thee, The Devils scope is here, to
draw Christ unto presumption, and he endeavors it by fair glosses, and sweet
blandishments, viz. First (says he) there is no danger in the thing at all,
neither any cause of fear, for thou shall be kept and preserved by the
Angels. Yea, Secondly, thou may be assured of it, for Deus jussit, God has
commanded his Angels concerning thee, and therefore they dare not but look
carefully unto thee; wherefore mitte te deorsum, cast thy self down. From
whence we may observe, and good for food, and the end was good also being
knowledge and honor Genesis 3.4.5.
. Hence unlawful delights are called the pleasures of sin, because sin
seems full of pleasure and delight; the devil is a subtle fowler, that
deceives us with his sweet music; and like the Panther hides his devouring
jaws, letting us see nothing but a fair, delectable and sweet smelling skin;
he can cry like a Crocodile, until he have drawn us out of our way; he will
embrace us with a Ioabs arm, and salute us with a Iudases kiss; yea his care
is not to terrify us, but to allure us.



Romans 6.23.
, and no better then Circes cup, which of men, will make us beasts; and
therefore let us withstand all the temptations of Satan, with the
consideration of the end of sin.

Secondly, the devil deludes and deceives us, by making us to presume of
pardon; he tells us, Si quoties peccant homines sua fulmina mittat, if God
were as severe as some make him, none could be saved; but he is not ready to
punish, but rather to pardon; he will accept of us at any time, though at the
last gasp, as he did the thief upon the cross: yea if we will believe him, he
will tell us, that we need not fear though our sins be great, for great
Saints have been as great sinners as we are: David was an adulterer; Noah a
drunkard; Lot an incestuous person, yea Christ came to save sinners; and
therefore thou may presume of pardon: But we must remember, that Christ came
to save only penitent sinners, not impenitent: there were many thieves,
adulterers, drunkards, incestuous persons, etc. whereof were saved, vel duo,
vel nem^, very few; there were many widows in Israel, but the Prophet was sent
to none, but to her alone of Sarepta. Why did Christ save one thief upon the
Cross? Because none should despair of mercy, upon the condition of true
repentance. Why did Christ save but only one, (that we read of) at life's last
period? Because he would have none to presume of mercy, and to procrastinate
their repentance.

VERSE. 7. Jesus said unto him, It is written again,
. 1. It is written again.] Is the Scripture contrary

No: but our Lord hereby shows, Numb. 23.19.
, neither are his words our words Esa. 55.8
, and therefore his words remain the same for ever Esa. 40.
, one sentence of Scripture is not contrary to another, but they all make up
one truth, and all proceed from one mouth, which cannot fail. Truth is one,
immutable, and constant, and can never become a lie, or false: but the word is
truth; sanctify them Father with thy truth: what is that? thy word is (not
true only, but) Truth Ioh. 17.17.
.

It is written again.] Satan abuses Scripture, (and as it were prophanes it)
yet Christ nothstanding this, gives it not over; but keeps him close to his
guard, with this Sword of the Spirit in his mouth, and hand, Scriptum est, it
is

Here diverse questions will be made.

What is the Scripture, the use whereof we

It is the word of God written by the Prophets and Apostles, 2 Pet. 1.19.20.
. The words of the Prophets and Apostles, were the words of God: hence ever and
anon they say, Thus says the Lord, because the Lord spoke in and by them. The
Papists believe the Scriptures to be the word of God, and prove it too, but by
an argument, which the Philosopher will not approve of, viz. Probatione
circulari, treading out this truth like a horse in a mill, in this manner; The
Scripture is the word of God, because the Church teaches us so: the testimony
of the Church they think infallible, because it is guided by the Spirit of
God: they are sure it is guided by the Spirit of God, because the Scripture
says so Ioh. 16.13.
, and thus they run at the ring, ending where they began.

If the Scripture be not known to be the

For answer hereunto, Page 1. only adding one answer more to those many: It
appears that the Scriptures are the word of God, by comparing of them with all
other books, writings, and writers: for the amplifying whereof, take notice of
three sorts of Books; under. one of which ranks, all sorts of books and
writings may be included, viz. First, Humane Secondly, Ecclesiastical.
Thirdly, Divine.

First, Humane books are books written by men (either in the Church of God,
or out of it) of humane things, as Philosophical Books, or Rhetorical
books, or Political books, or books of any other humane Art or Science.
These are not divine books, but humane, not the books of God, but the
writings of men, having both the matter, manner, method, and style from men:
And therefore these are not authentical books, in all things to be believed,
which they affirm.

Secondly, Ecclesiastical books are those which are written by holy (or at
least learned) men, in the Church, containing divine things: Now these writings
are to be admitted, and are called the word of God, as far as they
sympathize, consent, and agree with the word of God: but they are not
authentical of themselves, but as they depend upon the Scripture, and speak
her true language. These writings, I say, are (...), worthy to be believed, but
not of themselves to be believed, nor any further than they accord with the
word of God.

Thirdly, Divine books are the books of God, written by the Prophets and
Apostles; which books are the word of God, the Prophets and Apostles being
only instruments (Penmen thereof) and the holy Ghost the Dictator, who
endites unto them, both the matter, and manner, and the very words: and
therefore is called aright the word of God, and are (...), of themselves to be
believed, because the writers were (...), and (...), inspired, taught, and
directed by the Lord of glory, and Spirit of truth in the writing of them. And
thus comparing the word of God with all other writings, we find that there are
none to be equalled for excellency, truth, purity, and infallibility
thereunto; and therefore great necessity there is to adhere unto them.

Ter. 31.34. Ioh. 6.35. Heb. 8.11.
.

the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, (that is in the times
and places of the Gospel) as the waters cover the Sea Isai. 11.9.
.

Scriptum est, it is written?

Divinae enim lectiones ita sibi connectuntur tanquam una sit lectio, quia
omnes ex uno ore procedunt August.
. All the Divine precepts of the word of God, are so linked together, as though
they were but one only heavenly lecture, because all of them proceeded from
one blessed and celestial mouth.

Secondly, because the Scriptures are more excellent Quicquid in Scriptura
docetur, veritas, quicquid praecipitur, bonitas, quicquid promittitur,
faelicitas Hugo Card.
. That is, the Scripture teaches nothing but truth, commands nothing but
goodness, promises unto us all happiness. Aliae scripturae si quam veritatem
docent, non sine contagione erroris est; si quam bonitatem commendare
videantur, Gregor.
vel malitiae mixta est (ut non sit pura) vel sine cognitione vel dilectione
Dei, ut non sit perfecta. That is, if other writings teach any truth, yet it is
not without the contagion and taint of error; if they seem to commend any good
thing, it is either mixed with malice, and so not pure; or without the
knowledge, or love of God, and so not perfect. Ambros.
Tota Scriptura est convivium sapientiae, singuli libri singula sunt fercula,
the whole Scripture is a banquet of wisdom, and every several book a dainty
dish; and therefore great reason there is, that we should cleave close unto
them.

Thirdly, of all writings the Scriptures are Pius himself said, Resistendum
est quibuscunque in faciem, sive Paulus, sive Petrus sit, qui ad veritatem
Evangelii non ambulant Abba^ Urspergensis.
. He is to be resisted to his face that walks not (both in practice and
opinion) according to the truth of the Gospel, though it were Peter or Paul
themselves. The Prince of Anhault termed the Scriptures, the swathling bands,
wherein Christ was wrapped that is the containers and includers of truth it
self. Therefore we must never forsake them.

Fourthly, there is nothing more profitable

First, it is profitable for those that are not regenerated and as yet borne
anew unto God, and that in these regards. First, the word of God breaks the
hard heart: Is not my word (says the Lord) like a hammer, that breaks the
Rock in pieces Ier. 23.29.
. Secondly, the word of God gives sight to the blind eyes Psa. 19.8.
, Behold (says God unto Paul) I have sent thee to open their eyes, and to
turn them from darkness unto light Acts 26.28.
. Thirdly, it is profitable for such, to bring them from the power of Satan,
unto God Act. 26.18.
. Fourthly, it is profitable unto them, for the pardon of their sins, and
spiritual adoption into the fellowship of sons Act. 26.18.
. Fifthly, it is profitable to convince them of their sins 1 Cor. 14.24.
.

Secondly, it is profitable for those that are regenerated, in these respects.
First, the Scriptures protect and defend them against the temptations of Satan;
they are a shield unto them that put their trust in God Pro. 30.5.
, yea they are the spiritual sword, which serves both for offense and defense
Ephesians. 6.17.
.

Secondly, by the Scripture the understanding of Gods children is more and more
enlightened Psalm. 19.8 9.
Thirdly, their affections are thereby more and more enflamed: Did not our
hearts burn within us (said the two Disciples) while he opened unto us the
Scriptures Luke 24.52.
. Fourthly, the word of God does purge us from our guylt. Now ye are clean
through the word, that I have spoken unto you Ioh. 15.3.
.

Fifthly, the Scriptures are profitable unto the righteous, to arm them against
afflictions, and to comfort them in sorrow Romans 15 4.
. Sixthly, they strengthen them unto patience in all crosses whatsoever Romans 15
4.
.

Psa. 19.8
, that is, regula recti, the rule of truth and uprightness; yea thereby the
servants of God are forewarned, that is advised, preadmonished, and forearmed
against the assaults of Satan Psalm. 19.11.
. The word of God is a light unto our feet, and a lamp unto our paths Psa.
119 105.
. And therefore we must not seek unto them that have familiar spirits, but
seek the Lord, in the law and in his testimonies Isa. 8.19 20.
. And therefore seeing the word of God is the conducter of the soul, we must
take heed, that we never forsake, or let go out of our hands this weapon of
the Scriptures.

Sampsons Foxes Judge. 15 4.
, meet in the tails both of them opposing us and the truth; but their heads
are diametrally opposite one to the other, as appears by a double quaere.









Moses and the Prophets, we will believe nothing, says our Savior Luke 16 29.
, because the Scriptures were written, that we might believe, and believing,
be saved 1 Ioh. 20.31.
, and therefore saving faith is built upon the Scriptures only, and neither
upon traditions nor enthusiames: yea it is only the Scriptures that are truly
profitable for all sorts of men, as was showed in the former question, answer
4. yea they are able to make us wise unto salvation, and perfect men in Christ
Jesus 2 Timothy 3 15
, and therefore are the only loadstone of our

Secondly, who shall expound the word of God which is the souls conduct?

First, here they both answer, that the Scriptures

Secondly, the Papists, say the Church must interpret the Scriptures, that is,
that Church which is built in the Popes breast, infallibility lying and residing
only in him.

Thirdly, the Anabaptists say, the Holy Spirit in them is the interpreter of
the word; that is, their revelations are all divine truths, and to be obeyed,
and admitted as oracles from heaven.

Fourthly, we say the holy Scriptures interpret themselves: quod in uno
difficile, alias aptius, that which is more difficult in one place, is easier
in another Austen.
. And therefore I conclude, that the holy Scripture is that Lucifer, or day
star, that directs the soul unto Christ: for the Father sends us unto the
Son, commanding us to hear him: the Son sends us unto the word, bidding us
search that diligently Ioh. 5.39.
, the scripture is able to make us perfect: the Apostles taught the whole
Counsel of God Acts 20.20.27.
, and yet they teach nothing besides Moses and the Scriptures: And therefore how
injurious unto the souls of Men are Papists, that rob the people of this
light, and debar them from the Scriptures: These are builders (...), of
Babell, indeed they speak a tongue which the people cannot understand, for
they must not enjoy it, or be suffered to read it in the vulgar tongue. These
make the Scriptures like the Show bread, which none were to touch but the
Priests alone. These are like the spies Canaan, they bring evil reports of the
word of God: telling the people the beauty of it, but withal the difficulty to
be such, as they can never overcome, and therefore it boots them not read
them.

To this I answer, First Chrysostom opposes Chrysostom. hom. 3. de Lazaro.

Secondly, if the divine Scriptures be obscure, navi and blemishes: yea
Augustine and Hierom confess, that they may err; and therefore would have
none to subscribe to their opinions further, then they go according to the word
of God.

Can we find infallibility in the Councels? they have erred, as may be showed
largely, both out of Bishop Jewel, Doctor Whitakers, Doctor Willet, Chamierus,
and diverse others. Can we find certainty amongst the Popish writers? least of
all, they jarring like an instrument wholly out of tune, Thomas against Scotus,
Catherinus against Cajetane, Whatson against Parsons, Bellarmine (in
somethings) almost contrary to them all; and therefore if obscurity and
difficulty be a sufficient rampire to keep us from reading the Scriptures; by
the same reason we are debarred from reading Philosophers, Rhetoritians,
Fathers, Schoolmen, Popish writers, yea all writings and books in any sort
material or necessary to be studied, because they all in many things are
difficult and obscure to the understanding, and the Scripture is no more.



August. li 1. de doct. Christ
, Christum Dominum obscurasse Scripturas, quo his major habeatur reverentia and
autoritas; qua communia sunt vilesscunt, rara vero and difficilia cum pretio
admirantur, that is, Christ our Lord in his infinite wisdom has made the
Scriptures something difficult, not that men might forbear to read or study
them, but that they might hold them in greater authority, price, and reverence;
for naturally we contemn those things, that are plain and facile unto the
understanding; but those things which are rare and difficult, we most admire
and more highly value.



They prove the consequence thus, the Scripture read by those that are
ignorant, is the cause of all errors and heresies: usus Scripturarum est causa
omnium haereseon Alphons. de Castro:
, the vulgar use of the Scriptures is the ground of all errors. Audenter
dicimus, nullam haeresin ess^, quae non occasionem in Scriptura Cens. Colon.
, I dare boldly say (a bold speech indeed) that there has no heresy sprung
up in the Church, but it was occasioned by the word of God. An Italian Bishop
dehorted the people from reading the scriptures, ne fiant haeretici Clem.
Espens s. Tit. 1.
, least it should make them damned Heretics.

To this we answer; First, the Scriptures may occasion errors either By a
misunderstanding, or wrong interpretation thereof; but this is not the fault of
the Scriptures, but the malice, perverseness, or ignorance of men.


Augustine says; the Bees must not forsake the sweet flowers, because the
spider extracts poison from them: Christ does not (here) forbear the use of
Scriptures, because the devil abuses them: some men wickedly abuse Wine unto
drunkenness; Meat unto gluttony; Marriage unto coveteousnesse and adultery;
Magistracy unto Tyranny: Must therefore Wine, Meat, Wedlock, Magistracy, be
prohibited, and cried down as unlawful, I hope they will not; and therefore
let them consider how little reason they have upon the like grounds, or
insequent, or ilsequent consequences to forbid the reading of the Scriptures
unto the laity in the vulgar tongue.

3. They permit worse and more pernicious Justinius, Irenaeus, Origin, who were
Chiliastes, Tertullian and Cyprian who were Montanists: these they permit, only
the Scriptures they prohibit: why? because there is a greater enmity betwixt
the Scriptures and the Papists, then there is between these Fathers and the
Papists: the Fathers in somethings have erred greatly, the Papists in many
things do err grossly, but the Scripture in nothing at all it being the
touchstone of truth, and the hammer of errors to break them and dissolve them
in pieces: and therefore as great opposition and enmity there is between the
Papists and Scriptures, as is between truth and error, life and death.

Secondly, the Priests allow the people to read lascivious and wanton books,
which may and do infect them: why then not the Scriptures which is immaculate?
it is an inhumane thing, yea an argument of small love, to permit them to
wallow in stinking puddles, or to drink unwholesome, yea venomous waters; and
only prohibit pure streams, yea the water of life unto them. Si manifestu^
infidelitatis signum sit, aliquid scriptoru^ rejecere vel non scripterum
inducere; quid dicemus de lasciva praeferentibus Basil. tract. de vera fide.
? that is, if it be a manifest sign of infidelity, either to reject and refuse
any part of holy writ, or to induce into the Canon of faith, that which is not
divine scripture; what shall we say then of those who prefer lascivious and
wanton books or toys, before the word of God?

Fourthly and lastly, the objection is apparently false; for first it is not
the Scripture, but the Chysost. s. col. 3.16
; which truths we learn even from Truths lips, ye err (says Christ) not
knowing the Scriptures Mat. 22.29.
, where we see plainly the cause and the effect; the effect is error (ye
err) the cause of their error is ignorance of the word of God, ye know not
the Scriptures, therefore ye err: It is not then without great cause, that the
Holy Ghost calls the Pope (...), the adversary, that thus dares in his Tenets
oppose Christ himself to the face.

Secondly, the Scriptures reproove heresies and errors, and therefore there is
no likelihood, that they in themselves should be the cause of them 2 Timothy 3.16.
.

Thirdly, there is nothing else worthy of credit besides the Scriptures: other
writings being as chafe, this as wheat Ierem. 23.28.
, whence the Fathers Hier. s. Matthew. 23. and Greg. hom. k. sup. Ezech.
said, quod de scripturis sacris authoritatem non habet eadem facilitate
contemnitur qua probatur: those writing or opinions which are not confirmed by
the holy Scripture, are easilyer contemned then confirmed, better rejected then
received. Inter mill talenta secularium sermonum, vix centum denarios (imo nec
december obolos) spiritualium reperies Cass. s. Matthew. 1.
. Amongst a thousand talents of secular sentences, a man shall scarce find a
hundred pence (yea not ten half pence) of spiritual coin. Now if there be
this immense disproportion between holy Writ, and all other writings; there is
then a great impudency in those that shall cast this aspersion upon them to be
the causes of heresies, and consequently forbid the reading and studying of
them.

Fourthly, the Scriptures are given us by God, to be our spiritual armor and
weapons Ephesians. 6.12.
, Number in bellum sine iis? quomodo servaremur Chrysostom. s. Col. 3.16.
; and therefore if we should enter into the Lists against our spiritual
enemies without these, how could we possibly escape their hands, or retire
with safety and freedom? they therefore that prohibit the common people the
use, benefit, and knowledge of the written Word of God, do certainly not
desire, that they should be the free men of Jesus Christ, enabled manfully and
victoriously to fight the battles of the Lord against Sin and Satan; but
rather desire and endeavor that they may be overcome by Satan, and retained
in his captivity and slaverie forever, to the eternal destruction both of
body and soul.

Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God]. This place is taken either from Deuteronomy.
6.16. or from Exodus 17.7. or from Numb. 21.5. which place is repeated Psalm.
106.14.

tempting?

Tentare, to tempt, is to enquire after some thing by some sign; or an
endeavor to try, or to make trial of something. And thus first man is
tempted, and that either, I. by God, when he proves it is, as he did the
Israelites, Job, and Abraham, Genes. 22. Or, II. by Satan, when he tries if he
can deceive and delude man, by causing him to fall.

Secondly, thus God is tempted by man, when we make trial of his power, or of
his truth; either in his threatenings, or promises: and this is the temptation
here spoken of.



pie, piously, and warrantably, and that four manner of ways, viz.

First, when we tempt him by repentance, that is, having by our sins provoked
God unto anger, we repent and turn from them, to try whether the Lord will
avert his judgments, or not. This is a warrantable tempting of God: for we
have a command for it from him: Prove me now herewith, says the Lord, and try
if I do not bless you Malach. 3.10.
.

Secondly, when we tempt him by prayer and fasting: Thus the King of Niniveh
by a public edict, sanctified a fast upon this ground, Who can tell, whether
God will repent, and turn from his fierce anger, that we perish not Iona 3.9
; as if he should say, we will try God, if he will, by this means be
appeased toward us. As the former trial was commanded by God, so this is
commended by him: and therefore must needs be both warrantable and religious.

Thirdly, when we tempt God by patience and dependence: thus the three
children say unto the King, We know our God is able to deliver us; but if not,
we are ready to suffer for him Dan. 3.17.
, that is, we know, God is able, if he please, to free us from thy hands; but
we know not whether he will do it, or not; yet by patience and confidence,
we will try, what he will be pleased to do with us.

Fourthly, when we tempt or try God by some especial command from him: that
is, when the Lord shall bid us try him by any sign we will, whether he will
do, what he has promised unto us, or not: it is warrantable then to tempt
him; yea not to do it, is blameworthy. Thus God commands Ahaz to try him, by
asking what sign he will: and reproves him, because he says, I will not tempt
the Lord Isa. 7.11 12.
. This verse speaks not of this pious tempting and proving of God.

Secondly, we tempt God impie, impiously Mala tentatio est signa petere, non
ad salutem, sed experientiam Aug. confess. 35.
: the wicked tempting of God, is to desire a sign from him, not for our good,
but only out of an incredulous curiosity to make trial what he can do. Mala
tentatio est de Dei potentia, sapientia, voluntate, (non necessario) periculum
facere P. Mart. 1.7. Sect. 5
: the prohibibited tempting of God, is, to make trial of his power, wisdom,
and will, when by no necessity we are compelled, or urged thereunto. Nulla
causa Christo, se precipitandi, nisi experientia; ergo fuisset tentare Deum
Aug. de vera relig. 1.38.
. There was no cause at all, why Christ should cast himself headlong from the
pinnacle, except it were to make an experiment of Gods power; which was to
tempt God unwarrantably; and therefore he will not do it, but answers, It is
written again, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God.

How do we tempt God wickedly and unwarrantably?

First some Amesius med. Theol. f. 3 28. Sect. 10.
say, We tempt God two manner

P. Mart. 2.4. Sect. 54.
, GOD is tempted 3 manner of ways, viz. First, when we have means for the
obtaining of our desires, but use them not; because we desire more gallant
means, that is, either to be helped without m^anes, or by means
extraordinary: thus the Devil here tempts Christ to do, not to go down, but
to cast himself headlong. Secondly, when we want means, wherein is a double
fault, viz. First, because we will not patiently expect and awayt the Lords
leisure. Secondly, because we prescribe unto God, either the Time, as Ozias
persuaded his brethren to endure five days, and if within that time God did
not succor them, he would surrender the City Judith 7 30.31.
. Manner, when we are not contented either with An ordinary blessing, but we
desire greater, although prohibited unto us: thus Evah tempts God, that she may
obtain a greater measure of knowledge: and Rachel is not content, so long as
she is deprived of issue Genesis 30.1,
. An ordinary obedience, but tempt God, by imposing heavier things upon our
selves, than the Lord requires of us, as the Israelites do Act. 15.20.
.


Thirdly, when obstinately and contumaciously we provoke God unto anger
against us, by our sins; Shall we (says the Apostle) provoke or tempt God
unto jealousy, as though we were stronger than he? that is, do it not, for
his jealousy burns like fire 1 Cor. 10 22.
.


Threatenings, to see whether God Can, or Will,
avenge himself upon us, according to his comminations. Promises, which
sometimes we Believe not at all, by a distrust Of the Doctrine; that is, of
the Gospel, and the truth of God. Of the practice; that is, of the protection,
or providence of God.
Believe too much and either Add some circumstances out of our brain, Or,
Neglect the means appointed by God to be used.




First, we tempt God in his threatenings, when notwithstanding them, we
continue in our sins: How long will ye provoke me, says the Lord) unto
anger, with your wickedness Numb. 14.11.
? Herein we tempt God three ways, to wit, First, we try, whether God can
avenge himself, as he has threatened: thus Pharaoh says, Who is the Lord,
that I should obey him? I know him not, neither will I let Israel go Exodus 5.2.
. As if he would say, for this once I will try, what he can do unto me for
my disobedience of him. Thus Nebuchadnezzar, being not obeyed by the three
children, in his fury, says, Who is that God (...) can deliver you out of my
hands? that is, I will try whether your God can prevail against me, or not
Dan. 3.15.
.

Secondly, we try whether God can see what wickedness we commit, or not: They
encourage themselves (says the Psalmist) in an evil matter: they commune of
laying snares privily, and say, who shall see them Psalm. 64.5.
? yea more Atheistically they elsewhere say, Psalm. 94.7.
The Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it: as though
they would say, they do not believe that God can see, what they secretly do,
and therefore they will put it to the trial, whether he can, or not.

Thirdly, we try, whether God will avenge himself or not upon us: often we
persuade our selves, God sees us, and is able to punish us, and yet doubting
whether he will or not, wickedly try it. These things have thou done, and I
kept silence (says God) wherefore thou thoughtest, that I was altogether such
a one as thy self, etc. Psalm. 50.21.
that is, thou thoughtest that I loved sin, and favored it, as thou thy
self do; and because I did not speedily avenge my self upon thee,
therefore thou thoughtest I would not punish thy impiety at all. It is very
full of peril to tempt God any of these ways.

Secondly, we tempt God in his promises, when we do not believe the
Doctrine, or scope of the Doctrine, or the promise that is made therein unto
us: Now it is a dangerous and heavy temptation not to believe the bare word of
God, without some ocular sign: Thus the Israelites tempted the Lord, saying;
Is the Lord among us, or not Exodus 17.7.
? that is, we will not believe he is, except miraculously he provide water
for us. Thus the Jews blasphemously mock Christ, saying, Come down from the
cross (upon which thou hangest, and unto which thou art nailed) and we will
believe thee Matthew. 27.42.
, otherwise we will not, although God from Heaven has pronounced thee to be
his Son. Hence our Savior reproves the Jews, because (not content with the
infallible word of truth) they seek and demand a sign Luke 11.16. and Ioh.
6.30.
, the word being given us for the rule of our lives.

Thirdly, we tempt God in his promises, when we do not believe the promise
of grace, of mercy, of protection, or providence which is made unto us: that
is, when we distrust of the success or event, we tempt God impiously: this
God blames in his people, Ye say, it is in vain to serve the Lord Malac. 3.14.
; that is, it matters not whether we serve him, or serve him not, all is one:
for he will not be appeased, or reconciled unto us, do what we can. God
commands us to use the means both in natural and spiritual dangers, and
evils; and he promises to bless those means unto us, as far as may stand
for his glory and our good: and therefore for us to use the means (hereby
doing our part) and to distrust the event and success (which is Gods part) is
to tempt him. This was the Jews fault, Can God (say they) provide a Table in
the wilderness, and meat in the desert Psa. 78.18.
? That which God requires (herein) of us, is this, if any lawful means may
be used, use them to the uttermost; but leave the success unto God: if there
be no means in our power to use, then cast our selves wholly upon God, with
boldness of confidence, as Saint Paul did, Having this confidence, I know that
I shall abide and continue with you Phil. 2.25.
.

Fourthly, we tempt God in his promises, when we believe too much; that is,
hope and expect for more then is promised; for to believe those things which
God has not promised, is to tempt God, or to desire, beg, or pray for more,
then God has made any promise to grant, is to tempt him,

Every petition powered forth, must be in Faith Iam. 1.6.
, which Faith is built upon the Word, that is, the promises Romans 10 17.
, which promises are only to be found in the Scripture 2 Cor. 7.1.
. And therefore we must not desire or expect more, then the word of God does
warrant or promise unto us: Carefully herein observing these three particulars.
viz.

First, God only promises unto us Generalia, general things; as, I will be
their God 2 Cor. 6.16.
, and I will be thy exceeding great reward Genesis 17.1.
, and whom I once love, I love unto the end Ioh. 13.1
.

Secondly, when God promises unto us Particularia, particular things, they are
made upon some condition: Thus God promised that those that trusted in him,
their life should be given them, as a prey in all places Ier. 39.18. and 45.5.
, and yet holy Zachary was slain, Mat. 23. and Kingly Esaias was dissected
with a saw; and therefore particular promises belong unto particular persons,
and are made unto them upon some condition or other, which they must carefully
observe, if they desire the blessing promised.

Thirdly, we must therefore content our selves with generals; that God will
one way or other, by some blessing or other, make good his promises unto us,
and either bestow some temporal blessing upon us, or free us from evils; or
give us peace of conscience, or sustain us by his grace, or strength of the
Spirit.

It may by way of doubting be demanded, how

I answer first, this is done two manner of surely there is a reward for the
righteous Psalm. 58.12.
. First, is thy affliction heavy to be borne; then remember, sorrow may endure
for a night, but joy comes in the morning: as thou may perceive by many
examples; Jobs affliction was great, yet it was shortly turned into prosperity,
and all temporal affluence, the danger of Daniel and the three Children was
extraordinary, yet God preserves the one in the Lions den, and the other in the
fiery Furnace; and delivers both the one and the other, in his appointed time.
Ionahs danger was great, to be first swallowed by the sea, then by the Whale,
yet in Gods due time he is brought safe on shore. And therefore whatsoever thy
affliction be, yet bear it, waiting patiently the Lords leisure for
deliverance from it.

Secondly, is thy innocence, and good name questioned and scandalized, and the
false aspersions cast upon thee believed by others, yet murmr not; the Lord
in his appointed season will cause thy innocence to shine and break forth as
the Son out of the clouds. Thus David's innocence does show it self, at
length toward Saul, and Mephibosheths toward David. 2 Samuel 19.

Thirdly; whatsoever thy grief or pain be, yet be not too hasty with God;
Canis festinans edit caecos catulos, the hasty bitch brings forth blind
puppyes, and therefore, festina lent, be not impatient of delay, but stay the
Lords leisure. The bond is not due, until the day appointed, and so long as
thou art not delivered, Gods limited day is not come, and therefore tempt not
God by prescribing unto him a time, but seeing the times are decreed by him,
for the accomplishing of his promises, let us patiently depend upon him, until
his mercy appear toward us.

Secondly, this is done by prescribing unto the

First in spiritual things, by binding heavy burdens, and grievous to be borne
Matthew. 23.4.
upon our own backs, or upon others; this is to tempt God Act. 15.20.
, yea to take away that Christian liberty from us, which we are called unto,
and enjoy by the Gospel: of this sort are the Monastical vows, of poverty,
single life, the observation of days, meats, and the like, which God requires
not of us, and therefore in these we should remember these two things. First,
Religion is burden enough for thee, if it be rightly understood, professed and
practiced; and therefore there is no need to add hereunto, for want of
employment, things not enjoined by the Lord. Secondly, thou know not thy
own strength, thou art not sure in thine own mind, whether thou shall be
able, rightly to undergo and perform these vows or not: whether the love of
the world, or the lust of the flesh be so thoroughly mortified and crucified in
thee, that they will never rebel, or make head against thee: and therefore
take heed, that by such vows we do not deprive our selves of those lawful
remedies, which God has appointed against such sins, for this is to tempt
God, and to endanger our selves to be tempted by the devil 1 Cor. 7.5.37.
, wherefore we must not cause our souls to sin Eccles. 5 5.
.

Secondly, in temporal things; by expecting or desiring greater things then
God has as yet given, not contented with what is given: Rachel enjoyed health,
the comfort of friends, and the company of a religious husband; but all these
afford her no comfort, but except she have children, she shall die for sorrow
Genesis 30.1.
, Naaman comes to the Prophet to be cured, but once purposed to go away
uncured, rather then be healed, by so contemptible a means, as the washing in
Jordan 2 King. 5.11.
. The Israelites first long for bread, but afterward when they have it, they
loath it, and lust for flesh Numb. 11.4. etc. and 21.5.
, wherefore they are said to tempt God And therefore we must learn always to
be contented with our present portion, not tempting God; but remember, he
knows and sees our necessities as well as our selves, he knows our strength,
and what may be good for us, better then we our selves, he sees what the event
will be, and will order and dispose it to our good. The children of God may
very well be contented to want all things, when God has promised to care for
them, and prohibited them to care at all, for the end, or success 1 Pet. 5.6.
, because although we might have what we desire, yet we know not what the event
will prove, as for example.

First, would thou desire children, as Rachel did? It may be first, they
would draw thy love from God, if not in toto, yet in tanto, thou would so
delight in them, that thou would not rejoice thy self so much in God as thou
did before.

Or Secondly, it may be, if children were given or granted unto thee, they
would prove, disobedient, stubborn, rebellious, profane, traitors, thieves,
heretics, or such dissolute prodigals, that thou would wish them dead, and
bless the womb that never bare, in regard of thy unhappy self.

Secondly, would thou wish riches, little do thou know what danger they
may bring thee into; they draw many from Christ, as we see in the young man,
who had been a happy man, if he had not been a rich man Matthew. 19.22.
. Riches are often ordained for the destruction of the owner; as one says
Barth. Casa. Spanish cruelt.
, the poor Indians had been happy, if their country had not afforded gold,
for auri sacra fames, the insatiable desire of gold made the cruel Spaniards
unsatiable in the shedding of blood: as that author, in an assembly of the
Royal Counsel of the Judges, (with many learned Divines and Lawyers) called
by the King, spoke with best caution (being affronted by Sepulveda) avouching,
that the Spaniards had slain and destroyed in the several Islands, where they
came above twenty Millions Page 132.
.

Thirdly, would thou wish honor? It is a most dangerous temptation; Honores
mutant mores, honors change dispositions, and good manners. Stephen Gardener,
and Bonner were never persecuters, until they were made Bishops, Saul was puer
bona indole, a youth of good hope and towardness until he was advanced unto a
Kingdom: The number of those, who have been made worse by honors, is like the
number of black Swallows, but of those who have been made better thereby, is
like the number of black Swans.

Fourthly, would thou wish health, and quiet ease; freedom from sickness,
affliction, misery, injuries, wrongs, and the like? Thou little know how
profitable physic for the soul, these bodily afflictions are, although for
the present they be not joyous but grievous Heb. 12.11.
. And therefore tempt not God in lusting for that which thou want, but be
joyfully, and thankfully contented with that lot and portion, which thou have
in temporal things.

Fifthly, and lastly, we tempt God in his promises, by believing too much, when
we expect to enjoy what we desire, although we neglect the use of those lawful
means, which God has allowed and commanded us to use. This is the sin,
which the Devil here tempts Christ unto, and which we, with Christ, must
carefully avoid, not presuming either of the providence, or protection of God,
without a warrant, and a word of promise from him. Here then two things are to
be eschewed; First, Nemedia praetereamus, that we do not omit lawful means:
thus although Jacob had a promise to prevail, and find mercy at his brothers
Esaus hands, yet he sends gifts unto him, which in him was a lawful means.
Hezekias had a promise of a longer life, and yet he uses the means to
preserve it. And therefore, First, they are to blame, that neglect to be
providently careful for themselves, or their families: yea, they are worse
than infidels. But such will say, God will provide. I answer, God has provided
and done this already; for he has given unto thee either some substance to
employ, and improve, or some wisdom, and understanding; or some strength and
ability to work, and employ thy self: and therefore thou shall give an
account unto God of this talent given unto thee by him. Secondly, they are to
blame that neglect spiritual means, as the hearing and reading of the word of
God, prayer, the Sacraments, mutual pious conference, and the like. These will
say, we are not called. I answer, you must not expect to be called sedentes,
but sudantes, not when you are idle, but when you are employed in the outward
work of the Lord: when the Eunuch was reading the Scriptures, then God sends an
Expositor unto him, to clear his doubts. Those that would be healed did wait
at the lake of Bethesda, and those that would be hired, must attend in the
market place. Thirdly, they are to blame, that neglect the health of the body,
or the preservation of their life; as first, those that will not defend
themselves, or stand upon their guard, when they are assaulted, as the
Macchabees did. Secondly, those that neglect medicines and physic in
sickness, why has God given herbs, and medicines, and the Art of Physic,
but to be used?

Thirdly, those that will not for their healths sake eat those meats, which are
good and wholesome, the learned Papists allow those that are weak and sick,
upon weighty occasion and urgent necessity to eat flesh, or broth wherein
flesh has been boiled, upon a Friday or a fasting day; and yet there are some
so ignorantly superstitious, that they will rather wholly overthrow their
healths, yea endanger their life, then do it. Thus much for the first thing to
be avoided.

Secondly, the other thing to be avoided is, Ne in pericula nos conijciamus,
that we do not cast our selves into unwarranted, and unnecessary dangers.
This is the very sin that Christ is here tempted unto, to hope for mercy,
which was not promised unto him: Thus the Israelites presume to go up to the
hill against the word of God, and are therefore slain by the Amalekites Numb.
14.44.
, and therefore we must not thus tempt the Lord, by intruding our selves into
any dangers, beyond our callings, either in general, as we are Christians, or
in our particular callings.



we are not stronger then he is. 1 Cor. 10.22.

were destroyed of the destroyer. 1 Cor. 10.10.



Psa. 106.14.
and to give us those things, which with murmuring we tempt him to give, in
anger; thus he gave the Israelites Quails and Manna, but leanenesse in their
souls.

VERSE. 10. Then says Jesus unto him, get thee hence Satan, for it is written,
thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.
Abi, get thee hence.] Some here observe a difference, between (...) here used
to the devil, and (...) used to Saint Peter, Matthew. 16.23. But this
observation is not worth observing, because Saint Luke Chap. 4. Verse. 8. uses
the same phrase to Satan, which he does unto Peter. The meaning is this; cease
satan, desist, tempt no more, but submit thy self.

Get thee hence satan.] Why does Christ



First, Christ now handles satan severely and with power, in respect of
himself; that he might show, that he was all this while tempted willingly,
and not by the will of satan; and that satan can tempt him no longer, then he
pleases, that we hence might reap comfort in temptations.

It may here be demanded.

Are all temptations directed, and ordered by

The temptations of the faitfull are guided and disposed by Christ, 1 Cor. 10
13.
; he is always present with his children, and always watchful over them; and
therefore they shall not be tempted further, then he pleases.

Why are the temptations of the righteous guided and ordered by Christ?

First, that we might learn hence, that we are not tempted at the devils
pleasure, neither can he sift us when he will: but only go as far as God
gives leave, and assault when Christ permits, as we see in Job. 1.12. and 2 6.
and 38.11.

Secondly, that we might learn hence, that Iam. 1.2.3.
, that our faith may thereby the better appear 1 Pet. 1.7.
. Or Secondly, that we might be the more confirmed in the assurance of our
Adoption, Regeneration, or future Glory, for 1. they are bastards, and no
sons, that are not tempted, afflicted, and tried Heb. 12.5.
. 2. There is no participation of Christ, without partaking of his sufferings
and trials 1 Pet. 4.12.
. 3. There is no assurance, that we shall be glorified with him, except we
suffer temptation and tribulation with him Romans 8.17.
. Or, Thirdly, that we might be instructed, and weaned from sin: thus the
Lord afflicted Israel 1 Chro. 21.10.
, or that thereby we may be preserved from sin, which we are otherwise like to
fall into, and thus, lest Paul should be puffed up by abundance of revelations,
a temptation and buffet of satan was sent unto him 2 Cor. 12.7.
.

Thirdly, Christ directing all our afflictions Gregor.
, silonga, levis, si magna, brevis: if long, it is the lighter, if strong, it
is so much the shorter: as we see in Gods message, unto David, whether he would
choose 7. years famine, or 3. months flight, his enemies pursuing him, or 3.
days Pestilence 2 Samuel 24.13.
.

Are all that are tempted regenerated and united

First, there is a double temptation, in regard

Secondly, there is a twofold temptation in regard

Thirdly, to speak properly, Satan suos non tentat sed imperat: the devil
tempts, opposes, and assaults the righteous; but he commands the wicked to
obey, not tempting them: for those that are his, are not shaken and assaulted
with a violent opposition unto sin, but sin of themselves daily, and are
allured unto iniquity

Fourthly, temptation is a sign of filiation, when we war against Satan,
and struggle against sin. More particularly, examine these four things, for
the trial of our adoption and regeneration.

First, do thou ex animo, from thy soul desire to glorify thy God in thy
life and conversation? Secondly do thou with thy soul grieve, that thou do
by thy daily sins displease and dishonor thy God? Thirdly, art thou
watchful and careful to prevent all sin, yea the very occasions and
provocations thereunto? Fourthly, when thou art assaulted, do thou pro
viribus, with all thy might and strength withstand the temptations of Satan,
fighting even unto blood, resisting and striving against sin? He that finds
these things in him may be comfortably assured, that he is Athleta Christi, the
Lords Soldier, fighting under his banner, who has renounced the service of
Satan, and will rather die in battle, then be (by sin) brought into
subjection unto him again. Thus we have heard the first general reason, why
Christ does thus answer the devil; Get thee hence Satan:

Secondly, Christ did this in respect of satan, because now he palpably
reveals himself to be opposite to God. Quae hactenus levia, contemptu facilia
Aretius s.
, his other temptations were more trivial and contemptible: this more insolent
and impudent; and therefore Christ will suffer him no longer, but quels him,
and drives him away, as he will also at the last all wicked men, that oppose

Who oppose Christ?

Get thee hence thou wicked wretch into everlasting fire.

Thirdly, Christ did this in respect of the sin that the devil tempted unto,
which was the profanation Abi, Get thee hence.

. 3. Get thee hence satan.] Why does

First, Christ calls him Satan, that he might cacodamon es, thou art no
other then a wicked devil.

Secondly, Christ calls him Satan, that he satan, then I cannot but hate
them the more deadly, and resist them the more manfully: Thou seem (says
our Savior implicitly) to be my friend, and to desire my advanceme^t, and to
make me the sole Monarch of all the world, but aliud simulas front, aliud es
pectore, whatsoever outwardly thou seem, yet thou art neither better nor
worse then a devil, a destroyer, the enemy of mankind, and therefore Abi, Get
thee hence satan:

Teaching us hereby, satan our grand enemy: as for example, First anger, it
comes from the devil Ephesians. 4.27.
. Secondly, brawles and contentions or jarres are hatched in hell 1 Iam. 3.7.
. Thirdly, lying, and Fourthly cruelty, spring from the same original, for the
devil was a liar and a murderer from the beginning John 8.44.
. Fifthly, and sic de caeteris, we may say the same of all sins, they being
the devils works 1 John 3.8.
.

Why will this remembrance or consideration,

Because as soon as ever we call this to mind, mors in olla, that there is
danger and death in it, if the devil tempt unto it: because he is our enemy
Matthew 13.25.
, and therefore his counsel must needs be pernicious: he is a liar, and a
murderer, and therefore death is the doom of him, that believes his lies.

. 4. For it is written,] We see, Christ here

Why does not Christ answer the devil otherwise? give me what thou say, if
I should fall down and worship thee? or do thou promise that, which thou
meanest not to perform? Secondly, though thou have a desire to be as good as
thy word, whether art thou able or not? is the whole world thine to dispose of
at thy pleasure? Thirdly, suppose all this world were thine to give me,
could thou thereby make me greater, or more happy then I am already?
Fourthly, can thou persuade thy self, or imagine, that I can be moved or
enticed at all with the possessions and preferments of the world? Christ (I
say) might thus have taken off satan, but he does not, but only puts him in
mind of his duty; It is written, thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God: And
that for these causes, First, that he may teach us his Modesty, he does not
complain of these injuries and injurious speeches of satan unto him.

Secondly, that he may teach us his meekenes, he does not by way of
recriminatio^ reproach satan.

Thirdly, that he may teach us his carfulness to obey his Father; seeing he
neither proves nor affirms any thing from himself, or his own will,

Fourthly, his answer being necessary, modest, and directly pertinent to the
question; does teach us thereby, that Christians answers should be meek, and
ad rem, gentle, and punctual unto the thing demanded. First, they must be
meek and gentle: let all bitterness of speech (says Saint Paul) be put away
from you Ephesians. 4.31.
. And again, lay aside all evil speakings 1 Pet. 2.1.
. Secondly, they must be ad rem, pertinent unto the question, and the thing in
hand: let your speech (says the Apostle) be always with grace, seasoned with
salt, that ye may 4.6.

Why must we be thus careful of our answers?



Secondly, idle words in interrogatories, or harsh answers beget jarres, and
contentions, and bitter brawlings; and therefore our answers must

Thou shall worship the Lord thy God:] The Papists Bellar. l. 4. de Euch. Cap.
29.
object this place for the adoration of the Eucharist: God is verily, and
truly to be worshipped; as in this verse, thou shall worship the Lord thy God:
But Christ in the Eucharist is very God: therefore verily in the Eucharist to

First, we may easily grant the whole argument as framed by the Cardinal, that
Christ is in the Eucharist to be adored; and so he is also in Baptism, and in
the word preached, as the Apostle shows plainly 1 Cor. 14.24.
, If all prophecy, and there come in one who believes not, etc. the secrets
of his heart are made manifest, and he will fall down on his face and worship
God, and say plainly; that God is in you indeed. So we also, though we
utterly deny that the Eucharist is to be adored, yet we worship Christ in the
Eucharist, saying, we praise thee, we bless thee, we worship thee, we glorify
thee, etc.

Secondly, we may deny the argument, as framed by the Cardinal, it being a
false Syllogism: the Minor proposition not following from the Major, according
to the rules of Art. God is verily and truly to be worshipped, (this is most
true) But Christ in the Eucharist is very God, says Bellarmine; whereas he
should have assumed thus, if he would have proved any thing: But the Eucharist
is very God, which is blasphemy to say.

Thirdly, though we should grant the body of Christ to be verily present in the
Eucharist, yet it is the not the body of Christ God.

Fourthly, there are the forms of bread and wine remaining still, which being
creatures and not hypostatically joined to the person of Christ, cannot without
great peril of idolatry be adored.

Fifthly, to put all out of doubt, Christ's flesh is not bodily present, neither
can they ever be able to prove it: and therefore they have no color or ground
at all for this their adoration of the elements.

Thou shall worship the Lord thy God.] These words we see are here alleged by
our Savior against satan, who had tempted him to fall down and adore him:
wherefore by this text all falling down and prostrating of our selves before
any creature to adore it, is forbidden, without which submissive gesture, not
the meanest kind of religious worship can be exhibited unto any:

Bellarmine answers hereunto, that this place is to be understood of a certain
kind of religious worship, which is only proper unto God.

All religious worship is forbidden in this place to be given to any but unto
God: for satan did not tempt Christ to worship him as God, but only to fall
down and worship him: he asked only of him (...), a certain inclination of
the body, which Christ denied, as being only proper to God.

. 6. And him only shall thou serve. Solum only, or alone, is not in Deuteronomy.
6.16. Why does our Savior here add it, or allege it?

First, to teach us that all precepts enjoining the Alone Perkins.
.

Secondly, satan does not prohibit Christ Solum, alone; teaching us that God
is not rightly worshipped, except he be only worshipped: or the worship of the
creature, is contrary to the worship of the Creator: that is not only the
internal affection, and worship of the heart (which is forbidden in the first
commandment) but also the external worship of the body, forbidden in the
second commandment, non incurvabis, nec coals, thou shall not bow down unto,
nor worship any other thing besides the Lord. The word which the devil uses
verse 9. is (...), which belongs unto the outward worship of the body; and is
derived either from (...), to be vainglorious, or one that loves glory: or
from (...). I incline my self: or from (...) I kiss (as the Papists do the
Popes feet) or from (...) a hat, and so (...), signifies a mooving of the hat:
Now all spiritual worship both external and internal is the Lords
prerogative, and peculiar unto him alone; and therefore he is not truly
worshipped, except only worshipped.

VERRS. 12. Now when Jesus had heard, that John was cast into prison,
Why did Christ depart from Judea into Galilee?

John's auditors; and therefore John being taken away,





First, if our calling will suffer it; here it is more lawful for people to
fly from those cities, that are infected with the plague, then for Ministers:
because the calling of the one will rather permit it, then the calling of the
other. Secondly, if our flight or departure may be without the offense of the
weak: those that profess to have a sure trust and confidence, and affiance in
the providence and protection of God, do often give a great scandal to those
that are infirm, by their fearefulnes and speedy departure, upon any
conjecture, suspicion, or probability of danger. Thirdly, if our life
(preserved by departure and flight) may bring more glory to God, and more
benefit unto his Church; then our death, it is lawful to depart.

Beza denies that Christ fled, First, because (...), signifies redijt; non
discessit, he returned, not he departed. Secondly, because the place, he
went unto was less safe then this from whence he departed; Galilee being
under the jurisdiction of Herod Antipas, which Judea was not. Wherefore he
answers, that Christ returned into Galilee, that he might succeed unto John
(who was now shut up in prison) in the Evangelicall office, and preaching of
the Gospel.

VERSE. 13. And leaving Nazareth,
Why does Christ leave Nazareth?

First, because it was less safe, say some: But this was not the reason of it,
for first, when Joseph was afraid to go into Judea, he turned aside into
Nazareth, Matthew. 2.23. which was in Galilee, verse 22. yea secondly, Capernaum
was the more famous place, and therefore the more dangerous.

Secondly, Christ left Nazareth, because he was there unworthily handled: for
first, his word was there contemned and despised: hence it is said, that he did
not many mighty works there, because of their unbeleefe Matthew. 13.58. Mark
6.4.5.
. Secondly, he had violence there offered unto him, for they rose up against
him, and thrust him out of the city, and led him out unto the edge of of the
hill, that they might cast him down headlong Luke 4.29.
.

VERSE. 14. That it might be fulfilled,
. 1. Vt impleretur, that it might be fulfilled:] Nazareth, and came to
Capernaum, John was cast into prison: and secondly, because the Nazarens were
ungrateful unto him, in not believing either him or his doctrine; how then
says Saint Matthew, that he did this, That the saying of Isaias might be
fulfilled?

I answer, Nazareth for the forenamed causes, but yet God does direct this his
departure unto a further end; to wit, that, which is mentioned here by the
Evangelist, the accomplishing of the prediction: Joseph was sold wickedly, and
maliciously by his brethren, but the Lord ordered it for good both to him and
them Genesis 45.5.
. The rainbow proceeds from natural causes, but yet God has ordained it as
a sign, or a memorandum of his promises Genesis 9.13.
. Christ was slain by the Jews out of malice, and yet did no more then was
preordained by God Acts 3.18.
* For first in him we live, and move, and have our being Acts 17 28.
. Secondly, he is not an idle spectator (as some of the Philosophers in their
idle speculations imagined) of the passages of the world, but his providence
does begin every motion or action. Yea thirdly, unto what end God at first
intended any thing, unto that same end, he does at last dispose of it.

That it might be fulfilled, which was written by Isaias the Prophet saying.]
How is this Prophecy fulfilled?

Esai 9.1. enjoy light, by the preaching of the Gospel of Christ. Esai. 9.2.

VERSE. 16. The people which sat in darkness, saw a great light; and to them
which sat in the region and shadow of death, light is sprung up.
The people which sat in darkness:] Who were in darkness before Christ
came?

All the world, not some few of the Gentiles or Jews only, but all men by
nature without Christ, were under darkness and death. The truth of this
answer will appear particularly thus.

First, all men without Christ are subject to death: all have sinned, and come
short of the glory of God Romans 3.23.
, all men have sinned, and therefore death has passed upon all men Romans 5.12.
: who cannot be freed from this spiritual death, or made partakers of the
life of grace, but only by Christ Romans 8.2.3.
.

Secondly, all men without Christ are in blindness and darkness: no man is
borne learned, neither can we without Christ learn or understand any thing
that is good: spiritual things are spiritually understood, and the natural
man cannot aright conceive them, or take them up 1 Cor. 2.14.
, by reason of his natural and innate blindness.

Thirdly, this blindness and ignorance shows it self in the Gentiles two
several ways, viz.

First, in their Idols, which they honored and held as Gods; when ye knew not
God, ye did service unto them, which by nature are no Gods, said the Apostle
Gal. 4.8.
, yea they made Gods of birds, foure-feeted beasts, and creeping things Romans
1.23.
, yea so palpable was their blindness, that they made a God of the devil: the
things (says Saint Paul) which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to
devils, not to God 1 Cor. 10.20.
. Secondly, the blindness of the Gentiles shows it self in their horrid
worship or service of their Gods: for first they had a Barbarous worship, as
appears in their Bacchanalia, which were celebrated with drunkenness,
brawles, madness, and the like.

Secondly, they had a filthy, obscene, and unclean worship, which was
celebrated with fornication and adultery: thus Priapus was worshipped: and thus
amongst some of them, the Bride must be deflowred by the Priest, before she was
given unto her husband.

Thirdly, they had a cruel worship, which was celebrated by murder; their
sacrifices being of humane flesh, thus the Goths sacrificed often men to their
Idols: and the Carthaginians to Saturn.

Fourthly, this blindness and ignorance shows it self in the Jews, who
first offered up their children to devils. Read Psalm. 106.36. 2 King. 16.3.
and 17.27. Secondly, made unto themselves diverse Idols, worshipping them as
gods as we may see in the calfe. Ex. 32. and 2 King. 17.29. and Deuteronomy. 32.17.
and 2 Chronicles. 11.15. And thus we see, how the whole world lies in wickedness
without Christ 1 Ioh. 5.19.
, and therefore he came to deliver us from this ignorant and wicked world Gal.
1.4
.

. 2. That sat in darkness.] To sit, signifies Exposit.
Thus the people of Israel say, why do we sit still Ier. 8.14.
. that is, why do we defer any longer.

Secondly, to love: thus David pronounces him an happy man, that sits not in
the seat of the scornful, that is, loves not their society Psalm. ^.1.
.

Thirdly, it signifies to endure patiently, and contentedly; Sit thou silent,
and get thee into darkness, oh daughter of the Caldeans: that is, be quietly
contented with thy portion of affliction Esa 47.5.
. The meaning of this verse then is; The Gentiles did love their ignorance, and
most patiently did brook it, procrastinating and neglecting the remedies
against it.

. 3. They saw a great light:] What was

I answer, Christ;

How does it appear that Christ is this great that enlightens all the world?

By the animadversion or consideration of these three dependent particulars, to
wit.

First, the expectation of light and knowledge is from God: Thou art my lamp
oh Lord (said David) and the Lordwill lighten my darkness 2 Samuel 22.29.
, so again, unto the upright there arises light in darkness Psalm. 112.4.
, that is from the Lord; and therefore Saint John says, God is light 1 John
1.5.
.

Secondly, God from whom we expect light, promises to impart it unto us by
Christ: I will give (says the Lord) a light to the Gentiles Esa. 42.6 and 49.6.
: and again, the Sun of righteousness shall arise Malach. 4.2.
, to give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death Luke
1.79.
.

Thirdly, God has performed his promise unto us, by giving of Christ, who is
the life and light of men Ioh. 1.4.
, yea the true promised light, which lighteneth every man that comes into the
world Ioh. 1.9.
And lest the world should be ignorant of him, does openly himself profess,
that he is the light of the world Ioh. 8.12.
, which is come for this cause into the world, that they that believe in him,
should not abide in darkness any longer Ioh. 12.46.
, he being the only light of the world, so long as he was in the world Ioh.
9.5.
; and therefore it is manifestly apparent, that Christ was this great light.

What manner of light was Christ? or what

First, there is a double light; First, the light which was in us in our first
creation: but this is lost by the fall of Adam.

Secondly, there is the light of grace, a reparation of our former light lost,
which is our only light; and this is the light, we enjoy by Christ: for he is
the way, the truth and the life John 14 6.
, he was made unto us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption 1 Cor. 1.30.
; yea all the promises of the Gospel are yea and Amen unto us in Jesus Christ 2
Cor. 1.20.
.

Light (Christ) we gain four things, First, illumination of the
understanding. Secondly, direction of life. Thirdly, peace and comfort of
conscience. Fourthly, life eternal.

First, this light (Christ) does enlighten our understandings, and increase our
knowledge.



God, who in diverse manners taught his people in times past, has in these last
days taught us by his Son Heb. 1.1.2.
, which is the light that shines in darkness, the dawning of the day, yea the
Day Star that arises in our hearts 2 Pet. 1.19.
.

Cornelius, Acts 10. nor Christ Paul, Acts 9. but the Angel sends Cornelius
unto Peter, to be taught by him: and Christ directs Paul unto Ananias to be
instructed: because God has now committed unto us, (the Ministers) the word of
reconciliation 2 Cor. 5.19.
.

to call God Father Romans 8.15. and Gal. 4.6.
.

Secondly, this light is profitable unto us for the Direction of our life: and
that in these four regards: First, it shows us our errors: All things that
are reproved, are made manifest by the light, and whatsoever does make
manifest, is light Ephesians, 5.13.
. This light is regula sui and obliqui, the rule of truth and falsehood: in the
night we err, and miss our way, but the day light shows us our errors: and
therefore wicked men hate the light: they therefore that know not themselves to
be sinners, and sinful creatures, are not enlightened with this light; for it
shows our sins and errors unto us.

Secondly, this light does enlighten the air, or dispose the means of
knowledge, both external and internal; that is, thereby we are enabled to
reap benefit by the means, to obey those things which we know; God, by
Christ, giving unto us both the will and the deed Phil. 2.13.
. And therefore those that receive no benefit at all by the Ministry of the
Word, neither obey God, are not Christ's.

Thirdly, this light expelles darkness: as a candle does presently enlighten
the most dark room: and therefore those that yet remain in the shadow of
death, partake not Christ: those that bring forth no other fruit than the
works of darkness, and sin, do not as yet enjoy this light.

Fourthly, this light directs our steps in the ways of God, unto that which
is good: he is our Way, Light and Life Ioh. 1.4.
, Ambulare vis? Ego via. Falli non vis? Ego veritas. M^ri non vis? Ego vita
Aug. s. Ioh. 14.6.
. Would thou walk? I am (says Christ) the way. Would thou not be deceived
in thy walking? I am the truth. Would thou not dye? I am the life. Thus
Christ is our chiefest light, without which we err, and by whom we may know
how to moderate and direct our lives, according to the will of God: And
therefore those that desire to obey God aright, let them hear Christ, let them
come unto the light, and let them learn the word: other teachers may lead us
aside, but the word is a certain guide, and they do well, that attend
thereunto 2 Pet. 1.20.
.

Thirdly, this light and bright Sun cleares the heavens, and comforts the
conscience: the Sun comforts all creatures in a manner; and Christ is
comfortable unto all his children: the message of the rising of this bright
morning Star, was news of great joy Luke 2.10.
. When Christ comes unto Zacheus, he rejoices Luke 19.6.
; when this light shined in Samaria, there was great joy in that City Acts 8.8
, when the Eunuch was made partaker of Christ, he goes home rejoicing Acts
8.39.
: When the Keeper of the prison was converted unto Christ, he rejoiced
exceedingly Acts 16.34.
.

Do all rejoice, that are made partakers of

They do,

Secondly, those that have weak eyes, do not rejoice in the light of the
Sun; so those whose affections are yet captivated with the love of sin (
John 3.19.) or the love of the world, (1. John, 2.15.) do not rejoice in this
light: And therefore those who think they enjoy Christ, and yet do not
rejoice in the fruition of him, must know, that the reason is, because either
they love some sin, or the world too much.

Fourthly, this light is profitable for us unto eternal life: this is the end
of all. The Sun renewes the earth after winter is past: so after the winter
of this life, this light will renew our days, by making us partakers of life
everlasting: And therefore whosoever are destitute of light, are destitute of
life: whosoever are without Christ, are without salvation.

Who are without Christ?

First, Heathens, and Infidels, who are extra Ecclesiam, both out of the
visible and invisible Church.

Secondly, Heretics, who hold tenets that

Thirdly, ignorant persons, who neither

Fourthly, profane and wicked persons, who

The reader (perhaps) will think it necessary, that I should have shown the
means how this light may be obtained; which I had indeed set down; but that
it follows more naturally in another place, and therefore now I omit it in
this.

VERSE. 17. From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent, for the
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.
. 1. From that time.] That is, after that John was cast into prison. Hence two
questions are made.



Aretius.
say, because God would have it so, and we are not to enquire after any other
reason.

Hierom. sup.
answer, this Christ did in regard of his doctrine, because the Gospel was to
be preached, and published after the Law. Now John preached the Law, and
therefore Christ preaches not, so long as John continues preaching; but when
he is cast into prison, and debarred from preaching, then Christ begins. But
I rather think, that John preached the Gospel (though not perfectly) than the
Law; because our Savior says of him, that he was the least in the kingdom
of heaven Matthew. 11 11.
, that is, in the Church of Christ, in the New Testament: and therefore if he
belonged to the Church of the Gospel, it is most likely that he preached the
Gospel, although not so clearly, as now it is taught; because Christ had not
as then finished the work of our redemption.

John Baptist, lest otherwise he should have been thought rather Christ's
companion, than his forerunner, if they had preached both together Chrysos.
sup.
, yea, hence it was, that John, while he had liberty, only preached, and
baptized, but wrought no miracles Ioh. 10.48.
, because he would not be thought to be equal unto Christ, but only one
that made way for him.

Chrysos. sup.
, as the Jews falsely said to him, Thou bear witness of thy self, therefore
thy testimony is nothing Ioh. 8.13.
, that is, thy testimony is of small worth, if it be confirmed only by thy
own mouth. But this calumniation Christ proves false: Ye sent (says he)
unto John, and he bare witness of me Ioh. 5.33.
: yea John plainly averres this, Ye your selves bear me witness, that I
said, I am not the CHRIST, but that I am sent before him Ioh. 3.28
.



First lest the people should have been separated and sundred, some running
after the one, some after the other, if they had both preached together.

Secondly, lest they should have been excused, in saying, they knew not who^ to
follow; the one being after one manner, the other after another: that is,
Christ more familiar, and John more austere, as our Savior says of himself,
and John.

John was in prison?

John should not be confirmed. Thus Gualter sup.

John was hindered, lest that the preaching thereof should ceasei, Gualt. s.
and this was the principal cause.

Thirdly, Christ did this to teach us, that no Herod against John Baptist, that
he might be hindered from preaching, but he cannot prevail: for John being
exstinct, behold, God stirs up another, and from that time Jesus began to
preach. The Pharisees forbid the Apostles to preach, Acts 4.21. and put them in
prison for preaching, Act. 5.18. but yet they cannot stop their mouths. In the
Judaicall Church, they slay the Prophets, but still God does raise up others.
In the Primitive Church, sanguis martyrum, semen Ecclesia, the persecution of
the Christians, did spread the religion of Christ, more than otherwise it is
likely would have been. The hand of man is too weak to hold Gods hand, or
hinder his work, and therefore so long as this world continues, God will have
a Church upon earth, and in some place or other, some or other to preach his
word.

. 2. Saying, Repent.] The Papists Bellar. de paenit. l. 2. ca 2. Object.
affirm, Contrition, which is joined with an inward terror of the mind, and
proceeds from the sight and consideration of our sins, does not appertain
to the Law, but to the Gospel. They argue thus, Christ preached Repentance, to
the which Contrition does belong ( Repent, for the Kingdom of God is at hand
in this verse) but Christ was a Minister of the Gospel, not of the Law, and
therefore Contrition belongs to the Gospel, not to the Law.

First, Repentance has part from the Law,

Secondly, though the Law and Gospel are Moses the Minister of the Law, may
preach Christ, and Christ the Minister of the Gospel does also establish the
Law, and by the terrors of the Law, call men to the knowledge of their sin,
where Repentance begins.

VERSE. 18. And Jesus walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon
called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a not into the sea (for they were
fishers.)
. 1. And Jesus walking by the sea of Galilee.] some Apostles, some Prophets,
some Evangelists, some Pastors, and Teachers, for the work of the Ministry
Ephesians. 4.11.12.
, and has given unto the Ministers the Ministry, and word of reconciliation 2
Cor. 5.18.19.
. Secondly, he has given unto them spiritual weapons, which are mighty,
through God, to pull down strong holds 2 Cor. 10 4.
. Thirdly, he has given them power, making them able Ministers of the New
Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spiritc. 2 Cor. 3 6.
And therefore they that despise them (as Ministers) despise not men, but
Christ.



Faith is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. and it is he, that reveals divine
truths unto men, Matthew. 16, 17. Flesh and blood has not revealed this unto
thee (says Christ, that I am the true Messiah) but the will of my Father,
which is in heaven: yea, none can come unto God, by any means, except the
Son bring him. John 6.44.



neither he that planteth, nor he that waters, is any thing, 1 Corinthians. 3.7.

Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17. Yea, he gives men faith and power to
believe by the preaching of the Apostles Ioh. 17.20.
; I pray not (says Christ) for these alone, but for them also which shall
believe on me through their word. And therefore the vocation of the Ministers
is not to be contemned.



Dead, in the eye of the world, in which notwithstanding, are some alive in the
eye of the Lord: thus there were seven thousand in Israel 1 King. 19.18.
, though Elias saw none: and in Sardis there were a few names of those that
were pure Rev. 3.4
. Living, in the which some are dead notwithstanding: thus it was with the
Church of Ephesus, Revelat. 2.4. and with Pergamus, Revelat. 2.14. and of
Thyatira, Revelat. 2.19.20. Yea, even in the Church of the Corinthians, and the
Galatians, when they were most pure, there was corruptions among them: and
therefore it is unwarrantable to forsake our Church for the spots and
corruptions of some.




By the Sea of Galilee.] This sea was the lake of Gennesareth, Luke 5.1. near
unto Capernaum, where Christ first began to preach: and therefore it appears
to have been in the beginning of his preaching, and yet some are gained:
Teaching us, that the preaching of the

How comes it to pass,

First, because the Gospel is a seed, and always

Secondly, the principal reason of this is, because

First, by hindering them from going to some places; thus God hindered Saint
Paul from going to Rome Romans 1.13. and 15.22.
, and he was hindered also from going to Thessalonica 2 Thessalonians. 1.18.
; yea directly forbidden by the holy Ghost, to go either to Asia, or unto
Bithynia Acts 16.6.7.
.

Secondly, Sometimes Ministers are called by God, from one place unto another;
thus Saint Paul was called from Troas to Macedonia Acts 16.8.9.
. And hence it comes to pass, that whithersoever God sends his word, there he
does call some by it; which may serve for the comfort and encouragement of the
Ministers, to continue faithful and painful in their vocation, because so
long as they continue and abide, they may hope, God has some there to convert
and turn unto him.

But some Ministers will object,

First, be people never so wicked, yet Ministers If thou warn the wicked of
his way, to turn from it: if he do not turn from his way, he shall die in
his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy soul Ezech. 33.9.
.

Secondly, Ministers must preach, though That they may know that there has
been a Prophet among them Ezech. 2.5.
.

Thirdly, they must not forbear to be instant

. 3. He saw two brethren.] And afterward Zebedee.

Why is mention made here of their affinity,

First, to teach us that the Ministry is a kind the message of the Lord.

Secondly, to teach us, that Christ loves this



Psa. 133.1.
, therefore Christ loves it.

Love comes from God. 1 Ioh. 4.7. and is both the new and old commandment. 1
Ioh. 2.7. yea it is the fulfilling of the commandments. Romans 13.9.

this is my commandment (says Christ) that ye love one another Ioh. 15.12.
.

Romans 12.5. and 1 Cor. 12.12. Secondly, we are the brethren of Christ ( Mat.
12.38. and Heb. 2.17.) and therefore Christ loves to see us live as brethren.

Agapae, or love feasts, Jude. 12. verse. they had their kiss of love. 1 Pet.
5.14. yea a holy kiss, as we see. Romans 16.16. and 1 Cor. 16.20. and 2 Cor.
13.12. and 1 These. 5.26. All which show their mutual and reciprocal love, and
endeared affection one toward another; which our Savior loves to have us
imitate.

the Disciples of Christ (John 13.35.) translated from death unto life (1 Ioh.
3.14.) purified by the holy Spirit of God (1 Pet. 1.22.) in whom God himself
dwells and resides (1 John 4.12.) therefore it is grateful and delightful
unto God.

VERSE. 19. And he says unto them, follow me; and I will make you fishers of
men.
Fishers of men?

in mala^ partem, in the worst sense: thus the Lord threatens his people for
their Idolatry: Behold, I will send for many fishers, and they shall fish them
Ierem. 16.16.
.

in meliorem partem, in a good sense, thus the Lord showing unto the Prophet
Ezech. 47.10.
, the vision of the holy waters says, And it shall come to pass that the
fishers shall stand upon it.

Thirdly, the sense of the phrase here used, is, the kingdom of heaven (that
is the Gospel) is like unto a Net, says our Savior, and therefore they are
wicked fishers, who leaving this net, fish with other poisoned hooks; that is
preach their own inventions, errors, heresies, schisms, and the like.
Fourthly, the Fishers are the Ministers.

Why does Christ speak unto these two Apostles He taught the people in
Parables, because they seeing see not, and hearing they hear not, neither do
they understand Matthew. 13.13.
?

First, Christ did not use a figurative speech

Secondly, our Savior uses this allegory, allegory of Fishers in this verse.

Simon and Andrew: It may now further be demanded, why he uses this allegory
(of Fishing) unto them?

Because, this allusion does most aptly denote unto us the office of Ministers:
to wit, the Fishing and gaining of souls unto God. Malac. 4.6.

That in fishing we must consider both the Fish themselves, who First would
not be catched or taken: but swim away from the Net: so natural and carnal
men would not be won by the word of God; would not be taken captive by the
Net of the Gospel. Secondly, they are not taken by the hook, except they bite,
Ob Jerusalem how gladly would I have gathered thee together, as a hen gathers
her chickings under her wings, but ye would not Matthew. 23.37.
.
Fishers, and that both in respect of the 1. Knowledge, Fishers must know all
shelves, and rocks, and shallowes, the ebbing and flowing of the sea: so
Ministers must know how to direct in prosperity and adversity; how to steer
aright course through the vices and heresies of the world: they must know the
evils and remedies, that they may both save themselves, and those that hear
them, and sail by their direction. 2. Diligence and care required in them:
wherein observe three things; First, Fishermen must observe the heavens, and
the nature of the fishes: thus the Apostle says, to the weak I became as
weak, that I might gain the weak: I am made all things to all men that I
might by all means save some 1 Cor. 9.19.20, 21, 22.
.



Secondly, they must endure cold and danger: Fishers must put to sea in winter
as well as Summer, exposing themselves to dangerous storms which frequently
assail them in their calling: Thus the Apostles suffered hunger and thirst,
and nakedness, and cold, and buffeting, and persecuting 1 Cor. 4.11. and 2
Cor. 6.8
.

Thirdly, Fishers work continually, night and day, we have labored all night
(says the Apostles) but have catched nothing Luke 5.5.
.

Fishes are not taken except they bite and eat the bait: and therefore First,
recusants that will not come unto the word of God, can gain nothing by it;
Secondly, those amongst us, that like Martha are troubled about many things,
preferring the cares of the world, before the cates of the word cannot be won
by it. Thirdly, those that are present at the preaching of the word, but not
attentive unto the word preached, reap no benefit by it, because they learn
it not. Fourthly those that attend to the hearing of the word, but cannot
intend the practice of the word, are not catched by it. Fishes are not taken by
looking upon the bait, but by the eating thereof: so it is not speculation but
practice, not knowledge, but active obedience that benefits our souls.

Fishers had need know both shelves and shallow places: and therefore those
that are ignorant of the nature of sin, and grace; or that know not the
evils and remedies of the disease and the cure, should not intrude themselves
into this function, for they are unfit fishers of men.

Fishers observe the seasons, and the nature of the fishes for which they
labor; so Ministers must first observe the heavens, the blasts of the Spirit,
the zeal of the hearts, that is, the occasions offered unto us by the Lord of
preaching the word: as Saint Paul says, I came to Troas to preach Christ's
Gospel, and a door was opened unto me of the Lord 2 Cor, 2.12.
, that is, the Lord gave me liberty, opportunity or occasion with benefit and
profit to preach the Gospel of Christ.

Secondly, we are made all things to all men, we must apply our selves to all
sorts of maladies, evils, diseases and sores: and that three manner of ways,
viz. First, Opere, by preaching, and catechizing, examining, conferring,
disputing, that the people may be made perfect 2 Timothy 3.16. and 4, 2.
. Secondly, Objecto, by reprehending and reprooving whatsoever is amiss,
whether drunkenness, or adultery, or oppression, or blasphemy, or lying, or
filthy speaking, or any sin whatsoever. Thirdly, Modo, sometimes reprooving
mildly, sometimes with fear, plucking them out of the fire Jude ver. 22.23.
; sometimes with a rod, sometimes with the Spirit of meekness, read 1 Cor.
4.21. and corner 1 Cor. 5.3.4. with 2 Cor. 2.7.8. and Gal. 3 1. with 4.12.19.
and Nehem. 5 11. with verse 13. Neither must people think, that Ministers do
this in hatred, to the party sinning, but that they might present them as
chaste virgins unto the Lord.

Fishers expose themselves to cold and danger in the discharging or executing
of their callings; so do Ministers; and therefore people first should think
Ministers worthy of honor and reverence: yea secondly, of maintenance: yea
thirdly, and principally be careful that they loose not their labor, that they
fish not all night and catch nothing: that they rise early and go late to bed,
expose themselves to perils and dangers to no purpose, or benefit at all unto
their people.

Fishers work night and day: so Ministers must preach diligently, because all
the names given unto them signify labor and pains:

Whether the Church of God be compared to a House: then we are the builders
thereof, 1 Cor. 3.10. Or Family: then we are first, the Stewards to take care
for the provision of all: Cor. 4.1
Secondly, Schoolemasters, to teach the children of and in the family: Thirdly,
Physicians, to cure the maladies of the sick in the house. Or Sheepefold, then
we are the Sheepheards. Or Field; then we are, First the husbandmen, or tillers
thereof 1 Cor. 3.9
. Secondly, the planters and waterers 1 Cor. 3.6.
. Thirdly, the workers in the vineyard Mat. 9.38.
. Or Sea: then we are, First the Pylots of the ship. Secondly, the Fishers in
this Sea.


And thus we see by this Allegory of fishing, Christ does to the life point out
the office and vocation of Ministers.



Luke 5.5. but Christ commanding, and they obeying, they catch many. verse 6.
and therefore our Savior here says, ego faciam, I will make you fishers of
men: I will (says he) be with you Matthew. 28.20.
, and I will not forsake you John 14 18.
, but will give an increase unto your pains 1 Cor. 3 6.
.

How does Christ give a blessing to the labors of his servants the Preachers?

By the Holy Spirit, which works with the

VERSE. 21. And going on from thence, he saw other two brethren, James the
son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in a ship with Zebedes their father,
mending their nets: and he called them.
He saw two brethren in a ship.] In the Allegorical sense of this verse, we
may observe; That this world is like unto a Sea,

. 2. With Zebedee his Father:] Why was

Chrysostom answers, Non ut adjuvaret eos, sed ut solarentur illum, not that
he might help them, but that they might obey, and comfort him: And this their
love, and care, and duty toward

Why must children give obedience to their

The first reason hereof is Temporal: children sic vos non vobis, parents take
care and pains for their children, therefore there is great reason that
children should obey, respect, and reverence their parents.

The second reason is Natural, children have

The third reason is Spiritual; and this is Exodus 20.12. Levit. 19.3. and
23.22. Ephesians. 6.1.2.

What do children owe unto Parents?

Four things, viz. First, Nutrimentum, Joseph took care to provide for his
old Father, in the time of that long famine Genesis 45.9.10.
; And therefore unnatural are those men, who being rich suffer their parents
to want.

Secondly, Amorem, love: children whether they or their parents be rich or
poor, they must love, and tenderly endeare their parents.

Thirdly, Reverentiam, reverence and respect: Non vultu laedendi Ambros. s.
, children must not wound their parents with darts of discontented
countenances: for Qui torvo visu, elatis oculis, meretur supplicium Hierom. s.
; he that beholds his Parents with a proud look, or a stern and grim eye,
deserves to be punished. Solomon, when a King, honors his Mother Bathsheba:
and Hester, when a Queen, her Uncle Mardochee; who in stead of a Father had
brought her up. Hest. 2.7.

Fourthly, Obedientiam, obedience and duty: for this obedience, I. God
commands. Colos. 3.20. II. God commends, where he finds it: as we see in the
Rechabites. Ierem. 35.18. and Prove. 15.20. III. the contrary hereunto God
threatens. Deuteronomy. 21.20. and complains of. Ezech. 22.7. IV. the obedient unto
parents, God comforts. Prover. 13.1.

Is the cause of disobedience toward Parents,

Certainly the fault may be in parents, And that either First, by education
either By not educating them civilly, but rudely and unmannerly, as many do.
Or By bringing them up unto drunkenness, gaming, sports, and the like. Or By
pampering them too much, or by being too much indulgent over the^, not
crossing them in their wills or desires, nor correcting them for their faults.
Or
Secondly, by enriching themselves by wicked means, and so God in judgment
giving them children, that shall prodigally scatter, what they impiously did
gather: de male quaesitis vix gaudet tertius haeres, evil gotten goods last
not long; Fathers wickedly gather, and sons profusely spend, so that within a
time, those goods are possessed and enjoyed by others.


Now although Parents thus may be the occasion of their childrens disobedience,
yet this does not excuse the undutifulnesse of the child, because their Fathers
have not deserved it at their hands.

Mending their nets:] Why did some mend Nets, and some fish?

(Chrysostom. oper. imperf. s.) say, forte it

Peter only fished, and John mended the Nets.

Chrysostom verus. Chrysostom. op. imp. sup.
sup.) to teach us, That God makes choice of the poor of this world 1 Cor.
1.26. Obser.
. And therefore those that are poor must not be dejected, as though they were
less dear unto God: for first in Temporal things, they are more blessed, the
little which the righteous man possesses, being better then the riches of many
wicked Psalm. 37.26.
. And secondly, in Spiritual things they are nearer unto God; and therefore
better is the poor, that walks in his uprightness, then the perverse rich
man Pro. 28.6.
: yea better is a poor and wise child, then an old and foolish King Eccles.
4.13.
. Wherefore poor men should not be discouraged nor dishartened, but remember
that Christ for our sakes became poor 2 Cor. 8.9.
: and therefore none ought to think that they are less dear unto God,
because they are not rich.

VERSE. 22. And they immediately left the ship, and their Father and followed
him.
Christ first calls, and then they follow, they enter not into the function of
the Ministry, until they be called: Teaching us,

Why is no function to be undertaken without a calling?

Because we can do nothing of our selves,

Secondly, it is God that fits and prepares us, and that in inferior callings:
he fits, and then calls Bezaleel, and Aholiah, for the cutting of stones, and
the carving of timber, and engraving in gold and silver Exodus 31.45. and
35.30.31.
.

Thirdly, hence we think those men to be called to the work of the
Ministry, who are fitted for the discharging thereof, and enabled to divide the
word aright.

Some perhaps here will say, that this aptness unto,

To which we answer, that it does altogether: for we have a double calling, the
first is Internal, External, which is a certain fitness or ability
thereunto, whether it be acquired by instruction, or study, or natural
endowments, which are given by God, and are necessary to be had, before we
undertak any calling: that is, we must be instructed, we must be taught, we
must study, we must be made fit and able for the discharging of the calling,
otherwise we are not called: for fitness and ability unto or for a calling is
a negative rule of a calling; that is, they that are unfit for, and unable to
discharge the work of a Minister, were never by God called unto the Ministry.

VERSE. 23. And Jesus went about all Galilee teaching in their Synagogues, and
preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, and healing all manner of sickness, and
all manner of diseases among the people.
. 1. And Jesus went about all Galilee.] Why

For three causes, to wit, First for Christ's cause.

First, this history is here inserted and expressed for Christ's own sake,
that thereby he might show unto us, that he did not call Apostles, that
himself might be idle; for notwithstanding this, he preaches, and
endeavors the salvation of our souls himself: Ministers can do nothing of
themselves without Christ, and therefore he gives them a promise first of his
own presence ( behold I am present with you unto the end of the world Matthew.
28.20.
.) And Secondly, of the presence of the Holy Ghost: I will send the comforter
unto you, to lead you into all truth





That it is the root of all evil, yea, wounding and piercing deep the soul
with many sorrows. II. To the libidinous apply, 1 Cor. 6.18. that the
fornicatour sins against his own body, III. To the prophaners of the Temple,
and House of God, apply, 1 Cor. 3.17. if any pollute the Temple of God, him
will God destroy, for the Temple of God is holy. IV. To liars apply, Rev. 21.8.
and 22.15. that out of heaven shall be shut all those, that love or tell lies.
V. In general to all sinners apply, 1 Cor. 6.9. and Ephesians. 5.5.6. that no
sinners shall inherit the kingdom of God, or of Christ.



Teaching in their Synagogues, and preaching.

Chrysos. imperf.
.





Secondly, Christ taught them, for the helping

Thirdly, our Savior did teach them, for the 2 Pet. 1.12.15.
.

Secondly, in respect of the affection, because therein are tares, and the
foreskinne of the flesh, yea a love unto, and a delight in every thing that is
evil: Now preaching is a knife, to cut off this corrupt prepuce or foreskin,
it is a weeding hook to root out these tares, yea a sword to subdue all
rebellious lusts; and therefore it should frequently be performed with all
meekness, and tenderness of spirit, by the mercy of God persuading men.

Thirdly, in respect of the Impediments which from without hinder men from the
practice of religion, which are many, and with the most prevail much; and
therefore Ministers should be both careful and painful in reproving,
admonishing, advising, persuading, and exciting men, to a solid, serious,
sincere, and constant serving of God. Thus some (I say) show a difference
between teaching, and preaching, referring teaching to moral virtues, or
natural righteousenesse, and preaching to the righteousness of faith, and
Evangelicall graces.

Secondly, I rather think that these two docens et praedicans, teaching, and
preaching, are Synonyma, importing and signifying one and the same thing; Or at
least are but thus to be distinguished; to teach, shows what he did in
Galilee? To preach, signifies, how he taught, and what he taught: First,
Quomoda, how he taught in Galilee; it was publicly: Secondly, quae, what he
taught in Galilee, the Gospel and word of the New Testament.

. 3. In their Synagogues.] These Synagogues Jews, and Samaritans.


Why did Christ preach in the Synagogues?

First, lest he should otherwise seem to contemn







First, every religion of the world does teach the worship of some power, yea
and that publicly. All Heathens that worship any Gods, have solemn public
places and days, separated and set apart for the worship of them; yea, all
religions throughout the world, none excepted, have their public places for
public worship; and therefore it were absurd for Christians to be without, or
to neglect them. Secondly, the Church in all ages, places, and times, where and
when the profession of religion was permitted, and not publicly persecuted,
had their solemn places for public meetings: The Jews had the Temple and
their Synagogues, which Christ here resorts unto to preach in; and which the
Apostles also repair unto for the celebration of public worship, as we see in
many places of the Acts.

Again, they had their Synagogues in Antioch Acts 13.15.
, for this same purpose; yea, in every city there were some of these publik
places Acts 15.21.
, and therefore it is very unfitting for Christians to be destitute of them, or
careless of the service of God in them.

Thirdly, because Christ did not despise them, (whose action is our instruction
and imitation) neither his Apostles after him; as we see in Capernaum, Christ
and his Apostles being there on the Sabbath day, he enters (not unto a private
house, but) into the Synagogue and preached Mark. 1.21.
so also in his own country Mar 6.1.2.
, which he did not seldom, or some few times, but frequently, for as his
custom was, he went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day Luke 4.16.
, So Peter and John go up together to the temple to pray Acts 3.1.
. And therefore although we may and ought to pray at home, yet not upon the
Lords day, or in any other time of the celebration of the public ordinances,
if we be able to come to Church.



They differ in three things; to wit, first, in power, vis unita fertior; the
more aid, the stronger force; those that pray at home, sleighting the
assemblyes of the Saints are deprived of the help of their prayers, the joint
cry of many quickly penetrates the heavens.

Secondly, in the promise of being heard; where two or three are gathered
together, there Christ has promised to be present also Mat. 18.20.
, if in his name they be assembled; how much more graciously will he be then
present, when many are gathered together, both upon his own day, and in his
own house, for the celebration of his worship, and to power forth prayers unto
his Father in his own name and mediation.

Thirdly, in the ordination of God, who by his Church has appointed and
ordained the Lords day for prayer, and reading, and preaching, and hearing, and
meditating, and the like: and therefore faith is strong here, hoping assuredly
that our pra^ers shall be heard. I. because God is merciful. II. because we
pray in faith yea III. because we pray unto God upon that day, which is
appointed for this and other holy duties, yea in that place which (by his
providence) has been set apart for his public worship and service: my house
(says our Savior) shall be called a house of prayer. And therefore we must
not neglect to join our selves with the congregation of the Lord met together
in his house, upon his day, for his worship, and service: And thus much for the
first answer, or reason why our Savior went into the Synagogue to preach.

Secondly, Christ went into the Synagogue, what I tell you in darkness, that
speak you in light: and what ye hear in the ear, that preach ye upon the
house top Mat. 10.27.
: yea our Savior being examined by Cajaphas, answers, I spoke openly to the
world, I ever taught in the Synagogue, and in the Temple, whether the Jews
always resort; and in secret have I said nothing John 18.20.
, And therefore both by our Saviors precept, and practice, the word is not to
be preached in corners, and unlawful conventicles, but publicly, in the
temple, so long as the profession and preaching thereof is not persecuted:
truth blusheth not, neither seeks corners, but religion is truth, because
Christ is truth John 14.6.
; yea again, he fears not man, that truly fears God John 12 42.
, and therefore those that are called by God unto the work of the Ministry,
must boldly preach the word of God, not fearing the frown or anger of any.

What may we think of the meetings and secret

They are neither to be liked, nor allowed of; nocte latent mendae, in the
dark, gross faults are not perceived, and therefore those that do evil hate
the light, lest their evil should be made manifest, whereas the truth refuses
not to be tried by the light.

Secondly, their love of private assemblies, and contempt of public does at
the best ar^^^ one of the worst vices, and first sins, that is pride; they
hereby preferring their own tenets opinions, doctrines, assemblies, yea
persons, before all others: And therefore these as both proud and erroneous we
justly reject.

Heb. 11.38. for which they are commended and rewarded by God, verse 39. and
therefore this practice is not to be thus taxed, as proud and erroneous.

Elias that fled for his life) they were enforced to hide themselves, and
privately to enjoy those comforts, and discharge those duties and exercises of
religion, which they could not publicly be suffered to do: But the
Anabaptists and Familists, may enjoy the reading and preaching of the word, and
the benefits of Sacraments, and the assemblies of the Saints, and be made
partakers of the prayers of the congregation; and will not.







He taught in their Synagogues:] Why does Christ teach and preach in a corrupt
Synagogue? For as the Galileans were a mixed people, so their religion and
worship was mixed, as was that of the Samaritans, as is largely declared 2
King. 17.32.34.41. where we read that they both worshipped God, as the Levites
taught them; and served their Idols, as their own Priests taught them?

Because the place was dedicated unto God, Acts 3.11 and 5.12.
, yea preach and pray by a rivers side. Acts 16.13.14. yea in Athens, Paul
neither refuses to dispute in their Synagogues, nor in the market place, Acts
17.17. nor to preach upon Mars hit hill, verse 22. And that because the true
zeal of the preaching of the word, and of the worship of God, will not be
quenched or hindered by small impediments, no not by any that is not sinful or
prohibited, either directly, or by a necessary consequent: Paul would rather
have the word to be preached through strife and contention, then not at all.
Phil. 1. yea rather then that should be let, Timothy is willed to be
circumcised.

What shall we think of those, that give over the preaching of the word, and
forsake their high callings, only for ceremonies, not only Anabaptists, and
Separatists, but diverse others?

I answer first, whatsoever is commanded by superiors which is evil and sin
in it self, is not to be done; thou must die rather, for evil must not be
done, that good may come of it Romans 3.8.
. And therefore before thou give over thy calling, thou must consider, whether
those things enjoined be sin or no? Secondly, if the things enjoined be not
sin, but inconvenient, then distinguish between him that commands it and thy
self: Judge not him, for that belongs unto God; but look unto thine own
part, and give not over the care of thy flock, or thy preaching for a garment,
or seeming inconvenience only, which is imposed upon thee by command. Thirdly,
I judge no man but my self but let all those judge themselves, that for these
outward laudable and ancient ^^ceremonies of our Church give over their
callings, whether they want true zeal or not? or whether they more respect
themselves, then they do the preaching of the word of God? remembering that
Christ would preach in a Synagogue, which had been defiled by manifold
superstitions, rather then not preach at all, that being the principal work
for which he was sent, as it is ours who are his Messengers.

. 4. The Gospel of the Kingdom.] Why is

In a double respect, viz. First, in respect of God. Secondly, in respect of us.

First, it is called the Gospel of the Kingdom, in Malach. 4.6.
; we ought to be the Lords both by creation and election, and every way, both
in body and soul; but by sin, and the malice of Satan, we are now none of
Gods, neither have any part in him at all; but are wholly opposite unto him,
both in hearts and lives, deprived of the glory of God Romans 3.24.
, reprobate unto every good work, and polluted both in soul and body:
wherefore our condition being thus desperately miserable in our selves, the
Lord in much mercy sends the Gospel unto us, his scope therein being, to
reconcile us thereby unto himself.

And therefore first, let us put off the works of darkness, and in our lives
and conversations submit and subject our selves unto the obedience of God,
doing willingly and readily, that which he requires of us in the Gospel. And
then secondly, we may be sure of remission and pardon of all our sins, of
reconciliation unto our God in and through Christ, of protection and providence
both spiritual and temporal; yea, of whatsoever is good here, and of eternal
glory hereafter: for all these are promised by him that is faithful in his
promises, to all those that truly obey the preaching of the Gospel of the
kingdom.

the Gospel of the Kingdom, in respect of us, because it calls us unto our
Coronation, and to the enjoying of a Kingdom: not that every faithful person
shall be made a King or Ruler over some one Nation or People: neither have a
temporal Diadem set upon his head: But first, because the greatest things in
this world are Kingdoms, therefore it is called, the Gospel of the kingdom;
because it brings us unto that honor, pleasure, joy and felicity, which far
exceeds all temporal possessions, crowns, royalties, and Monarchies
whatsoever. And secondly, because Kings are free, and subject unto none,
therefore it is called the Gospel of the Kingdom, because thereby

Wherein does the joy and felicity of the

In a full assurance, that they shall want nothing either spiritual or
temporal,

First, those that are obedient unto the Gospel, and word of God, have a
promise of temporal blessings, to wit, that rather Lions shall hunger, and be
destitute of a prey, then they want any good thing which they stand in need of
Psa. 34.10.
, because they shall be like trees planted by the rivers side, and whatsoever
they do, it shall prosper Psalm. 1.3. and Ierem. 17.7.
; yea, their seed shall be mighty upon earth: the generation of the upright
shall be blessed; yea wealth and riches shall be in his house Psalm. 112 2.3.
.

Secondly, they have a promise of spiritual graces, to wit, first, protection
against Satan, because although Satan be strong, yet Christ is stronger Luke
1^ 22.
, yea protection against sin, it shall not reign over them Romans ^.14.
, neither shall they sin unto death 1 Ioh. 3.9.
. Secondly, that they shall delight themselves in the works of holiness, in
the ways of God, and in the exercises of Religion. Read to this purpose the
whole 119. Psalm. Thirdly, they shall have peace of conscience Phil. 4.7.
. that being always quiet, excusing not accusing them: yea such a peace, that
nothing can dismay them, or cause them to doubt, or fear, or to forsake their
hold, that is, the Lord in whom they trust Job. 13.15. and Romans 8.36 etc.
.

Thirdly, they have a promise of eternal glory, where first is life
everlasting. Secondly, glorified bodies. Thirdly, absolute freedom. Fourthly,
deliverance from all miseries, disasters, griefs whatsoever. Fifthly, the
presence of God, the sight of whose face shall be our chiefest felicity; as
follows in the next chapter. To sum up all, the child of God, I. Considers,
who it is, that makes all these large promises in the Gospel, it is the Lord,
who is faithful in his promises, they being all Yea and Amen unto the
faithful in Christ Jesus; yea, it is the Lord, who is so true and certain in
his word, that every word of his shall be accomplished, and heaven and earth
shall rather pass away, than one Iota, or tittle of his word shall fall to the
ground unfulfilled. II. He considers, what God promises; A sufficiency in
temporal things, security, safety, and joy in spiritual things; yea,
unspeakable happiness in the kingdom of heaven, where his body shall neither
be subject to death, nor corruption, nor captivity, nor sickness, nor
misery, but shall live for ever, a glorified body, enjoying the fruition and
sight of God in eternal bliss. Now the consideration of these two things,
makes the child of God enjoy heaven upon earth, and a greater measure of
comfort, than the possession of the whole world could afford unto him: the
assurance of the accomplishment of these promises unto him, puts more gladness
in his heart, than all the things and comforts of this life can in the heart of
the worldling Psalm. 4.7.
. And therefore aptly is the Gospel called the Gospel of the Kingdom,
because it calls and invites us to greater joy, happiness, and glory, than
the greatest Monarch enjoyes.

. 5 Healing all manner of sicknesses, and all manner Christ, we see, first
teaches them, and preaches unto them, and then bestows corporal blessings
upon them.

Why does our Savior work miracles after

First, ob dignitatem, because of the excellency

Secondly, ob utilitatem, because of the utilitie, miracles are altogether
unprofitable unto us, until we be taught and instructed by the word, because
they do not edify us any further, than only as they confirm the word unto
us: thus the Apostles preach, and God confirms the word by them preached, with
miracles and signs Mark. 16.20. and Acts 4.16
.

ob instructionem, for our instruction, that we hence might learn, that
temporal blessings are not to be expected, until we be instructed in the
knowledge of spiritual graces: For the true order of mercy is, first to
convert the soul, then to heal the body.



Probare, to prove and try us: thus the Lord hedgeth about his vineyard, and
pruneth it, to try if it will bring forth grapes Esa 5.1.2
: thus he spares the tree one year longer, and digges about it, and dungs it,
to see whether it will prove more fruitful, than it has been heretofore Luke
13 8.
. And thus the Lord bestows temporal blessings, and corporal mercies upon
us, to prove us, whether we will convert unto him, and serve him more
faithfully, than formerly.

Secondly, Damnare, to leave us without excuse, and for our greater judgment
and condemnation: the Lord gives the former and latter rain in his season
unto us Ierem. 5.24.
, and therefore great shall our punishment be, if we will not serve and obey
him: we must render a reason at the last day, of our stewardship, and give
account whether we have improved all his mercies and blessings, upon us
bestowed, to his glory, and the benefit of our own souls.

Thirdly, Coronare, to crown our obedience: God persuades us to fear, love,
and serve him, and bids us try him, if he will not bless us Malach. 3.13.
, and therefore when we are obedient unto his call, he makes good his blessed
promises unto us: If my people would (says the Lord) have hearkened unto me,
and walked in my ways, I would thus have crowned and rewarded their obedience,
I would have subdued their enemies, and avenged them upon their adversaries; I
would have fed them with the finest of the wheat, and with honey out of the
Rock have satisfied them Psalm. 81.13.15.16.
. Thus we see the first end is uncertain, the second end is desperate, and it
is only the third, that is sweet and comfortable, because it depends upon the
promises of God. Read these places, Exodus 23.25. Levit. 26.3. Deuteronomy. 7.13. and
11.26. and 15.5. Prove. 10.6. Lam. 3.25. In all which places God promises to
bless even with temporal blessings, those that serve him in singleness of
heart: which promises he performs: first for his truths sake, because the
word is gone out of his mouth, therefore he will make good what he has said.
Secondly, for his childrens sake, in love unto them; he delights in them that
delight in him, and his service; and therefore willingly performs with them
the oath which he has sworn. Thirdly, for the sake of others, that all may
know, that God loves the righteous, that there is a reward for the righteous;
Esai. 61.9.
and that what blessings God gives unto them, he gives in love; that by the
experimental knowledge hereof, men may be allured to serve the Lord.

Healing all manner of sicknesses, and all manner of diseases.] Why does Christ
rather these miracles

Christ could indeed have wrought greater miracles, because all things were
possible and facile unto him,

First of all, Christ chooses to heal and cure, and do good, rather than
other miracles, that he might show himself to be a Minister of mercy, full
of tender compassion. Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit utile dulci: he teaches
profitable things for the soul, he works pleasing things unto the body; and
all for this end principally, that he might gain and win them to embrace
the Gospel: Teaching us,

Secondly, Christ choseth to heal and cure, and the like, to show, that
temporal things are to be expected from him, and to be desired of him: and
hence he teaches us to pray, Our Father which art in Heaven. Give us this day
our daily bread Mat. 6.11
.

What temporal blessings come from God, or

First, in general, All, for he is the author and

Secondly, more particularly, many several from the Lord: When Moses prays
then Israel prevails, when he cease praying, Amaleck prevails Exodus 17 11.
.

Secondly, preservation or deliverance from enemies and danger comes from the
Lord; this was not unknown unto Jacob, who being afraid of his brother, cries
unto God, Deliver me I pray thee, from the hand of my brother, even from the
hand of Esau; for I fear him, least he will come and smite me Genesis 32.11.
.

Thirdly, health, or recovery from sickness comes from the Lord, this made
Hezekiah when he heard that he must die, to pray unto God to add some more
days unto his life, and he was heard 2 King. 20.2.
, and Ahaziah is blamed for this, because he sought not unto God in his
sickness, but to the Physicians 2 King. 1.3.
.

Fourthly, offspring, and children come from the Lord; thus the Psalmist,
Children are an heritage of the Lord; and the fruit of the womb is his reward
Psalm. 127 3.
, and it is he only that opens the womb, making the barren to bring forth;
for which cause Anna repaires unto him, praying for a child 1 Samuel 1 10.
.

Fifthly, Marriages are disposed by God, and a good wife comes from him Prove. 19
14.
; and therefore Abraham's servant prays unto him so to direct his journey, that
he may obtain a wife for his Masters son Genesis 24.12. etc. and v. 50.
.

Sixthly, Food and Raiment comes from the Lord, and therefore Jacob not knowing,
what would become of him in the place to which he went, he desires God to
provide him meat to eat, and clothes to put on Genesis 28.20.
.

Seventhly, the Lord prospers buildings, and therefore Nehemiah fearing, lest
the work should be hindered, prays unto God, to prosper it, which he does
Nehem. 4.9.
.

Eighthly, Rain in time of drought comes from the Lord, and therefore Elias
prays unto him for it 1 King. 18.42.
. Thus the Lord is our cornucopia, that affords unto us whatsoever is good, in
him dwelling all fullness; and therefore in all our necessityes let us repair
unto him, begging from him what we stand in need of, observing these two
cautions. I. In petendo, in thy supplications, crave first those things that
are most worthy, and temporal things only in the second place Mat. 6.33.
. II. In sperando, in our hope to be heard, let us first labor to be
converted from sin unto God, and then we have a promise to be heard Malach.
3.10.
, otherwise none Ierem. 5.25.
.

Thirdly, Christ chooses to heal, cure, and the like, that in a type he
might show, that he only cures the diseases, and maladies of the soul; but
of this we have elsewhere amply to treat of, and therefore here I omit it.

. 6. Healing their sicknesses and How do these differ?

First, some say, by sickness is meant the infirmities Chrysostom. (if it be
his work) op. imperf. s.

Synonyma, both signifying one and the same thing, or that the one signifies
great infirmities, and the other little.

Thirdly, it is only to be understood of bodily

Omnes; all diseases, and all sickenesses.] How did

Not collective (as they say) as though he distributive, that he cured some
of all sorts of diseases: Thus answers Calvin.

Secondly, I rather think that is to be understood collective then
distributive, that is both, of persons, and maladies; that all persons
whatsoever, and howsoever diseased that either came, or were brought unto him,
were cured by him; no person or plague sent away without redress. Wherein two
things are held forth unto our view, first, that nothing is impossible unto
Christ; for he can cure all, and all manner of sicknesses and diseases.
Secondly, that Christ cures all our sicknesses, and all our sores; or Christ
perfectly cures all our sins.

What sins does Christ cure?

All whatsoever; though our sins were as blood, yet they shall be clean
washed away. Isai. 1.18. read Ezec. 18.22. Ier. 50.20. Mich. 7.19. and 1 Ioh.
1.7. The blood of Christ purges us from all our sins.

How does this appear, that Christ purges us

First, it appears robore agentis, by the omnipotency

Secondly, this appears; valor pretij, by the

Thirdly, this appears, modo agendi, by the Non tollit ut non sint, sed ut non
imputentur: He has cured and healed all our sins, not so as that we have no
sin inhering in us, but that none, we commit shall be imputed unto us: And
therefore if we have Christ we have enough, we need not the merit of the Saints
to bring us to heaven, as the Papists teach.

But they object,

First, suppose it were thus, yet there is no necessity but this is no less
then plain blasphemy, as shall elsewhere be showed. I say there is no need of
any intercessours unto Christ, nay there ought to be none, because intercession
is the office of Christ: And hence the Wise Men being instructed by the Holy
Spirit (as was showed before) fall down before Christ, not before the Virgin,
and worship him, not her.



First, they offer unto God the Merits of the Saints; or more plainly, they
pray unto God to hear them, for the Saints sake. Quaesumus domine, ut per
merita Christoferi, Erasmi Thomae. etc. We beseech thee oh Lord to hear us,
for the Merits of Saint Christopher, Erasmus, Thomas Becket, Damian, Hierome,
Martha, Gertrude, etc. Chemnit exam. p. 3. 154.
. Yea most plainly, Supplicamus domine, ut meritis Rochae ab aeterna morte
liberemur Ibid. f. 153. b. b.
. That is hear us good Lord, and by the Merits of Saint Roch deliver us from
eternal death, and diverse the like blasphemies Lege f. 158. a.
.

Secondly, they desire protection and preservation from the Saints, they have a
prayer unto Saint Andrew, O tuis meritis me a futura ira defendas: Oh holy
Saint Andrew, defend me by thy merits from the wrath to come Chem. p. 3. 157. b.
, and the like request they make unto Saint James, O Iacobe, tuis meritis, me
ab ira ventura eripias, et in angelorum consortium, etc. Oh holy Saint, by thy
merits deliver me from the anger of God, and bring me to the participation and
fellowship of the blessed Angels Id. f. 157 b.
. They have the like prayer unto Saint Jude, O Judah, tuis meritis a potentia
damonum ad invisibiles potentias, etc. Oh blessed Saint, by thy merits free me
from the power of Satan, and bring me unto the dominion and kingdom of God
158. a.
.

Thirdly, they pray unto the Saints, for to impute their righteousness unto
them, and by their merits to make them just: Thus they pray to Simon Zelotes,
Sancte Simon Zelotes, a cogitationibus immundis, tuis meritis me emundes, and
monita mihi tribuas, unde angelica celsitudo, admirabilem me videat and justum:
That is, oh holy Saint Simon, by thy merits cleanse me from all my unclean
thoughts, and give thou me such counsel and advice, and such ability to obey
it, that I may appear to those blessed Saints and souls, and Angels who are
in heaven, to be holy and righteous f. 157. a sine.
.

Fourthly, the reason of these prayers made unto the Saints is, because God is
severe, rigid, and austere, yea, and Christ also, but the Saints are mild and
merciful f. 183. b
, hence they say, appellandum a justicia Dei ad misericordiam Mariae f. 147. a.
. We must appeal from the justice of God, to the mercy of the Virgin Mary.
Again, Christus judex, nil inultum, ergo Deus providit advocatam mitem,
suavem, says Antoninus: That is Christ is so severe and exact a Judge, that he
will spare no offenders, neither leave unpunished any offenses; wherefore God
has provided a sweet and meek Advocatrix to mediate for us f. 147 a.
. He that desires to see more and worse examples of the point in hand, let him
read, Chemnit exampar. 3. f. 183. b. and 147. a. and b. and Biel ^lect. 80. and
Mort. Appeal. 240.

Fifthly, hence it comes to pass, that their love to the Virgin Mary, does
far exceed their love unto Christ, O Maria nescio ad quem fugiam, etc. f 156.
a.
Oh Blessed Virgin, whom can I fly unto with comfort, but only unto thee.
Laus Deo, Virgini, and Christo Mort. App. f. 240. l.
. Glory and praise be given unto God the Father, unto the Virgin the Mother,
and unto Christ the Son. Thus they can pray with more comfort unto the
Virgin, then unto Christ, and therefore in their Magnificat they prefer and
place the Virgin before Christ, rancking her with the Blessed Trinity, yea
leaving out the Holy Ghost, to put her in.

VERSE. 24. And his fame went through all Syria, and they brought unto him all
sick people, that were taken with diverse diseases and torments, and those
which were possessed with Devils, and those which were lunaticke, and that had
the palsy, and he healed them.
. 1. And his fame went throughout all Syria.]

What and where was this kingdom of

It was an ample and large kingdom, Euphrates. Fourthly, the South side
thereof was limited by the Deserts of Arabia and Egypt, and did not extend
further, than thither.

How many parts was there of this large kingdom

Some make seven parts thereof Tyrius l. 13. de bello sacro cap. 2.
. I.

. 2. And they brought unto him all sick people,

What diseases or sicknesses did Christ heal?

Some Aretius sup.
say, that he healed two several heaps, were, First, sick people, Secondly,
taken with diverse diseases. Thirdly, oppressed with torments.
Unto these answer, Fourthly, those that were possessed with Devils. Fifthly,
those that were Lunatike. Sixthly, those that had the Palsy.


But I omit the prosecuting of these, because they are more curious: this we
may take notice of, that all the sicknesses and diseases mentioned here to be
cured by Christ, were grievous maladies.









Male habentes, all sick people; these are sinners, who although they would
persuade either themselves or others, that they are not sick; yet the truth
is, they are not well, and therefore if they be not cured by Christ, they can
never recover, but will grow worse and worse: although their sins seem but
small as yet.

Morbis detent^s, those that were taken with diseases: these are they that are
captives unto sin, taken prisoners of Satan, and must continue in those
chains, until Christ free them.

Torminibus detentos, those that were taken with inward pains and torments:
(...), Probationibus,



Go thy way, and sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee Ioh 5.14.
, as if he would say, this long and heavy disease has been inflicted upon
thee for thy former sins, and therefore take heed of sinning hereafter. Thus
the Apostle tells the Corinthians, that for their unreverent and unworthy
receiving of the holy communion, many were sick and weak among them, and many
slept: that is, many were sick, and many dead 1 Cor. 11.31.
.

Secondly, sometimes sickness is inflicted upon us to curb and keep us back
from sin: thus David was afflicted Psa. 119 67.71.
.

Thirdly, sometimes to stop the mouths of others: thus David's child was
stricken with sickness and death 2 Samuel 12.14.
.

Fourthly, sometimes to teach others by their example, that are thus afflicted:
thus the Lord daily lays sickness upon some for the instruction of others,
and thus the Galileans were wounded Luke 13.3.5.
.

Fifthly, sometimes to glorify God, and that either By the miracle which is
wrought: thus God was glorified by the blind man. Ioh. 9.3.
. By our patience; and thus Job was afflicted with boyles and sores.


And hence they are called Trials: wherefore we must apply all our sicknesses,
and griefs of body, to the comfort and advantage of the soul; learning
therein, I. to increase in patience, II. to repent us of our sins, and III.
to grow up in faith and confidence in God, in and through the only Physician
of the Soul, Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, Lunaticos, those that were lunaticke: Aretius sup.
say, that Lunatici signify Epileptic^s, either those that were sick of the
falling sickness, or the Epilepsie, a disease which deprives one of the use of
mind and sense together for a time: it is called by the Physicians, Morbus
sacer, and Comitialis, and Herculeus. Secondly, I rather think, that Lunatici
here signifies Maniacos, those that are mad, brain-sicke, and deprived of
common sense: and are called lunaticke for diverse causes, according to the
opinion of diverse. First, some think, because this disease is caused by the
influence of the Moon A retius sup.
. Secondly, others think, because those only which are born directly at the
change of the Moon, are afflicted with this disease. Thirdly, others think,
they are so called, because this disease is bred in the brain, by the Aspect
of the Moon with other Planets. Fourthly, because this evil does increase and
decrease according to the increase and decrease of the Moon: and in this sense
it is a symbol of sin; for our hearts are dunghils, or noisome channels, and
the more they are stirred, the more they smell; the more our affections are
excited and provoked unto sin, the more mad we grow therein. And therefore
none must think, that they are free from this lunacie of sin, because they
are not excited; but if they be prone unto sin when they are provoked, or
occasion is offered, certainly they are not in their right wits, or minds, or
not rightly disposed in their souls: and therefore had need labor by Christ
to be healed of this phrenzie.

Fifthly, Damoniacos, those that are possessed of Plato and the Philosophers
used for God: Secondly, or for the good and evil Genius: Or thirdly, for an
evil Spirit, and thus the holy Scripture always uses it. Hence (...)
signifies, a damone teneor, I am captivated or taken by the Devil: and (...)
obsessus, besieged, or beset round about with the Devil. Thus by nature we
are assaulted daily, by one Devil or other, which is in us: there is a Devil
of pride, and of anger, and of envy, and of luxury, and of drunkenness, and
of calumny, and of covetousness, and of treachery, and of blasphemy, and of
profaneness, by which we are daily tempted, and therefore we must repair to
the Physician of our souls for preservation from this internal foe.

Paralyticos, the Palsy; this is an ordinary disease in the Soul, when the
Nerves are bound, and there is no power of moving: and therefore power and
ability is to be begged at Gods hands.

Thus much for the second general answer, why our Savior is said here to cure
only great maladies.

Propter Medicum, for the Physicians sake, these sicknesses that were more
incurable unto others, he cures, but those that ordinary Physicians could
help, he omits.

Acts 3.16.
, but they cannot cast out Devils always Mat. 17.16.
. Paul could recover some sick persons, by sending his handkerchiefe unto them
Act. 19.12.
, but he cannot restore unto health Epaphroditus, that was so dear unto him
Phil. 2.27.
. Peter's shadow could heal some, and his word destroy Ananias and his wife,
but he could not deliver or free himself from prison, Acts 12, nor from the
hands of Nero Eusebius
: But Christ can do all things whatsoever he will, and whenever he will: and
therefore in all our sickness and distress, and danger, let us have recourse
only to Christ, unto whom no cure is hard.





First, some forsake seeking unto Christ, and travel unto Hell, to be cured by
the Devil. Thus Ahazia sends to Baalzebub the god (rather the Idol or
Devil) of Ekron, (2 King. 1.2.3.) that by him he might be cured of his hurt:
and thus many repair to witches and wizards in their sickness, as we showed
before.

Secondly, some neglecting Christ, seek help from the Earth: these are they
who repair unto the Physicians, and trust in their skill. True it is, he is
to be honored, and used, and sought unto as a lawful remedy, as we may see
in these places, Ecclesiasticus 10.11. and 18.10. and 38.1. and Genes. 50.2.
and Ezech. 47.12. and Apoc 22.2. But we must neither trust in the Physicians
help, nor despair of health, though we should be deprived of it; for this
is blamed in these Scriptures; 2 Chronicles. 16.12. and Ierem. 46.11. and Mark. 5.26.

Thirdly, some neglecting the help of this heavenly Physician Christ, make
choice of others in Heaven, to wit, the Saints: These are the Papists, who in
their distress fly unto the glorified spirits for health, help, and succor,
and they approve, and prove the efficacy of this practice, by many miracles, as
true as the tenet it self: instead of many take one, they tell us a story of a
woman, who was possessed with a devil, and by the direction or revelation of
the Virgin Mary, she was brought to the Idol of Loretto; where the Priests
invocating and imploring the aid of God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, the
devil moved not at all, but when he sung the Letanie of the Virgin Mary, the
Devil raged, and stormed, and a wooden Image of the Ladies, being laid upon
the Damsels head, the devil cried out in her: quid mihi caput conteris, oh
woman, why do thou break my head Chem. exam. p. 3. f. 182. b.
?

Hereunto we answer first, this, and the like, vide Melch. Can. Loc. 6.

Secondly, suppose these Fables were truths, Matthew. 7.22.
.

Thirdly, how can thou pray unto him in Romans 10.14.

Fourthly, what need is there to seek help at

VERSE. 25. And there followed him great multitudes of people, from Galilee, and
from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judea, and from beyond Jordan.
There followed him great multitudes of people.] Why does the Holy Ghost
express this?

To teach us that many are called,

Why do so many start aside from their stations,

First, by reason of persecution, thus our Savior

Secondly, by reason of the difficulty of obedience: durus sermo, the way of
the Lord is hard to walk in, and therefore they prove retrograde Ioh. 6.60.66.
.

Thirdly, by reason of the tediousness and Noviter conversi fervidi, August.
they are fervent when newly converted unto the profession of Religion, but by
and by grow lukewarm, and within a while stone cold, Zelus ruit mole sua,
they begin in the Spirit, but end in the Flesh, their zeal declining and
falling by his own weight: Nullum violentum est diuturnum: No extremes hold
long, and the buildings upon the sand cannot long endure. Thus many begin
well, hearing the word of God with joy ( Mat. 13d) but for want of depth of
earth quickly wither and die.



Phil. 2, 12.
, Certe plures occidit gula, quam gladius, and praesumptio quam desperatio:
Intemperance slayes more then the sword, and presumtion then desperation, we
being naturally too prone hereunto: have thou a mind enlightened, thy affections
inflamed with the love of God, and virtue; a sense of thy duty toward God and
man, a conscience of thy sins committed both against the first and second
table; yet measure not thy self by these. Are thy neighbors worse then thou
art (Ne te quaesiveris extra) yet measure not thy self by them; go not out
into the streets to seek for thy self: but measure what thou art by these
rules: First, by thy own sins which thou do commit, this will make thee
blush, and be ashamed of thy self. Secondly, by those bright shining lamps of
the primitive Church, who lived on earth like Saints indeed, truly mortified
in their carnal affections, truly crucified unto the world, truly quickened
by the Spirit, giving themselves wholly unto the Lord, and the Lords work,
being frequent in contemplation, and fervent in practice: this will make thee
seem unto thy self more deformed, then Thersites.

Thirdly, measure thy self by the purity of God and his Law, consider how
undefiled the Law of the Lord is, and how infinitely pure the Lord of this Law
is; and then thou will be like the Dove, that could find no place to rest her
foot upon; thou will see nothing in thee, which thou can approve of, or like,
but abhor thy self in dust and ashes.

Fourthly, examine thy self by thy debility and weakness of perseverance,
consider thy impotency and insufficiency, to persevere and continue in the
ways, and work of the Lord, unto the end of thy life, and this will show thee
(as in a glass) that thou art more brittle and frail then the finest glass.
Thus let us meditate of these things, and take heed of presuming.

Secondly, examine, and search daily thy heart, trying and examining therein
these particulars. First, have thou any faith at all? Secondly,

How may we know, whether our faith be true

By these marks, First do thou love God, Gal. 5.6.) and where there is no
love, there is no faith; and where no true love, no true faith; and therefore
examine, whether thou love God, or not: and that not only lightly in word,
but solidly in heart.

Quest. How shall I know this, whether my

Answ. By these two things, viz. First, by the

Secondly, we may know whether our faith be true or not, by this, do we
perform the

Thirdly, we may try the truth of our faith, by the truth of our actions; do
we all these things above mentioned out of a true heart; not as hypocrites

CHAPTER V.
VERSE. 1. And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a Mountain: and when he
was set, his Disciples came unto him.
OUR Savior in this Verse begins his Sermon upon the Mount, which continues
unto the end of the Seventh Chapter, it is without question the best Sermon,
that ever was Preached, and therefore I have enlarged my Meditations more upon
it, then upon any of the four former Chapters, or shall upon any of the
following Chapters. This Sermon contains most Divine and Heavenly lessons of
instruction and direction, for the ordering of the lives and conversations of
all sorts of men, so long as they continue in this life, if they desire so to
live here, that they may live with their Christ for ever hereafter; and
therefore let not the Christian Reader (who reads to learn) grieve at the
large handling of these three Chapters, for the matter contained in them does
so abundantly overflow the banks of humane understanding, that a man may see
some thing, but not any one man possibly perceive all the divine truths aimed
at, and taught therein.

And seeing the multitude, he went up into a mountain.]



Luke 4.42. and sometimes into a ship thrust off a little from the land, Luke
5.3. that he might not be troubled with the thronging of the rude multitude.

(Chrysostom. imperf. s.) he went up into the mountain, that he might fulfill
the prophecy and prediction of the Prophet Esaiah Chap. 40.9. who says oh
Zion, that bring good tidings, get thee up into the high mountains; oh
Jerusalem that bring good tidings, lift up thy voice.

(oper. imperf. s.) say, that this was done Tropologically, the mount signifies
the Church, and therefore he ascends into the Mount to preach, to teach us,
where the preaching of Christ is to be sought? to wit, in the Church.



Carthus. sup.
.

Sixthly, some say, Christ ascended, that he might pray, Luke 6.12. he sat,
that he might Luke 6.13. he descended and stood, that he might teach the
people, Luke. 6.17. Muscul. sup.
; but Calvin thinks, that Saint Luke in that 6. Chapter conjoynes together two
histories of a diverse time.

Seventhly, Gualter. sup. shows that there went up into the Mountain, when he
went about to preach: to wit,

First, that he might be heard the better of all his auditors. Secondly, that
hereby he might the more lively demonstrate unto us, that he taught sublime,
high, and spiritual mysteries.

Thirdly, that he might answer to the type of the law in the Mount God gave
the law with terror. Christ gave the Gospel with comfort.


Fourthly, that hereby he might teach us to lift up our hearts, and to have
our conversations in heaven, our affections being set upon those things which
are above. Colos. 3.2. Phil. 3.20. Ascendit ut turbas ad altiora trahat Hier. s.
, he ascends in person to the top of the mountain, that he might teach the
people to ascend in their affections, from temporal, to spiritual things.

. 2. And when he was set;] Why did Christ

First, some say, that he might the better hide Hier. s.
.

Secondly, some say Christ sat for the dignity Aug. de S. D. in Monte.
.

Thirdly, the true reason thereof was this, because sitting. Mat. 13.1.2. Mark.
4.1. Luke 5.3. Ioh. 8.2. and most plainly, Luke 4.20. he reads a Chapter, and
then sits down and preaches. So Mat. 26.55. Thus the Jews were accustomed to
sit and teach, whence they were said to sit in Moses seat Mat. 23.2.
. And after Christ, the Apostles practiced this same custom, sitting and
preaching Acts 16.13.
.

. 3. His Disciples came unto him.] Why did

First, some think these words are here inserted, Aretius s.
. But he went not into the Mount, that he might be rid of the common
people, but that all might hear him with the greater facility Gualt. s.
. Ne opineris solis Discipulis loquutum, sed et caeteris: We must not think,
that Christ spoke here only to his Apostles but to the rest also, says
Chrysostom. sup. et Hom. 6.

They shall sit with Christ at the day of Judgment. Mat 19.28. Luke 22.30.
Certainly, The faithful shall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6.2. But this is not the
meaning of this place, for the Apostles here were taught by Christ, as well as
the rest.

(Bullinger s.) Secondly, because they were more obedient, ut essent corpore
viciniores, quia animo praeceptis appropinquabant Aug. de S. D. in Monte.
Observe.
, that they might be nearer to his person in body, as they were nearer to his
precepts in mind: Teaching us, that the more obedient any man is unto God, the
nearer Christ will draw him unto himself; and hence come those phrases, If ye
obey me, ye shall be my friends, and my brethren. Mark. 3.34. Ioh. 14.6.

They came unto him.] If any man desire to be

First, not negligently, or remissely, we must

Matthew 7.21.

If any man thirst (says Christ) then let him come unto me Ioh. 7.37
. We must be so sensible of the want of Christ, that we desire nothing in
comparison of him. And therefore let us not come unto Christ with idle desires,
or sluggish endeavors, (vult and non vult piger) but with longing desires, and
labourous endeavors, until we have found him, whom our soul loves, and are
made partakers of him.



posse and velle, good desires, and ability and power to effect that which is
good, then we must endeavor to perfect and finish it; we must not sit still,
and cry God help us, but use those means which the Lord commands, and
endeavor to perform what he prescribes, and conanti aderit Deus, he will
certainly bless those our endeavors, and assist us by his grace to work,
out thoroughly the work of our salvation Phil. 2.12.13.
.

What is required on our part, for the obtaining

First, thou must take up thy cross; patiently undergoing whatsoever the Lord
lays upon thee to bear.

Secondly, thou must deny thy self Mat. 16.24. put off the old man with his
old garments, and put on Christ, by faith and new obedience, not making
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, but laboring to fulfill
and obey the will of God Romans 13 13.14.
, casting away from us (though never so dear unto us) whatsoever may hinder us
from approaching near unto Christ; blind Bartimeus threw away his cloak,
because it was an impediment unto him, when Christ called him; he Traveller,
and Soldier cast away, whatsoever may hinder them in their journey, or
warefare, and thus must we, if w^ ^esire (with the disciples here) to come unto
Christ, we must cast off those sins that hang so fast on, and cleave so fast
too, and run cheerfully unto Christ Heb. 12.1.
.

VERSE. 2. And he opened his mouth,
. 1. And he opened his mouth.] Why does the opening of his mouth?

First, it is an Hebraisme, he opened his mouth, that is, exorsus loqui
(Calvin. s.) he begun to Peter (when he had heard why and upon what
occasion Cornelius sent for him) opened his mouth and said Act. 10.^ 34.
, that is, begun to preach unto them: True it is the Jews did not always use
this phrase of opening the mouth, when they meant to express the beginning of
a speech, but only when they were to speak of some serious and weighty
things; thus the Psalmist, I will open my mouth in a parable, I will utter
dark sayings of old Psalm. 78.2.
. And thus Solomon, Open thy mouth for the dumb; yea open thy mouth and judge
righteously. That is, be careful to speak and plead the poor man's cause
which is oppressed Pro. 31.8.9.
. Thus Gualter sup. thinks that the Hebrews only used this phrase in such
cases of moment, but Beza thinks, it is not universally true.

Secondly, this phrase is here used to show the original of the Prophesies,
and predictions of the opened the mouths of the Prophets: Thus August. S. Dom.
in monte.

Thirdly, or this phrase may here be used, to show that Christ taught some,
and sometimes Chrysostom. sup.

Fourthly, or this phrase does show, that Christ David says, The mouth of the
righteous speaks wisdom, and his tongue talks of judgment Psalm. 37.30.
. And Solomon; the mouth of a righteous man is a well of life, yea the mouth of
the just brings forth wisdom Pro. 10.11.31.
Teaching us hereby two things, to wit, First, that we ought to set a watch
over our mouths, and keep

VERSE. 3. Blessed are the poor in Spirit,
Blessed.] There are three parts of this Sermon Mount, the first whereof is the
Preparation, laid down in the two first verses of this Chapter: the second is
the Sermon it self, beginning at this verse, and continuing unto the Chapter
7. verse. 28. The third is the Conclusion in that 28. verse.

This Sermon does either Prepare the Apostles; and that By comforting them,
Chap. 5. verse. 11.12. By counselling and advising of them, chap 5. verse. 13.
Teach the Prophets what is to be Known, to wit, two things, First, true
happiness, wherein First generally, he recites 8 several beatitudes.
Secondly, particularly he applies the 8th to his Apostles, verse. 11.
Secondly, the exposition of the Law, wherein First, he speaks of the
Interpreters thereof, the Ministers, verse. 13. etc. Secondly, of the
interpretation thereof, verse. 17. etc.

Done, viz. holiness of life, where he removes the Remoraes and that both in
The sixth chapter, wherein he names, Hypocrisy, verse. 1. etc. Care of this
world, chap. 6. verse. 19. etc.
The seventh chapter, wherein he takes away many and sundry impediments, verse.
1. etc.




Blessed.] The Fathers Aug. S. Dom, Thom. 1 a 2 ae. q. 69. Anton. p. 4. Titul.
7. cap. 7.
and Schoolmen much addicted, and the latter too much doting upon the number
of seven, do observe only seven beatitudes mentioned in this chapter, to wit
1. Poverty of Spirit, verse. 3. 2. Meekness and Humility, verse. 5. 3.
Mourning, verse. 4. 4. Hungring and thirsting after Righteousness verse. 6. 5.
Mercifulness, verse. 7. 6. Purity of Heart, verse. 8. 7. Peacemakers, verse. 9.




Infantia, Infancy, which is from the birth until the age of seven years
old. II. Pueritia, Childhood, from seven to fourteen. III. Adolescentia,
Adolescencie, from fourteen to twenty eight. IV. Inventus, Youth, from twenty
eight to forty. V. Virilitas, Strength, from forty to fifty six. VI.
Veneranda Senectus, reverend old age, from about fifty six to seventie. VII.
Decrepita Senectus, Decrepit, and much decayed old age; from seventie to death.

First, man's first age is Infancy; this must be regulated by the first
beatitude, Poverty of Spirit, we must be like Infants, who are humble and
lowly, or we cannot come to heaven.

The second age is Childhood: this must be ordered by Meekness and
gentleness; not obstinacy, perverseness, and stubbornness: that is, we must
be of humble and lowly spirits toward men, and meek and gentle toward God,
willing to be taught and instructed, and directed by him in all things, not
opposing his will in any thing.

The third age is Adolescencie; and is to be curbed by Mourning, and godly
sorrow: this age is subject to many temptations, both of the Flesh, Devil, and
World; and therefore humiliation and compunction of heart are good guides for
this age to follow, to beat the body, and bring it into subjection, is a
necessary work, and needful (although a very hard one for that age) and shall
be rewarded with Blessedness.

The fourth age is Youth, which is prone to covetousness, and the profits and
preferments of the world, longing for, and laboring after them too much. And
therefore it should rather be directed by a hungry and thirsty desire of
righteousness, the fourth Beatitude.

The fifth age is Strength, or the perfection of a man; at which a man's
strength begins to decline: this must be moderated by the fifth Beatitude,
Mercy, charity, liberality, hospitality, and the like.

The sixth age is Venerable old age, this is principally to be squared by
Purity of heart; old men must labor that their hearts may be free from all
fraud, or love of sin, and filled with holy thoughts, and meditations, and
longing desires of their journeyes end Anton. part. 4. Titul. 7. cap. 5. sect.
6.
.

The seventh is Decrepit old Age: in which a man must study Peace and Patience.

seven Beatitudes may be squared and fitly applied to the seven Ages of the
World: viz.

The first age fell by pride, and therefore we must learn to be poor in
spirit.

The second age fell by the height of Nimrods ambition, who would have built
Babell: and therefore we must learn, and labor to be meek and humble.

The third age fell, because they would not suffer adversity and want in the
wilderness, patiently and contentedly; but placed their happiness in earthly
things: and therefore we should esteem this world a vale of misery, and not
grieve for any temporal thing, we lack herein, but rather mourn, that we our
selves are so long herein; being separated from the full fruition of our
Christ, so long as we are present in the body; because blessed are they that
thus mourn.

The fourth age was ruined, because righteousness was contemned, and equity
trampled under feet; and therefore we must hunger and thirst after
righteousness: for so we shall be blessed.

The fifth age perished through cruelty, murder, bloodshed, and discord, as we
may see in the Maccabees; and therefore we must learn to be merciful, and so
we shall find mercy, and not perish.

The sixth age brought forth Christ, who was a Lamb without spot: teaching us
to endeavor, as the fellow members of Christ, to be pure and clean in heart,
soul and spirit.

The seventh age hitherto has been, and shall be full of wars, broils, and
seditious strifes; and therefore if in this age we desire to be blessed, we
must be keepers, lovers, and makers of peace Anton. part. 4. Tibul. 7. cap. 5.
sect. 7.
.

Which is the first blessedness pronounced by our Savior?

This in this verse, to wit, Poverty in Spirit.

What is considerable,

The Proposition, wherein are three circumstances, viz. Quid, what is promised?
Blessedness. Qui, Who are blessed? The poor. Quatenus, What poor? In Spirit.
The reason, because theirs is the kingdom of heaven, to wit, both the
kingdom of Grace, the preaching of the Gospel, Glory, eternal life.



Poverty of spirit?











poverty of spirit.

Blessedness does not consist in the plenty, fullness, and abundant fruition of
peace, or temporal possessions. Secondly, that afflictions do not hinder a man
from being truly happy. The scope therefore of our Savior here, is, to teach
us what is true happiness, and wherein it consists.

What is true happiness according to Christ's

First, the Philosophers erred heavens breadth Xenophon says. Secondly (for I
will but name these, having to speak of them more largely elsewhere) some
Quaestuosi.
place it in riches. Thirdly, some Politici.
in honors. Fourthly, some in Fame, credit, and reputation; thus Pindarus
says, (...), to have a good name, or to hear others report well of us, is a
great happiness. Fifthly, some Stoici.
place it in virtue, (...), or virtuous quality: honestum judico foelicem,
Pindar.
injustum miserum. I count the honest man an happy man, and him that is
dishonest, truly miserable, said Plato Plato Gorg.
: and again, Foelices possessione justitia and temperantia, infalices
miseriae: he whose heart abounds, and life shows forth the works of
righteousness and equity, and temperance, is a happy man; but he is wretched,
whose inward man is overflowen with the gall of bitterness and hatred. Sixthly,
Aristotle adds, Plato ib
that bliss consists in a perfect life. Seventhly, we might add, that it
consists in a faithful and religious purpose: Mihi adharere Deo, bonum est,
said one Plotinus.
, my happiness is to stick close to the obedience of God.

Secondly, true felicity, is something more then all these, for it is Praemium
virtutis, ergo Rhod. 18.14.
, the reward of virtue, and therefore more then virtue it self? Yea it is
bonum ex omnibus bonis compositum Plato def. Phi.
, a good, compounded out of every good thing; or the quintessense of all things
that are good: it is Reditus uniuscujusque rei, ad principia Mirand. in Genes.
, the returning of a thing unto his proper object, from which it has been
separated, and therefore it is conjunctio cum Deo Plotinus
, an union and communion with the Lord of our life, and the God of our hope.

in fortunis, (...), in the external good things of this life: This felicity
is neither promised unto the faithful, nor denied: and hence it is, that we
see some of Gods children abound in all temporal blessings, as did Solomon;
some want many necessary things, as did Lazarus. Secondly, it consists, In
mente (...), in the endowments of the mind and inward man, and this happiness
is twofold, to wit, either first, Philosophical, consisting in an ample
measure of wisdom, knowledge, learning, and the like: Or, Secondly,
Thelogicall, consisting in the knowledge of God, and the Cross of Christ, the
former of these two is given but to few ( not many wise according to the flesh
being called 1 Cor. 1 26.
) but this latter is promised and given unto all the children of God in some
measure: This is life eternal (says Christ) to know thee, and him whom thou
have sent Ioh. 17.13.
, and therefore the Lord will so enlighten the understanding of his children,
that they shall have a taste of this saving knowledge. Paul tells us for our
imitation, that he desires to know nothing save Christ and him crucified Gal.
6.^6.
; and certainly those for whom Christ efficaciously dyed, shall be in time
made partakers of this knowledge.

Thirdly, the last and most perfect happiness, consists in aeternitate vitae,
(...), in eternal life and glory, and this is the happiness which is
pronounced and promised in all these 9. verses. for (...) and (...), belong
unto this life, but (...) unto the life to come, and as the second exceeds and
excels the first, so the third the second: for there are three sorts of men, in
the world. First, Terreni, mere earth worms, giving themselves wholly up unto
pleasures, and the profits of the world. Secondly, Caelestes, who are more
refined, their minds being more sublime, seeking after learning, literature,
and knowledge.

Thirdly, Divini, whose studies, desires, and endeavors, are after piety,
purity, and integrity of life; and these are truly the happy men; they are
called (...), blessed, either from (...), to rejoice and be exceeding glad
Arist. Ethic. 7. cap. 11.
(...) Eustathius.
, because they are no more subject either to misfortune, fate, danger,
distress, or death, and this happiness Christ brings those

Are the poor.] Why does not our Savior say, Blessed are the righteous, and
those that fear the Lord, but blessed are the poor?



Secondly, to teach us that the poor are nearer God has chosen (says Saint
James) the poor of this world, to be heirs of his Kingdom Iam. 2.5.
.

It will be here objected,

First, it appears plainly by Saint Luke, that Blessed are ye poor: and on
the contrary, verse. 24. he says, Woe unto you, that are rich.

Secondly, our Savior here blesses the poor, (Chrysostom. de varijs loc.)

Thirdly, Christ pronounces the poor blessed,

Wherein ar the poor more happy then the

They want the temptations and trials,

First, those that abound in the wealth of this world, are much more prone to
the love of the world, then those that are deprived of that affluence: Mel qui
non gustavit, nescit, he that never tasted honey, knows not how sweet it is;
and he that never tasted of the sugared baits of the world, cannot so love
them, as they do, who are bewitched with them.

Secondly, poor Lazarus is free from that heartbreaking care of getting,
keeping, spending, and leaving of riches; which rich Dives grows lean and old
withal; cura facit canos, for this care makes the head quickly gray. Thirdly,
the Rich Man is tempted in the acquiring of riches (which so insatiably he
desires) unto deceit, and theft, and lying, and perjury, and oppression, etc.
All which temptations, the poor man is less frequently assaulted withal.
Fourthly, in the enjoying of riches, the rich man is tempted unto Contentions,
and Suites, and Pride, and Intemperancy, and Pleasure, and Unchastity, and that
because he is rich, and his money will supply him in all these, and procure
him, whatsoever his wicked heart may long and lust after, but the poor man, to
whom this fuel is wanting must needs be more cold, and less forward unto any
of these, then the rich man is: And therefore in these regards we may safely
say, blessed are the poor.

. 3. The poor in spirit.] What is meant here

First, some understand the Spirit of God; and Blessed are the poor in spirit,
that is, blessed are they who are poor for the Holy Ghost; or who are made (or
become) poor in will, for the Holy Spirit Hierom. ss.
. Hence Bellarmine collects the vow of poverty, but yet does not so understand
this word spirit.



It is hence doubted, whether by the humane spirit, be meant the will or the
cogitations?

This will the more clearly appear, by the exposition Poor.

Poverty in Scripture is threefold, viz. either Affliction, thus David says, I
am desolate and poor, that is afflicted Psalm. 25.16.
. Want, and this is threefold, either in Act, but not affection, which is
poverty by necessity: Affection, but not in act, which is poverty by will, not
poverty indeed. Both, Affection and Act Bellar. de Monac. lib. 2. c. 20.
.
Humility.


Hence there are three expositions of the word, some First, expounding it of
Affliction. Secondly, some of want and poverty. Thirdly, and some of humility.

First, some by poor understand the afflicted, thus Calvine s. expounds the
word, but Bellarmine altogether rejects this, because this verse then would be
one and the same, either with verse. 4. or 11. that is, if by poor, were meant
afflicted men, then it is the same with those, that mourn, verse. 4. or those
that are persecuted, verse. 11.

Secondly, some understand this word, de egestate, want or poverty in temporal
possessions, and this exposition only delights the Cardinal Bellarmine: who
yet takes it neither for poverty in act only, or in affection only, but in
both; adding over and above these two things, viz.

First, Affection is twofold. Of Truth, this is natural affection, and is
without any heart of zeal e Bern. Sermon. de festo omn. Sanct.
. Of Charity, this is a spiritual affection for the love of Christ; and this
he means here.


Secondly, hence he collects, that poverty is not only to be brooked and
borne, but also to be vowed: this collection was gathered with the left hand,
for many things please God, ipso imponente, when he lays them upon us, which
please him not, te assumente, when men undertake them of themselves without
either his imposition or injunction: It is pleasing unto God, when men are
patient and contented in their poverty, the Lord laying it upon them, to
exercise and try them thereby; but it displeases the Lord when men impose
poverty or misery upon themselves, the Lord not requiring it at their hands,
but blessiing them in temporal things.

Bellarmine gives us a triple reason (that we may take our choice) for the
confirming of his deduction.

First, because our Savior means only such in this place; blessed are the
poor in spirit, that is such, as willingly make themselves poor.

Blessed are the poor in spirit. Secondly, the Prophet David in the same
sense, says, I am poor Psa. 25.16.
, yet was he a King and abounded in riches. Thirdly, our Savior our says,
The poor receive the Gospel Mat. 11.5.
, yet were they not all poor in substance that received Christ; as we may see
in Nicodemus, Joseph of Arimathaea, and Zacheus: But if this reason please not,
the Cardinal has provided us a second, and that is.

Because poor here is opposed to rich Luke

To this we answer First, although Christ Woe unto the rich, yet he means
not all rich men, but such as trusted in their riches: for such only are
excluded the Kingdom of Heaven Mark. 10 24.
.

Secondly, although it be true, that Christ opposes Bellarmine gives us a
third reason, which is this.

Our Savior Christ was poor both in action

To this we reply First, that Christ was not Cajetane affirms, giving these
two true reasons to prove it.

To wit, First, because he bought necessary things. Secondly, because he gave
unto the poor.
John 13.

Secondly, it is untrue, that Christ did profess Ioann. 22. Tit. 14. cap. 5.
And hence the more discreet and ingenious Papists overslip this place:
Stapleton in his antidot mentions it not, Canisius, that rakes up all the
places and proofs he can, for devoted poverty, does yet not cite this verse,
and Alphonsus de castro, in this head of poverty, Haeres. 3. does plainly deny
this to be the meaning of this place; and gives this reason for it, because
then it would follow, that only poor men should come into the Kingdom of
Heaven; which was the heresy of those that called themselves Apostolici. Ib.
Haeres. 1.

Thirdly, some understand this place, de humilitate, of humility, Blessed are
the poor in spirit, that is, blessed are the humble: now if it be meant of
humility, not of poverty, then necessarily the Spirit does signify the
cogitation, not the will: and this exposition Bellarmine cannot deny (because
it is Chrysostomes and Augustines) but he preferres his own exposition of
vowed poverty before this. Non de paupertate, quia non per se laudabilis Chrysostom.
de variis loc.
. By poor in spirit is not meant poor in substance, that not being a thing
praiseworthy in it self; but contriti cord, the broken and humble in heart
(Chrysostom. s. et op. imperf.) qui non magna sapit de se (Id. Ibid.) sed factus
ut puer. (Ib.) Who has no high thoughts or conceits of himself, but is lowly
in his own eyes, as a young child: So Saint August. blessed are the poor in
spirit, that is, Non habentes inflantem spiritum, who has no lofty or puffed
up spirit. Humilia spirantes, conscijindignitatis sua Hilar. s.
the poor in spirit are those, that are lowly, being truly conscious of their
own unworthiness.







Abraham, Job, Solomon, Joseph of Arimathaea, were rich in substance, and poor
in spirit, and therefore are now blessed Saints in heaven.

Secondly, this word (poor) is added exceptive,







blessed are the poor in spirit.

James and John, the sons of Zebedee, that the one might sit on his right
hand, and the other on his left, in his glory Mark. 10.35.36.
. Yea we see a great deal of pride in the rest, who in their Masters company,
dispute among themselves, who should be the greatest Mark. 9.34.
.

Why is this blessedness first pronounced, for

First, this was because the beginning of all misery Lucifer and his proud
train out of heaven, and that was the sin that cast Adam out of Paradise,
and brought so much misery and wretchedness upon the earth Chrysos. imperf.
.

Secondly, because the Prophet had foretold, humble, lowly, and should tremble
at his word. (Esa. 66.2.) Therefore our Savior does first pronounce this
beatitude Hilar. s.
, from this which has been spoken. Concerning the sense and meaning of these
words, we may gather a threefold observation,

Secondly, we may learn hence, that the poor Solomon tells us, that a poor
proud man is an abomination unto the Lord; whence we may see, that a man may be
poor and proud, and although he be poor, yet if he be proud, he is so
far from being one of the blessed of the Lord, that he is abominable in his
sight.

How shall we know, whether poverty be

Poverty is known and discerned to be evil 3.

First, poverty is evil, if it be evilly procured, or were occasioned by some
sin; that is, first, if thou have prodigally, and profusely wasted thy
estate, by idleness or negligence in thy calling, or by drunkenness, or
gluttony, or gameing, or whooring, and the like: Or Secondly, if thou have
provoked God to punish thee with poverty, for some of these sins: to wit,
because the riches that now thou art deprived off, were acquired, either by
fraud, or deceit, or oppression, or rapine, or theft, or by undermining of
others, or by wronging the fatherless and widows: If thus thy poverty were
occasioned, then it is mala paupertas, not commended by Christ.

Secondly, poverty is evil, if it cause evil, that is, If because thou art
poor, thou will therefore lie, and steal, and pilfer, and injure thy
neighbors; then thy poverty is not beata paupertas, pronounced blessed unto
thee, but rather condemned.

Thirdly, if thy poverty be accompanied with evils, or in thy poverty thou
do accompany thy self with evil men, as with wandering beggars (amongst whom
is the cave and den of all impiety) or drunkards, or harlots, or thieves, or
cheaters, or liars, or idle persons, or murmurers; then thou art none of those
poor, which Christ here pronounces blessed.

The third observation, that arises from these poor in spirit are humble; Or
it is only humility that is pleasing unto God, and here commended by Christ:
but of this we shall treat in another place.

. 4. For theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.]

First, there is an earthly Kingdom, Secondly, there is an heavenly Kingdom,
which is taken three ways, Either for the Kingdom of Grace: Or, For the
Kingdom of glory: Or For both the Kingdom of Grace and Glory.



And thus the Kingdom of Heaven is taken in this place: First, for the
Kingdom of Grace. Secondly, for the Kingdom of Glory.

First, by Kingdom of heaven is here meant, the Kingdom of Grace, that is,
the preaching of the Gospel Aretius s.
: Because it was thus foretold of Christ by the Prophet, that he should preach
the Gospel unto the poor Esa. 61.1.
. And Christ bidding John's Disciples, to tell their Master, what they had
seen, reckons up this amongst the rest, that the poor receive the Gospel
Matthew. 11.5.
. And hence it is called the Kingdom of heaven, both by John Baptist, Matthew.
3.2. and Christ himself, Matthew. 4 17. The sense therefore of these words, is,
that the preaching of the word is sent unto the humble.







humble, than unto others?





Secondly, by the Kingdom of heaven is humble? do not the godly, and chaste,
and liberal, and merciful come thither as well as they?

Chrysostom. Imperf.

for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, because none can come into the Kingdom
of heaven, who are not humble, or without humility: God resists the proud, but
gives Grace unto the humble Pro. 29, 23.
.

And therefore humility must go before honor, and pride before destruction
Pro. 18.12.
. For there is no gap or gate open at all, whereby any proud man may have
access or ingresse into heaven; wherefore those that desire admission into the
Kingdom of glory, must take heed of proud religion, or religious pride.

What is religious pride? or how manifold

It is threefold, viz First, superbia de religione, a pride of Religion, that
is, when a man waxes proud of those religious duties, which he performs;
thus the Pharisee was puffed up, because he was (in his own opinion) more
careful in the outward observance of religious duties than others were Luke
18.11.
. Secondly, there is superbia in religione, a pride in the performance of
religion* when religious duties are proudly perfomed: thus some will come into
the Church on the Lords day in the afternoon sometimes, when they will, but
they will not be compelled. Thus great ones often applaud the practice of
religion, and religious practices; but themselves are very slack, remiss, and
negliligent in the performance of such duties; yea, when they do perform
them, it is (as it were) voluntary, for they think not themselves obliged and
bound thereunto. Here there is indeed pride in religion. Thirdly, there is
superbia cum religione, pride conjoined with religion, and that is, when those
that are professors of religion, are men of proud lives, arrogant spirits, and
will endure no reproof, but advance themselves above all others, crying, stand
far from me, I am more righteous than thou art. None of these three, being
poor in spirit, have any right unto, or hope of the Kingdom of heaven, for
that is the reward of humility. Thus Christ first humbled himself, then God
exalted him unto the height of honor and felicity Phil. ^.7.9.10,
. And thus we shall be crowned with glory in heaven, if with Christ we be
humble on earth. There is a double world, to wit, this world, and the world to
come; whereof the first is Gods, the second is ours, that is, he that here
neglects himself, and addicts himself wholly (in the humility of his soul) unto
the service and obedience of God, shall be eternally happy and blessed in the
kingdom of heaven, according to our Saviors promise in this place.



Poverty, by the hope of celestial joy and glory, although we be not rewarded
at all in this life.





Luke 18.30.

Hierom. s. And it cannot be meant of temporal things, 1. because these
temporal blessings are not given unto many of the children of God. 2. because
it were absurd to think, that he which forgoes one wife for Christ's sake,
should have a hundred wives given unto him, according unto the letter of that
promise: and thus says Hilarious upon these words.

Job patiently and humbly bearing his losses and crosses, was rewarded twofold
into his bosom, even in temporal things ( Job. 42.) Therefore the humble and
poor in spirit may expect a reward even here on earth.

A particularibus ad universalia; non valet consequentia. General rules follow
not from particular instances. Socrates was very wise, therefore every man is
very wise, is no very wise argument. Christ saved one thief, therefore Christ
will save every thief, follows not: so here, God rewards Job twofold in this
life therefore he will do so unto all, that fear God as Job did, or bear
their afflictions and losses patiently, as he did, is an unwarrantable
consequence; and proved false by that undeniable instance, Daily experience.

Why may we not expect a temporal reward

Romans 8.17.) who was not temporally rewarded in this life: and therefore, if we
desire to be rewarded, we must endure unto the end, expecting that celestial
glory with Christ: Datur pati, it is given unto us to suffer Phil. 1.29.
, and we are called thereunto, and therefore we must endure, and undergo
afflictions, losses, poverty, injuries, slanders, and whatsoever the Lord
shall please to exercise us withal, expecting our reward only in heaven.

Coloss. 3.3.) and consists not in the abundance of earthly possessions (
Luke 12.15.) Life eternal only being absolutely called Life Wherefore we must
await for our Crown, and recompense, until we come thither.

Thirdly, prosperity in temporal things seldom Prosperity does often take
off, and abate the edge of our affections unto God; making us say, as Peter
did: bonum est esse hic, It is good for us to stay here Matthew. 17.4.
, or as another said, Haec faciunt nos invitos mori, we unwillingly depart
from these, although it be to go unto God. Thus Prosperity in worldly things,
bewitcheth us with the love thereof; but adversity and poverty weaneth us from
the world, and makes us weary of it. Secondly, Prosperity draws us into
sin; hence Adam was easily seduced in Paradise; and David when he was quietly
seated in his throne, and Solomon, when silver was as plentiful as the stones
in the streets: very few there are that can rightly bear themselves in an
equal and just balance, in the time of plenty and abundance: yea many there
are, who can carry themselves fairly, soberly, modestly, and unblameably in
poverty, and a low estate, who run headlong to destruction by some sin or
other, when they are great or rich: And therefore they err and decline, a
recto, from the truth, who being poor, serve God, that they may be made rich:
for this should not be done, neither should great things be expected in this
life Ierem. 45.5.
, because we know not, how banefull riches may prove unto us: we must be
content with those general promises that God has made unto us, that we shall
have food and raiment; and that we shall want nothing, that the Lord sees and
knows will be good for us, and unto us: and that he will lay nothing upon us,
but what he will enable us to bear: yea that all things shall work together
for the best unto us in this life, and we shall be made eternally blessed in
the life to come.

VERSE. 4. Blessed are they that mourn,
Blessed are they that mourn, etc.] Peccata Ingentibus, non solum peccata
remittit, and panas, sed and solationem retribuit Deus Chrysos. variis.
. To those that mourn for their sins, God does not only grant remission of
the guilt and punishment, but also comfort and consolation.

If this promise be true, how comes it to pass,

The causes why the children of God do often not conclude true and solid
consolation unto themselves, from hence in the day of sorrow,

Secondly, sometimes the remainders of infidelity, which abide in the
faithful, hinder them from laying hold upon this saving comfort, by a sure and
certain faith.

Thirdly, the conscience of our own proper indignity, and unworthiness of
this comfort, principally after the committing of some grievous sin: David
and Peter weep, and that bitterly, but cannot (for this cause) speedily apply
comfort unto themselves.



lays no more upon them, then they are able to bear 1 Cor. 10.13.
.

Secondly, when God removes the grief, with the causes thereof: Thus he
comforted Manasses, by delivering him out of the hands of the King of Assyria,
and bringing him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom 2 Chro. 33.13.
.

Thirdly, when God gives inward comfort to the heart and conscience, by his
word, or by his Spirit, making his children even to rejoice in tribulation Romans
5.3.
. Thus Saint Paul says, that in Asia, he was pressed out of measure, above
strength, insomuch that he despaired of life 2 Cor. 1.8. yet God comforted him
in his tribulation, that he might be able to comfort them which were in any
trouble, by the comfort, wherewith he himself was comforted of God, 2 Cor.
1.4. yea as the sufferings of Christ did abound in him, so his consolation also
abounded by Christ. 2 Cor. 1.5.

Fourthly, this promise of comfort is accomplished, when God by death puts an
end to all the miseries of his children, bringing their souls to eternal
life. Thus was Lazarus comforted Luke 16.25.
and daily many of Gods dearest Saints, who are only by death freed from the
miseries of this life.





First, in personis, in our persons, we must labor that we may be made
Christians, such as God has promised to comfort: Christ speaking unto his
Apostles, says, ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into
joy Ioh. 16.20.
, as if he would say, it is not every one that mournes that shall be comforted,
but only the members of Christ, wicked and righteous men may sorrow with the
same sorrow, but for a diverse end, as both David and Cain mourn for their
sins, but the end of Cains tears, is the punishment that he has incurred,
David's sorrow being rather for the sin then for the punishment: and therefore
we must endeavor to be made the righteous and holy members of Christ, and
children of God, if we desire to be assured of comfort in the time of
mourning.

Secondly, In rebus, in the things sorrowed for, or in the cause of our
mourning; for many sorrow for that, which is not to be sorrowed for. As for
invide out of envy, thus 1. some grieve for the prosperity of others, (as David
had almost done, Psalm. 73.2.) some for the piety of others, wishing that the
righteous man may be taken away, as not being profitable unto them: or rather
because his glory does obscure their pride, and therefore they are offended
with him, and sorrow for his presence: These mourners have no promise of
comfort.

Secondly, some sorrow Avide, covetously, Iam: 1.5
, or follow sin with more eagerness, freeness, and liberty, which they
cannot do by reason of their poverty. Or II. because although they have
enough in regard of necessary things (that is, sufficient for food and raiment)
yet they are not content, but with an unsatiable desire, wish for more, and
grieve for the want thereof: The mourning of these shall not be turned into
mirth neither.

Thirdly, some mourn and grieve Carnaliter; Pharaoh, Cain, and Judas did: and
therefore shall be no more comforted than they.

Fourthly, some sorrow Impie, wickedly: these are

Fifthly, some sorrow Diabolice, with a Divellish Achitophel grieves that his
counsel is not followed, and to put an end thereunto, puts an end unto
himself; thus Judas mournes, that he has betrayed his innocent Master, and in
his agony hangs himself: These mourners are utterly deprived of all comfort,
both here and hereafter. Sixthly, blessed are they that thus mourn: for they
shall be comforted

What comfort or consolation is it, that shall

First, the world has many solaces for those

Secondly, the comfort of these blessed ones

What comfort or consolation does this Paracletus or Comforter give unto these
mourners?

Temporale solamen, temporal comforts, first, Providence; he will so provide
for them, that they shall want nothing; although it be with them, as Bias
said, Omnia mea mecum porto, that they carty all they have about them, as Hagar
and Jacob, who had no more then the clothes upon their backs, and the water
in their bottles, yet when those are spent and gone, he will provide more.
Secondly, Protection and Deliverance: he will protect, defend, and deliver them
from all evil, as carefully, as he does provide for them, what is good: Many
are the afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of all,
that is, either 1. takes away the affliction wholly, or 2. takes away the sting
thereof, as he did unto Paul, giving him sufficient grace to endure the
temptation, though he took not the buffet from him, and therefore let us place
all our hope and confidence upon God; let us depend first, upon him, for
whatsoever good temporal blessing we stand in need of: And secondly, for
deliverance, either from the affliction (if the Lord may see it good for us) or
from the evil of the affliction.





First, for all sorts of men the Lord has sundry sorts of comfort; as we may
instance in some few, to wit, Ministers, Magistrates, Poor men, Godly men,
Professors.

First, the Lord has comfort in store, or store of comforts for Ministers, who
are painful and faithful in their calling, notwithstanding those many
discouragements, that they meet withal therein; as for example. First, few
will believe their doctrine; this is irksome unto them, and makes them in the
anguish of their heart cry out, Lord who has believed our report, and to whom
is the arm of the Lord revealed Esa. 53.1
. Secondly, they are made a spectacle unto the world, and to Angels, and to men
1 Cor 4.9.
. Thirdly, sin (which by their preaching they labor to beat down) does
grow up, and abound more and more. Fourthly, hence they grow weary of their
lives, as we see in Elias, who desires that he may die, because of the
wickedness of the world 1 King. 19.4.
, so holy Jeremiah cries out, Woe is me, my Mother, that thou have borne me a
man of strife, and a man of contention to the whole earth Ierem. 15 10.
. Yet let them lift up their heads, and listen unto the comforts pronounced
unto them: For First, God says to Moses and Samuel (and under them to all his
Prophets) and Christ to his Apostles (and under them to all faithful
preachers) They have not despised you, but me. Secondly, the Lord says unto
them, fear not, I am with you Ierem. 1.8.
.

Thirdly, their labor shall not be altogether in vain, in regard of others,
for some shall be still converted, wheresoever the Gospel is preached Acts
17.34.
. Fourthly, their pains shall not be at all in vain, in regard of themselves,
for they shall be crowned. Thus the Lord is pleased to comfort the sad hearts,
and lift up the drouping, and hanging down heads of his faithful Ministers.

Secondly, Magistrates they watch, when subjects, and inferiors sleep; they
take care for all, and yet though they be thus faithful and zealous, they are
not respected, but rather disobeyed, hated, and slighted by the vulgar sort of
the sons of Beliall. This is enough to make them mourn, and a just cause of
sorrow, and therefore to comfort them, the Lord bids them not to fear, for he
will be with them Josh. 1.5, 9.
, and their work shall be rewarded.

Thirdly, poor men want in a manner all necessary things, which makes them
grieve, but for these (if good) the Lord has these comforts, that 1. he will
give them needful things (though not superfluous) to the supplying of their
wants, though not of their desires: and 2. those things, that he withholds
from them, he detaines, because he sees them to be poison, and hurtful unto
them.

Fourthly, Godly and pious men dare not lie, nor defraud, nor cosen, by false
weights, or false measures. and therefore their gains and means is very
small: but here is their comfort, God will provide for them.

Secondly, the Lord has comforts and consolations, for all perils and dangers
and griefs whatsoever, as for example. First, if thou be in any temporal
danger; then here is thy comfort, that all things shall work together for the
best unto thee Romans 8.28.
. Secondly, if thou be derided for the profession of religion, the holy
Comforter will afford internal consolation unto thee. Thirdly, do thou
mourn for the sins of others, and art in fear for them; then here is thy
comfort, viz. 1. If they be righteous men who have sinned, and for whose sins
thou art troubled, thou must remember, they stand or fall to their own Master
Romans 14.4.
. 2. If they be wicked men, for whose sins thou mournest, and whose persons
thou art afraid of, in regard of their sins, yet thou may be comforted
through hope.

What hope can we have in bewailing the sins Chrysostom. imperf?

First, it may be, that by thy prayers, tears, counsel,

Secondly, the audaciousnesse and boldness of

Thirdly, God will glorify himself, either by our sorrow for their sins.



Fourthly, if thou grievest for thy own sins committed against thy God; thou
may hearken what the Lord says, and he will speak peace unto thee, he will
tell thee, he desires not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should
turn from his sins and live; He will tell thee, that the sacrifices of God
are a broken and contrite heart, and such a sacrifice he will not despise Psa.
51.17.
. Yea thy Christ will tell thee, that if thou feel thy sins to be a burden
unto thee, that he will ease thy shoulders of that load, if thou will but come
unto him Mat. 11.28.
. Thus the Lord has particular comforts, for all the griefs of his children,
or whatsoever their causes of mourning be. And thus we have seen the first
consolation, which we have from this Blessed Comforter, and that is,
temporal. Secondly, the Holy Spirit gives unto all holy mourners, spiritual
solace, and that two ways, first, by mitigating their affliction by inward
comfort; hence they can rejoice in tribulation Romans 5.3
yea hence they can cheerfully endure death Romans 8.36.
, as we see in Paul (Acts 20.) and in the other Saints, Heb. 11.35. etc. And in
the Apostles, who rejoice, that God is pleased to think them worthy to suffer
for Christ's sake Acts 5.41.
. Secondly, by giving unto them internal peace of conscience, both with
themselves, and with their God Phil. 4.7.
, insomuch as they become thereby more then conquerers, in their greatest
afflictions and trials Romans 8.31.37. and 2 Cor. 1.4.
. Thirdly, this Paracletus will give unto these mourners in Zion, eternal
consolation in the new Jerusalem which is above: where and when Death shall be
swallowed up in victory, and all tears wiped from off their faces Esa. 25.8.
and Apoc. 7.17.
, Revel. 21.4. And their temporal mourning changed into eternal mirth, as
Abraham says to Dives, of Lazarus, he in his life time received pains,
therefore now he is comforted Luke 16.25.
, and hence it is called everlast^ng consolation 2 Thessalonians. 2.16.
, yea joy and comfort which the heart of a mortal man is not able to conceive
off 1 Cor. 2.9.10.
.



when the spirit returns unto God that gave it, and the soul is carried by the
Angels into heaven, to enjoy the joys of that celestial paradise, with Christ
for ever and ever. The second is, from the resurrection, when the body being
united into the soul, both are made partakers of that eternal bliss; when we
can see God with these same eyes Job. 19.26.
, having put on immortality as a garment, and our corruptible bodies being made
incorruptible. And therefore from the consideration hereof, we may see how
blessed a thing it is to mourn, and to want comfort for a while here on earth;
and how wide they shoot, that think those happy that laugh and rejoice here on
earth: Extrema gaudij luctus occupat, the end of temporal joy is eternal
sorrow, as we see in Dives, thou in thy life time receivedst pleasure (says
Abraham) therefore now thou art tormented Luke 16 25.
. We see worldlings rejoice, and expose themselves wholly to profuse laughter
and mirth, according to that of the Prophet, The harp and the violl, the
tabret, and pipe, and wine are in their feasts Esa. 5.12
, with joy and gladness slaying Oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and
drinking wine Esa. 22.13.
in bowls, chaunting to the sound of the violl, inventing instruments of
music, and anointing themselves with the chief ointments Amos 6, 5.6.
. But all this jollity does not argue felicity, the lives of worldlings being
merely tragical, that is merry in the beginning, but the Catastrophe, death
and misery; Balthazar feasts, but by and by trembles, and within few hours is
slain, Dan. 5.5. And many more like him, spend their days in good things, and
in a moment go down into the pit Job. 21.13.
. And therefore let us remember, how vain all the joys of this world are, and
not place our felicity in them, or think our selves happy because we enjoy
them, but rath r think, blessed are they that mourn.

What comforts may we be supported withal

Ruminate in the day of mourning, and time of grief, of these five things
Remember first, Heb. 12.8.
.

Secondly, remember affliction may be grievous to the body, but it is joyous
to the soul: our Savior says, Fear not him (nor that) which can kill the
body; but fear him (and that) which can cast body and soul into hell fire:
And therefore we should not fear affliction, because it can but kill the body,
it cannot destroy the soul

Thirdly, remember the pleasures of sin are but for a season, and wicked
delights and joy may be pleasing unto us a while; but the end thereof is death:
and therefore we had better be clothed with mourning, than girded with this
mirth.

Fourthly, remember thy sorrow and mourning shall not long last, it shall but
endure for a night; thou shall not be long under the Chyrurgians sharp
instrument; and therefore bear patiently thy momentany pain.

Fifthly, remember, most undoubtedly thy sorrow shall end in eternal joy and
glory; For if thou patiently suffer with Christ, and for Christ, then thou
shall be glorified with him Rom, 8.17.
, when and where all grief and cause of sorrow shall be taken away; as our
Savior says in this verse, Blessed are they, that mourn: for they shall be
comforted.

VERSE. 5. Blessed are the meek:
. 1. Blessed are the meek.] The Fathers and only observe here seven
Beatitudes; and some of the Fathers, and most of the Papists, do make Poverty
in Spirit the first beatitude, and Meekness the second, and Mourning the
third, etc.

Whence they propound this question, Why is meekness put after poverty of
spirit?



Charthus. s.
.

For they shall inherit the earth.]. What

Chrysostom. s. and Imperf. does reject.

David says, My portion is in the land of the living Psalm. 27.13.
, as if he would say, our bodies while we live here are the land of the dead,
but are called the land of the living, when they are glorified. (Chrysostom.
imperf.)

Hilary upon these words understands them.

Peter mentions (2 Pet. 3.) and which is called earth, in respect of heaven.
(Chrysostom. imperf.)

they shall inherit the earth, that is, the world: and thus (almost) all our
late divines expound it.

Non de futura solum sed etiam de praesenti. Chrysostom. s. And thus I take the
words indeed to be understood; but yet for a more methodicall and orderly
handling of them, we will severally observe a double sense, viz. First, they
are to be understood of this life present. Secondly, of the life to come.

First, by Earth is meant the life present: Meek men are thought to be
deprived of the riches, and possessions of this world, by worldlings; but
Christ shows here the contrary, that they shall possess the earth Chrysostom s.
and de variis.
. Or more plainly, that although God give unto the meek eternal life, and
would have them to expect it and hope for it, yet over and above he does also
give them earthly possessions: the promise of future blessings does not take
away the hope of present, for holiness has a promise both of this life, and
the life to come 1 Timothy 4.8.
. which promise is principally and particularly confirmed and made unto the
meek, both by our Savior here, and also by the Prophet David. Psalm. 27,
9.11.22.

How does God give the earth, in this sense Moses was constrained to do?

First, some understand this of the men of the blessed are the meek, upon the
earth, for they shall have many friends in the world: And therefore those that
desire amity, and not enmity, let them embrace meekness; what benefit is it to
be opposed by all? it were certainly much better to be beloved of all; We hate
proud men, we avoid the company, and society of angry men, those that are
cruel (though great) men, we wish in their graves, now meek, gentle, and
humblemen are free from that hatred, these wishes, and consequently gain much
love and friendship amongst men.

Secondly, some understand this, of the fruition blessed are the meek, for
others are so troubled, turmoiled, molested, and disquieted, that they have no
comfort in any thing they enjoy, but are (in regard of any comfortable use
thereof) deprived as well of those things, which they have, as which they have
not; but they shall enjoy what they possess with joy and comfort; yea although
they be as having nothing, 2 Cor. 6.10.
yet they shall possess all things.

Thirdly, some understand this of the affairs

First, meekness is very profitable unto those, that have undertaken the state
of Matrimony, for so the Husband shall win his Wife, and the Wife the Husband:
Plato tells us, that if a man clap his hands together, being both open, or if
one be shut, and the other open, he takes no harm at all by the blow, but if
the fists be both bent, he will hurt his hands: So if both husband and wife be
mild and meek, or if the one be always gentle, patient, and forbearing, the
bond of conjugall love does long continue entire, but if both be proud, or
furious, or angry, or hasty, or revengeful, then the Matrimonial knot of love
is quickly loosed; and therefore meekness is profitable for the married
couple, if they desire long to continue in mutual love.

Secondly, meekness is very necessary and behovefull both unto children and
servants, that is, Masters and Fathers, by being meek and gentle unto them,
shall gain more love, respect, service, and obedience of them, then by being
proud, harsh, and cruel unto them: Parents and Governors must not be remiss
and negligent, but meek and gentle in their places; they must not provoke
their youth unto wrath Ephesians. 6.4 6
, lest they say, as he does Terent. Adelph.
. Illum colunt, at me mortuum cupiunt: If we had meek and courteous Ma^ters,
we would reverence, love, and obey them; but we have such currish and harsh
masters, that we wish they were dead.

Thirdly, meekness is good among neighbors; Mollis lucratur amorem, the mild
and gentle man is loved wheresoever he comes; because quiet and meek answers
do quench the sparks of strife and contention, which often are occasionally
kindled amongst adjoining neighbors.

Fourthly, meekness is good in Magistrates: and therefore the old experienced
Councillors give advice unto Rehoboam, to be a servant unto the people one
day, and in answering them, to speak good words unto them, and then they would
serve him for ever 1 King. 12.7
: that is, speak them fair, be affable, gentle and courteous unto them, show
thy self meeeke toward them, and one that loves and desires their good: and
then thou shall knit them unto thee for ever. The excellency of this counsel
appears by the sequel: for Rehoboam answering them with proud and threatening
language, ten of the twelve Tribes fell from him. The common people are like
untamed (yea wild) beasts; and therefore must not too rigidly be governed, but
domanda popismis, are to be tamed with clapping, and soft and gentle handling;
which if Pertinax the Emperor had done, he had not been slain.

Fifthly, if we be expulsed, or expelled, or banished out of our native home,
then Meekness is profitable in exile, for omne solum miti patria, a mild man
is never out of his country, every nation being to him wheresoever he is, as
his own. The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof Psalm: 24.1.
. And therefore he will fulfill his promise made by Christ, unto the meek, in
every land and place.

Sixthly, if we should descend to lower and more inferior persons, estates, or
particulars, we may evidently see, how good and profitable a thing it is to
be meek and gentle: as first, if we have any thing to buy, we desire rather
to go to that shop where there are quiet, courteous, and gentle Shopkeepers,
than to those that are peevish, froward, and hasty. Secondly, if we lack
servants, men or maids, we rather covet those that are meek and quiet (though
worse, for that employment we have) than those that are so proud, that they
will not be reproved, or so turbulent, and of such unbridled tongues and
tempers, that the family is continually disquieted by them. Thirdly, yea when
we travel, we love that fained and counterfeited meekness and courtesy which
we meet withal in our Innes. And therefore we should accustom our selves unto
meekness, that so we might be beloved of all persons, lovingly entertained in
all places, and happy and blessed in all estates and conditions. Substantia
perire potest, affabilitatem furari nemo potest Gualt. s.
. Riches may be lost, and may become unprofitable unto us; but affability,
courtesy, gentleness, and meekness, is a virtue, which none can take from
us, and which we may (with benefit and comfort unto our selves) exercise and
practice in all places, and in all employments. Thus much may suffice for the
third answer.

Fourthly, some understand by the inheriting the good blessings of this life,
and that either, first, because what they enjoy, shall not decrease. Or
secondly, because it shall truly increase.

First, the possessions of the meek shall not decrease, but continue with him,
as appears thus;

First, he himself will not consume them, either in law, or suits, or
contentions, or pride, or vain ostentation, or by ambition, as many do.
Secondly, neither are others provoked by them. Many a man has been utterly
undone, and impoverished by incensing and exasperating of others, by proud,
scandalous, and uncourteous words: But the meek man provokes none; and
therefore as he does not sue others, so he is not sued by others. Thirdly,
neither is the anger of the Lord kindled against him. Many gather riches
wickedly, and the Lord scatters them justly; many by oppression join house to
house, and land to land, and the Lord curses them for it Esa. 5.8.
. Now the meek man is free from this danger, because he does not so desire
riches, or temporal possessions, that he will acquire them by any wicked
means, or ways.

Secondly, that which the meek man possesses, shall truly increase, because
the Lord will prosper him, as he did Joseph, this being the very thing which
is promised in this place, that the meek shall be blessed in temporal things.

Fifthly, some understand long life to be the David says, Bloody and cruel
men shall not live out half their days: therefore by the rule of contraries,
mild and meek men shall multiply their days, and be crowned with the crown
of old age. Wherefore I conclude the first sense and exposition of this verse,
with the saying of the Psalmist; Wha^ man is th re that desires to live long,
and see good days? let him learn and labor to be mild and gentle: for so
blessed are the meek in this life, that they shall inherit the earth.

Secondly, the words, for they shall inherit the earth, are to be understood of
the life to come, and not only confined to this present life: as if our Savior
would say, Blessed are the meek: for they shall be crowned with eternal
glory; as the Father Basil. s. Psa. 33.
said, The celestial Jerusalem is not the spoil or conquest of bloody
Soldiers, Sed spes mansuetorum, but the hope and reward of those that are
meek.

VERSE. 6. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness: for
they shall be filled.
Blessed are they that hunger, etc.] This verse contains the fourth beatitude,
wherein I shall but only propound one general question, and that is this;

What is meant here by hungring and thirsting?

It may either be taken Literally, or Morally,

First, hunger and thirst may here be taken Literaliter, for natural hunger
and thirst; And thus Saint Luke seems to mean ( Luke 6.21.) when he says,
Blessed are ye which now hunger, that is, which through poverty hunger and
thirst in the world: thus Saint Paul says, even unto this present hour we
both hunger and thirst 1 Cor. 4.11.
.

Some Staplet. Antid.
vehemently inveigh against this exposition, thinking it not enough to say,
that this is not the principal thing that is aimed at, or understood in these
words; but this is not meant at all in this place. And they bring these three
reasons, or arguments, for the confirming of their assertion, and dislike of
our present interpretation. The first is this.



Jacob, Joseph, and Job: yea there is a direct general promise made unto the
faithful, both in this life, and the life to come 1 Timothy 4.8.
; and a special particular promise of the point in controversy: Behold (says
the Lord) my servants shall eat, and ye shall be hungry, my servants shall
drink, and ye shall be thirsty, etc Esa 65.13.
.



Calvin (whom Stapleton here opposes) does not say, jam saturandos, but
posthac, not they that now hunger and thirst, shall instantly be filled, but
hereafter: to wit, either first, by allaying and abating the appetite, as a
Martyr said, If his enemies took from him bread, God would take from him
hunger. Or secondly, by peace of conscience, affording them such internal joy
and comfort, that their poverty and hunger pincheth them not. Or thirdly, by
the crown of eternal life bestowed upon them; and thus the hunger of Lazarus
was satisfied.





Esurientes (appetentes) temporalia, non beati, miseri potius: Those that
hunger after (that is desire) temporal things, are not blessed, but rather
miserable; and therefore by hunger and thirst a literal lack cannot be
understood.

Calvin, who does not speak, de appete^tibus, of those that desire temporal
things; but de carentibus, of those that want and stand in need of temporal
things.

Luke (chap. 6.21 verse) says, Blessed are ye that hunger now: and by an
Antithesis, verse. 25. says, Woe unto you that are full: What is the meaning of
this? Does our Savior denounce a woe against them that are full of the works
of righteousness? Certainly no such thing, but those that abound in temporal
possessions: for there is a double Fullness, the first terrene and earthly in
this life; the second spiritual, in the life to come: Woe be unto those
(says Christ) that seek the first, for they shall lose the second (verse. 25.)
and blessed are those that have not the first, for they shall have the second
(verse. 21.) and howsoever they may (by reason of their poverty and want) seem
miserable unto others, yet they are nothing less, they being indeed truly
blessed.

Are all blessed that are pinched with poverty

No, but only those, hunger and thirst for righteousness sake; there are many
men, that are miserably poor, and poor miserable men, who hunger and thirst
for want, but not for righteousness, being impoverished, either by idleness,
or wastfulnesse, and therefore have no promise at all of blessedness: But
happiness is pronounced and promised to the righteous man, who will not
unjustly enrich himself; who will not for wealth forsake his God, to run
after the world, or the devil, by the use of wicked means, but will rather be
as poor, as Lazarus. Certainly, the poor man that walks, and thus
continues in his integrity is a happy and a blessed man Pro. 19.1.
. And thus much for the literal interpretation of these words.

Secondly, by hungring and thirsting may be meant a moral hunger and thirst,
which is, when men hunger for just judgment to be executed, they being
unjustly injured or scandalized Muscul. s
, and cannot obtain justice, according to the equity of their cause: To these
our Savior says, Blessed are thy that hunger and thirst after righteousness,
that is, blessed are those, that by wrongs and injuries, are deprived of their
right in this life, and so are constrained to hunger and thirst after that
which is their own, waiting with patience to obtain the same. Now this moral
hunger after righteousness is twofold, viz. Either for our selves, or for
others. First, the moral hunger after righteousness, is when being injuried
and wronged, we desire to be justly dealt withal; or if we be slandred, that
the truth may be brought to light, that so we may be acquitted of the crime
laid unto our charge. Secondly, the moral hunger after righteousness may, and
ought to be for our brethren as well as our selves; for we should be zealous
for others, when we see them oppressed in their estates, or punished in their
bodies, or wronged in their good names, for righteousness sake, as that holy
Prophet out of his godly zeal unto those who were oppressed, cries out unto
God, Oh Lord, how long shall I cry, yea cry out unto thee of violence, and thou will not save; wherefore hold thou thy tongue, when the wicked devoureth the
man, that is more righteous then himself Habak. 1.2 13.
.



to weep with those that weep, and to rejoice with them, that do rejoice
Romans 12 15.
, yea to remember them that are in bonds, as though we were bound with them,
and them that suffer adversity, as though we were under the rod Heb. 13 3.
.







ne ultra crepidam, thou must go no further, then thy calling will warrant
thee; that is, first thou must grieve in thy heart for their wrongs, and
oppressions. Secondly, thou must pray for them unto God, that he would arise to
defend them, and to plead their cause, against all their enemies. Thirdly, thou
must show thy zealous love and affection unto them, by thy words, that is by
speaking for them when they are abused or scandalized, and by urging the
Magistrate with all modest importunity, to execute just judgment for them upon
their enemies. And thus much for the Moral sense of these words.

Thirdly, there is Fames spiritualis, a spiritual hunger and thirst: having
elsewhere to handle this, I here will but only touch it: Blessed are they that
hunger and thirst after righteousness: First, these words may spiritually be
expounded thus: Blessed are those that are grieved with the iniquities of the
times, and mourn for the sins of the world, and withal do in heart and soul
long for the amendment and reformation thereof. Secondly, by righteousness we
may well in the first place understand the righteousness of Faith, whereby a
sinner is justified through faith in Christ, and so stands righteous before
God, having the pardon of all his sins sealed unto him: We may in the second
place by righteousness understand righteousness of works, whereby a man is
sanctified and made holy, having Gods Image renewed in him by the Spirit of
grace, which was lost by the fall of our first parents: And this appears by
these places. Isa. 55.1. 1 John 7.37. Rev. 21.6. All which places are one in
substance, for by waters we must understand righteousness, which is that
spiritual grace of God, the fountain of all blessings, whereby sinners are
justified and sanctified Perkins. s.
.

VERSE. 7. Blessed are the merciful,
In this verse we have these two parts, to wit, The blessedness promised,
wherein are these two things, First, in general, who are blessed, the
Merciful. Secondly, in particular, what mercy, and how manifold it is, which
is here required unto this blessedness.
The reason of the blessedness, or promise thereof, wherein are these two
things, viz, First, in general, why are the merciful blessed; because they
shall obtain mercy. Secondly, in particular, what mercy this is, which the
merciful shall obtain.



First, in general, we see here, who they are that shall obtain mercy; only
the merciful: He has showed thee O man (says the Prophet) what is good; and
what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy Micah
6.8.
.



Nemo sibi natus Cicero.
. No man is borne or brought into the world only for himself, but to do good
unto others, as well as unto himself. Secondly, Nature teaches that we must
not be cruel, or revengefull against our own flesh: No man ever hated his
own body, but nourishes and cherishes it (says the Apostle) that is, by the
light of nature we are taught to do good unto our selves, and those that are
of our own flesh and blood: And therefore we should be merciful unto all,
because we are all children of one Father, and creatures of one and the same
species, or kind.

Thirdly, Nature teaches us, that vindictae brevis voluptas, misericordia
perpetua, the pleasure that a man has in revenge is very short, but the
delight which a man finds in showing mercy is of great continuance: and
therefore we should be merciful.

Secondly, mercy pleases God, and therefore The earth is full of his mercy
(Psalm. 33.5.) Yea his mercy reaches unto the clouds (Psalm. 36.6. and 108.4.)
and is perpetual, enduring for ever (Psalm. 100.5. and 106.1. and 107.1. and
136.) yea, all his ways are mercy and truth (Psalm. 25.10.) this being his
nature, to be merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and of great kindness,
Psalm. 86.5.15. Exodus 34.6. Secondly, the Lord has proposed this his mercy
unto us for our imitation; Be merciful as your Father in heaven is merciful
Luke 6.36.
, and do good unto all, as he does, who causes his Sun to shine, and his
rain to rain both upon the good and bad Mat. 5.45.
: and therefore when we follow the Lord herein, certainly we please him.
Thirdly, the Lord to assure us hereof, has plainly told us, that mercy is
very acceptable and grateful unto him: I will have mercy, and not sacrifice,
says the Lord and his Christ. Ose. 6.6. Matthew. 9.13. and 12.7. And Solomon, a
type of Christ, says, that the merciful man does lend upon usurie unto God
Prove. 19.17.
: yea our Savior describing the general judgment, does show how graciously
the Lord accepts works of mercy, wherein we have first, Gods acceptance, In
as much as ye have done it to them, ye have done it unto me. Secondly, his
enumeration, When I was hungry ye fed me, when I was thirsty ye gave me
drink, etc. Thirdly, his remuneration, therefore come ye blessed into
everlasting joy Mat. 25.40. etc.
. And therefore we may safely say, that God is pleased with mercy, and that
it is our part to be merciful, if we desire to please him.

Behold (says the Lord) this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, she did
not strengthen the hand of the poor and needy: therefore I took her away as
I saw good Ezekiel. 16.49. etc.
. And thus Solomon threatens, that whosoever stops his ears at the cry of the
poor, he also shall cry himself, but shall not be heard Pro. 21.13.
. And shall have judgment without mercy, because he showed no mercy James 2.13.
. Secondly, the merciful man has from God a promise of mercy: This will
further appear in the second part of this verse, and therefore I now leave it.

We being many, are one body in Christ, and every one members one of another
To. 12.5.
. Read for this purpose, 1 Corinthians. 12.12. and 10.17. and Ephesians. 4.4.15.16.
Secondly, never any man hated his own flesh Ephe. 5.29.
. Thirdly, hence came that mutual communicating of riches, which we read of,
Acts 2.44. and 4.32. that no man esteemed any thing his own which he
possessed; but those that had, communicated unto the necessities of those that
had not. This made Theophrastus say of two friends, Cur ergo alter dives, alter
pauper? If you be such a pair of friends as you make the world believe, then
how comes it to pass, that the one of you is rich, and the other poor? As if
he would say, one friend should not see another lack, so long as he has to
supply his want. Fourthly, hence God leaves poor amongst us, to try, whether
we will communicate unto their necessities, or not; The poor shall never cease
out of thy land; therefore thou shall open thy hand wide unto thy brother, to
thy poor, and to the needy in the land Deuteronomy. 15 11.
. Fifthly, from hence mercy is made an evident token of a righteous man, and
such as the Lord will acquit and justify. Read Job 31.16.17.18.19. and Luke
10.30. And therefore if we desire to discharge our duties either to God or
man, it is necessarily required that we should be merciful.

In the first answer to the former question, we

It is not,

First, some are herein contrary minded, not in their judgment approving of
Mercy: and these are either the common people, or the Philosophers. First, the
common sort of people think merciful men to be Polypragmones, too
pragmaticall, and meddling; yea indeed no better than fools, who not being
content with their own afflictions, and proper miseries, will trouble
themselves with the distresses of others. Secondly, the Stoickes, a Sect
amongst the Phisophers, had a double sinister opinion concerning this virtue of
Mercy: First, they thought merciful men twice miserable men, because they
were afflicted, I. with their own misery: and, II. with others misery.
Secondly, they thought merciful men to be very weak men; and pitiful men
to be passionate men; because they would have men to be subject neither to
mercy, nor envy, nor any other passion Cicero Tuscul. 3.
. Wherein we may see, I. the foolish wisdom of the flesh, even in the
Philosophers, and how corrupt carnal reason is. II. We may hence see also
their absurd consequence, it is an infirmity and weakness to be subject to
vice; therefore also to virtue: we must not be subject to the passion of
envy, therefore not of mercy. The one is forbidden, the other is commanded:
the one is pleasing unto God, the other is displeasing: by the one (Envy) we
imitate Satan: by the other (Mercy) we imitate God. And therefore this
opinion is to be exploded.

Secondly, some are contrary hereunto in their practice, being cruel, hard,
uncharitable, and of flintie hearts: And therefore the Apostle (utterly
disliking this amongst Christians) does earnestly desire them, as the elect,
holy, and beloved children of God, to put on the bowels of mercy and kindness
Col. 3.12.
. But here hard-hearted men will object many things.

First, from carnal reason, or natural wisdom, quia and perdit, and
prolongat vitam admiseriam Plaut.
, that is, first, he wrongs himself, because he loses what he gives:
secondly, he hurts the other, because by his present relief, he does prolong
the miserable life of the poor man. Secondly, for the most part, the poor are
most unthankful people, and therefore as the proverb is, all the liquor is
lost, that is put in a cracked dish.

First, thou know not what a day may

Secondly, thou must not neglect to show

Secondly, they object from equity and justice

First, what they are, or have been, is nothing Gal. 6.1.
.

Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, thou shall not respect the
person of the poor, nor of the mighty: but in righteousness shall thou judge
thy neighbor Levit. 19.15.
, whether poor or rich. Indeed it is required, that Mercy should be mixed
with justice in judgment, but not that justice should be altogether omitted.
Secondly, Divine punishments are not inflicted by one and the same rule, or
way: for sometimes God afflicts for sin, sometimes for trial; and therefore
wheresoever we see the hand of God lie, we may there assent in our hearts unto
the Lord, that he is righteous in all his ways, and just in all his
judgments: but yet with our helping hands, we should commiserate, pity, and
(to our ability) ease and lessen the burden of the afflicted.



I answer, we must do as we would be done

Secondly, they say, it is not only iniquum, an unjust thing; but it is also
impium, a wicked and ungodly thing: for by this means they injure their
children; and he that provides not for his family, is worse than an Infidel.

I answer, we must prefer neither the riches actus elicitus, sed imperatus,
not a free and voluntary action, but a thing commanded and enjoined by God, and
therefore we are obliged thereunto in duty toward God. Secondly, remember, we
and the poor are but one flesh. Thirdly, that which we do unto them, we do
unto God. Fourthly, if we be hard-hearted toward the poor, we provoke the
wrath of God without mercy. Fifthly, Merrcie being a Divine work, shall
certainly be rewarded. And thus much for the first branch of the first part,
who they are that are blessed.

Secondly, what mercy is this which is required

Mercy may be defined thus, Alienae miseriae in cord compassio. (August. de
Civit. Dei, 9.13.) A commiserating of another man's misery in our heart: Or
aegritudo ex aliena miseria (Cicer. Tuscul. 3.) A sorrow for another man's
distress. Or, Dolor pro aliena miseria, ex voluntate and charitate. (Gualt.) A
hearty grieving for another man's grief, arising out of an unfeigned love unto
the party afflicted. Or more plainly thus, Mercy is a pitying of another man's
misery, with a desire and endeavor to help him to the uttermost of our
ability. And therefore unto mercy is required, First, a sorrow: Secondly,
sorrow for our brothers affliction, not for our own. Thirdly, a cordial, not
a counterfeit sorrow. Fourthly, not a a bare sorrow of the heart, but a grief
accompanied with a helping hand.

How manifold is this mercy, to which is made

First, some divide it into Temporal and Spiritual, of those that are
scandalized. I grant these are good works of mercy: but this division is
imperfect, many things being omitted therein (as follows by and by) and
therefore I pass by, and from this.

Secondly others ( Stapleton Luke 6.37.3 S.) say,

Toward thy self; not spoken of in this place; Toward. others, viz. Either
toward Cattle: Or Toward Men, which is either Internal; Or External; which
is showed either By giving, Or Forgiving.





First, quibus, to whom mercy is to be showed, To all men. To Beasts.
Secondly, in quibus? wherein? to wit, In Heart. In work, and that both By not
repaying injuries and wrongs, that is evil with evil. By giving good things,
Either spiritual: as for example, I. Instruction if the party be ignorant or
erroneous. II. Reprehension, if he have sinned. III. Consolation, if his
conscience be pressed with the sense of sin. IV. Prayer for him in all
these, and all other his afflictions. Or external: as for example, I. To
preserve him whose life is in danger. II. To advise and counsel him for his
health, who is sick. III. To preserve the good name of our brother. IV. To
give meat and drink unto the hungry and thirsty. V. To entertain those who
are weary through travel. VI. To cloth the naked. VII. To visit and comfort
those who are in prison. VIII. To give counsel to our neighbor in his
affairs. IX. To bury the bodies of the dead.


Thirdly, quomodo? and quatenus? how far, and how mercy is to be showed? to
wit, 1. With a pious intention. 2. Prudently, to all, but principally to the
godly. 3. Plentifully. 4. Quickly, without delay. 5. Cheerfully. 6. Frequently
and often.



First, mercy is to be showed to all men; or the object of mercy are all those
who stand in need; thus our elder Brother exhorts us. Give to every one that
asks Luke 6.30.
. And thus our heavenly Father does, He causes his sun to shine, and his rain
to fall upon all men Matthew. 5.45.
.

merciful and charitable unto all, both good and bad?

Romans 5.6.7.
.

Saul's and enemies, yet we hope they may become Paul's and friends, and
therefore we love them: Or thirdly, by the bond of the flesh, as all those who
have any carnal relation unto us at all, whether by affinity, or
consanguinity, or cohabitation, or the like: Or Fourthly, by creation, and thus
all men in the world are our brethren, and therefore are to be loved, and
helped by us in their necessities.

Secondly, mercy is to be showed, to beasts, or to be exercised toward them.

What mercy is to be showed to unreasonable

First, if they wander or stray, thou must bring

Secondly, if they fall, down in the way, thou

Thirdly, thou must give them rest upon

Fourthly, thou must regard the life of thy

Fifthly, thou must not delight, to exercise cruelty Quibus: To whom mercy is to
In quibus, wherein mercy is to be showed. First, Cord, in the heart. Secondly,
Ore, in the mouth. Thirdly, Opere, in works. First, mercy is to be showed to
our brother, in and with our heart, two manner of ways. viz.

First, Orando, by praying heartily for them, we must pray for all the Saints
Ephesians. 6.18. yea for all men. 1 Timothy 2.1. we must pray one for another, because
the prayer of the faithful availes much James 5.16.
. And therefore this kind of mercy is to be extended unto all, because thus we
may help King, and State, and Church, and all that are in any distress, by
praying fervently for them. Secondly, Compatiendo, by being fellow-feelers of
their misery: and this is the root of the work of charity. For when we
truly commiserate their estates, we do then relieve and help them as much as
we can: yea true mercy is to be founded upon that (...) cordis, the bowels of
compassion; we must be touched with a sense of their misery, as though we
our selves were in the like case Heb. 13 3.
, we all are but one body, and one member suffering, all the members suffer
with it 1 Cor. 12.26.
. And therefore the works of charity (Alms) without the compassion of the
heart, are not acceptable unto God.



Matthew. 6.





Secondly, mercy is to be showed unto our brethren, with our Mouth, and that
also two several ways, viz. First, solando, by comforting them. Secondly,
consulendo, by counselling them.

First, we must comfort those that mourn: Or true mercy is to comfort those
that are sick in mind, this being the oil that the Samaritarie powered into
the wounds of the halfe-dead man: Luke 10.30.
yea, for this end the Lord giving the spirit of consolation unto some, that
they might comfort others 2 Cor. 1.4.
. And therefore we must remember, that every mourning man is an object of
mercy, and ought to be comforted; whether he be overwhelmed, First by some
spiritual sorrow, as shaken by the strength of temptation, or assaulted unto
desperation. Or secondly, by some civil grief, whether sickness,
imprisonment, loss, death of friends, or the like.

Secondly, mercy is to be showed, by counselling and advising those that stand
in need of direction; thus the servants of Naaman counsel their master unto
his health and profit. 2 Kin. 5. And it is the office of mercy to reduce by
counsel our brother from every unprofitable path.





Secondly, because it is very profitable for us Pro. 2^.23.
. Secondly, we teach our selves while we advise and instruct our brother.
Thirdly, we shall be saved, if we thus discharge our duty toward our
brother, though he will not be persuaded by us. Fourthly, and if we can
prevail with him and by our counsel reduce him from his wicked ways, we
shall shine in heaven as the stars in the firmament Dan. 12.2. and Iam. 5.19.
.

How must we counsel and advise our brethren?

First, in civil and temporal things, and in his

Secondly, so also in spiritual things thou to admonish one another. (Romans
15.14.) to edify and build up one another (1 These. 5.11.) to exhort and
instruct one another (Heb. 3.13.) 2. Thou must reprove the errors of his life:
Warning those that are unruly (1 These. 5.14.) rebuking thy neighbor, and not
suffering him to sin (Lev. 19.17.) for therein thou shall have delight (Prove.
24.25.) And therefore first, Ministers must teach and reprehend (1 Timothy 5.20.)
And secondly, all men, according to their place, rank, quality, and calling.
Ministers Autoritative, other men Charitative.

Thirdly, mercy is to be showed to our brother, in our deeds, and that two
manner of ways: First, negatively, we must not repay evil with evil; mercy
does not avenge her self but pardon, and otherwise there is no mercy to be
expected from God, neither have we any warrant to pray for it Mat. 6.14. and
18.35.
.

Secondly, affirmatively, we must do good unto those that stand in need, that
is give bread unto the hungry, take into house those that are cast out, and
cover the naked Esa. 58.7.
, that thus we may make us friends by our riches Luke 16, 9.
, and show that the religion which we profess is a pure and holy religion Iam.
1.27.
.

Why must we thus give good things to those

First, in regard of our selves, because otherwise

Secondly, in regard of God, wherein there are To wit, First, who requires
charity, and mercy at our hands? the Lord and his Christ, and therefore our
Savior says, when I was hungry you fed mea, etc. Mat. 25.41. Secondly, what
does God demand of us? his own, nothing but what he has lo^t us, hence says
Job, God gave, and God has taken away, as if he would say, he has taken away
from me nothing, but his own Job. 1.21.
. So David, Oh Lord God, all this store that we have, comes of thine hand,
and is all thine own 1 Chro. 29.16.
Thirdly, how does God require of us his own? unto Usury, although it be his,
yet he graciously promises to reward it sevenfold, yea a hundred fold into
our bosom. And therefore seeing it is God that bids us give, who requires of
us nothing but his own, and yet faithfully promises to reward our works of
mercy; there is great reason, that we should be careful to abound in good
works.



What works of mercy must we abound

Extraordinary. Ordinary, and those either toward our brothers Fame,
Reputation, and good name, Person, three ways, Dead body. First, by
hospitality. Secondly, by visiting of him. Thirdly, by almesdeeds.




First, there are extraordinary good deeds, which are occasionally offered unto
us: As for example.

First, to admonish our brother, of what danger we know, and which he is likely
to incur without our admonishing of him. Secondly, to reduce into the right
path him, whom we know does err Esa. ^8.7. and Ezech. 34.4.
, as a certain man did by Joseph, when he wandered up and down, and could not
find his brethren Genesis 37.15.
. Thirdly, to defend those that are oppressed, to take part with the widow,
fatherless, and afflicted. Thus Jonathan pleads for David (1 Samuel 20.) and
Job, the poor and him who had no helper Job. 29.12.13.
. Fourthly, to redeem those who are in captivity. Fifthly, to help those,
whose lives we see are in jeopardy, either by poison, sword, ship-wracke,
deceit, false witness, or the like? All these are extraordinary, but when
occasion offers any of them unto us, we must lay hold upon them.

Secondly, there are Ordinary works of mercy, which are threefold, viz. First,
toward the good name of our brother: Here some Staplet. s. Matthew. 6.^.
observe two things. I. We must not calumniate and slander our brother. II.
We must not reproach or insult over the infirmities of our brethren; reciting
them to their disgrace, wheresoever we come, as the manner of some is; and
this is that which is meant in this place: Charity covers a multitude of sins
Prove. 10.12 and 1. Pet. 4.8.
, and therefore those are strangers to this work of mercy, who have itching
tongues, and itching ears, to which no talk is pleasing, but that which tends
to the disgrace, and dispraise of their neighbor. Secondly, there are ordinary
works of mercy to be exercised toward our brothers person, and these are
three. First, Hospitality, whereunto we must be prone; according to the advice
of the two principal Apostles, Saint Paul, and Saint Peter, the first
exhorting us to be given to hospitality Rom 12.13.
, and the second, to use it one to another without grudging 1 Pet 4.^.
.





Deuteronomy 10 18.19.
.

Thirdly, because some, by being given unto have received Angels into their
houses. Genesis 18. and 19. and Heb. 13.2 Yea thus we may come to entertain
Christ, who has said, he that receives you receives me Mat. 10.40.
.

What hospitality is it, that we must be given

There is a threefold hospitality, to wit First,

Secondly, there is a Prohibited and unlawful hospitality; which is showed to
lewd wandering beggars.

Thirdly, there is a Religious hospitality, which is I. lawful, and II.
exercised toward the poor, who are not able to recompense him that
entertaines them; and III. blessed, according to that of our Savior, When thou
make a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind, and thou shall
be blessed, for they cannot recompense thee Luke 14.13.14.
.

Secondly, the next ordinary work of mercy, which is to be performed toward
the person of our brother, is visitation, whether he be sick, or in prison:
viz. Those whom either necessity does p^nch, or the cruelty of men do detain
in hold, not suffering them to enjoy their liberty.

Thirdly, the last ordinary work of mercy to be exercised toward the person
of our brethren, is Alms, or a real relieving of their wants and necessities,
whether it be by giving meat to the hungry, or drink to the thirsty, or
lodging to him that is destitute thereof, or clothes to the naked, or money to
him that lackes, and the like, whereof we shall speak in the next Chapter,
and by and by.

The third ordinary work of mercy is to be showed to the dead body of our
brother, that is, by interring it with a Christian burial; this duty is much
commended in Scripture, which for our imitation does express the religious
care that was taken for the burial of ( Genesis 23.19.) of Jacob (Gen 49.29.) of
Joseph (50.25.) and of Saul and Jonathan (2 Samuel 2.5.)

Why must we perform the duty of Christian

First, for the Body or Carcasses sake, yea for our own sake, least it should
putrify and send

Secondly, for civility and humanities sake; because it were a very barbarous
thing not to afford burial unto the dead, but let them lie like dead dogs in
the streets, fields, or highwaies.



Fourthly, Augustine (De Civit. Dei. 13.) adds a fourth answer, and that is,
the memory of the party deceased: Si anon^^^^, vestem, supellectilem amatis,
quia patris fuit, cur non cadaver fratris Christiani? If thou love dearly, and
keep carefully a ring, or some garment, or jewel, or piece of
household stuff, because it was once why fathers: then why not the dead body
of thy dear deceased christian brother.

Quibus, to whom we must be merciful, and in quibus, in what or wherein we
must show our mercy; I come now to the Third and last particular of the first
part of this verse, and that is Quomodo and Quatenus? How our works of Mercy
are to be performed,

The rules for the direction of our charity and mercy, do either respect first
the hand, or secondly the affection, or thirdly, the judgment.

First, in respect of the Hand, there are two rules: Sit eleemosyna Plena manu.
Continuata manu.


First, our Alms must be given with an open fist, and liberal hand: for if
they be sparing, it is not a work of mercy: Thus David describes the merciful
man, He has dispersed, he has given to the poor Psalm. 1 12 9. and 2 cor.
9.9.
, that is, largely, and liberally. Thus Solomon describes the liberal woman,
She stretches out her hand to the poor: yea she stretches forth her hand
unto the needy Prover. 31.20.
: yea, this is the Lords command, If there be a poor man among you, thou
shall not shut thy hand from him, but thou shall open thy hand wide unto him,
and shall surely lend him sufficient for his need, in that which he wants
Deuteronomy. 15.7 8.
.





Dicit; da mihi ex eo quod dedi tibi. August. s. Psalm 103. God says, give me
part of that which I have given unto thee; and let my bounty showed toward
thee, be thy rule to direct thee in showing mercy toward others.

Deuteronomy. 15.8.

Fourthly, another measure of mercy, is our own hand, that is our ability and
power: Non solum quantum, sed de quanto (Ambros. s. Corinth) That every one of
them according to his ability, sent relief unto the brethren which dwelt in
Judea Acts 11, 29.
.

Fifthly, sometimes the Lord does prescribe unto some a particular measure of
mercy, which

First, the Lord did appoint unto the poor all the fruit, that sprang up or
grew the seventh year Exodus 23.11.
. Secondly, some remainder and gleanings every year. Deuteronomy. 24.19. Thirdly,
sometimes half of that which we possess; thus Christ commands the people
Luke 3.11.
, and thus does Zacheus Luke 15 8.
. Fourthly, sometimes God commands us to sell all and give unto the poor,
Matthew 19.21. Luke 12.33. Fifthly, sometimes we are commanded, if we have for
the present nothing to give, to labor, that we may be able to help others.
Acts 20.35 Ephesians. 4.28.

Who offend against this rule?

First, those that labor hard in their callings,

Secondly, those that give sparingly unto the For if there be first a willing
mind, it is then accepted according to that which a man has, not according to
that which he has not 2 Cor. 8.12.
: where he most plainly lays down two rules of charity; the first is,
whatsoever we give, whether little or much, it must be given willingly: the
second is, that we must give proportionably unto that which we possess, that
is, if we have but little God will accept then of a little: but if we abound
in estate we must abound in good works.

Thirdly, those err from this rule, that spend if we sow sparingly we shall
reap sparingly, and if we sow plentifully, we shall reap plentifully 2 Cor.
9.7.
. Secondly, our alms must be given with a continued hand, true mercy is not
sometimes to be done, but to be habituated by a frequent and daily practice:
Give (says Solomon) a portion to seven and also to eight Eccles. 11.2.
, and Saint Paul would have the Corinthians to lay by some thing in store every
Lords day 1 Cor. 16 2.
, and disswades all men from being weary of this duty of charity Gal. 6.19.
, or of forgetting the works of mercy Heb. 13 16.
.



2 These. 3.13.
.



Act. 6.1
, and of Cornelius his constant course of prayer and alms Act. 10.2.
, that we might learn to imitate them in this virtue so lauded by the Lord.





John Elecmosynarius. Leontius vita.
unto a poor brother, Nondum sanguinem pro te, etc. I have not yet shed my
blood for thee, as Christ did for me, and therefore I must not yet give over
doing good unto thee. And thus we must continue liberal so long as we continue
in life, and ability to do good.

Having showed how the rules of Almsdeeds do respect the hand; it follows
in the second place, to consider how they respect the affections: wherein we
have also two rules diligently to observe, viz. Dandum hilariter. Dandum cito.


First, what we give, must be given willingly and cheerfully: or true mercy
gives with a willing mind: whence the Apostle exhorts the Romans, to give
cheerfully Romans 12.8.
; and assures the Corinthians, that God loves a cheerful giver 2 Cor. 9.7.
: and unto them exceedingly commends the Macedonians, who prayed him with much
entreaty to receive their gifts 2 Cor. 8.4.
. And therefore it is not enough to give, except we give willingly and
cheerfully, because the Lord only rewards such givers.

Secondly, as we must give willingly, so we must give speedily: true mercy
being always prepared to do good: We must not say unto our neighbor, Go,
and come again, and tomorrow I will give, when thou have it by thee Pro 3.28.
: yea we must be so ready to give, that we may not stay until we be asked;
for then it is not given willingly, neither is so praiseworthy with God,
because the original and ground thereof is not within thee, but without thee,
proceeding not from thy affection and desire to give, but from him that begged
it at thy hands. Hence we read; how God saw the prodigal son, while he was
yet a far off, and runs unto him, Luke 15.20. And Christ saw the widow
whose some was dead, Luke 7.13. and the people that were hungry, John 6.5. and
the blind man, John 9.1. And the Samaritane saw the wounded man, Luke 10.34.
All which examples teach us, that we must be ready to do good;

Who transgress or err from this rule?

First, those that avoid and decline occasions of doing good, seeking how to
shun them,

Secondly, those that will give no more

Thirdly, those that never give, but when they send messengers into the
streets. (Matthew. 22.) that is, our eyes, our ears, our tongues (by enquiring)
that so we may find out who they are that are truly indigent. Thus we have
seen how the rules of mercy and almesdeeds respect the Hand, and Affection:
It now lastly remains to show how they respect the Judgment.

Here also two rules are to be well marked: viz. Dandum prudenter, we must give
prudently. Dandum pie, we must give piously.


First, the works of mercy are to be distributed and bestowed prudently,
with judgment, not with a blind mind; where two things are carefully to be
observed: to wit,

First in general, thou must give to none but to those who want and stand in
need: Cave ne Christi substantiam imprudenter, rem pauperum non pauperibus,
etc. Hier. ad Paul.
. Take heed thou do not disperse, Deuteronomy. 15 11.
, to try their charity; implying plainly hereby, that charity is to be
extended toward the poor.



First, they offend here that beg and want



Paul does very fully urge in his directions sent unto Timothy: If any widow
have children, or nephews, let them learn first to show piety at home, and to
requite their parents. And again, If any provide not for his own, and
especially for those of his own house, he has denied the faith. Besides, If
any man or woman that believes, has widows, let them relieve them, and let
not the Church be charged with them 1 Timothy 5. chapter 4.8.16. verse.
. Where we see plainly, that those who are rich, are enjoined to provide for
their poor kindred, and not to suffer them to live of the poores stock. And
thus much for the first observation.

Secondly, in particular, there is an order to Give to every one that asks;
yet secondly, there is a difference to be put, and some indigent persons are to
be preferred before others. Aliquando melius negatur quam datur August. Epist.
48.
, because sometimes it is better to say some persons nay, than to give unto
them. And therefore before we give, we should examine two impediments, to
wit, First, Legis of the Law, does not the law forbid thee to give to such and
such? that is, to wandering beggars, who will not keep at home, where the Law
provides, they should be provided for. Religion does not teach us to despise
just laws, as their lewd practices show they do. These laws are founded upon
religion, and Christian Prudence, because we cannot truly know the want of
those, whose persons and habitations we know not; and therefore all poor are
to make their wants known unto that parish and people, that know both them and
their necessities. And those who will not do thus, but contrary to all law and
government, wander abroad, are either not to be relieved at all, or if we
relieve them, we should procure, that they may be corrected withal, either by
stocks or whip. Thus the just prohibition of the law may hinder our alms.

Secondly, Conscientiae, of conscience, we must do good, especially to the
household of faith, (Galath. 6.10.) for his soul will bless us, and God will
hear his prayers for us; but he will not hear the prayers of the wicked; and
therefore our Savior says, that which is given to a Disciple (nomine
Discipuli) in the name of a Disciple, shall be accepted, and rewarded Mat.
10.42.
. And therefore before we give, we should examine both the persons poverty,
and his religion.

May we not then give relief unto wicked

Certainly we may, observing these cautions,

Secondly, we must give our alms piously as well as prudently; that is, mercy
toward others, is not accepted of God, except it be joined with piety in our
selves: Thus the Lord says, that if a just man shall give bread to the hungry,
it shall be rewarded Ezech. 18.5. etc.
. Audistis peccata redimi eleemosynis (Dan. 4.24.) ne intelligite perverse:
prosunt si mores mutaveris, sin in malis perseveraveris, non corrumpes judicium
Dei eleemosynis tuis Aug lib. hom. 50. hom. 19.
. It may be (says the Father) thou observest Daniel to exhort the King to
redeem his sins by giving of alms, but thou must dexterously understand
this, thus, alms profit a man if he change his life, but if he persevere in
his perverseness, he cannot then by all his alms bribe the Judge of all the
world, neither find any favor at all in judgment: And thus Saint James does
plainly clear the point in hand, in saying, Pure and undefiled religion is to
visit and relieve the fatherless and widows, and (immaculatum se servare) to
keep himself unspotted Iam. 1.27.
. True charity is a fruit of Repentance, and is an approbation or trial of our
faith.



First, those who give alms e male partis of evil got by thy just labors
(says Solomon) not by thy injustice, or Usury, or oppression, or lying, or
fraud.

malo animo, out of an evil mind, that is, either out of hypocrisy, that they
may be seen and praised (Mat 6.2. etc.) of men, now this is not acceptable
unto God, as the Father said, Ingrata Deo non quae videtur, sed quae fit ideo,
ut videatur: The Lord never is pleased with those alms, which are therefore
done that men may see them; but with those that (although men see them, yet)
proceed from a mind truly merciful and charitable Chrysos. s.
.

pie, holily, that live impie, ungodly: many are bountiful unto the poor, but
wicked in their lives, wherefore their alms is not gratfull unto God. Qui
egenti dat, and animam non custodit, Rem tribuit Deo, and Se peccato Greg. mor.
19.
. He that gives food to the poor but hunger-starves his own poor soul,
gives his substance to God, and himself to sin. And therefore he that
desires to have his alms accepted, must first endeavor to have his life
purged. Thus much may suffice for the first part of this verse, wherein we have
showed who are blessed, the merciful; what mercy it is that shall be rewarded
with blessedness; and the division thereof. I come now unto the second part:
For they shall obtain mercy.

There are two things here considerable, 1. Illatio, the Inference. 2. Positio
vel Ratio.

First, the Inference is employed in this word, Nam, For, as if our Savior
would say, those that obtain mercy at Gods hands, are blessed; but these men
who are merciful shall obtain mercy at Gods hands, therefore they are blessed.

habebunt misericordiam, they shall have (or obtain) grace and mercy from God.



No, but from the mere mercy of God. Paul disputes this question, Romans 4.5.6.
etc. from Psalm. 32.1. etc. and concludes that blessedness proceeds not of
debt but of grace: So Zacharias being filled with the Holy Ghost, prophecieth
thus of his son John Baptist, that he was sent to give knowledge of salvation
unto his people, by the remission of their sins, through the tender mercy of
our God Luke 1.67.77.78.
. Where most evidently we see that remission of sins, and eternal salvation
do flow unto us, not from our merits, but Gods tender mercies.

Why may we not be made happy and blessed

First, because all our strength is but weakness.

Secondly, because it is the Lord that works He converts us Lam. 5.21. of his
own good will, he regenerates us, Iam. 1.18. he gives both posse and velle,
power to will and do what is good, Phil. 2.13. And therefore he is said to
have mercy upon us, Romans 11.32.

Thirdly, the Lord having converted, regenerated,

When once Christ has redeemed us, then by Christ we are enabled to serve God
in righteousness and true holiness Luke 1.75.
, but not until then. When the Lord infuseth grace in our hearts, then are we
by his grace enabled to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to serve
him all our days Tit. 2.11.
. And from this ground it is, that the Apostle Saint Paul does so stiffely deny
justification by works, Romans 3.20. etc. unto verse. 28. and 2. Tim. 1.9. and
Titus 3.5. etc. holding them like two incompatible qualities, that cannot stand
together. Romans 11.6.

Are all good works like an unnecessary garment

We do not deny Opera, but Operum merita, we find no fault with good works,

Why may we not ascribe some merit unto our works?

Because this were to arrogate unto our selves, both against Christ precept,
and Paul's president; when we have done all we can, to say, we are but
unprofitable servants, and therefore have deserved nothing Luke 17.10.
. S. Paul is so afraid to ascribe any thing unto himself, that he desires,
when his hand is to be held up at the bar of Gods Tribunal at the last day,
he may be found, not having his own righteousness of works, but that which
is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith
Phil. 3.9
. And thus much for the inference.

The second particle of the second part of this verse, is the Position or
Reason why the merciful are blessed; because Misericordiam habebunt, they
shall obtain mercy.

Shall every true merciful man find Mercy?

Certes no truly merciful man shall lose his reward: does good to his own
soul, Prove. 11.17. And therefore he is happy, Prove. 14.21. and he shall be
blessed, Prove. 22.9.



Solomon has it, he that has mercy on the poor, honors his maker, Prove.
14.31. and therefore God will honor him, as he said unto Samuel concerning
Eli.

Secondly, because herein he imitates God, the Father of mercies Psalm.
103.8.9.13. and 145.8.9. And therefore let the certainty of the reward be a
means to induce us to be merciful.



Luke (Chap. 6. verse, 38.) says, there shall be given unto him, good measure,
pressed down, shaken together, and running over; from whence Stapleton
observes four degrees of this reward: viz.

First, there shall be given him good measure, In temporalibus, pressed down,
in naturalibus, shaken together, in spiritualibus, and running over, in
aeternis. Particularly, First, there are but three sorts of Rewards, Temporal,
Spiritual, and Eternal, wherefore I will comprehend all the blessings
promised unto the merciful man under one of these, beginning with the first,
to wit, temporal blessings, for he that gives to the poor, Prove. 19.17.
lends to the Lord b.



Solomon, He that withholdeth corn, the people shall curse him, but blessing
shall be upon the head of him that sells it Pro. 11.26.
. If he that sells unto the poor be blessed, then much more he that gives;
on the other side if he be cursed that denies to sell, so is also he that
refuses to give in the time of need: but elsewhere the Kingly Preacher has it
more plainly in these words, he that hides his eyes from the poor shall
have many a curse d. Pro. 28.27.
Indeed sometimes the curse of the poor, is vain and idle, because it is
pronounced sine causa, without just cause, but when it is provoked by the
cruelty or coveteousnesse of men, it is then most powerful and prevalent, and
does pierce the clouds: and on the contrary, blessed is he whom the soul of
the poor man blesses, and therefore by mercy and charity, we should procure
their prayers.

David says, Blessed is he that considers the poor, the Lord will deliver
him in the time of trouble Ps. 42.1.
, we have examples hereof, 1. in Rahab, who was saved from destruction with all
her household, for her mercy and hospitality extended unto the Spies, Josh.
2.12. and 6.23.2. in Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, who was delivered for his
compassion showed unto Jeremy f. 3. in a Citizen of Antioch Jer. 39.16.17.
, whose History is this. Under the the Emperor Mauritius the City of Antioch,
was shaken with a terrible Earthquake, after this manner. There was a certain
Citizen so given to bountifulnsse to the poor, that he would neither sup nor
dine unless he had one poor man to be with him at his table. Upon a certain
evening seeking for such a guest, and finding none, a grave old man met him in
the market place, clothed in white, with two companions with him; who^ he
entreated to sup with him, but the old man answered that he had more need to
pray against the destruction of the City; and presently shook his
Hand-kerchiefe against one part of the City, and then against another; and
being hardly entreated, forbore the rest. Which he had no sooner done, but
those two parts of the City, terribly shaken with an Earthquake, were thrown
to the ground, and thousands of men slain. Which this good Citizen seeing
trembled exceedingly, to whom the old man in white, answered and said, by
reason of thy charity to the poor thy self, house, and family are preserved D
Beard Theater of Gods Judgments, f. 587.
. Thus sometimes the Lord himself extraordinarily delivers those that are
merciful.

Secondly, sometimes the Lord excites and stirs up the enemies of merciful
men unto mercy; as the Psalmist says, He made them also to be pitied of all
those that carried them captives Ps 106.46. and 2 Chro. 30.9.
.

Thirdly, he that gives to others, to him it shall be given; that is, First, he
shall not want, thus says the wise man, He that gives unto the 28.27. And
Saint Paul confirms it positively in these words, He that ministers seed to
the sower, will minister bread for your food, if ye be merciful, 2 Cor. 9.10.
Secondly, his estate shall increase, thus the Apostle in this sense comfort
the Corinthians for their bounty toward the poor, God will multiply your seed
sown, and increase the fruits of your righteousness (2 Cor. 9.10.) and the
Holy Ghost elsewhere tells us, That there are some who scatters, and yet
increases, and some who withholds more then is meet, but it tends to
poverty Pro. 11.24.
that is, liberality unto the poor increases the portion in temporal things,
but by hard-heartednesse the estate is decreased.

Secondly, the next reward which shall be given to the merciful, is
Spiritual: Thus Daniel persuades the King to redeem his sins by Alms, Dan.
4.24. And our Savior says, Give Alms and all things shall be pure unto you.
Luke 11.41. yea Dorcas is praised for her Almes-deed^ Act. 9.36
. Our Savior divides the Law into a twofold love, viz. toward our God, and
toward our Neighbor. And Saint Paul assures us, that love is the fulfilling
of the Law, Romans 13.8.10. Now this love of man is threefold, I. toward our
Superiors, II. toward our equals. III. toward our inferiors. And this last
is the best, because they most stand in need of our love and charity.

Thus mercy toward the poor, prepares the way unto Spiritual graces, non
opere operato, vel ratione meriti, not by the work wrought, or any merit
therein; but it testifies our love unto God: for he that for conscience sake,
or for Gods sake, does love his brother, as a member of Christ, the bowels of
his compassion yerning upon him; does plainly thereby demonstrate his love unto
God. Yea this true mercy toward those that are truly indigent, does increase
graces in us; as for example, it teaches us to contemn and despise the love
of the world: it teaches us to moderate our care for our selves and ours: it
works in us a quiet and peaceable mind: And increases our hope, confidence
and faith in Christ, because he has said, Blessed are the merciful, for they
shall obtain mercy.

Thirdly, the last reward which shall be given to the merciful, is Eternal;
He shall never be moved. Psalm. 112.6. yea he that follows after mercy,
finds life, Prove. 21.21. And he which sows bountifully (to the poor on
earth) shall reap bountifully (from the Lord in heaven) 2 Cor. 9 6. And Saint
Paul prays for Onesiphorus, that the Lord would give mercy unto him, because
he had bountifully refreshed him, when he was forsaken of the most, 2 Timoth.
1.16.18.



For our light affliction (says the Apostle) which is but for a moment,
works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2. Cor.
4.17. So that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be
compared to the glory which shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.18. The Lord
hereby showing his bounty unto us, for our greater encouragement; that seeing
he is so graciously pleased to reward our temporal alms, given unto the
poor for his sake, with spiritual grace, and eternal glory, we should be
the more careful to be rich in good works. ready to distribute, and willing
to communicate 1 Timothy 6.18.
.

if we be Sons, then Heirs, even Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with
Christ, and shall be glorified with him Romans 8.17.
.

In as much (says our Savior) as you did it to them (that is, the poor) you
did it to me; wherefore come ye blessed of my Father, into everlasting joy,
prepared for you, Matthew. 25.43.

Almsdeeds are meritorious?

Inter mercedem, and premium, betwixt wages and reward, and we must not be
merciful that we may merit or deserve heaven as wages of due debt, but if we
be merciful we may expect a reward, for a cup of cold water shall not go
unrewarded, if given charitably. Certainly, it is much to be lamented to see
how Charity is grown cold, and (as it were) fled out of the world: there never
were more objects of mercy than now, and men never less merciful; very few
careful (according to our Saviors advice) to lay up for themselves treasure
in heaven.

Some will say, by a positive law, we are forbidden

There is a foolish, wicked, dangerous, and Crudelis misericordia, cruel
pity, to maintain such, that live in a trade of sin, and will neither be
obedient to laws humane, nor divine.

Secondly, in every place, where there are

VERSE. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart:
. 1. Blessed.] What is Blessedness?

First of all, Aliquid eximium, some excellent thing.

Secondly, but there is nothing more full of Happiness is, as appears by
Cicero, Lactantius, and Varro, who reckon up 288 opinions, about this
particular. The principal whereof are these:

Some place Blessedness in Externis, outward things, viz. 1. some only in
pleasure, as the Epicureans. 2. some only in Riches, as the worldlings. 3.
some in both these. 4 some in Honor, as the Ambitious. 5. some in fame and
credit, as the Academickes. 6. some in Fame and abundance together. Internis,
internal things, to wit, 1. in wisdom, solus sapiens beatus, only the wise
man is happy says Tully. 2. or in virtue, Honestum judico faelicem: I esteem
the honest man a happy man, said Plato. 3. some in virtue conjoined with riches
(...), Pindarus. 4. some in virtue conjoined with a perfect life, so Aristotle
and the Peripatetickes. 5 some in virtue conjoined with faith and Religion
toward Christ Jesus: and thus hold the Christians: But it is something more.


An action leading unto a happy condition; which action is Faith and
Obedience, that conduce unto eternal felicity: And in this the Christian
Peripatetickes do rightly place Happiness. The fruition and possession of God,
and that either in the life. Present, by faith in God, and love of God. To
come, to wit, in Ineffable glory. The sight of God.




This verse speaks of the Beatificall vision, which the pure in heart shall
certainly enjoy in the Kingdom of heaven for ever and ever: of which by and
by in the fourth.

Are the pure: This is the sixth Beatitude, and is a rectification of the rest:
the other may be in us hypocritically, and therefore here our Savior
pronounces them truly blessed, who are Puri Cord, pure in heart, showing
hereby unco us viam and modum, the way and means how to obtain true felicity
and happiness.

What is the purity which shall be crowned

It may be known by his contraries; Duplicitati, to double dealing. Mixturae,
to composure or mixture: thus the Apostle says, we must be (...) Phil. 2.15.
, without any mixture of Impurity; this purity is two fold, viz. Simple and
absolute, and so none is pure in this life. Respective, and in part.



First Purity is opposed to double dealing: And therefore those that desire to
be made heirs of heaven, they must be simple, without fraud, harmless as
Doves. Matthew 10.16. like Nathaneel in whom was no guile John 1.47.
, blameless and sincere 2 Cor. 1.12. and 11.3.
.

Why must Christians be thus careful to avoid all deceit and false dealing?





Eve by his doubling with her; and Saint Paul feared that he through his
subtilty, would corrupt the minds of the Corinthians from the simplicity that
is in Christ 2 Cor. 11.3.
, because he is so false and subtle, that he can transform himself into an
Angel of light 2 Cor. 11 14.
; And therefore we should not imitate the father of lies, but the Father of
truth, who is of a most single essence.



Why must we thus labor and endeavor to

First, because without this purity we cannot please God: hence the Apostle
exhorts us to be transformed in our minds, that so we may prove what is that
good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God Romans 12.2.
.

Secondly, because we are reconciled unto Colos. 1.22.

Thirdly, because God elected us in Christ, that we should be holy, and without
blame before him in love. Ephesians. 1.4.

Fourthly, because this is the will of God, that how to possess our vessels in
sanctification. 1 These. 4.3.4.

Fifthly, because only purity leads unto the If ye love me, keep my
Commandments John 14.15.
.

Who sins against this precept, which injoynes purity of life?

Some transgress in Opinion, Orthodox.

First, some err here in Opinion; and these are either I. Libertines, who
deny all good works; let Saint James say what he will, yet they believe that
faith will save them without works; and therefore assume unto themselves the
name of Solifidians: that this is an error appears thus, 1. Saint James
says, faith without works profits nothing, Iam. 2.2. The author to the
Hebrews says, without works no salvations is to be had Heb. 12.14.
. 3 Saint Paul would have us persuade our selves, that we were created unto
good works Ephesians. 2.10.
: And therefore all that time is misspent, which is not spent in holy actions.
4. our Savior teaches us first of all to pray, Hallowed be thy name, to
teach us, that the end, scope, and aim of our lives is the glory of God, and
the same blessed mouth of thruth tells us, that God is glorified by good works;
Let your light so shine before men, that they seeing your good works may
glorify your Father which is in Heaven Mat. 5.16.
. Or

Secondly, those err here, who deny any perfection of purity; although the
Scripture affirm plainly, that the law which we obey is perfect, James 1.25.
and that Abraham is commanded by God to be perfect, Genesis 17.1. And all the
children of God by Christ, to be perfect as their Father in heaven is perfect.
Mat. 5.41. yea although Saint Paul tells us, We preach, warning every man, and
teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man Perfect in
Christ Jesus, Col. 1.28. And although Epaphras (who knows the prayers of the
righteous shall be heard) Labors fervently for the Colossians in prayer, that
they may stand Perfect, and complete in all the will of God. Colos. 4.12. But
of this Perfection we shall speak more plainly in the 48. verse of this
Chapter. Or

Thirdly, Profane persons err here, who deride all endeavors of purity;
persuading men not to be too holy, nor too pure, because Ne quid minis is a
good rule. Indeed I confess that 1. in hypocrisy there is an evil purity:
yea 2. in cacozelia, blind and superstitious zeal there is an evil purity:
But 3. in the law, we cannot be Nimis too pure, or too strict: for who can
love God too much? who can obey and serve God too much? when (in the best
performances) our Savior teaches us to confess our selves to be but
unprofitable servants Luke 17 10.
. And therefore it is a thing full of danger to deride or contemn those, who
dare not swear or lie, or be drunk, or speak any vain and unbeseeming
words, or commit the least sins; For they that despise these despise the Lord
whose servants they are, and slight the words of Christ, who has here
pronounced such Pure Blessed.

Secondly, some violate this precept which injoines Purity of life in practice,
and these are either first, they who live a wicked life. Or secondly,

First, they transgress here, who lead a wicked and impure life.

But some will say, there are none pure, but all men are polluted; and
therefore who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean Job 14.4
? who can say I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin Pro. 20.9
? that is, none: and therefore if any man say he sins not (or pollutes not
himself by sin) he is a liar 1 Ioh. 1.8.9.
.





First, not by nature, or by any strength in our selves: for naturally the very
thoughts and imaginations of our hearts are evil, and that continually Genesis
8.21.
; yea the heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked Ierem.
17 9.
; wherefore Paul confesses, the law is spiritual but I am carnal sold under
sin Romans 7.1 14.15.
, and cannot do the good which I would, but does the evil which I would not.

Secondly, this purity is procured by faith God put no difference betwixt us
and them, purging and purifiing our hearts by faith Acts 15.9.
whence it is evident, that we have not our purity and holiness from our
selves, but from Christ, who was made unto us Sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.30. and
who delivers us from sin and Satan, Romans 7.25.

Who must labor to acquire this purity?

First, some answer that there are not many,

Secondly, purity belongs unto all, and therefore they must remember their
Creator in the days of their youth, for if that be spent in impurity, they
must answer it at the great day Eccles. 11.9. and 12.1.
.

Secondly, sanctity belongs unto old men, and therefore Saint John writes unto
them to put them in mind of it Ioh. 2.13
.

Thirdly, it appertains unto husbandmen, who must be as careful to plow up
the fallow ground of their hearts, as to till their fields Ier. 4.4.
.

Fourthly, it belongs unto the simple and foolish; and therefore Wisdom
calls and admonishes them to turn from sin, unto the service of the most
High Prove. 9.4.6. and 1.20.21.
.

Fifthly, it belongs unto the rich to be pure and unspotted, otherwise their
riches cannot preserve them from hell; as we see in Dives, Luke 16.

Sixthly, it belongs unto Kings, and Monarchs; for Tophet is prepared of old,
it is wide, and large, yea for those Kings is it prepared whose lives are
impure, and wills not subject unto the will of God Esa 30.33.
; And therefore David admonishes them, that although they be like Gods on
earth, yet they shall fall like men into pardition, except they labor to be
pure, and to participate of that divine nature 2 Pet. 1.4.
. Thus it appertains unto all to be pure and holy, because every soul that is
not circumcised shall be cut off.

Secondly, they err here in practice, who mingle Bonum malo, Corn and Cockle,
wheat and chafe, good and evil together: that is, they who obey in some
things only, like Agrippa, who was half persuaded to become a Christian; or
Herod, who did many things but not all, and abstained from some sins but not
from all Mar. 6.20.
.

But some will say, who can perform all things that are required of them? who
can do all

We cannot obey God in all things perfectly,

First, in Resolution; we should resolve to serve God in singleness of heart,
and purpose to leave and forsake whatsoever is displeasing unto him; yea even
to cast away from us those sins that hang so fast on, and cleave so fast too,
and have been formerly valued as hands and eyes.

Secondly, in endeavor; we must strive to perform what we have purposed,
and labor to accomplish what we have resolved, with the utmost power of our
souls: we must fight even unto blood Heb. 12.4
, and wrestle as Rachel with her sister, with manfull wrastlings till we have
prevailed: and thus both in desire and endeavor we must serve the Lord
sincerely; and although we do but obey in part, and fear in part, and love
in part, yet with all our hearts we must desire and labor that what is in part
were abolished, and that we could serve the Lord in singleness of heart.

In heart. Why does our Savior pronounce

My son give me thy heart, says God. Prove. 23.26. for except I have that, I
will have nothing. Thus Saint Paul says, the end of the Commandment is to
love and serve God with a pure heart. 1 Timothy 1.5. And therefore he prays for
the Thessalonians, that the Lord would establish their hearts unblameable
before him in holiness 1 These. 3.13.
. And prays Timothy, that he would follow the steps of those who call on the
name of the Lord out of a pure heart 2 Timothy 2.22.
.

Why must our Religion and purity be rooted

he is a Jew, that is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, in
the spirit Romans 2.29.
. yea, our anointing, and seal, and earnest, are all begun in the heart, for
Christ has anointed us, and has also sealed us, and given the earnest of the
Spirit in our hearts 2 Cor. 1.21.22.
.

Secondly, our religion and obedience is not A good man (says our Savior) out
of the good treasure of the heart, brings forth good things Math. 12 35.
; And on the contrary from an evil heart proceed no good things. And therefore
it is necessary that first the heart should be purified.



Fourthly, it is requisite that our purity and religion should be rooted in the
heart, because otherways we do not honor God, but rather dishonor him: He
is a Spirit, and therefore must be worshipped in spirit and in truth John 4.24.
, and not only with outward worship: God is not like man, who sees only the
outward appearance, but he sees the heart ^ Sam. 16.7. and Act. 15.8.
, and he will make manifest the counsels of the heart 1 Cor. 4.5.
; According to that confession of David, I know, O Lord, thou provest and
triest the heart 1 Chro. 29.7.
and inward man: and approvest of none whose heart is not upright. And hence it
is that the Apostle does so highly commend the obedience of the Romans, and
bless God for it, because it proceeded from the heart: God be thanked (says
he) that ye have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was
delivered unto you Romans 6.1^.
.

Who do obey God but not with the heart?

First, those who under a show of obedience Cui bono, what good it will do
them thus to profess religion? For they cannot deceive God, who sees their
hearts as well as their outward man Gal. 6.7^
; and if their conscience tell them, that they profess with their mouths,
what they approve not with their hearts, God who is greater then their
conscience, must needs much more accuse them 1 John 3.20.
. What a folly is it for men to go about to deceive men, when as the Judge,
and accuser, and witness, that is, God, Satan, and their own consciences,
see and know what they do? Let these consider what the reward of Hypocrites is,
the approbation of men, and the rejection of God.

Secondly, those who under the cloak of obedience

First, some avoid sin for fear of temporal punishment: they take heed of
adultery and theft, not of lying, swearing, or drunkenness; because these are
not so strictly looked unto, not so severely punished as those are. Certainly
these are neither pure in heart nor life, who do abstain but only from some
outward sins.

Secondly, some avoid public sins, but not private; and stick not to
commit adultery if it may be done secretly, or to injure their brother, if they
may do it closely, or supplant their neighbor if they can do it, and not be
perceived, or dissemble, if it may be done fairly: Certainly these I* are
not pure in heart, because that is polluted with close impiety. II. this
obedience of theirs is but that eye service, which God cannot endure Ephe. 6.5.
and Col. 3.2^.
: yea III. these are but ^ooles, who hide their sins from man, and lay them
open before God, who might judge them at the last day, according to their
works 2 Cor. 5.10.
.

Thirdly, some abstain from sin, but it is with murmuring and much
unwillingnesse now these are not pure in heart, neither does this blessedness
belong unto them.

who draw more unto God with their lips, but their hearts are far from him
Esa. 29.13. and 58.2.
. These may be known by these two marks. First, if they strain a g^^^ and
swallow a Camel; if they stumble at a straw, and leap over a block; if they
tithe mint and anice, and neglect greater things; if they make more conscience
of that which is of less moment, then certainly they are no better then
outward formalists, which God cares not for.

Secondly, if they be fair without and black within; if the superficies be
gold, and the substance copper; if they have Jacobs voice, but Esaus hands; if
the Cup be plate, but the draught poison; if the face be beautiful and the
heart adulterous; if they be painted sepulchers, fair without, but within
rottenesse; if they be like the apples of Sodom, pleasant to the eye, but
within ashes; if they have a form of godliness, but in their hearts have
denied the power thereof 2 Timothy 3.5.
, certainly they are but Hypocrites, whose hearts are not pure, nor themselves
blessed.

Fourthly, those obey not with the heart,

For they shall see God.] Is not God invisible? is it not said, none can see
him and live? Exodus ^^.20. and none has seen him at any time; John 1.18. Does
not the Apostle testify, that he dwells in the light, which no man can
approach unto, whom no man has seen, nor can see? 1 Timothy 6.16. and 1 John
4.12. And therefore how shall the pure in heart see God? Not in this life, but
in the life to come;

What great matter is it to see God? what wonder Abraham saw him often. Genesis
12.1. and Chap. 15. and Chap. 17. and Chap. 18. and 22.14. Jacob saw him. Genesis
32.30. Moses saw him. Exodus 33. The Prophet Esaias saw him chapter. 6.1. and
the Prophet Ezekiel, Ezech. 1.29. Stephen saw him also, Acts 7.56. And Paul, 2
Cor. 12.

First, all these were pure in heart.

Secondly, this was miraculous, and extra ordinary,

Thirdly, this sight of God which these had Abraham saw God like a man. Genesis
18. Ezechiel saw him imperperfectly; and Moses saw not Gods face, Exodus 33. But
the pure in heart in heaven shall see God perfectly, and not in part; they
shall see him face to face, as they are seen and not darkely, or through a
glass 1 Cor. 13 10, 11, 12.


But has not this promise place in this life? do not the pure in heart see
God at all on earth,

This promise has place both in this life and in the life to come:

Here then observe that there is a manifold vision of God:

The Uision and sight of God is either in the life Present, and that either
First Intelligendo, by understanding either the Or Nature and person of God;
but as he is simple, The will and word of God.
Secondly, Videndo, by seeing some representations of him, as those holy men
did whereof we spoke before quest. 2. Thirdly, sentiendo by perceiving either
the Mercy of God; which is called his face; Thus Aaron was to bless the
people, The Lord make his face to shine upon thee: that is, show mercy unto
thee Numb. 6.25.
, so Psalm, 13.1.44.14. and 80.7. Thus Moses by faith saw him who is invisible
Heb. 11.27.
, and feared not the wrath of the King of Egypt, because he was sensible of
Gods mercy. Peace of God, which passes all expression Philip. 4.7.
or by rasting how sweet and good the Lords is, Psalm. 34.8.

To come and that is two fold, to wit, either Corporeal, with the bodily eye;
which is impossible. Or Spiritual with the eye of the soul which is the
knowledge of the nature of God, and is either Perfect: in regard of our
capacity and apprehension, as every vessel thrown into the sea shall be
filled. Absolute; and thus only God can comprehend what God is.




In this life the pure in heart see God by understanding his will: the meaning
therefore of this verse, may be this, Blessed are the pure in heart: for they
shall see God; that is, the pure in heart and mind shall see the will, and
truth, and Be renewed (says the Apostle) in your minds, that you may prove,
what that good, and perfect, and acceptable will of God is Romans 12. Ephesians.
5.8.10.
. And therefore we should purge our hearts from all pollutions, that so we
might be able to understand what is acceptable unto the Lord.





In the life to come the pure in heart shall see God with a spiritual sight;
that is, although the Creature cannot absolutely comprehend the Creator; yet
he may with a certain degree of perfection.



Greg. s. Psalm. paenitentiales
.

Secondly, this beatificall vision none can perfectly define, nor fully
describe: but yet some things we may conjecture at, as for example,

First, we shall know the immense Deity: the simplest in heaven shall far
exceed in wisdom, and the knowledge of God, the wisest upon earth.

Secondly, we shall have Angels, Prophets Apostles, Martyrs, Patriarchs, and
all the blessed Saints to be our Companions.

Thirdly we shall there have true, solid, and ineffable joy, wherein we shall
delight, and with which our souls shall be satisfied.

Fourthly, we shall have a new and continued desire after this joy: for our
desire shall be without any lack, and our fullness without any dislike.

Fifthly, God himself will be all in all unto us. And therefore let us give our
selves unto purity in this life; that we may be assured of protection, grace,
and peace of conscience here, and of immortality and felicity for ever
hereafter.

VERSE. 9. Blessed are the Peacemakers: for they shall be called the children
of God.
. 1. Blessed are the Peacemakers.] Who

First, some expound this, of the reconciling of brethren; that is, both those
who reconcile them that jarre, and those who are reconciled Chrysostom. sup. and
Op. imperf.

Secondly, some expound this, of those who Vis cognoscere quis pacificus? andi
Psalm. 34.14. Cave a malo, sequere pacem. (August. de Sermon. Dom.) Would thou
know who is a Peacemaker? listen then unto the Psalmist, and he will tell
thee, that it is he, who eschewes evil, and follows after peace.

Thirdly, some understand it of those, who Obliti eorum, quibus offendi
possunt, in fratrum charitate viventes. (Hilarious) that is, he is a
peacemaker, who lives in love and charity with his brethren, passing by, and
forgetting those injuries which are offered unto him.

Fourthly, some expound it of those, who Quid enim prodest alios pacare, dum
intus bella vitiorum? (Hierom. sup.) What benefit is it to make peace amongst
others, while our own corruptions war within us?

Fifthly, all our late Interpreters, (viz. Calvin, Gualter, Musculus, Marlorate,
and Aretius) in a manner expound it of those, who preach, and publish, and
bring peace from God, and love, concord, and brotherly amity amongst
themselves.

There being such diversity of opinions concerning this particular, that we
may give a clearer resolution of this first question, I will propound a second,
and that is,

How manifold is Peace?

First, some say, there is a threefold peace: Stapleton sup. Pentecost.

Secondly, there is a fourfold peace; to

First, there is a peace of conscience; when a man labors to subdue all
rebellious lusts in the heart; and is so careful to obey and serve his God,
that he has an excusing, not an accusing conscience. These are certainly the
dear children of God, that are thus careful to imitate their Father in
purity and sincerity Ph. l. 1.15.
. But this verse speaks not of this peace, and therefore I omit it.

Secondly, there is a Civil peace in our selves; when we are careful to live
peaceably with all men Rom 12.18.
, and to follow peace with all men, Heb. 12.14. But properly to make peace is
referred and attributed unto those who reconcile others, not unto them who
conserve and keep peace in themselves. And therefore this place not speaking
of this peace, I also leave it.

Thirdly, there is a Spiritual peace betwixt us and God: and thus Aretius,
Musculus, Gualter, and it agrees well with the scope of the place; for our
Savior speaks here unto his Apostles, comforting them against the derision of
the world; Blessed (says he) are the peacemakers, as if he would say, the
world will hate and contemn you, but blessed are ye, because 1. ye shall be
called the Sons of God, and 2. because ye shall bring peace from God unto
the sons of men; and 3. because ye shall be a means to make peace that the
word of reconciliation is committed unto us, 2 Cor. 5.19. and we preach peace
unto the people of God, Romans 10.15. for which our feet are called beautiful.
Nahum. 1.15.







Adam and Eve, that they may be thrust out of the earthly. Fourthly, they
having eaten of the forbidden fruit, and thereby violated the law of God, hence
the wrath of God was kindled against them; which just anger in him produces
these effects toward them. I. God judges them Genesis 3. II. Casts them out of
Paradise. III. Defends the tree of life with a flaming sword, that Adam might
not take of that fruit. IV. With-drawes his presence and sight from Adam, who
must not now enjoy that sweet society, which formerly he did. V. Yea hence the
earth was cursed, and by this curse subjected to barrenness, sicknesses,
diseases, sudden casualties, and the like; the wrath of God being thus revealed
against man Rom, 1.18.
. The sense and apprehension of which anger did amaze David Psalm. 38.2. etc.

Fifthly being thus subjected unto anger, and a curse for sin, it was merely
impossible for us to escape or free our selves by any means. For I. Riches will
not avail us for the pacifying of this anger. Prove. 10.2. II. Natural, or
carnal wisdom can not help us to free our selves, from sin, Satan, or
the irefull hand of God; this wisdom being but foolishness. Romans 8.6. III.
Moral works cannot save us, as the Apostle proves plainly, Romans 1.2.3.6, 11.
IV. The Law cannot save us. To. 8.3. And thus it evidently appears, that the
sweet peace and union that was betwixt God and us, was now disjointed and
broken; and therefore there was great need of a peacemaker, or a messenger of
peace.

Who makes peace betwixt God and us?

The peacemakers are either Principal or isntrumental.

First, the principal peacemakers are three, viz. First, God the Father, who
out of his unspeakeable love unto mankind gave Christ, and sent Christ into
the world, that it might be saved by him John 3.16.
, ordaining Christ to suffer and to take our nature upon him for this end, to
make up the breach, to be our peace, to make our God and us one, and to break
down the middle wall of partition between us Ephesians. 2.14.
. Secondly, God the Son, who has laid down his life for us, Ioh. 10. And
has made peace through the blood of his Cross Coloss. 1 20.
.

Thirdly, God the Holy Ghost, who confirms this peace and reconciliation unto
us; assuring us that we are not now enemies, but friends, and servants, yea the
Sons of God. Romans 8.15.

Secondly, the isntrumental peacemakers, are the Apostles, and Ministers of
Christ, whose work is to labor, to turn the hearts of children unto their
fathers, Malac. 4.6. whence they are called (...), laborers together, or
coworkers with God 1 Cor. 3.9.
, wherefore Saint Paul is not afraid to say plainly unto the Corinthians, in
Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel 1 Cor. 4.15.
. And as a wise Master builder I have laid the foundation 1 Cor. 3.10.
. Yea hence certainly it was, that our Savior taught that salutation unto his
Apostles, when they came unto any place to preach, Peace be unto this house
Luke 10.5.
, because they were instruments of peace betwixt God and man.

But perhaps some will say, the Apostles and came not to send peace, but a
sword, and division; so that two shall be against three, and three against two
Luke 12 52.53.
. And thus Jeremiah was a man of contention and strafe to the whole earth
Jerem. 15.10.
. How then are they peacemakers?

This is accidental, arising from the people,

If the true end and aim of Preachers be thus

It must not be heard for form or fashion sake; or with itching ears,

First, so hear the word of God, that thou may learn thereby to break that
covenant which thou have made with the world, and with thy own affections, and
lusts, that so thou may have peace with God.

Secondly, labor in the hearing of the word for the remission and pardon of
thy sins already committed. Thirdly, strengthen thy self daily with a new
and renewed purpose of repentance, for thy sins committed. Fourthly, so
hear, that faith may be wrought in thee, that is, examine by that which thou
hear, thy self, thy estate and condition wherein thou stand, thy
repentance, thy love unto that which is good, thy hatred unto that which is
evil, and the like.

Fifthly, when thou art thus careful to examine thy heart, and to direct thy
life by the word of God, then thou shall be made partaker of the peace of God,
and the Ministers of the word shall be messengers of peace, and reconciliation
unto thee.

Fourthly, the last peace is the civil peace amongst brethren; And thus
Chrysostom, Hierome, Calvin, Aretius, Gualter, Musculus, and A fool (says
Solomon) breeds jarres amonst friends, but a man of wisdom appeaseth strifes,





First, ratione conservationis, in respect of preservation: for without peace
nothing can subsist. If a Kingdom be divided against it self (says Christ)
it cannot stand.

Secondly, ratione perfectionis, in regard of perfection in life, for without
peace nothing can live.

Thirdly, Ratione fruitionis, in respect of possession; because no man without
peace, has joy in that which he does possess. And therefore seeing peace is
so good a thing, so common a good, and a thing so much desired, it must needs
be a godly and blessed thing, to make peace between those who are divided.







Moses as a busie-body, when he did interpose himself to compose the
contention which arose between the two Hebrews Exodus 2.13.
, but has rather set it down for our imitation; because it is the duty of
all Christians, not only to care for themselves, but to be careful to
preserve peace amongst others. And he who thinks this office of making peace
belongs not unto him, has forgot that he is a member of Christ.

Some perhaps will object here, the saying of Pittacus, That a man must not be
Judge, or Arbitrator between two friends, lest by judgeing profitably for the
one, he loose the friendship of the other.

First, we must give way unto an inconvenience rather than a sin; now it is
but an inconvenience

Secondly, in all Christian duties required of

Thirdly, some have been arbitrators between Archidamus the Lacedemonian,
being chosen arbitrator, to decide a contention between two friends, first
brought them into the Temple of Diana; then secondly, made them both swear
upon the Altar, precisely to observe whatsoever he determined: And then
thirdly, gave this verdict, that neither of them should depart out of the
Temple, until they were reconciled. And thus they were both constrained (by
reason of their oaths taken) to make themselves friends, and to agree betwixt
themselves, and both still esteemed alike of Archidamus, because he had given
definitive sentence against neither. And thus by wisdom and prudence, a man
may so order and dispose of himself, that he may both make peace between
friends, and also keep peace with friends.

. 2. For they shall be called the Sons of

How are Peacemakers the Sons of

Three manner of ways: viz. First, in Who is the author and fountain of every
good gift, and every perfect being, James 1.17. To compose strife, and to
unite dis-joynted brethren, is so good a work, that our Savior has here
pronounced that man blessed that does it; and therefore he that does this
work, must needs acknowledge, that he was assisted by God his Father in the
doing of it.

Secondly, Peacemakers are the children of Esai. 45.7. From God comes peace,
Romans 1.7. because he is the God of peace, Romans 15.33. and 16.20. And therefore
lovers of peace imitate God therein.



they shall be called the Sons of God? are they not indeed Gods children?

Formosus, beautiful.

Lucretia is called an Adulteress, or unchaste, and sober Socrates called
intemperate.

nomen sine re, nor rem sine nomine; but and nomen, and rem, not the name
without the thing, nor the thing without the name; but both the name and thing;
as when a holy man is called (like as some impious Popes have been) Pius. And
this is that which our Savior here speaks of, they shall be called the Sons
of God, that is, they shall both be the Sons of God, and also so called: or,
Blessed are the Peacemakers; For first, God will esteem them his children: and
secondly, men shall call them so.



Noah's Arc all the wild beasts were tame and peaceable, the Lion feeding with
the Lamb, and the Bear with the Dog; now the Arc was a Type of the Church
of Gods and therefore all Christians should be mild and peaceable, not cruel
and revengefull Staplet. s. John 14.
Caesar nil oblitus, nisi injuriarum August. epist. 5. ad Marcellin e Cicerone.
The memory of Casar was so strong, that he forgot nothing which occurred unto
him but only injuries and wrongs: And therefore it is a shame for Christians
to seek revenge; who should rather suffer wrong, observing diligently these
three short rules. First, prize peace in thy self. Secondly, persuade others
thereunto. Thirdly, submit thy self rather to thy brother, then suffer the
bond of peace to be broken: we have a singular example of this in our Father
Abraham, who fearing that the contention set on foot betwixt his brother Lots
Herd-men and his own, would extend it self unto them; comes unto his brother
Lot to quench this fire which was already kindled with these mild and soft
words; Let there be no strife I pray thee, between me and thee, for we be
brethren: The whole land is before thee, therefore if thou will take the left
hand, then I will go to the right; or if thou depart to the right hand, then I
will go to the left Genesis 13.8, 9.
. And thus we should rather imitate this holy Patriarch, in submitting our
selves one to another for the preservation of this blessed peace, then by
contention, strife, revenge, and the like, dissolve this bond.

Secondly, those are enemies and opposite unto

Thirdly, those are principally opposite unto this Solomon says, He that
sows discord among brethren, is an abomination unto the Lord Prove. 6.16.19.
.

Who are these sowers of Discord, that are thus opposite unto this Christian
virtue?

They are found either in the Church, or in common and private affairs.

First, there are sowers of the seeds of sedition in the visible Church of
Christ, and these are Sectaries, which the Apostle forewarnes us of in these
words, Observe those which cause breaches and divisions in the Church.

Secondly, there are seedesmen of strife in private and public matters: to
wit, I. Those who are whisperers and tale-bearers; such there were in Saint
Paul's time, who were not only idle, but also tatlers and busybodies 1 Timothy
5.13.
. II. Those who provoke others to sue them by whom they have been injured; who
are as spurs in men's sides, to instigate and hasten them on to dissension and
discord. III. Those Lawyers, who (like covetous and unconscionable Chyrurgions)
prolong suites, by their demurres and delays, only for their own advantage.
All these are opposite unto this peace, and therefore have no interest at all
in this Blessedness which is pronounced by Christ unto the Peacemakers.

VERSE. 11. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and
shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake.
There are three phrases here expressed, reviling, persecuting, and speaking
evil of: The second, (to wit, persecution) I have wholly omitted, reserving
the consideration thereof unto another place. The first and third (viz. to
revile and speak evil of) seem to be the same, and are of one and the same
nature; but Augustine distinguishes them thus. First, we are reviled to our
face, as the Jews did unto Christ; say we not well, thou have a devil John
8.48.
. Secondly, we are spoken evil of behind our backs; and thus some say
privately of Christ, that he cannot be the Mess^as, because he is a Galilean,
and Christ must not come out of Galilee x. John 7.41.


VERSE. 12. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven,
for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you.
Great is your reward in heaven.] The Papists object this place for the Merit
of our works, thus: life everlasting is in this verse called Merces, a
recompense or reward; therefore good works do properly merit.

Augustine says Aug. Praef. in Psalm. 109.
, Quicquid promisit indignis promisit, ut non quasi operibus merces
promitteretur, sed gratia gratis daretur; whatsoever God has promised he has
promised to those that are unworthy, that it should not be promised as a reward
unto works, but as grace freely given. The argument then follows not, there
is a reward: ergo merit; for the reward may be counted of favor as well as of
debt, Romans 4.4. as follows in the next answer.

Secondly, there is a double reward, the first properly so called; the second
improperly, and by a certain similitude; now of this latter, to Homanymorum or
ambiguous and doubtful words; Porsanus here proves

These examples will not prove the consequence; for all these are of a proper
appellation, Father and Son,
between Husband and Wife,
between Master and Servant,
between Hills and Valleys.
Because he cannot be a Father without a Son; or a Husband who has no Wife;
and so of the rest: But there is not a perpetual relation between Mercedem
and Meritum,
or Wages and Merit.
As appears thus:

When Leah brought forth Issacbar; she said, God has given me my wages,
because I have given my maiden unto my husband Genesis 30 18.
. Now in this thing, Leah did perform no good work, neither did it for Gods
sake, neither did well in doing of it; and therefore there could be no merit
in it, neither in any respect can the giving of her maiden unto her husband be
called a merit, or can it be said that thereby she did merit or deserve any
thing at Gods hands. And therefore there is no perpetual relation between
Wages and Merit; or that wheresoever we read of reward, there we must needs
understand it to be given as of due debt Chamier. tom. 3. f. 465.
.

Great is your reward in heaven.] Our Savior does not promise a reward in
earth, but in heaven:





I reckon that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be
compared to that glory, which shall be revealed in u^ Romans 8.18.
.



It may be objected, our afflictions, losses, and

First, a temporal reward is not promised, and

Secondly, the hundred fold reward promised

Thirdly, the true and adequate reward of the

Fourthly, that this heavenly reward which we shall be made partakers off is
an exceeding reward, yea also eternal. For these things considered, we shall
think nothing hard or heavy to be borne, but even the yoke of the cross
light and easy: Art thou injured? the time will come when thou shall be
avenged: art thou slandered, and thy reputation not vindicated; the time will
come when thy innocence shall appear and shine as the Sun; art thou killed
for Christ's sake? there is a time when thou shall rise again, and live for
ever with Christ in eternal glory; and therefore blessed are they who are
persecuted, reviled, slandered, and afflicted for Christ's sake, for great is
their reward in heaven.

VERRS. 13. Ye are the salt of the earth, but if the salt have lost his
savor, wherewith shall it be salted? it is thenceforth good for nothing, but
to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men.
Ye are the salt of the earth.]



ye are the salt of the earth, that is, it is your office and work to salt and
season the earth: Trahit ad personas quod est doctrinae (Calvin s.) Christ
applies that to their persons, which belongs unto their doctrine. Non tam ad
personas quam ad munus (Gualt. s.) This does not so much belong unto their
persons, as unto their office;













Ye are the salt of the earth.] If the salt



Secondly, heretical teachers, such as teach

Thirdly, such as preach true doctrine, but yet

Fourthly, they who though they teach the

Why must Ministers be thus careful to be in

First, because if they be unsavory salt, they

Secondly, because although otherwise they

Thirdly, because if they be not savoury salt,

Fourthly, if they be not seasoning salt, they shall

VERSE. 14. Ye are the light of the world,
. 1. Ye are the light of the world.] The occasion

Whether do these two parables signify one

Both the Parables have the same scope,

First, salt does preserve meat from being any worse then it is when it is
salted; but if it be tainted before it be salted, then the salt does not reduce
it to his first estate, or make it as good as it was. But light does reduce us
from that darkness and ignorance wherein we were Chrysostom imperf. s.
.

Secondly, salt has reference to a good conversation; light unto sound
Doctrine Ib. Id.
, or (as Aretius thinks) contrarily, salt signifies, sound and wholesome
doctrine; and light a holy and unblameable life.

Thirdly, Ministers are salt unto believers; light unto the ignorant.
Conversatio sine luce non adducit ad veritatem, scientia sine pietate non
praeservat in sanctitate Id. Ib.
. A conversation without the light of doctrine cannot bring us unto truth;
knowledge without holiness cannot preserve us in piety: And therefore it is
necessary for Ministers to be both Salt and Light.






Nam conversatio ducit ad scientiam, contrarium vix. Multi scientes sine timore
Dei, nulli timentes sine scientia Chrysostom imperf. s.
. A good conversation leads unto knowledge, but seldom the contrary: For many
know much who fear not God, but none truly fear God without some knowledge,
The fear of God being the beginning of wisdom.



Secondly, that is no true knowledge, that does not arise from piety and
holiness.

Thirdly, that is not true piety which does not hunger after the knowledge of
God.

Ye are the light of the world.] Christ was the light of the world Ioh. 8.12.
and 9.5. And John was not that light, but was sent only to bear witness of
that light, Ioh. 1.8. How then are the Apostles the light of the world?



Marlorat. Thesaur.
First, for the Creator of light, as John says, The light shined in darkness,
and the darkness comprehended it not, Ioh. 1.5.

Secondly, for the Son of God, thus Saint John the Evangelist, says of Saint
John Baptist, He was not that light (that is the true Messiah) but was sent
only to bear witness of that light Ioh. 1.8.
.

Thirdly, for that power of the understanding and reason which is kindled in
the minds of men; thus John says, Christ was life, and the life was the light
of men Ioh. 1.4.
.

Fourthly, for the knowledge of the glory of God: Thus Saint Paul says, God
who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts
to give us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God 2 Cor. 4.6.
. Where light is taken both for the knowledge of spiritual and celestial
glory.

Fifthly, for sanctity of life; What communion (says Saint Paul) has light
with darkness, that is what agreement is there betwixt sanctity and sin 2
Cor. 6.14.
. And so our Savior in the next verse save one unto this, says, let your
light so shine before men, etc. Where by light is expressed to be meant a holy
life replenished with good works.

Sixthly, light sometimes is taken for the doctrine of the Gospel; according to
that of Saint Paul, Christ being risen from the dead, shall show light unto his
people (the Jews) and to the Gentiles Acts 26.23.
, that is, shall send his Gospel to be preached unto both.

Seventhly, light is taken, for the Doctors of the Evangelicall doctrine as in
this verse, ye are the light of the world.

Eighthly, all Christians are called light. So the Apostle exhorts the
Philippians to be harmless, blameless, and without rebuke, because they were
lights among the ignorant Gentiles Phil. 2.15.
. Now true Christians are called light in a threefold regard. First, because
they are enlightened in themselves by that most true, pure, and bright light,
the illumination of the Spirit of Christ. Secondly, because they walk in the
light. And thirdly, because by their pure and holy life they show light unto
others.

Secondly, Christ is called light, because he is Ioh. 1 9. and 8.12. Esa. 9.2.
and 40.6. and 43, 6. and 60.1.12. and 1 Ioh. 1.5. and 2.8.

Thirdly, Apostles, and other Doctors and Ministers lux mundi, the light of the
world, in these regards: First, because they bear witness of the true light
Ioh. 1.7.8.
. Secondly, because they have received the splendour of divine knowledge from
Christ. Thirdly, in respect of the sincerity of life, and integrity of manners.

Fourthly, God is the cause of light; this may the Father of lights. James
1.17. yea he commands the light to shine out of darkness 2 Cor. 4.6.
. Secondly, God the Son enlightens every one who comes into the world Ioh.
^.9.
. Thirdly, God the holy Ghost is called the Spirit of light. The Apostle proves
most plainly that the ever blessed Trinity is the cause of light, in these
words I pray for you that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ the Father of glory
may give unto you the Spirit of wisdom, that so the eyes of your
understanding may be enlightened Ephesians. 1.17.18.
.

Fifthly, the light it self is the word of God: Thus David, Thy Word is a light
unto my feet, Paul, Christ has brought life and immortality to light, through
the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. And Peter, ye do well to take heed to the word of
God, as unto a light that shines in a dark place. 2 Pet. 1.19.

Paul was sent unto the Gentiles, that by the preaching of the word unto them,
he might open their eyes, and turn them from darkness to light Acts 26.18.
.





Heb. 6.4
, yet secondly, the application of the outward light by the ministry of the
word, is the ordinary means whereby the internal light is wrought within us.
And therefore I conclude this objection thus; First, the light is the word,
which comes from God, not from the Ministers. Secondly, the power of
enlightening is from Christ, not from the Ministers; and they only illuminate
through his help and assistance, Thirdly, yet it is the office of Ministers to
hold forth the light in their Ministry.

Ye are the light of the world.] The Apostles

they shall sit upon twelve seats, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel
Matthew. 19.28.
.

the light of the world, lest the Ministry should seem to be supported by
an arm of flesh. If the Scribes and Pharisees had been made the light of the
world, the world would then have thought, that the word had been upheld and
maintained by humane power; but when the Gospel is preached, published,
divulged, and dispersed through the world, by the Apostles, who were but
Fishers, Toll-gatherers poor, and illiterate men, then all the world will say,
Hic est digitus Dei, that this is Gods work, and supported by a divine hand.

Thirdly, our Savior calls his Apostles (not the light of the world, to teach
us, that worldly pomp and splendor, adds nothing to the efficacy of the
Ministry; it neither helps (if present) nor hurts, if absent.

Why does not external and mundane glory

First, because it is a spiritual work, and therefore Paul opposes them,
first, in his conversation, in these words, Our rejoicing is the testimony of
our conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly
wisdom, we have had our conversation in the world 2 Cor. 1 12.
. Secondly, Saint Paul opposes them in his preaching: Christ (says he) sent
me to preach the Gospel, not with wisdom of words 1 Cor. 1 17.
, not with excellency of speech 1 Cor. 2.1.
, not with enticing words of man's wisdom; but in demonstration of the Spirit,
and of power 1 Cor. 2.4.
.

Secondly, God in this work will not use the power of men, lest the praise of
the work should be given unto men. Vzza was struck with death, because he
puts his hand to the Arc 2 Samuel 6 7.
. And God will not deliver his people by 32000, but by 300 Judge. 7.2.
lest the people should glory in themselves; whereas he that glories should
glory in the Lord: yea, hence it was, that God would not take the temptation
from Paul, but rather sustain him in it; because thus his glory and strength
was made perfect in weakness 2 Cor. 12.9.
.

. 4. A City that is set on an Hill, cannot be hid.] These words (as also the
former) some

Touching the visibilitie of the Church, I lay down this proposition.

There shall be always a Church truly visible, so long as this mortal world
shall last. Here that I may be the better understood, let me add these
explanations, to wit,

First, the most visible Church shall not always be truest: for the weeds of
error, and chafe of hypocrisy, and superstition, shall sometimes over-grow
the come of true religion Aug. brev. coll. col. 3.
; as Arianisme did the truth in Hilary his days Hyl. cont Auxen. test. M.
Cano.
. Yea, this is confessed, Major pars vincit aliquando meliorem, the greater
part oftentimes overcomes the better. Bellarm. de Council. 3.9.

Secondly, errors over-growing the truth: peradventure the Church shall at
some time be visible only, ad intra, not ad extra, that is, known among
themselves, though not observed of the world. I say, peradventure, because many
of our worthy Divines hold, that it shall be visible always, not only in some
scattered persons, but in an orderly Ministry and use of the Sacraments D.
Field de Eccles. 1.10.
.

Thirdly, this Church shall not always be resplendent and glorious in the
worlds eye (as the Papists sometime persuade the ignorant) but (after Saint
Augustines comparison) like the Moon, ever being, but sometimes in the wane,
scarce seen shining at all. Obscurari potest multitudine scandalorum, says
Bellarmine Bell. de eccles. milit. 3.16.
, in answer to Hylary, out of Saint Augustine, epistol. 48.

Fourthly, this visible Church has no warrant of not erring (in the usual
sense, to wit, in part) this being the greatest imposture, that the Papists
gull the world withal, as shall be showed in another place.

A City set upon a hill:] Here we have two things to consider of, first what
this City is? Secondly, what this Mountain is?

City is which is set upon a Mountain?

mundus pro mundanis, the world for worldlings: And therefore our Savior does
not say, Ye are the City set on an hill.

Secondly, others say the Church is this City, the City of God, Psalm. 46.4. the
joy of the whole earth, the City of the great King, Psalm. 48 2. and of
righteousness, Esa. 1.26. yea it is termed Mount Sion, the City of the living
God, the heavenly Jerusalem, the Church of the first borne Heb. 12.22.
. How dear and precious this City is in Gods sight, may appear by these
things observed by some in the metaphore. I. The City is the Church: thus
David, Glorious things are spoken of thee, oh City of God Psa. 87.3
. II. The Mountain whereupon the City stands is Christ; according to that of
the Prophet David, The stone became a great Mountain, and filled the whole
earth Da. 2.35.
. III. The Citizens of this City are the Saints; thus says Saint Paul, Ye
are fellow-citizens with the Saints and of the household of God Ephesians. 2.19.
. IV. The Towers of this City were the Prophets, who were most eminent in the
Church. V. The Gates of this City were the Apostles, by whose Ministry men
were brought into the Church. VI. The Walls of this City are the Ministers of
the Word, and the Apostles successors; who are as rampers, to defend the
Church against the assaults of sin, superstition and error Chrysostom. inperf. op.
s.
.

Thirdly, the true City is not in this life: for Hebr. 13.14.) to wit, that new
Jerusalem which is above, Revel. 21.2 10.



Analogice, because it something resembles the heavenly Jerusalem, and
triumphant Church; partly, Synechdochice, because it is a part of that City
which is above.

What is to be expected, or may be looked for,

Four things, to wit; first, (...), Order, 1 Cor. 11.16.
. And therefore those who will not be subject to the godly, decent, and lawful
injunctions and orders of the Church, are no true members thereof, or at least
are to be esteemed as stubborn children; whether they be 1. Fanatici, the
Anabaptists, who understand all truths as they list themselves, measuring all
Doctrines by their own revelations: Or 2. Furiosi, the Brownists, who will
tolerate no rites or customs at all, although all who know any thing, agree,
that in all Churches there have been some. Or 3. Pertinaces, those that are
headstrong, perverse obstinate, and rebellious, whose will is a Law, and will
make any thing lawful that they please, not subjecting themselves to any
government, or command, though never so lawful. Of all these we may say with
the Apostle, If any seem to be thus contentious, we have no such custom, we
nor the Church of God 1 Cor. 11.16.
.

Secondly, the second thing to be expected in this City is Unity; there is but
one government, one King, one head, and one body, and therefore we expect
unity in this City (read Ephesians. 4.5.16. and Romans 12.5. and 1 Corinthians. 10.17.)
it being necessary that the Citizens should be of one mind and of one
judgment, having but one rule to walk by, and one way which all must walk in
who hope to be saved Phil. 3.16.
. There is one light whereby we are enlightened, one truth whereby we are
directed, one law of obedience unto all, one faith in Christ unto salvation,
one profession of faith and obedience, and whatsoever differs from this is an
error. We may differ in outward and adiaphorall things, and yet be of the same
religion and body of Christ: as we may see Protestant Churches, that although
they vary in circumstances, yet they hold one and the same substance and
fundamental truths entire.

Thirdly, as we may expect in this City unity between the subjects and
Sovereign, the body and the head; so we may also between the fellow members
of this body, because I. they are concives, fellow-Citizens Ephesians. 2.19.
. II. They are brethen, Psalm. 133.1. III. because they are members of one
mystical body, Romans 12.5. and 1 Corinthians. 10.17. Ephesians. 4.16. and 5.27.

Fourthly, in this City there is splendor; villages are more vile, but Cities
are more splendidious and sumptuous; this splendor and glory which is in that
part of the Church which is triumphant is lively portraied, Revel. 21.18. ad
verse. 25. but that beauty which is in the Militant Church is especially
internal and spiritual, not external and corporal: according to that of the
Psalmist, The Kings daughter is all glorious within Psalm. 45.13.
. And therefore if we desire to be assured that we are members of the Church
militant, and shall be of the triumphant; let us then learn I. to be subject
to the lawful and decent rites of the Church. II. To be obedient to the Laws
of God and behests of Christ. III. To love, to agree and accord one with
another in brotherly and christian-like love. And IV. to endeavor that we may
be pure and unspotted in the hidden man of the heart.

Hill upon which this City stands. And first, hence it may be demanded, what
this Hill or Mountain is?

Who shall dwell o Lord (says David) upon thy holy hill? Psalm. 15.1. and 24.3.
He that believes shall possess thy holy hill, Esa. 57.13. But the word is not
thus taken in this place.

Augustine sup.

(Chrysostom. imperf.) alluding unto Sion, which is called the holy Mount,
Ephhes. 2.20, 21, 22.) the head, beginning, and firstborn of the faithful,
Coloss. 1.18. yea our alone Savior, Acts 4.12. And therefore we may not seek
help from any other.





First, he must have Scientiaminopiae, a knowledge of our wants and
necessities: The Papists dispute, that the Saints know our wants in speculo
Trinitatis, seeing them in the face of God as in a glass. But 1. this glass
is but a foolish fiction and braine-sicke fancy of their own, and it is
false, at the least doubtful whether the Saints know any of our particular
griefs or not. 2. It is necessary, that they should hear all at one time who
pray unto them. Yea 3. understand the hearts and hearty desires of all in
distress; but these are peculiar unto God, as shall be showed, Math. 6.9

Secondly, he must have Potentiam juvandi, power and ability to help: that
is, be able 1. to give all good things unto us which we want. 2. To preserve us
from all dangers we are incident unto. 3. To overcome Satan our deadly enemy.
4. To direct all things that befall us unto our good: Now the Saints cannot
give all things unto us, for they are but creatures, and this is proper to the
Creator and Lord of all things in heaven and earth: When a Papist prays to any
Saint in heaven for any blessing, if that Saint should hear his prayer, I
persuade my self he would answer, as Christ did to the Mother of Zebedees
children (who desired that one of her sons should sit upon his right hand,
and the other on his left) That it was not his to give, but it should be given
to them, for whom it was prepared of his Father Mat. 22.23.
, prosperity, promotion, preferment, and the like, being ordered and disposed
by him. Again, the Saints cannot deliver from danger; This Eliphas the
Temanite knew right well, when he said, To which of the Saints will thou turn
Job 5.1.
? But if we call upon the Lord he can deliver us, Psalm. 50.15. Again, the
Saints cannot enable us to overcome Satan, for this power is derived unto us
from God, who being stronger than he, can take away his armor wherein he
trusts, and his captives whom he possesses, binding him in chains, and setting
them at liberty.

Lastly, the Saints cannot order and dispose of all our actions to our good,
because they do not know what may come to pass Eccles. 8.7.
: Omnia in futurum reservantur incerta: But the Lord calls those things which
are not, as though they were, knowing things to come as well as present or
by-passed, and has promised by his special providence so to dispose of all
the actions of his children, that all things shall work together for the best
unto them Romans 8.18.
; And therefore we must pray to no other.

Thirdly, he must love us cordially, having Voluntatem juvandi, as well a will
to help us, as power and ability to assist us: Now none has equalled the
Lords love unto us, for that was infinite Joh. 3.16. and 1 John 4.16.
. And thus much for the third exposition of the word Hill.

Fourthly, some more generally understand Mountain and Hill, only a more
glorious and conspicuous estate of the Church: And thus the name of a Mountain
is given to the Church it self: Ye are they that forsake the Lord, and forget
my holy Mountain Esa. 65.11.
, that is, the Church.

How and wherein is the Church of God like City set upon a Mountain?

First, it is more conspicuous, and in that regard it cannot be hid.

Secondly, it is defended with Towers, Walls, Jeremiah, Behold (says the Lord)
I have made thee this day a defenced City, and an iron pillar, and brazen
walls, against the whole land, against the Kings, Princes, Priests, and people
Jer. 1.18.
. As the wall repelles and beats back the darts, and keeps out the enemies,
so in like manner do the Ministers; they oppose themselves against sin, and
boldly reprove sin, not fearing the favor or frown of any: Christ calls
Herod Fox: Elias reproves Ahab, telling him that it was he and his Fathers
house who had troubled Israel.

Thirdly, a City built on a Hill has watch-towers, Ezekiel 3.17. Son of men,
I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel, and therefore give them
warning: And the Ministers of the new Testament are made overseers, Acts 20.28.
and Heb. 13.17. And therefore they are no faithful Ministers who do not admonish
their people of danger: in war, if he sleep who is appointed to stand
sentinel, and to watch for the safeguard of the army, he is hanged by Marshall
law; Wherefore Preachers who are the Watchmen of this city the Church, had
need to be vigilant, lest they incur the Lords displeasure against them to
cut them off, for their negligence and remissness.

Psalm. 46.5.
, and will establish it for ever Psalm. 48.8.
. And therefore the children of God, and the inhabitants of this City need not
fear; because the Lord is their watchman who is able to preserve them, and so
careful of them, that he neither slumbers nor sleeps.

Cannot be hid.] Why are these words added?



It cannot be hid?

Chrysostom thinks this spoken prophetically, that although now the Gospel
of the Kingdom be but newly published, yet in time the Church shall flourish.

Ephesians. 3.5. Colos. 1.26.



VERSE. 15. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel; but on a
candlestick, and it gives light to all that are in the house.
Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, etc.]

Scharp. curs. theolog. f. 37. arg. 9.
.

It gives light to all that are in the house.]

Tim. 3.15. the Citizens are the household of God, Ephesians. 2.19 and of faith.
Gal. 6.10.

How are the faithful separated from the

First, by profession of the true God, they are

Secondly, by the profession of Christ, they are

Thirdly, by the profession of the pure word

VERSE. 16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works,
. 1. Let your light so shine before men.]

What is the sense and meaning of the whole

First, the true genuine and natural interpretation Let your light shine, not
only before God, but also before men, not only in doctrine, but also in the
works of your ministry, yea in your whole life; that men not only may hear,
but likewise may see your good works, not to the intent that they may
celebrate your praise, but that they may glorify your Father which is in
heaven.

Secondly, more particularly, the sense and

First, the Ministers of the Church of Christ ought to shine before men, not
only by sound and saving doctrine, but also by a sincere and sanctified life.

Secondly, those Ministers do neither rightly nor sufficiently shine unto
edification, who do only teach and preach well, but their life is not
answerable to their doctrine.

Thirdly, the preachers of the word must not only (in that which they do)
satisfy their own conscience betwixt God and them; but (as Saint Paul says)
they must provide for things honest, not only in the sight of the Lord, but in
the sight of men 2 Cor. 8.21.
, they must circumspectly avoid all scandalous actions, or which may be
interpreted to be such.

Fourthly, the Ministers of the word, both in their preaching, and in all the
actions of their lives, must seek the glory of their heavenly Father, and not
their own fame, honor, gain, esteem, or the like.

Fifthly, our Savior does here seem to imply, that if in the preachers of the
Gospel sound doctrine be stained with a corrupt life, God is not then
glorified, but rather dishonored and scandalized by them Rom 2.24.
.

How may this verse be divided?

Herein two parts may be observed, viz. First, the Commandment wherein are two
things, Quid? what is commanded? let your light shine. Quibus? to whom? before
men.
Secondly, the reason of the precept, taken from the end which is twofold,
First, that men may see your good works. Secondly, that God may be glorified:
wherein there are First, the maine end, which is aimedat in our works, and
that is Gods glory. Secondly, the name given unto God; your Father. Thirdly,
the place of his abod, or of the greatest manifestation of his glory, and that
is in heaven




I have propounded this question, and divided this verse, because I shall treat
a little more amply upon it, than upon the former.

Let your light shine.] What is meant by Shining light which is here commanded
to be held forth?

Are not you (says Saint Paul to the Corinthians) my work in the Lord 1 Cor.
9.1.
? And hence he exhorts the Thessalonians, to esteem highly their Ministers for
their works sake 1. These. 5.3.
: yea preaching is called the work of an Evangelist, 2. Tim. 4.5. And he who
desires to be fitted for, and admitted into this calling, is said, to desire a
good work 1 Timothy 3.1.
: Teaching us, that it is not enough Musculus sup.

Gualt. s. Teaching both Pastors and people, that to the knowledge of the word,
they must adjoyne the practice of piety: Or they must diligently labor to
increase both in knowledge and practice.









Who are faulty in this particular?

First, those who prefer ignorance before knowledge, darkness before light.

Secondly, those who are remiss in seeking for knowledge; who are ignorant,
and negligent in the use of the means of knowledge: Vult and non vult pige^,
they love wisdom, and say, they long for understanding; but other things
wholly divert them from the quest thereof. And therefore it is necessary to
hear, and read, and learn, and pray for the increase of knowledge.

Thirdly, they are too much defective here, who labor for knowledge, and rest
only therein; whether Pastors or people: for we must not be hearers only, or
speakers only, or knowers only, but doers also; because without a holy,
obedient, and religious life, our preaching, hearing, and knowledge is
altogether fruitless. Indeed it is true, that a knowing Minister by his
preaching may benefit others, but not himself; except he be a follower as
well as a leader, a Disciple as well as Doctor, a practitioner as well as
Teacher.

Fourthly, those Ministers are principally faulty here, whose lives are
scandalous, and conversations impious; who do not only no good, but also much
evil: These weave Penelopes web, undoing as much by their evil life, as they
do by their good doctrine; destroying as fast with the left hand, as they
build with the right. Thus much for the second general answer to the first
question: the third and last remains.

Thirdly, some expound these words, Let your of piety only: Thus Calvin, most
truly, as though our Savior would say, as you are the light of doctrine
(verse 14.) so shine in good works, that men seeing them, may glorify God.

Who are they that are commanded to let their or to hold forth a good example
unto others?

First, this belongs unto all, in regard of all Thirdly, because all men in
their several states and callings, have some singular occasions of doing some
good, which others upon the like occasion offered, ought and may imitate: And
therefore every one should labor to shine in the works of holiness and
uprightness, that others thereby might be provoked to the like.

Thessal. 3.9. and 1 Timothy 4.12. and Titus 2.4.7. Now the reasons why this duty
of shining unto others, belongs unto all sorts of superiors, are these, First,
because much is required of him, to whom much is given Luke 12 48.
: and therefore the more God has honored any, let them be the more careful
to honor him; the higher he has raised any, the more are they engaged to
strive by the light of a holy life, to advance his glory. Secondly, because the
more eminent a man is in place, the more conspicuous is his life, and is the
less hid: as our Savior says in the former verse save one, A City set on a
hill, or a lighted candle put into a candle-sticke, cannot be hid. Those who
are in any high place, cannot conceal their lives and actions, but they will
appear to those, who are under them, either to their glory or infamy; and
therefore it concerns all superiors and Governors, to be careful, that
their light so shine unto others, that God may be glorified by them and in
them. Thirdly, because those who in place, degree, or rank, are above others,
ought in going before, to show the right way to others. Fourthly, inferiors
depend upon superiors, and therefore for the most part, compose themselves
according to their example: If a Ruler (says Solomon) hearken to lies, all his
servants are wicked Pro. 29.12.
. And therefore all Governors had need to be wary, lest they mislead those
whom they must answer for; and so their blood be required at their hands.

Before men.] What is the meaning of these words?

Musculus understands it of preaching the word: as though our Savior should
say, you must preach the word to all, without respect of persons, that is,
first to all nations and people, whether Jews or Gentiles. Secondly, to all of
what order and degree soever: whether rich or poor, masters or servants, Kings
or subjects. Thirdly, to all of what condition, quality, or disposition
whatsoever: whether wise or simple, ignorant or learned, wicked or righteous,
obedient or rebellious: for whether they will hear, or whether they will
forbear, the word must be preached unto them Ezech. 2.4. etc.
, that those who will not amend, may be left without excuse.

Let your light shine before men, may be expounded of piety also as well as
preaching; as if Christ should say, you must be careful to order your
conversation aright, as well in regard of others, as of your selves: For first,
they are our brethren; and therefore we ought to love them: Secondly, by our
evil example we may hurt, pervert, debilitate, detain, and keep them back
from the ways of grace, and work of the Lord. Thirdly, by our good example
we may help, convert, strengthen, excite, and excourage them to undertake the
practice of piety, and to submit themselves to the obedience of the Lord. And
therefore we must make it our chiefest care so to live, that we be not
bridles, to hold any back from the course of religion, but spurs to quicken
them forward, that so the Lord may be glorified both by us and them.

. 4. That they seeing your good works.] Why

First, because we must so repent as we have As we have formerly yielded our
members servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity unto iniquity; even so now
yield your members servants unto righteousness, unto holiness Romans 6, 19.
. As formerly we sinned greedily, so now we must repent zealously: as we
offended publicly, so we must amend openly; as before our wicked works were
perceived by others, so now our good works must be seen by them.

Secondly, good examples are grateful and

Thirdly, if we do not so live, that others 2. Pet. 2.2.
: he that enjoyes the means of grace, and does not honor God by showing forth
the good fruits thereof, he does dishonor him.

Fourthly, we ought to show unto men, to

Fifthly, we must show forth our good works, Procure things honest (says the
Apostle) in the sight of men Romans 12 17. and 2 Cor. 8.1.
: for a good name is better than riches, Prove. 22.1. yea, is a precious
ointment, Eccles. 7.3.

Are we to hunt after praise and fame in the works must be done secretly,
Matthew. 6.3.6.16.

First, good works must be so frequent, customary,

Secondly, if we show forth any good work, before men, that others may be
edified thereby, and God glorified, then it is not at all disallowed by Christ;
who does not forbid simply our works to be seen, or to appear before men;
but not to be showed forth for the praise of men; and therefore we must
distinguish between these two.

To wit, To seek praise, and to boast of our good works: for this our Savior
prohibites, Matthew. 6. To perform good works evidently; for this is commanded
in this place, for the good of our neighbor, and the glory of our God.


Public, these of their own nature require to be manifested unto others,
and may and ought modestly and warily be represented unto others. Private;
these ought not to be published or divulged by us, because this would argue in
us ambition, of vain glory.




It is; yea hence Saint Paul appeals to the people, Ye are witnesses, and God
also, how holily and justly, 1 Thessalonians. 2.10,
and unblameably we behaved our selves among you Answ.
. And therefore they stray from the true path, who neglect fame, credit, and
reputation among men; who say they care not what others say or think of them;
for the Apostle would have us so careful in this particular, that he
admonishes us to avoid and abstain from every appearance of evil 1 Thessalonians.
5.22.
, we must approve our hearts unto the Lord, and our lives unto the world, that
so men may see what we do, and witness what we are; we must carefully
endeavor so to walk, that we be not evil spoken of by any.



Evil actions, this is to be reformed. Doubtful actions; and this is
circumspectly to be avoided, for as much as in us lies, we must give no such
occasions, but eschew all such actions as may be evilly interpreted. Good
actions; and herein we may rejoice; they speak evil of you (says Saint
Peter) because you run not with them unto sin 1 Pet. 4.4.
. And thus we must be careful, that we give not occasion to be reproached for
evil, or doubtful actions, but if for good works, then not to regard their
detractions at all.




Iam. 2.18.
. Thirdly, our own conscience is thereby quieted, and our election daily made
more sure unto us 2 Pet. 1.10.
.

. 5. That they may glorify your Father.] The

First, Preachers must so labor in the preaching of the word, that people may
thereby be provoked and stirred up to glorify God.

How must we so preach that the Lord may

It is done 3 manner of ways, viz. either, First, Secondly, by persuading men
to advance and set forth Gods glory in all their actions. Thirdly, by laboring
faithfully in the work of the Ministry: in becoming all things to all men,
that they may by some means win some: and in preaching the word, Opportune
Importune, in season, and out of season 1 Timothy 4.2.
.


What is here required of people?

They must so hear the word preached,

Secondly, in hearing we must learn the mercy of God; that is, I. consider in
the word, how merciful the Lord is in his own nature, II. admire the infinite
mercy of God unto us and unto all mankind. III. Labor to be made partakers of
this mercy; beg it earnestly at Gods hands, that being sensible thereof, thou
may truly rejoice: God is glorified by our hearing, when we thus hear.

Thirdly, hearers must learn so to hear, that their lives may be directed
piously, prudently, watchfully, and unblameably, because God is glorified by
their thus hearing of his holy word, as follows in the next particular. Thus
we have showed the first work, which Christ requires unto Gods glory, which
belongs unto Ministers, namely the preaching of the word.

Secondly, the next work belongs both unto Preachers and people, and that is
the practice of religion: For all men must labor so to live, that God may be
glorified in them and by them; or we must labor to abound in those works, by
which glory may redound unto God.







First, some works are odious and abominable both unto God and man; as
Murder, Incest, Treason, Rebellion, Cruelty, and the like; there is no
question to be made of these, for all will grant that God is not glorified by
these, but dishonored.

Secondly, some works are odious unto God, but grateful unto men; as to
flatter and sooth up men, to apply themselves to their dispositions. These
works are not to be done, for although they please men, yet they do not
glorify God.

Thirdly, some works are both acceptable unto God, and grateful unto men: And
in these works must we principally labor, because all good men will commend
them, and give glory unto God for them. And therefore although all good works
are to be wrought, yet principally such as procure praise unto God from men,
being approved as precious both by God and men.





Secondly, as their goodness must be evident unto al, so they must be
profitable also unto men: S. Paul distinguishes between a righteous man and a
good man, telling us that for the former scarce any would dye, but for the
latter, some would dare to dye Romans 5.7
. Now this is the true good man which some would lay down their life for, who
does abound in those works which are beneficial and commodious unto others,
namely, first the works of pardon toward offenders, laid down in these
places, Romans 12.14.17, 19. Coloss. 3.13. and 1 Cor. 6.7. and 1 Pet. 3.9. It is
profitable to those who offend to pardon their offenses, and it is pleasing
unto all to observe, how ready we are to pardon and pass by wrongs. And
therefore Christ prays for those who crucified him, Father forgive them; and
Stephen for those who stoned him, Lord lay not this sin unto their charge.
Secondly, the works of mercy, whereof we treated largely before, verse. 7. And
therefore I conclude, if we desire so to live, that the Lod may be glorified in
us and by us, we must abound in every good work, but principally and chiefly in
those which are 1. good in themselves 2. grateful unto the good God. And 3.
pleasing and profitable unto men.

. 7. Your Father.]

Why does not Christ call God, the Lord,

Because our Savior by this relative compellation would provoke them unto a
greater care,

. 8. Which is in Heaven.]

Why are these words added?

Because by the very mention of Heaven,

VERSE. 17. Think not ye that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets: I
am not come to destroy, but to fulfill.
In this Sermon preached by our Savior upon the Mount, there are these three
parts.

To wit, the Exordium, wherein our Savior treats of true blessedness, chap.
5.3. unto verse. 13. Tractate, concerning instructions which direct us in a holy
life, unto chap. 7. verse. 24. Conclusion, which is parabolicall, chap. 7. verse.
24. etc. unto the end of the chapter.


The Tractate has a double instruction, whereof the first is of the preaching
the Law, and that both of the Preachers, the Apostles, chap. 5.13. unto verse
17. Law preached, and this both in General, showing that the Law is to be
observed and kept, chap. 5.17. unto verse. 21. Particularly correcting some
errors about the Law, alleged by the Jews, either Truly, but not aright
explicated, as of Murder, chap. 5.21. unto 27. Adultery, chap. 5.27. unto 31.
corruptly, and that either Indirectly, and that either because First, it was
not a true or positive Law, but only a toleration, as of Divorce, verse. 31.
unto. 33. Secondly, it was not the whole Law, as of swearing, verse. 33. unto
38. Thirdly, it was not given unto them, as of revenge, verse. 38. unto 43.
Directly, by adding unto the Law, as of love and hatred, verse. 43. etc. unto
the end of the chapter.



Second is of the practice of piety, where Christ follows a double method,
namely, First, he condemns the evil examples of hypocrites in Almes-giving,
chap. 6.1. unto verse. 5. Prayer, where he blames in them two things, Boasting,
6.5.6. Battologie, 6.7. unto 16.
Fasting, 6.16. unto verse. 19.
Secondly, he lays down the good precepts which are to be observed, viz.
First, wordly care is to be avoided, 6.19. etc. unto the end. Secondly, our
brethren are not to be judged, 7.1. unto verse. 6. Thirdly, holy things are not
to be profaned, 7.6. Fourthly, prayer is confidently to be made, 7.7. unto
verse. 13. Fifthly, holiness is industriously to be followed, 7.13. unto 24.




The general Tractate concerning the law, has 3. parts, to wit, the
Proposition which is partly Negative, wherein may be observed The phrase,
Think not ye. The thing, that I am come to destroy the law.
Affirmative, wherein are two things, The affirmation, Not to destroy, but to
fulfill. The confirmation, where two things are observeable, The phrase of
asseveration, verily. The certainty where are The time, until heaven, etc. The
universality Not one jot, which is meant of precepts. Al shall be fulfilled,
which is meant of punishments.




General conclusion unto all men: whosoever shall Break, verse. 19 Keep.
verse. 19
Particular application unto the Apostles, verse. 20.


I came not to destroy the Law, etc.

We have in these words two things to observe, The occasion of them, The
scope, wherein there is two parts, the First, Negative, wherein are The phrase.
The thing it self,.
Second Affirmative.





Law,

Both by his Doctrine, because 1. he taught not as the Scribes Math. 7.29.
. 2. He condemned their traditions, Math. 15 9. etc. and chap. 23. 3. The
legal lotions and purifications and ceremonies he contemned and despised,
Math. 15.2. And therefore by these things they thought that he was no friend
unto the Law. Conversation, because first he was very seldom amongst the
Pharisees and Princes of the Jews: Secondly, often amongst the Publicans and
Harlots.


let our light shine before men, if now thou put an end to the old law? To this
our Savior answers, I ca^ not to destroy the law: in which answer he implies
two things; viz. First, that he was no Innovator; neither went about to bring
in any new thing, but only to fulfill those things which were foretold by
Moses and the Prophets Luke 24.27.44.
. Secondly, that he went not about to loose the raines of liberty, by making
void any part of the moral Law. And therefore the Ministers of the Word should
so preach, that it may appear, they neither 1. affect novelties (for there is
no new thing in the true observation of the Law) Nor 2. give any liberty or
leave to sin or licentiousness at all.

. 2. Secondly, we now consider the phrase Think not ye with your selves.



Think not ye that I will accuse you to the Father John 5.45.
. And thus Saint Paul speaks unto the Corinthians, Let no man think me a
fool 2 Cor. 11.16.
. And so in this verse, Think not ye, that I come to destroy the Law, etc. As
if our Savior would say, I know that there are many foolish opinions broached
against the Law of God, but Nevos putate, Think not you, etc. In which phrase
he implies, that amongst men there are many things held amiss concerning the
Law of God.



Mirabiliarii, the Enthusiastes, and the Anabaptists, Danaeus de Haeres.

Danaeus 62.) and the Marcionites, who condemn the whole Old Testament (
Danaeus 66.) as do also the Appellites (69.) and the Severians, Tacians, and
Manichees, Danaeus 71.

Simon Magus (Danaeus ex Epiphanio) and the Cainani ( Danaeus 55.) and the
Manichees, who call it a killing Letter, Senensis 78.2. c. yea an unjust and
cruel Law, Senens. 452.2. etc.

Danaeus 115.) thus the Montanists slight the Law, because they would have none
compelled to live well ( Danaeus 194.) And some have given reasons for the
strengthening of this opinion; namely, first because the soul is not polluted
by sin, but only the body; thus the Simonians and the Gnostics ( Danaeus
6.) Secondly, because we are saved by grace, and therefore it is lawful to
sin, if so be we do but believe ( Romans 6.1.) thus the Basilidians, and
Gnostics, and Simon Magus, and Saturnians, and Manichees, and Aetians, and
Eunomians; and hence the Corpocratians taught uncleanenesse, and the
Valentinians derided all goodness. Now lest some should think that I revive
and give new life to old forgotten and forsaken Heresies; it will not be amiss
to observe in a word, that there are many such as these even at this day, who
think it is lawful for them to sin (because where there is no Law there is
no sin, Romans 4.15.) and therefore they reject the Law ( Senens. 79.) The
Libertines teach that all sins are lawful, and therefore they plainly reject
the Old Testament ( Prateolus ex Lindano. 254. and e Calvino contra libertinos)
Teaching us, that the wisdom and opinions of the flesh do easily oppose
themselves to the Law and Commandments of God.

Why is carnal wisdom so prone to contradict

First, because it is not subject to the will of The carnal mind is enmity
against God: for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be,
Romans 8.7.

Secondly, because the Commandments of

. 3. I came not to destroy the Law.]

The Jews object this place, to prove that the I came not to destroy the Law,
but to fulfill it: and afterward, verse. 19. he says, Whosoever shall break
one of these least Commandments, and shall teach men so to do, he shall be
called the least in the kingdom of Heaven. And therefore, say the Jews, that
both by the words and deeds of Christ it evidently appears, that the
Mosaicall Law shall not cease or be abrogated.

That we may truly see how Christ fulfilled the Law and the Prophets,

First, in the law and Prophets there are Moral things, to wit, the ten
Commandments, which are necessarily to be obeyed unto salvation by all those,
who are of years of discretion: and therefore were not to cease at the coming
of Christ, nor to be abolished by him, but fulfilled.

Secondly, in the law and Prophets there were Judicial things, as an eye for
an eye, a tooth for a tooth, and diverse the like, in these there was judgment
without mercy, and therefore they were to be mitigated and allayed by the
sweetness of mercy, at the coming of the Messiah.

Thirdly, in the Law and Prophets there were Ceremonial things, to wit, all
the sacrifices, and many more, which being but figures of things to come, were
to vanish when Christ (unto whom they all pointed) came into the flesh: now
even these Christ did obey and fulfill literally until the determinate time of
their cessation, and then by himself, and his Apostles, did reduce them unto a
spiritual and mystical sense,

Fourthly, in the law and Prophets, there were Sacramental things, as
circumcision, the Paschall Lamb, and the red Heifer; these were figures of
Christ's suffering; death, and bloodshed and therefore were necessarily to
cease when Christ came: And these were fulfilled by him in his death and
suffering.

Fifthly, in the law and Prophets, there were Promises of the coming of the
Messiah, and withal of the conversion of the Gentiles, of remission of sins,
and eternal salvation, and these our Savior perfectly fulfilled Galatinus,
lib. 11. cap. 2. fol. 400.
.

The Manichees (as was said before) rejecting the law of God, and the Old
Testament, are urged (by Saint Augustine) to give over their opinion,
considering what our blessed Evangelist has positively avouched in this verse,
why do ye not (O Manichees) receive the law (says the Father) and the
Prophets, which Christ came to fulfill?

Here Faustus in the behalf of them all takes the quarrel in hand, disputing
thus.

Matthew, who followed Christ when he came down from the mount, and was called
to be an Apostle after this Sermon was preached, namely, Chap. 9.9. but Saint
John says nothing of it, who was always with him.

Augustine answers, that though Matthew heard it not from Christ upon the
Mount, yet he might either hear it from his own mouth at some other time, or
he might hear it from John who was present.

Faustus objects again, this Gospel was not written by Matthew, but by some
other, for of Matthew it is written in the third person: He sees a man
sitting at the receipt of custom, whose name was Matthew, Mat. 9.9.

Augustine answers, that by the same argument Faustus may as well conclude,
that Saint John writ not his Gospel, for he speaks of himself saying, Peter
turned him about and saw the other Disciple whom Jesus loved.

Faustus objects, to believe the new Testament is nothing else but to
acknowledge the disanulling of the old, and therefore the law is not now to be
observed.

Jeremiah 31.31.

Fourthly, when a Jew shall ask thee (says Faustus) why thou do not keep
the precepts of the Law, which Christ came not to dissolve, thou either 1. must
confess this verse to be false: or 2. deny thy self to be Christ's Disciple:
or 3. yield to observe the ceremonies still.

The faithful (says Augustine) do keep the Law and the Prophets, when
truly, cordially, August. contra Faust. lib. 19. Cap. 7.

How is the Law destroyed, because our Savior he came not to destroy the Law?

First, the Law is destroyed, Male explicando,

Secondly, the Law is dissolved, Male explendo,

Either by the coming of Christ the Law is Paul urges, first, that by the
works of the law we cannot be justified, Romans 3.20.21. and Gal. 2.16. and
Romans 4.14.15. Secondly, that it is impossible for the law to save us, Romans 8.3.
Gal. 3.21. Thirdly, that we are not now under a pedagogue, Gal. 3.24.25. that
is, not under the law, but under grace, Romans 6.14. we being dead unto the law,
Romans 7.4. Galat. 2.19.

First, the ceremonial law is abolished; for that

Condition which is either of Death, which is Malediction and a curse, and this
Christ took away in his cross, and abolished it, as appears by these places
2 Cor. 3.7. Gal. 3.10.13. Deuteronomy. 27.26. and 1 Cor. 15.56. Life, which is
Justification, and this also is abrogated, Romans 3.20. Gal. 2.16. and 3.11. and
5.4, For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that
believes, Romans 10.4.
Direction, the rule of good, and this is immutable as God himself is; because
it is his will.


Romans 8.2.) But yet we are debtours not to the flesh, to live after the flesh;
but to the law, to be regulated thereby; for the law is good, holy, just,
spiritual, and to be consented unto, Romans 7.7.12.14.16. yea to be delighted
in, and that in the inward man. Romans 7.22. And therefore, although the
ceremonial law be now disanulled, and the conditions of the moral law
abrogated; we being freed from the curse and condemning power of the law, and
not justified by the law; yet as the law is a rule of direction unto us, so it
is to be obeyed, and submitted unto.

Teaching unto us this necessary instruction, Blessed are they (says David)
that are upright in their ways, Ps. 1.1. etc. and if we would enter into
life, our Savior says, we must keep the Commandments. Mat. 19.17. etc.
whence S. Paul says, that those who are in grace, are not without law to God,
but under the law to Christ 1 Cor. 9 21.
. And again, the grace of God which brings salvation, teaches us to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present world Titus 2 11.12.
: And therefore both the negative and affirmative part, both of the first and
second table, is to be obeyed even of the dear members of Christ, because this
he did not by his coming destroy.



James 1.17. But the Law (as was said before) is the will of God.

Luke 1.79. and 1 Thessal. 4.4. and Titus 2.11.14. and Heb. 12.14. and 1 Pet.
1.17. But the rule of holiness, goodness, truth, equity, and justice, is no
where laid down but in the Law, and therefore the Moral Law is perpetual.

Cor. 6.9. Ephesians. 5.3. Coloss. 3.6, And therefore Bellarmine is most injurious
unto us, in saying, that Protestants affirm, Christian liberty to consist in
an absolute freedom from the obedience and subjection of the Moral law: Quod
Moses cum suo Decalogo nihil ad nos pertineat: and that Moses with his
Decalogue, belongs not unto us Bellar. lib. 4. de Just. cap. 5 initio.
.

How false and malicious this is, all the world may know, considering that we
subscribe to the truth of this present Scripture, that Christ came not to
dissolve, but to fulfill the law. Indeed the Muscovites do hold, that the
Decalogue is abrogated by the Apostles Theolog Muscovit. cap. 5.
: But Protestants are far off from so gross an opinion: for we say, That
Christian liberty consists in these three things, namely,

First, that we are exempted from the Ceremonies of the Law, and the
Judicials, so far forth as they concerned the politic state of the Jews
Act. 15.10.
.

Secondly, we are freed from the curse and guilt of the law Galath. 3.13.
, Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, when he was made a curse
for us.

Thirdly, we are delivered from the servitude of sin: And therefere it is a
shameless slander, to avouch, that we hold Christian liberty to consist in a
freedom from the obedience of the Law of God.

The Law.] What Law is here meant?

There is a twofold Law, Paul calls the law of Nature; They do by nature
the things of the Law, Romans 2.14. Secondly, the Law of the Jews, which is
threefold, viz. First, Ceremonial, which is described and explained in the
Books of Moses, especially in Leviticus; and prescribed rites and ceremonies
unto the Jews, to be observed and performed in the worship of God. Secondly,
Judicial, which prescribed ordinances for the government of the commonwealth
of the Jews, and the civil punishment of offenders. Thirdly; Moral, here
meant, and wherein 3 things are observeable, viz. First, the Moral Law is that
which was written at first in the heart of Adam, and in all men since by
nature, in regard whereof it binds all men. Secondly, it commands perfect
obedience, both inward in thought and affection; and outward in speech and
action. Thirdy, it binds to the curse and punishment, every one that fails
in the least performance of holy duties Gal. 3.10.
.




And the Prophets.] Who are meant here by Prophets?

Paul says, One of your own Prophets has said. Thirdly, of the truth, of
whom Christ says, Behold, I send unto you Prophets and wise men. Now our
Savior means the Prophets that did foretell of him. Faustus ex August. lib.
19. cap. 7. cantr. Faust.

But to fulfill it.] Our Savior here affirming, that he came not to destroy
the Law, but to fulfill it, may make some doubt, whether there be any
difference between the Law and the Gospel, or not; and how they differ.

The Law First, is Natural, and was in man's nature before the fall. Secondly,
sets forth Gods justice in rigor, without mercy. Thirdly, requires perfect
righteousness within us. Fourthly, threatens judgment without mercy, and
therefore it is called, the ministry of condemnation 2 Cor. 3.7.9.
. Fifthly, promises life to the doer Romans 10.5.
.
The Gospel. Is spiritual, revealed after the fall, in the covenant of grace.
Sets forth Justice and Mercy, united both in Christ. Reveals our acceptance
with God, by imputed righteousness. Shows mercy to man's sin, in and by
Christ, if we do repent, and believe in him with a lively faith. To the
believer. Romans 4, 5.

How did Christ fulfill the Law?

First, by and in his Doctrine, and that these Matthew. 5. verse. 21 22.27.28.)
which was depraved by the Pharisees, as appears plainly in the whole next
chapter. Secondly, by revealing the right way, whereby the law may be fulfilled.

Deuteronomy. 27.28.
, and also taken upon him our curse and malediction, he fulfilled that crying
Law, cursed is every one that does not abide in all, that it written in the law
Gal. 3.13.
. He was made a curse for us, that we might obtain and partake the blessing of
Abraham in him. Secondly, he fulfilled the Law in his person, by enduring and
undergoing human things, although hard to be borne, and unjustly commanded:
Thus he pays tribute (when it was required) although it were proper unto
strangers, the children being free. Thirdly, Christ fulfilled the Law in his
person, by observing the ceremonies and shadows of the Law. Fourthly, by
fulfilling all the predictions and prophesies of the Law concerning himself;
whether they were, I. the Types of the Law: or, II. the promises of salvation,
as for example, Jacob says, The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, etc.
until Shiloh come Genesis 49.10.
. Moses says, The Lord will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of
thee, of thy brethren, unto him shall ye hearken Deuteronomy. 18.15.
. Isaias says, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, therefore the Lord has
anointed me, and sent me, etc Esai. 61.1.
. Read further, Isai. 53.4-6. Ezech. 36.25.26. Zach. 12.10. Psalm. 110.1. In
all which places, and many more, we may see the Oracles and predictions of the
Law and Prophets, concerning the Regal, Sacerdotall, and Prophetical offices
of Christ, really and verily fulfilled by him: and therefore he does most
truly affirm, that he came not to dissolve the law, but to fulfill it.
Fifthly, Christ fulfilled the Law in his person, by performing perfect obedience
unto the Moral law, doing all that was therein required of him, either in
regard of God, or man; in which respect he was said to be made under the Law
Gal. 4.4
. There was in him such a perfect obedience, and conformity unto the Law of
God, that he did observe it fully, and fulfill it without the least defect; yea
herein dares challenge his adversaries the Jews, Which of you can reprove me
of sin Ioh. 8.46. and Heb. 7.26
. And thus Christ in his person fulfilles the Prophesies, Ceremonies, Types,
Shadows, and Promises of the Law; yea, after his resurrection, tells the two
Disciples, that it was necessary, that he should fulfill all things which was
written of him in the law of Moses, and of the Prophets, and Psalms.



First, by creating faith in their hearts, whereby they lay hold on Christ, who
fulfilled the Law for them. Secondly, by writing the Law in their inward man;
Ierem. 31.33. I will write my law in their hearts. Thirdly, by giving them his
own blessed Spirit, which makes them endeavor to fulfill the Law; which
endeavor Christ accepts for perfect obedience, though it be imperfect: For
Christ infusing the grace of his Spirit into us, by the virtue thereof we are
quickened, and begin to fulfill the Law, in performing new obedience unto God,
according to all his commandments. And thus we see the truth of this
assertion, or sentence, I came not to destroy the law, but to fulfill it.

VERSE. 18. Verily I say unto you,
. 1. Till heaven and earth pass.] Shall the

First, some answer, that the written Law and Bucer.

Secondly, some say that the yoke and coaction

Thirdly, some say the phrase is figurative, and They shall fear thee Oh Lord
(says David) Donec Sol, so long as the Sun and Moon endure Psalm. 72 5.
, where Donec does not include a set time; so our Savior says unto his
Apostles, Lo, I am with you, Donec, even unto the end of the world Matthew. 28.20.
, that is for ever: Yea Saint Luke thus alleges this verse, It is easier for
heaven and earth to pass, then one tittle of the law to fail Luke 16.17.
. Wherefore Gualter concludes, Est argumentum ab impossibili: As it is
impossible for heaven and earth to pass, so it is impossible for any part of
the law not to be fulfilled, or to be made void:

. 2. One jot or one tittle shall pass.]

If the studious Reader desire a learned exposition of these two words, Jot,
and Tittle, let him read Senensis, Biblioth sanct. lib. 2. fol. 75. sine. and.
76.

What does our Savior mean by these words?

(...), Jot is the least letter, (...), Tittle, August. s by which our Savior
means, that there is nothing so little in the law that it may be omitted;
hence he says elsewhere that account must be given unto God for idle words,
yea for thoughts. God is wiser then men, and has commanded no vain thing, but
all things are significant, which are enjoined in the law, that being
altogether just Psalm. 12.7.
, God is holy in all his works, much more in all his laws, and therefore the
least transgression of the law, shall be punished.

Until all things be fulfilled.]





VERSE. 19. Whosoever therefore shall break one of those least commandments,
and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven;
but whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the
kingdom of heaven.
Whosoever shall break one of these.] (...) The word here used signifies to
untie a knot, or to loose a bond or chain:







External. Secondly, Internal.

First, there is an Internal liberty, when a man will not be taught, or
directed, or reproved, or compelled to perform any service unto God. This is
not granted unto any, yea all must know, that what they do is not grateful
unto God, except they pay it as a debt, and do confess that it is their duty
to do it. There are three sorts of men that obey God. First, some acknowledge
the obligation, but are backward to perform covenants; they confess it is
their duty to obey God, but they do it unwillingly, these must remember that
God loves a cheerful and ready service. Secondly, some freely and willingly
do that which God requires, but will not acknowledge it as an obligation, they
are content to perform holy duties, but yet will not confess that they are
so obliged to the performance thereof, that they had sinned if they had omitted
them, or that they have deserved nothing for the performance of them. These
must remember that God requires service of us, and not will worship. Thirdly,
some confess that it is their duty to serve the Lord, and labor to obey him
willingly and cheerfully, readily, and with a willing mind; and the obedience
only of these is acceptable unto God. It is too ordinary with many, because
the word is preached by poor and mean men, to disdain to obey it, yea hence
to do whatsoever they will, and to come to Church when they will; but they
must distinguish between the Messengers and Message, Ambassador and
Embassage, for although the Ministers be poor, or contemptible, yet the word
they bring, is not to be despised, because that comes from God 2 Cor. 5.19.
.

Secondly, there is an Internal liberty, when the conscience dares not resist
the Law of God, and this is twofold. First, Servile, O derunt peccare mali,
formidine poenae. When a man out of a slavish fear of punishment dare not
transgress the Law of God; this is not praiseworthy in it self, but yet
these are much better then those, who will not at all obey the Lord.

Secondly, Filial, when the love and reverence of God are so conjoined
together, that we neither dare commit any evil or omit any thing that is good,
but of this elsewhere.

. 2. One of these least commandments, etc.]

Sin is esteemed small in a threefold regard: tithed Mints, but left undone
the greater works of the Law Mat. 23.23.
, that is, they performed easy duties, but those which were hard to be
obeyed, they omitted. Thus some sins may be called less than other, because
we can more willingly forbear, and more easily abstain from some sins, than
from other, some being more pleasing unto our nature, and suitable to our
dispositions, than others.

Thirdly, sin is said to be small or little, in regard of our Estimation;
and thus the Scribes and Pharisees thought it a less sin to violate the
commandments of God, then their own traditions Mat. 15.9.
. And this is that which our Savior meets with, and condemns in this verse,
proving that there is no sin little, or small, because 1. every sin is
against an infinite law, which is both the rule of true, good honest, and
profitable things, 2. because every sin is against the Majesty of God, the
true Lawgiver, and 3. because the least sin works death and condemnation:
for sin is (...), the prevarication of the Law, and the breach of the Law is
death: Hence some sins which seem small unto man have been severly punished
by God, as Adams eating of an Apple was punished by expulsion out of Paradise;
Acheus preserving the gold and garment out of the fire, was punished with the
death of himself and his family: Saul's sparing of the best of the Cattle was
the cause of his rejection from the Grown, and for gathering a few sticks
upon the Sabbath day the poor man was stoned to death. Numb. 15.32.33.

. 3. He shall be called the least in the Kingdom of heaven.



Vocabitur, he shall be called, that is, he shall be esteemed, or he shall
be indeed the least, etc. as before verse 9. he shall be called the Son of
God, that is, not falsely, but he shall be made Gods son. Now in this word
all the Interpreters agree.

Secondly, Minimus, the least; First, some understand this for Nullus; so
Calvin, and Stapleton: Minimus vocabitur, that is, minime vocabitur (Castalio)
he shall be called the least, that is, he shall not be called at all, one of
the kingdom of God. Secondly, some understand by Minimus, Infimus, he shall be
called the least, etc. that is, he shall be the lowest, and most inferior in
the kingdom of heaven; as if our Savior would say, he shall be admitted into
the Kingdom, but he shall not be honored therein, thus the Papists expound
generally the words as follows by and by.

Thirdly, in regno caelorum, in the kingdom of heaven, this I. some expounds
of the kingdom of the Church, and of Grace, as Calvin and Beza: because thus
John Baptist was called the least in the kingdom of heaven. Luke 7.28. II.
some expound this of life eternal, and so Aretius and Stapleton.

Minimus, the least; For from hence the Papists collect, and hereupon establish
their Evangelicall Counsels unto perfection; He (say they) that breaks the
least (Counsel not Precept) shall be called least, (that is, of least
esteem, as the Laics, or Plebeians) But he that keeps the least, (that is,
the Monks, and Friars, and Nuns) shall be highly esteemed, and greatly
prized.

Mandata, Commandments. Secondly, from the scope of the place: our Savior
principally here prohibiting the violation of the least commandments, the
least sins; and therefore they are not great.



Minimus erit, he shall be the least; he does not say exterminabitur he shall
be destroyed; he shall not be cast out of the Church, but he shall be
lightly regarded, in the Church. To this their own Stapleton answers; Imo
nullus erit, he shall not all belong unto the Kingdom of heaven. Non
significat gradum inferiorem, sed e coelo exclusionem (Chrysostom. s.) Least here
does not signify an inferior degree of glory, but a direct expulsion from
heaven, as follows in the next verse, except you be more righteous then the
Scribes and Pharisees, you cannot be saved.

Thirdy, from what was said in the first answer, we may observe a difference
amongst expositors kingdom of heaven; I. some understanding them of the
kingdom of grace. And II. some of the kingdom of glory: Now I suppose that
they may be understood of both; namely, first of the kingdom of grace, because
the Church of Christ is ever and anon called the Kingdom of heaven, as Matt.
3.2. and 4.17. and Luke 7.28. The Church of God is the Kingdom of Christ, and
the Church militant and triumphant make up but one and the same kingdom.
Secondly, these words may be understood of the kingdom of Glory; he shall be
called the least in the kingdom of heaven, that is, he who is disobedient to
the least of Gods Commandments, howsoever he may be esteemed in the world,
yet with God he shall be rejected, neither by him allowed a place in the
Kingdom of Heaven. The Lord respects no man's person, but judges every man
according to his works, and therefore those who give way unto the works of
wickedness shall receive from him the reward of their iniquity.

. 4. Whosoever shall do the least of these commandments; and teach them, etc]

Our Savior in these words does silently point at three sorts of Teachers,
namely.

First, those who teach indeed, but by their teaching destroy the law; and
therefore neither they themselves fulfill the law, neither by their teaching
do they induce others unto the obedience thereof.

Secondly those who do not destroy the law by their opinions, but do truly
teach the law unto others, although they do not practice it in themselves:
both these are rejected by Christ.

Thirdly, those who teach the law soundly, and practice it sincerely; that is,
who direct by their doctrine and example others unto God, and instruct them in
the works of righteousness, and true holiness; and these are they, whom our
Savior says here, shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven; which
simply is to be understood of a greater and more eminent degree of glory,
according to that of David, They that turn many to righteousness, shall shine
as the stars for ever and ever Daniel 12.3.
. Parens sup.

VERSE. 20. For I say unto you, that except your righteousness shall exceed
the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
. 1. For I say unto you except, etc.]

Bellarmine produces this place, to prove that life, arguing thus, if
salvation depend upon the condition of works, then there can be no certainty
thereof; but the Scripture does in plain terms teach us, that salvation
depends upon the condition of works; Therefore none can be sure of his
salvation.

The Minor or second proposition he confirms by this verse, I say unto you,
except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, you cannot enter into the knigdom of heaven: so chap. 19. If thou
would enter into life,

First, the condition of works does either simply suppose 1. the necessity of
works; or 2. over and above the merit of works: Now in the first sense the
Scriptures does require indeed, that they who desire to be assured of
eternal life and salvation, must labor to abound in the fruits of
sanctification: And thus we grant that salvation does depend upon the
condition of works.

In the second sense it is signified that this salvation is acquired by the
merit of those works of sanctification: And this we altogether deny, as
follows in the following objection, and third answer of this.



Bellarmine cannot persuade us Protestants, to grant that any such condition of
works is made in the Gospel; neither does he prove it, the places alleged
by him being understood of the first condition of works, which supposes their
necessity, not of the second, which supposes their Merit Chamier. tom. 3. de
fide li 13 Cap. 17. Sect. 30. 31. 33. fol. 444.
.

It is questioned betwixt us and the Papists, whether, the Evangelicall
promises have the condition of works added unto them, not simpply, but whether
as antecedent or consequent: And Bellarmine affirms the former, we the latter.

Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. This is an Evangelicall
promise, because it comprehends the kingdom of heaven: and yet it has the
condition of actual righteousness, which consists in a perfect observation of
the

First, it may be doubted, whether this be an Evangelicall promise or not,
considering that Christ's scope here is to vindicate the law of works, from the
traditions of the Pharisees: for when he had protested, that he came not
destroy the law, but to fulfill it; had and pronounced them to be the least in
the kingdom of heaven, who broke one of these Commandments: he does by and by
add, Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven; signifying hereby,
that this righteousness of the law did far exceed and excel that
righteousness, which the Pharisees did exercise and commend as most perfect.

Secondly, the reason why the Cardinal persuades

First, because the plain and direct name is in the Gospel, not in the law;
this phrase (The kingdom of heaven) being frequent in the New Testament, but
not found in the Old.

Secondly, because this kingdom of heaven is obtained by the Gospel, not by
the law: Now if these two regards should make the kingdom of heaven not to
belong unto the law, the same would make life eternal not to belong unto the
law; which is absurd.

Thirdly, although we should grant that this

Fourthly, the last words of the Jesuits objection Chamier. tom. fol. 521. de
neces. oper. lib. 15. cap. 5. Sect. 3. 4. 5. 6.
.

. 2. Your, except your righteousness, etc.]

Why does our Savior add this word Your?

Because righteousness is not acceptable before God except it be Ours; we
cannot be helped by another man's righteousness, but every 10.

How then are we saved by the merits of

Because they are Ours: as appears thus, Romans 8.3^.
. Thirdly, faith purges and sanctifies; or leads unto purity and
sanctity: thus says the Apostle, God put no difference betwixt us and them
purging and purifying our hearts by faith Acts 15.9.
, and Saint John says, he that hopes to be saved by Christ, will purge
himself, even as he is pure 1 John 3.3.
: And thus the righteousness of Christ is imputed unto us, and applied unto
us, and so made Ours:













Righteousness, except your righteousness.]

This place is alleged by one of the present pillars of our Church against
Popish equivocation; Except your righteousness do exceed, etc. showing,
where there is more knowledge of Christ, there the profession must be more
honest: And Saint Paul says expressly, There is such fornication among you, as
is not among the heathen 1 Cor. 5.1.
: Concluding that it is blasphemy against God, for a Christian to be more vile
in life then a Pagan. The Minor is proved from the Jesuit (Eman. Sa. Ies.
Aphor. Tit. Iuramentum) who tells us that some of the Papists hold, that a
prisoner unjustly detained in prison, if upon his oath he be licenced to go
forth, is bound according to his oath to return again, except he be
absolved from his oath by a Bishop. This is an oath without equivocation; but
our Equivocators think their equivocation in making an oath better, and of
more power then any Bishop to free them from perjurie in an oath; esteeming it
as good as no oath, wherein they use their Reservation, when as yet the very
infidels in respect of their natural knowledge of God, kept better fidelity
among men. If any desire an example or further proof of this, I refer him to
Bishop Mortons confutation of Equivocation. Chap. 17. part 3. fol. 89.

. 4. Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness, etc.]

What does our Savior condemn in the Pharisees and Scribes, that he here
admonishes all his to excel them, and not to follow their steps, but rather
to outstrip them?

There was in the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, a fourefold
Hypocrisy, which our Savior justly reprooves, the first consisted in
external righteousness without internal, whereof Christ speaks, saying,
ye Pharisees make clean the outside of the cup, and of the platter, but the
inward part is full of ravening and wickedness. Ye fools did not he, that
made that which is without, make that which is within also Luk 11.36.
? And again, Woe be unto you Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye are like
unto whited tombs, which appear beautiful outward, but are within full of
dead men's bones, and of all filthiness Mat. 23.27.
, that is, outwardly ye appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of
hypocrisy and iniquity.

The second consisted in an external holiness also, but preposterous and
defective, because they were scrupulous in trifles, but negligent in things of
weight hence Christ says unto them, w^e be unto you Pharisees, for ye tithe
the mint, and rue, and pass over judgment and the love of God Luke 11 42.
, and the weighty matter of the law Mat. 23.23.
.

The third Hypocrisy of the Pharisees was a verbal not a real, a famed not a
true observation of Gods commandments, which Christ taxed in them, saying,
whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; but do not according to
their works, for they say and do not Mat. 23.3.
.

The fourth Hypocrysie of the Pharisees was vain glory, for in all their
actions of religion they sought the glory and praise of men; as our Savior in
the next chapter does plainly prove. Now from this fourefold hypocrisy of the
Scribes and Pharisees, Christ dehorteth all Christians by a motive of heavenly
bliss, in this verse; as if our Savior would say, labor I. that your
righteousness may be external and internal: II. that you may be more
careful of the performance of substantial and real things, then of
circumstantiall and rituall III That your religion may not consist in a verba
profession, but in a real practice. IV. Be not proud or vain glorious in the
duties which you perform, but seek the glory of God in all your actions; and
then assure your selves that your righteousness exceeding the righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall certainly enter into the Kingdom of
heaven, Copley. observe. doctr. et mor. fol. 101.
.

What sort of righteousness is it, which our Savior taxes here in the
Scribes and Pharisees?

Distributive, Commutative, and Directive or Regulative; now they were faulty
in all these: For first they honored rich men, and despised poor men, and
therefore transgressed the laws of Distributive righteousness.

Secondly, they did wrong, deceive, and injure their neighbors, by oppression,
and fraud, and therefore violated Commutative righteousness.

Thirdly, they did not govern or regulat their lives aright, making no
conscience of the sins of the heart, because men saw them not, yea obeying
outwardly the Commandments of God, either for fear of punishment, or the
praise of men, or the gain of worldly things, and the like base ends; and
therefore sinned against that Righteousness which the Lord had expressed in
his word for them to regulate their lives and conversations by Anton. Part. 3.
Titul. 18. cap. 5. Sect. 4. col. 2.
.

. 5. Of the Scribes and Pharisees.

Who were the Scribes and Pharisees?

First, a Scribe is a name of office, whereof public Notaries, and Shimshai.
Ezra. 4.8. Secondly, Ecclesiastical, who were employed in the expounding of the
Scripture; such an one was Ezra himself, chap. 7. verse 1.5.6. and those who
are mentioned. Mat. 13.52. and 23.2. and such are meant in this place, to wit,
men in Ecclesiastical Office, descending from the Tribe of Levi, who expounded
the law unto the people: and these were all one with the Priests and Levites
under the law, wherefore Ezra is called both a Scribe and a Priest. Nehem.
8.1.2.

Esseenes, the Saduces, and the Pharisees: The Esseenes were like popish Monks
and Friars, which did separate themselves from the people; vowing, and
dedicating themselves to live in perpetual sanctity. The Saduces were a sect
who did expound the law according to the letter and syllable, and withal
denied the Resurrection and the immortality of the soul, as is plain, Acts
23.8. The Pharisees were such as did forsake the common exposition of the
Scribes, teaching and framing a more exact and strict exposition of the law,
according to the traditions of the Fathers; and these were most holy outwardly,
and of chief account among the Jews; and such an one was Paul. Acts 23.6. and
26.5. yea sometimes the Scribes and Pharisees were all one, that is, the
Pharisees were also Scribes, as appears thus, John 1.19. it is said; The Jews
sent Priests and Levites (which were Scribes as was showed before Answer 1.)
unto John, and verse 24. They who were sent unto John were Pharisees.

Why does our Savior mention only the

First, the Scribes and Pharisees were not Worse then the Publicanes, in regard
of their present condition, for they had attained unto a higher degree or
measure of holiness then they: the Pharisees being pure in their outward man,
but the Publicanes Better then the Publicanes, in regard of true repentance and
conversio^, but rather worse; for the Publicanes confess they are sinners, but
the Scribes and Pharisees think themselves wronged, when they are so called
Ioh. 9.40
.


Secondly, our Savior names the Scribes

VERSE. 21. Ye have heard, that it was said by them of old time, Thou shall not
kill:
. 1. It was said by them of old time.]

Why does our Savior allege or recite these

To teach us,

Tertullian says, Quod antiquissimum verissimum, To seek and ask for the old
paths, where is the good way, and walk therein Ier. 6, 16.
How then do we say that Antiquity is not true?

We must distinguish between a double Antiquity, namely, Prima, the first, or
Antiquissimum: and this we grant (according to Tertullian) to be verissimum;
Secunda, the second; and this is oftentimes false: for thus we may prove
murder from Caine, Drunkenness from Noah, ancient religions of the Heathens
which were full of superstition, yea sacrifices of humane flesh: all which are
of great antiquity: And therefore our Savior urges the Jews to look ad
primam, to the first Antiquity; from the beginning it was not thus, Matthew. 19.8.




What is the chafe to the wheat? where the Word of God is compared to wheat,
and the words or writings of men, to chafe.

The God of this world has blinded their eyes 2 Cor. 4.4.
; Irenaeus, Tertullian, Augustine, yea all before Hierome understood this of
the Lord, who is blessed for ever; but Hierome expounds it of the Devil, who
is accursed for ever. Now the first interpretation is more ancient, but the
second is more true, as all expositors do now acknowledge. Moses says Genesis 6.2
, The sons of God saw the daughters of men, that they were fair, etc.
Iustine, Origin, Tertullian, Philo, Josephus, and diverse others, understood
this of the sin and fall of the Angels: but now all agree that by the sons
of God are meant not the Angels, but the posterity of Seth, who married with
daughters of the posterity of Cain. Here also the first opinion is more
ancient, but the second more true. It was a common error maintained by all
before Augustines time, that the Angels were created long before the world; and
he holding that they were created within the six days, it was called inventum
Augustini. And yet he which was later spoke more true than those who were long
before him.

Tertullian and Cyprian were Montanists, wherefore Hierome calls them
Haeresiarcha, Arch-heretickes. Irenaeus, Justinius, Papias, Tertullian,
Lactantius, were Ghiliasts: Origin in many things so faulty, that although he
often does hit the mark, yet where he misseth, none roves so far, or erres so
grossly, as he does. In libris doctorum inveniuntur prava (Anselmus.) In the
writings of the Ancients are many slips. Dum errorem destruunt in alterum
incidunt (Senensis.) While the Fathers labored to avoid one error, they often
fell into another.

Fourthly, the ancient Fathers would not Nolo authoritatem meam sequaris,
(Angust. epist. 112. ad Paulin.) I would not have thee to follow my directions,
or to build thy faith upon my opinions: Solis Scripturis canonicis, hanc
authoritatem, timorem, etc. (August. epist. 19.) but only respect the
authority of the Canonical Scriptures, and regulate both thy opinions and
practice thereby.

May we not build our faith upon the ancient

First, the Papists sometimes say absolutely Greg. a Valent. tom. 3. page 291.
d) says, The Protestants in the questions of faith, should enquire on what
side the Fathers stand, that it being known, immediately without any other
examination, they might embrace that Doctrine which the Fathers of old judged
to be true. So another ( Brist. Mot. 14.) cries out, what the Fathers believed
I believe; what they held, I hold; what they taught, I teach; what they
preached, I preach.

Secondly, some of the Papists are not so lavish All the Doctors or the Fathers
consenting in one, are to be assented unto: The meaning whereof is not that
they know the judgment of all at any time (unless it be very rare) but this
is it Greg. 4 Valent. tom. 3. f. 290.
. They are to be counted All the Doctors, whose authority is such, that the
circumstances of their learning, piety, and multitude considered, they alone
may justly be regarded, and the rest neglected as no body, if they be compared
with these. And thus one or more Doctors erring, may be pressed with the
authority of the rest. Here we see one brave device, that although they brag
of all the Fathers, and say they will refuse nothing wherein they all consent,
yet when it comes to scanning, they have no hope so much as to find this
consent of all, but refer it to their own discretion, wisely to judge by
circumstances, who are all, and what the consent is Another brave device of
theirs is to give sovereign authority to the Pope over the Fathers, to explain
their meaning, to allow them, dis-allow them, purge them, and fit them to their
purpose. If the Reader desire to see this clearly confirmed, let him repair to
White, his way to the true Church, fol. 328.. 11.

Thirdly, some Papists (of as good credit as the former) answer this question
negatively, that they care not what the Fathers say, neither does their
authority move them at all, and therefore they will be sure not to build their
faith upon them; here first they speak of the works and writings of the
Fathers in general, thus Marsilius Def. p. 413.
says. He will receive whatsoever they bring consonant to the Scripture: but
what they bring dissonant from it, he will reject upon the authority of the
Scripture, whereto he will lean. Turrecremata says In c. Sancta Romana, d.
15. n. 12.
, The writings of the Fathers bind us not to believe them in all their
opinions, but we may lawfully contradict them, where they speak against the
Scripture or the truth. And Possevine says Bibl. select lib. 12. cap. 23.
, Some things in the Fathers (wherein they dissented from the Church) are
judged and rejected.

Secondly, they reject the Fathers one by one, ordinarily, when they cross
Romes Doctrine: Many examples the Reader may see hereof in our forenamed
Author, White, page 330.. 13.

Thirdly, the Papists basely slight the Fathers, although many of them agree in
one and the same thing: as for example, in the question touching the cause of
predestination, one Sixth Senens. bib. lib. 6. annot. 241.
says, that Chrysostom, Origin, Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine, Theodoret,
Sedulius, Theophilact, Oecumenius, and Theodulus, held the prescience of
merits; the which opinion was condemned in Pelagius. And thus he rejects ten
Worthies at once.

Another Mich. Medin. ^rig. sacr. hom. li. 1. cap. 5.
says, that Hierome, Augustine, Ambrose, Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysostom,
Theodoret, Oecumenius, and Theophilact (which are the chiefest of the Fathers)
in the question concerning the difference between a Priest and a Bishop, held
the same opinion which Aerius, the Waldenses, and Wickliffe did, whom he
counts for Heretics, and charge the Fathers with the same heresy. In the
matter touching the baptism of Constantine the great, they Baron. an. 324. n.
43. and 50. et inde
reject Eusebius, Ambrose, Hierome, Theodoret, Socrates, Sozomen, and the whole
Council of Ariminum, saying, they deserve no credit, because not they (that
is, the Fathers) have written the truth, but themselves (that is, the Papists)
have truly related, that he was baptized by Eusebius the Bishop of Nicomedia.
And thus we see, how the Papists esteem of the Fathers, or their writings,
when they suit not with their own Tenets.

Fourthly, the Works and Writings of the Perkinsi Problema, page 2. etc. ad
44. And Censura quorundam Scriptorum. Auctore Roberto Coco, where he shall
find this answer abundantly confirmed.



Theophilus calls Ephiphanius Haerefiarcham, the grand Captain, and Father
of Heretics.

Gennadius says, that Saint Augustine was not far off from being an
Heretic.

Saint Hierome writing to St. Augustine, says thus, In Epistola tua quaedam
haeretica esse judicavi, I conceive that there are some heretical opinions in
your Epistle.

Saint Augustine wishes Saint Hierome to acknowledge his error and recant
Jewel Defense of the Apolo. f. 37. 8.
.

Sixthly, the Fathers have erred in many things, and therefore are not firm
pillars to build our faith upon. This a learned Papist does acknowledge ^anus
loc. Th^ol. l. 7 c. 3. conclus. 2.
in these words; The Canonical Authors Anselm. Comment. in 2. Cor.
that in their books which the Church reads, many times are found things
corrupt and heretical. Thus Hillary denied that Christ in his sufferings had
any sorrow ( Refert. Bellarm. de Char. l. 4. c. 8.) Clemens Alexandrinus says,
that Christ did not eat and drink of any necessity, but only to show that he
had a true body; and that he and his Apostles after their death, preached to
the damned in hell, and converted many Strom: l 6 and l. 3.
. Cyprian held rebaptization; and Athenagoras condemned marriage.

Seventhly, we Protestants do not deny the Romans 10.14. and therefore the word,
not the Fathers, must be the rule of our faith, and by the proportion and
Analogy of faith and truth therein contained, all opinions are to be proved.
And therefore I thus conclude this question: first, that the Fathers may err.
Secondly, that many of them may err together. Thirdly, that the learned of
this present age in many things have more understanding then the Fathers had:
we being (as Dominicus Bannes a Doctor of the Church of Rome said page 58. 59)
like ch^ldren standing on the shoulders of Giants, who being lifted up by the
tallenesse of the Giants, see further then they themselves. Fourthly, and
lastly that therefore with reverence they may in some things be refused.

. 2. sbalt not kill.

How many degrees are there of murder

Five, namely, Whosoever is angry with his brother: by Anger here is meant all
the interior motions in the mind, will, and heart, which are repugnant to
brotherly love. The second degree is, to call our brother Raca, that is to use
some signs and gestures of an angry and malevolent mind, either by the
countenance or by some disdainful words of reproach which break forth, or by
some gesture of the body. The third degree is to call our brother Fool, that
is, when the mind and affections being thoroughly moved, we break forth into
manifold opprobrious and evil speakings. The fourth is, when by some deed
which externally we perform, we harm the body, or impair the health of our
brother. The fifth and last is Homicide it self; But of all these more
particularly by and by.

Much might be spoken, first of the Antiquity of this law, it being given
presently after the flood; Whos^ sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be
shed Genesis 9.6
. Secondly, of the Antiquity of the breach of this Law, it being violated, not
many years after the creation Genesis 4.11.
, when Cain, killed Abell. Thirdly, of the generality of this Commandment,
Every one that takes the sword, shall perish with the sword Matthew. 26.52.
. But I here forbear, referring these to another place.

Thou shall not kill?

To teach them that they did not truly and rigthly understand it,



Give us this day our daily bread; shall we not therefore pray for health,
apparel, life, preservation, and prosperity, all which are included in this
word Bread.



Thirdly, God is to be worshipped in Spirit,

Secondly, the Law is an exemplar of God; and therefore is holy and pure, Psalm.
19.7.8.

Again, there are others worse than these, and that is those who distinguish
the words of the precept: for the former granted only the words and literal
sense, the latter will not allow of all the words according to the letter: as
for example, some can distinguish lying, into, first, a pernicious lie: and
secondly, a manifest and apparent lie; and these they condemn: but if 1. it be
an officious lie, whereby some profit or benefit may accrue, either to
themselves, or others: or 2. if it be a palliated lie, then as lawful we
defend it. But, non distinguendum ubi lex non distinguit: we are no other than
Lawyers, who can only expound the ancient and fundamental laws, but not make
new laws, neither by false glosses pervert the law, or divert it from the true
sense thereof: we must not distinguish where the Law does not, lest the Lord
will not accept of our distinction, and so by our quaint sophistry, we only
cozen and deceive our selves.

How manifold is Homicide? or what is it

Homicide or Bloodshed is threefold, Iustum, just: secondly, Impium, wicked:
thirdly, Immune, free from punishment, or excuseable.

First, there is a just and righteous murder, which is either Necessary, se
defendendo, when a man in his own defense killes another, being not able to
free himself out of the hands of his adversary, either by flight, or by the
aid and assistance of others. But here we must carefully observe, that this is
twofold: First, sometimes a man slayes thieves, and robbers, and enemies, who
lie in wayt for his life, because otherwise he cannot escape from them: this
is lawful, if the cause be real; but some kill, when they need not, but might
escape by flight, or preserve their lives by the loss of their purse.
Secondly, sometimes a man is laid in wayt for, or assaulted by the Magistrate,
or the Kings Officers, that they may apprehend him: here it is not lawful for
us (before God) in the defense of our selves, to shed their blood; and
therefore we must not thus defend our selves against Arrests. Lawful, which
is acted in a lawful war; to wit, either first in a defensive war, when
we are assaulted by some foreign foe: Or secondly, in a war undertaken for
the recovery of a due, true, and necessary right, which has unjustly been
taken away.


Secondly, there is a wicked murder, which is either First of a man's self, being
done Violently and wilfully: when a man lays violent hands upon himself: Now
this is altogether desperate and horrible.
Secondly, of another, whether done First, rashly; this the Lord himself
condemns for murder: If a man smite his neighbor with any mortal or deadly
weapons, either o^ Iron, or stone, or wood, that he dye, he is a murderer, and
shall be put to death. Numb. 35.16 17.18. 2ly, of malice, whether done by A
man's self, whether by lying in wait secretly for the destruction of his
brother, or by underhand poisoning of him: or by an open assault, onset, or
force. Read Exodus 21.14. Numb. 35.20. Deuteronomy. 19.11.
By another, and that either Imperando, by commanding; and thus David slew
Vriah, and Iezabell Naboth, because they were slain through their commands.
Consulendo, by counselling; thus Herodias slew John Baptist, because he was
beheaded through the counsel given by her to her daughter, Mark 6.24.
Conducendo, by persuading, provoking, and hiring with a reward, or price: and
thus the Scribes and Pharisees were guilty of the blood of Christ; because
they hired Judas with money to betray him, Matthew. 26.15. Petendo, by
entreating: and thus Herodias daughter was the killer of John Baptist; because
Herod beheaded him at her request, Mark. 6, 25. Consentiendo, by consenting:
and thus Ahab was guilty of Nabo^hs blood, and Paul of Stephens. Silendo, by
co^cealing, or not revealing the murder: if this be done Before the fact (that
is, if a man knows of a murder intended, and conceal it) it is murder jure
divina, by Gods law. After the fact is done, he is condemned, jure positivo,
by man's law, and that justly; because murder is not to be concealed, neither is
such counsel to be kept.





Thirdly, there is an excusable homicide, viz. casual, and contingent; as when
a man is employed about some honest affairs, and accidentally kills his
brother: this homicide is excused; because the Lord delivered him into his
hands. Read Exodus 21.13. and Numb. 35.22. Deuteronomy. 19.5. and 4.42.

VERSE. 22. But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother without
a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever shall say to his
brother, Racha, shall be in danger of the council; but whosoever shall say,
thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.
But I say unto you] To whom does

(Staplet. Antidot.) And hence they deduce two conclusions, the first is
concerning Evangelicall Councels: the second is of venial sins, whereof
something has been spoken already, and more follows in this verse to be
considered of.

Stapleton gives us these reasons, or arguments for his opinion,



Calvin answers, that Christ is not a new Lawgiver; which answer Stapleton
derides, not remembering that saying, There is but one Lawgiver, who is able to
save and to destroy Iam. 4.12.
.

Secondly, Stapleton answers this reason himself; Staplet. Ibid.
. And therefore it follows not, that because Christ is a Lawgiver, therefore
he must make new laws, disanulling or opposing the old.

Secondly, Christ says, Ego dic^, I say, not as Haec dicit Dominus, Thus says
the Lord; and therefore Christ here opposes himself to the law of God.

The reason why Christ says, I say, Propheta ad conservos, Christus ad ser^os
Chrysostom sup.
. Christ as a Lord speaks unto his servants, and therefore says, I say unto
you, the Prophets as the servants of the Lord, speak unto their fellow
servants in the Lord, and therefore say, thus says the Lord.

Thirdly, Stapleton proves this from examples; Christ says he adds new Laws,
and therefore thou shall not swear at all, verse. 34.

I answer; it was never lawful or allowable by

Secondly, Christ teaches that Divorce is never lawful but for adultery or
fornication verse. 32.

I answer, this was an old Law, and no new one. Our Savior himself saying,
that from Matthew. 19.8.
.

Thirdly, Christ teaches us under the Gospel to love our enemies, verse. 44.

If (says the Lord) thou meet (not thy friends, but) thy enemies Ox, or his
Ass going astray, thou shall surely bring it back to him again Exodus 23.4.
. Now none can deny, but this instance does plainly imply and injoyne love to
our enemies. But if any be so blind, that they cannot see it, or so obstinate
that they will not acknowledge that it may hence be deduced or proved, that
we ought to love our enemies, let him listen then to the wise man, If thine
enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat, and if be be thirsty, give him water
to drink, etc Pro. 25.21.
. And therefore that addition which our Savior speaks of, verse. 44. Thou
shall hate thine enemy, is a falsification of the Pharisees, as shall be
showed afterward, and was never enjoined by the Law of God.

Fourthly, Christ teaches us to love our brethren, and calls it his
Commandment, John 14.15.21. and 15.10.12.17. and John 13.34. and Saint Paul
calls it, the Law of Christ. Galat. 6.2.

David expressly commends, and implicitly commands this brotherly love: Oh how
good and joyful a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in amity and
unity, Psalm. 133. etc. Yea, our Savior says the one half of the Law is to
love our neighbor as our self, Mat. 22.49. which words are taken from Lev.
19.18. And therefore I may safely (those rubbes removed out of the way)
conclude this question, that certainly, Christ does not here oppose himself
to the Law of God, but to the expositions of the Pharisees.



internal concupiscence of the heart, (in the tenth Commandment) God is to be
worshipped in spirit, and with spiritual worship (Joh. 4.24.) this also the
Law commands, Solomon persuades us to give God our hearts (Prove. 23.26.) and
Moses, to love and serve God with all our hearts, and with all our souls. Deuteronomy.
6.5. And therefore there was no need of a new Law, the old being such as has
been said.

Secondly, whatsoever Christ taught or desired Mat. 19.17. Now this is enjoined
in the Old Testament. The second is, to love the brethren, or our brethren,
this also was commanded in the Law. The third is, to believe in Christ, but
this is the Commandment of the Father 1 Ioh. 3.23.
.

. 2. But I say unto you.] The scope of Christ It was said of old thou shall not
kill, etc. but Rabbi Solomon, or Ben-Ezra, does not say so: But I say unto you,
that hence we might learn, that the true trial of antiquity is in the Holy
Scriptures; and therefore we are commanded to search them, Ioh. 5.39. to
repair to them, Esa. 8.20. because by them we are regenerated. 1 Pet. 1.23.
from them we have faith. Romans 10.17. yea, they are able to make us perfect 2 Timothy 3 16.
. The Church is our Mother, therefore she must be subject to God our Father,
for the wife ought to be so unto the husband: and hence Saint Paul would have
us to wave the opinion of an Angel, rather then of the word of God Gal. 1.8.
, much more then of a Father, who is subject to error, as was showed in the
former verse.

Is there no use at all to be made of Antiquity,

First, in general, the true use of the Ancients

Secondly, more particularly, the true use of In these 4. things, to wit,
First, in the exposition of the Scriptures, which is twofold, namely, either
Positive; as for example, this exposition of Scripture is true, because the
Fathers so interpreted it. This follows not. Privative, this exposition is
false, because none of the Fathers so give it: here observe two things namely,
First, this is no certain or general rule, because often all the Fathers of
some one time, or for a long time have been mistaken, as was showed in the
former verse in the exposition of Genesis 6.2. and 2 Cor. 4.4. Secondly, this is
to be reverenced, and does strongly convince Private spirits, when we can say,
none have as yet thought thus besides your self.

Secondly, the true use of the ancient writers, is in convincing those
adversaries which trust unto them and rely upon them: for although this follow
not, the Fathers say thus, therefore it is true; yet this follows; these men
pretend to follow the Doctrine of the Fathers; and yet in their opinions vary
from (yea are enemies unto) the Fathers; and therefore they do but deceive and
juggle with the world, making a show of that which is not: This is the usual
pranke of the Papists, to exclaim that all the Fathers are on their side, and
when the matter comes to trial, their Judges condemn them, and the Fathers
speak against them. Thirdly, the use of the Ancients is, for the moving of the
affections of their hearers; for certainly modest Christians and ingenious
natures will be much moved, and strongly persuaded, when they hear the thing
they are exhorted to embrace; not only to be consonant to Scriptures, but also
agreeable to the example, counsel, and resolution of the Fathers. Fourthly,
the use of the Fathers is to direct us in outward things, or to teach us the
nature of indifferent things, how far they may be used, and how they are
abused.


Whosoever is angry with his brother, etc.]

Anger, Racha, Fool, Judgment, Counsel, Fire?

Weemes, in the tractate of the Judicial Law of Moses, lib. 1. chap. 16. and
Doctor Field of the Church, who will resolve him in this particular D. Field of
the Church, lib. 5. cap. 9.
; for my own part; I forbear to transcribe them, they being both in English,
and easily to be had.

Whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly. The second is, in showing of
this indignation outwardly, by any disdainful words; as in calling one Racha,
that is, idle-head, light-braine: for so (Rik) in the Hebrew (to which this
Syrian word Raka agrees both in found and sense) signifies light, or vain
Iuniur. s
. This indignation may be expressed also by other signs, as by grinning,
frowning, spitting, and such like, The third degree of anger consists in open
railing, as calling one Fool, with other terms of reviling; which is a
weapon fit for the Giant with three hands, because Tres quasi uno ictu occidit
Basting.
, it kills three as it were with one blow; first, himself that revileth and
raileth. Secondly, him that gives credit to his reviling and railing: Thirdly,
him who is slandeted and reviled.

Beza thinks.

Fourthly, from these premises I thus conclude Beza affirms upon this place.
Or if we look to the former words, they will help us to the true
understanding of these; It was said of old, Thou shall not kill: and whosoever
shall kill, shall be in danger of judgment, where we see, the Jews held a
murderer to be guilty of judgment; and that not only positively, but
privatively: as if our Savior would say, ye yield the homicide to be guilty
of judgment, who really takes away his brothers life; but he is not called
into judgment with you, who sheddes not his brothers blood, although he hate
him in his heart, and revile him with his tongue: But ego dico, I say unto you,
whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of
judgment: Where we see, Christ gives as much to anger, as they to murder
Areti. s.
. And therefore the true sense and meaning of the words, I take to be this:
He that is angry, shall be guilty of judgment; that is, at the day of
judgment he shall give account, and answer for that his anger Math. 12.36.
. He that calls his brother Racha, shall be guilty of a Council; that is,
shall be more severely punished, than the former, as his sin is greater. He
that calls his brother Fool, shall be guilty of hell fire: that is, is
condemned already before God Augu. s.
. And yet all these three are eternal punishments; and the first may be
resembled unto a petty Sessions: the second unto a general Assizes: the third
to Marshall law.



Fool Bellarm. de Purga. lib. 1. c. 4.
.

Secondly, Thomas of Aquine likes the general He that is angry with his
brother is guilty of judgment; which words must be understood, De motu
tendente in nocumentum, etc. of a motion tending to hurt, where there is
consent, and so that motion is deadly sin, Thom. in opuscul. Ex Lippom.



1 In respect of the nature of sin, which of it self deserves death, Romans
6.23. The wages of ^^ne is death: Yea, sin is the transgression of the Law, 1
John 3.4. And every transgression of the Law is under the curse, Gal. 3.10.

2 In respect of the infinite Majesty of God, which to violate can be no
venial sin of it self.

3 In respect of the perfect and absolute righteousness of God, which cannot
abide the least blemish or imperfection: And therefore in these regards, no
sin committed against God can in it self be venial White s. Exodus 20.
Confut. 5. ^rac. 6. f. 330.
.

Fifthly, this motion and passion of anger, even when it is sudden and
unadvised, though there be no further purpose nor intendment to Whosoever is
angry with his brother without a cause, shall be guilty of judgment, that is,
shall be guilty of damnation: for so judgment is taken in Scripture David
prays that the Lord would not enter into judgment with him Psa. 143.2.
. And Paul says, Thou that judge another, condemnest thy self Romans 2.1.
, where to judge and condemn are taken for all one: to be culpable then of
judgment is to be guilty of condemnation.

Thirdly, we admit this distinction of venial Romans 8.1.) But to the wicked and
impenitent all their sins are mortal.

Sixthly, the Fathers side with us in our opinions, Canisius, Pupilla oculi,
Manipul, Curatorum, and the rest. Chrysostom upon this verse, says, Christus
dat ultionem homicidio, irae; supplicium aeteruum adulterio, concupiscentiae,
Christ does not punish murder, and spare anger, or condemn adultery and acquit
concupiscence, but condemns and punishes both the one and the other. St.
Augustine s. says, that all these three are to be arraigned before Gods
judgement-Seate, where Hell shall be the reward of all: If any object why then
are the two former degrees ( Judgment and Council) named? He answers,
because there are several degrees of punishment in hell, according to the
degrees of sin on earth.

Saint Hierome condemns the first degree of anger, to be worse than idle
words; but these we must give account for at the day of Judgment, when and
where, no sins that we must answer for are in their own nature pardonable
Mat. 12.36,
. Saint Hilarie, Non minus ira rea Evangelie quam homicidium lege. Anger under
the Gospel is no more a venial sin, than murder was under the Law. And
therefore I shut up this question with this assertion, That to be angry with
our brother unadvisedly, to call him Racha, or fool in our anger, are all
mortal sins, and deserve in their own nature eternal fire.

Bellarmine (tom. 3. fol. 113.) objects, Thou shall not kill: Therefore this
will not exclude us from the Kingdom of Heaven.

First, here is Petitio principii, a begging

Secondly, if this were granted, that these two were only degrees of that
Commandment, Thou shall not kill, yet it would not hence follow, that they are
venial sins, which will not exclude us out of Heaven; For to call our
Brother Fool, is but only a degree of that Commandment, and yet the Jesuit
himself does confess that to be mortal, and to deserve condemnation,
Bellarm. de Purgat. lib. 1. cap. 4. tom. 1. 1809.

cursed is every one that continues not in all things, which are written in
the Book of the Law Galath. 3.10.
. There being no transgression so small, but it shall be punished, except it be
repented of, and washed away by the Blood of Christ.

Bellarmine says, the violation of the Commandment it self, according to the
letter, excludes us from the Kingdom of Heaven; but not the transgression of
the degrees of the Commandment.

Christ here says plainly, that the Pharisees and Scribes did observe the
Letter of the Law, but that was not sufficient to bring them unto Heaven, or to
preserve them from Hell; And therefore if we desire to be saved, we must
carefully observe the very degrees of the Commandments, and therein our
righteousness may exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
because otherwise we cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

Whosoever is angry with his Brother.]



Give no place to wrath, give no place to the Devil, Ephesians. 4.27.

Non ab illius injuria, sed a tua superbia (Basil. hom. de ira.) Anger proceeds
not from the injury of others, but from the pride of our selves, that being the
moving cause thereof: Many are wronged, and yet but some are provoked, and some
are not; Why? because some are patient, and others are proud. Now we should
labor not only to withstand the assaults of Satan, but also to subdue our
own corruptions, and pride, and impatiencie in the suffering of injuries;
because these are the causes of Anger.

Iam. 1.20.) Those which are in the flesh cannot please God, Romans 8.8. But
Anger is a work of the flesh, Gal. 6.20. And therefore cannot please God.

Secondly, Anger is dangerous and pernicious to him that is angry; for it hurts
the heart, it wounds the conscience, it expels the holy Spirit, and deserves to
be punished. Fructus ira, lingua effraenis, manus incontinentes, contumeliae,
accusationes, verbera Basil. hom. de Ira.
, the fruits of anger, are an unbridled tongue, a quarrelling hand, reproaches,
accusations, strokes, and the like, whence our Savior reputes it murder in
this place; how lightly soever Bellarmine esteems it.

Do all the Papists think Anger a venial

The more ancient Papists were otherwise minded: Pomerius (dom. 5. Pentec.)
expounds these words thus, He that is angry shall be guilty of judgment, that
is, he shall be accused before God at the day of Judgment, because he has
sinned against that Commandment, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
He that says to his Brother, Racha, shall be in danger of the Council; that
is, the whole Congregation of the Saints will approve the sentence of his
condemnation.

The same Author does there for the better clearing of his exposition, observe
eight degrees of anger, wherein there are some things amiss which I pass by,
because he speaks plainly and abundantly enough for the proof of what we
affirm against Bellarmine.

The first degree of anger is provoked through zeal, either toward God, or
against sin; and this is good, as follows by and by. The second degree is a
sudden motion and disturbance of the mind; which (says he) is not sin. The
third is a deliberated anger, but quickly blown over: this (says he) is a
venial sin in it self. Fourthly, Anger joined with some small desire of
revenge, or with a desire of some small revenge; this also (says he) is
venial by reason of the smallness of the desire of revenge. The fifth degree
is, when Anger is accompanied with a will and desire of some great vengeance;
but yet is concealed within in the heart, coming no further, neither showing
it self in the countenance or actions: this he says (and that truly) is
mortal. The sixth is, when internal anger conceived, and for a while
concealed in the heart, does at length break out, revealing it self by some
signs; as for example, either 1. by some frowning, and lowering, and
discontented look. Or 2. by turning away the face from the party we are angry
with all. Or 3. by not speaking unto them. Or 4. by not re-saluting them, when
by them we are saluted. The seventh degree of anger is conjoined with some
reproachful words, as Fool or Ass; this also (says he truly) is a mortal
sin. The eighth and last degree, is Anger accompanied with some real harm
done unto those, with whom we are angry; this is also a mortal sin. And thus
by his sixth, seventh, and eighth degree of Anger, he does plainly show, that
all the three degrees of anger laid down in this verse are mortal sins: And
therefore we should carefully avoid and abstain from all prohibited Anger.

By what ways or means may we resist and

The remedies against Anger are either in Others, that is, not to provoke us,
either by opprobrious words, or injurious works; But this not being meant in
this place, I pass it by. In our selves, which are these which follow, namely.
First, Premeditation; before thou begin to be angry, ponder with thy self,
I. all the provocations, reproaches, injuries, and wrongs, which may be
offered unto thee, that so thou may prepare thy self to contemn and
despise them, and not to be exasperated by them. II. Ruminate with thy self
what thy duty is, and how thou ought in patience to possess thy soul,
notwithstanding all crosses and wrongs which may be offered unto thee; that
thus thou may arm thy self against them. III. weigh with thy self, what
Christ suffered for thee, and with what patience; he suffered contempt,
derision, injuries, yea death for thee, and in them all was like a lamb dumb
before the shearer, or as a dove without gall: And therefore remember this,
that thou may imitate thy Master herein. These premeditations being
frequently and seriously in our hearts, will be one excellent remedy against
Anger. Secondly suppress it within; give no place to the water; nor to the
fire of wrath: as soon as ever an angry motion arises in thy heart, nippe it
at the root, that like Jonas his gourd it may suddenly wither. Thirdly,
remember how unprofitable anger is; it hurts thy self, it harms others, but
is gainefull to none. Fourthly, observe the excess, immoderate rage, and anger
of others: mark how ill it becomes them, yea how it does disgrace them; look
upon angry men, as the Lacedaemonians made their children behold drunkards, that
detesting it in another, thou may avoid it in thy self. Fifthly, employ thy
self about some honest and lawful affairs, that thy mind may be taken off
from the provocations unto anger. Otio crescunt pathemata. Sixthly, accustom
thy self to prudence and wisdom: remember how thou ought to show thy
self to be a wise man, yea a Christian, endued with patience and heavenly
wisdom, and clothed therewith as with a garment Colos. 3.12. James 3.17.
that so thou may acquit thy self like a wiseman in all provocations,
injuries, and wrongs whatsoever.



Without a cause, or unadvisedly.



subito. He that is angry with his brother suddenly, or causually, not
willingly incensing himself unto wrath against his brother, but rashly overcome
by a For he that is hasty of Spirit exalts folly. Pro. 14.29.

sine causa, He that is angry with his brother without a just cause; as if our
Savior would say, Anger is not to be blamed when it springs from a good root,
or is moved and provoked by a good cause. Teaching us, that Anger is to be
judged according Be angry but sin not, Esaias 4.26. therefore there is a
lawful anger.

How may we know whether our Anger be

Two things in anger are observable First, Radix the root thereof, from whence
it springs; that is, the internal affection or irascible faculty, as it is
natural, and lawful, without any hypothesis moved against the sin
committed, without any displicency or hatred of the sinner: of this more
plainly by and by. Secondly, the branches, or the anger it self which is
either. Evil, which is twofold, namely Or First, immoderate, and excessive, of
this we spoke. 4. Secondly unjust, and is either When we desire our own
revenge: Or When we are angry for our own gain or loss.

Good; which springs either from a cause Civil, Ira cos fortitudinis, I meddle
not with this, Spiritual which First, is allowable, and warrantable; religion
not prohibiting all anger: for first, this were impossible. And Secondly, it is
sometimes profitable Chrysostom. sup.
, for those who offend. And thirdly, necessary for our selves, because Non
irasci ubi irascendum est peccatum peccato addere Chrysostom. s.
, Not to be angry, when we should, is to add one sin unto another.
Secondly, is an anger against sin, to wit either against Our own proper
sins, or our selves for our sins; and thus Bern. s. 4. Psalm. 4.26. Be
angry and sin not; that is, (says he) be angry with thy self for thy
sins committed: and sin no more. Our brothers sin; Oportuna est ira quae
increpando convertit Chrysostom. s.
, that anger is seasonable and commendable, that reduces a brother from his
evil way.








Augustine answers, Non fratri, qui peccato fratris irascitur: He is not angry
with his brother, who is angry with the sin of his brother: for sin and the
sinner are two distinct things; and therefore a man may hate his brothers sin
and yet love his brothers person: he may be angry with the offense committed,
and yet not break the bond of Christian charity with the offender.
Chrysostom upon this place, gives us these examples hereof: first, of Moses,
whose anger waxed hot for the peoples idolatry, and yet he hated not their
persons Exodus 32.19.
. And so again in the matter of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, it is said, that
meek Moses was very wroth Numb. 16.15.
. Secondly, of Paul, who seems to reproach the Corinthians, I speak it to
your shame; and yet through his whole Epistle, he shows how he loves them 1
Cor. 6.5.
. And again, he calls the Galatians fools Gal. 3.1
, but hates them not. We may add, how his spirit was stirred in him, when he
saw the Idolatry of the Athenians Acts 17.16.
. And thirdly, the example of Christ, who was angry when he saw the
hard-heartednesse of the people Mark 3.5.
; and scourged some (at another time) out of the Temple John 2.16.
. And this Anger is called Zeal. Yea fourthly, we have an example of Gods
anger kindled against a holy man for want of this anger. Eli hearing of his
sons impiety, admonishes them, Why do ye such things? your dealings are
evil: and it is no good report I hear of you 1 Samuel 2.23.
: but yet notwithstanding this, what says the Lord, I will judge his house for
ever, for the iniquity which he knows: because his sons made themselves
vile, and he restrained them not; or (according to the Hebrew,) he frowned not
upon them 1 Samuel 3.13. (...)
. God did not thus threaten Eli, because he would not hate the persons of his
sons, (for that had been unnatural) but because he was not zealously moved
against their sins. And therefore there is a godly anger against our
bretherens sins.

Wherein does this anger consist which is to

It consists in four things,

First, let the object of this anger be lawful, or

Secondly, let thy anger be against Satan, not Cum Satan instigat, frater
instigatur ad malum, in illum converte iram, in hunc autem mi ericordiam Basil.
hom. de Ira.
. When Satan does instigate, and thy brother is persuaded by him unto evil,
be angry with him that tempted, but merciful and pitiful unto him that is
tempted: Be angry with the Devil, as the cause of thy brothers sin, but not
with thy brother, who is overcome by his subtilitie and strength.

Thirdly, this anger must arise from love, not

Fourthly, let this anger never be immoderate, or unbridled; anger must be
curbed (as a headstrong horse) with a bridle. Sit ira instrumentum virtutis,
non domina mentis, sed ancilla ad obsequium parata Gregor. Mor. 5.33.
. Anger must be the instrument of virtue, not the instigator unto vice; it must
be as a dutiful hand-mayd always prepared to obey; not a mistress of the
mind to dominiere or command. When the cause of thy anger is not good, then
restrain it; when the cause is good, then loose the reins, but do not cast
the bridle out of thy hands, but still restrain it, that so thou may never
break forth into intemperate rage.

Shall be in danger of the judgment.]

Judgment?

The word being expounded before,. 3. quest. 1. I here only add, that there
is a threefold judgment, Namely, First, Discretionis, of discerning or
separating the good from the evil, For judgment (says Christ) am I come into
the world Ioh. 9.39
, that is, to divide the good from the bad. Secondly, Punitionis, of
punishment, either Particular, at the hour of death, Or, General, at the last
judgment.
Thirdly, Remunerationis, of reward; when the Lord shall judge the Saints.


This verse neither speaks of the first judgment of Separation, or of the
last of Remuneration, but of the second, and second particle thereof, the
judgment of the last day. For these words, He shall he in danger of
judgment, do contain the reward and punishment of unlawful anger; as if our
Savior would say, anger shall not escape just punishment, but shall be
arraigned and summoned before Gods Tribunal at the dreadful day of judgment,
when the angry man shall not be able to answer one word of a thousand.

Whosoever shall say to his brother, Racha, shall be in danger of the Council.

Bellarmine lib. 1. de amiss. great. cap. 9. objects this place to prove, that
all sins deserve not eternal death. Christ (says he) makes three degrees
of anger, proportioning also three degrees of punishment thereunto, to wit, of
Judgment, Counsel, and Hell fire, which is threatened only to be inflicted
upon him that calls his brother Fool: Therefore there are some sins which
do not deserve hell fire.

Judgment, a Counsel, and Hell fire, do but signify three degrees of the
same punishment; Hell fire being due to the rest, but added only for
distinction, to show both the difference of the sin and punishment.

Judgment, (...), is taken in Scripture for everlasting punishment, or
condemnation, as Roman. 2.3. How shall thou escape the Judgment of God? And
therefore Bellarmines consequence is naught, He that is angry, shall be guilty
of judgment, therefore not of hell fire: for Judgment signifies the
punishment of ever-burning Tophet.

Thirdly, Saint Paul says, No rayler shall inherit (1 Cor. 6.10.) But he that
says Racha to his brother, is a ^ayler; wherefore he that says Racha, shall
not inherit the kingdom of heavens The Minor proposition is thus proved, Racha
is an Hebrew Interjection, and is derived from (...) Raiak, evacnare; and is
read by the Thalmud (...) Inavis, vacuus, that is, a light head, or
cock-braine, wide and empty of wisdom, or understanding. Now he that thus
reviles his brother, railes upon him; and therefore if Saint Paul may be
believed, he that calls his brother Racha, shall not inherit the kingdom of
heaven.

. 8. Whosoever shall say, thou Fool.] Is it

First, it is lawful for God to call wicked men Prove. 12.6.) and for Christ to
call the two Disciples foolish ( Luke 24.25.) yea for Saint Paul, to brand the
Galatians with folly, Gal. 3.1. and plainly to call the Cretians, Liers and
Slowbellies, Titus 1.12.

Secondly, this place is to be understood of

Does the abuse of the tongue deserve hell fire,

First, Pomerius says, Convitia, reproachful

Secondly, Pomerius says, Maledicta, evil Pomerius, do so allay, and
qualify the poison of the tongue, that it will not prove mortal unto us.

Thirdly, we have a more sure word of prophecy that is the word of God, which
teaches us what to think or judge of railing, reproachful, and cursed
speeches, by these particulars: First, the Scripture commands us, if we desire
to approve our selves to have put on Christ, to put on the virtue contrary unto
these: Put on therefore as the elect of God, bowels of mercies, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering, forbearing one another, and
forgiving one another Coloss. 3.12.13.
. All these are contrary, or opposite, to reproaches and evil speakings, and
therefore if the one be commanded, then is the other forbidden; if one be an
argument of an elect vessel, the other is of a reprobate, at least for the
present: And therefore whether simply taken, or according to Pomerius his
qualifications and restrictions, they are no venial sins.

Secondly, the Scripture prohibites these ex consequenti, by a necessary
consequent: Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that
which is good, etc. That you grieve not the Holy Spirit of God Ephesians. 4 21.
. Now none will deny but that reviling and wicked speeches are corrupt
communication, at least tend not to edification, but rather offend God. The
Apostle seems plainly thus to argue; those speeches which are corrupt, and
edify not the hearers are displeasing to the pure Spirit of God, and become
not Christians; but railing, reviling, and reproachful speeches, are corrupt,
and tend not to edification; and therefore they are unbeseeming Christians, and
displeasing to the Holy Ghost, and consequently (in their own nature) lethall
and not venial.

Thirdly, the Scripture dislikes all speeches of this kind, because they argue
that there is neither grace in us for the present, nor hope of glory for the
time to come. I. That man who gives way to these abusive speeches does thereby
testify, that his heart is not seasoned or sanctified with true grace. If any
man seem religious and bridleth not his tongue, he deceives his own heart,
and his religion is in vain Iam 1.^6.
. II. That man is as yet no heir of glory. Be not deceived; for raylers and
revilers shall never enter into the kingdom of God 1 Cor. 6, 10.
. I conclude this particular with this plain syllogism. That which excludes
us both from grace and glory is mortal and not venial, but railing, reviling,
and reproachful words (not being repented of) exclude us both from the
possession of grace, and true hope of glory, therefore they are no venial
sins.

Fourthly, these are directly and positively forbidden by God in his word; and
therefore are no venial sins in their own nature. Lay aside all malice,
envy, and evil speakings, says Saint James 1 Pet. 2.1.
, and Saint Paul most plainly, Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and
clamor, and evil speaking, be put away from you Ephesians. 4.31.
. Having showed that railing and reproachful words are

Ephesians. 4 29. Coloss. 4.6
. For the performance of these holy duties God in mercy has given us (not as
unto the other creatures, dumb and silent tongues, but) speaking tongues: and
therefore he that shall thus far defraud the Lord of his expectation, making
this rare member, an instrument of wickedness, shall be punished by the Lord
for this abuse thereof with hell fire.

Secondly, because these speeches are evil in Michael contending with Satan
about the body of Moses, durst not use any reviling speeches, but only said,
The Lord rebuke thee Jude 9. verse.
. The Lord best knowing the impiety of such words, and how prone we are unto
them, has showed his infinite mercy, and care toward us, in the preventing of
them, by the framing, fashioning, and placing of the tongue: God does nothing
in vain, and therefore he would have the sons of men to anatomize the tongue,
and to read some profitable lecture upon every particle thereof: as for
example. I. The tongue is placed in the head, in the midst of the senses; to
teach us, that our words must be wise, grave, weighty, and discreet. II. The
tongue is hedged and fenced in with a double wall; namely, of earth, and of
stone, the lips being as the earthen wall, the teeth as a stone wall, to teach
us that we must set a watch over our lips, and keep our tongues as with a
bridle; yea, be cautelous and circumspect in our words, that nothing may break
through the teeth and lips, which is either displeasing unto God, or
disagreeing unto our profession, or disgraceful unto our brethren. III. The
tongue is simple, and undivided; men being not like Serpents double or cloven
tongued, to teach us, that we must speak the truth always; for truth is but
one, and we have but one tongue, and therefore it should always utter the
truth. IV. The tongue is tied below, but has no ligaments above; to teach us
that our tongues must be much more prone and ready to speak of heavenly and
celestial things, then of earthly and terrestrial; frequent in discoursing of
those things which are above, more spare of those which are below. V. It is of
a soft not of a hard, canly, or tough nature, to teach us that our words must
be mild, soft, gentle, and not proud, reproachful, cruel, disdainful, and the
like. These things the Lord would have us to ruminate upon, in our tongues,
that so it may be a means to make us more wary of our words, we being
naturally so prone to break forth (upon all occasions and provocations) unto
unchristian speeches, which are both displeasing to our Father, hurtful to our
brother, and mortal to our selves, and therefore if we would not defile our
tongues, provoke our God, extinguish grace, grieve the Spirit, inflame and
kindle the fire of hell, for the burning of our selves, we should abstain
from all railing, reviling, and reproachful words; not saying in our anger to
our brother, either Racha, or thou Fool.



The righteous studieth to answer, but the mouth of the wicked powers forth
evil things Pro. 15.28.
. Let us not accustom our selves, to speak whatsoever comes uppermost (as the
proverb is) but digest, weigh, and ponder the nature, and quality of our
words, before we speak.

molliter, mildly, gently, calmely, that thy answers may be soft Pro. 15.1
, for they will pacify wrath; that thy tongue may be soft, for that breaks
the bone Pro. 25.15.
. Frangit osseum, that is, durissimum and rigidissimum; gentle and soft words
will mollify the most hard, rigide and cross natures Tremel. sup.
.

sancte, holily and purely: Let thy words be seasoned with salt, fit for
edifying, that they may add grace to the hearers, Ephesians. 4.28. Coloss. 4.6.
Let us accustom our selves to pious discourses, that they may become habitual
unto us, and so we shall be the more free from all corrupt and wicked
speeches, which our Savior has threatened here to punish with hell fire.

Shall be in danger of hell fire.] What is meant by Gehenna,

Hinnom, which is mentioned, Joshua 15.8. And which was abused by Idolaters, to
barbarous, inhumane, and heathenish Idolatry. Thus Ahaz burns incense in the
valley of Hinnom, and burnt his children in the fire, after the abominations of
the heathen 2 Chro. 28.
. Thus Manasses causes his children to pass through the fire in the valley of
the son of Hinnom, 2 Chronicles. 33, 6. The fire wherein their children were
burnt, was called Tophet: They have built the high places (says Jeremiah) of
Tophet, which is in the valley of Hinnom, to burn their sons and their
daughters in the fire Ierem. 7 31.
. And the Idol whereunto they there offered their children, was called M^lech:
They built the high places in the valley of Hinnom, to cause their sons and
their daughters to pass through the fire unto Molech Ier. 32.35.
.

Hinnom, there was a double fire; First, the fire wherein their children were
burnt: our Savior here by the fire of Gehenna, may have reference to this
fire, thus; First, this valley of Hinnom was a place of misery, in regard of
those many slaughters, that were committed in it through their barbarous
idolatry: so Hell is a place of misery, and infelicitie, wherein there is
nothing but sorrow. Secondly, by the bitter cries, and ejaculations of poor
infants, the restless torments of hell may be shadowed here also.

Secondly, in this valley of Hinnom was another fire, which was kept
continually burning, for the consuming of dead carcasses, and filth, and the
garbidge that came out of the City. Now our Savior by the fire of Gehenna in
this place, has reference principally to this fire, signifying hereby the
perpetuity, and everlastingnesse of hellish pains.

If my Reader desire further to learn, how the Kabbalists paraphrase and
distinguish of a superior and inferior Gehenna, or how they observe seven
mansions or degrees in Gehenna, called, 1. Infernus, 2. Perditio, 3. Profundum,
4. Taciturnitas, 5. Vmbra mortis, 6. Terra inferior, 7. Terra sitiens. Let him
read Capnio de Kabala, page 644. and Pet. Galat. lib. 12. cap. 6. and lib. 7.
cap. 7. and Reuchlin in lib. 1. Cabalae, page 456. and Otho Gualtper syllog.
page 81. 82. 83.

This place is strongly urged by Peltanus, Bellarmine (lib. 1. cap. 1. and lib.
2. cap. 6. de Purgatorio) and diverse others for the proof of Purgatory: Some
of them briefly arguing thus,

If in the world to come, the first and second degrees of anger here expressed,
shall not be punished with hell fire, and yet shall be punished with some
torments; then it remains, that they must be punished in Purgatory, because
after this life, there is no other place of punishment, but either hell or
Purgatory, Bellarmine and Peltanus they dispute thus: First, our Savior
speaks here of punishments which are to be enjoined unto, and inflicted upon
sinners, by the judgment and sentence of God after this life. Secondly, that
there are here distinguished by Christ three sorts of sins, and three kinds
of punishments; and that hell fire, and eternal condemnation is attributed
only to the third kind: and to the first and second, more light punishments,
that is, temporal. And therefore some souls shall be punished after this
life, with temporal punishments, to wit, in Purgatory, because there is no
other place of punishment after death, but either hell or Purgatory.

First, we grant, that our Savior speaks Chamier. tom. 3. fol. 1160. de
Purgat. cap. 6. Sect. 3. lib. 26. and Scharp curs. Theolog. de Purgat. page
557. resp. 2.

Secondly, we deny, that there are three distinct every transgression of the
Law is sin; and the wages of every sin is death, (Romans 6.23. and 1. Ioh.
3.4) But to be angry rashly, and to rail, are transgressions, and consequently
sins (as was showed before.) And therefore in themselves are worthy of
everlasting death.

Secondly, he that loves not his brother, abides in death, that is, has no
eternal life 1 Ioh. 3.14.15.
. But he that is angry with his brother unjustly, loves him not: therefore he
has no part in eternal life. Thirdly, no raylers shall inherit Gods kingdom,
that is, without repentance 1 Cor 6.10.
. But he that says to his brother, Racha, that is idle-braine, or light-head,
raileth: therefore this sin (without repentance) excludes from heaven: and
consequently, in it self is worthy of hell. Willet. Synops. 408. Fourthly,
Christ speaks here of the sin, not of the punishment; for to be angry with
our brother, and to harm him with some opprobrious words, is the fault of the
sin, not the punishment thereof: but every fault and guilt of sin not
pardoned, does bring upon the sinner eternal condemnation (as shall elsewhere
be showed.) And therefore all these three degrees of sin are guilty of hell
fire. Fifthly, Christ concluding this discourse, commands every one to be
reconciled unto his brother, lest he be delivered unto the Judge, and by him
sent into prison, from whence he shall not come out, until he have paid the
uttermost farthing, that is, never, as shall be showed by and by. And
therefore although there be diverse unequal degrees of punishment in hell, yet
all are equal in regard of the eternity and perpetuity thereof. Chamier. de
Purgat. fol. 1160.. 5.

Scharp. de Purgat. fol. 557. resp. 2. and Sadeel page 258. error 2.



Judgment or Council, can in any respect agree, or be applied to Purgatory;
there not being in them the least mention or insinuation of any purging, more
than there is in the word Gehenna. Amesius tom. 2. page 201.

Bellarmine himself observes two kinds of punishments distinct from the
eternal torments of hell fire. And therefore if this argument be worth the
owning or maintaining, he must grant two Purgatories distinct in place and
situation: For as the Council is a distinct place and jurisdiction from the
place of the fire of Hell (as he says) so also is the place of Judgment, a
distinct place from the Synedrion or Council: And therefore if the Papists
contend for this, that the Synedrion or Council differs from the fire of Hell:
we do no less strive for this, that in like manner Judgment differs from
Council; and so cannot be numerically one. Wherefore either they must go set
up a second and new Purgatory from this place, or pull down the old one, which
they have so stoutly heretofore maintained from hence, because this Scripture
we see must either support two Purgatories or none.

Seventhly, if this conclusion of the Papists be

Eighthly, what Fathers can they find who Theophilact upon these words, by
council understands the consent of the Apostles in the great and general
judgment. And Saint Augustine (de sermon. Dom. in monte) from this place
concludes, that there are different degrees of punishment in Hell.

Ninthly, to prove Purgatory from this place Non culpam sed panam in
Purgatorium venire: that the guilt of our sins does not come into Purgatory,
that being washed away in the blood of Christ, but only the punishment: For in
the Judgment and Council they consulted of the fault: Iudicium dicitur, etc.
says Augustine (l. 1. de ser. in mente cap. 19.) that is called Judgment
where the sentence is not pronounced, that is a Council where the punishment
is yet consulted of; but Gehenna or Hell is that, which has certain
damnation, etc. 2. If the words of our Savior here concerning Judgment and
Council, do belong unto Purgatory, then that is false which the Papists say,
that Purgatory is a Tormentory or a place of punishment; for neither the
judgment nor the lesser Synedrion were places of punishments, as was showed
before. Lastly, this Bellarm. Costar, Ecchius, Salmeron, Jesuit. tract. de
Purgat. And is confuted by Swarez, Jesuit. tom. 4. in Thom. disp. 45.. 1. number.
13. And by Mal^onat. Jesuit. in Matthew. 5 From ^. Morrons Appeal. fol. 15 s^^^
.

VERSE. 23. Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the Altar,
Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the Altar.]







If thou bring thy gift unto the Altar, etc. that is, if thou be conscious
unto thy self, that thou have done something, whereby thy brother is justly
incensed and provoked, then give all diligence with all speed to be reconciled
unto him by confessing and acknowledging the wrong thou have done him ( W^tten
of the Reconcil. of sinners.) Others again expound these words literally thus,
that Christ speaks here only according to the present state and custom of
the Church of the Jews; thus Bulling. Aretius, Marlor, Calvin, Muscul.
Gualter, and others, and it is the most safe exposition: Sic non potest de
fratribus absentibus (trans mare) sed praesentibus intelligi Aug. de sermon. dom.
s.
. But if the words be thus literally interpreted, then they mean our present,
and not absent brethren; for if we have offended some who are in another
remote land, we must not then leave our offering, until they come over.

Lubertus contra Socinum.
.

Thirdly, some expound these words morally, of every good work which we
perform unto Staplet. Antidot.
. The Altar is faith upon which we offer Prayers, praises, and spiritual
duties, August.

Fourthly, some understand this of the expiatory Necesse est legem de externo
sacrificio, etc. (Stapleton s.) Our Savior here does certainly speak of some
external sacrifices, therefore that of the Mass: this he proves 1. Because
the Fathers did apply this place to the Eucharist, or Lords Supper. 2. Because
Christ here prophecieth, what would come to pass.

First, it is true that the Fathers did apply this

Secondly, they did not only apply it to the Dissidentes mensa illa non
suscipiat; Audiant qui cum inimicitiis ad altaris communionem, etc Chrysostom. s.
. The Table of the Lord will not receive those who will not agree, or be
reconciled; and therefore let all those fear and tremble, who bring their
dissensions, hatred and discord along with them unto this holy Communion. But
hereunto the Father adds, the sacrifices of Prayer and Alms, from Psalm.
50.14.23. and of praise, Psalm. 107.22. and of a contrite heart, Psalm. 51.17.
Yea, De omni pio opere, ad cultum Dei destinato, of every good work which is
enjoined as a part of Gods worship, as Stapleton himself (Antidot.) says,
which is his Explication of this verse, but rather our Application. And
therefore how does this belong unto an expiatorie Sacrifice?

Thirdly, we willingly confess that the Eucharist gratulatorium, non
expiatorium, a gratulatory, not expiatory sacrifice; as may be proved, first by
the name of Eucharist, which is given to the Sacrament, which signifies as much
as a sacrifice, or a religious exercise of thankesgiving and praise. Secondly,
by the exposition of the Holy Ghost; We have (says the Apostle) an Altar (to
wit, Christ) whereof they have no right to eat (Heb. 13.10.) By him therefore
let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of
our lips, giving thanks to his Name, (Heb. 13.15.) Thirdly, because the
Fathers did conjoyne the Sacrament with other holy exercises of Religion: And
therefore this is a palpable perverting of the truth, to wrest this place to an
expiatory sacrifice.

. 2. That thy Brother has ought against





If any be called a brother, says the Apostle 1 Cor. 5.11. hence Christ is
called the first borne amongst brethren, Romans 8.29. And therefore all the
members of Christ are brethren, and should so be prized and esteemed.

that we are translated from death unto life if we love the bethren 1 John
3.14.
. Secondly, hence we know that we are borne of God, if we love one another 1
John 4.7.
. Thirdly, because he that hates his brother is in darkness; but he that
loves his brother abides in the light, and there is no occasion of stumbling
in him 1 John 2.9.10.
. Fourthly, he that loves not his brother is not of God 1 John 3.10.
. Fifthly, he that loves not his brother, loves not Christ 1 John 5.1.
, for he that loves Christ will love those that are his. Sixthly, he that
loves not his brethren, loves not God; and if any say he loves God and not
his brother, he is a liar 1 John 4.20.
.



First, this will make us careful not to offend them: If meat (says the
Apostle) make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh till the world stands
1 Cor. 8.13. and Romans 14.
. Secondly, this will make us careful to speak the truth one to another. Put
away lying, and speak every man truth with his neighbor: for we are members
(that is, brethren) one of another Ephesians. 4.25.
. Thirdly, this would appease jarres, and mitigate contentions, and abate
suites, and going to law one with another. Ye are brethren (says Moses to the
two Jsraelites) and therefore you must not fight. Brother must not go to law
with Brother (says Saint Paul) for that is unseemely. 1 Cor. 6. And therefore
they are much to blame who deride this phrase of Brethren, and note
Schismatickes by that name; for it is a term which is proper to the Church of
Christ, and not to the Synagogue of Satan, as we may see. Acts 10.23. and
11.1.12.29. But the new brotherhood of the Separatists excepted against Canon.
9. I speak not, nor allow not off.

Have ought against thee.]



Racha, or fool, or been angry with him, if thou have wronged him in the
least kind, confess thy offense, and be reconciled unto him.

Why must we be thus careful to abstain from all wronging of our neighbors,
and to satisfy the least injury done unto them?

Levit. 25.17.

Secondly, charity begins at home: and

Thirdly, it is the nature of Charity, to do no Romans 13.10. neither to think
evil, 1 Cor. 13.5. and therefore where there is true brotherly love, there
will be a true care to keep the bound of charity entire, and to make up all
breaches, which occasionally may be made.

Must we satisfy our brother, if he know not the

Yes.

But against this it may be objected, If our

First, if there were only in thee a purpose of

Secondly, if thy brother be truly injured and

What must the party offended do, if the offender

First, Augustine here answers, non est opus ad there is no need that the
offended should go unto the offender; non veniam postulabis, sed dimittes; for
it is enough for him to forgive the offense committed against him (and this is
his duty to do) he need not go to desire love and reconciliation. Of this
opinion in a manner is Hierome.

Secondly, Chrysostom answers, that our Savior

Why must he that is injured seek amity and

First, because thus we imitate Christ, who We in Christ's stead desire you to
be reconciled unto God. 2 Cor. 5.19.

Secondly, because otherwise it is an argument

Thirdly, without this there can be in the thus consult with himself; He that
does wrong, and will not acknowledge it, yea satisfy for it, and be
reconciled unto him whom he has abused; shall be delivered unto the Judge and
from him by the officers cast into Prison, from whence there is no redemption:
But my brother has injured and abused me, and knows what I have against him,
and yet will not come and seek reconciliation and atonement; And therefore in
love unto his soul I must stoop unto him, and desire betwixt us mutual and
Christian love, that so I may pluck him as a brand out of the fire, or else his
obstinacy will at last bring him to eternal misery.









Fourthly, to be reconciled one unto another

Fifthly, because this only is commended and rewarded by God: Si confessus ubi
offendists, quid Chrysostom. imperfect.
. If thou have offended thy brother, and confess thy fault unto him, what do
thou deserve? only pardon from thy brother. If thou be wronged, and art
content to pardon thy brother, and to be reconciled unto him, when he
acknowledges his offense unto thee, and desires pardon and reconciliation
from thee, what do thou deserve? the praise of men: If thou be unjustly
injured by thy brother, and as soon as thou know the offense and the
offender, thou run unto him, desiring that the bond of love may not be
broken betwixt you, but that you may be one in Christian love; what deservest
thou, or what shall thou have? praise, pardon, and a reward from God: the Lord
will commend thee, whose praise is better then the praise of men: The Lord will
pardon thy offenses unto thee, because so freely for his sake thou forgavest
others: The Lord will reward thee with eternal honor and glory.

VERSE. 24. Leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way, first be
reconciled unto thy brother, and then come, and offer thy gift.
. 1. Leave there thy gift before the Altar, etc.]

Why must not the sacrifice be offered, until

First, as we must give no place to anger Ephesians.

Secondly, Christ gives this charge, that thereby

Thirdly, our Savior prescribes this injunctio^,

Are the works of the second Table to be

No, if the works of the first be true,

Why do not the exercises of religion

First, because such duties do not proceed Ergo. This Saint John confirms in
these words, He that says, he loves God and hates his brother is a liar, for
how can he love God whom he has not seen, and hate his brother whom he has
seen 1 John 4.20.
?

Secondly, such duties are no better the^ corrupt bribes, whereby we think so
to bleare and blind and wrongs we have done unto our brethren And therefore
they never shall be grateful or pleasing unto him.

Nil prodest orare, dum unus orat pro te, alter contra Chrysostom. imp^rf.
: what does thy prayers avail thee, when one prays for thee, another against
thee?

1 Cor. 13.1.2.
.



Si de been partis, if it be a portion of well got goods: If God has blessed
thee in thy honest calling, lawfully discharged; it is then lawful for thee to
return back a part thereof unto God again.

Si de male partis: If thy goods be evil come by, then satisfaction is to be
made to him that has been wronged, not unto God or the Church, or the poor:
for that were to offer unto them a part of a spoil unjustly acquired: But we
shall have more direct occasion else where to clear this more fully: and
therefore I thus here superficially leave it.

Go thy way.]

Ezech. 46.10. where the Prince himself might not depart, till all were ended.
The Prince shall go in, when they go in, and when they go forth, he shall
go forth.



And be reconciled unto thy brother, and then offer.

The meaning of this is, compose your jarres, link your selves together in the
chain and bond of Christian charity, and then offer your sacrifices unto the
Lord.

Why must we not offer sacrifices unto God until we be reconciled unto men?





Thirdly, God loves concord and unity amongst his, he himself not being the
author of confusion, but of peace: yea commands us

Fourthly, we are all brethren, yea, all members Ephesians. 5.29.) but nourishes
and cherishes it; yea, though the hand should harm the eye, or foot, the
body will not therefore hate the hand, but pardon it, and prize it as highly as
ever it did before: Saint Peter uses this argument to persuade us to this
duty: Finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another, love as
brethren, be pitiful, be courteous. And therefore before we can offer any
acceptable sacrifice unto God we must be reconciled one unto another, that
is, both the injurious person, and the party injured.

He who has been unjustly injured, and palpably

First, flesh and blood shall never inherit the kingdom 1 Cor. 15.50. and
therefore desperately miserable is that man's condition, who can do or suffer
no more then flesh and blood can.

Secondly, all good and holy duties are difficult;

Thirdly, the question is not what thy brother Matthew. 18.22.
.

Fourthly, suppose Christ should (as he does

Fifthly, the work indeed is not difficult, because

Sixthly, it is an excellent sign of a mind truly

Seventhly, and lastly, if thou will not pardon thy brother no more will the
Lord pardon thee,











take it patiently, what reward shall he have, Matthew 5.46. and 1 Peter 3.16.







Zacheus did.

. 4. Then come and offer thy gift.]

We see here, that as soon as we are reconciled

Why is the Lord appeased toward us, as soon as our brother is pacified;

First, because herein we obey God; we are obsequious unto his will, when we
seek peace,

Secondly, because he that submits himself to

VERSE. 25, 26. Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way
with him, lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the
Judge deliver thee to the Officer, and thou be cast into prison, verily I say
unto thee, thou shall by no means come out thence, till thou have paid the
uttermost farthing.
. 1. Agree with thine adversary, Cito quickly.]

What is the scope and drift of our Savior in Quickly?

First, he hence would have us to observe the Agree with him quickly, because
thou do not know, how quickly thou may be taken hence: It is the Devils
craft to make us blind, insensible, obdurate, negligent, and full of delays in
the work of grace: it is through the malice of our adversary, that we put off
our repentance, crying, we will repent us in our old age. But our Savior does
counsel and advise us not to procrastinate our conversion and repentance;
because 1. many are dead before they be sick, dying suddenly, 2. many when
they are sick unto death, are either so oppressed with bodily pain and
anguish, that they have no spare time seriously to call their sins to
account; or if they do, it is extorted from them through the pain of the
body, not the compunction of the soul. 3. Because wicked men grow worse and
worse; and the more they are in years the more they are settled upon their
lees. Wherefore these things considered, Christ exhorts us, if we love our
selves, and souls, to agree with our adversary quickly.

Secondly, our Savior hereby would teach us that reconciliation is not to be
deferred or delay. Agree with thine adversary quickly, that is procraed:
stinate it not, but be made friends out of hand; and seek to be reconciled
maturely and betime: remembering I. if thou defer it, then thou may seek it
too late. Yea, II. the more quickly thou seek reconciliation at thy brothers
hands, the more pleasing and acceptable thou art unto God: for it argues that
we do it willingly and readily without compulsion, which the Lord loves.





totum vitae spatium, the whole time of thy life to be reconciled in; for datur
vita sola, non tota; thy life only is given thee to be reconciled in, but not
thy whole life: that is, there is no reconciliation after this life, and
therefore either whilst thou live or never thou must be atoned unto thy
brother: but thou can not be reconciled unto him at any time, when thou
please; Wherefore our Savior commands thee to agree quickly.









agree with thine adversary quickly.



he hears not sinners. And therefore these things considered, what hurt or
danger can it be unto me, though he die before our jarres be composed?

First, what will it avail thee, that the wrong

Secondly, if thy brother were a member of

Thirdly, if thy neighbor against whom thou

For That were contrary to Gods justice not to hear the cry of him that is
wronged. This is according to Gods justice to hear the complaints of the
oppressed, and to revenge them.


. 2. While thou art in the way.] What is meant

Some understand them Allegorically; Dum in via, whilst thou art in the way,
that is, in hac vita, whilst thou live: Thus Chrysostom oper. imperf. And
all the Fathers.

What does our Savior imply in these words,

First, Christ hereby would teach us, that this

Secondly, our Savior would teach us, that It is appointed unto all men once
to die, and after death comes judgment Hebr. 9.27.
, where we see life brings us to death, and death unto Judgment.

Thirdly, Christ would hereby teach us, that

The remembrance of the Reward, will persuade us unto patience in wrongs.
Punishment, will terrify us from seeking revenge.


What will it help a man to revenge himself upon his brother, and himself
therefore to be judged and condemned by God? and therefore we must so meditate
of the severitie and terror of the last day, that we may avoid dissensions,
and embrace Christian charity.



Lazarus as soon as he dies, is carried into Paradise, but rich Dives into
the painful prison of eternal destruction Luke 16.22.23.
.

Secondly, this life is the very last period of

Justice and mercy has kissed each other, but not crossed, thwarted, or
contradicted each other; And therefore mercy at death gives way unto judgment.
For the understanding hereof observe.

That there are 2 parts of Gods mercy, viz. First, to pardon the penitent, and
those who are reconciled. And here the suffering of Christ does satisfy the
mercy of God. Secondly, to expect those who are obstinate, rebellious, and
disobedient, that they laying hold upon mercy, and turning unto God, might be
saved 1 Timothy 2.9. and Pet. 3.9.
. And this part of Gods mercy shall be satisfied at the last dreadful day.
Romans 2.4. and 2 These. 1.8.




he stands before the door Iam. 5.9.
.

Secondly, remember our life is lent us, not to sin, or to corrupt our ways;
but that we might be converted Romans 24.
, because our good and gracious God desires not the death of a sinner, but
rather that he would repent and live Ezech. ^3.1^.
. Thirdly remember that after death there is no mercy to be expected, by those
who have not laid hold upon mercy while they were in the way: as the tree falls
so it must lie: wherefore let us spend our lives. I. in striving, wrestling,
and fighting against sin, and out own innate corruptions, Heb. 12.4. II. In
watchfulness and circumspection against evil and the occasions thereof,
Ephesians. 5.15. III. In growing and increasing in the ways of grace, 1 Pet. 2.2.
IV. In redeeming the time bypast of our lives, by being zealous of good
works, devoting our selves wholly and sincerely unto the service of the Lord.

. 3. He shall not come out, until he have paid the

The Doway men undertake to prove Purgatory from hence, by the justice of God:
the last farthing, and says here it must be paid; and therefore there is a
purgatory, wherein this satisfactorie punishment must be inflicted Doway
Bible. page 33.
.

First if a man die truly penitent, all his sins are forgiven him in Christ,
and none of his

Secondly, the satisfaction to Gods justice is Willet. Synops. fol. 410. initio.
.

Thirdly, this verse will not serve them to build Purgatory upon, as follows
in the next section.

. 4. Agree with thine adversary quickly,

Bellarmine strongly urges this verse for the proof of Purgatory, ex inferno
nulla redemptio, from hell there is no redemption. Bellarmine more plainly
argues thus, By the way is meant this life present; by the adversary is meant
the law of God himself: by the Judge is meant Christ: by the Officers the good
Angels, or the devils: by the Prison hell: by the last farthing, our lesser
sins, for which we are to satisfy either in hell or in Purgatory. Bellarm.
Tom. 1. fol. 1804 de Purgat. li. 1. Cap. 4.

First, if we should grant the Cardinal all he Amesius. T^m. 2. page 200.

Secondly, this saying of our Savior may safely be expounded according to the
letter of, the affairs of this life, as Saint Chrysostom does expound it,
that men to prevent their further danger should be ready to compound their
controversies betimes. And such counsel also the Wiseman gives, That if a man
have given his word, and is become a surety for another, he should not sleep
before he had delivered himself Pro. 6.3.
. And this exposition is most agreeable to the Text; for the word is (...) an
adversary at the Law. And Luke 12.58. where the same sentence of our Savior is
repeated, there is mention made of the Magistrate, and of the Jailer, which are
terms and Offices properly fitting the business of this life, Willet Synops.
fol. 407.

Figura dictionis; for Bellarmine faines unto himself here an allegory (where
as Christ uses plain, proper, and perspicuous words) especially in Saint
Luke, where the Magistrate and Jailer are named) and then from this unnecessary
allegorical sense, he frames an argument for the confirmation of an article of
his faith, which is 1. against his own rule delivered, lib. 3. cap. 3. De
verbo Dei. 2. Against the rule delivered both by the ancient and modern
Divines. Diligenter cavendum esse, ne quae dicta sunt allegorice, tanquam
proprie dicta intelligamus Aug. doct. Chri. lib. 3. Cap. 10.
. We must take special heed, that we expound not those things literally which
are only allegorically, meant. Yea III. this practice of the Cardinal is
contrary to that Axiom of the Schoolmen which Thomas so often repeates, viz.
Symbolicam Theologiam non esse argumentativam: that is, certain and necessary
arguments cannot be drawn from Allegories.

Bellarmines be true, and that men ought to satisfy for their sins event
unto the last farthing; then it will follow that Christ has in no sort
satisfied for our transgressions: for it is well enough known, what is meant
by this phrase of speech, I will keep him in prison, until he have paid the
last farthing: But this consequence is (...), false and impious: and therefore
so also is the Antecedent. Sadeel fol. 250. advers. human. satisfac.



First, because the word (...), a prison is taken 1 Pet. 3.19. for the place of
the disobedient, which is Hell: for they do not use to send obstinate sinners
to purgatory.

Secondly, he shall not come out till he have paid the uttermost farthing: or
as Saint Luke says, the utmost mite; that is never: unless he dare say that a
sinner is able by his punishment to satisfy the utmost mite of his debt, that
is, his sin unto God, which is great blasphemy to affirm, and contrary to
the Scriptures: we not being able to answer God one thing of a thousand Job 9.3
.

Sixthly, this place may be expounded by that Mat. 18. where the unkind servant
is cast into prison, till he should pay all that was due, verse 34. that is,
he should lie there for ever; for the debt was ten thousand talents, too much
for a Prince, much less for a servant to pay: and verse 25. he had nothing to
pay: and therefore his Master forgave him the debt, verse 32. Wherefore we see
our debt is not paid unto God by us, but forgiven; and where it is not
pardoned, it can never be paid. Again, it follows, verse 35. So shall my
heavenly father do unto you, if you forgive not from your hearts one another
your trespasses: What is this, So shall my father do unto you? sent them to
Purgatory? No, but unto hell: for uncharitable and malicious men which will
not forgive others, I hope they will not ordain unto a place of temporal
punishment: for as Saint John says, he that hates his brother, and so is a
manslayer cannot have eternal life 1 John 3.15.
. Chemnit. de Conc. trid. part. 3. fol. 135.

Seventhly, although Bellarmine brag much of Chem. council. trid. part 3. page
135. a.

Eighthly, by the word Prison Bellarmine understands Donec until, must signify
both nunquam, and aliquando, never, and sometimes, which is grossly absurd.

Lastly, although this place be objected by Bellarm. and others; yet it is
sufficiently confuted by their own Iansenius, (in hanc locum.) from Bishop
Mortons appeal. fol. 15. fine.

VERSE. 27.
. 1. Audivistis, ye have heard.]

From whom did they hear this?

Not from the Vulgar sort, (Thou shall not commit adultery) but only the
actual sin: Teaching us, that errors in religion often proceed from the
Priests and Pastors of the Church. the prophets Prophecy lies, and the Priests
take bribes. Ierim. 5.31. yea both Priest and Prophet have erred through wine.
Isay 28.7. and by coveteousnesse, Ier. 6.13. and 8.10.

Why are the shepherds so often the causes

First, because they are enemies often unto reformation, Sysiphus stone always
relapsing and falling back either unto the former errors, or unto worse. And
therefore every particular national Church ever and anon stands in need of
Reformation. Secondly, the leaders and Rectors of the Church, are often the
greatest enemies unto this reformation: he that desires to see a true and
clear illustration of this, let him read the History of the Council of
Trent, where he shall see amply proved, that the reformation which was so
carefully, instantly, and necessarily desired by many, and for a long time, was
still opposed and withstood by the Court of Rome and the Clergy. Thus the
Pharisees were enemies unto Justification by faith in Christ, because it was
contrary to their estimation and credit.

Eli troubled, vexed and disquieted the Church 1 Samuel 2.12.
. II. How the Priests in Ieremias time seduced the people and opposed the
Prophets Ierem. 1.^8. and 20.1. and 28.1. and 26.11.
. III. How the Pharisees opposed Christ, John 7.47, etc. and withstood his
Apostles, Acts 4.1. and 5.17. and 7.51. IV. How great a combustion did Arrius
kindle in the Church because he obtained not a Bishopric? such a fire as made
the whole world weep, before it could be quenched. V. What shall we say of the
ringleaders of the Brownists and Separatists, who have withdrawn many subjects
from their true Christian obedience, not suffering them to pray, hear, or
communicate with us. VI. God no sooner sowes Wheat, but the devil sowes
tares: The Lord had no sooner raised up Luther and Zwinglius, but the devil
conjured up Zwenkfeldu^, Servetus, Osiander, David-Georgius, and diverse others.
VII. If we look upon the Papists, we shall behold a Map of misery in this
kind: For first, their Priests seduce the people unto Idolatry, making them
say to a stock, thou art my father, and to a stone, thou have brought me forth
Ier. 2.27
. Secondly, they will not be reformed in what is amiss, holding this opinion,
that nothing must be changed or altered in their Church or Religion, lest they
should seem formerly to have erred; grounding this their infallibility upon
that of the Prophet: The law shall not depart from the Priest, Ier. 18.18. and
that speech of our Savior unto Peter; The gates of hell shall never prevail
against my Church; but how falsely they ground this opinion upon these places,
we shall see God willing in their proper places. Thirdly, such enemies are the
Papists unto Reformation, that they persecute those who are reformed: In
Jerusalem the blood of the just was shed by the Priests and Prophets Lament.
4.13.
, and so also in the Popes jurisdiction; how great was their rage, against
Luther, Zwinglius, and all those who were by their Ministry reformed both in
opinion and practice. Fourthly, their principal care is to seduce people, and
to lead them into errors: As Christ said of the Pharisees, so we may say
justly of the Popish Clergy, They compass heaven and earth to pervert and
divert a soul from the ways of truth, such zealots, and zealous factors are
they for the devil: what nation is there where true religion is professed; but
some of their Jesuits, and S^minaries, or Secular Priests, are sent thither
privately, to seduce and corrupt simple souls, bringing them from light unto
darkness: How our land has long groaned under these soule-devouring locusts
is well known, who creep into men's houses, polluting and defiling both the
bodies and souls of poor credulous, and ignorant women. The Prophet Hosea
threatnes the Priests, that God will power vengeance upon them, Hose. 5.1.
Because they were a snare on Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor: And
therefore let the seducing Priests of the Romish Church consider, how by this
their wickedness they provoke God unto anger, who will require the blood of
all those, whom they have corrupted, at their hands.

If errors and heresies begin so often at the

They must not be tossed to and fro with every Ephesians. 4.14.) like the waves of
the sea ( Iam. 1.6.) but walk wisely and circumspectly, according to these
ensuing rules:

First, labor for a sure foundation; that is, Pet. 2..2) in grace, strength,
and knowledge: that thereby you may be made perfect (2 Timothy 3.16.) that being
the true light by which we must walk, 2 Pet. 1.20. Secondly, add nothing unto
the word of God, neither 1. the chafe of superstition with the Papists Ierem.
23.28.
: for what has the chafe to do with the corn? neither 2. new opinions, as
the Sectaries, who daily beget and breed new Minervaes in their own brain:
but remember, God and Dagon will not dwell together; and therefore add nothing
unto the true and pure word of God.

Secondly take heed of all seducings; that is, Paul exhorts holy Timothy to
be instant in Preaching the pure word of God; for the time will come when men
will not endure sound doctrine, but having itching ears, will turn away their
ears from the truth unto fables 2 Timothy 4.2.3.
. Secondly, never embrace wrested, constrained, and forced interpretations of
the word; which will not agree with the proportion of faith, or good manners,
or the scope of the place.

Thirdly, let us love and labor for the peace true children of God. Children
must be obedient unto Parents, and therefore when the Mother injoynes that
which the Father does not forbid, the child must subscribe to the practice of
it: Here observe that there are three Churches. I. The Primitive Church. II.
The Modern Churches, where our religion is professed; And these two we
reverence and submit unto, where they do not oppose the law of God. III. The
Popish Church; Now this we do not so hate, that we will refuse to embrace
things worthy to be received, because they used them. They have the Word,
Sacraments, Ministers, and a Ministry, yea and use all these; shall we
therefore refuse them?

Secondly, for the peace of the Church, let us be of the same mind with Saint
Paul, to become all things to all men (in lawful and indifferent things) that
thereby we might win some. We should not rend Christ's seamelesse coat in
twain, or break a gap in the hedge of the Church for Adiophorall things, lest
in avoiding the use of them, we fall into a direct breach of the fifth
commandment.

That it has been said.]

The Pharisees here allege and urge the words of the precept, for the
confirming of an error, namely, that no man sins against the seventh
Commandment, but he that actually commits the sin of uncleanness.



Many (says Saint Peter) pervert the Scriptures to their own damnation, 2
Pet. 3.16.



Pighius and Perresius) then say truly, that they are like a nose of wax,
which a man may turn which way he list; or like a shipmans drawers, which
will fit any person; yea the causes of heresies, because they may be expounded
according to every man's judgment, opinion, and affection?

Pighius, for the Scriptures in themselves are not such: but only are
perverted by wicked men unto their destruction.

Perresius, from a true proposition collects a false conclusion: Heresies
(says he) are founded upon the Scriptures: men still alleging Scripture for
the proof of their opinions, whether true or false (this is true). Therefore
(he concludes) the Scripture is not to be read by the laics; this is false;
as was showed before verse 7. Chap. 4. We must not refuse to suck honey out of
the sweet flowers, because the spider from thence extracts poison; we must not
forbear the use of Scriptures, because wicked men abuse them, but read them,
study them, and learn to understand them.

How may we be enabled to understand the

Interpret them according to these few plain rules: to wit,

First, hold fast the Analogy of faith, this is a

Which is the Analogy of faith? are the principles Nicene, and Athanasius, or
any of them?

First, we must wade warily through this

Secondly, the grounds and princip^les of

Thirdly, but yet the grounds and principles Cujus contrarium est verum, that
is, the principles and grounds of Catechism are to be judged by the
Scriptures, not the word by them.

Fourthly, we say therefore, that there is no

Fifthly, two things are here therefore to be observed,

Secondly, we must not so ground any opinion

Secondly, attend diligently to the scope of the Holy Ghost, that thou extend
and stretch the place no further then was meant by him: In this rule many
things are carefully to be attended unto; namely, First whether is the place
Allegorical or literal? For I. to wring Allegories out of plain and clear
truths, is both ridiculous, and impious: and instead of that sincere milk
which is therein truly contained for our nourishment, is presented unto us the
unwholesome blood of man's perverting brain. This is the fault of the
Origenistes and Anabaptists. II. If the place be literal, then let the
exposition thereof accord with the analogy of faith, and seek not for
Allegories. III. To exact a literal exposition or interpretation of every
place, is full of danger, yea more perilous then the former:

For if the place be Literal, then he who expounds it Allegorically does
only loose the true sense, and overthrow the germane and genuine meaning of
the words; but not establish untruthes. As for example, we read in Genesis,
that when Abraham was old, and it ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of
women, that unto them was borne Isaac: Origin expounds this thus; By Abraham is
meant a Wiseman, and by Sarah, Virtue; to whom is borne Isacke, that is
pleasure, when it ceased to be with her after the manner of women, that is,
when all carnal affections and desires, were mortified in her: And hence he
concludes, Vera voluptas ex virtute nascitur. The fruits of true joy spring
from the root of virtue; which conclusion is true, although the true sense of
the place be lost. Allegorical, then he who expounds it literally, does not
only pervert the true sense and meaning of the place, but does also establish
a falsehood and untruth; for thus a man might prove Christ to be bread, yea to
be a stone, which none are so stony or blockish to believe.


Secondly, observe whether is it a rule or an historical narration; we read
of Iephtah who offered his daughter; of the Midwives who lied unto Pharaoh, of
the adultery, and subornation to drunkenness and murder in David; of Noah's
drunkenness, and Lots incest: Now if these historical narrations should be
by some understood to be rules of directions, how diabolical would their
lives and conversations become? And therefore we must not draw a rule A facto
ad jus; from a deed done to the equity thereof, for by that rule all things
were lawful.

Thirdly, observe, if it be a Rule, then whether is it given as a Command and
Precept, or as a counsel and advice? Paul would have all to live unmarried, 1
Cor. 7.7.8.
but this he speaks by permission only (that is by way of counsel and
advice) not by a positive command from God. Verse 6. For concerning Virginity,
he had no commandment from the Lord; but only supposed it to be good for the
present distress to remain unmarried. Verse 25 26.

Fourthly, consider, if it be a precept and a command, then whether is it
general or particular? That is, I. Whether was it given to one man only, or
to all? Thus God commands Abraham to slay Isaac, and this precept is not to be
extended further then to him. II. Whether does the precept respect some one
particular action, which is only once to be performed; or a work which is
frequently to be practiced? Thus the Israelites were commanded to spoil the
Egyptians; which precept was neither to be stretched unto any other, nor unto
them at another time: that is, by this command, no other persons were allowed
to rob the Egyptians, neither were the Israelits warranted to do it at any
other time. III. Whether were the Precepts given only unto some one particular
people, or unto all nations? Thus the judicial Law was given unto the Jews
only, and not unto the Gentiles. IV. Whether did the Command concern some
certain time only, or was it to be extended also unto all times? Thus
Circumcision, Sacrifices, and the Ceremonial law are not now to be urged,
because they were to continue but unto the death of Christ. Thus we must
carefully observe the scope of the Holy Spirit, and urge nothing beyond that.

Thirdly in the reading and expounding of the positiva, privative, positive
things privatively. Thou may hate thy enemy because thou must love thy
brother. Mat. 5.43.

Secondly, some expound Confutativa, confirmative, those things which are
spoken by way of Confutation, as though they were spoken by way of
confirmation; as for example, Saint Paul says, The doers of the Law shall be
justified Romans 2.13.
.

From whence The Apostle concludes, that none shall be justified The Papists
conclude that we may be justified
by the works of the law.

Thirdly, some expound Scriptures so, as that there is no consequence at all;
but a palpable non sequitur: Thus Hooker observes the Separatists and Brownists
to do daily: And thus the Papists do hourly, I have prayed for thee Peter
(says Christ) therefore the Pope cannot err. Master (says Peter) here are
two swords: therefore the Pope has both Ecclesiastical and Civil
jurisdiction; both over King and People, and many the like. But we must take
heed of these sophismes, and of this begging the question.

Fourthly, be never obstinate in thy own opinion: the spirits of the Prophets
be subject to the Prophets 1 Cor. 14.32.
. Great is the error here of the Papists, who will change nothing, retract
nothing, lest they should seem formerly to have erred. Great are the blemishes
hereof of the Lutherans with the Zwinglians, concerning the corporeal
Concomitancie; who rather then they will ^^cant or confess their error, will
(which is too gross) confess the Ubiquitie of Christ^ humanity.

Certainly, this obstinacy in opinion in general does hinder the progress
of faith, and of religion: and therefore all Christians should be careful to
observe this rule, not to be too stiff in their own tenets, or obstinate in
their own opinions.

David became wiser then his teachers, because he had respect unto the
Testimonies of the Lord Psalm 119.99.
. And therefore if any thing be difficult suspend thy judgment, read it over
again, turn unto other places like unto it, and compare them together, and
happily God will reveal it unto thee at the last Phil. 3.15.
.

David's frequent practice: Show me thy ways, oh Lord: teach me thy paths:
lead me in thy truth, and tea^h me; Psalm. 25.4 5. Again, Teach me O Lord the
way of thy statutes, yea give thou me understanding, and I shall keep thy law,
Psalm. 119.33.34. And again, Make thou me to understand the way of thy precepts
verse 27. yea Make thy face to shine upon thy servant, and teach me thy
statutes, verse 135. for my lips shall utter praise, when thou have taught me
thy precepts, verse 171. Thus pray fervently unto the Lord, to enlighten thy
understanding, to anoint thy blind eyes with the true eye salve of the blessed
Spirit; and to lead thee in his truth: and then rest certainly assured, that
faithful is he who has promised, who will at length reveal himself and his
truth, to him who does his endeavor, to know the Lord, and the way, and truth
whereby he may be brought unto him, by reading, hearing, meditating, and a
willing subjecting of his opinion and judgment to the word of God.

Of old time]

The Papists say the consent of the Fathers is the true rule of interpreting
the Scriptures; Chamierus Tom. 1. de interp script lib. 16 Cap. 11 Sect 1. f.
601.
urges this place thus: If the consent of the Fathers were a certain rule of
interpreting the Scriptures, then it should never be reprooved and blamed (this
is manifest by it self) But the consent of the Ancients in the expounding and
opening of Scripture, has been reprehended and refused. Therefore their
consent and agreement is not the true rule of interpretation. The Minor
proposition is proved from this verse 21 31.33.38.43. where our Savior does
plainly and directly oppose himself against the expositions of the Ancients.
It has been said of old thus, but I say thus unto you.

Thou shall not commit adultery.]

Moses only restrain and forbid the outward act of sin?

A sw.
The law did not only restrain the body but the mind also; not only the
outward action, but also the inward affection.

Against this, it is ob ected, it was said unto you of old, Thou shall not
commit adultery; But I say, etc so that it appears the law only restrained
the outward act, but Christ does forbid more, even the inward affection and
desire.

First, our blessed Savior speaks according ye have heard that it has been
said, thou shall love thy neighbor and hate thy enemy: but in all the old
Testament there is no such precept given by God, or liberty for any to hate
their enemy: our Savior then means not such sayings as were found in the
law, but such expositions as they made among themselves.

Secondly, the law of Moses did bind not only

First, none are said to repent but of that which is evil: but they under the
law were to repent, and to show themselves contrite, even for the internal
acts of their mind: as appears, Psalm 4.4. Tremble and sin not, examine
your hearts upon your bed, etc. Therefore the law did restrain the inward will
and desire.

Secondly, it is directly forbidden. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy
heart Levit. 19.17.
: which was an internal act; and many other such like sins of the heart are
reprooved by the Prophets, Ierem. 14 4.

Thirdly the Law does not just^fie that which is naturally unjust but
forbids it. Therefore the extends law it self to the hidden man of the
heart, not only tying men's hands. The assumptio^ is proved thus; First, he that
coveteth his Neighbors wife, fails in the end, coveting her only out of
lust, not for procreation, which was the principal end of the institution and
ordination of marriage. Secondly, Matrimony is grounded even upon the law of
nature: if then to break and violate matrimony be against the law of nature;
then to will, and purpose so to do, is against nature also: yea the will and
purpose is rather sin then the act it self; for it may fall out that the
external act is sometime without sin as when a man ignorantly lies with
another woman, taking her to be his wife, as Jacob took Leah for Rachel: but
the will and desire is never without sin, as says Tostatus himself. s.
exodus 20. praec. 7.

Fourthly, our Savior says that this precept, Thou shall not kill, is
transgressed by the anger and hatred of the heart, verse 22. Therefore the law
intends even by the external act to forbid the internal also.

How does Christ oppose himself to this precept, Thou shall not commit
adultery?

Not by denying it, them forward to a spiritual sense, which is to be extended
beyond the literal: as if our Savior would say; It was said of old. Thou
shall not commit adultery; and this is true, but this is not the whole truth,
for there is mo^e then this here meant.

What uncleanenesse is here meant?

Uncleanness is twofold, either Internal in the heart, External, which is
either Circumstantiall, in gesture, and voice. Substantial, which is Indirect.
Direct, viz. Against, or contrary to nature, namely Sodomy, either with Brute
beasts, called (...). Men, that is Males, called (...). (...).

According to nature and is committed either Uiolently, and is called a Rape.
Uoluntarily and is either Co^plicata, because it is With a kinsewoman and is
called Incest, With a married woman and is called Adultery.
Simple and that either With a strumpet, called (...). With a Uirgin, called
Stuprum.








I will not here speak at all, either I of the Internal uncleanness; or II
of the Circumstantiall; or III. of the Indirect, because I will understand the
place as the Pharisees understood it, namely only of actual uncleanness: and
for the horror and odiousness of the name, I will omit Sodomy.

Thou shall not commit adultery.]



Exodus 20.14. Deuteronomy. 23.17. Prove. 5.8. Heb. 13.4.

Be not deceived (says the Apostle) for neither fornicators nor adulterers
shall ever enter into the kingdom of heaven.

If a damsel play the whore in her Fathers house; they shall bring her out to
the door of her fathers dwelling, and the men of her city shall stone her
with stones that she die, because she has wrought folly in Israel Deuteronomy.
22.21.
.

Moses to punish (...), fornication with a strumpet with death; yet the Lord
himself does; cutting off four and twenty thousand in one plague for this
simple fornication. Numb. 25.1. and 1 Cor. 10.8. And therefore we should not
think that a light thing, which the Lord (who is just in all his judgments)
punishes so severely.



First, certainly it is most false that the permitting

Secondly, if Hardings argument were true, For we must not do evil, that
good may come of it Romans 3 8.
. No necessity of health or life can or ought persuade hereunto: Ludovicus the
King of France undertaking a long pilgrimage, and his Queen not being with
him, his health begun to impair; which his Physicians observing, and knowing
the reason of it, persuaded him in the absence of the Queen, to take unto him
another woman, because his health and safety required it* which he did utterly
refuse, protesting he had rather die, then have his life preserved by such an
ungodly means: But we see our Harding would never have stuck at this. I will
relate here one remarkable example. The inhabitants of the city Basil in
Germany, embracing the Gospel of Christ, for the space of four years
expelled the harlots out of the city, and pulled down all their Stews:
afterward some persuade to erect and new build them up again, for the
redressing and allaying of those private adulteries, fornications, and
uncleanness which were observed to abound more then formerly: Oecolam padius
resists a longtime, but in vain; for they build and reedifie one fair public
house for that lewd and wicked purpose: The house being finished, and the air
very clear, a cloud not to be seen, thunder from heaven falls upon a tower
adjoining to the new brothell house, fires certain barrels of Gunpowder, which
were kept therein, ruins and razeth the Castle from the very foundation, and
lays flat with the ground also the new stews: which strange and remarkable
accident the Magistrates observing, and being struck with a great fear and
amazement, embraced the Apostles counsel: That it was not good to do evil,
that good might come of it. Theatr. hum. vitae. vol 7. lib. 3. fol. 1270.






First, he sins against and offends his own wife, he not having power over
his own body, but his wife, 1 Cor, 7.4.
yea if a man may not abstain from the natural use of the wife, except it be
I. for a time only. And II. with a mutual consent of both parties: And III.
for fasting and prayer, that they might give themselves thereunto: Verse. 5.
Then much less has a man power over himself to use his body unto adultery.
And therefore the adulterer is a thief unto his wife; and the adulteress a
thief unto her husband; giving that unto another, which is not theirs to give.

Secondly, the adulterer sins against his neighbor, whose wife he defiles:
and that three manner of ways. First, he injures him in the highest degree,
this being a wrong which cannot be borne: Jealousy is the rage of a man;
therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance Pro. 6.34.
. Secondly, he wrongs him in his fame, reputation and credit. Thirdly, he does
injure him in his children, making them to be supposed by others to be
bastards: It is observed, that the cuckoo never sits upon her own eggs, but
destroys the eggs of another bird, and then lays eggs of her own in the
neast, which the other supposing to be her own, sits upon them, hatcheth them,
and seeds them as her own: And hence it is that men whose wives violate their
conjugall love, oath, and bond; carry that reproachful name, because they
educate, nourish, feed, give portions, yea, leave their inheritances often to
other men's children, supposing them to be their own. And thus as the
adulterer is a thief to his wife, so he is also to his neighbor, robbing him
of his inheritance.

Thirdly, the adulterer sins against his neighbors wife whom he allures;
thus tempting her unto condemnation; and hereby proving himself to be the
worst enemy she has: unto his brother and his children he is a thief, but
unto his brothers wife he is a plain devil, a direct Tempter: the great
Dragon draws stars from Heaven; and the adulterer draws souls to Hell.
This is worse then Rape, Homicide, Theft, to steal and murder a poor soul;
they do rejoice and have cause to be glad, who gain souls, H^b. 13.17.
but they that destroy them have cause to mourn, because they will b^ required
at their hands. Yea, in other sins true and unfaigned repentance does cure
the whole sin, Iam. 5.20.
and heales the whole wound; but not in this: For the woman being partaker of
the sin, it is not wholly healed or salvede, xcept both the parties repent.

Fourthly, the unclean person sins against the children he begets, making
them bastards; from whence, First follows infamy, ignominy, and reproach,
yea such a disgrace, that the name of Bastard will bear an action in our law,
where many other opprobrious names will not. Secondly, from hence follows a
cutse upon the children unlawfully begotten: Bastard slips shall take no deep
root Wisd. 4.3.
but shall quickly be rooted out. (Wisdom. 3.16) Hence the seed of the
unclean bed were to be rejected and cast out (Ezra. 10.44. compared with 1.
Esdras. 9.36.) And the children of Jsrael (that is, which were lawfully
begotten) must be separated from strange children, that is, the fruit of
fornication: Nehem. 9.2.
yea this is founded upon the direct law of God; who has said: A Bastard shall
not enter into the congregation of the Lord, even to his tenth generation.
Deuteronomy. 23 2.
And therefore, I. We may hence see the greatness of the sin, that brings a
punishment upon the innocent party; as we see in David's child. 2 Samuel 12.14.
II. We may see the cruelty of adulterers and fornicators, who sow their
seed, that they may bring up fruit, and set plants, for the devil; who
labor that their issue may be briars and thorns, and so fit fuel for the
fire of Gods wrath. And therefore all lustful and lascivious persons should
here remember, how many ill sounding, and unpleasing peales, will daily be rung
in their ears in Hell, by the devil, by their own consciences, by the souls
of the parties whom they have defiled, by the children which unlawfully they
have begotten, and whom they have addicted unto death and destruction, as much
as in them lies.

Fifthly, the unclean person sins against the Church and Commonwealth
wherein he lives; because he corrupts it by his example: as did Zimri, Numb.
25.6. And thus we see, how woeful the effects of adultery and fornication are,
both in regard of God, the wife of the party offending, the neighbor, whose
wife is abused, the neighbors wife who is defiled, the children that are
begotten in a polluted bed, and the Church and Commonwealth, wherein the
offender lives.

What punishments are due unto the violaters

The punishments are either Humane. Divine. which are either Corporal. which
are either Ordinary. Extraordinary.
Spiritual.



First, there are Humane punishments, which are inflicted by the laws of the
Gentiles, or by the Civil law, or by the Canon law. First by the laws of the
Gentiles a threefold punishment was inflicted upon such offenders. I. Some of
them punished it with death: thus did the Arabians, (Eusebius) and the
Parthians Alex. ab. Alex. 4.1.
, and the ancient Saxons, who hanged both parties Carrion. and Nau. clerus.
. Plato, leg. 3. ordained also death for such transgressors: Charles of
Burgundy caused an Earl, first to marry a country wench whom he had forced,
and then made him to be beheaded Spandenberg.
. Sesostres, King of the Egyptians, caused many unclean and adulterous women
to be taken and shut up in a little village, and then burnt the village and
them together p. Diodor. Sic. 1.
II. Some of them inflicted corporal punishment, but not death: Thus Zalenchus
ordained, that he who was taken with a married woman should loose both his
eyes, and after in part inflicted the same law upon his own son taken tardie
in that sin Valor.
. The Egyptians in this case appointed, that the man should have a thousand
stripes, and the woman her nose cut off, that wanting the chief grace and
ornament of her face, she might inflame and allure no more Dioder. Sic. 1.6.
. The Germans were accustomed to shave the man's head, to strip him out of his
garments, and then to scourge him through the streets Alex. ab Al. 4.1.
. Mahomet himself commanded, that an adulterer should receive an hundred
lashes in a great assembly, forbidding any man so much as to pity him. III.
Some of the Gentiles punished this sin with infamy and shame. The Cumani,
set such as were either taken in the act of uncleanness, or were convicted of
it, upon a stone in the marketplace, and after they had sitten there a while
to be a spectacle unto al, they were set upon an Ass, and carried up and down
the market place, and some chief streets that they might be a laughing stock
unto all; and then afterward were set upon the stone again, and held as
infamous varlets all their lives after; whereupon it was called lapis
detestabilis Erasm. chil.
, the abominable stone. The Ostrogothes, caused the man to be drawn about the
market by the privy parts, and then banished him Olatis. Magn. 14.16.
. If any desire to know the customs of diverse other nations in this
particular, let him read Rhodingin. 27.4. and Alexander ab Ales. 4.1. and
St^baus. Thus we see how adultery and fornication was punished by the
Gentiles, either with death, or some other corporal punishment, or disgrace.

Secondly, the Civil law punishes this crime thus. The Julian law punished it
with death. Aurelian hanged those that were herein guilty Rhoding. 10.6.
. P. Attilius slew his own Daughter, because she had suffered her self to be
defiled Valor. max. 6.1.
. Augustus banished for this his daughter Iulia. Tacit. and Dion.

Thirdly Canon Law punished it thus: first with seven years Penance, Council.
Ancyranum. l. Can. 20. and Council. Wormaciense. Can. 9. Secondly, others
Council. Elibertinum. can. 64. and 69. punished it thus, I. if the woman
committed adultery but once, she was to do penance five years. II. If she
continued long in adultery, but left it at length; she was enjoined ten years
penance. III. If she continued in her sin, she was never to be admitted to
the communion, nor enjoined any penance.

Secondly, there are besides these Humane Punishments, others which are called
Divine; and these are either Corporal or Spiritual; and the Corporal are
either Ordinary, or Extraordinary. The Ordinary punishments are those which are
enjoined by the law of God: as for example, I. Adultery was punished by the
death of both parties, Levit. 20.10. II. Uncleanness committed with one that
was espoused or contracted unto a husband, but not as yet known by him, was
punished with the death of both parties also. Deuteronomy. 22.24. III. He that lay
with a woman in her months must die and she also. Levit. 20.18. IV. He that
defiled the daughter of a Priest must die. V. The damsel that works folly in
her fathers house, and is afterward married unto another must die, Deuter.
22.21. Thus we see how the law of God punished this sin with death.

Thirdly, there are Extraordinary punishments, here observe I. God approves
sometimes of severe punishment which is inflicted by others upon this sin:
thus he approues of Phineas Act who slew that couple, Zimry and Cozbi. Numb.
25.10. By which it appears how odious and detestable this sin of
uncleanness is unto God. II. Sometimes God shows and reveals his severe
anger against this sin by inflicting many several punishments upon the
transgressors thereby: and that either in regard of the estate or of the
credit, or of the body.

First, God punishes unclean persons in their estates; for it rooteth out all
the increase of our substance Job 31.12.
, it brings a man to a crust of bread, Prove. 6.26. and 23.27. because he that
keeps company with harlots spends his substance, Pro. 29.3. Strumpets for
the most part are costly, and therefore quickly consume and wast those, who
maintain them: And again God by a just vengance does not bless any thing
that such a person takes in hand: And therefore those who desire to be blessed
in their estates, let them take heed of Adultery and fornication.

Secondly, the Lord punishes such in their good name, credit, and reputation;
whence the Apostle entreats both the Corinthians and the Ephesians, not to be
companions of fornicators 1 Cor. 5.9. and Ephesians. 5.7.
, because that would be a blemish to their reputations: this evidently appears
thus. I. none can endure to be called Adulterers, or Adulteresses, whatsoever
they are; showing thereby that it is a disgrace to be such. II. Whatsoever men
are, yet they would not be known to be such; thus they that are wicked in this
kind, do yet desire that their sin might be concealed from others, because
it were a shame for them to be known to be such. III. Those are chaste will
not associate themselves with such, yea though they be but suspected to be
such. IV. Except it be those who are obdurate in wickedness, all men are ashamed
publicly to frequent the familiarity and society of harlots: all which shows
that it is a blemish and stain to reputation of any to be tainted with
uncleanness: and therefore those who are charie of their credit, and desire
fame amongst men, let them take heed of fornication and adultery.

Thirdly, God punishes the breakers of this seventh Commandment in their
bodies: as for example.

First, Fornication and Adultery spiritually pollutes and defiles the body 1
Cor. 6.16. 1 These. 4.4.
. Secondly, it subjects the body often to many impure and loathsome diseases,
which consume the flesh Prove. 5.11.
.

Thirdly, hence it brings a man more quickly to his end. Wherein we may see
the remarkable Justice of God. I. Those who would have their lives unlawfully
pleasant and sweet, shall be cut off the sooner. II. Those who give themselves
to these secret sins shall be unmasked and disclosed by some loathsome
sickness or disease. III. They who lead lewd and filthy lives, shall be
branded with filthy marks, and the French or Neapolitane disease, which makes
them odious (almost) unto all men: IV. It brings a man often in danger of death
and destruction: He that goes after the strange woman goes as an ox to the
slaughter Prove. 7.22.
, she being as a deep ditch, and a narrow pit Prove 23 27.
. We see how the lust of Hamor brought the city to destruction, Genesis 34. and
the prostituting of the Levites wife cost the Benjamites full dear, Judge. 20.
And therefore if a man neither regard God nor the devil; heaven nor hell, yet
he should regard his own life, calling to mind how many have perished through
Adultery and fornication: sometimes by those whom they have violently abused,
as often in war: sometimes by the parents of those who secretly have been
seduced: sometimes by their corrivals: sometimes by the husband, whose wife
has been defiled: infinite are the examples that might be showed in all
these, but I forbear it. V. God sometimes punishes this sin himself; thus
he plagued the Israelites for their fornication, so that four and twenty
thousand of them perished at once. 1 Cor. 10.8.

Fourthly, God punishes adultery and fornication with spiritual evils: and
that four manner of ways.

First, Permittendo, by not restraining them from evil; but giving them over
to a reprobate sense to work all manner of uncleanness Romans 1.24.26.29.
. This is a grievous punishment, because men being le^t unto themselves, do
run headlong to evil: committing sin even with greediness, yea justifying
their wicked doings, and boasting of their sins.

Secondly, Dementando, by suffering them to be besotted, and bewitched with
their sins: this follows from the former: for whoredom takes away the heart
Ose 4.11.
, and therefore he who goes after the strange woman is called a fool Prove. 7.
and 9.16.
; we say love is blind, because lust puts out the eye of reason. Augustine
propounds this Quere, why in uncleanness men not fearing the punishment
thereof, do yet notwithstanding desire to be more secret in the committing of
that sin, then in others, and are more ashamed to be taken in that sin then
in others? And he answers, Quia appetitus regit, ratio erubescit se captivam
fateri. Because the carnal appetite does rule and bear sway, and reason is
ashamed to confess that she is captivated and overcome by affection.
Experience teaches us, that there are many, who are prudent, wise, and of
understanding enough in other things; and here mere fools and sots; neither
respecting their estates, good name, or lawful issue. This is a greevous
punishment, for a man to be so besotted that although he sees his danger,
yet he cannot avoid it, but runs headlong thereinto.

Thirdly, Captivando, by suffering the lascivious person to be taken captive
of his lust; this follows from the former; for when we are besotted upon
beauty, we willingly yield our selves thereunto, and so come to that height,
that we cannot cease to sin, 2 Pet. 2.14. Custom of evil taking away the
sense thereof. And this evil given way unto does more and more envassai^e us,
getting daily more strength in us, and power over us, while in the mean time
we grow weaker and weaker.

Fourthly, Damnando, by punishing these sins with eternal death and
condemnation. Read 1 Cor. 6.9. Ephesians. 5.5. and Heb. 13.4 and Apoc. 21.8. and
22.15. and Job 31.12. and Prove 6.29. and 7.27. and 5.5. and 9.18. And thus we
see how the Lord punishes th^s sin of uncleanness spiritually. I. He ^eaves
us unto our se^ves. II. We being thus left are presently besotted with the
face of beauty, and pleasures of sin. III. Being thus bewitched with the
love of harlots, we are easily seduced by them, and captivated IV. Being thus
linked, wrapped, and buried in the grave of lust, and chains of uncleanness,
that we will not cease to sin, the justice of God requires that we should be
eternally punished.

What are the remedies against these sins?

The remedies are either (...). Medicative. (...). Preservativa.


First, there are remedia Medicative; Physical, or Medicinable remedies:
namely, to leave and forsake all manner of uncleanness; th^s is the only
healing plaster, and curing potion; this if thou can do, Captivum te
redimis, thou have freed thy self from the fetters of sin, and bondage of
Satan.

How may we be enabled to do this? by

Use carefully, diligently,

First, listen more to reason, less to affection: strengthen and back thy
reason with religion, and the Commandment of the Lord: when thou art tempted
unto lasciviousness, say thus unto thy self, shall I prefer a foolish
desire and corrupt appetite of nature before reason, and religion? If I do
thus, I shall show my self to be but weak, not able to moderate, rule,
govern, and subdue my own affections; yea herein show my self more like a
beast then a man, for they are led only by their sensitive appetites: Thus
consider with thy self, what a shame it will be for thee, to let thy lust
overbeare both religion and reason.

Secondly, learn to hate fornication and Adultery: so long as thou love
them, thou will be ready to turn with the dog to his vomit; and they are
never truly hated so long as they are followed.

Thirdly, do this by and by, while the iron is hot, give no sleep unto thy
eyes, nor slumber unto thy eyelids, until thou have sued a divorce from thy
sins: lust gets strength, the longer it remains, and therefore labor to
subdue it at first.

Fourthly, ordain and appoint unto thy self certain Law days; wherein thou
may examine thy conscience, visit thy self, thy heart, thy body; and see
how they accord with the law of God. For sin cannot take deep root in our
heart, so long as we are thus careful daily to prevent it

Secondly, there are Remedia Praeservativa, means to preserve us from
uncleanness; and these are first in order of nature: that which is usually
distinguished by the Physicians in their Preservatives, need not here be
distinguished by us: they say there is a double preservation, the first is of
those who are sound, strong, and healthy, that they may be preserved in that
healthful and good constitution: the second is of those who are inclining and
dropping into some sickness and malady, if it be not prevented by some
medicinable helps. We (I say) forbear this distinction, because I suppose
that all are in some sort inclining, or inc^inable unto this evil, there
being a concupisc^ble faculty in all. Now concupiscence is a fire, and
therefore the only preservative remedy here will be to quench, stint, and
put out this fire. Here then observe

The fire of Concupiscence is extinguished, three manner of ways, namely
either First, by throwing on water, to wit, either Meditation, namely First of
the brevitie of the pleasure; which is short and momentarie: Secondly, of the
place, where thou commits folly: to wit, in the sight of an infinite pure God;
remember here, an adulterous thought condemn^s, because God sees it; how
dare thou then act uncleanness in Gods presence. Thirdly, of the evils
which proceed from hence, to wit either Of the Effects, both A^ Extra, in
regard of others; remember how thou hurtest. I. The Church of Christ. II. Thy
own wife. III. Thy neighbor. IV. Thy children. V. Thy neighbors wife. Intra:
in regard of thy self; consider how lamentably thou injurest and harm: est,
thy self, both in thy Estate. Credit. Body, and that both Spiritually, by
contamminating it. Temporally, and that either Violently, by exposing thy self
unto some violent death. Naturally causing Either some sickness. Or Some
untimely death. Or Some odious contagion.


Spirit because First, thou do besot thy spirit. Secondly, thou do
captivate, and enthrall thy spirit.


Of the punishments, either Humane; which are inflicted either. I. by the laws
of the Gentiles; or II. by the Civil law: or III. by the Canon law. Divine
which are either Corporal, which are either Ordinary: appointed in the law of
God. Extraordinary which are either Inflicted or Approved
by God.
Spiritual, which either concern The Mind, by leaving and forsaking it. The
Soul, by damning it.




Or Devotion; namely prayers and tears: certainly, this water is very
effectual for the quali^ing or this fire: for the conscience being truly
elevated by prayer unto God, cannot close with such base lusts; Fornication and
Adultery is frequent, because prayers and strong cries are very rare. Or an
holy conversation; to wit 1. the society of those who are good, godly, and
zealous: make choice o^ those for thy companions who are sober, grave, and
auster; not those who are jocund and light. This is a hard saying to flesh and
blood, but unto him whose blood is inflamed through the lusts of the flesh, it
is better to go into the house of mourning then or mirth, Eccles. 5.2.
Confess and make known thy temptations to some pious and faithful friend, or
rather some pious, prudent, and grave Minister; Then this benefit and
commodity would he reaped from it: 1. He would gain holy, wholesome and sound
counsel, for his direction. 2. The participation of the prayers of him to whom
he makes his grief known, for his supportation. Yea 3. this will increase in
him a greater hatred of sin, a greater shame to sin, and a greater desire
to repent of all sins committed.
Secondly by abating the fuel, namely both The nourisher of the flame in the
concupiscence: to wit, idleness, which begets impure cogitations. Otia si
tollas: and therefore we should take in hand some honest calling, and
employment, which might preserve us from all evil occasions, The nourishers of
the heat in the flesh; which are First, Gluttony, which is to be tamed by
frequent fasting, which is an excellent remedy against it. Concupiscence is a
Devil which is not cast out but by fasting and prayer: and therefore it may
justly be suspected, that fornication and adultery is more frequent, because
fasting is so rare: As in the Church of Rome, ever since their fasting from all
meats, was turned into a fasting with junkets, wine, and dainties; the fire of
lust has extremely raged amongst them. Secondly, Drunkenness; wine is the
tinder of lust, which presently enflames and sets it on fire Hose. 4.11.18 and
Esa. 5.11.
, as we see an example in Lot, who being overtaken with wine, was overcome with
incest Genesis 19.33.
. And therefore the wise man gives the intemperate man this counsel, look not
thou upon the wine; for then thine eyes shall behold strange women Pro. 23.33.
.

Thirdly separate thy self from the fire by avoiding carefully, First, the
society of women: whereof there are three sorts, First, Harlots, and suspected
women; from these thou must altogether estrange thy self; for they are crafty
to allure. Secondly, chaste Matrons; these are to be highly esteemed, and
valued; but their companies are to be frequented warily and circumspectly; Non
saepe visitandae (Hier) neither are they too often to be visited. Thirdly,
weak vessels, or young women, whose beauties may inflame thee; The society of
these also thou must eschew.
Secondly, all allurements, of sight, hearing, meditation, and the like; of
which afterward.



Revel. 3.4.) For this white garment is, I. Sometimes a type of Martyrdom. (
Revel. 7.11.13.) And II. Sometimes a type of chastity. ( Revel. 14.4.)
Secondly those who are pure shall be presented unto Christ. 2 Cor. 11.2
Thirdly, they are the members of Christ. 1 Cor. 6.15.
Fourthly, they are the vessels of the Holy Ghost, and the Temple of God. Esa.
52.11. and 1. Corinthians. 6.19. Fifthly, they shall be like unto the Angels in the
kingdom of God. Mat. 22.30.
Sixthly, they shall be like unto God himself, who is purity it self: Thus
happy and blessed is he that is chaste, pure and unspotted; but with the
adulterer and unclean person, it shall not be thus.

VERSE. 28. But I say unto you, that whosoever looks on a woman to lust after
her,
. 1. Whosoever looks on a woman.]

Is it a sin to look upon a woman?

look not at things which are seen, but at things which are not seen. 2 Cor.
4.18.
Where we may observe, that (...), is so to look as the Archer looks to the
mark; he that beholds a woman thus, has an adulterous eye; yea the word
here used (...)) is not only to look with the eye, but with the heart,
signifying more then (...) for this only signifies the beholding of an object
simply, which way a man may behold a woman without sin; but that signifies
the intention of the mind, which goes along with the eye; and thus to behold a
woman, with the sight of the eye, and the lust of the heart, as evil is here
forbidden. If the sight of the eye be thus dangerous, and ready to conveye
lust unto the

First, some of the Heathen knowing how unruly the eye was, have pulled out
their eyes, Seneca when he said, Nonne intelligis partem foelicitatis nostroe
esse coecitatem: It adds no small deal unto our happiness that we are
blind,

Secondly, these were mistaken, for Christ requires not this of us, to pluck
out our bodily sinful eye (in the next verse) that is, to take lust from our
eye, which is a Member of our sinful body, and then the eye of it self is a
good member of the body.

. 2. He that looks upon a woman, to lust after, has committed adultery
with her already

thou shall not commit adultery; or of the last: Thou shall not covet?

Gregor. in Ezech. hom 13. Yea, Augustine also is of this opinion: That in this
seventh Commandment the work of uncleanness only is noted; but in the
tenth, the very concupiscence. Aug. in. qu 71. in Exodus


sanctimonie and purity of the mind is here commanded, and the contrary
forbidden, as appears by these particulars. First, by the definition of
purity and chastity, which is to be holy both in body and spirit; thus Saint
Paul describes a true Virgin. 1 Cor. 7 34.
And thus he exhorts us to be. 1 These. 5.^3.
Secondly, both the souls and bodies of the faithful are the Temples of the
Holy Ghost, and therefore ought to be kept holy. 1 Cor. 3 16.
Thirdly, Chrysostom urges these four reasons; I. From the interpretation of
our blessed Savior, who shows that this Commandment is broken in the very
inward lust and concupiscence, in this verse. II. From the analogy and
correspondencie, which it has with other Commandments: To be angry with our
brother without a cause, is a breach of the precedent Commandment: Thou shall
not kill; So to desire a strange woman, though the act of concupiscence follow
not, is against this Precept. III. In respect of God, who does not so much
look to the work of man as to his heart. IV. Because concupiscence is the
cause of adultery: all adultery proceeding from concupiscence. Mark. 7.21.
Chrysostom. hom. 12. in Mat. And therefore seeing the effect, that is,
adultery, and outward uncleanness is forbidden in this Precept, it follows
also that the very cause thereof, which is concupiscence, should be restrained.

Whosoever shall look upon a woman, etc. has committed adultery with her.]





Secondly, because the eye is the most quick ut vidi ut perij; sometimes a
glade of the eye brings a glance to the heart, which sets on fire the whole
course of nature. Observe here that a man has two eyes, to wit: I. Oculus
informans, the right eye whereby sometimes he casually beholds a woman; this is
not simply condemned, as was showed before.. 1. II. There is Oculus depascens,
the left eye, which delights in the beholding of beauty, and is never glutted
therewith; this is faulty and here forbidden, as was showed before. Indeed
the first sight is sometimes a bait, and proves at last mortal; as we see in
Evah, whose sight of the Apple cost the world dear, Genesis 3.6
afterward the sight of women caused those sins, that at length brought the
Dleuge: Genesis 6.2
The sight of Dina^ cost the Shechemites their lives. Genesis 34.2
And the sight of Joseph unto his Mistress brought her to forget all
woman-hood. Gen 39.7
And David's eye first casually beholding Bathsheba, occasioned adultery,
subornation to drunkenness and murder.

Thirdly, because the beholding of beauty Levit. 20.17.
And therefore with Job we should make a covenant with our eyes, and not give
way to alascivio^s look.

What looks must we principally avoid?

There is a threefold aspect of women, Visus solicitans; a sight which
persuades and counsels unto evil; and this is wicked: Solomon says; He
winketh with his eyes, Pro. 6.13.
that is, he labors by wanton looks, winkes, smiles, and the like to seduce
and allure. These as absolutely wicked, are to be avoided. Secondly, there is
Visus ruminans, a pleasing and delightful look; this Solomon forbids: Let not
thine eyes behold strange women. Pro. 23.33
And his father David tells us, it is a vanity, and therefore we should
turn our face from it. Psalm. 119.37.
This is (...) not (...) the very thing which is here forbidden. Noli aspicere
quod non licet concupiscere: Do not look earnestly upon that which it is not
lawful for thee at all to covet. (Bern.) Oculus impudicus impudici cordis
nuntius (Augustine.) Such looks are often the forerunners of unchaste actions,
and do presage an unchaste heart.

Thirdly, there is Visus casualis, an accidental or casual aspect; this is
not evil in it self, yet even in this we must be wary, and watchful, and
not let our heart go along with our eye.

. 4. To lust after her in his heart, has committed

Is the concupiscence of the heart sin?

First, the Papists say the second Concupiscence Math. 4.1.. 3. Object. 1.2.

Secondly, the Father says; Non quicunque It is not every one who lusts or
desires his neighbors wife, that commits adultery, but he that therefore
looks upon her, that he may lust after her: And here Augustine makes three
degrees, namely, I. Suggestion. II. Delectation. III. Consent: resembling these
three to the Serpent, Evah and Adam; or 1. to the motion of the flesh; 2. to
the delight of the mind; 3. to the consent of reason, and here it is perfect;
as Saint James says: Concupiscence brings forth sin. Iam. 1.15.
Suggestion is the temptation of the Serpent, ye shall not die, but be like
God. Genesis 3.45.
This was not sin unto Eve. Delectation resembles Evahs listening unto the
Serpent, and believing him, she saw that the tree was good for food, and that
it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise: Genesis
3.6.
neither was this sin unto her. Consent resembles Adam and Eves eating of the
Apple, which was a sin unto them: And thus the Father seems to mean. That,
I. the motion of the flesh unto sin, is not sin. II. That the delight of
the mind, is not sin neither. But only the III. the Consent of reason. And
Saint Hierome differs not much from him (upon this verse) saying, that there is
a difference between (...) and (...), passio and propassio, the first being a
sin, the second not.



First, the Scripture forbids it in the Moral law: Thou shall not covet. Exodus
20.17. which Prohibition makes Paul know that it is a sin, which otherwise he
had not understood. (Romans 7.7.) I had not known lust, (that is, to have been
sin,) except the law had said: Thou shall not covet.

Secondly, Saint James speaks of sin accomplished, that is, of external and
actual sin.

Thirdly, the Fathers above mentioned, imply as much: For (with Hierome) Passio
is a sin, and Propassio has the guilt and stain of sin in it, although it be
not simply esteemed a sin in it self: Now this Propassio he calls
Titillationem carnis, cum delectatione mentis; The motion of the flesh
accompanied with the delight of the mind: Now is not this sin? Again, Saint
Augustine has three degrees of sin; but we must here observe as he
himself does there: de sermon. Dom. s.
That every suggestion does not arise from Satan, but sometimes from the
memory, sometimes from the senses: Now, as it comes from Satan it is not
ours, and so is not sin; but as it springs either from our memory, or
senses, so it is ours, and proceeds from the Original corruption of our
nature, and is sin unto us. Yea, Augustine himself condemns all
Concupiscence, Quis dubitat omnem malam concupiscentiam recte, vocari
fornicationem? Who makes question but all evil Concupiscence may justly be
called Fornication? And another Hylar. s.
most plainly, In evangelicis motus oculi adaequatur adulterio, and illecebrosa
affectio visus transcurrentis cum opere fornicationis punitur. In the Gospel
the lascivious motion of the eye is resembled and equalled with adultery: And
the enticing affection of a glancing look equally punished with actual
fornication.

Fourthly, it appears that Concupiscence is sin by this reason, because
sin is not in the eye, but in the heart, or the motion, or mover unto sin:
Yea more plainly; because our Savior does not here say, he has committed
adultery with a woman in his heart, who looks upon a woman, that he may commit
adultery, but that looks and lusts after her: Teaching this unto us,

Why is the lust of the heart sin before God? and how does it more evidently
appear to be such?

First, because God requires the heart ( Prove. Deuteronomy. 10.16. and 30.6.) yea he
requires the heart as his own right, because he has bought it, 1 Cor. 6.20.
and therefore he will be glorified therewith, 1 Cor. 7.34.

Secondly, the lust of the heart is sin, although Gal. 5.16.
; yea we hence argue against the Papists: It is praiseworthy strongly to
resist concupiscence and the first motions unto sin; therefore that is evil
which thus we resist.

Thirdly, original concupiscence is sin in

Fourthly, this appears by the example of Paul, who cries out, Oh wretched
man, who shall deliver me from this body of death, and this law of my members,
Romans 7.24. and yet he solemnly protests, that he would not sin, nor give way
unto these corruptions, verse. 16.19. yea it appears he would not, because when
he is assaulted he prays many times against it, 2 Cor. 12.7. And therefore
give no place unto lust at all, but remember that not only they who consent
unto sin, and commit it actually, are guilty before God, but also those who
ruminate, meditate, and delight in the thoughts thereof.

How must we resist this internal lust? or by

First, remember, that it is the root of all sin: Mat. 15.19. These thoughts
and suggestions are the seeds of all manner of evil, and therefore if thou
would not have thy life overspread with the weeds of wickedness, root out
and destroy this seed.

Secondly, remember all is nothing thou do, Sodomes fruit, although they be
fair and pleasant to the eye, because they are but ashes within: And therefore
if we desire that any thing we do may be acceptable unto God, we must be
careful to purge and purify our hearts.

Thirdly, remember that all thy thoughts are fearelesse of these thoughts; for
it argues that thou fear the Devil more than God, and man more than both:
thou dare not commit the act of uncleanness before men, but thou dare
ruminate and delight in unclean thoughts before the presence of God. Read 1 Chronicles. 28.9. and Apoc. 2.23.



Our concupiscence, a certain sweetness and delight. Our mind, a certain
pronnesse to give way thereunto, Non possum adversari meis. And therefore
withstand it betime.


Sixthly, accustom thy self to contrary meditations

We should meditate of some things in General, where we must remember both
our Natural estate and condition wherein we are: namely, first we are now
sold under sin, and the captives of Satan. Secondly, we are altogether by
nature barren of grace, and destitute of every good thing; we are like
fruitful fields unto evil, abounding with weeds, and therefore we are near
unto a curse Heb. 6 8
. Thirdly, our understanding is prone to be seduced: That we may be thoroughly
convinced of this truth, let us observe how many there are every where who err
and go astray: either 1. through curiosity, as many do. Or 2. through
superstition, as more do. Or 3. through profaneness, as the most do: And
therefore we had need be sober and watchful. Fourthly, remember, how naturally
our desire and will are averse from every thing that is good, and violently
carried after every thing which is evil. Fifthly, consider, although our
present estate and condition be so miserable, that we cannot but see it and
know it, yet we are not able to redress it. Danger, and that both in Life,
wherein all things are snares to entrap us, and stumbling stones to cause us to
fall: our actions, words, society, friends, and the evil examples of others,
are all of them as so many baits of sin, and allurements unto iniquity, yea
impediments from good. The world gives and affords temptations, Satan urges and
persuades us to bite at those sugared baits, and our own corrupt nature does
long after them, and lust for them: Thus we have enemies within us and without
us, never being safe: and therefore we had not need be secure, but watchful
and sober. Death, the time thereof being altogether unknown unto us: we know
not how suddenly we may be arrested, and cast into the prison of the grave, and
the dungeon of death: we know not how short the time is which we have to live
unto the Lord; and therefore we must be careful to redeem the time. After
death, here remember, 1. How suddenly we may be plunged into perpetual pain,
as Job says the wicked do, who spend their days in good things, and in a
moment go down into the pit Job. 21.13.
. 2. How impossible it is for us there to repent or find mercy; yea though
with Esau we seek it with sighs and tears.
The mercy of God, who has First, created us after his own image, making us
(next unto the Angels) the best of his creatures: And why? That we might
glorify him. And therefore frustrate him not of his aim, defraud him not of
his right. Secondly, redeemed us, and that with a wonderful price: to wit, by
the precious Blood of his most dear Son John 3.16. and 1 Pet. 1.21.
. And why? that we might show our selves to be the sons of God; that we might
join our selves unto the Society of the Saints; that we might learn to live
on earth as though we were in Heaven: And therefore we had need be
extraordinarily careful over our ways. Thirdly, prepared a Kingdom for thee
Luke 12.32.
, which is incorruptible, immortal, and eternal 1 Pet. 1.4.
; and for which we should neglect all other things: And therefore let us not
prefer base lusts, and worldly delights, and the momentary pleasures of
sin, before this Crown and weight of glory.

In particular, to wit, First, meditate upon thy present estate and condition;
examining carefully these three things, namely, First, whether art thou in the
state of nature or of grace; whether art thou rooted in faith, and built upon
the true Rock Christ Jesus, or as yet a member of old Adam? Secondly, whether
have thou strictly obliged thy self to the service of God, and a course of
piety, resolving with thy self that henceforth thou will serve sin no more,
because thou were borne, created, redeemed, instructed, and enlightened or the
glory of God? Or whether do thou trifle away thy precious time, in and for
those things which will not benefit thee at all? Thirdly, art thou daily
careful to sow the seeds of piety in thy heart, that the fruits of Religion
may show themselves in thy life and conversation? Or do thou sow wicked
thoughts and impure desires in thy soul, which will bring forth nothing but
briars and thistles the fruits of corruption? Or do thou strive to weed all
wicked, wanton, idle, and carnal desires, lusts, and thoughts out of thy
soul, that so the seed of grace and godliness may thrive the better?
Secondly, examine thy daily life and therein these particulars: First, whether
have thou the Spirit of God or not, to be thy guide and conducter? 1. If thou
have him not, tremble, fear, and labor for him. 2. If thou have him, then
grieve him not, but be willingly obedient unto him. Secondly, whether do thou
daily increase in grace, repentance and faith? Thirdly, which are the
principal errors of thy life, and the chiefest enemies which war within
thee? Fourthly, how are thy corruptions and lusts wont to deceive thee, and
overcome thee? that is, 1. How often do they prevail against thee? 2. By what
ways and means do they overcome thee? Fifthly, how shall thou overcome thy
enemies? whose help, what means stand thou in need of for the conquering
of them? Sixthly, whether have thou been accustomed to examine the errors of
every day, or week, or month? Seventhly, whether do thou daily pray unto God
for strength against sin, and carefully reconcile thy soul unto him for thy
daily offenses?
Thirdly, whatsoever tentation does assault thee, resist it still with the
Sword of the Spirit. 1. Art thou tempted unto wantonness, and fornication?
then say, Oh but fornicatours and unclean persons shall never enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven 1 Cor. 6.9.
. 2. Art thou tempted to contemn and slight the Word of God? then say, Oh but
the fire of the Lords anger shall burn and consume all those who despise the
Law of the Lord, or set at naught the Word of the Holy one of Israel Esa. 5.24.
. 3. Art thou weary with abstaining from sin, or is the perseverance which is
required of thee in the service of the Lord tedious unto thee? resist this, by
remembering how short man's life is, how much of thy time is past how little is
to come, and how great the reward is of those who continue unto the end?



Thus much for the sixth answer, and remedy against the internal lust and
concupiscence of the heart.



First, the Carnal man prays earnestly for temporal things, for his corn,
cattle, ships, fair weather and the like. Secondly, the Hypocrite prays that
he may be kept and preserved from the infamy and disgrace of the world, and
all gross and enormious sins. Thirdly, the truly religious man sends forth
strong cries unto God to forgive him his secret sins Psalm. 19.12.
, to create in him a clean heart Psalm. 51 10.
, yea to search and know his heart, to try and know his thoughts Psalm. 139.23.
. And this is an approved remedy against internal lust.

VERSE. 29.30. And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from
thee: for it is profitable for thee, that one of thy members should perish, and
not that thy whole body should be cast into hell. And if thy right hand offend
thee cut it off, and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for thee that one
of thy members should perish, and not thy whole body should be cast into hell.
And if thy right eye offend thee.]



There are some things which are Contrary to love, charity, and purity; and
concerning these, Precepts are to be given, and not Counsels. Only
impediments unto love, purity, and religion; and concerning these Counsels are
to be given, and not Precepts.


But against this we hold out these two verses as a buckler to defend us
withal; If thy eye be unto the an occasion of falling, then pluck it out, etc.

. 2. Pluck it out, etc.]

It is a rule given by Divines, That that cannot be the true literal sense of
Scripture which is contrary to the analogy of faith, either in credendis, in
those things which are to be believed, or in faciendis, in those things which
are to be done; that is, if it be contrary to the Articles of our faith, or
any of the Commandments, then that cannot be the literal sense, as for
example, If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee;
Here the words are not to be taken literally (for this were contrary to the
sixth commandment, Thou shall not kill) but figuratively.

. 3. If thy right hand offend thee cut it off: If

Here observe that our Savior speaks not of the eye and hand Elective, as
though this precept were not to be extended to any other part of the body; but
he names them vice omnium, as we say one or two for all; for not only the hand
and eye are unto us occasions of sinning, but also the tongue, and ear, and
foot, and the rest Mat. 18.8. and Mark 9.47.
. Now these two are only named, because they are most profitable and most
worthy of all the external parts of the body.

What is the meaning of these words, If thy hand and eye offend thee, etc.

First, some understand by hand and eye our Romans 12.5. and 1 Cor. 12.27. as if
our Savior would say, if thy nearest neighbors, or thy dearest friends should
seduce thee unto evil, cast of their acquaintance, and leave their society.

Augustine more particularly understands By eyes, friends who counsel and
advise, that is, by Right eyes, those who counsel and advise us in divine
things. Left eyes, those who counsel and advise us in humane things.
By Hands, friends who aid and assist viz. by Right hand, those who help us in
spiritual things. Left hands, those who succor and assist us in temporal
things.



Hierom. s.) that if these cause us to offend, we must be careful to subdue
them.

(Calvin. s.) by setting a watch over our ears, hands, eyes, tongues, and the
rest.

(Muscul. s.)

Aug. Beza, Aret.

Why does our Savior here command us only to pluck out the right eye; and
cut off the right hand, if they cause us to sin? must we not do thus also
with the left upon the like occasion?

First, our Savior does not speak this only right, but also of the left, and
that much more: if we must forsake those things which are more dear,
profitable, and better, then much more those things which are less dear, or
commodious unto us.

Secondly, our Savior names only the Right hand and eye, and not the Left,
for these causes.

First, some say because the right is more prone unto evil: but this holds
only in the hand, not in the eye.

Secondly, some say, because the right hand and eye are more dearly beloved of
us then the left. August. Beza. Muscul. s.


Thirdly, some say, because the right are more profitable, and more apt to use,
then the left.

Fourthly, Christ names these two, to teach two things unto us,



Premit afflictio dum timetur, prosperitas dum amatur. (Gregor.) Adversity
sometimes drives us to murmuring and despair; Prosperity, sometimes to pride
and the love of the world.

Jerusalem and suffer there; but Peter persuades him rather to stay where he
was, and not go thither: Mat. 16.22.
although he was sent by his death to purchase our redemption.









Cor. 7.30.) If the Lord so bless and prosper thee, that thy riches increase;
yet set not thy heart upon them Psalm. 62.10.
. Take heed thou do not love thy friends too much, lest thou be drawn to
say, as they say, and do, as they do, and that in evil: Set not thy heart
upon thy Children, lest thy affections oversway thy judgment: Neither set thy
heart upon thy Wife, lest she turn it from God, as Solomon's wife did.

VERSE. 31.32. It has been said,
. 1. It has been said:]

Our Savior here changes his former form Audivistis, ye have heard that it
has been said: neither ab antiquis, that it has been said of old; but only
(...) Dictum autem fuit, but it has been said; where Sed, But does show that
these words do belong unto those which went before; as if our Savior would
say, It has been said by you, Thou shall not commit adultery, but thou may
give a bill of divorcement to thy wife and send her away, and then lawfully
marry another, and so under a pretext of marriage, thou may do what thy
heart lusts after. Thus said the Scribes and Pharisees, but this Christ taxes,
and denies; showing that notwithstanding these, pretenses their fact was no
other then adultery.

Why does our Savior condemn every pretense

First, in general, because deceit does not

Secondly, in particular, because God expects Esaias 52.11. and 1 These. 4.4. and
Ephesians. 5.3. etc. and 4.29.

Is he an Adulterer before God, who under a

He is; It was not Shechems marrying of Dina, Genesis 34. as we may gather by that
heavy judgment which fell presently after upon him and all his people for it.

Is it not good to satisfy the party who has

First, this is good, but that was evil; the end

Secondly, we here may further distinguish

Some commit fornication Between their contracting and the consummation of
their marriage; without doubt this is sin in Gods sight. Without any contract
where consider First, the purpose, which is manifold: 1. Some pretend and
intend marriage: These are much to blame to begin thus preposterously, viz. at
fornication; for thus they first celebrate their Espousals with the Devil, and
then afterward with God, and therefore cannot expect that God should bless it
at all, or give them joy, in that estate. 2. Some pretend marriage, if the
woman abused and enticed prove with child, but not otherwise: these are worse
than the former. 3. Some intend to abuse a woman unto fornication, but not to
marry her at all, though she should be with child: These are by much the worst
of all. Secondly, the end; here observe, Some refuse to marry those whom they
have committed fornication withal, and these (as was said) are the worst of
all. Some consent and agree to marry those whom they have defiled, but yet this
does not satisfy for the fornication committed; and therefore thou must yet
acknowledge thy self to be impure.




Belial make unto themselves, who shall notwithstanding be condemned by God for
adultery?

First, those who marry in unlawful and prohibited

Secondly, those who being in other Lands

Lots daughters cause their father to commit incest that they might have
children Genesis 19.31.
; and therefore they who rather desire to have bastards than to be childelesse,
are adulterers before God. Secondly, some pretend a necessity of uncleanness
for the preserving of life. Here observe, women sometimes pretend a necessity
of committing fornication or adultery, for the saving of a threefold life;
namely, 1. Of themselves, because being assaulted, they were necessitated
either to satisfy the lust of some unclean adulterer, or to be slain by him:
Many have rather slain themselves, then they would suffer themselves to be
thus distained, as did Pelagia, Sephronia, two Virgins, with their mother, whom
Ambrose commends for it Senens. 426.
. And Hierome (s. Ionam.) thinks that they should do thus, but Augustine (de
Civit. Dei. l. 1.) does piously confute it, Senens. ibid. True it is, they must
not to avoid one sin, run into another, by killing themselves; but yet they
must rather suffer themselves to be murdered, than willingly prostitute
themselves for the safety of their lives; for the life of the body is ill saved
with the destruction of the soul.

II. Sometimes women pretend a necessity of adultery, for the saving of the
life of some lascivious person, because he swear to kill himself, except they
yielded unto his lust: this they must not do, because if they prostitute
themselves, that is their sin; but if the other murder himself, being
enraged for their constant and unmovable chastity, that is none of their
sin: And therefore they must not redeem the life of an adulterers body with
the death of their own soul.

III. Some pretend a necessity for the preserving of their husbands life,
because he was threatened to be murdered, except she yielded unto adultery:
Augustine (upon this verse) here staggers in his judgment, not knowing how to
resolve this question; and seems to incline unto this; That if a man and his
wife were laid in wait for and were betrayed, and the man threatened to be
murdered, except his wife suffer her self to be defiled; she may lawfully do
it, if her husband will permit and consent thereunto, or command her to do it,
because the man has power over his wife; but the man has not the whole and
sole power, and therefore neither husband nor wife has power lawfully to do
that which God forbids: And a curse hangs over the heads of all those, who do
evil that good may come of it.

. 2. Whosoever shall out away his wife.]

Whether was this Law enacted and ordained Moses, or not, for a man upon any
dislike to put away his wife, and to give her a bill of divorcement?

First, some absolutely deny, that ever Moses If a man hate his wife because
he has found some uncleanness in her, then let him write her a bill of
divorcement and send her away (Deuteronomy. 24.1.) And this our Savior calls (...) a
precept ( Mark. 10.5.)

Secondly, some urge this as a positive Law commanded unto all, as not lawful
for a man to retain a wife, whom he has found to commit adultery: But the
Pharisees themselves say, Moses permisit, Moses suffered or permitted to write
a bill of divorcement Mar. 10.4.
, not Moses commanded, etc.

Divortium and Libellum. 1. There is divortium, a separation, or a putting away
of the wife, this is no where commanded by Moses at all. 2. There is libellus,
a bill of divorcement, and this is commanded: Thus the Pharisees say, Moses
imperavit libellum, Moses commanded to give a writing of divorcement Mat. 19.7.
. And Christ says, Permisit (non imperavit) divortium, Moses suffered (not
commanded) you to put away your wives. 3. And this Commandment was but
political and civil, not moral, and therefore did not bind all.



Moses suffered for the hardness of their hearts, they take for a moral
precept: Moses permitted, they think ought to be done as a thing good in the
court of conscience: Teaching us, that many things are tolerated by humane and
civil Laws, which are neither religious nor warrantable before God: Men
respect the greater evil and therefore tolerate the less for the avoiding of
the greater, according to that vulgar saying, Ex duobus malis minus malum est
eligendum, of two evils we must choose the least.

to do evil, that good may come of it? Romans 3.8.







Matthew. 19.8.) lest otherwise in their hatred unto their wives, they should
kill them. So I. Because men are so hard-hearted, that they will rather see
their brother suffer, yea perish, then lend him gratis to supply his want: And
II. because a Land could not subsist, nor trading flourish without borrowing
and lending sometimes; therefore the Laws of Nations do permit Usury.

Secondly, from the beginning it was not lawful for a man to put away his wife
Mat. 19 8.
. And this is the case of Usury also; as appears thus. 1. it was directly
forbidden, Thou shall not lay usury upon thy brother, neither shall thou b^ to
him as an usurer: Read Exodus 22.25. Deuteronomy. 23.19. Nehem. 5.7, 8. 2. He is
promised a place in the Lords Tabernacle, who puts not out his money to
usury Psalm. 15.1.5.
; as if the Kingly Prophet would say, usurers shall never come unto Gods holy
Hill. 3. He is pronounced a just man who takes not usury (Ezech. 18.8, 9.) and
an unjust, who gives forth his money upon usury, verse. 13. 4. The Lord severely
threatens to punish usurers, Ezech. 22.12. etc. All these show that usury was
not from the beginning, neither was ever lawful by Gods Law among brethren, as
all Christians now are; wherefore it is a great shame, that the Jews should
refuse to take usury one of another, and yet Christians hereby eat out the
bowels one of another.

Thirdly, Christ crosses their ancient opinion concerning the putting away of
their wives, telling them it is not lawful to do it, except it be for
fornication: So also in this our Savior says, Lend, looking for nothing
again Luke 6.35.
: and verses 39.42. of this chapter.

. 3. Let him give her a bill of divorcement.]

What was the use of this Bill?

First, it was a remedy of a greater evil, as

Secondly, it was to terrify them from separation,

. 4. But I say unto you]

Whether does Christ here oppose Moses or the Pharisees?

First, some say that Moses commanded these Hominis consilium, non Dei imperium
(Hier. s. Math. 19.) the counsel of man, not the command of God, as that
Father says: but Moses was faithful in all Gods house, and therefore I dare
not subscribe to Hieromes opinion.

Secondly, Christ does not deny that this Moses, but denies that it was a true
rule of direction, being indeed but a bare permission, as was showed before.

. 5. Whosoever shall put away his wife.]

Bellarmine (de Matrim. lib. 1. cap 14.) says, that it is lawful for the
parties married to be dismissed each from other, for diverse causes besides
fornication, as for heresy, for avoiding of offense, and for the vow of
continency: Christ here says plainly the contrary, Whosoever does put away
his wife, except it be for fornication, causes her to commit adultery: And
therefore whether Christ or the Cardinal deserve better to be believed, sub
judice lis est, let the world judge.

. 6. Except it be for fornication.]

Is it lawful for a man to be divorced from his

It is: of this more amply by and by.

How many causes were there of this separation,

Three, namely first, there was Causa levis, Causa necessaria, a necessary
cause, and that in case of murder; when the hatred of the man grew so extreme
that the woman stood in fear or peril of her life: then a divorce was
permitted. Thirdly, there was causa legi^ima, a lawful cause of divorce, and
that was fornication and adultery; which was lawful unto the Jews in the old
Testament, and is allowable unto us in the new.



First, Romulus allowed, a man to put away

Annihilando, by disanulling of it: to wit, First, error which is twofold.
First, of the sex, if a man marry a man, or a woman a woman, being deceived by
the habit, this marriage is void. Secondly, of the person, if a man marry in
the dark one for another, as Jacob did Leah for Rachel, the marriage is
annihilated, if the error be perceived before carnal knowledge.
Secondly, affinity and kindred: Thus the marriage of King Henry the 8 with
Queen Katharine, was justly disanulled, because it was not lawful for him to
take to wife, her who had been married to his brother Philip, Mark. 6.18.
Thirdly, a precontract, or former marriage with carnal knowledge, makes void
the second marriage.
Disrumpendo, by breaking of it, viz. First Religion, If the unbeleever will
depart, let him depart, says Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 7.15. Secondly, fornication,
as in this verse and Mat. 19.9. where for adultery and fornication, it is
lawful for a man to put away his wife: Cum illa carnem unam fornicando
separavit, non debet teneri, etc Hier. s. Math. 19.9.
. Gualter here includes all greater things, as poison, offering to stab, and
the like: but this is doubtful, and the Scripture herein silent, and therefore
Pet. Mart. (2.10..) holds the contrary.









Thomas Aquinas (in 1 Cor. 7.) following herein Saint Augustine, adds seven
cases, wherein it is not lawful for a man to put away his wife for
fornication: First, if he have prostituted her before marriage. Secondly, if he
be also a fornicator. Thirdly, if he have denied his body unto her. Fourthly,
if she upon good ground believing her husband to be dead, has married with
another. Fifthly, if it has been with violence, that is, if violently against
her will she has been ravished. Sixthly, if another fraudulently has
deceived her under the color of her husband. Seventhly, if after the adultery
manifestly found out, she has been still detained or carnally known by her
husband.

a man must not put away his wife but for adultery; yet elsewhere he says,
whosoever shall forsake father, or mother; or wife, etc Mat. ^9.29.
. where he allows, commends, and promises to reward those who put away
their wives for his sake: And therefore di^^^^^ for Religion is warrantable,
and a woman may leave her husband to come unto a Nunnery, and a man may leave
his wife to come into holy Orders, and ought to forsake them, being entered into
Orders Bellarm. lib. 1. de Cleric. cap. 19.
.

First, Christ by forsaking, means not that separation which is made by
giving a bill of divorcement, but that which is caused by imprisonment,

Secondly, as the Apostles forsook not the

Thirdly, th^s objection is clean contrary to Whosoever puts away his wife,
except it be for fornication, causes her to commit adultery (in this verse) By
which rule a Minister ought not for any other cause, to put away, and dismiss
his wife, but for fornication: And therefore it is not lawful, because of his
calling, or upon any other color to send her away. Secondly, St. Paul says,
that married couples should not defraud one another but for a time, and that
with consent 1 Cor. 7.5.
. Therefore if the wife will not consent, her husband cannot go from her; nay,
though there be consent, yet they must be separated but for a time, les^ the
Devil should tempt them.

Whether may the guiltless party, being lawfully

For no other cause in the world, and to marry again. Because this is
questioned (or rather plainly denied) by the Papist, I will first confirm it,
and then answer what they can object against it. Our proposition is this, In
the case of fornication, it is not unlawful to marry again, that is, those
who are lawfully divorced for fornication and adultery, may marry again with
others, but never one with another. The truth hereof appears thus; First, the
bond is broken, they are not now one flesh Hier. s.
; and therefore may lawfully contract marriage with others. Secondly, because
under the Law, divorce was never without liberty of a new choice, Deuteronomy. 24.1,
2. all that were divorced, had freedom to marry again; and therefore in a
lawful divorce this is not debarred under the Gospel. Thirdly, because
otherwise the guiltless party should be punished, and that grievously; It is
better to marry than to burn, says the Apostle, thereby showing that marriage
is left us by God, as a remedy against lust; now if the guiltless party could
not contain, neither might marry another, neither take her unto him who has
been divorced, Deuteronomy. 24.4. then he were necessitated to sin, which the Lord
never does unto any by any law. Fourthly, we might confirm this from the
Fathers (Ambros. Tertul.) 2. From the Councels, Council. Mogunt. Triburiens.) 3.
From the consent of many Bishops in Origens time 4. From the opinion of the
Papists (Zach. Papa Cajetan Ambros. Compsa.) 5. Of our men ( Pet. Mart. 2.10..
37, 38, 58.) But this I omit, coming to the last and best proof. Fifthly, that
it is lawful for the guiltless party to marry (for I now meddle not with the
guilty) appears plainly from our Saviors words in this verse, and Mat. 19.7,
8, 9. Whosoever puts away his wife (except it be for fornication) commits
adultery: Therefore for fornication, it is lawful for a man to dismiss his
wife. Matthew. 19.9. Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for
wheredome, and marry another, commits adultery. Therefore for adultery it is
lawful for the man both to put away and renounce his wife, and the wife
likewise her husband (there being the like reason for both) and for them to
marry again.

The Papists hold, that married persons may dismiss one another for adultery,
but neither party may marry again, for any cause, during life: And because
they are sore pressed with this place, they object many things, both against
the place, and point by us propounded.

Durand answers, that when Christ uttered these words, the Law of the Jews
was, that the adulterous woman should be put to death, and so the husband
might have liberty to marry again. Bellarmine overthrows this answer, by a
threefold reason, to wit;



Secondly, Christ might as well have excepted other crimes that were punished
by death, as murder and the like, that in those cases they might marrry again,
because by the Law their wives were to die, as well as in the case of
fornication.

Thirdly, Christ speaks of dismission; but properly the wife is not said to
be dismissed, when she is put to death: And therefore Christ is not thus here
to be understood.

Secondly, Bellarmine would have the exception (except it be for fornication)
restrained to the first clause, in this sense: He that puts away his wife,
which is not lawful to do but for fornication; so that the crime of
fornication makes it lawful to dismiss, but not after dismission to marry
again.

First, the Jesuit is here contrary unto himself,

Secondly, Christ's answer had not satisfied, if Moses Law, after the which it
was lawful for them to marry again; And therefore it was expected that our
Savior should answer to both these points; both in what cases they might
dismiss their wives, and marry aga^ne.

Thirdly, the Apostle says, If a woman depart (1 Cor. 7.10, 11.) Therefore it
is not lawful after divorce, to marry so long as both parties live.

The Apostle speaks not there of a lawful departure or separation, to wit,
Paul there, I command, no discedat, let not the wife depart from her husband)
but of a separation for Religions sake, or for afflictions, or for the cares of
those times.

. 7. Causes her to commit adultery.]

How,

First, if she which is divorced, being deprived

Secondly, if she which is thus unlawfully

Thirdly, he who marries a woman that is

Fourthly, he who puts away his wife, but not for fornication and joins
himself in marriage Chem. Harm. fol 569. fine.
.

Whosoever shall marry her that is divorced, commits adultery.]

Bellarmine (de Matrim. cap. 16. Arg. 1.) urges these words for the proof of
their former assertion, that for adultery one may dismiss another, but neither
party can marry again, for any cause, during life: Christ here says,
Whosoever shall marry her that is divorced, commits adultery: These words
(says the Jesuit) must be understood generally, without the exception of
fornication; for if it be lawful to marry an adultresse, who is divorced for
adultery; and the innocent party who is dismissed, but not for adultery; then
should the case of the adultresse be better than of the other.



Secondly, the innocent persons case is much

Thirdly, the innocent party may be reconciled to her first husband: 1
Corinthians, 7.11.

Fourthly, If she cannot be reconciled, and the froward party fall into the
sin of incontinencie, as he is most like in this case (refusing the company
of an honest wife) to be given over, then has the innocent party the same
remedy, which the adulteress has, but upon

Fifthly, the exception in the first clause of the sentence, (except it be for
fornication) must be supplied also in the latter. Willet synops. fol. 780. Arg.
2.

VERSE. 33. Again, ye have heard that it has been said by them of old time:
Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine
oaths.
Thou shall not forswear thy self.]

We see here that Perjurie is so infamous and notorious, that it is condemned
by the wicked Scribes and Pharisees, as a grievous sin.



Pejerare non est falsum jurare, sed quod ex animi tui sententia juraris id non
facere perjurium est: Cicero. offic. 3. Perjurie is not to swear falsely, but
not to perform what one has sworn: And this definition evidently appears to
be true by this verse. Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform
unto the Lord thine oaths: But of this more by and by.

How many sorts of Perjurie are there?

As there are two kinds of oaths, Assertorium, whose subject is an indicative
proposition, which shows something: this perjurie is called, (...). Secondly;
Obligatorium, whose subject is a Promissorie proposition, which promises to
do some thing; and this perjurie is called, (...). The first of these is more
palpable, and therefore the Jews rather taught the second: as appears plainly
by this verse. But of these more particularly.

Perjurie J say, is two-folde, First, Apertum, manifest and palpable. Secondly,
Palliatum, cloaked and palliated.


First, there is Perjurium apertum, manifest, and palpable Perjurie.

Why do men thus forswear themselves?

First, some do it for lucres sake, using it Geheza's prey, which was rewarded
with a cleaving Leprosy. (2 King. 5.27.)

Secondly, some do it that they may avoid

Thirdly, some forswear themselves, that so

Fourthly, some that they may not restore things that have been betrusted unto
them to keep.

Fifthly, some that they may by their perjurie

Sixthly, some forswear themselves out of

Why must we be thus careful to avoid this

First, because otherwise we shall destroy our

Secondly, because if we should be overtaken Amurath perceiving how Vladislans
the King of Hungary had shamefully broken Truce with him, opened the Book
wherein the League was written, (and which Vladislans had sworn to observe)
unto Christ, praying him to take notice of the disloyalty of his servant, and
to revenge his Perjurie, which he did indeed. The Papists brag (but their
equivocations and mental reservations make me call the truth of it in
question) that in the days and places of Popery, men were and are more true of
their words, and faithful in their oaths, then we Protestants are. And
therefore if we desire to adorn that Profession, which we have undertaken,
we must carefully avoid Perjurie.





we are not stronger then he is. 1 Cor. 10.22.


a swift witness against the false swearer. Mal. 3.5.
And therefore if we desire estimation and credit amongst men, if we desire to
honor our Profession, if we desire to off^r no indignity to our God, by
which he may be provoked justly to be angry with us, to condemn us, and
severely to punish us; then let us carefully avoid all Perjurie and false
swearing.

Secondly, there is perjurium palliatum, a palliated and subtle perjurie, when
men take an oath either in such a form, as they can interpret their oath which
way they will, or else have their private reservations, and crafty
equivocations; all which are usual with the Papists; Many examples might be
given of this which I pass by, reciting only one or two: Albertus Duke of
Franconia having slain Conrade the Earl of Lotharingia, brother to Lewis the
fourth then Emperor; and finding the Emperors wrath incensed against him for
the same, betook himself to a strong castle at Bamberge; from whence the
Emperor neither by force nor policy could remove him for seven years space,
until Atto the Bishop of Meutz by treachery delivered him into his hands.
This Atto, under show of friendship, repaired to the castle, and gave his faith
unto the Earl, that if he would come down and parle with the Emperor, he
should safely return into his hold: The Earl mistrusting no fraud, went out
of the Castle gates with the Bishop toward the Emperor; but Atto (as it were
suddenly remembering himself, when indeed it was his devised plot) desires to
return back and dine ere he went, because it was somewhat late: so they did,
and having dined return: The Earl was no sooner come unto the Emperor, but
he caused him to be presently put to death, notwithstanding he urged the
Bishops oath and promise for his return; for unto that allegation it was
answered, that his oath was quit by returning back to dine, as he had promised
him. And thus by this crafty perjurie the Earl was betrayed, and the
treacherous Bishop shortly after killed with a thunderbolt from heaven Melanct.
Chr. lib. 4.
.

Cleomenes King of Lacedemonia making war upon the Argives, surprised them by
this subtilty: he took truce with them for seven days, and the third night
whilst they lay secure, and unwarie in their tents by reason of the truce, he
oppressed them with a great slaughter; saying that the truce was made for days
only and not for nights: The reason of this perjurie was, because he thought
thus to take the city Argos, but missed of his purpose, for the Argive women
being enraged for the death and slaughter of their husbands, took arms like
Amasons, Tolesilla being their Captainesse, and compassing their city walls,
repelled Cleomenes, half amassed with the strangeness of the sight. After this
he was banished into Egypt, and there miserably and desperately slew himself
Campofulgos. l. 7. c. 3.
.

I pass by the equivocation of Arrius, who subscribing with on oath to the
truth of the Articles which were presented unto him, meant the Articles which
he had secretly hid and conveyed into his bosom, which were contrary unto the
other: for which by and by he voided his entralles, easing himself, and so
miserably died.

These examples should make us fear all false and deceitful oaths, and
learn to swear in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness Jer. 4.2.2.
.

Why is all perjurie, and forswearing, and false

First, because it overthrowes all policy, and Diodo. sic. 1.6.
. An oath is for the end of controversies Heb. 6.16.
, and therefore he who swears falsely overthrowes the greatest testimony
amongst men.

Secondly, because this prophanes the ordinance Exodus 22.11. and Numb. 5.19,
21. And therefore he who makes no account of an oath, slights a principal and
weighty ordinance of God, and kindles the anger of God against him for it:
Lisander the Lacedemonian was wont to say, that when the Lions skin (meaning
fortitude, power and valor,) would not serve, it was needful then to sow
unto it the Foxes case, meaning subtlety and fraud: Yea, so little reckoning
made he of forswearing himself, that he would often say: That children were
to be cousened with trifles, and men with oaths. But we must take heed of
this Maxim, for whosoever uses it, will find at last, that none is worse
cousened by it then himself, as this Fox Lisander did: who warring against the
Thebans, was taken in a trap, and slain at the foot of their walls Plutar^h.
.



Thou shall perform unto the Lord thine oaths, that is, thy vows.]

We see how the Scribes and Pharisees do here apply perjury to vows; whence
two questions may arise.

What is a lawful Vow?

It is a promise made unto God,

How many sorts and kinds of vows are

Uowes are either of Vows; neither agree with the definition expressed in the
former question. Liberty, and Freedom, and these are properly called Vows,
According to the Manner of the vow, and so they are twofold. First absolute,
for grace given, or favor showed; thus David vowed to have a religious care o^
the Arc, for Gods care Psalm. 131.2
Secondly, conditional, for the obtaining of grace; thus Jacob vowed to give
the tenth of his Possessions unto the Lord, if he will be pleased but to
bless and prosper him in his journey. Genesis 28 20.

Thing Vowed; And so they consist in a particular observance of our general
duties: to wit, either 1. In doing that which is good: Or, 2. In giving good
things to others; Or, 3. In abstaining from sin, and the occasions thereof.
But of these elsewhere.



VERSE. 34.35. But I say unto you, swear nor at all, neither by heaven, for it
is Gods throne: nor by the earth, for it is his footstool: neither by
Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great King.
But I say unto you.]





First, Christ here reproves and finds fault with the Scribes and Pharisees,
because they taught not the whole truth concerning the breach of the third
Commandment.



Iam. 2.10.
So the Catholic faith is to be kept whole and undefi^ed, or we cannot be
saved. ( Athanasius in his Creed) And therefore the whole truth and doctrine
of religion should be taught. Hence Moses is commended, because he spoke unto
the children of Israel, according to all that the Lord had given him in
Commandment to say unto them. Deuteronomy. 1.3
And so Paul appeals unto the people, that they know, how that he kept back
nothing from them: But taught unto them all the will of the Lord. Act. 20.26.


Secondly, truth should not be mingled with Daniel 2 43.) And therefore says
Saint Paul, I speak the truth in the Lord I lie not. (Romans 9.1.) Because all
Ministers should be careful to avoid all lying, and teach nothing but the
truth, and the whole truth unto their people.

Thirdly, because it is the subtletic and the Matthew. 4 6.
. Thus the Pharisees say Christ blasphemes, because he makes himself equal
with God: Ioh. 10.33.
and undertakes to forgive sins which none but God can do; Mar. 2.7
hiding untruthes under verity, Christ being God, as well as man, and
therefore might pardon sins, and without robbing of God, make himself equal
with him. And therefore if we desire not to err, we must labor to know the
whole truth of God, in things necessary unto salvation.



De facto.

Paul would not have the Romans to receive him, who was weak in faith, unto
doubtful disputations. Romans 14.1.





Secondly, Christ reproves and blames the Scribes and Pharisees, because they
tax the more gross sins, but see not the inferior.











Ye have that unction of the Holy Ghost, therefore you know all things, says
the Apostle (1 John 2.20, 27.) as if he would say, until we be endued with
grace from above, we cannot know or be truly convinced of our true and
spiritual duty unto God.





Herod did, and many do daily.

Herod, and the stony ground, who brought forth a blade, that is expressed some
shows of delight in the hearing thereof, either external or internal.

Fourthly, he may confess and acknowledge his sins, as did Caine and Saul.

Fifthly, he may humble himself, as did Ahab,

Sixthly, he may make some satisfaction and Judas who brought back the pieces
of silver again.

Seventhly, he may reform himself and life Ioas (for a time) and Iehu and
Herod, who did many things.

Eighthly, he may have some general gifts of Balaam, or of miracles with
diverse, Mat. 7.22.

Ninthly, he may join himself to the society Simon Magus, Acts 8.13. and
Nicholas, Acts 6.5. and Rev. 2.6. and many who at length left them 1 John 2.19.

If the natural man's estate be thus deplorable,

True it is, that the natural, civil,

First, the multitude of his sins; let him here sum up 1. His usual and
daily offenses which he commits, and yet thinks not of at all. 2. His idle and
vain words, yea his obscene and blasphemous speeches. 3. The eruptions of his
affections and passions, which are sometimes transported with anger, pride,
revenge, covetousness, and wantonness. 4. His unknown sins, which are
therefore unknown, because he does not observe and mark his actions: and
therefore unknown sins, because as yet he thinks them lawful, not knowing
them to be prohibited by God.

Secondly, let him consider his great neglect of good works and duties: as 1.
how many duties he has omitted and left undone, both toward God, his
Country, the Church, the poor, his parents, kindred, children, and servants.
2. How weakly and unworthily he performs those duties which he does; how far
short they come of that divine perfection which God requires in every good
work; yea how the outward good works which he performs are stained and
blotted with pride, vain boasting, ostentation, and self-love.

Thirdly, let him diligently observe the stupiditie of his conscience, how
bold, and obstinate, and senseless it is; as for example. 1. He never doubts
of his condition 2. He never fears the wrath and judgments of God. 3. He
never seeks to be delivered from the wrath to come. 4. He never trembles with
the sight of his sins (his heart not being circumcised) he is never touched
with a sense of his iniquities. The Children of God are ever and anon in
heaviness and tears for the sins they commit against so gracious a God, and
so beloved a Father, thinking in this kind every molehill a mountain; but
the natural man although he be never sure, yet he is always secure, singing
peace unto his own soul, and saying, no evil shall come unto him.

Fourthly, let him truly know and acknowledge the end of his obedience; and
what his aim and scope is in all the good duties which he performs; namely,
always either his gain, or estimation of the world, or vain glory; ever
obeying for himself, never for God; ever seeking himself, never seeking the
glory of his heavenly Father.

Fifthly and lastly, let him consider his weakness (of rather want) of faith*
let him examine what spirit he has; well may he have the Spirit of slumber,
and a deceivable presumption; but that internal sweetness and spiritual
peace, which might corroborate him against terrors, dangers, and death; or
comfort him in afflictions, or make him victorious over the greatest trials,
Romans 8.38. he never had the least taste or relish of.





First, if thou be not a thief, then see whether thou art not unmercifull, or
coveteous, or desirous of something which is thy neighbors. Secondly, if thou
be no murderer, then see if thou have not been angry with thy brother
without a cause, if thou have not hated him, if thou have not endeavored, at
least desired to be revenged, if thou have not contended with him for some
petty trifles, if thou have not called him Racha or fool in thy anger; yea
examine whether thou love him or not. Thirdly, if thou be no adulterer, then
see if thou have not either with thy hands, or eyes, or heart, or affection,
lusted after some, or showed some wanton tokens. Fourthly, if thou be no
perjured person, or one who has horribly prophanned the name of God by
blasphemies; then see if thou have not sometimes without an oath, spoken rashly
or irreverently of God, or of the Gospel, or of holy things; yea, have thou not
had unreverend thoughts of God? Thus examine thy self both by thy outward and
inward man.









Romans 8.2. and 4.5, 6. from Psalm. 32. And therefore our failings shall not make
us fall short of eternal life, if we do but in sincerity of heart strive and
endeavor to serve the Lord in whatsoever he requires, for he graciously does
accept of the will for the deed.

. 2. Swear not at all:

Why is this general negation added?

First, Thou shall not for swear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord
thine oaths; as if they would say, thou shall pay unto God what thou sweatest
(By God) to give unto him; but if thou swearest by any thing else (namely,
either by heaven, or earth, or Jerusalem, or thy hand, or eye, etc.) then thou
need not to perform thine oath except thou will: This was the Pharisees
gloss upon that saying which is mentioned before verse 33. and so our Savior
gives us a touch of it, Mat. 23.16. Hereunto our Savior in this verse, and the
two following answers, that by those things, to wit, heaven, earth, etc. it is
neither lawful to forswear nor to swear: this ^e lays down, and collects
that.

Wherein were the Scribes and Pharisees

First in general, Gualter (upon these words)

First, when we speak irreverently of divine things, to wit, either I. of God
himself; or II. of his law; or III. of his threatenings; or IV. by wresting and
perverting the examples of Gods judgments; or V. by jesting of Scripture inter
pocula, in our mirth.

Secondly, when we abuse it unto enchantments, John's Gospel, and Psalm. 50.

Thirdly, when we abuse it unto Execration and cursing; as God quite it, or the
vengeance of God light upon him for it, or the like.

Fourthly, when it is abused for gain; thus I. Beggars daily and hourly
profane the name of God: II. those also who pretend religion, that they may
deceive the better. III. And they who teach chafe for wheat, the inventions
of man for the word of God.

Fifthly, Magistrates are here faulty, when they do not use the power which
is given them by God unto the glory of God and his truth: All these are
transgressors of this precept, and yet without an oath: But these being more
remote from our Saviors scope, in this verse, I leave them.

Secondly, more particularly there is here a double fault, which our Savior
meets withal in the Pharisees, to wit, first, that they condemned no rash
oaths by the name of God but only Perjurie; if a man did not swear falsely,
then they thought him not faulty, although he swore by God. Secondly, as they
condemned not those oaths, which were dierctly sworn by God, except they
forswear themselves: so neither did they blame those oaths which were
indirectly sworn by God, to wit, by his creatures: of both which particularly.

First, the Jews thought that they were not bound to perform their oaths
except the oath were by God, Mat. 23.16, 17, 18. This our Savior here
opposes, Teaching us that it is not enough to swear truly, except also we
swear lawfully.







Only here a question may be moved, Whether it be lawful to accept of such an
oath at an

Saint Augustine (ad Publicolam) grants and allows it: and Peter Martyr, fol.
239.. 11. seems to assent unto it. Yea except this be admitted, there can be
no bargains or covenants ratified or confirmed with them: for an oath is the
strongest tie and bound that men have, and the heathens have no knowledge of
the true God; and therefore what can they swear by, but by those things which
they hold as Gods: Thus Vladislaus took an oath of Amurath though it were by
Mahomet: And thus Jacob takes an oath of Laban. Genesis 31.

Thirdly, they are faulty who swear by God indirectly: and these oaths are
twofold viz. First, by wresting or winding the thing affirmed, or by speaking
deceitfully thereof; this is called equivocation, of which before. Secondly, an
indirect naming of the person, by whom the oath is taken; This is done
sometimes Re, in the thing attested. Thus the Pharisees though they might
swear by Heaven (because that was not by God) but Christ says it is Gods
throne, and therefore it is an indirect swearing by him. This is done sometimes
Voce, by a Metathesis, putting one name or word for another; thus profane
persons will swear by Cocks bones, or Dogs death, and yet think they
swear not; but this is an indirect swearing by God also.



Laschaker, and Leschane; the first forbidden. Levit 9.12. the second, Exodus
20.7. and are thus distinguished; Laschaker signifies a false oath; Leschane
signifies a rash oath, both which are forbidden here, the first verse 33. the
second verse 34.

We are commanded to swear in truth, judgment, and righteousness Ier. 4.2.
; now we swear in truth and righteousness, when we swear that which is
true, considerately, and upon mature deliberation, an oath being required of us
by a lawful Magistrate in a weighty cause Simler. s. Exodus 20.
; If Vzzah were stricken with death because rashly he put his hand to the
Arc, what may they expect that thus rashly upon every slight and light
occasion dare profane Gods holy name. Hence Augustine says, Iuramentum non in
bonis, sed necessarijs: that is, the practice of swearing is not to be praised,
but, necessity urging, it is to be approved.

Vere sed etiam legitime, truly, but also lawfully?









Fourthly, when such a cause moves thee to by the life of Pharaoh, but by the
holy one of Israel.

Fifthly, let thy oath be undertaken consideratly,

Sixthly, and with a reverend meditation of the

. 3. Non omnino jurabis: swear not at

Christ meaning is not here to forbid all swearing simply, but all swearing
after the Jewish manner and custom, that is in common talk and communication
(of which by and by) as appears in the following words, let your communication
be yea and nay, verse 37. for this is a rule to be observed in the
interpretation of Scripture, That things generally spoken must particularly be
understood according to the circumstances of the present matter in hand: As
when Paul says 1 Cor. 9.22. he became all things to all men; if it should be
taken generally, we might say, that with blasphemers he became a blasphemer,
etc. And therefore that speech must be restrained to the use of things
indifferent, in all which he yielded to the weakness of all, that he might
win some: And so here, swear not at all, must be restrained to the Jewish
custom, which was to swear by the name of God in their common talk, and by
other creatures; both which Christ does here utterly condemn and forbid.

swear not at all: thus thought also some heretics (namely the Pelagians and
Waldenses) in the primitive Church, yea also some of the Ancient Fathers,
Hierom, Theophylact, and Chrysostom thought, that the Lord in the old
Testament did only permit swearing, as he did some other things which were
evil, that he approved not of, and that Christ now did quite take away the
same.

non omnino jurabis, Thou shall not swear at all, appears thus.

First, it is allowed in the Old Testament and commanded as a part of Gods
worship: and a means to cease strife, and contentions among brethren, Read
Exodus 22.11. and Deuteronomy. 6.13 and 10.20.

Secondly, it was allowed of in the New Testament: The Prophet Esaias prophesying
of the times of the Gospel, says, He that swears in the earth shall swear
by the God of truth Esaias 65.16.
. And the Apostle first teaches us that swearing is lawful by the Lords
example, who having no greater to swear by, swear by himself Heb. 6.13.
: then secondly he tells that men swear by the greater, and an oath among
them is an end of all strife, verse 16.

Thirdly, that all swearing is not forbidden or unlawful, appears by the
examples of the Saints both in the Old and New Testament; Abraham swears to
Abimelech, Genesis 21.24. and so Isaac also, Genesis 26.31. And the Prophet Esaias
says, five cities in the land of Egypt shall speak the language of Canaan
(that is, shall embrace the true religion) and shall swear by the Lord of
hosts Esaias 19.18.
.

Fourthly, that Christ does not quite take away all swearing, appears by these
reasons.

I. Because he says himself, he came not to destroy the law; now if he had
condemned and forbidden all oaths, he had dissolved the law and the
Commandment of God which says, Thou shall swear by my name Deuteronomy. 6.13. and
10.20.
; And therefore Christ here saying, Thou shall not swear at all, does not
destroy the law but fulfill it, because he taught them the way and means how
to fulfill it, namely, to take heed of all perjurie and rash oaths, as we
shall see amply by and by.

II. This will appear by the consideration of the nature of an oath; because
an oath is nothing else but an invocating of God, whereby we desire, that he
who is the only (...) searcher and knower of the heart, would give testimony
of the truth, and punish him who swears, if willingly or wittingly, he
affirms any thing which is false: Now none without blasphemy can say that
Christ forbids and condemns invocation of God.

III. The truth hereof appears by the end and use of an oath; both in regard
of God and man. First, an oath ascribes unto God, 1. the laud and praise of
infinite wisdom, because he only knows the most secret corners and passages
of the heart, and understands all truth; and therefore we implore his
presence, to testify the truth of that which is delivered. 2. an oath does
ascribe unto God the praise of infinite goodness and justice, because he is
the only defender of truth, and avenger of falsehood: and therefore we desire
in swearing, that if we utter any falsehood, God would judge us and make us
examples unto others.

Secondly, in regard of man, swearing is the very bond of all humane society
and civil government, which cannot subsist without truth: therefore the
Apostle says, that among men swearing is the end of all strife; as if he
would say, there is no greater, better, nor surer way to be believed then by
taking a lawful oath: because he who makes no conscience of an oath, makes
conscience of nothing: And therefore to condemn and forbid all swearing were
to detract from Gods glory, and to destroy and dissolve the bond of humane
society Pareus. s.
.

IV. That Christ does not quite take away all oaths appears, because there
was nothing commanded in the law of Moses, which was sin in it self; and
therefore Christ would not forbid that which was good.

V. Because swearing is commended, as a special part of Gods worship, and an
excellent sign of an upright man; yea, has a promise of blessedness: whence
I argue thus.

That which God the holy Ghost commends in Scripture as a part of Gods worship,
and a sign of an upright and holy man; and which God the Father promises to
reward with eternal happiness: that God the Son will never quite take away,
condemn, or prohibit:

But swearing truly and lawfully by God, is commended by God the Holy Ghost as
a part of Gods worship, and a sign of an upright and holy man; and has a
promise from God the Father of eternal glory. Therefore God the Son will
never quite take it away.

The first proposition I take as granted, because I hope none will deny it: The
second may be thus confirmed; Every one that swears by God shall glory, but
the mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped; here is both an
Antithesis between the wicked and those who swear by God; as also a promise
made unto such Psalm. 63.11.
. Thou shall swear (says Jeremiah) the Lord lives, etc. and thou shall turn
from thy abominations, and then thou shall not remove, Ierem. 4 1, 2. But most
plainly the Prophet David, Psalm. 15. propounds a double quere.

First, Oh Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? that is, who shall be made
partakers of eternal happiness?

Answer, He that walks uprightly, and works righteousness, and speaks
the truth from his heart.

Secondly, who walks uprightly, and works

Answer, He that swears and changes not, though it be to his own hurt.

VI. It further appears that Christ condemns not all swearing, because he
says here, Thou shall not swear by Heaven, or by Earth, or by Jerusalem, or
by thy Head; but he does not say, Thou shall not swear by God, and we allow of
no other oaths. And thus much for the first general answer to the second
objection, that our Savior does not prohibit all swearing, in saying, Thou
shall not swear at all.

Thou shall not swear at all ordinarily in thy common talk; And thus Saint
James is to be understood, when he says, Swear not neither by heaven, nor by
earth, nor by any other oath James 5.12.
.



Whatsoever (in our common talk) is more than yea or nay, comes of evil, that
is, from that evil one, the devil.







David says, He will praise God with the best member he has, that is, his
tongue, because it was given us by God, that thereby we might laud, praise,
magnify, and honor his holy Name; now by swearing we dishonor both God and
our tongues.

will never hold him guiltless, that thus prophanes his Name, Exodus 20.7. but
will cut off the swearer from the face of the earth, Zach. 5.3. and Hosea 4.2.



Eighthly, because of all other sins it is against

Ninthly, it is a thing condemned by all Religions,

Tenthly, because it is a thing very hard to be Nemo novit, nisi qui expertus,
quam cifficile extinguere jurandi consuetudinem (August. s.) None can imagine
how hard a thing it is to leave the habit and custom of swearing, but only
he who has been a common swearer, and has labored to leave it.

Eleventhly, because he who accustometh

Some object again, men will not believe me

Chrysostom (sup.) gives three answers hereunto.

Secondly, men will believe thee the worse

Thirdly, rather loose (says the Father) the

Whether is it lawful to enforce one to swear,

For a Magistrate to impose an oath,

. 4. Neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor by Jerusalem, nor by thy head, that
is, by no creature at all.]







Psalm. 63.10. Esa. 45.23. and 48.1. and Ierem. 4.2. Thirdly, he desires God to
be revenged of him, if he speak not the truth, or if he perform not his oath:
And thus he who swears by any creature, does I. call it to witness the thing
affirmed. II. Does oblige himself to worship it as a God. And III. Does
entreat it to punish him, if he falsify his oath; and so does idolize and
deifie a creature, setting it up as a God.

Elisha say unto Elijah, As the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, I will
not leave thee, 2 King. 2.4. and repeates the same words again, verse. 6. So
the good Shunamite says to Elisha, as the Lord lives, and as thy soul
lives, I will not leave thee, 2 King. 4.30. And so Paul, I protest by your
rejoicing that I dye daily, 1 Cor. 5.31. So good Hannah says to old Eli, as
thy soul lives, my Lord, I am the woman, that stood here before thee, etc. 1 Samuel 1.26. And thus Abner says to Saul, concerning David, as thy soul lives,
oh King, I cannot tell, 1 Samuel 17.55. Now all these are indirect swearing by
the creatures, and therefore may not we by their examples obliquely swear by
them also?

First, in general, if any of the Fathers or

Secondly, these phrases, as thy soul lives, or, as my soul lives, or, as I
live, is no more than, if we should say; in truth, or the thing which we
affirm is as true, as our souls live; and so is no oath, except we swear by
it, as Joseph did, By the life of Pharaoh.

Thirdly, Peter Martyr answers, that the active, actively, as here when a man
swears by the heaven, or earth, etc. and this is never lawful, for so a man
makes the creature his Judge. 2. Passive, passively, which may be lawful: For
the understanding hereof observe,

That some oaths are First, Simple, namely a direct and plain attestation or
calling upon God, or some creature, for witness of what is said, as by Heaven,
or Pharaohs life. Secondly, compounded, and that either with a Blessing, as
Pharaoh said, so let the Lord be with you, as I will let you go, Exodus 10.10.
Curse, as David said, God do so and more also, if I destroy him not 1 Sa.
25.22.




Now in this sense it is lawful to add the name of a creature, that is, with
this addition, saxit Deus: The Lord grant that thy soul may live: and thus
Joseph had not sinned, if he had said no more but this, The Lord grant that
Pharaoh may live.

Thus we see how carefully we should avoid all swearing by the creatures,
because all attestation of them is prohibited, A solio ad capillum, a maximo ad
minimum, August. sup.

Whether is it worse to swear by God or by

It is a very hard question for me to resolve: in thesi it is a greater sin
to swear by the creature, because it is peccatum, in thesi, simply a sin, and
never lawful to swear thereby.

Secondly, but yet in hypothesi, there are two things to be looked into and
observed, besides the sin committed by swearing.

To wit, First, the profanation of the Name of God, and so that is the greater
fin, which is sworn by the Name of God. Secondly, the Idolatry which is
committed: and so it is the greater sin to swear by a creature; for
this is Blasphemy to profane Gods name. Idolatry to swear by a creature.




Homer says, Kings swear by their Scepters, and others tell us, that the
Turks swear by their Swords; the Scythians by the wind, and sometimes by the
Kings Throne: Zeno by the caper bush; Socrates sometimes by a Dog, sometimes
by an Oak, sometimes by a Goat.

Hierom.

Thirdly, Christians have extremely exceeded here also, some swearing by the
Kings head, others by Othoes beard, others by the Saints, others by the Heaven,
by the light, by the day, others by the earth, bread, sword, or whatsoever is
in their hands or eyes, others by the head, soul, life, hand; And therefore to
conclude this section, remember these three things.

First, from whence comes this wicked swearing by the creatures? It comes
neither from the Spirit of God, nor from a holy zeal, nor from a pure
conscience, but from evil, that is, 1. either from the Devil; Or 2. From an
unbridled desire of sinning: Or 3. From a wicked custom.

Secondly, whom do thou resemble in thus doing? not believers, but infidels;
not righteous, but wicked men.

Thirdly, what do thou when thou swearest by a creature? thou make a God of
that which thou swearest by: And therefore let all those be ashamed of using
these oaths, who would be ashamed to make a God with their hands, and to fall
down and worship it, Psalm. 115.4, 5, 6, 7.

For it is Gods Throne.]





August. s.

Calvin.





August. s.

Chrysostom) we may observe, that Christ does not praise the earth, Earth,
because it is subject to God. Heaven, for the presence of God; because it is
the place where the glory of God is revealed:
he dwells in the Heaven, Psalm. 2.4. and 113.4, 5. our God is in the Heavens,
Psalm. 115.3. Read Psalm. 123. and Matthew. 6.9. and 1 Timothy 6.16. and Psalm. 15.1.
and 2 Cor. 5.6.





But God is said to dwell amongst us,

The habitation and dwelling of God is manifold; namely, First, in his Temple,
I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honor
dwells Psalm. 26.8.
. Secondly, amongst his people, In Salem also is his Tabernacle, and his
dwelling place in Sion: that is, in the assemblies of his children Psalm. 73.2.
.

Thirdly, in the hearts of the poor and humble: I am the Lord whom the Heavens
cannot contain, with whom then shall I dwell? even with him that is of an
humble and contrite heart Esa. 57.15.
.

Fourthly, in Heaven, and this is Gods proper Mansion: But of this more in Mat.
6.9.

. 6. Neither by the earth, for it is his footstool.]

Why are these words added, Earth is his footstool?

First, to teach us, that God governs all things

Secondly, to teach us, that God is so immense The Heaven (says Solomon) and
the heaven of heavens cannot contain him, 1 King. 8.27. Read Acts 7.48, 49.
and 17.24. Esa. 66.1. The person of the Lord is infinite, and Ubiquitie is
proper unto him. He is 1. As water in the Sea. 2. As the eye of man over the
earth. 3. As the air in the world. 4. As the knowledge of man, which extends
it self unto all things. 5. Or as the soul in the body, which is in the whole
body, and in every part thereof.

What benefit may we reap from this Infiniteness

It should teach us to have no base, or low,

First, of the glory, beauty, and excellency of his Majesty.

Secondly, how great respect, and reverence we owe unto him.

Thirdly, his anger and jealousy if we provoke him.

Fourthly, how infinite the reward is both of mercy and justice, which he has
in his power: How abundantly able he is to reward all those who serve him, and
to punish all those who offend him.

Fifthly, remember in how great need we stand of his mercy, and how miserable
we are without it.

. 7. Neither by Jerusalem, for that is the city

Why does not our Savior say, Swear not by but the city of the great King.

First, the Jews did not acknowledge Christ, and therefore he urges that
which they acknowledge.

John 4. and the people. Romans 11.



Jews respected Herod, and Pilate and the Romans more then Christ; and
therefore he shows that all their power, authority and dignity, is nothing
in comparison of this prerogative to be the city of the great King: because
all other things are uncertain, only this is solid.

Pet. 2.9.



John 5.19. and therefore we must serve and obey our King.

Revel. 2.9. and therefore are not to be imitated.

Cor. 13 12. 2. For purity, because no unclean thing shall come into heaven,
Revel. 21. the last verse. and 22.25. 3. For good affections, because evil
lusts war against the soul, and would debar us from heaven. 4. That we may
be made spiritual, because flesh and blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God, 1 Cor. 15.50. 5. Let us labor to be zealous for Gods glory, because we
are created unto his service, and we shall receive the inheritance of sons,
if by our service we glorify him.

VERSE. 36. Neither shall thou swear by thy head, because thou can not make
one hair white or black.
Neither shall thou swear by thy head.]







He that (wears by the Temple, swears by him that dwells therein: So he
that swears by creatures, swears by God who created them, and yet by no
means he will swear by the sacred name of the Lord; as if a child abhorring
any bitter thing or poison, should notwithstanding take the same under a little
sugar.

Secondly, because he calls upon dumb things that cannot hear, he brings
them to patronize his cause, who can neither hurt nor help: like infants that
prate unto babies made of clouts: or like Baals Priests, unto whom he was not
able to give answer, though they called upon him from morning, till noone tide.

. 2. Because thou can not make one hair

Why does our Savior name here only the hair of the head?

To teach us that the least things must be directed unto the service of God;

. 3. White or black.]

What shall we think of those who by powdring of their hair,

First, in general, Pet. Mart. 342. says fucus Droane, because none but idle
droanes, (who do not belong unto the Beehive of Gods Church, neither employ
themselves in any lawful or commendable course of life) use it. Cyprian says
it was invented, and devised by the devil: And Hierome (de veland. virg.)
says, Non sunt membra qua Deus fecit sed satan inficit. The painted face is a
member not of Gods making, but of the Devils marring: He who desires to see
the opinion of Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Hierom, and Augustine
herein, and what they thought of powdring and crisping of the hair, and
painting of the face; let him read Peter Martyr 2.11. 75. etc.

Secondly, more particularly, I express what not be more careful to please
men than God, and therefore they avoid this painting. V. The end certainly, is
either first pride, or secondly a temptation unto lust: And therefore the thing
cannot be good.

VERSE. 37. But let your communication be yea, yea; nay, nay, for whatsoever is
more than these, comes of evil.
But let your communication be yea, etc.]

The scope of our blessed Lord in these words, is to forbid all common
swearing, or all swearing in our common discourse; and therefore I will add
something to what has been said before, verse. 34.



Cornwall, who was a notorious common swearer, and upon the stumbling of his
horse, swore at him, and presently fell with his horse unto the R^ver, and was
drowned, saying as he fell, Horse and man, and all to the Devil.

All things fall out alike to all (says the wise man) to the clean and the
unclean^, to him that swears, and that fears an oath: In which words he
makes swearing an evident proof of a profane person, Eccles 9.2.

by Gods Blood; for when he lay upon his death bed, continuing still in that
sin, he finally heard the Bell toule, and therewith swear, Gods Blood this
Bell touleth for me, and presently the blood gushing out on all parts of his
body, he dyed.

by the Mass, and by the Rood?



This makes the Lord break into such impatience against the Israelites: How
should I spare thee, thy children have forsaken me, and sworn by them who are
no Gods Jer. 5.7.
. And again, They that swear by the of Samaria, saying, Thy God (O Dan)
lives, shall fall and not rise again Amos 8.14.
.

Be yea, yea, and nay, nay.]

What does our Savior mean by this affirmation and negation?

The Ancients did expound this doubling of the words, yea, yea; nay, nay,

First, as in the conscience the thing either is or not, so also it should be
in the tongue.

Secondly, as the thing indeed either is or not, so also it should be in the
speech.

Thirdly, as in the mouth there is yea, or nay, so there should be in the deed
or work: that is, according to the truth of the thing, and our knowledge
thereof, should our words be; and then according to our words spoken, our works
should be performed.

Secondly, our Savior hereby would teach us

: 3. For whatsoever is more then this.]

(...), the word here used, sometimes signifies excellent, sometimes abundant,
sometimes superfluous, coming from (...), supra, as if we should say, above
that which is necessary: and so it is taken ^n this place, whatsoever is
superfluous, or more than needs, avoid it, for it comes of evil.

The An^baptists hence object, that all swearing

First, necessary oaths are not superfluous Beza.

Secondly, our Savior says, Let your speech but when the Magistrate imposes,
injoyneth, and commands an oath, then it is not ours, that is, in our power (
Areti. part. 1. probl. 66.) Our Saviors scope is here, to forewarne us of all
levitie, and vanity in our ordinary talk, and not to forbid all swearing when a
weighty necessity urges thereunto.

They object again, our Savior says here, Whatsover is more than these,
comes of evil: And therefore to swear by God before a Magistrate, is
unlawful.

This follows not it proceeds from evil; Augustine says (sup.) Non dicit
malum est, sed a malo procedit: Christ does not say, that it is evil to swear
by God in it self, but that it comes from evil, thus ordinarily, and without
any necessity to call God to witness the truth of what we affirm.

Can that be abused in using which is lawful?

We may deprave and pollute the best things by too much liberty: as for
example, 1.

First, there are many external and outward good things which may be abused,
as for example. First, Honor is good, but yet, It is not good to eat much
Honey, nor for men to seek their own glory too much. Secondly, Prove. 25.26.
riches are good, but yet a man may so set his heart upon them, that they may
become a snare unto him Mat. 6.19.
; and therefore, as we must not seek honor too much, so must we not labor too
fast to be rich. Thirdly, Meat and Wine are good, and yet they may be abused
unto gluttony and drunkenness Eze. 16.49. Ephesians. 5.18.
. Fourthly, apparel are good, and yet they may be abused unto pride, Luke 16
19. Act. 12.21. etc. Fifthly, pleasure and delight is good, and yet they may be
abused, Luke 16.25. Prove. 25.16. Sixthly, ease and rest are good sometimes, and
yet the abundance of ease is the cause of much evil Eze. 16.19.
. Seventhly, time is good, but it may be misspent and abused.

Secondly, there are many internal and inward good things, which may be
abused: as for example.

First, joy is good, and yet a man may give himself too much to jollity and
mirth, Eccles. 3.4. and 7.4. and 1 Cor. 7.29.

Secondly, sorrow is good, and yet a man may be too sad, and dejected, giving
too much way to sadness and grief, Eccles. 3.4. and 1 Cor. 7.29. and 2 Cor. 7
10.

Thirdly, fear is good, and yet a man may be too fearful, 1 Chronicles. 21.31.

Fourthly, knowledge is good, and yet sometimes it puffes up, 1 Cor. 8.1. and
Eccles. 1.18. etc. Romans 12.3.

Fifthly, Justice is good, and yet a man may be too just Eccl. 7.18.
; that is, a man may be too cruel, severe, and rigid, pressing the Law always
to the uttermost, and so Summum jus summa injuria.

Sixthly, divine Revelations are good, and yet Paul was in danger to have bin
puffed up through abundance of them 2 Cor. 12.7.
. And therefore let us labor to be sober and moderate, Romans 12 3.

. 4. Comes of evil, or, a male illo.]

Some read these words, Neutraliter, comes from evil; some more rightly
Masculine, of the Devil, whatsoever is more than these, comes of the evil
one. Thus Beza, Musculus, Gualter: The reason of this reading is, First,
because the article is here added, (...) a malo illo: Secondly, because it is
thus taken elsewhere, when one hears the Word of God, and understands it
not, then comes (...) that wicked one, etc. Mat. 13.19.

Our Savior here teaches us, John 8 44. and 1 John 3.8.) so particularly
every customary swearing is from that evil one.

How is usual swearing from the Devil?

These ordinary oaths come from Satan two manner of ways:

To wit, First, immediately, because he tempts thereunto. Secondly, mediately,
because has a hand in the occasions of swearing, whether in our Selves, which
are these First, lightness and vanity of speech, or a pronesse unto swearing.
Secondly, a custom of lying, whence it comes to pass, that we are not
believed except we swear Thirdly, an habit, or evil custom of swearing.
Fourthly, unbridled anger, which makes us often break forth into swearing.
Fifthly, covetousness, whence thou will rather swear, then want what thou
would or should have. These things are wrought in us by Satan, and are
occasions unto us of swearing.
Brethren which are two, viz. First, incredulity, we swear because our
brother will not believe us by yea and nay. Secondly, persuasion, thus Job was
persuaded by his wife, to curse God and aye: and many are persuaded by their
friends to take many an unnecessary oath.


















Seventhly, remember that by swearing, I. Pet. 5.8. Yea, III. A custom of
swearing will bring thee to horrible blasphemy.

VERSE. 38. Ye have heard that it has been said,
This was a Law given unto the Jews by God,

First, in general, they hence thought revenge was lawful, and that by this
Law, liberty was allowed, par pari reponert, to recompense evil with evil.



an eye for an eye, etc?





Omittendo, by omitting something; as they did, verse 33. Thou shall not for
swear thy self: but omit the words of the law, Thou shall not swear.

Secondly, Addendo, by adding something unto the word: thus they do, verse 43.
Thou shall love thy friend, and hate thy enemy: the last clause thereof was
added: this is a cursed thing, to add to Gods word.

Thirdly, Sensus nostros ingerendo, by wresting the words to our own purpose:
Thus the Papists say, the Apostles had five loaves and two fishes. Therefore
there are seven Sacraments Mat. 14 17.
. Christ said to Peter, feed my sheep; Therefore the Pope had absolute power
to govern the Church, binding and loosing, excommunicating and deposing whom
he pleases: These are gross consequences.

Fourthly, Verba premendo, by straining the word beyond his meaning; Thus the
Papists inform those words, This is my body: So others, to wit, the Libertines
press those words, all things are lawful, stretching them as broad as their
consciences are large.

Fifthly, Male applicando, by a wrong application, and this is the Jews fault
in this place: they apply this law unto themselves, which was given only to
the Rulers and Judges.





David (according to the Leviticall law) to eat of the shewbread, but it was
necessary in regard of his and his young men's present hunger.





Senacherib was slain by his two sons, but it is not therefore lawful for
children to be Parricides.

Fifthly, apply the word aright: but of this we spoke before, Chap. 4. verse. 6.

VERSE. 39. But I say unto you, resist not evil;
. 1. But I say unto you, resist not evil.]

Wherein does Christ here oppose himself

First, they think, the law expressed in the Beza, sup.

Secondly, at least they thought that it was an eye for an eye, etc. Now our
Savior opposes himself to both these, showing that neither of the^ are
lawful: I say resist not evil.

What is meant by this word Evil? or what Evil is it that must not be
resisted?

First, Beza understands it Masculine, of that

Secondly, others take it Neutraliter, of evil: Poenae, the evil of
punishment, this we must endure patiently for Christ's sake. II. Culpae, The
evil of sin, here this general rule must be laid down: We must give no
place unto sin, or we must not yield to sin at all, but altogether resist
it: every sin is from Satan (1 Ioh. 3.8.) but we must resist the devil to
the face, giving no place unto him, Ephesians. 4.27. That is, first, we must
resist the motions of sin in our selves: Secondly, we must resist the
persuasions of sin which come from others. Thirdly, we must resist the commands
of superiors if they be sinful; that is, no command must make us do that
which God forbids: children are not to obey Fathers, servants are not to obey
Masters; Scholars are not to obey Teachers, when they injoyne the performance
of that which God prohibites in his word.

Fourthly, we must resist our brothers sin, that is, reprove and blame it,
and not seem to allow of it.

What is meant by this word, Resist?

First, sometimes it is taken in the best sense: Ephesians. 6.13. James 4.7. and 1
Pet 5.3.) and thus the evil of sin is to be resisted, as was showed even
now.

Secondly, sometimes it is taken in the worst Rebellare, to Resist, which is
manifold in Scripture, to wit, I. Some resist the will of God. Romans 9.19. II.
Some resist the Spirit of God. Acts 7.51. III. Some resist the truth of God. 2 Timothy 3.8. IV. Some resist the Preaching of the Gospel. 2 Timothy 4.15. V. Some
resist the Magistrate, Romans 13.2.

Secondly, it signifies Contradicere, to contradict and gainesay: Thus our
Savior promises to give unto his Apostles such a mouth and wisdom, that
their adversaries should not be able to gainesay nor resist Luke 21.15.
. And thus they who disputed with Stephen, were not able to resist the
wisdom, and Spirit by which he spoke Acts 6.10.
. So Elymas withstood Paul, Acts 13.8. and Paul, Peter, Gal. 2.11.



















Whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other also.]









We showed before that this truth was questioned

First, because God has instituted and ordained

Secondly, because in all civil, religion, and

Thirdly, because it is profitable for the evil Davenant s. Colos. 3.13.

We showed before that some thought it never

First, (as was said in the former question) he

Secondly, the Magistrate is justly implored propter justiciam, out of a love
to that rare virtue Justice; it is a just thing that offenders should be
punished, according to Gods own ordinance; that we may thereby have a
Testimony, that there is a God, who judges justly in the earth, either
immediately by himself or mediately by his substitutes and deputies, Kings,
Judges, and Magistrates ^.

Resist not evil; but whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to
him the other also: and if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy
coat, let him have thy cloak also: Therefore it seems, that it is not
lawful for a Christian to defend himself from danger, or to sue any upon any
cause.

Julian the Apostate, who would box the Christians upon the one cheek, and
then bid them hold up the other also.

Paul forbids the Corinthians to go before heathen Judges to plead; but
yet himself being enforced appealed to Caesar. So that the law takes not away
lawful means from a man to defend himself, but only shows when, and how
he should use those means.

Virtus moralis non consistit in puncto Mathematico sed habet suam latitudinem.
Moral virtues are not to be strictly interpreted according to the letter, but
may be further extended; So here, our Savior tells us, that in lighter
offenses and wrongs, we should remit something of our right, and not to stand
punctally upon our right in every thing. So thou must go two miles with a man,
if he compel thee, but not an hundred; Thou must not stand for a coat, or a
cloak; but if a man should take all that thou have from thee, then thou art to
resist him, and seek remedy by order of law. So the words following, verse
42. Give to him that asks, and from him that would borrow, turn not away thy
face: if they should be extended to the furthest, there were nothing more hard.

Lament. 3.30. He gives his cheeks to him that smites him; that is, he
suffers patiently,

Why smitest thou me? John 18.23. Therefore these words are not to be taken
literally, but are to be understood, that we should carry a Christian heart,
ready to forgive, and not to prosecut all injuries.





VERSE. 40.41. And if any man shall sue thee at the law, and take away thy
coat, let him have thy cloak also: And whosoever compels thee to go with
him a mile, go with him twain.
. 1. Whosoever shall sue thee at the law, etc].

The scope of our Savior here is this;

Why must all Christians be thus careful to

First, because peace is more excellent then Better is a dry morsel and
quietness therewith, then an house full of sacrifices with strife, Pro. 17.1.

Secondly, because it is an honor for a man Prove. 20.3.

Thirdly, because by suits we bite one another, Galat. 5.15.

Fourthly, because all Christians are brethren: Abraham would not contend with
Lot because they were brethren, Genesis 13.8. Moses would not have the Israelites
strive, because they were brethren: Joseph would not have his brethren fall
out, because they were all sons of one Father Genesis 45.24.
.

Fifthly, because strife and contention is a work of the flesh. Galat. 5.20.
yea bitter envying and James 3.14.15.16


Sixthly, it is a sign of a carnal man: There is among you envying, strife,
and divisions, are ye 1 Cor. 3.3.

Seventhly, because God is not the author of contention 1 Cor. 14.33.

Who sins against this direction of our Savior?

First, those who will contend for every trifle: Process for a word, or the
least wrong: yea bind a man to the peace for a matter of nothing, although
they cannot do it without perjurie.

Secondly, those who think they may without It is an honor for a man to cease
from strife. Prove. 20.3. yea we must seek pea^^ of those who have done the
wrong, as was showed before, verse 24.

Thirdly, those who will rather appeal to a

It is not lawful to appeal unto a godly Magistrate,

All things must be done in their right order; honored. Secondly, but first of
all put thy case to Arbitratours: This Saint Paul blames very tartly in the
Corinthians, Is there not a wise man amongst you to compose your wrongs (I
speak it to your shame) but ye go to law, etc. 1 Cor. 6.5.
. Alexander Severus, by an edict forbad them to be called Christians, who lawed
one with another. And Julian the Apostate did urge this text against those, who
were Christians and yet sued one another.

Thirdly, if thou can not refer thy cause to Arbitrators, because thy
adversary by no means will yield thereunto; then repair and appeal unto a
pious Magistrate.

Fourthly, before Ethnickes and Infidels Christians should not contend, except
it be upon a very urgent necessity; that is, I. for a weighty matter, not
for a trifle, as Paul appeals to Caesar for his life. II. If thy adversary
will not put the case to the Arbitration of Christians. III. When and where
there are no Christian and religious Magistrates. IV. When heathenish
Magistrates are thy Magistrates, that is, when thou live under them: as some
Christians under the Turks.

Whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile.]



Simon of Syrene to carry Christ's Cross. Mat. 27.23. The meaning therefore is,
If any (by authority from the King) shall endeavor to oppress, or to lay any
heavy load upon thee: thou shall not only willingly bear what is laid upon
thee, but (if occasion serve) thou shall do more then is enjoined.



Romans 13.6.



Prove. 16.2.

Mat. 17.27.





Mat. 17.25, 26, 27.



Why may we not grudge and complain when we are sessed too much, although we
cannot hinder the payment of it?

First, because herein thou art injurious unto

Secondly, because hereby thou betrayest and

Thirdly, because Oleum et operaem perdis, thou

Fourthly, because thus thou art a stumbling

Fifthly, thou hereby hastenest judgment: He but he that grudgeth to relieve
the poor is unmercifull James 2.13.
. He who sowes sparingly, shall reap sparingly 2 Cor. 9.6.
, but he who scatters unwillingly shall gather nothing: yea backwardness to
relieve the necessities of the poor is threatened with a curse: There is that
scatters and yet increases: and there is that witholdeth more then is meet,
but it tends to poverty Prove. 11.24.
.

What is our blessed Saviors principal scope if thou be compelled to go a
mile, go with him two?

First, that public burdens are to be borne if

Secondly, that hard impositions may be enjoined

Who are they that pretend the law of man

First, they who take the forfeitures of bonds.

Secondly, those who detain mortgages, and

Thirdly, they who deny secret right, that is

VERSE. 42. Give to him that asks thee:
And from him that would borrow of thee, turn thou not away.]

What is the scope of our Savior in these

First, to exhort his children unto liberality

Secondly, to teach Christians that they have must be ready both to give and
lend as often as a necessary occasion offers it self.

gratis we are no better then they. Secondly, our righteousness must exceed
the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, and therefore we must be
more ready to give, and more willing to lend then they were.

lend, says Christ, looking for nothing again, Luke 6.35.

Luke 6.35.

Beza, and the Marginall notes.



Calvine goes a little further, expounding these words thus, do not say, usury
is forbidden, and therefore I will only lend to him, who is able to lend to
me: But lend to him from whom thou can expect no such thing; as we must
feast those who cannot feast us again; Luke 14.12 But I shall speak more
fully of this place when I come thereunto.



Luke 6.34.

Number frater aut Deus potest melius pensare, Chrysostom. s. He that lends upon
Usury is rewarded by his brother, he that lends to the poor freely, shall be
rewarded by God: Now whether is the reward of God or man better.



Mutua quod a deo mutuatus es (Hilar. s.) Lend thou to thy brother that which
God has lent to thee; lend to thy brother as God has lent to thee, that is,
freely, not upon Usury.

Nummi non parturiunt (Aristot. polit. 1.7.) It is against nature that money
should beget money, and that inanimate things should thus increase.



Cato, Cicero, Lucullus, Lycurgus, Agesilani, and diverse others, did utterly
condemn it: yea, some of them punished a thief by making him to restore what
he had stolen twofold, but an Usurer fourefold.



But here Usurers object that the Civil law allows it.

First, the Civil law grants and permits Usury, Peter simply, and lend freely.

Secondly, the maine and plain scope of the Moses suffered them to give a bill
of divorce) Molem veterem gravissimam deduce^e ad ^^diocritatem (Iusten.)

Ninthly, because it is contrary to the law of do to others (says he) as you
would others should do unto you: Now who is there that would not freely borrow
rather then upon Usury?

Tenthly, because Usury is no vocation;

Eleventhly, because hereby thou hurtest thy videris dare, revera aufers
(Chrysostom. imperf.) Thou seem to give, but indeed take away from thy
brother. He who is bitten with the Aspe first laughs, then sleeps, then dies;
so the usurer under a show and color of friendship and help does bite and
kill his brother, whose substance does daily decrease by the use, he pays.

It is objected that only Neshek is prohibited, Exodus 22.25.

First, the word is very proper and fit; for all

Secondly, we must not strictly contend about Thou shall not commit adultery;
must we therefore say that only (...), adultery forbidden? Neshek we know is
used both by the Jews and Christians for all manner of Usury.

Thirdly, Neshek is not only forbidden, but al-also Tarbith.

To this some reply, that Tarbith sign fies Usury Ezekiell 22.12. Thou have
taken Usury and increase; where the word used is Tarbith which signifies (say
they) one of the worst kinds of Usury.

This appears not from the text; Thou have taken Neshek Vetarbith, usuram and
superabundantiam (Arias Montanus) usury and increase, or an overplus, which
seems to be only an exaggeration of the former word, as may appear by
another place in the same Prophecy: He has not given forth upon Neshek,
usury, neither has taken Tarbith, increase, Ezech. 18.8. that is, the
righteous is so far from biting usury, that he will not so much as take any
increase or augmentation of what he lends: where we see I. that Tarbith is a
less kind of usury then Neshek is, II. that God threatens them for Tarbith as
well as Neshek: and III. that the righteous man will avoid one as well as
another; and therefore it is not only Neshek biting usury which is forbidden,
but all manner of augmentation by contract.

Neshek and Tarbith are sometimes thus differenced: Neshek, respects money,
Tarbith respects victuals: Thou shall not give him thy money upon usury, nor
lend him thy victuals for increase: Where we see they are both forbidden, and
Tarbith seems to be less.

He that by usury and unjust gain increases his substance, etc. Where usury
and increase seem to signify one and the same thing: And therefore the Jews
who desired to walk according to the precepts of the law did refuse all
increase.

If thou lend money to any of my people that is poor by thee, thou shall not
be to him as an Usurer, neither shall thou lay upon him usury Exodus 22.25.
, as if the Lord would say, thou may lay usury upon the rich, and lend to
them upon usury: Again, If thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay
with thee, then thou shall relieve him, but thou shall take no usury of him, or
increase Lev. 25.35, 36, 37
, neither for money or victuals: Where the Lord forbids both Neshek and
Tarbith, to be used or imposed upon the poor: And therefore we may take usury
of the rich.

Deuteronomy. 23.19. Ezech. 18.8. and 22.12.



non distinguendum ubi lex non distinguit: We must not subtily distinguish
where the law does not: but rather satisfy our selves thus, usury in thesi, in
the general is simply forbidden, therefore we should forbear every particular
practice of it.







gain too far, saying thy brother gains, when he but only saves; as for
example, thou say if I had not lent him money, his lands or lease had been
forfeited, but now he has redeemed them: this is no gain, but only hereby
he is preserved from a loss.

Is it not lawful for widows, guardians of

Truly I conceive that they may lend their money for a participation of gain,
with an equal condition of hazard and loss: that is, if the party employing
their money loose, they will bear a proportionable share of his loss,
according to that proportion of gain, which they should have if he gain by it.

This point of usury being so much controverted

All clear and orthodoxe divines agree and accord in these things concerning
usury. I.

VERSE. 43. Ye have heard that it has been said,
. 1. Ye have heard that it has been said, etc.]

How do the Jews infer this that enemies are

The text alleged does directly forbid hatred; Thou shall not hate thy
brother, but love him as thy self, Levit. 19.17, 18. And yet they from hence
(by the rule of contraries) do collect, that because friends are to be loved,
therefore enemies are to be hated.

Wherein were they faulty by this collection

They were guilty of a double crime, namely. and meaning of the place by
pressing too much the words: The Law does not say (said the Scribes and
Pharisees) Thou shall love all men, but thou shall love thy Brother and thy
Neighbor, therefore strangers and enemies we are not commanded to love. And
thus by their additions and corrupt expositions, they would found error upon
the sacred Scriptures, for which our Savior blames them in this place.





First, if we desire so to expound the Word of God, that we may not mistake the
drift of the Holy Ghost, we must then observe diligently these probable Rules.









It is questioned and disputed amongst our selves, pro and contra, whether
usury be lawful or no? here it is granted by all, that it is certainly lawful
to lend gratis, but it is disputable, and undecided, what Usury is lawful by
the Word of God (for herein Divines differ) and therefore the most sure and
pure course will be, to lend freely.

Secondly, if we desire to open the Scriptures, that the mind and meaning of
the Holy Ghost may evidently appear unto us, then we must carefully and
diligently walk according to these few certain and true Rules.



Secondly, pray daily for a right and informed

Thirdly, let the exposition agree with the circumstances Pray continually, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.

Fourthly, do not too generally extend any

. 2. Thou shall love thy Neighbor.]

How many degrees of love are there one toward another?

The Ancients have these eight degrees. I. Augustine says, Qui amicum amat
propter commodum, non amicum convincitur amare, sed commodum: He who loves his
friend for his gain, thinks gain worth loving, but not his friend. III. Some
love others, because they trace the same path of impiety that they do; thus
drunkards love drunkards, and Heretics love those who maintain the same
Heresy that they do; this is a wicked and diabolical love. IV. Some love
others for some good work that they have done, or because they see them to be
good men; this love is commendable. V. Some love others because they are
members of the same body with them, that is, the children of their heavenly
Father; this is a spiritual love. VI. Some love those who love not them; and
this is a gracious love. Che^^. Harm. c. 51. p. 5^6.
There are two degrees more which the Ancients have ranked with these, but they
cannot be called degrees of love, but rather of hatred; namely, VII. Some love
not those who love them; and these are perverse persons. VIII. Some love not
entirely any, but are lovers of themselves; and this is an humane corruption
and infirmity.

. 3. And hate thy enemy]

The Scribes and Pharisees say this,

Why must we hate none?

First, because hatred is always forbidden, and The works of the flesh (says
the Apostle) are these, adultery, fornication, etc. hatred, variance, etc.

Secondly, because God loves all his creatures (as follows verse 45.) and
therefore we





Deuteronomy. 7.1, 2. Josh. 23.7, 12.







There are two sorts of enemies, to wit, ours, and Gods.

David did, arise O Lord, disappoint him, cast him down, and deliver my soul
from him Psalm. 17.13.
. And again, O Lord overthrow thou the counsel of Achitophel.

Secondly, if they be wicked men, and so Gods enemies, then these things are
required of us, namely:

First, we must hate their wicked works; ye that love the Lord hate evil,
Psalm. 97.10. The flesh that touches any unclean thing must not be eaten
Levit. 7.19.
, nor the society of sinners must be delighted in Prove. 1.10.15.
; but we must hate the wickedness of the wicked with a perfect hatred Psa.
139 21.
.

Secondly, it is lawful for us to pray against their malice; whether it be 1.
against God. Or 2. Religion. Or 3. Our brethren.

Thirdly, we must decline familiarity, and all intimacie with those who are
Gods enemies: David's delight was in the Saints Psalm. 16.3.
, and so must ours be; not in the wicked, for their company we must avoid Psalm.
26.4, 5. and 101.6. Esa. 52.11
, and that for these three causes. 1. Lest by their society we should be drawn
into sin, as Solomon was. 2. Lest we should be punished with them. Read
Numb. 16.26. Prove. 13.20. and 22.24. Apoc. 18.4. 3. Lest (at least) our hearts
should be grieved, and our eyes and ears offended with their wickedness: Thus
Lots righteous soul was grieved with seeing and hearing the abomination of the
wicked Sodomites 2 Pet. 2.9.
.

Here we must distinguish between those who Oppose themselves obstinately
against all goodness and Religion, these are to be avoided, and their company
not to be frequented. Are blind and ignorant, doing evil, because they know no
better; these are not altogether to be shunned, but as occasion offers it
self to be instructed and exhorted.


Fourthly, but whatsoever they be, though never so bad, yet they are to be
loved; 1. Because they are flesh of our flesh, of the same species with us. 2.
Because it may be they shall be converted hereafter: And therefore love them
for that hopes sake which thou may have of them.

VERSE. 44. But I say unto you, love your enemies,
. 1. Love your enemies.]

How does it appear that our enemies are to

First, from Levit. 19.17, 18. Thou shall not Where we see, 1. Our enemies must
be reproved, and we must not suffer them to sin, verse. 17. 2. We must not
avenge our selves upon them. 3. We must not remember the injuries, they have
done unto us, verse. 18.

Secondly, it appears from Romans 13.9. Thou And therefore Saint Augustine says
De doct. 1.30.
, this precept of loving our enemies belongs unto all.

Thirdly, it appears from Romans 12.20, 21. If

If we must love God with all our heart, and Deuteronomy. 6.5. and Mat. 22.37. then
where is there any place left for the love of our Neighbor?

First, it is certain that we must love none but supra, contra, aut prater
Deum, either above God, or besides God, or contrary to the command of God.

Secondly, but in the Lord we may and ought

Thirdly, yea those who love not men, cannot John 2.9. and 3.10. and 4.20.

How must we love our enemies?

First, affirmatively, we must love them thus,

David's example to hate them: Do not I hate them oh Lord, that hate thee; yea
I hate them with a perfect hatred Psa 139.21, 22.
? III. we must not love them unto death, that is, so love them that our love be
a means to bring them unto perdition: we must not flatter them in evil, but
labor by gentle reproves to reduce them from their errors.



We must not hold any man our enemy, Luke 10.31, etc.
and none our enemy: yea under the Gospel we are taught, That all men are our
brethren either By Regeneration or By Creation.
either Indeed, or In hope.
either In the Lord, or For the Lord.
And therefore none are to be held as enemies.



verse 45.

If any man say, he loves God and hates his brother is a liar: for how can he
love God whom he has not seen, and hate his brother whom he has seen? 1
John 4.20.

for every one who is borne of God loves his neighbor. 1 John 4.7.

Corinth. 12.12.) the partition wall being broken down; so that there is now
neither Jew nor Gentile which are to be hated, but all must be loved. Romans
12.18. And therefore they who hate the persons of those who are without, know
not what Spirit they are of.











Thirdly, the error in judging of love and charity: we neither know the
excellency or

Fourthly, the love of the world, and self-love

Fifthly, too deep an apprehension of the

Sixthly, an innate and natural pronenesse unto

Seventhly, the difficulty of showing and

What are the remedies against these impediments?

The remedies or means by which we may be helped forward in this duty of love
toward

Secondly, learn to see thy brother in thy

Thirdly, despise and contemn the world;

Fourthly, undervalew thy self, esteem

Fifthly, Let thy conversation be in heaven, which are above: walk continually
in the paths of love, charity, patience, humility, and meekness, and then
thou will be the more ready to love those who hate thee; and to do good unto
those, who do evil unto thee.

Bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, pray for them
which persecute you.]

Love your enemies, imply and include all these? Frustra fit per plura quod
fieri potest per pauciora: is not this unnecessarily to multiply words?











VERSE. 45. That ye may be the children of your Father which is in Heaven, for
he makes his Sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on
the just and on the unjust.
That ye may be the children of your Father.]

Stapleton urges and objecteth this place, to prove the merit of charity,
because our Savior commands us to love both our Neighbors, and enemies, in
the former verses; Vt fiamus filii patris, that so we may be made the children
of our heavenly Father.





Approba filiationem (Calvin, Beza, Muscul. Marlor) approve thy filiation to be
true by thy love unto thy enemies, and by doing good unto those who do evil
unto thee. II. Walk worthy of thy adoption and sonne-ship; as if our blessed
Savior would say, walk in your Fathers steps who does good unto all.

There are here two things considerable, namely, First, the Argument. Secondly,
the Consequence. First, the Argument which our Savior here uses, is this:
Because ye are sons therefore, etc. as if he would say, The chiefest care of
man is (or should be) that he may be made the son of God.

Why should we principally endeavor to be

First, in general, because all the promises of the

Secondly, because adoption and filiation are

Thirdly, because it is the greatest dignity in David thought it a great
honor to be an earthly Kings son in Law, how much greater is it then, to be
the adopted son our heavenly Father which is the King of Kings, and a Lord of
Lords: The blessed Virgin Mary was more blessed in being Gods daughter, then
Christ's mother.

Fourthly, because Christ only loves those

Fifthly, because Christ died for this end, that John 11.52.

Sixthly, because if we be not the children of Ioh. 8.44.

Seventhly, because if we be the sons of God, for as many as are led by the
Spirit are the Sons of God, Romans 8.14. and contrarily.

Eighthly, because if we be the sons of God Cor. 1.9. and 1 John 3.2.

Ninthly, if we be sons we are heirs, yea Romans 5.2. and 8.17, 21. and Gal.
4.7.

And therefore to conclude this Question; If we desire. 1. To be assured, that
all the gracious and comfortable promises of the Gospel belong particularly
unto us. If 2. we desire to be assured that we are of the number of those who
shall be saved. If 3. We desire to be promoted unto the greatest honor in the
world. If 4. We desire to be assured of Christ's love unto us. If 5. we long to
be gathered by Christ into his fold. If 6. We would not be the sons of Satan.
If 7. We desire the direction and conduct of the blessed Spirit. If 8. We
desire union and communion with God and Christ, we must then labor and
endeavor to be made the sons of God.

We hope we are the sons of God, and not of



We are the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.28. And therefore
if we have no faith, we are strangers from God and the Covenant of grace,
Ephesians. 2.12. and 4.18.

Romans 8.16. and Gal. 4.6. And therefore we must examine what manner of
certainty we have of our adoption. I. If we have no assurance hereof, we are
very miserable. II. If our persuasion be a lying presumption, and our hope
without any solid ground, then our condition is much more miserable. III. If
our assurance be weak, like a smoking flax, or bruised reed, then we must
labor that it may be more strengthened. IV. If our assurance be strong, and
built upon that never-failing Rock, then we are happy and blessed, Romans 8.38.
and 2 Timothy 4.8.

Gal. 5.25. and Romans 8 14. wherefore we should examine all our actions, and see
whether we live in the Spirit and walk in the Spirit or not: when we give
way unto sin, and avoid not the occasions unto evil, we should consider,
whether herein are we led by the Spirit of God, or by flesh and blood?

Fourthly, we may try our adoption by our affection;





Secondly, the next thing considerable, is the Consequence: The Argument was
this, Because ye are the children of God. The Consequence is this: therefore
love your enemies as becomes the children of God; as if our Savior would say,
none is the child of God who does not love his enemies.







Thirdly, because this is a divine thing, and an

. 2. Which is in Heaven.]

Why are these words added, Which is in Heaven?

To teach us,

Why must we love our enemies?

In God there are three reasons,

First, because God suffers him to be our enemy, and permitted him to do the
injury which is done unto us; and therefore we must confess and acknowledge it
to be just, both in regard of God and us; that is, the Lord did justly permit
it, and we justly deserve it. And therefore hate not thy Brother, because he is
but the instrument, and the stone which is thrown at thee.

Secondly, if thou be the son of God, then thy enemy cannot harm thee,
because the Lord will preserve thee: And therefore why should thou hate him
who cannot hurt thee?

Thirdly, though thou be injured and harmed by thy enemy, yet it shall be
profitable for thee, either, 1. Probando, by trying thy faith and patience: Or
2. Corroborando, by strenghtning thee more and more to undergo, whatsoever the
Lord shall lay upon thee: Or 3. Coronando, by crowning of us; because all the
crosses which we endure for the Lords sake shall be rewarded: And therefore why
should we hate those who do that unto us which is thus profitable for us?

. 3. For he makes his sun to rise.]

What is observable in the Sun?

First, the Philosophers gave it many high praises and phrases, as some of them
called it the heart, some the eye of the world; some the fountain of light,
the eye of heaven, and the mind of the world: some a heavenly fire, a
sempiternall living creature, a vital or animate planet (Speusippus.)

Agamemnon prayed unto it, the Persians adored it, the Egyptians called it a
God: Plato (de republ.) calls it the Image (or Vicar) of God, I forbear here to
show how some of the Gentiles worshipped the Sun, how some of them painted it,
how some built Temples unto it, yea how others in many things compared it to a
Lion.





II. the Sun runs continually; never abating his course at all, Read Psalm
104 and Cant. 1.5.

III. It enlightens the world; whence it is called magnum luminare Genesis 1.6.
and Psalm. 136.8.
, the great light.

IV. The Sun divides the times and seasons, Winter and Summer, Gen 1.14.

V. It ripens fruit, by his heat and warmth, as we see, by experience every
year.

VI. It is a means of man's generation, Sol and homo generat hominem (Aristot.)

VII. The Sun animates, quickens, and vivifies the world: yea, without the
Sun the world (in nature) could not subsist. But I enlarge not these things.

And his rain to fall.] What is observable in the rain.

First, we might speak here of the water philosophically, Moses, as also, 1
Pet. 3.21. and Tit. 3.5.

II. Water is the carrier away of the meat, what we eat, is not sent away,
without drink: whence we see how great a plague it was to be without water,
and how great the blessing was to be made partakers of it, 1 King. 17. and 2
King. 3.9. etc. Psalm. 105.41.

III. It is medicinable for many sickenesses, as fevers and those which are of
feaverous natures, which cannot be endured without the frequent taking of some
moist and liquid cool things.



We might observe, how the rain hangs above, and yet drownes not the world:
whence it is said, The Lord opened the windows of heaven, Genesis 7.11.
and it rained until the whole world was destroyed; and therefore it appears
that there is always water enough above us to drown us, if the Lord should
permit it to fall upon us.

II. We might note, how although the clouds weekly drop down their showers,
and the water in the springs and wells be continually drawn, yet neither of
them are exhausted or drawn dry. III. Admirable is the change which is
observd in this element, sometimes water becomes Ice, sometimes Ice, becomes
water; sometimes vapors become rain, sometimes rain becomes vapors. IV.
Great is the necessity and salubrity of showers, as might appear thus: 1. by
Gods promising of them as blessings, as Lev. 26.4. Deuteronomy. 28.12.13, and 11.14.
and Psalm. 147.8. and 1 King. 8.35. and Esa. 44 14. and Ezech. 34.26. 2. by Gods
threatening to withhold them in anger, Deuteronomy. 11.17. and Ierem. 4.4. and 2 Samuel
1.21. 3 by those good things which are compared unto rain, and showers, as Job
29.23. Psalm. 72.6. Deuteronomy. 32.2. Malach. 3.10.

. 5. He makes his Sun to rise, and his rain

Why does our Savior only name these two,

First, for the reforming of an old error: the

Secondly, other things are terrestrial, these two are celestial; therefore
our Savior names them, that our minds might be replenished with spiritual
meditations.

Thirdly, because we think, we can procure other things, as health, riches,
honor, and the like, by our own industry, or pains; but these two we all
confess, we are not able to obtain by any endeavor of ours, and therefore
against these two instances no objections can be made.

Fourthly, our Savior names these, for our example and instruction, to wit, 1.
As God gives these two unto all, so we should be ready to perform the duties
of love and charity unto all. 2. As God gives these two unto all for nothing;
so we should be ready to exercise the works of love, mercy, pity, and
charity to those who stand in need, although from them we are like to reap
nothing, we should not grudge and repine to give to those who cannot give to
us; for our Father does so unto us, we must not love our money better then our
brethren, and for the saving of that loose them. 3. God would have us give such
things unto our poor brethren, as he gives unto us: namely, First, he causes
his Sun to rise; so must we look with a cheerful countenance upon those
to whom we either give or forgive. Secondly, he causes his rain to fall,
which is profitable unto the earth, and nourishes both trees, herbs, and
come, yea, distilleth it self into every cranny and chinke of the earth; so
we must 1. nourish the poor; 2. give them those things which are profitable
for and unto them: yea, 3. give them plentifully for the supplying of their
wants.

His Sun to rise.]

Solemn orientem the rising sun?

Eccles. 11.7.
. Secondly, because we are quickly cloyed with the best things, and therefore
the Sun is not so delightful unto us, at noone, as it is in the morning.

Thirdly, because in the morning the Sun warmes and cherishes us, but at
noone, burns, harmeth, and causes those who are abroad often through heat
to faint: and therefore in the hottest inhabited climates of the world, the
people well brook the morning sun, but shelter themselves from his heat when
he comes to his height.

God makes his sun to rise.] Deus facit oriri: The rising of the sun seems
to be a work of nature, but it is indeed the work of God:



Tollere providentiam est negare Deum, to take away providence from God, is to
deny God himself, or that there is a God, or that there was a creation: For I.
The word teaches us that God made all things Genesis 1.1.2. and Psalm. 104.5. And
II. That he preserves all things which he has made. And therefore to deny his
providence in governing all things, is to deny his power in creating

Secondly, the truth of this that God orders, directs, governes and disposes
of all things appears by an induction of particulars: I. He governes the
Heavens, drop down ye heavens from above, and let the skies power down
righteousness, Esaias 45.8. II. He governes the Stars, Can thou bring forth
Mazzar^th in his season? or can thou guide Arctur^s with his Sons? Job
38.32. III. He treasureth up the s^^w and hail, and therefore sends them at
his pleasure, Job 38.22. IV. He made Summer and Winter, and causes them to
keep their appointed times Psalm. 74.17.
. V. He governs the Sea: Thou rulest the raging of the Sea; when the waves of
the Sea arise, thou stillest them Psalm. 89.9.
: yea thou dividest the Sea when the waves thereof roar Ier 30.35.
. VI. He by his providence ordains, and disposes of the birds; that is,
First he plumes them, Thou gave the goodly wings unto the Peacockes, and
wings and feathers unto the Ostrich Job 39.13.
. Secondly, he moves them; The Hawke flies by thy wisdom, and the Eagle
mounteth up at thy command Job ^9.26.27.
. Thirdly, he feeds them; The young ravens call upon him, and he gives
them meat, Psalm. 147.9. yea he provides for the fowls of the heavens Mat.
6.26.
. VII. He clothes the lillies of the field, Mat. 6.30. VIII. He feeds the
beasts of the field, Psalm. 147.9. And the wild beasts of the forest Job 39.1.2.
etc.
. IX. He feeds men, giving them grass for their cattle, and herbs, and
wine, and oil, and bread, Psalm. 114.14. X. He feeds all things; Every
creature expects his food from him Psalm 104.15.16.
. The eyes of all creatures look unto him, and he gives them their meat in
due season Psalm 145.15.16.
. XI. He governs all things: and gives to all things life, and spirit, and
breath, and all things, Acts 17.25. therefore in him we live, moove, and have
our being, Acts 16.28. yea by him all things consist, Colos. 1.17. and by his
mighty word all things are sustained, Heb. 1.3.

May we ascribe nothing to chance or fortune,

The name of Fortune should be banished from all Christian countries,

Whether things Animate. I. or Inanimate. II.
Whether things Good. III. or Evil. IIII.


I. Animate things are disposed of by God; and therefore a sparrow falls not
to the ground without the providence of God, Mat. 10.29.

II. Inanimate things are guided by God: The Lot is cast into the lap, but the
disposing thereof is from the Lord, Prove. 16.33.

III. Good things come unto us from our God: Thus Joseph says, God sent me
hither for your good Genesis 45 7.8.
; and therefore we must never sacrifice unto our own nets, or ascribe any
thing unto our selves.

IV. Evil things are ordered and disposed of by God: If a man casually murder
his neighbor, he shall fly to the city of refuge; because I the Lord
delivered him into his hand Exodus 21.13.
; for a hair cannot fall from your heads, without the providence of God, Luke
21.18. And therefore we must not murmur or complain for any crosses, but see
the hand of the Lord in all things.

Thus we see that both things animate and inanimate; good and evil, are
disposed of by God, and therefore no place is left at all for Fortune.

If all things be ruled by Gods providence,

We must not be careless in any thing of importance, but we may be fearelesse
of the event: Psalm. 107.6. II. Do thou fear imprisonment, God will either
preserve thee or bring thee out, Psalm. 107.10. etc. III. Do thou fear
Plague? God will deliver thee, Psalm. 107.11, etc. IV. Do thou fear danger?
He will give his Angels charge of thee; and they shall pitch their tents about
thee, Psalm. 34.7. and 91.11. yea the Lord will preserve thee as the apple of
his eye Zach. 2.8.
. VI. Do thou fear wild beasts? Thou shall tread upon the Lion and adder,
and they shall not hurt thee, Psalm. 91.13. VII. Do thou fear death? God will
deliver thee, Psalm 91.7. Et sic de caeteris: Thus the children of God are
happy and blessed, and need not fear the event of any thing, because all
things are ordained and disposed by their heavenly Father.

His Sun to rise, suum Solemn.]



Ier. 31.35.



His Sun, because he gives it freely unto us, and not of debt.

On the evil and on the unjust.]



To teach us that he does give, and we ought to give good things to those who
are evil.

First, Christ adds here the object of Gods mercy, to teach us, that God gives
outward

Have wicked men any interest in or right unto any temporal blessing? is not
temporal right only founded in grace?

Those who never were endued with faith or supernatural grace may have a true
and a just title unto temporal things: This may be confirmed by Gods own
gifts, and who can have a more sure, or just title unto a thing, then he who
receives it from God, who is Lord of all, and gives nothing but his own? But
God gives external good things to the wicked and unbeleevers: This is proved
by out Savior here himself; God makes his Sun to rise upon the evil, and
raineth upon the unjust. Hence then I argue. He who receives a gift from God,
has a true title thereunto.

But wicked men receive many temporal gifts from God: Therefore they have a
true and just title unto them.

Indeed the manner how wicked men and unbeleevers use temporal blessings is
oftentimes unjust, and yet the title thereunto may be most just Bishop Davena^t.
quest. 30. Page 137. initio.
.

Secondly, our Savior here adds Evil and Unjust, to teach us, That we must
do good even unto those who are evil, remembering that the object of Mercy is
misery, and not merit; and therefore we must not enquire after the goodness of
the object, but look unto his want and poverty. True it is we must chiefly
regard the household of faith; not forgetting the rest, Gal. 6.10.

VERSE. 46. For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not
even the Publicans the same?
What reward have ye.]

The Papists object this place to prove the merit of our works, because our
Savior here implies, that God will give us according to our

It is true, that God will give us according to our works, but not for our
merits; ut praemium non ut meritum; that which God gives unto us is given as a
reward, not as a thing deserved: God will reward our works, but we do not
merit that reward, being (in our best performances) unprofitable servants Luke
17.10.
.

That we do not merit that reward which shall be given unto us, appears thus.

First, because this is to derogate from God and to arrogate unto men: or as
the Apostle says most plainly, of salvation be of works, then it is not of
grace; and if of grace, then it is not of works, otherwise grace is no grace
Romans 11 6. Ephesians. 2.1.8.
.

Secondly, if salvation were of works, then rich men would buy heaven as they
do earth; because they are the works, the Popish Clergy look principally
after.

Thirdly, there is no proportion betwixt our works and heaven; and therefore
nothing that we do can merit heaven.

Fourthly, that which is here called (...) (reward) is called (...) thanks,
Luke 6.32.

But they thus object against this, If evil works merit death, then good
works merit life; if wicked works deserve hell, then good works deserve
heaven: for contrarierum eadem est ratio, there is for contraries one and the
same reason.

Good and evil works are not adaequate contraries; For wicked works are I.
in themselves perfectly wicked, but good works are imperfectly good, being
blotted with many infirmities. And II. evil works are eternal in will, that
is, if we should live for ever, we should sin for ever; but good works are
performed only by starts, with a frail and wavering affection, and
unconstantly: wherefore there is no equal proportion between good works and
evil: as we may see evidently in that difference which Saint Paul makes, The
wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life Romans ^.23.
.

What does our Savior mean by this interrogation, What reward have ye?

This question shows, that there is a reward of works, truly good; the word
here used, (...) is of the present time; as if our Savior would say, if your
works be truly good, then you have now a reward in certain hope; but in
these things which Publicanes and wicked men perform, what reward can you hope
for or expect? Christ hereby teaching us, Genesis 4.7. Psalm. 19.12. Pro. 11.21.
Esaias 3.10. Mat. 10.41.

Why shall the works of the righteous be

First, because they confirm their faith: the

Secondly, because God does accept of those In as much as you did it to them,
you did it to me, Mat. 25.40.

Thirdly, because God has ordained, that Mat. 5.16. should be crowned in
heaven with eternal glory, Romans 8.17. And therefore the Papists shamefully
belie us in saying, that we destroy good works; for Meritum non Mercedem
destruimus, we labor to overthrow Man's Merit, not Gods reward.



But Protestants say so: Therefore they are hinderers of good works.

The Major we grant, but deny the Minor; for we do not bid men work, even to
a cup of cold water Mat. 10.42.
: only we prohibit men to brag or boast of their merits or works.



Moses was encouraged by this argument to neglect and refuse honor and
pleasure Heb. 11 26.
. Christ hereby was encouraged to endure the cross, and to despise the shame
Heb. 12.2.
. And the Apostles for this immortal, and incorruptible reward did cheerfully
undergo affliction and persecution, Read 2 Timothy 4.8. Iam. 1.12. and 5.7, 8.
and 2 Cor. 4.17. and 1 Pet. 4.13. Revel. 22.12.

Romans 8.32. II. thou shall be hated of men: but thy comfort is, that God, and
Christ, and the Saints will love thee. III. If thou addict thy self wholly unto
the service of the Lord, it may be thou shall loose many a friend which now
thou have: but thy consolation is, God has said I will never fail thee, nor
forsake thee, Heb. 13. from Josh. 1.5. IV. In the way of religion perhaps thou
may walk alone, unaccompanied by any; but be not any whit herewith
dismayed; for Elias thought thus, but God tells him, that there were seven
thousand who served the Lord and not idols: yea thou shall be accompanied by
God, the Saints, and Angels, who are ministering spirits for the consolation of
the godly. V. It may be thou may meet with derision, taunts scoffs, and
mockes by the world and worldlings, for thy good works and sanctity: but
remember thou art dear, and acceptable unto God, who does commend and praise
thee for thy obedience. VI. Thou may think that it is a hard thing to
forgive him, that has done thee wrong; but thou may be encouraged hereunto
by this, that if thou pardon him, God will pardon thee, Mat. 6.14. VII. It may
seem hard unto thee to give over all unlawful pleasure; but here is thy
comfort; that if thou do this on earth for Gods sake, thou shall be rewarded
by him in heaven with everlasting joy. VIII. If thou think it difficult to
renounce the world, who is like a beautiful harlot; then remember that if thou
do it, thou shall in the world to come be made partaker of those joys, which
eye has not seen, nor ear heard, etc. 1 Cor. 2 9. IX. If it seem much unto
thee to impair thy substance by imparting thereof to the fatherless and
widows: then consider, that hereby thou do lay up treasure for thy self in
heaven; yea thou treasurest up hereby riches for thy children. Thus consider
how great blessings the Lord promises to bestow upon us, if we labor to be
rich in good works both toward God and man; and this will be a means to
overcome the difficulty of good works?

What works shall be rewarded by God?

First, the worship and service of God: ye 23.25.

Secondly, the hearing and obeying of the If thou shall indeed obey his voice,
and do all that I shall speak, then I will be an enemy unto thy enemies,
etc. Exodus 23.22.

Thirdly, the observation of the Sabbath: If 58.13, 14.

Fourthly, the preaching of the word, he that planteth and that waters are
one: and every man 1 Cor. 3.8.

Fifthly, a spiritual life; He that sows to the 6.8.

Sixthly, righteousness; In every nation he that Acts 10.35.

Seventhly, Constancy and perseverance in Be ye steadfast and unmovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, for your labor is not in vain in
the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58.

Eighthly, the works of mercy, and charity; God is not unrighteous to forget
your work and labor of love, which ye have showed toward his name, in that
ye have ministered to his Saints, Heb. 6.10.

Ninthly, patience and confidence in tribulation; Rejoice and be exceeding glad
(when you are persecuted and reviled) for great is your reward in heaven, Mat.
5.12. And again, cast not away your confidence, which has great recompense of
reward. Heb. 10.35.

And therefore if we desire to be crowned with temporal blessings in this
life, and with eternal glory in the life to come, we must then I. Worship the
Lord. II. hear his voice and obey it. III. sanctify his Sabbath. IV. If we
be called unto that high calling, we must preach the word faithfully, and
constantly. V. We must live and lead a spiritual life. VI. be righteous
toward men. VII. be constant in the service of God unto the end VIII. be
charitable unto the poor. IX. be patient and confident in all adversity
whatsoever.



I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes, Psalm. 119.112.







Fifthly, if we obey God with a cheerful heart; Thy testimonies have I taken
as an heritage for ever; for they are the rejoicing of my heart, Psalm. 119.111.

Sixthly, if we serve God constantly through

. 2. What reward shall ye have?]

We have heard that by this Interrogation our What reward shall ye have?

Christ hereby on the contrary does show that for the works of the Pharisees
there is no reward,

Shall not the works of natural men be rewarded?

First, the best works of those who are no better

Humane; this natural men may have; yea Hypocrites and formal professors have
the praise of men, or estimation in the world, Mat. 6.2.5.16. Divine which is
either of Justice, and thus God will give them what they desire; namely, a
temporal reward and recompense, for a temporal work. Mercy, and this reward
the natural man shall never receive.



Quid faciam? What shall I do that my works may be accepted and rewarded by
God?











Do not even the Publicans the same?]



will love their friends.

Does our Savior here condemn the function and office of the Publicans?

First, the office and vocation is lawful, and Give unto Caesar that which is
Caesar's Mat. 22.21.
. And Saint Paul, render tribute to whom tribute is due, and custom to whom
custom is due Romans 13 7.
. And therefore without doubt it is lawful to gather toll and tribute.

Secondly, but they are blamed, taxed, condemned, Luke 18.11. The Jews despise
and reject Christ because he did eat with the Publicanes, Mat. 9.11. and
11.19. Yea Christ himself seems to slight them, and brand them as notorious
sinners, both when he says, let him who neglects to hear the Church, be unto
thee as a Publican, Mat. 18.17. and also when he conjoynes Publicans and
Harlots together, Mat. 21.31, etc.

Why were the Publicans generally thus odious

First, because they were like Ieroboams Priests, to wit, of the lowest of the
people; they were

Mat. 17.26. and hence good Zacheus (when he repented) made restitution of the
injuries and wrongs he had done, when he was a Publicane Luke 19.8.
, yea hence they were reckoned up with sinners, Luke 6 32. and exhorted to take
no more then was their due, Luke 3.13.





Do not the Publicans the same?

Do not the Publicans (says Christ) the same? as if he would say, what a
shame is it for you that are Teachers, to do no more then such base, vile, and
naughty people as Publicans do.



VERSE. 47. And if ye salute your brethren only,
. 1. And if ye salute your brethren only.]

How does this verse differ from the former?

It seems to be the same with the former, That speaks of the internal
affection, this of the external conversation: as if our Savior would say, the
Pharisees teach that you must not love your enemies; but I say you must not
only love them, but also outwardly carry your selves courteously and humanely
toward them.

What is meant by this word Salute?

(...) the word here used signifies to embrace and that with a kiss, as 1 Thessalonians. 5.26. Pet. 5.14. according to the manner and custom of those times, and
the Oriental nations. Beza. s.

How many sorts of Kisses are there?

There are two kinds of kisses in the Scripture Idolatrous; thus the Israelites
kiss Baal, 1 King. 19.18. Adulterous; thus the harlot kisseth the young man,
Prove. 7.13. Treacherous; examples whereof are, 29. Sam. 20. Mat. 26.44. Prove.
27.6.
Secondly, lawful, and is threefold, viz. First, Benedictionis, of Blessing;
thus Isaac kisseth Jacob, Genesis 27.27. and 31.55. Secondly, salutationis of
salutation, and is either when Friends are met withal and that either
Ordinarily; thus did Abraham to those who came unto him 2 Samuel 15.5.
, and Mary Magdalen to Christ, Luke 7.45. Or After a long separation; or when
friends first see one another: Thus Jacob kisseth Rachel, Genes. 29.11. and
Laban him, ver. 13. Read also Genesis 33.4. and 45.14.
Friends depart one from another: thus Laban complains of Jacob, that he would
not suffer him to kiss his children before they departed Genesis 31 18.
. Read more examples of these parting kisses in thse places. 1 King. 19.20.
and Ruth 1.14. and Acts 20.27.
Thirdly, Affectionis, of affection; these are either Divine; let him kiss me
with the kisses of his lips, Cantic. 1.1. Now all these kisses above mentioned
are strangers to this verse. Humane which are either of Love; thus Jonathan and
David kiss one another 1 Samuel 20.41.
, and examples hereof we have in the New Testament Romans 16 16. and 1 Cor. 16.20
and 1 Thessalonians. 5.26. and 1 Pet. 5.14.
. Reconciliation; thus Joseph kisseth his brethren, Genesis 45.15. and David
kisseth Absalom, 2 Samuel 14.33. and Luke 15.20.





What would our Savior teach us from this custom of theirs, of saluting one
another?

First, that not all the customs of the world are to be declined, but that
we may in some things apply our selves to the manners of the nations wherein
we are: Namely, I. in ceremonies, thus Ambrose persuades Augustine for the
peace of the Church to fast upon that day which is used in the place where he
is: that is, it he be in a place where they use to fast upon the Saturday, let
him do so; and when he is present with those who use to fast upon Friday, let
him do so also. II. In outward things; here observe, the manners and customs
of nations are threefold, viz.

First, vicious and impious, these are never to be

Secondly, some manners and customs are vain, fantastical, idle, and
ridiculous; as the fashion of apparel, and complements, and the like, which
ingenuous natures affect not, but slight.

Thirdly, some customs there are which are lawful and laudable enough, and in
these we may apply our selves to those amongst whom we live: for here only
the rule holds true and warrantable.

Cum fueris Romae, Romano vivito more.
Cum fueris alibi, vivito more loci.
If thou in Rome do range,
A Roman seem to be:
If thou thy dwelling change,
Live like them that live with thee.
Secondly, our Savior would teach us by this

Do not the Publicans the same?]

Bellarmine objecteth this place to prove, that unbeleevers may perform good
works* our Savior says, if you love those who love you, and salute your
brethren only, what do you more then the heathen and infidels: Therefore the
heathens may show some signs of love and good will toward their brethren and
friends; which is a good work; for otherwise Christ would not have said, What
do ye more? but why do ye this?

Good either materialiter or formaliter, either quoad operis substantiam, or
quoad rationem boni: that is, In good works there are two things to be
considered of, the Matter or substance of the work, and the manner of doing it
well; as for example, when a man gives bread to the hungry, or loves his
friends, or salutes his neighbors, he performs a good work for the substance
or matter of it: when a man does this, with a good will, or with a good
intention, or out of a love unto God or virtue; he performs a good work for
the manner of it.

Bellarmine himself confesses, when he says Potest servari praeceptum
secundum substantiam operis, etiam cum peccato.

bonum non bone, a good thing but not well: he who desires to see a Jesuiticall
conflict, let him read Maldonate upon this verse, where he shall see him
fighting for us against his brother Jesuit; affirming boldly that none shall
be rewarded for any of these works here mentioned, except they do them
propter Deum, for Gods sake.

Fourthly, Bellarmines proof is frivolous, in Cur hoc facitis? Why do ye
this? and not, quid amplius facitis? what do ye more? for they are both one in
effect: for if every good work be rewarded by God; and these to love our
friends, or to salute our neighbors, are not rewarded by him; and are denied a
reward because Pagans and Publicans do the^: Then it must needs follow, that
these works shall not be rewarded by God in Pagans and Publicans; neither in
them are good works Chamicr. de lib. arb. l. 4. Cap. 9. Sect. 7.8.10. Tom. 3.
fol. 99. Verse. 48.
.

VERSE. 48. Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father, which is in heaven is
perfect.
. 1. Be ye therefore.]

These words having reference unto those which go before, it may be demanded,

First, he would not have his to offer wrong unto their neighbors or
brethren.

Secondly, not to be revenged more then the wrong suffered, or sustained
requires.

Thirdly, not to be revenged so much as the

Fourthly, to suffer further injury, rather then revenge any.

Fifthly, to do more then he requires, that does him wrong.

Sixthly, not to hate him that does him wrong: but even to love him.

Seventhly, to be beneficial unto him, and to pray to God for him. Chrysostom.
Homil. 18. s.

We produce this place against that Popish distinction of Precepts and
Counsels: Our Savior here says, ye shall be perfect as your heavenly Father
is perfect: Therefore all Counsels tending to perfection are Commandments. If
there be any thing, whereby we may more nearly attain unto perfection, we
are commanded and bound to do it: as for example, if a man can better obtain
this perfection of godliness, by living single, if he have the gift, he ought
to do it. Reply.


Bellarmine (lib. 2. de Monach. Cap. 9. Arg. 5.) distinguishes: There are
(says he) two kinds of Perfection; a less which consists in the full
keeping of the law, which is necessary to salvation: and this perfection is
commanded in this verse. There is a greater perfection not simply necessary
unto salvation, but required for the obtaining of a more excellent degree of
glory; and this perfection consists in the observation of counsels; and this
our Savior means, when he bids the young man to sell all that he has,
that he may Mark. 10.21.

First, there can be no greater perfection, then the absolute fulfilling of the
law, which is in love; wherefore that which he calls the less perfection is
the best, seeing it fulfilleth the law Romans 13 10. and 1 John 4.12, 16, 17
.

Secondly, the perfection spoken of in this verse is the best perfection; we
must labor to be perfect as God is perfect: now what greater perfection: can
there be, than to be perfect according to the example of God?

Love your enemies, etc. which perfection all the Papists refer unto a
Counsel, not unto a precept, as does also Bellarmine himself ( de Iustificat.
lib. 4. cap. 3.) and therefore according unto himself his distinction is false
and frivolous. Bellarm. enervat. Ames. tom. 2. fol. 163.

love our enemies; for a man may give all his goods to the poor, and yet be
without love 1 Cor. 13.3.
, but a man cannot love his enemies, unless he have love: And therefore that
exhortation to perfection, Willet. synops. fol. 323.
contains not only a Counsel, but a command.

Be ye therefore perfect.]





Why does Christian perfection consist herein?

First, because there is nothing more difficult to nature than to pardon and
love our enemies.

Secondly, because there is nothing more opposite unto Satan than this is, to
love those who hate us.

Thirdly, because there is nothing wherein we more resemble (or come near
unto) our God than this, to forgive those who have injured us, and to love them
who hate us.



Matthew. 19.17.) but in many things sinful ( James 3.2.) and if any deny
this, and say he is no sinner, John will tell him he is a liar 1 John 1.8, 10.
Answ.
.

There is a double perfection, to wit, either First, Absolute, which is an herb
growing only in heaven: and is found in God, the Angels, and glorified Saints:
this perfection is spoken of in 1 Corinthians. 13.10. Heb. 12.23. and Phil. 3.12.
This we cannot attain unto in this life, but must endeavor unto, as long as
we live. Secondly, limited, which consists in sincerity, when the heart is
upright: examples whereof we have 1 King. 15.14. and Phil. 3.15. Now this is
required in us, and is called perfection, in a threefold regard; namely, I.
Because there is in us a sincere purpose to obey and please the Lord in all
things. II. Because we have the seeds of all virtue in us. III. Because we
endeavor daily, to be more holy, more pure, more perfect, Ephesians. 4.13.


Why must we thus labor after this perfection

First, because it is commanded, and that both Abraham, be perfect, Genesis 17.1.
and of all the people of God, Deuteronomy. 18.13. and of Solomon 1 Chro. 28.9.
. II In the New Testament, Be ye perfect. 2 Cor. 13.11.

Secondly, because it is commended, and that Noah, Genesis 6.9 and in Hezekiah. 2
King. 20.5. and Asa. 1 King. 15.14. II. In the New Testament, Zachary and
Elizabeth were both perfect, Luke 1.6.

Thirdly, because the contrary is condemned; Amaziah is reprooved, because he
sought not God with a perfect heart. 2 Chronicles. 25.2. And II. in the New
Testament, Simon Magus is reproached because his heart was not perfect in the
sight of the Lord. Acts 8.21.

Fourthly, because this is the end of the Ministry that as pure virgins they
may present them unto God. 2 Cor. 11 2.

Fifthly, because this the godly pray for: Epaphras Colos. 4.12.

Sixthly, because we must labor to regulate study to know, what the good, and
absolute, and perfect will of God is.

Seventhly, because God loves those which The eyes of the Lord run to and fro
thorowout the whole earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them whose
heart is perfect toward him. 2 Chronicles. 16.9.

What kind of perfection must we endeavor

Perfection is twofold, to wit, either General, which is First, Fide, in
faith: gird up the loins of your mind, that you may believe perfectly 1 Pet.
1.13.
. Secondly, Paenitentia, in Repentance, Resolution, and a true Purpose of the
heart; First to hate, leave, and forsake all sins, the least as well as
greatest Secondly, to abstain from the appearance of evil (1 Thessalonians. 5.22.)
that is, the circumstances of sin, and all scandalous actions. Thirdly, to
detest all evil, even in the hidden man of the heart. Fourthly, to loath and
leave all sin for ever, even until death.

Particular, and that both Within, in A right heart; which is called justitia
veritatis, holiness of truth Ephesians 4 24.
and sincerity and truth: Josh. 24.14. and 1 Chronicles. 29.9. and 2 Chronicles. 19.9. A
good conscience, 2 Corinthians. 1.12. Knowledge, Romans 16.19. and 1 Corinthians. 2.6.
and 14.20. and Heb. 5.14.
Without both, in Our life and conversation: here read these places 2 Samuel
22.24. Ephesians. 6.13. Phillip. 3.15. and 2 Timothy 3.17. and 1 John 2.5. and 4.12.
and 1 King. 11.4. and 15.3. Our words, see James 3.2. Patience, in wrongs,
injuries, tribulations, and the like, James 1.4. The circumstances of purity:
following after those things which are honest, and of good report Phil. 4.8
, laboring to do that which is good, and to do it well.










Brethren follow me, and together with me, them also who walk according to our
example. Phil. 3.17.



As your Father is perfect.]

Gualter thinks) little less than the sin of Lucifer?

Paul in these places, 1 Corinthians. 15.10, 57. and 2 Cor. 3.5. and 5.7.

David, Psalm 120.5. and Paul Romans 7.24.

Ad similitudinem non aequalitatem, Calvin. s.



he raises up the poor out of the dust, etc Psalm 113.7, 8. II. in the
degree of love, we must love them as brethren; for the Lord loved as a Father
does his children, read Psalm 27.10. and 103.13. and Esa. 49.15. III. in
patience toward those that wrong us; for God is patient toward us, though we
provoke him daily. IV. in our actions: God gives us good things not evil, and
therefore we should do good not evil unto others. V. God never punishes but
for good: he in all his corrections respects the end, chastening us as a Father
does his children, that we might be amended Pro. 3.12. and Heb. 12.5.
. Herein also we should imitate our God, never desiring that those who have
offended us should be punished out of revenge, but corrected that they might
learn to amend. VI. We must imitate God in affection; he is loath to punish,
and grieves when he corrects, but he rejoices to show mercy, Psalm 103.8.
Ezech. 18.23, 31, Thus should we do. VII. God in rigor and justice remembers
mercy. Mic. 7 18. so must we, remembering summum jus, summa injuria, to use the
extremity of the Law is hard and unchristian-like measure.

Secondly, we must imitate the perfection of Tit. 2.11. Taking no liberty to
do any thing that is evil, or to leave undone any thing that is good: That so
we may be perfect according to the similitude of our Father.

. 4. As your Father which is in heaven.]

Why does our Savior add this amplification, Qui es in caelis, Which is in
heaven? had not the mention of the exemplar, your Father, been sufficient?

Our Savior adds these words to teach us,

What glory, felicity, or excellency is there in

The glory of heaven may be conjectured, and amplified, both from the Price
which it cost, 1 Pet. 1, 18.
, wherein note, Quis? Who bought it? God the Father, who best of all knew the
value and worth of it. Quomodo? How was this price paid? not unwillingly, but
willingly. Pro quibus? For whom was it bought? not for himself but for us.
Names and elegancies thereof: I. Because life is sweet unto all, therefore it
is called life eternal, Mat. 25.44. The righteous go into eternal life. II.
Because all men desire some certain estate, therefore it is called an
Inheritance, immortal, incorruptible, and undefiled, 1 Pet. 1.4. III. Because
all men have some ambition and aspiring thoughts in them, therefore it is
called a Kingdom Lu. 12.32.
, and a crown of glory, 2 Timothy 4.8. IV. Because all men de^ight in the light,
therefore it is called light inaccessible 1 Timothy 5.16.
. V. Because all men desire honor and glory, therefore it is called a weight
of glory 2 Cor. 4.17.
. Thus the Lord expresses heaven by those things which are most desired by
men. Effect, because it makes us to be glorious, and that both in Soul: both
by a Removal of whatsoever is evil; for there all tears shall be wiped from
of all faces Esa. 49.10, and Rev. 7.16. and 21.4.
. Concession of whatsoever is good and which our hearts desire.
Body, which shall be endued with health, strength, beauty, comeliness, and
the fruition of whatsoever may make our joy complete. Whole man, for there the
righteous shall shine forth as the sun Dan. 12.2. and Mat. 13.43.
.
Circumstances, and that both of the Place: Here observe, men generally desire
stately houses, and love them so much the more, if they were built by some rare
and famous Architectour, principally if they be safe, healthful, delightful,
and pleasant habitations: Now heaven is a glorious place in all these regards
both in respect of the Creation, and fabrique thereof; it being the Lords
Masterpiece, in manimate things so beautified and adorned with Sun, Moon,
and Stars, that we may well say, Si tanta extra quid intus? if the outside be
so glorious; what is the inside? Creator and builder of it, it being a prime
piece of the best Architectour in the world: to wit, the worke-manship of God
Heb. 11.10.
. Habitation and situation thereof, it being free from all danger, anoyances,
greevances, and evils whatsoever, it is a pleasant place in it self, and a
place free from the assaults of enemies, or danger of sickness, or the like.
Society, both with God the Father: our fellowship is with the father, 1 John
1.3. Son: our fellowship is with Christ, whom we shall see as he is, 1 Ioh
1.3. and 3.2. Holy Ghost: if there be any fellowship of the Spirit, etc. Phil.
2.1.
Angels, and Archangels, and all the host of heaven. Men, namely,
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and all the blessed Saints.
Meat, we shall then be fed with Nectar and Ambrosia, Angels food; yea heaven
shall be unto us as a continual banquet. Apparel, in heaven we shall be
clothed with garments of Immortality And glory.
1 Cor. 15.53. Perpetual possession thereof: it being an inheritance that
never fades away 1 Pet. 1.4.
.



Thus we see the reason why our Savior adds these words, Which is in heaven,
that the meditation of heaven, and the joy and glory thereof may spur us
forward to strive and endeavor to be perfect as our heavenly Father is
perfect.







Thirdly, the meditation of heaven and the

Fourthly, these thoughts seriously ruminated Paul all his tribulations because
of that heavenly recompense of reward, Romans 8.18. and 1 Corinthians 4.17. etc.
2 Timothy 4.8.

CHAPTER VI.
VERSE. 1. Take heed that ye do not your alms before men, to be seen of them:
otherwise ye have no reward of your Father which is in Heaven.
OUR Savior in this Chapter does reprove the Scribes and Pharisees, 1. For
their Hypocrisy in giving, praying, and fasting: 2. For their care of the
world: because these spoil the best work which is performed.







ex animo; that is, there must be a conformity between the internal motions
of the heart, and the external good actions. Secondly, principally, because it
is Gods will and commandment, therefore that we may perform that obedience
which is due unto him, we must labor in good works. Thirdly, in our best
performances we must labor to retain an humble mind, confessing we have done
no more then was our duty to do, Chem. harm. f. 591. fine.

Take heed that ye do not your Alms before men.]

Some (Vulg. and Beza) read here (...) Alms; some Manuscripts have (...) (
sic August. de sermon. in Monte. cap. 2.) do not your righteousness before men;
the sense is one and the same, for to do righteousness is sometimes with the
Hebrews to give alms; yea, they called Alms righteousness, as we see,
Deuteronomy. 24.13. If thou restore unto the poor his raiment, it shall be
righteousness unto thee before the Lord thy God: The word there used is
(Tsedakah) which the Septuagints renders not (...), but (...) Alms, so also
Daniel 4.25. So Solomon says, Righteousness delivers from death (Prove. 10.2.
and 11.4.) but Tobit 12.9. It is alms delivers from death, Tsedakah being
there expounded by (...); so also Psalm. 112.3.9. and 2 Cor. 9.9. it is said,
His righteousness endures for ever, that is, his alms.

Before men.]

Is this absolutely commanded, or are we enjoined

No, as thus appears, 1. Mat. 5.16. And therefore from these three particulars
it is clear, that we are not absolutely forbidden to give alms before men.

We give alms because God commands us,

There is a good and necessary use of holding and showing forth good works,

First, there is a necessary use of holding forth good works in general, and
that in a fourfold regard; namely, 1. Of our God. 2. Of our Neighbor. 3. Of
our selves. 4. Of our profession.

First, in respect of God, it is requisite to do good before men, that so he
may be glorified, Matthew. 5.16.

Secondly, in respect of our brethren, it is necessary, that so we may be as
lights and good examples unto them, to encourage them in the way of God, and to
provoke them unto good works, Phil. 2.15,

Thirdly, in regard of our selves, that we may procure a good name and fame
unto our selves, we must be careful to procure things honest in the sight of
all men, Romans 12.17. and 2 Cor. 8.21. and 1 Timothy 3.7.

Fourthly, we must show forth outward good works, in respect of the Gospel
which we profess; we must strive that the mouths of all men may be stopped,
and that the glory of the Gospel may be advanced.

Whose mouths is it, that we must be principally

First, of Papists, who brag and boast of their

Secondly, they must stop the mouths of profane

Secondly, more particularly, there is a necessary use of showing forth this
work of Alms even before others; for he which is able to give much may give
publicly: and that for these two causes; First, that the poor knowing, thou will give, may beg of thee, and make their wants known unto thee. Secondly,
that thou may remove the imputation of covetousness and hard-heartednesse
from thee, which would be cast upon thee, if thou were known to be rich in
goods, and not known to be rich in good works.









VERSE. 2. Therefore, when thou do thine Alms, do not sound a Trumpet before
thee, as the hypocrites do, in the Synagogues and in the streets, that they may
have glory of men. Verily I say unto you; they have their reward.
When thou do thine Alms.]

Intention placendi Deo, with an intention to please God thereby: And for the
proof hereof object this place, thus; Our Savior here reproves the Pharisees
because they gave Alms to be seen of men: but we must give our alms in
secret, that God may reward us, verse 5. as they seek the praise of men, so we
must seek the praise of God Bellarm. de bonis oper in particular, li. 3. cap.
13. Answ.
.

Our Savior Christ bids us not in this place in giving our alms, to
propound and set before us the praise and reward of God, but only to take heed
of the praise of men, and to shun the same by giving in secret, and the
praise or reward of God follows upon this simplicity and singleness of
heart in giving of alms: We grant that our almsdeeds are well pleasing and
acceptable unto God through Christ; for with such sacrifices God is well
pleased, (Heb. 13 16.) but yet we must not do them only for hope of a reward,
or the like respect, but for conscience sake, and out of duty toward God.

Sound not a Trumpet.]





First, it tries hearers, whether they be the children of God, or not; for many
men deceive both themselves and others in many things, who David, who takes
kindly a particular reprehension (2 Samuel 12.12.) but wicked men cannot endure
thus to be touched to the quick.

Secondly, it is a means to humble hearers; Cor. 14.24. etc. being reproved he
falls down: so the Prophet Esaiah tells the people, that their carnal
security shall be talked of and reproved, and it shall be a vexation to
understand the report Esa. 28.19.
.

Thirdly, it is a means to make sin odious Ahab, who being reproved, seemed
by his sorrow to loath the sins, which he had committed.

Fourthly, it does excite us to amend: gentle

What is meant by this phrase, Sound not a

First, some think that it was a Proverb, Gualter s.

Secondly, the phrase was not proverbiall, but

Thirdly, it is observable, that this was commanded Moses to make two silver
Trumpets, that by the sound thereof, the assembly might assemble together at
the door of the Tabernacle Numb. 10.1. etc. verse. 19.10
; yea by the Trumpet they were assembled unto battle, verse. 19.10. whence a
Feast of the blowing of Trumpets was instituted Number. 29.1.
. We might observe two things from hence; namely.

First, that holy and divine institutions may

Secondly, that all kinds of hunting after vain

. 3. As do the Hypocrites, or Pharisees.]

The meaning of these words is, that in the performance of good duties, we must
not be like unto them.

What was the manner of the Pharisees and Hypocrites in moral worship?

First, the Pharisees were diligent in small Matthew. 23.23. but we must
principally respect the greater things of the Law, not neglecting the less.

Secondly, the Pharisees in their good works

Thirdly, the Pharisees performed external

VERSE. 3. But when thou do alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right
hand does.
When thou do alms.]

Christ we see here does not reprove giving of alms, neither forbid it, but
allows it when thou give alms:

Are all alms good, and to be done?

Evil and conterfeite, whereof something has been said before, Chap. 5. verse.
8. and something remains elsewhere to be spoken of. Good, and these are
twofold, viz Public: these belong unto the Magistrate, see Gualt. sup. fol.
198. Private: these belng unto us, and are to be done secretly, according to
our Savior Christ's present injunction.





If there be among you a poor man, thou shall not harden thy heart against
him, but open thy handwide unto him, Deuteronomy. 15.7. Hence I argue, that which God
does command man must obey: but God commands us to give alms: Therefore we
must obey him herein.

He has distributed, he has given to the poor, his righteousness remains
for ever, Psalm. 122.6.

Exo. 23.11.
. 2. The tenths of the third year, Deuteronomy. 14.28.3. 3. Every year they must
have some gleanings left for them; yea some sheaves, Levit. 14.9. and 23.22.
and Deuteronomy. 24.19.







The poor these two things. First Humility. Secondly Patience.
Others, these two things, namely, 1. Compassion. 2. Bounty.




James 2.15. and 1 John 3.17, 18. and therefore those who make a profession of
the Gospel, and yet are hard hearted do argue their religion to be in vain,
their hearts not being softened with the fire of love, Iam. 1.26, 27.

Secondly, consider thy own estate and condition; Heb. 13.3.

Thirdly, labor to see God and Christ in the (In as much as ye did it to them,
ye did it to me) when thou see thy poor brother in want, suppose thou saw
thy eldest brother (Christ) in need, and look what thou would do unto him,
do unto the poor, for that is as done unto Christ.

Fourthly, look upon the primitive times, and Impij Galilai and suos and
nostros nutriunt (Julian. Apost. Eusebius) These Christians are merciful both to
their own sort and sect, and also to heathens and infidels: And do thou
likewise.

Fifthly, remember the punishment is due unto Thou shall have judgment without
mercy, if thou show no mercy, James 2.13.

Sixthly, consider that thou shall not loose Prove. 11.25. and 19.17.

What are the Impediments which hinder us remedies against those Impediments?

The Remora are many,

First, the love of riches hinders us from relieving

Secondly, the care of the world, and the fear

Thirdly, the ear of and for our children does often hinder us from the works
of mercy; we are unwilling to distribute, lest they should lack. But this is
an error and fault: indeed parents should be careful not to be idle, or
prodigal, wasting their estates with riotous living, or contentions,
exhausting their wealth by brawles and suits; but they must not fear to give
alms: for he that does so, spares he knows not for whom Psa. 39.6.
, on the contrary, neither the liberal, nor his shall lack Psalm. 37.25.
. A man cannot better provide for his children, then by giving a part of their
portion unto the Lord to keep, who will certainly return it unto them with
advantage.

Nabal, shall I take my bread and give it to others? 1 Samuel 25.11. But what
have thou, which thou have not received 1 Cor. 4.7.
? yea what art thou? not the proper owner, but only a steward who must give
account of every penny given unto thee.









Non dignus ira Caesaris: yea, 2. consider that the charity is so much the
greater, which is extended unto an unworthy person.



Let not thy left hand know what thy right does.]

What is the meaning of these words?

First, some allegorize them thus, we must do nothing sinisterly, but all
things dexterously, or Gualt. s.
.

Secondly, some oppose these words only to

Thirdly, some further stretch the words; as if let not thy left hand know,
etc. That is, let none know it at all; or do not only conceal what thou do
in part, but altogether.

Fourthly, some understand these words of hiding let not thy left hand, etc. As
if our Savior would say, thy good deeds must be concealed from thy self, if
it be possible, lest thou should be proud of them in thy self.

Why may we not behold, and look upon the

First, because for the most part they are hypocrites

Secondly, because they seldom stand who Peter makes a galiant promise, That
though all the world forsake Christ yet he will never forsake him, Mat.
26.33.35. but he performs it badly, verse 69.

Thirdly, because this will make us be ready Sub host quem prostravit
moritur, qui de bono quod gesserat elevatur. Greg. Mor. lib. 20. He perishes
by his enemy whom he has subdued, who is puffed up with that good work,
which he has performed.

Fourthly, for a man to behold the good works I actantia non est vitium laudis
humanae, sed perversae animae, laudem amantis August. de civit. Dei. 12.
. Boasting is not the vice of the man who praises, but of the perverse mind
which loves the praise of men. And therefore let us not accusto^e our selves to
read over and over the Books of our good deeds, for that is a Catalogue
which will puff us up, and make us with Pymalion fall in love with our own
handiworke; for good works are often like beauty, wit, learning, and
knowledge, which are known, and being known puff up, 1 Cor. 8.1.

Is it never lawful for us to look upon or to speak of the good deeds we
do?

First sometime the aspect of our good works is Adam or in new 2 Cor. 13.5.
. Now the tree is known by his fruit, Mat. 7.16.20. and James 2.17. and
therefore for the attaining unto the true knowledge of our estates, it is
profitable to look unto our good works. III. When the heart grows dull and
too forgetful of rendering thanks unto the Lord for his great mercies, then
we may consider how he has washed us from our former pollutions, how he has
renewed our strength, how he has mortified sin in us, how he has freed us
from the snares of death, and how he enables us in some weak measure to obey
him in that which is good.

Luk 17.10. and we have not as yet attained unto that perfection we ought to
have. Phil. 3.12.13. Happy is that man who seems little in his own eyes but
great in the eyes of others: who shines unto others and yet seems dark unto
himself, and in that regard despises the praises of men.



Luke 18.11. Averte oculos ne capiaris forma: lest thou grow proud.







Mat. 5.48. and thou will acknowledge, that the East is not so far distant
from the West, as thou art from what thou should and ought to be.

Sixthly, remember the many blots and defects

Seventhly, whatsoever thou have it is the gift Cor. 15.10. and therefore why
should thou thy self boast, or any other make thee proud of that which is
not thine? for at the best thou paiest but God with his own coin.

VERSE. 4. That thine alms may be in secret;
. 1. That thine alms may be in secret]

The scope of our Savior here is, that pro virili,

Why may we not reveal our good works unto men, but thus hide them from them?

First, because we perform them for Gods

Secondly, it is not equal and fair dealing, to

Thirdly, vessels that sound most, are most Come (says Iehu unto Iehonadab)
and see my zeal for the Lord, 2 King. 10.16. and yet verse. 31. it is said,
Iehu took no heed to walk in the Law of the Lord God of Israel with all his
heart: for he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, which made Israel to
sin. So the young man says unto Christ, Omnia feci, all these things have I
done, Mat. 19.20. and yet he will leave Christ rather than his riches: So
Peter speaks most boldly, but falls most fowly, Mat. 26. And therefore take
heed of vain ostentation in the performance of good works.

Does not this verse cross Mat. 5.16? is there Let your light so shine before
men, that they may see your good works; And Let your alms be done in secret,
that men may not see them.


They differ in two things; 1. In re, modo, in the manner of doing.

First, these two verses differ in the thing. Here observe, that some good
works cannot be concealed; some may.

First, there are some good works which cannot be hid, as for example, I. When
a public work is commanded, as the work of the Lords day the preaching and
hearing of the word, and public prayers; these cannot be concealed. II. When
the omission of duties may scandalize religion, then they are not to be
concealed. III. When we are seriously asked by our brethren what good works
we perform, we must not lie; but yet there is a difference to be observed, by
whom we are asked: For First if the question be asked by a Saint and holy man,
who has no need of our example, then we must rather urge our omissions and
neglects of good duties; and our answer must savor of the confession of our
sins, rather then of our good works. Secondly, if the question be asked by
one who is weak, then build him up by thy example, yet let it be done
modestly. Ostendens non Ostentans, showing him what thou do but without all
ostentation, yea extenuating what thou show him, and not amplifying of it;
nor taking any thing unto thy self, but ascribing all the glory of thy good
works unto God.

Secondly, there are some good works which may be concealed; and yet in some
cases may and ought to be manifested, otherwise not; as for example, I. There
are some works which procure praise, some which beget shame. First, some
works will humble us, and affect us with blushing to lay them open; as the
sense and profession of our infirmities, whether of anger, coveteousnesse,
wantonness, idleness and remissness in our callings. These a man may show
unto a holy and faithful friend modestly.

Secondly, some works beget praise, as honest and beautiful works, such as
alms is; these must be concealed as much as we can. II. Sometimes it is
necessary that we should hold forth our works, and be examples unto others:
As First, when thou live among those who are wicked, who altogether neglect
religious works. Secondly, when the work is difficult, and rare; as the daily
examination of our selves, and the pardoning of injuries, and the like, that so
others by our examples may be encouraged thereunto. Thirdly, when the work is
perilous as the profession of Christ among heretics: In these there is need
of our example, and therefore we should herein show our selves. III. Sometimes
the glory of God is dishonored by sin; here show all the might and power
thou have: If sin be committed with a high hand, then let religion be
professed so also, that is openly and undauntedly, but yet with modesty; for
constancy and boldness in religion differ much from boasting and vain
ostentation.

Secondly, this verse and Mat, 5.16. differ In modo, in the manner of doing of
good works? For All these are lawful. I. They are held forth sometimes unto
Gods glory. II. Sometimes for the honor of religion. III. Sometimes for the
example of our brother. IV. Sometimes for the removal of the scandal of
impiety from our selves.


V. Sometimes we hold forth our good works, for the setting forth of our own
praise. And this only is faulty, pharisaicall, and to be avoided.

. 2. And thy Father which sees in secret, himself shall reward thee openly.]

In general we may observe how God does First, the Pharisees desire to be
seen. Secondly, the Pharisees desire to be rewarded. Thirdly, to be honored
before the people.
To this Christ answers God sees us. God will reward us. God will give us our
reward openly.


Our Savior hereby teaching us,

How does the truth of this appear, that

First,

Secondly, there is nothing which is seemingly

1. Do thou love bodily Pleasure, namely, either first, of eating and
drinking? here remember the greatest pleasure is in Temperance, as Epicurus
himself said: yea, the soul is fed with the food of the Word, and Faith, and
Prayer, and holy exercises, which food far surpasses all the delicacies of
the world. Secondly, do thou love recreations and pastimes? certainly there
are many which are lawful, and which a religious man may use: but the
internal Joy of the Holy Ghost does exceed the delight of the most delightful
recreations. Thirdly, would thou live at peace? do thou love
tranquillities? oh remember, the peace of God passes all understanding, Phil.
4.7.

2. Do thou love fame, reputation, and credit? Certainly, there is no greater
estimation any where than in piety: Ye shall be a wise, and an understanding
people, if ye obey my Law, Deuteronomy. 4.6.

3. Do thou love Riches? The best treasure is grace, and faith; for that is
more precious than gold 1 Pet. 1.7.
.

4. Do thou love Honor? unto the righteous is prepared a Kingdom ( Luke
12.32.) and a Crown of glory, 2 Timothy 4.8.

VERSE 5. And when thou prayest,
In this sixth Chapter our Savior forbids two things, viz. Hypocrisy, and that
in three things. First in Alms, verse 1. unto 5. Secondly, in Prayer^, wherein
are reproved their Ostentation, where there is A prohibition, verse 5. A
precept, verse 6.
Prolongation, where there is A prohibition which is both Declared, verse 7.
Confirmed, verse 8.
A precept, which is both Given, verse 9. Amplified, verse. 14.


Thirdly, in Fasting, verse 16.
Care of the world, verse 19.


And when thou prayest, thou shall not be as the Hypocrites are.]



Ye worship (says Christ) ye know not wha^ (Ioh. 4.22.) Where our Savior
condemns the Samaritans invocation, for he who worshippeth not God aright
cannot pray aright.



Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name he will give it you (Ioh. 16.23.) as
if our Savior would say, if you ask but not in my name, then you shall
receive nothing.

We know God hears not sinners (Joh. 9.31.) that is, those who continue in
their sins, against their consciences, without repentance God will not hear,
though they pray unto him.





Zebedees children did, who entreated Christ, that one of her sons might sit
at his right hand, and the other at his left in the Kingdom of God. And
therefore if we desire so to pray, that our prayers may be heard; we must 1.
learn to worship truly the true God. 2. Beware of Idolatry. 3. Turn from
sin. 4. Pray in faith, and in the name of Christ. 5. avoid battologie, and
all vain repetitions. 6. Take heed of hypocrisy. 7. Frame our prayers
according to the will of God.

When thou prayest, etc. But what necessity is there of praying at all?

verse. 9. and therefore here briefly I answer. First, that by praying unto God
we worship him, and therefore it is necessary that we should pray.



Thirdly, it is requisite to pray, because so we Pareus. s. page 651
.

. 2. They pray standing in the Synagogues.]

Does our Savior here condemn public

No, Moses prays publicly. Levit. 23.8. and Solomon, 1 King. 8 22. and David,
Psalm. 26.8. and 68.31. and Iehoshaphat. 2 Chronicles. 20.5. yea, hence the Temple
is called the House of Prayer: and Christ promises to hear such prayers,
Matthew. 18.21. Whence Saint Paul does institute them, 1 Cor. 14.19. and 1 Timothy
2.1.

What need is there of the public prayers?

First, because the prayer of many agreeing If two of you shall agree on earth,
as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my
Father which is in heaven Math. 10 19.
.

Secondly, because thus publicly we testify our Faith, Hope, and
Thankfulness, and by

Thirdly, that thus we might testify, that we

. 3. For they love to pray.]

Does our Savior condemn the offering up

First, some understand this of the praise of

Secondly, the meaning is, they pray in the

Why do men naturally delight more in a corrupt religion then in a pure? in a
false worship then in a true?

First, because there is a preposterous opposition between God and corrupt
nature: the one striving against the other, Galath. 5.17. and each an enemy
unto other, Romans 8.6.7, 8.



That they may be seen of men.]

Our Savior by these words expounds the former; you must not pray in the
streets and Synagogues for that end that you may be seen of men: for God is
neither worshipped nor pleased by prayers which are made for the praise of men.













(ad inflandos) for the puffing of us up, when he will not approve of it (ad
convertendos) for the converting or encouraging either of our selves or others:
Hence we see many will commend hypocrites, who condemn the generation of the
just: and will laud good works (though but external) but not follow them.

Why does the devil by any of his instruments commend the good works of any,
when himself is an enemy unto every good work?

First, the devil cannot hinder the righteous from bringing forth good fruits,
because they

Secondly, this is profitable for Satan: for if

Thirdly, Satan provokes wicked men sometimes

VERSE. 6. But when thou prayest,
. 1. When thou prayest enter into thy closet,

What is meant by these words?

First, by the closet some understand the Solomon says, Curse not the rich in
thy bed Chamber (Eccles. 10.20.) that is, in thy heart. And here there is a
double Allegory, namely, I. The Chamber door is the sense: shut thy door, that
is, carnal sense, lest vain imaginations and worldly thoughts distract thy
mind in praying Agust. s.
Ostium est sensus quem pull, at Christus (Cantic. 5.8.) Christ stands at the
door (that is, of sense) and knocks Chrysostom. impers.
II. The Door is our mouth: shut thy door, that is, thy lips, and let thy
Prayer be like the Prayer of Hanna, conceived in thy mind but not uttered with
thy mouth 1 Samuel 1.11. Hierome. s
David says, open thou the door of my lips. Psalm. 141.3.

Secondly, some understand this literally; Enter (when thou prayest) into thy
Closet, that is, let none at all be present with thee but the Lord. Chry. imp.
Obser.
And this is the true meaning of the words. Our Savior hereby would teach us,
that we should conceal our private Prayers as much as we can from men.

Why must we be thus careful that our private

First, that so thou may shun vain glory:

Secondly, we pray not for man's sake, but

Thirdly, witnesses in this case are irksome, met together of one heart,
mind, desite, and affection, their prayers are very powerful and effectual,
but yet he who utters his voice cannot power forth all his heart with that
freedom he should when others are present, as follows by and by.







(Modestia, contritione, lachryonis, non sonitu, strepitu, etc. Chryso. s.
.), with modesty, contrition, and tears, not with a troublesome and clamorous
voice.





Hannahs heart was full, and yet her words were not heard, 1 Samuel 1.11.. Abels
blood cried, and yet the voice thereof was not heard, Genesis 4.10. Moses soul
was so troubled, that the Lord says, why do thou cry unto me? and yet he
uttered nothing with his tongue, Exodus 34.15. and David prays from the bottom
of his heart, Psalm. 130.1.



Chrysostom (upon these words) gives three answers to this question, namely:

First, because this argues some distrust, as though God could not, or did not
hear us, when we pray with a soft still voice unto him; or as if he did not
understand the thoughts of thy heart.

N^c a Deo audiris, and a malis rideris: This is no wise man's part, so to pray,
as that God shall not regard him, but wicked men shall deride him.

Sensus ad te rapis. For the better understanding of this question and answers,
observe two things, to wit; I. That it seems the manner was in Chrysostomes
time, sometimes when the faithful met together, every man did pray by himself
silently, and no one publicly, as the custom now is: Read August. de civit.
Dei. 22.8. Thus it were lawful for Christians to do, if they durst not pray
openly for fear of giving offense. II. It is lawful to use the voice in
prayer; of old certainly it was an use for the people to pray aloud when they
prayed alone in the Temple; for otherwise Eli would not have reproved Hannah,
because her voice was not heard, 1 Samuel 1. So David faith, Evening and morning,
and at noone will I pray, and cry aloud, and he shall hear my voice Psalm.
55.17.
. Yea, it seems that sometimes many prayed vocally together at once: John and
Peter tell their company what had happened unto them; And when they heard it,
they lift up their voice to God with one accord, and said, Lord thou art God
which has made heaven and earth, etc. Acts 4.24.
. So many pray together (as is most likely) in Niniveh, Jonah 3.8. At the least
all the Ministers of Gods Word have been accustomed to pray in the Temple with
an audible voice, as appears, Joel 2.17.

What necessity is there at all to use the voice,

First, it is requisite for the expressing of the

Secondly, it is expedient for the corroborating

Thirdly, because zeal is not to be hindered by Daniel said, I blush and am
ashamed, Dan. 9.) yet notwithstanding sometimes it breaks forth into external
gestures and expressions, which are not to be wholly suppressed, but moderated.

What advantage has private prayer above

Prayer in secret,

First, it is less in danger of the taint of Hypocrisy: the proud Pharisee,
and the humble Publicane go both to the Temple to pray; and the Hypocrites
love to pray standing in the Synagogues, etc. that they may be seen of men: But
he who prays in secret does it to be seen of God.

Secondly, in private a Christian may descend unto such particulars; as in
public or before others, he will not, neither ought to mention.

Thirdly, he may in private use such expressions and outward manifestations,
for the better passage of his hearts affection, specially being perplexd with
sorrow, or fear, as before others were unseemly and immodest. In that day of
the great mourning in Jerusalem, when they shall look upon him whom they have
pierced, they shall mourn for him in bitterness, every house and family shall
mourn apart, and their wives apart Zach. 12.10. unto the end of the chapter.
.

Has public prayers no prerogatives above private?

Public prayers want not their privileges, as for example.

First, they are performed in the order,

Secondly, in the Church and congregation, many agreeing touching a thing to be
asked, have a special promise that it shall be done for them of their Father
in heaven; upon whom they set, by their prayers, as it were, in a troop.

Thirdly, in our public prayers and praises of God, we do give testimony of
his providence in governing of the world, and all our affairs; and that he is
present with his Church, and hears their requests, for the convincing of
Atheists and Epicures, and confirmation of others in believing undoubtedly his
care over his people and servants.



The Papists say, God rather dwells and is present in Churches then
elsewhere, and therefore it is more available for a man, even to make his
private prayer in the Church, Bellarm. de sanctis, lib. 3. cap. 4.

The Protestants say, that public prayers made by the congregation in the
Church, are indeed to be preferred before private, but yet not because of the
place, but in respect of the congregation, whose prayers jointly altogether are
more fervent and effectual then the prayer of one man; and that the prayer of
a particular person made in the Church privately, is no better than a prayer
made at home in regard of the place, appears thus: Our Savior says, When
thou prayest enter into thy chamber: he says not, go to the Church.

Bellarmine answers, that the shutting of the door cannot literally be
understood, because Christ himself prayed in the Mountains often, but in his
chamber we do not read that he prayed at all.

To this we answer; First, by shutting the door, God which sees in secret will
reward thee openly.

shut the door and prayed, for he had no house or place where to rest his
head.

Secondly, Bellarmine says, that Christ here

Reply.
Our Saviors words are plain without Allegory, for he speaks of shutting the
door of the chamber: And there is a manifest opposition between the Pharisees
praying in the corners of the streets, and the others praying in secret: as
Cajetane himself well interprets the words, They pray in the synagogues and
corners of the streets, that is, In locis Publicis, in public places.

Bellarmine to this place answers, that by the Chamber is meant the secret of
the heart, and here only are forbidden all the wanderings and vagaries of the
mind, in the time of prayer.

First, this is absurd, for by the same reason, Let thy alms be done in
secret.

Secondly, it is clear (as Cajetane here observes) qua tales sunt: But public
as well as private ought to be conceived in the secret of the heart, without
any vagaries or extravagancies of the mind: And therefore that cannot be the
meaning of our Savior in this place.

. 2. Pray unto thy Father who is in secret.]

Where is God? where does he dwell and

In the third heaven (2 Cor. 12.2. Tim. 6 16. above all heavens, Ephesians. 4.10.

What does our Savior mean by these Who is in secret?

First, he would hereby teach us the power and

Secondly, Christ hereby would teach us the

. 3. Will reward thee openly.]

Bellarmine (lib. 1. de bon. oper. in partic. Cap. 3.) would prove from this
verse, that prayer is meritorious, because God is said to reward them openly,
who pray unto him secretly: His argument is this: Reward is of merit. Prayer is
rewarded. Therefore it is of merit.


The Major proposition is false, He that gives but a cup of cold water shall
not loose his reward Mat. 10.42.
. And yet Heaven cannot be merited by so small a gift: Therefore this reward
is of mercy, and this place shows, that prayer is not in vain, but is
accepted of God, but that it is meritorious it proves not.

VERSE. 7. But when ye pray use not vain repetious as the heathen do; for
they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.
. 1. When ye pray use not vain repetitions.]

What is the sense and meaning of these

First, some understand it of a foolish loquacitie and multiplicitie of words,
which is indeed a great fault.

Secondly, some understand it of long prayers,

Thirdly, some understand it of vain repetitions; Ba^t^ a foolish Poet. And
this is the true sense of the words, Erasm. Rheding. Beza.

Why does our Savior condemn in praying these repetitions of the same thing
diverse times?

First, because it is idle and needless to repeat





Non requiritur attentio actualis sedvirtualis; If they attend a little at the
beginning it is sufficient. Indeed if this be not eade^ blaterare,

. 2. As the heathen do.]



Certainly because their custom was used among the Jews: The Israelites
detested the

Whence comes it that in the visible Churches of Christ, oftentimes are abuses
no less, then

First, because there are many in the Church who are mere natural, having no
more grace then the very gentiles have; and therefore no

Secondly, because in natural things, and endowments, many heathens do far
exceed and excel many that are within the Visible

What was the custom of the heathens in their prayers, for the using of which
our Savior

First, the Gentiles thought, God was like an earthly man, who might be
persuaded by words.



Oh Baal bear us, Oh Ba^l bear us, 1 King. 18.^6. The heathens adored and
worshipped a God that either 1. Was asleep, or doing something else, and so
could not attend unto or hear their prayers Kin. 18.27.
. 2. Or one who would not give them what they desired, namely, the devil,
Deuteronomy. 32.17. and 1 Cor. 10.20. 3. Or one who could not give them what they
wanted and demanded: Thus some of them adored First, dead Kings, as Ninus was
worshipped after his death. Secondly, in famous persons, thus Priapus and Venus
were adored. Thirdly, insensible Idols, who had eyes but saw not, ears but
heard not, etc. And therefore they were forced to cry much and long.

. 3. They think they shall be heard for their

Our Savior in these words shows that many

How many were guilty of this fault?

First, some used many words hypocritically, making long prayers that they
might the better devour widows houses Mat. 23.14.
, these prayed maliciously.

Secondly, some used many words foolishly; They think to be heard for their
much babbling.

Is it not meet and requisite that our prayers

First, it is not always necessary, for occasions,

Secondly, but certainly long prayers are

Thirdly, we have a Commandment, to be Luke 11.5. and 18. 1. Romans 12.2. and
Ephesians. 6.18. and Colos. 4.2. and 1 These. 5.17.

Fourthly, we have Christ's pattern and example prolixe in prayer. Guevara.

Fifthly, it is an unjust, and unequal thing to

What much speaking is it which our Savior

First, not every long prayer, for himself was prolixe in prayer, as aforesaid.

Secondly, not every repetition of the same Mat. 26.44.

Thirdly, but prolixitis is forbidden in these taught by thy many words. IV. If
there be affectiaton and delight in prolixitie and multiplicitie of words.



VERSE. 8. Be not ye therefore like unto them: for your Father knows what
things ye have need of, before ye ask him.


VERSE. 9. After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which art in Heaven,
hallowed be thy name.
After this manner pray ye.]

Sic orabitis, ye shall pray thus.



pray continually, Ephesians. 6.18.

Ask and ye shall have, Mat. 7.7. as if our Savior would say, no asking, no
receiving.

Job says, the wicked are old, mighty, blessed in posterity, and with
prosperity, etc. Job 21.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, they spend their days in wealth, and
in a moment go down to hell. II. Infants enjoy many blessings and mercies,
and yet pray not.



Secondly, these do pray, by crying. The Ravens pray unto God (that is, cry
after their manner) and he feeds them, Psalm. 147.9. so infants pray when they
cry, Psalm. 145.15. III. The

True it is that God gives many things unto

Thirdly, God has promised to hear our Mat. 7.7. and John 14.13. and 15.16.
and 16.23. James 1.5.

Fourthly, it is necessary to pray in regard of

Fifthly, it is fitting that we should pray in regard

Sixthly, God loves to be sued and sought unto,

Seventhly, it is necessary for our selves, and Prove. 16.3. and Psalm. 37.23.
and 40.4. III. Prayer sanctifies the creatures unto our use, 1 Timothy 4.5. IV.
Prayer comfort us in tribulation: hence Christ prays when he was
sorrowful unto the death Mat. 26.38. Luke 22.44.
, hence Saint James exhorts us to pray if we be afflicted, James 5.13. yea
hence God commands us to pray, and promises to hear our prayers, in the time
of our distresses Psalm. 50.15.
. V. Prayer testifies our love to God: for he who delights in private prayer
does show that he loves to have discourse with God, and consequently loves God.
VI. Prayer is an argument of our hope, trust, and confidence in God: it is
(conversio cordis ad Deum August.
,) the turning of the heart unto God, or the reflection of the soul upon God:
For by prayer we acknowledge, that First, God cares for us. Secondly, God gives
all good things unto us. VII. Prayer does corroborate pious affections in us,
yea increases and nourishes the love of God in us: as mutual society and
discourse does nourish affections; so the love of God is augmented by frequent
praying unto him. And therefore prayer is not needelesse, but necessary,
useful, and very profitable.


What is prayer?

It is the Colloquie of the soul with God: Or it is the spiritual ascent of
the soul unto God, begging at his hands those things which concern his glory,
and the salvation of our souls, according to his will by the merits of Christ.

When must we pray?

Prayer is either Ordinarily, with the congregation, upon the Lords day and
other Festivals. Extraordinarily, whenever upon any occasion we may be made
partakers of them, whether in season or out of season.
Private, which is either Solemn, and Uerbal, viz. With our Family: thus we
must pray daily, morning, and evening. In our closet; thus we must pray, as
often as our affairs and callings will permit.
Internal, thus we must pray continually, because we have always need: For
if I. we were sensible of our sins, wants, weaknesses, and dangers, we would
pray continually. II. If we were sensible of Christ, the Spirit, and heaven, we
would always hunger.





John 4.12.

My house shall be called the house of prayer, says Christ; and it is the
most fit place for public prayers.



Our Father which art in heaven.]

It will not be amiss (considering the excellency of this prayer taught us by
our blessed Savior) to handle it a little more particularly, and exactly, then
we have done the precedent, or shall do the consequent verses: Although the
contents thereof are so large, and the sense so profound, that all the
profitable truths therein contained can hardly be touched upon.

First of all I will lay down a general Analysis or Synopsis of the Lords
prayer: and then that which is sufficient to be known by the vulgar reader,
concerning the Division of this prayer shall follow afterward; Oration
Dominica habet tres in universum parts Praefationem Noster docet. Fiduciam;
quia noster est. Charitatem; non pro me solum.
Pater qui in caelis. Pater; hinc amorem Dei. In caelis; hinc potestatem Dei.

Petitiones spectantes vel ad Gloriam Dei, viz. istae tres petitiones. I.
Sanctificetur nomen tuum significat and Deum ipsum. Cultum ejus. Quae Dei sunt,
viz Voluntas Attributa. polluitur hoc nomen vel Iuramento. Verbis prophanis
Dehonorando. contra haec oramus




II. Regnum tuum veniat est vel Inchoatum in hac vita, oramus ut Amplificetur
hoc regnum, viz ecclesia in genere, and hic oramus pro omnibus necessarijs, ut
pote. Verbi publicatione. Haeresecon destructione. Ministerij Plantatione.
Directione. Sanctificatione.

Nos in illud regnum cooptemur Regeneratione. Obedientia.

Confummatu^ in caelo; oramus ut Cito veniat. Nos fiamus participes.

III. Fiat voluntas tua; hic continentur duo vide licet. Petitio, fiat, etc.
hic Fatemur voluntate^ Dei Gubernare omnia in mundo Esse justam et misericordem.
Petimus ut Possimus voluntati ejus Conditio, sicut etc. viz perfect, ut illi
Angeli. Secretae subscribere, tum ea quae vult Deus. Petendo. Ferendo.
A pertae obedire.



Salutem nostram, viz. ista tres. IV. Panem nostrum quotidianum da nobis. Paris
nomen docet nos. Omnia necessaria petere. Sola necessaria petere.
Hodie ostendit tria viz. Quotidie petendum. In victu quotidiano misericordiam
Dei agnoscendam; de crastino non curandum.

V. Remitte nobis debita etc. hic duo. Petitio, remitte; ubi Confitemur nos
esse peccatores Petimus ea remitti.
Conditio, sicut nos, videlicet Eadem necessitate. Non eodem gradu.

VI. Ne inducas in tentatione^, sed, etc. ubi. Negativum; hic oramus Contra
tentationem condition aliter, fiat tua voluntas: Ne superemur ab eadem; et hoc
summa fide.
Affirmativum; sed libera, etc. ubi oramus Liberationem a sathana. Tuitionem a
malis ab illo inflictis, scil, Temporalibus. Spiritualibus. Aeternis. Haec
autem cum condition, si Deus vult.





Conclusio habens Fiduciae rationem, a magnitudine Dei nostri: Tum Materia: in
tribus, viz. Regno. Potentia. Gloria.
Aeternitas, in seculum seculorum.
Resolutionem in hoc verbo Amen docens tum Fervorem desiderij. Fiduciam
obtinendi.





Secondly, I will now propound some general questions concerning this prayer.

How many Petitionsare there in this Prayer?

Chrysostom seems to make but six; but Augustine says, Septima and ultima,
and so makes seven. It matters not which we adhere unto, if we do but avoid
the superst^tious observation of the number of seven, wherein some famous men
have waded too far.

What order does our Savior observe in this Prayer?

The most perfect and exact order that can be imagined: For this prayer is of
all other most perfect, not only containing all things that are necessary to
be prayed for; but also the order, which is to be observed in the praying for
them; As thus most evidently appears.

First, the foundation of all is the glory of God; this is the last scope of
all our actions, and therefore first to be prayed for.

Secondly, then we desire the coming of Christ's Kingdom, and that for two
reasons. I. Because the consummation of the Kingdom of God, is the second
foundation of our actions. II. Because the kingdom of grace is the means to
bring us unto God: And therefore this in the second place is prayed for.

Thirdly, then we cry, thy will be done; because before we be admitted into the
Kingdom of grace, we cannot fulfill, or obey the will of God.

Fourthly, having thus prayed for Gods glory, and spiritual graces, we then
come to demand temporal blessings, Give us this day our daily bread.









Fourthly, then we pray for the pardon of our sins; and that for these
causes. I Because our sins are then remitted, when we are admitted into the
Kingdom of grace. II. Because the most sanctified of all sin against God, and
that daily.

Fifthly, then we beg to be delivered from the Tempter, and preserved from
temptation; Because it is always necessary, that God should protect us. We
should be circumspect.


What may we learn from this method and

First, and before all things to desire the glory

Secondly, the three first Petitions respect Deuteronomy. 6.5. and 10.12. and 11.1.
and Mat. 22.37. and that for Ps 31.24. II. Because such God has promised to
regard; he that honors God, God will honor him; he that cordia^ly loves God,
him will the Lord love. III. Because if we thus respect and love the Lord above
all things, we shall live for ever Deuteronomy. 30.19.20. John 23.11.12.
.

Thirdly, spiritual things we desire first, and in more words, yea more
petitions then one: Temporal things but once in one Petition, yea Cor. 12.31.
and 14.1. and 10.3 4. Col. 1.9. and that for these following reasons. I.
Because earthly things are not always good for us: but often hinder a man from
his natural rest Eccle. 5.12.
, The abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep. II. Because they are
never equally and alike good for us; or so good for us as are spiritual graces
Romans 15 27. and 1 Cor. 9.11. and Romans 1.11
, for these are profitable both for soul and body. III. Because spiritual
graces are necessary for us: for without them we cannot come unto God or glory
1 Cor. 3.1.
; but we may without any, yea many temporal blessings. And therefore we should
most earnestly hunger for, and desire spiritual things, because they are both
most excellent in themselves, and most profitable for us.

Whether is it lawful to use any set form of

Set forms of Prayer read and considered before hand are very profitable unto
the weak;

Whether is it lawful to use this form of

First, there are many forms of prayer, which

Secondly, but this is the most perfect form,

Thirdly, there is no other form enjoined us Moses, David, Solomon, Paul, etc.
but of none it is said as here, Sic orabitis, ye shall pray thus.

Whether was the Lords prayer given 1. as an

First, some say this was given and commanded sic, non (...) hoc: pray Thus,
not This.

Luke says, say thus: When ye pray; (...) say. Saint Matthew here (...) pray;
whereby it appears that the words may be said as a prayer.



Omnibus and semper to all, always, because all men in all ages must strive in
their supplications to imitate this form, as we shall see further in the next
question.

In the third answer we affirmed that the Anabaptists deny this to be a prayer;
which is also the opinion of the Brownists, who held, that the words laid down
here by our blessed Savior in the 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13 verses, are positions,
or rules of direction for praying, and not petitions; Against this assertion we
argue thus.



But these words, when thou prayest, say thus, Mat 6.9. and Luke 11.2. say our
Father, etc. is such an express Commandment, as is neither against reason,
nor contrary to nature, or the analogy of faith, but agreeable to the scope
and tenor of the place. Therefore it ought to be obeyed, and literally
understood, and used as a prayer.



But this Scripture, Mat. 6.9. has in every respect the form of a prayer:
Therefore it has been used as a prayer, and is not only matter of doctrine.

The Major proposition is thus proved; how can we tell which are prayers and
which are not, but only by their form of petition, whereby they are
distinguished from Doctrines and rules proposed in another form; as Whatsoever
you ask it shall be given you, and the like Mat. 7.7 and 21.22. and 1 John
5.14.
.

The Minor proposition is as evident as the Sun, as is thus showed. That
Scripture which has expressly the Petitioned, and the Petitioner, and the
Petition, has in every respect the form of prayer.

But this Scripture Mat. 6 9. has lively laid down in it I. the Petitioned,
Our Father: II. the Petitioner every one of the faithful, shrouded, and
soulded up in those words Our, and Us. III the Petition, which is either
deprecative against sin, satan, and temptation: or supplicative both for
spiritual graces, and temporal blessings. Therefore these words here used by
our Savior have in every respect the form of prayer.

In a duty prescribed unto all, and to be used by

The Brownists object,

First, an express Commandment is warrant

Secondly, There is no example of Baptising Mat. 28.19. with Acts 10.28.19.5.

Whether are we obliged and enjoined to use

First, No.

Secondly, it binds First, Negatively always, for we must never use another
form; that is, we must pray for no other things, nor otherwise then according
to this form. Secondly, affirmatively only in part, secundum exigenti^m, Mus.
s. according to our present necessities and occasions; as appears by these
three particulars.
I. Christ himself did not always pray this same prayer, for First, sometimes
he gives thanks, Mat. 11.25. I thank thee O father Lord of Heaven, etc.
Secondly, sometimes he prays in other terms, Mat. 26.30. Father, take this
cup from me. II. The Apostles of Christ often pray otherwise, Read Acts 1.24.
and 4.24. III. Sometimes we are (in a manner) constrained in our prayers to
express our spiritual necessities, which verbatim are not contained in this
form. And therefore we are not affirmatively obliged always to these words.

Thirdly, I add another answer to this question Paraeus Pareus s. Mat.
. That although publicly in the congregation, and privately at home, we often
(in regard of our present necessities) pray in other words then these in the
Lords prayer; yet it is very fit and convenient that we should seal up and
conclude all our prayers with this form of prayer; and that for these causes.
I. Because thus we obey the Commandment of the Son of God; who in this verse
says, Sic orate, pray thus, and Luke 11.2. When thou prayest sic dicite, say
thus; And therefore it is fit that sometimes this form should be used. II.
Because we must not doubt, or question, but these words prescribed by God the
Son, are very acceptable unto God the Father, when they are poured forth by a
pious and intelligent supplicatour: For the Father does always hear the
Son, and therefore he will be ready to hear the words of his Son. III.
Because it does most briefly contain a perfect sum of all those things which
are necessary to be prayed for, and therefore whatsoever is over-slipt by us in
our Petitions, is supplied by this form, wherefore it is not amiss to
conclude always with it.

And thus I conclude the general questions concerning this prayer, proceeding
unto the exp^ication of the several petitions.

If any desire to know whether this Prayer may or ought to be said to the
Saints, let him consult with M. Fox in his Acts and Monuments, where the matter
is discussed, page 1274.

Our Father which art in Heaven.]

I will not consider of these words according to the order of nature, but of
place, taking them as they lie.

ours?

our father he will help us.

our father, not my father?

Gal. 6.4.

our father for the greater increase of our confidence, and assurance that we
shall be heard; knowing that all the faithful pray with us and for us. Vis
unita fortior, many hands quickly dispatch a great work, many faithful
prayers quickly pierce the clouds, and ascend the heavens, and come into Gods
ears, and never return without a blessing: And therefore great is our
confidence and assurance to be heard, when we know that all Gods children with
us pray, our father, thereby praying with us and for us as well as themselves.

father, is only the first person of the blessed Trinity supplicated?

our father, yet we are not hereby prohibited to supplicate either God the
Son, or Holy Ghost, for we may pray unto any of them, this word father being
taken in Scripture two manner of ways: Namely, Personally, as it is
distinguished from Son and Holy Ghost, but not so here, Mat. 20.19.
Essentially, as it does distinguish God from man, and so it is here taken, to
teach us that we must pray unto none but unto God, as follows by and by.



Father, Unto us a son is given, who shall be called the everlasting Father,
Esa. 9.6. And therefore the Lord Christ is here included.

the Father of lights, Jam 1.17. and therefore this title Father does not
exclude the other persons of the blessed Trinity.

Fourthly, it is our duty to supplicate, and invocate

I. We petition God the Father for what we stand in need of, because he is the
Author of every good thing which we enjoy, Iam. 1.17.

II. We supplicate God the Father in the Name and mediation of God the Son,
who is the alone Mediator between God and man, he only laying flat the
partition wall John 16. Act. 4.12.
.

III. We implore the Throne of Majesty in the Name and Mediation of Christ, to
be pleased to impart spiritual graces and gifts unto us by the administration
of the blessed Spirit, and therefore this title Father includes, not excludes
the rest.

Why call we God Father?

First, that we may acknowledge our selves

I. By Creation, because he made and framed us, Luke 3.38.

II. By Protection, because it is he that takes care to defend us from all
those dangers we are incident to fall into.

III. By Redemption, because he has ransomed us by Christ from the captivity
of Satan.

IV. By Sanctification, because it is the Lord that by his Spirit does
regenerate and sanctify us 1 Cor. 6.10, 11.
.

And therefore deservedly we call him Father, in these regards, although in no
regard we have deserved to be called or made his children.

Secondly, we are taught to call God Father,

For First, the godly regard no other father in regard of this Father.
Secondly, the wicked they have God to be their Lord, but not their Father; he
is Lord over them and rules over them, but they deny unto him that love,
reverence, and obedience, which a child ought to give unto his Father.


Thirdly, we are taught to call God father, to Psalm. 2.9, 10.

Fourthly, we call God father to corroborate We are present before; And We make
our wants known unto
a Father, who loves his children more dearly then any natural parent does
his child, for his love unto them is infinite, sempiternall, yea eternal Luke
12.30, 31.
.

This Verse is a strong argument against the popish invocation of Saints, our
Savior not sending us unto any creatures, but unto God himself, Pray thus,
Our father.

Why must we pray unto the Lord in all our

First, because prayers to Saints are no where willworship to pray unto them.

Judge. 13.16. Acts 10 26. Apoc. 19.10. and 22.10.

Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the time of thy trouble, so Joel 2.13. and Act.
2.21.

Exodus 3. and Psalm. 107. They cry and pray in their distress, not unto the
Patriarchs, but unto their God.

Joel 2.13, 14. and Matthew. 4.10.

Romans 10.14.) Now we must not believe in the Saints but only in God: In our
Creed we do not say (Credo in ecclesiam, sed Credo in Deum) I believe in the
Church, but I believe in God.

Seventhly, because we cannot say to the Saints Our father; and therefore this
prayer cannot be said unto them, neither any prayer according to this form;
because as was said before, we are obliged negatively unto this, see before
Question 7. and Book of Martyrs, page 1274.

Eighthly, the last, but not the least answer is taken from the nature of him
unto whom we ought to pray. Here then observe, he that we Lubens, willing to
help us. 2. Sciens, one that knows our necessities. 3. Potens, able to save.

First, he whom we must pray unto, ought to be lubens, willing to help; but
there is none like unto the Lord in mercy, he being the Father of mercies: And
therefore he only is to be invocated.

Secondly, he ought to be scien^, one that knows more then we our selves: For

I. He should know Genus morbi, the kind of the disease, what our malady is;
the Physician and Lawyer can better understand our estates, then we our selves,
and those that cannot, are unfit and unable to help us.

II. He should know apta remedia, what the best means are for the curing of
our griefs, lest otherwise they should give a stone instead of bread, and hurt
rather than help. Sometimes we ask that which is hurtful for us; and
therefore he unto whom we should pray, ought to know, both what we are, and
what may be truly good for us for the time to come: And these things the Lord
knows better then all the Saints and Angels together.

Thirdly, he should be Potens, able both To hear, and that 4. manner of
ways; namely, First, from Heaven unto earth; this the Papists say, the Saints
can do in a glass, that is, the face of God; but this is false, as shall be
elsewhere proved. Secondly, to understand all languages and tongues wherein men
pray: this the Papists think the Saints do, and it may be so; therefore I
question it no further. Thirdly, to hear the sighs, and see the hearts of
all; and this is necessary in a double respect, to wit, I. That they may be
able to understand those who pray in the Spirit, without a voice, or words,
Romans 8.26. II. That they may be able to distinguish between those who pray
spiritually, and those who pray hypocritically. Many seem to pray with much
fervencie, and therefore it is requisite that he that is supplicated should not
only hear the words which are uttered, but also see the heart from whence
they come. Now to ascribe this unto Saints, were to attribute Omnipotency unto
them, which is peculiar unto God.
Fourthly, Simul and semel, they should be able to hear all suites and suitors
at once, in all the parts of the world: this also is proper unto the the Lord,
and cannot be communicated unto any other without a great indignity offered to
his sacred Majesty: For this is the difference between the Creator and the
creature; He knows all things in instanti, we know, what we know successive.
To help, relieve, and satisfy all our wants and desires, which only the
Lord does. Read Esa. 43.11. and 45.21. and 46.5.




First, the Saints pray for us, therefore we may pray unto them.



non sequitur; they pray for us, therefore we may pray unto them, follows not:
For

I. We pray for our brethren; therefore (by this Argument) they may pray unto
us.

II. Poor men pray for Kings, therefore Kings may pray unto poor men.

III. The Papists pray for the godly deceased, therefore (by this Argument) the
deceased Saints should pray unto the Papists, which is grossly absurd.

IV. The Papists pray for the Pope, therefore he ought to pray unto them.

Secondly, we stand in need of a Mediator unto the King, therefore much more
unto God.



John 2.12.) And therefore it is an injury offered unto the office of Christ,
to have any other.

non est par ratio, the simile or comparison holds not, as thus plainly
appears.

I. A King cannot remember all things, cannot know all his subjects, cannot
hear all suitors, cannot particularly love all faithful subjects; because he
neither knows all, nor knows the hearts of any: But God remembers all things,
knows all men, can hear all petitioners at once, knows the hearts of all,
and particularly knows all his subjects and faithful servants, knowing them
all by name.

II. We cannot have access unto the King at all times, but we may unto God.

III. We are strangers unto the King, but if we be the children of God, then
God is our Father, and Christ is our Husband: The Queen needs no Mediator
unto the King, nor the son unto the Father: And therefore if we belong unto
the Lord, there is no need of any other Intercessour but Christ.





piaefrandes and pia mendacia; because good use may be made of them, as Fables
may be moralized; yea, confessing many to be apparently false, and many at the
best to be suspected. I refer him who makes question of this to that
ingenuous Jesuit Melchior Canus Pa. 333 334.
.

Secondly, miracles are not promised to believers Cor. 14.) Ecclesijs
plantandis non plantatis, for the settling of Churches, not for settled Churches;
where the Gospel is about to be planted, not where it is already planted. And
therefore these miracles they so much brag of; do rather prove them to be
infidels, and as yet no true Church, then any thing else; for to a Church so
many hundred years settled as they would make us believe, theirs has been,
there is neither need nor promise of miracles.

Thirdly, in times past there were miracles

Here they will object, among the heathen the Ioh. 8.44.) but they call upon
the Saints, who will not deceive them.

Certainly the Saints will not, but Satan can: (qua talis) but as an Angel of
light (2 Cor. 11.14.) And so at this day amongst us and them, there are some
who will cure horses and hogs by good prayers, altogether ignorant that the
poor creatures are helped by the devils means. If any deny this, let them
show, why their prayers are better and more prevalent for this purpose then the
prayers of other of Gods children. And therefore the Papists had need well to
consider this, lest that Satan, not the Saints cure their maladies, deluding
and deceiving them, as a just judgment of God upon them, for their incredulity
and disobedience unto his word 2 These. 2 10, 11.
.

Fourthly, we say and conclude therefore, Miracles Deu. 13.1. etc.
. Yea, there shall be false miracles in the false Church 2 These. 2.9.11.
. Wherefore the Papists must either prove invocation of Saints by Scripture, or
not at all, for miracles against the Scripture are not to be believed 2 Pet.
1.19, 20.
.

What benefits do we receive from God that we are taught only to pray unto
him?

If he be our Father then First, Secondly, he will preserve us from that evil
one, the devil. Thirdly, he will inhabit, and dwell with us, and in us, 2
Cor. 6 18. Fourthly, he will provide all good things for us. Fifthly, he will
guide and direct us by his Spirit, Romans 8.14, 15. Sixthly, he will give the
Kingdom of heaven unto us, Luke 12.32. Romans 8.17.


What is it that hinders our prayers from being

The impediments are either First, General, namely, sin; because God will
not hear sinners (Ioh. 9.31.) nor those who regard iniquity in their hearts
(Psalm. 66.18.) Secondly, particular, to wit, First, Cruelty: Ye shall make
many prayers, but I will not hear; Esa. 1.15.
for your hands are bloody. Secondly, hard-heartednesse against the poor. He
that stops his ears against the cry of the poor, he also shall cry
himself, but shall not be heard, Prove. 21.13. Thirdly, dissension, and
discord: hence our Savior advises those to be reconciled who have offended
one another, before they come to offer up the Calves of their lips unto God,
Read Mat. 5.24. and Mark 11.25. Fourthly, Pride; God resists, withstands, and
denies good things unto the proud, but gives grace to the humble, see Psalm.
51.17. and Esa. 66.2. and 1 Pet. 5.5. Fifthly, Doubting, he that would be heard
must pray in faith without wavering, James 1.6. Sixthly, Contempt of the word
of God: Because I have called and ye refused, yea set at naught all my
counsel; therefore ye shall call, but I will not hear you 1 Prove. 1.24, 25.28.
.



And therefore if we desire that our prayers may be heard, we must carefully
eschew Cruelty, Miserableness, Discord, Pride, Doubting, Contempt of Gods
word, yea all sins whatsoever.

Our Father?













Which art in heaven.]



Augustine understands them of the hearts of the faithful; as though those
Temples were the heaven, wherein God dwells. He confirms his paradoxe by these
arguments. I. Because otherwise those who are higher in stature, state, and
situation, should be nearer unto God: that is, if God dwell in heaven
(literally understood) then taller men, and those, who live upon mountains and
hills, and ambitious and high spirits, should be nearest unto God: whereas the
poor, lowly, and contrite in spirit are nearest and dearest unto him. II.
Because God professes that he will dwell in the humble, and with them Esa.
57.15.
. Therefore (says the Father) by heaven is meant the hearts of the humble. III
Because God has said, that the hearts of his children, are his Temple, and
mansion place, 1 Cor. 3.16. and 6.19. and 2 Cor. 6.16. IV. Because God is not
to be included in heaven.

Secondly, although the remembrance of this (extra calum non exclusus) without
heaven, yet not shut out of heaven; as he is (intra caelum non inclusus) within
heaven, yet not shut up in the heaven; so he is also (intra corda non inclusus)
in the hearts of the faithful, but not included within them. 2. Because
although God be present in the earth, as well as in the heavens (as follows
in the next question) yet there is a more full and ample manifestation of the
Majesty and glory of God in heaven, then there is one earth. Heaven is his
seat and Throne, earth is but his footstool: The truth of this reason further
appears thus: First, the Scripture says, he dwells in heaven 1 Timothy ^.16.
, and he looked down from heaven, Psalm. 2.3, and 14 12. Secondly, the
manifestation of Gods power, justice, and anger is from thence: God manifested
his power upon the old world, by rain from heaven: he showed his wonderful
works upon Egypt, by hail from heaven: yea notified his power upon the
Amorites, by throwing stones from heaven upon them (Josh. 10) and upon Sodom,
by raining fire and brimstone from heaven upon them, Genesis 19. Thirdly, Christ
praying looks up unto heaven, Mark 7. and Luke 9. Fourthly, Christ tells
us, that as he descended from heaven, so he will again ascend into heaven,
Ephesians. 4.10. And therefore this word heaven is not here to be understood of
the hearts of the faithful, but of the Empyreall heaven.

Why do we say, Which art in heaven, is not

First, in general God is every where both in Esaias 66.1. Jeremiah 22.23, 24.

Secondly, God is on earth, and his eyes are King. 8.23.

Thirdly, but his glory is most transcendent and apparent in Heaven, that being
his throne. Psalm. 2.4. and 5.34. and 115.3. and Esa. 57.15. and 1. Tim. 6.15.

God is said to be in Heaven. I. in regard of GOD. II. in regard of our selves.

First, we say our Father which art is Heaven, in regard of God, and that for
these ends. I. That we may understand him to be the Creator of Heaven. II. That
we may hereby confess him to be the governor of all the world, who sees and
knows all our necessities. Psalm. 2.4. and 115.3. Yea hereby we show forth
his divine dominion, that unto his Kingdom and office who is in Heaven does
appartaine to hear our Prayers, to consider our wants, to regard our
necessities, to relieve our distresses, and to afford help unto us in all our
straights. III. That we may show forth his divine power, that he is able to
do and give those things which we demand, all things being in his power. IV.
That we may acknowledge his divine wisdom, for being in Heaven, he knows how
to free and help us, yea what may be truly good for us. V. That we may
acknowledge him to be the Author, Romans 6.23.
and giver of heavenly joy, and eternal life. o VI. Christ reaches us to call
God Father, to show hereby two miraculous things unto us, viz.

First, that he who dwells in that inaccessible light and height which no eye
can attain unto (1 Timothy 6.16.) is yet notwithstanding prepared to hear the
requests of poor earth-wormes when they pray unto him.

Secondly, that the Prayers which are uttered in a small still voice, should
ascend the Clouds and penetrate the Heavens.

Secondly we say, our Father which art in Heaven, in regard of our selves, and
that for these ends, viz. I. That all our thoughts of God might be divine and
heavenly: or that we might have no base or earthly conceits of God, not any
human imagination of him, lest we should measure him by the standard of carnal
reason. II. To teach us to state a difference, between our heavenly and our
earthly Father: because he is omnipotent, perfect, just, impartial, and the
like, which our natural parents are not Math. 23 9.
III. That by this compellation or addition we might be admonished to seek
heavenly not earthly things of God, and when as we seek earthly, to desire
them for this end, that we may be more enabled to do good, and thereby to
glorify God, having a spiritual arm and end even in our petitions for
temporal things. IV. That by this appellation we might be admonished. to
know, and acknowledge, that so long as we live on earth, we are pilgrims and
strangers from the Lord, who is in Heaven: and consequently to excite and
kindle our desires, that they may be enflamed with a longing and hungring
affection after the fruition and possession of that heavenly Kingdom where our
Father is. Chem. Harm. Cap. 51 fol. 607. V That we might pray the more
fervently, seeing we invocate a heavenly Father. VI. That we might rather use
the spirit then the voice in Prayer, because it is not the words of the mouth
but the sighs, groans, and desires of the heart which reach unto Heaven, VII.
That we might be careful to crave no unlawful nor unjust thing at the hands
of our Father which is in Heaven. VIII. That we might be careful to be
transformed unto a heavenly nature, and conversation, that seeing our Father is
in Heaven, we might (as children of such a Father) have our conversation on
earth, as though we were in Heaven.

. 4. Hallowed be thy Name.]

What is meant here by the Name of God?

First, the Name of God sometimes signifies They that love thy name (that is
thy self) are blessed. Psalm 5.12.

Secondly, sometimes Name signifies the How excellent is thy Name, that is, thy
works, Ps. 8.10.

Thirdly, sometimes Name does signify and God; as Exodus. 3 14, 15. My name is
Eheje, and Jehovah, that is, one that has life and being in himself, and from
himself, and gives life unto, all other creatures: and Exodus 15.3. The name of
the Lord is, Dominus bellicosus, a warlike God: so he is called El-elohim, a
strong and A mighty God; and Saddai or Schaddai an All-sufficient God.

Fourthly, Name by a Metonymie is taken for glory, or honor; Oh Lord show thy
Name, that is thy glory, honor, and power, Exodus 9.16. and 14.4.17. and 33.19.
and Josh. 7.9.

Fifthly, it signifies the worship, or celebration of God. Acts 21.23. And thus
in this place it is taken for the glory, honor, and worship of God himself,
and the celebration of him in his attributes.

What is meant by this word Hallowod?

First, it signifies to make holy: thus Christ John. 17.19.) and us, Romans
8.30.

Secondly, it signifies to consecrate or dedicate

Thirdly, it signifies a preparation unto divine Exodus 19.10.

Fourthly, it signifies to proclaim, or declare Corinth. 10.31.

Why must we thus earnestly endeavor and

First, because God is better and more worthy

Hallow his Name.

Proverbs. 16.4) and therefore let us not frustrate his expectation, nor
defraud him of his right, but labor to honor him, and hallow his Name in all
our actions.



a child honors his Father. Malach. 1.6.) And therefore if we desire to be
assured that we are heirs of glory, we must glorify our Father which is in
heaven.

John. 1.12. and To. 8.17.
he has married us to Christ Phil. 2.9
such a dignity as we are not able worthily enough to conceive off. David
thought it a great thing to be called the Kings son in law; how great then is
our dignity that are not the sons in law of an earthly King, but the adopted
sons of the King of Heaven and earth: And therefore we shall be left without
excuse, if we make it not our chiefest study, to bring much glory and honor on
earth, to our heavenly Father.

Samuel. 2, 30. II. In the life to come. Daniel. 12.3. and Matthew. 13.43.
Wherefore we should endeavor to advance and set forth his glory. Aaginst the
sum and substance of this question it will be objected,



viz the acknowledging, preaching, publishing, and setting forth of his glory,
which is the thing we here pray for, and must here endeavor to practice.



Opere, in our deeds and works, and that two several ways, to wit. I. In our
whole life we must study to set forth his glory, and whatsoever we do, to
do it to that end. II. We must patiently suffer all injuries and wrongs
according to the example of Christ our Savior, Esa. 53. For God is glorified
when we suffer undeserved injuries patiently for his Name sake.

Secondly, Ore, in our speeches, and tongues, Apocal. 3.16. III. By
acknowledging the law of God to be just and gracious; that he commands us
nothing, but what he may justly exact, yea his Commandments are light and
easy in regard of what he might lawfully, and justly exact. IV. By
acknowledging all the works of God not only to be just, but merciful also.
That man is happy, who can see, and clearelie interpret the mercy of God in
all his works and dealings with him: That howsoever the Lord handles him, yet
he confesses God to be merciful, because all the affliction the Lord has
laid upon him, comes far short of what he has deserved. V. By acknowledging
all good things whatsoever we enjoy to come from God. James. 1.71. VI. By
reading continually the praises of our heavenly Father in the Book of the
creatures, and the actions of the World: every creature in the World being a
little Book, wherein we may read the praises of our God, Psalm 148.

Thirdly, Cord, in heart, and that three Psalm 27.4. and 42.1, 2. And thus
we must labor to glorify our Father which is in Heaven, in thought, word,
and deed.

How is the Name of God dishonored?

As it is honored, three manner of ways, viz. by thought, word, and deed.

First, God is dishonored Cord, in the heart, and that diverse ways, I. By
the love of carnal and temporal things, God having made the heart for higher
ends then these; And therefore woe be unto that man who makes unto himself a
God in this world, whether it be his belly, or his gold, or his pleasure: For
our hearts should be always in heaven, and our affections set upon those
things which are above, Colos. 3.2. Otherwise we dishonor our Father with our
hearts. II. By a neglect of spiritual things, and a contempt of those graces
which God offers unto us in and by the word. III. If we do not labor and
endeavor daily to weane our affections from the world and worldly things, and
to increase in strength of grace, and wisdom, and all virtues more and more
(seeing that we are imperfect so long as we are in the way) we dishonor our
God. IV. We dishonor the Lord in our hearts; when we are inwardly or
outwardly proud of graces given, as the Pharisee was. Luke, 18.11.

Secondly, God is dishonored Ore, by the tongue, and that diverse ways also. I.
By swearing, Levitic. 19.12. and Matthew. 24.16. II. By meddling with the
attributes of God, and holy things lightly, idly, vainly, and without
reverence. These two belong unto the third Commandment, and therefore I here
pass them by. III. By blasphemous speeches of God, or his word, or holy things.

IV. By murmuring either. First, against the law of God. Or, Secondly, against
Gods dealing with us in any particular affliction.


V. By excusing our sins. 1. John. 1.8, 9. and Josh. 7.19. My son confess
thy sin, and give glory to God; as if he should say, he who cloaketh,
denies, or excuses his sin dishonours God. VI. By all vain, unseemely, and
filthy communication, Ephesians. 5.3, 4. VII. By praying wickedly, rashly, or
irreverently.

VIII. By denying of Christ, and that either First, in general, by a
cowardlinesse, and fearfulness in our profession, when we dare not profess
Christ before men. Or, Secondly, particularly, by not speaking for God and
Christ, against sin.


IX. We dishonor God if we do not glorify him. A dead Image does not
dishonor God, although it speak no good; but man that is a living Image of
the everlasting God does dishonor his Maker, if he honor him not with his
tongue, and in his words: For it it is not enough for man to speak no hurt, or
not to dishonor God by his words, but he must labor also, that God may be
glorified by his gracious speeches, and holy communication, otherwise he does
dishonor his God.

Thirdly, God is likewise dishonored Opere, by our works, and that these
ways. I. By giving that glory which is due only unto God, unto the Saints, as
the Papists do in their worshipping of them, and praying unto them. II. By
magnifying, glorifying, and honoring men, or our selves, more then our God.
III. By sinning, thus principally we dishonor God in our lives and actions.
Every sin pollutes, by every sin God is dishonored, but chiefly by great
sins, which are either more exorbitant in themselves, or are committed by men
more eminent, as for example.

First, Ministers are Cities, set upon a Hill, and therefore they must be
extroardinarily careful not to defile their ways: because by their sins God
is most of all dishonored.

Secondly, Magistrates are the Image of God, yea his Deputies, and Vicegerents
on earth, being styled by his Name, and called Gods, Psalm 82. And therefore
if they be wicked, they much dishonor him whose Image and superscription they
bear.

Thirdly, those who are potent and rich, whom God has raised to great estate,
or high places; it these be given to oppression, or lying, or covetousness, or
profaneness, or gluttony and drunkenness, or chambering and wantonness, they
much dishonor God; because the more abundantly God blesses them the^ others;
the more is he dishonored by then, if theY be not better, and their lives,
more unblamable then others.

Fourthly, the professors of the Gospel do exceedingly dishonor God, when
they are wicked.

Romans 2.24.
IV. We dishonor God in our lives, if we do not by our lives glorify his
Name: If we be but negative Christians, we are nothing, for God created us unto
good works. ( Ephesians. 2.10.) that thereby we might glorify his Name, Matthew,
5.16.

VERSE. 10. Thy Kingdom come, thy Will be done,
. 1. Thy Kingdom come.]

What is meant by Kingdom?

Kingdom is taken either. Figuratively, to wit. Sometime for the word of God;
The Kingdom of God shall be taken away, and given to another nation (Matthew.
21.43.) that is the word shall be taken from them. Sometimes for the infusion
of grace by the Spirit of God. Mark 4.26. Sometimes for persons, to wit, either
the Saints, or the Church of Christ.
Literally for that dominion which God exercises, which is either. General,
to wit, his Lordship over all men, all creatures, yea all the world; specified
in these places. Psalm 29.19. and 47.7. and 97.1. Particular which is either.
Of vengeance, anger, power, and wrath; And thus he rules over the wicked,
Psalm. 99.1. Of mercy and love, and thus he rules over his children, according
to a double time, viz. either. Of grace in this life. Or, Of glory in the life
to come. Read. Psa. 24 7. and. 44.5,





Adveniat, let it come? Heaven comes not unto us, but we go unto it;
wherefore it should rather be (Adveniamus) Let us come unto thy kingdom: then
(Adveniat) let it come.



First, for Declaretur, let it be made known; as if our Savior would say; let
the world know that thou art King, and that thou rulest over all: And this is
to be referred to the Kingdom of vengeance.

Secondly, for Perficiatur let it be consummated and finished; as if he would
say, that which thou have decreed and determined concerning thine elect,
fulfill and perfect both in us, and in all thine: Now this has reference to
the Kingdom of mercy.

First, Adveniat regnum, id est, Declaretur regnum, Thy kingdom come, that is,
let thy Kingdom be made known: This cannot be understood of Gods general
Kingdom over all the world (mentioned in the former question) for God has
this already, yea no Christian makes question, but that God is Lord, ruling and
governing all the world. It is therefore to be understood of his particular
Kingdom, to wit, the Kingdom of vengeance; the words being taken from the
declaration of Gods wrath, anger, power, and vengeance, Teaching us, David
prays; power forth thy anger upon the Gentiles, yea smite and destroy them in
thy wrath.



Gods glory; he is dishonored and contemned by the wicked, who will not obey
his behests, but oppose his injunctions; who will not be subject to his laws,
but (validis remis) with all their might set themselves against his rule and
government, and will not have him to rule over them ^^d therefore the glory and
honor of God is highly advanced, when as such impious, obstinate, stubborn
and rebellious people be cut off and destroyed.

Secondly, because it is good for the godly. Gods enemies, through our zeal to
Gods glory, so also we pray for the perdition and destruction of the enemies
of the Church of God, through our love to the Church, and true members thereof,
because their destruction is good and profitable for the children of God, who
are oppressed, injured, wronged, and persecuted by them. Bonos punit qui malis
parcit Seneca.
he punishes the righteous who spares the wicked, because the impunitie of the
wicked increases their impiety toward the righteous. Hence we find a
double practice in the people of God, namely, I. They pray for the destruction
of the Lords enemies. Judge. 5.31. Psalm. 83.8. etc. II. They give thanks for
their destruction, when God has revealed, his vengeance and declared his power
in their utter ruin and downfall, Read Exodus 15. Judge. 5. Ps. 136.

How may we pray for the enemies of God,

Not only in zeal, nor only in love, but Paul breathed forth threatening,
against the Disciples of Christ; and the Apostles were too ready with Elias to
call for fire from Heaven; but the Lord checks them for this their forward
cruel zeal, because it was not mixed with love, but proceeded from a desire
of revenge. II. Some natural respect unto the person of the enemy of God, and
the Church, makes us oftentimes to pray only in love for his health,
prosperity, preservation, and the like, and not in zeal. Because he is of
affinity, or acquaintance, or by some bond of friendship knit near unto us,
therefore we pray for him in love, toward our selves, but not in zeal unto
Gods glory, or love unto Gods Church, carnally preferring our particular
interest and relation unto any enemy of God or his Church, before either the
glory of God, or good of his Church, unto whom he is an enemy.

And therefore, whatsoever the enemies of God or his Church be in regard of
our own Particular, it is our duty thus to pray for them.

First, with a condition, that if it may stand with the Lords pleasure and good
will, he would be graciously pleased to convert and turn them, and of
persecuting Saul's to make them preaching and professing Paul's.

Secondly, but if not, that they may be destroyed, lest they bring the people
of God unto ruin, or the Lords name be profaned by them.











Thirdly, we may pray for the subversion and

Fourthly, we may beg this, even out of

Will God hear these imprecations?

Certainly he will: he has promised to Luke 18.7. much more then when they
pray against those who are both the enemies of God, and adversaries also unto
his Church.

Who are these enemies whom we must pray

First, those who by their sins dishonor

Secondly, those who by their sins glve a

Thirdly, those who sin with a high hand,

Fourthly, those who sin desperately without Thy kingdom come.

Secondly, Adveniat regnum, Thy kingdom come, is taken for perficiatur, and
has reference to the Kingdom of mercy. Now in the words thus understood we
beg many things at Gods hands; To wit, both that we may be Freed from the
false Church, to wit, both of Satan and His Ministers, that is, Persecuters.
And Seducers, which are either Atheists, Or Superstitious persons.


Brought into the true Church, and this we desire both for All the godly that
First, the Church may be consummated. Secondly, that it may be glorified to
wit, by the extension of the Limits, and bounds thereof. And Holy profession
thereof. And Pure life, and good examples of professors.
Thirdly, that they may enjoy the means, viz. The word, and The power of the
Spirit with the word.

Our selves, that we may be brought both into the Kingdom of Grace, in this
life. Glory, in the life to come.




Having, all these several particulars to handle in another place, I will here
only speak a word or two of the two last, wherein we pray that both we and
all the elect may first be brought into the kingdom of grace, and afterward
into the kingdom of glory.



Gerson answers, Signanter dicitur in oratione Dominica, Adveniat regnum tuum,
id est, ad nos veniat, quia virtute nostra ad ipsum pervenire non possumus.
Very significantly does our Savior in this verse say, Thy Kingdom come, that
is, let it come unto us, because we by our own power and strength are not
able to come unto it.



First, by prayer, as in this verse. Secondly, by submitting of our selves unto
God by true obedience, suffering him wholly to rule, and bear sway in our
hearts by his blessed spirit. Thirdly, by opposing and resisting as much, and
as far, as lawfully we may the enemies of Christ and his Church. Fourthly, by
comforting and helping the Church, and children of God to our abilities; we
must do good unto all, but especially unto the household of faith; that the
faithful who are in any distress may be comforted, and others thereby
encouraged to strive to be of that society and fraternity, who will not see
one another lack. Fifthly, by a good life, and holy conversation: for that is
a means to convert others unto the faith, and bring home erring sheep unto
Christ's fold. Phil. 2.15. and 1 Pet. 2.12.




Mat. 6.33. Seek first the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof.





Mat. 6.33. Romans 8.32. and 1 Cor. 3.21.



Who are careless and negligent of helping forward this Kingdom of Christ,
and grace?

First, those who are altogether negligent in praying fervently for the
amplification, and extension of this kingdom.

Secondly, those who cannot endure the Psalm. 2.2, 3.

Thirdly, those who mani^estly, and openly, Cast in thy lot with us, Prove. 1.
who will rather condemn the generation of the just, then of the wicked.

Fourthly, those who will not either for the Paul said, well, he had rather
speak five words in a known tongue, then ten thousand in an unknown 1 Cor.
14.19.
. So many say (or at least think in their hearts) wickedly, that they had
rather speak ten thousand words against preaching then five for it. The
preaching of the word is as a treasure, which should be purchased though at a
high rate, Mat. 13. But there are too too many, who will rather want it, then
buy it, yea some had rather give a pound to be deprived of it then a penny to
enjoy it. Certainly, those who are enemies unto preaching are no friends unto
this spiritual kingdom of Christ.

Fifthly, those are faulty in this particular of

What may we think of those who are thus

First, they are to be esteemed as disobedient,

Secondly, we may think them scoffing Ishmaels, Thy kingdom come, when they
labor to hinder it, without palpable derision of prayer?

Thirdly, we may think such to be rather

Fourthly, that in Baptism, and the celebration of the Lords supper they are
perjured and forsworn; and therefore are to be ranked with such as neither
observe faith, nor troth, nor Promise, nor word, nor oath with God, because all
these they have violated most perfidiously.



Romans 6.23.

Thy kingdom come:]

In these words we desire of God, that we may be brought unto his Kingdom.

kingdom of grace, or of glory; for the word sometimes signifies the one,
sometimes the other; and probable reasons may be given for both.



kingdom can be meant both the kingdom of grace, the kingdom of glory?

The Kingdom of Christ is one, for he is King of earth and heaven, Col. 1.20.
and all things in heaven and earth are subject to his dominion. Phil. 2.^0. But
there are two degrees of this Kingdom according to a double time; namely, I.
we desire that we may be admitted into the kingdom of grace in this life. And
II. in to the Kingdom of glory in the life to come.

The scope therefore of the petition is twofold, Primarie, that at length we
may be brought into the Kingdom of glory; now this we desire immediately,
finally, and for it self; because it is the perfection of a Christian, and his
true (...), and chiefest good.

The Secondary scope of this petition is, that we may be brought into the way
which leads thither, to wit, the kingdom of grace: and this we desire because
it is the condition: None can come into that kingdom, but by this, and
therefore we desire to be brought into the kingdom of grace for the kingdom
of glories sake,

Here it may be demanded, An fit? whether there be a heaven, or kingdom of
glory? It is wonderful, and much to be lamented, to consider how far Satan
does prevail not only with Pagans, but also with Christians, insomuch as they
do not only doubt of, but also deny that there is any such thing: yea this
is the craft of the devil, who will quickly make us deny, if once we begin to
doubt of the truth of it: But it belongs to another place to show the several
enemies of this kingdom of glory: I will here only show the causes of this
negation, and then answer the question.

First, natural, and carnal reason cannot comprehend God; man's brain being a
shell too shallow to contain such an Ocean: And hence the wisest are soonest
seduced, because they will not believe any thing, which they cannot take up.

Secondly, our affections naturally desire, that we might be ingulfed freely in
the sea of pleasure that without co^straint we might do whatsoever our hearts
lust after: facile credimus quod enixe cupimus, we easily believe that which
we earnestly desire; and therefore we spend our days in good things, thinking
that there is no life after death.

Thirdly, to deny this Kingdom of God seems the most present remedy against
the horrors of conscience: It is reported, that a Friar urged so pathetically
the sufferings of of Christ, that he drew tears out of some of his hearers
eyes; which being perceived, he bad them not weep, for perhaps the history
was fabulous and not true, I would not belie the devil, and therefore I will
not affirm this for a truth, but say it may be a Fable: and will only make
this application of it, when the conscience is struck with horror, that for
sin she shall never be admitted into the Kingdom of God, but shut out from
thence; then the devil brings this comfort to the drouping person; that it may
be there is no such thing as a Kingdom of God, and therefore it is but a
fopperie to grieve for the loss of a thing which is not. And thus the God of
this world blinds their eyes, making them believe that as it is with the
beast, so also with man, there is no more of them after death, no reward for
righteousness, and therefore let them take their pleasure while they may.

I now come to answer the question,

First, if there be a God, then there is a Kingdom of God. But the former is
true, Therefore also the latter.

I. From the confession of all nations it appears that there is a God; because
all worship something.

II. This is clear also from the terror of conscience which wicked men have,
as we might show by the examples of Herod, and Nero, but that something has
been said before, Chap. 2. ver. 3. both of Herod, and this horror of
conscience.

III. That there is a God is evident from the nature of Satan: we grant that
there is a devil (which is spiritual, invisible, and eternal a part post)
and shall we deny that there is a God.

IV. From the creation of the world, for either, I. the world was made; and
then by whom but by God? Or II. It was not made, but is eternal: now what a
shame is this to give eternity unto the earth, and to deny it unto God.

Secondly, If there be a resurrection of all either unto death or life,
happiness or misery; then there is a Kingdom of God, and place of happiness.
But the Resurrection is proved from these scriptures, Esaias 25.8. Apoc. 21.4.
and 2 Pet. 3.13. and 1 Cor. 15. where it is proved by many arguments. Therefore
there is a Kingdom of God.





First, from Scripture, Phil. 3.20. and 2 Cor. 5.1. and Col. 1.5.

Secondly, it is called Jerusalem which is above, Gal. 4.26. and Col. 3.1.2.
quae supra.

Thirdly, Christ ascended up into heaven, Luke 24.51. Acts 1.9. and Ephesians. 4.8.
so also Elias.

Fourthly, the elect which are upon the earth at the last day, shall be caught
up in the clouds, and shall meet the Lord in the air 1 These. 4.17.
.

Fifthly, there is a promise made us of a new heaven, Esaias 65.17. and 66.22.
and 2 Pet. 3.13. and Apoc. 21.1. And therefore it is evident that this Kingdom
of God is in heaven.

Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.]



First, the thing desired, viz. That the will of God may be perfected.
Secondly, the measure; to wit, as sincerely in earth, as in heaven.


Bellarmine produces this place to prove the possibility of fulfilling the
law of God: arguing thus, We pray according to Christ's prescription; Thy will
be done as in heaven so also in earth; wherein we desire grace and ability to
fulfill the law of God; and we either attain unto this perfection in this
life, or we pray this prayer daily in vain.

give us this day our daily bread, so also every day forgive us our trespasses:
and all the ancient Fathers confess that this petition is necessary for all the
Saints, so long as they live. But to those who obey God on earth, as he is
obeyed in heaven, there is no need of remission or pardon. Therefore there is
none obey God so on earth: for although this be here desired by the Saints, yet
it is never obtained in this life.

Bellarmines argument.

I. Thy will be done in heaven, so also on earth; that is, as thy will is
accomplished in the Angels; so let it be also in men. In this sense it is
manifest, that the regenerate do not obtain what they daily beg for, until
they obtain to be made (...) like unto the Angels.

II. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven: that is, let thy will be
obeyed as in the righteous so also in the wicked; here first, Bellarmine would
blush to say, that all wicked men should fulfill the law of God, although we
thus pray, or shall equal the righteous in obedience. Secondly, in this sense
the fulfilling of the law is not included; because all those do not for the
present fulfill the law, who are called righteous, but humbly confess and
acknowledge their sins, striving hard to the mark.

III. Thy will be done in earth, as in heaven: that is, let the flesh assent
unto thy will, as does the spirit: neither let the flesh lust against the
Spirit; but as a good Spirit does not resist thy will, so let not the body
resist the spirit. This sense does wholly overthrow the Cardinals argument; for
this perfect subjection of the flesh unto the Spirit, although we pray for it
in this life, yet we do not obtain it until the end of our life.

Thirdly, that which the Jesuit says (that Davenant de justitia actuali, Cap.
52. page 562, 563.

Why do we pray Thy will be done? will not

Hic non oramus ut faciat Deus quod vult (nam faciet omnia quacunque voluerit)
sed ut nos possimus facere quod ipse vult: Cyprian. s. we do not here pray,
that God would do what he himself desires (for he will do all his pleasure)
but that we may be able to do whatsoever he requires of us.

. 4. Thy will be done.]

The ordinary question is here, what will of Signi an Beneplaciti? 2.1.
Whence this question may be demanded, Has God two wills? Is there
composition, opposition, or mixture in God?

As God is one, so his will is one: Voluntas Dei respectu Modi Secreta Revelata
Respectu object Decreti. Mandati. Respectu natura Signi. Beneplaciti.







That which belongs unto our institution, is this; The Will of God is taken
some times for that which He has decreed to do He would have done by us
And is called Voluntas Decreti Mandati.


We must now know that the will of God in this place may be taken for either
or both of these; for although the principal parts of this petition be meant,
de voluntate mandati, of that which God would have done by us; yet Christ
elsewhere expressly expounds it, de voluntate decreti, of that which God has
decreed to do: Father if it be possible, let this cup pass from me,
nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will, that is, as thou have decreed
Mat. 26.39.
. Having to handle the former (God assisting me) in another place, I here treat
only of this latter; De voluntate decrati.

Thy will be done, that is, O Lord fulfill whatsoever thou have decreed.

Romans 9.19. Neither must we enquire or search into Gods decrees Act. 1.7.
.

Medes and Persians, which cannot be disannulled or made void, but shall surely
in the appointed time be accomplished.



I. A subscription and assent unto the will of God.

II. A desire conjoined with prayer, that we may freely submit our selves unto
the will and decrees of God without murmuring.

Unto this willing subjection to the immutable will of God many things are
required of us, viz. 1. An acknowledgement of the providence of God. 2. An
acknowledgement of the goodness of God. 3. An acknowledgement of the wisdom
of God. 4. A resting in the will of God. 5. A careful circumspection, lest we
should tempt the providence of God.

First, in the petition thus understood, de voluntate decreti, there is
required of us, Agnitio providentiae Dei, an acknowledgement that the will of
God governes the world: He does whatsoever he will Ps. 115.3
, both in heaven and earth Psa. 1 35.6.
.

How does it appear that all things are ordered and disposed off according to
the will of

Psalm, 103.20, 21, 22.

Secondly, he now rules and governes all



Who are faulty in this particular? that is,



Secondly, the Heathens who ascribe things Rotam volubilem. Certainly, this is
the foundation of Atheism.

Thirdly, those who bridle, and restrain the will

Fourthly, those who say they will do this or if God please, James 4.15.

Secondly, there is required of us in this petition, Agnitto bonitatis Dei, an
acknowledgement of the goodness of God; or an humble confession, that the will
of God in all things is just, his will being the rule of goodness. Read Dan.
9 7. Romans 3.4. from Psalm. 51.4.

Who deny this, either in opinion or practice?

First, those who murmur against Gods dealing

Secondly, those who give themselves to humane,

I. Why has God given man a Law, which is impossible perfectly to obey?

II. Why will not God save all those whom he has created?

III. Why did not God preserve Adam in his holy estate, but permitted him to
fall?

IV. Why were not all redeemed in and by Christ effectually, seeing his death
was a sufficient price for all?

V. Why did not God by his Prophets preach unto Tire and Sidon, seeing they
would have repented, if the word had been sent unto them? And many more of this
nature: to which we might answer many things; as for example.

First, that the Law is not impossible in it self (for it is fulfilled in
heaven) but unto our corrupt nature, Romans 8.3.

Secondly, God is debtor to no man, God owes neither mercy nor salvation unto
any; for it is of his great mercy that we are not all consumed Lam. 3.21.
.

Thirdly, it makes for Gods glory, that those who are obdurate and hardened in
their sins, should be damned.

Fourthly, we might answer (with Augustine) Fecit gehe^^nam curiosis, that God
has a hell in store for such curious inquisitours, as dare demand of him a
reason of his actions.

Fifthly, but that answer which becomes us best unto all these, is this, Even
so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. Injuria fit Deo, Mat. 11.26.
cum causam (voluntate Dei) superiorem postulamus (Aug.) It is a great
indignity and injury unto God, to seek a further, or higher cause of his
actions then his own will. Paul durst not do it, but in the disputations of
this nature cries out, Oh man, who art thou that replyest against God Rom 9.20.
. And again, How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding
out Romans 11.33,
: Teaching us to acknowledge, Saepe occulta, semper justa; that is, the
judgments of God are always just in themselves, although we are not able
often to see the equity of them, nor to understand them.

Thirdly, there is required of us in this petition, agnitio sapientiae, an
acknowledgement of the wisdom of God; or an humble confession, that it is much
better for us to yield our selves to be guided and directed by God, then to
draw him to our desires: We must so highly prize the wisdom of God, that we
should rather desire to obtain from him what he in his heavenly wisdom knows
to be good for us, then what we our selves should wish, if we might have
whatsoever we would. But I reserve this unto chapter 26. verse 39. Not as I
will Father, but as thou will.

Fourthly, we are taught in this petition to acquiesce in the will of God, or
whatsoever the will and providence of God shall bring to pass, we must endure
and undergo, patiently, willingly, and contentedly; humbling our selves under
the mighty hand of God 1 Pet. 5.6
.





Vana est sine viribus ira, Anger without power to revenge is idle; we cannot
prevail against God, but do we what we can, he will do all his pleasure,
and therefore patience is the best.

Thirdly, whatsoever the Lord does is just



Fifthly, whatsoever the Lord does unto us is done (Paterno amore, non
tyrannico more) with a fatherly affection, not in a tyrannical passion; as
thus evidently appears.

I. He seeks our good, he desires not our destruction, but rather that we
might live.

II. He takes notice of all our wants, distresses, and dangers: the hairs of
our head are numbered before him Mat. 10.30.
. And all our tears are put into his bottle Psalm. 56.8.
.

III. When he does tempt and afflict us, it is for our good: We are chastened
of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world 1 Cor. 11.32.
.

IV. He never afflicts us above our strength, but with the temptation makes a
way to escape 1 Cor. 10 13.
: And therefore who would not commend himself into his hands, cast himself
into his lap, and commit himself unto his protection, providence, tuition, and
care?



First, those who murmr against God, in the time of adversity, misery, and
affliction: And therefore that we may not be faulty herein,

I. If we give reverence to the Fathers of our flesh when they correct us,
shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of Spirits, when he
afflicts us Heb. 12.9.
?

II. If all be made partakers of chastisement, then why should we murmr Heb.
12.8.
?

III. If correction be a sign of Gods love unto us, then we should not repine
at it Heb. 12.6.
.

IV. If affliction be a confirmation of our adoption, then it is cheerfully to
be undergone Heb. 12 7.
.

V. If we receive good things from Gods hands which we have not deserved,
shall we not receive evil things which we have deserved Job 2.10.
? And therefore let us learn to be contented in the worst condition in regard
of temporal things, as Paul was Phil. 4.12.
; let us patiently submit our selves unto God, as David did 2 Samuel 15.26.
; and learn to give thanks unto God, or to acknowledge his justice in all his
judgments, as Job did, Job 1.21.

Secondly, those who relapse, and fall either Daniel and the three Children
durst cast themselves upon God, the one suffering himself to be cast into the
Lions den, rather then he would omit the worship of the true God; the other
into the fire, rather then commit idolatry, by worshipping a false God, Dan. 3.
and 6. Thus confident and constant were also the Apostles of Christ, who herein
are worth our imitation Act. 4.19. and 5.29
.

Thirdly, those who in the time of affliction give themselves to the use of
wicked means: as

1. In injuries men often fly presently unto evil speeches, and revenge,
altogether unmindful that it was not done without Gods permission and
providence.

2. In sickness, some repair presently unto witches, charms, and the like.

3. In poverty, some run unto theft, fraud, deceit, cozenage, supplanting
others, and the like.

Fourthly, they who immoderately bewail Sam. 3.18. and 2 Samuel 12.20.

Fifthly, those who are given to covetous wishes, desires, prayers, and
immoderate cares, whereof afterward.

Fifthly, in this petition, Thy will be done, understood de voluntate decreti,
we are taught to take heed, that we do not tempt the providence of God; that
is, we must not so adhere unto the will of God, that we neglect the ordinary
means which God has appointed to be used: for the means are the ordination
of God, and a part of his will, and therefore by no means to be neglected.

What means are they which we must not neglect?

External, which are either Remedies against evils and that either To come, as
caution, circumspection, and care not to intrude our selves into danger.
Present, and that either In act, as Medicines and Physic against sickness. In
power, as Marriage against concupiscence.

Means for the obtaining of good things, as labor, industry, wisdom, etc.
Internal, are to be used according to the external which if they be Absent,
then we must adhere to the internal, and trust only in them, and that in
their order, namely, First, we must use prayer; thus does Hezekiah, both
against his sickness, and his enemy, Esa. 37.1, 2, 14. and 38.2. Secondly,
faith; we must say, 1. God sees my distress; 2. God has brought me into this
straight. And 3. he will take care of me to deliver me, and help me, if it
may stand with his glory and my good. Thirdly, patience; although the Lord
should not deliver us; thus the three children say, if the Lord will not
preserve them, then they will patiently suffer for his sake, Dan. 3.17.
Present, they are either Evil, and diabolical, which are not at all to be
used, as was said before. Good, and then First, the external means are to be
used with all fidelity. Secondly, but we must not trust in them, but
corroborate them by the addition of the internal means.





In earth as it is heaven.]





Thy will be done in earth (that is, in the Church, the Spouse) as it is in
heaven, that is, by Christ the head of the Church.

Thy will be done in earth, that is, in the Church militant, as it is in
heaven, that is, the Church Triumphant: And thus it is usually interpreted.









Mat. 22.30. But they serve the Lord perfectly, Psalm. 103.20, 21.

John 3.2. therefore without sin.

Revel. 14.13. therefore from sin.

sin is the sting of death, 1 Cor. 15.55. etc.

Cor. 15.42. and in all things we shall be perfect, complete in knowledge, 1
Cor. 13.10. yea perfect men, Ephesians. 4.13.

Sixthly, all mutable and changeable things

What means must we use to be made partakers

First, meditate upon a threefold life, namely, Adam in Paradise. 2. Of our
selves in the flesh. 3. Of the life which is lead in heaven.

First, meditate upon the life of Adam in paradise, that so we may remember
from whence we are fallen, and repent, Revel. 2.5. Yea, consider our loss,
and seriously bewail it. Remember what thou were there, namely,

I. Innocent, pure, without sin, created after the Image of God, Genesis
1.29. Ephesians 4.24.

II. Secure and safe, in peace and tranquillity; for there was neither danger,
nor death, nor enemies.

III. Familiar with God; In Paradise Man durst talk with his Maker without
fear.

IV. In the Garden man's wisdom was excellent, he could name the woman, and
all the creatures with names suting unto their natures: But by sin man has
lost all these: Oh who would not desire to recover this condition? And
therefore remember if thou were in heaven thou should have all these, and
much more, and should never lose them.

Secondly, meditate upon our life which we lead in the flesh, what manner of
life it is,

To wit, that here is First, calamities, and sudden chances. Secondly, poverty
and want; the best standing in need of many things. Thirdly, troubles, crosses,
griefs, frettings, and never quiet. Fourthly, and the sins which thou have
committed, thou committest daily; this would make any tender conscience cry
out, Woe is me, that I am constrained to dwell in Mesech, Psalm. 120.5.
Fifthly, infirmities and weaknesses whereby we are not able to do what we
should. First, Temptation arises, and assault us unto evil. Secondly, many
sinister ends we have in the performance of good duties. Thirdly, a sluggish
weariness and unwillingnesse, seizes upon us in good works. Fourthly, if any
good duty be performed willingly, and cheerfully, we are ready presently to
brag and boast of it. Fifthly, we are very uncertain and inconstant in the way
and work of the Lord: And therefore what cause of mourning does this life
afford unto us?
Sixthly, blindness of mind, so that we can neither Meditate of eternal
joys: Nor Understand spiritual things, 1 Cor. 2.14.
Seventhly, all things are frail, nothing is stable: And therefore who is
there who would not be weary of this life, when he seriously remembers these
things?


Thirdly, meditate upon that life, which the Saints lead in Heaven, that so we
may hunger the more earnestly after it.

Remember there: First, that an end shall be put to all evils for ever: all
things there being sweet, and happy. Secondly, mutability shall be taken away:
all things there being eternal and stable. Thirdly, the chains of sin shall
be broken, and the mind shall be free from all evil: there shall be chastity
without any uncleanness, sanctity without any pollution, gravity without any
foolishness, temperance without any gluttony; there the mind shall be always
sober, holy, pious, wholly and always addicted to the love of God. Fourthly,
We shall see God face to face, Mat. 5.8. Revel. 22.4.


Dalilah was Sampson.



I. Satan is crafty.

II. Sin daily increases within us, both in regard of quantity and quality.

III. We daily are estranged more from God, and stray farther from him.

IV. Death comes daily creeping upon us: oh consider how many fall into the
snares of death, at unawares, when they think of no such thing at all.

Mary choosing the better part, and placing our affections upon those things
which are above, using the world as though we used it not, 1 Cor. 7.30.

And thus much for the first thing observable in this petition, that in Heaven
God is perfectly worshipped and served.

Secondly, from these words, Thy will be done on earth, as in Heaven; we
learn, that God is not perfectly worshipped in earth, for otherwise John 5.19.



China, Aethiopia, Turkey, Persia, and India? yea how many Papists, Heretics,
Familists, Libertines, and Separatists, who understand not aright the will of
God: And therefore no wonder if they do not obey it.

Secondly, in the Church there are many wicked, many disobedient unto the will
of God.

Thirdly, the godly in the Church are infirm John 1.8, 9.

How many sorts of people are there in the

Many, but principally these five, namely;

First, profane persons, to whom nothing but sin and iniquity is pleasing.

Secondly, moral and civil honest men, who are without all taste or relish
of Religion.

Thirdly, Hypocrites, who have a form of godliness, but deny the power
thereof in their hearts Tim. 3.5
.

Fourthly, those who are half converted; as Agrippa was half persuaded to
become a Christian, and Herod contented to do half the work of a Christian
man, Mark 6.20.

Fifthly, those who stick at the threshold, and cleave in the bark of
Religion; tything mints, and straining gnats, but neglecting the greater things
of the Law.

What is required of the righteous within the Church toward these?

Iud. 23. verse.
.





VERSE. 11. Give us this day our daily bread.
Bread.] This is the object of the petition.

Bread?





Bread signifies sometimes all temporal things, or all things necessary for
this life; and thus it is taken in the text.







If the son does ask bread, the father will not give a stone: And therefore
our Savior teachus to pray for bread, as if he would say, we must pray that
those things which God gives us, may be given for our good with a blessing.

How does it appear that it is lawful to pray

First, because Christ has made a general that whatsoever we ask his Father
in his name, be will give it unto us: And therefore temporal things are
included, John 14. and 1 John 5.14.

Secondly, because temporal things must be

Thirdly, because it is an acknowledgement

Fourthly, because it shows our trust and confidence

Many things are here objected, your Father knows what you have need of, ver.
30.

First, that it is lawful to pray for temporal

Secondly, it is not prohibited us to beg them

Thirdly, the instances objected do partly condemn

How must we pray for temporal things?

According to these short Rules.

First, beg them not only; it is a shame for a

Secondly, beg them not first, Mat. 6.33. that

Thirdly, desire not temporal things, with

Fourthly, pray not for them, but for pious

Fifthly, pray for worldly things, until the





Jacob did with a vow, Genesis 28.20.







Psalm. 141.8.







Chemnit (Part. 4. Page 107. exam. Council.) gives diverse reasons hereof,
namely, First, that we may learn, not to eat like the horse and mule who have
no understanding, but that our eating may be conjoined with pious and
religious words, and thoughts. Secondly, that hereby we may acknowledge, that
we have those creatures from God, who takes care to provide for our bodies, as
well as our souls. Thirdly, that we may know that we are altogether unworthy
of those creatures (having lost our right of the use of them by Adam) except
only as they are restored by Christ again unto us to be used. Fourthly, that
hereby we may believe, that the use of the creatures is sanctified unto us by
prayer. Fifthly, that thus we may desire God to make them profitable for the
health of our bodies. Sixthly that we might pray unto God, to preserve us from
intemperance, and excess, we being so prone unto gluttony in eating, and to
healths, quaffings, and drunkenness, in drinking. Seventhly, because after we
are full, we are forgetful, after we have received the good blessing of God,
we are very prone to unmindfulnesse of them, Deuteronomy. 8.12, 14. Eighthly, I add
another reason why we must consecrate and sanctify the creatures before we
eat of them, and that is taken from authority, namely, I. Of Saint Paul, who
commands us to use it, 1 Timothy 4.4, 5. II. Of Christ and the faithful who
frequently used it. III. Of the ancient Church, Chrysostom Hom. de fide Annae
concludes, Oportet, tum in initio, tum fine; It behooves us to give thanks
both before meat, and after. If the studious Reader desire to see the custom
of the Greek Church in this duty of giving of thanks, I refer him to
Clemens. lib. 7. Constitutionum: If he desire to know the manner of the Latin
Church let him repair to Chemnitius, exam. council. Trid. part. 4. page 108.

. 2. Our daily bread.]

What is the meaning of this word Daily?

(...), By Interpreters is diversely rendered, supersubstantialem, or
supersubstantiall bread. Origin and Hierome, and they expound it either I. Of
Christ: Or II. Of the word of God: Or III. of the Sacrament; giving this reason
for this exposition. Quia absurdum de terrenis cogitare: It is absurd to think
of earthly things in our prayers.

Secondly, some interpret it, Crastinum quasi (...) (Erasm. s.) Give us this
day bread for to morrow, as natural parents do provide for their children
against the next day.

Thirdly, but most truly, it is rendered, Vulgarem, quotidianum, quotidie
usitandum, our ordinary, usual, and daily bread; thus Hier. s. Luc. 11, and
Chrysostom. and Senens. 6. and August. epest. ad Probam. and all our Modern
Interpreters: Syriacus, panis necessitatis nostra, out necessary bread. And
Augustine gives three worthy and weighty reasons against the other
interpretations, namely, First, because the Eastern Churches did not
communicate or assemble unto the solemn places of divine worship, every day;
and therefore they did not understand this word, either of Christ, the word of
God, or the Sacrament.

Secondly, because if it were meant of the Sacrament, then it were not lawful
for them to use this prayer, on that day they communicate, when one they have
comunicated, which yet was usual with them, to say the Lords prayer after the
Sacrament.

Thirdly, because it is not lawful for us to pray contrary to this form, as
was said before verse. 9. question 7. And therefore either temporal things are
understood and meant in this petition, or it is not lawful for us to pray for
them at all, which is proved false, by Christ's own practice (Father if it be
possible take this cup from me) and before in this verse. The meaning then of
this verse is, give us our vulgar, and daily bread, which may serve for our
ordinary use: Teaching us, that in temporal things no great matters are to be
prayed for.

Why may we not desire rare, great, eminent,

First, because temporal things are not to be

Secondly, because it is a sign of a coveteous

Thirdly, because it is hurtful for us, and that one shall not escape, if he
transgress the law, because he is rich, Eccles. 5.12. II. In the body, it
hinders the peace, quietness, and tranquillity thereof; for the cares, and
affairs of a rich man will not let him sleep, Eccles. 5.11. and Psalm. 127.2.
III. In the soul, riches pearce that through with many sorrows, 1 Timothy 6.9,
10. And therefore we should learn to bridle our desires, praying only unto
the Lord for necessary things, and no further.

What temporal goods may we pray for?

First, Necessaria, necessary both for Being: thus food and raiment are
necessary. Well-being both in Body: thus the health of the mind, body and
members are necessary. Estate, and goods, for the executing of our calling.

These are to be prayed for. Secondly, Competentia, competent either unto The
comfort of our life. Or, A full and ample estate, Or, Honor, and a high estate.
These are not to be desired from God, but may be received, if given by him.
Thirdly, Superflua, superfluous things, whereof there is no laudable use. These
are neither to be desired, detained, nor reserved; such as these were of old
banished per Ostracismum. Rhoding. and Alex. ab Alexand. And therefore having
necessary things, we should be therewith contented Perk. upon Mat. 6.25.
.








Eccles. 5.10.

Eccles. 5.9. but his heart will be like the horse-leach that cries give, give,
and has never enough, Prove. 30 15.

Mat. 13.

Dives call: Stulte hac nocte, thou fool, this night shall they take away thy
soul; and then whose shall those things be, for which thou have wearied and
ruined thy self. Content is like a wall upon the top of a hill, from which if
a man descend he shall never be satisfied.

Our daily bread.]





Our bread, because it is ordained for us by God.

If God have decreed, what he will give to every

First, prayer is the ordinance of God, and

Secondly, we must pray, because this shows

Thirdly, we know not whether God have

How or with what mind can we pray in these

We must pray according to these meditations, animadversions, and resolutions,
namely, Luke 1^.26.
. Fourthly, therefore if it please God to leave us in our temporal troubles,
and not to preserve, and deliver us, we are contented, and intend patiently to
endure whatsoever our good God has decreed concerning us.

Fifthly, yet notwithstanding this resolution we pray unto him, and must
continue praying until his blessed Will be revealed in and upon us. And that
for these two reasons. I. lest we should be wanting unto our selves by our
remissness. II. Lest we should be culpable before God for our neglect: or,
that we doing our endeavor we might be free from blame before our heavenly
Father.





yea and Amen in Jesus Christ.

David constrained God to take the rod of correction in his hands. 2. Sam. 12.
Thus Christ complains, that he would have been gracious unto Jerusalem, but
they would not Matthew 23.37. So the Lord would have bestowed yea showred his
blessings upon his people, but their sins hindered and withheld good things
from them, Ierem. 5.25. Malach. 3.10. And therefore if we desire that the Lord
may hear and answer graciously our requests, we must leave all sin, and
labor in sincerity of heart to serve the Lord.



VERSE. 12. And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.
And forgive us.]



First, some say Christ handles those things Secondly, which concern our
selves. In which he lays down. 1. Natural things. 2. Spiritual things.



First, Divine things, in the three former petitions. Secondly, Humane things,
in the fourth petition. Thirdly, Diabolical things, in the two last petitions.


For, good things first, in four affirmative petitio^s, Against evil things
in the second place, in two negative petitions.
And unto these I assent.

What is observable in this petition?

1 The debt. Our debts. 2 The remission of the debt. Forgive us our debts
Secondly the condition, as we forgive our debtors.


What is this debt?

Sin, (...). Luke 11.4. And hence ever and anon in the Scripture we read of
the Remission Creed.

A debt is that which a man owes unto another; and therefore if our sins be
debts, it will follow that we ought to sin; for a man ought to pay his debts.

There is a threefold debt. First, Direct, and this debt is obedience A
which we owe indeed unto God; For we are debtors unto God, to live according
to the Spirit. To. 8.12. Secondly, Per consequens, by consequent; thus the
Mulct of sin, namely, punishments temporal, spiritual, and eternal, is
called a Debt. Thirdly, Metonymicum; and thus the cause of the debt (to wit
sin) is called a debt in this place; because sin is the cause of that
punishment which is due unto us: But the most proper debt is obedience.


Do we desire to be freed from obedience?

We do not in this petition desire a relaxation from our obedience;

Why does our Savior call this a debt?

First, that we might know, sin to be the

Secondly, that we might know, that all is

How do we owe the debt of obedience unto

First, we owe it out of duty: Because the

For this end has I. Created and made us, Ephesians. 2.10. and Romans 9 21. We were
made men for his service. II. Redeemed us, that we might serve him in
righteousness, and true holiness, Luke. 1.74. Tit. 2.14. III. Elected us, and
predestined us unto the adoption of sons, that as children we might obey
him Ephesians. 1.4.
. IV. Called us, that we might obey him in sanctification and honor. 1 Thessalonians. 4.7. V. Enlightened us, that we might increase in his service. 2. Corinthians. 3 18. VI. Sanctified us in Christ, that as members of Christ we might
perform his will. Ephesians. 5.27.


Ephesians. 4.24. Wherefore S. James calls it the Law of liberty. James 1.23. Now
this command is, that we should serve him in Righteousness toward man, and
Holiness toward himself, and that all our days.





And that both. First, in Baptism, wherein we promised fealty, and new
obedience unto the Lord. Secondly, in our profession, and vocation unto
Christianity; as we are Christians we have promised to put on Christ, and
serve God as the members of Christ, all our days. Thirdly, in our daily
Prayers wherein we make new promises unto God of new obedience. Fourthly, in
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, wherein we receive a pledge from God, which
is as a seal of that covenant which is made between us and God.






Forgive us.]







The Papists say, forgive us our sins: And therefore no man is just by his
works.

To this Bellarmine answers, Bellar. de Iustif. lib. 6. cap. 20. resp. ad loc.
5.

First, the word is (...), Debts; so that

Secondly, S. Luke reads (...) sins; and S. John defines (...), sin to
be (...), transgression. 1 John. 3.4. But great sins are transgressions of
the Law more then venial: Therefore, they are not excluded.

Thirdly, if good works be tempered with

The Papists say, good works are meritorious Verse go about to prove, that
Prayer satisfies for sin: we pray (says Bellarmine) for forgiveness of
sins, and by thus praying we satisfy for our venial sins.

The Lords Prayer overthrows their doctrine of satisfaction; we therein
concluding, for thine is the glory: we take not the glory, to our selves, but
ascribe all unto God. Forgiveness of the debt is of mercy; where then
remission is of grace, there can be no satisfaction of worthiness.

Stand all sins in need of remission? art not

First, the Papists say, some sins are venial, (ontra legem, sed praeter
legem Dei) against the Law of God, but besides it; as the hatred of our enemy,
in some degree; or not to be silent, when an Elder commands, and the like. Or
II. for the littleness, and smallness of the sin; because they are not equal
to eternal death, neither deserve it Staple^. Antid. Evang.
.

Secondly, the Papists agree but jarringly amongst themselves in this
particular: some saying Bellarm.

Thirdly, that which is not Contra legem against the Law of God, is not sin;
For the Law is the Rule both of good and evil; And every sin is sin in as much
as it is a violation the Law.

Genesis 3) then an idle word? ( Mat. 12.36.) Then a corrupt thought? Genesis 6.5.
And yet these are threatened with judgment and punishment.

Stapleton says, these sins are not paria aeternae morti, that is, there is no
resemblance analogy, or proportion between these small sins, and eternal
death; I add therefore this one answer more; That there is a parity,
resemblance and equality.

I. In the affection of the person offending, who would for ever have given way
to these if he had lived.

II. In the person offended, who is an infinite God. And

III. In the choice of sin, before life eternal. And

IV. In the guilt and stain of sin, because it can never be blotted out, by
time or torment.

venial sins, and the Scripture of mortal; And therefore some are venial.

venial or mortal, four manner of ways, namely

First, comparatively, as a sin which is less evil. Thus there are seven
deadly sins, (as the Schoolmen say) which are greater then a sin of ignorance;
because that is excusable In tanto non in toto, in part, but not altogether.

Secondly, in respect of the person sinning which is either I. Elected, but not
as yet regenerated; now such a ones sins are all venial in the event, because
they shall be pardoned, 1. Tim. 1.13. II. Regenerated, and justified; whose
sins shall not be imputed,


Hence David pronounces such a one blessed, Psalm 32.1. And S. John says
such have an Advocate for their sins 1. John 1.9. and 2.1. Hence sin is
sometimes said not to be theirs, Rom 7. Yea not to be sin, 1 John 1.3.9. and
5.18.

Thirdly, in respect of the infallible danger: so S. John says, there is a
sin not unto death (1. John. 5.16.) Where we may observe, that sin is called
Mortal for which we must not pray: and that a sin not unto death whose
danger is not so great as that is.

Fourthly, in respect of the merit: that sin is called venial which in the
severity, rigor, and strictness of justice does not deserve death. And thus no
sin is called small in all the Scripture.

Are all sins equal?

First, the Stoics affirm it, and Christians confirm it.

I. Because sin does not consist in the matter of the action, but in the mind:
Sin is a prevarication and straying from the truth, and right way. The sin is
alike, to sink a Ship by overlading her, either with Sand, or Gold. Thus the
Stoics: the following reasons are produced by the Christians.

II. Because, every sin is a violation of the Law, yea of the whole Law; for
he who is guilty of the breach of one, is guilty of all, James 2.20. Therefore
all are alike.

III. Because the same punishment is allotted to him who works wickedness,
and to him who consents only thereunto. Romans 1.32.

IV. Because the action and cogitation are both alike before God: to commit
adultery actually, and with the heart; to kill and to hate; as also of other
sins ( Matthew. 5.) Are alike in the sight of God; And therefore all sins are
equal.

Secondly, although sin differ not (ab extra without, yet it differs within; to
wit, that sin which is committed through ignorance, negligence, and infirmity,
is lighter and lesser then that which is committed maliciously, wittingly, and
of set purpose. Again many are worse then one. Again, he sins worse, who
sins against a greater measure of grace. And therefore thus all sins are not
equal.

Thirdly, one sin differs from another ab extra,

Fourthly, certainly there is an inequality; in the Scripture; And that

I. Of glory 1. Corinthians. 15.

II. Of punishment. Matthew. 10.15. and 11.22. Of both which elsewhere.

III. Of sin, there being a difference between anger, Racha, and fool, as
was showed in the former Chapter verse. 22. so John. 19.11.

Fifthly, we distinguish between the Nature of sin; which is (...), the
transgression of the Law; and is the same in all sins, without any difference:
hence all are mortal, even unto idle thoughts. Degree of sin which is
aggravated principally by these circumstances, viz. First, from the mind, and
heart, and internal purpose; if it be done with inward boasting, or a
perverse will. Secondly, from the neglect of greater power, strength, and
grace. Thirdly, from the number; many sins being heaped together. Fourthly,
from the time; when sin is long continued in. Fifthly, from the person; when it
is committed against God.



And thus although all sins have one and the same nature (as all Individua
partake of the nature of their Species) yet in regard of the degree of sin we
say, that those sins are greater which are committed wittingly and willingly,
then those which are committed ignorantly, and with reluctation against them.
Those which are committed by a man of more grace, strength and knowledge, are
worse then the infirmities of the weak. Those in whom are legions of Devils
and sins, are worse then those who are given but to one sin, as the young man,
Mat. 19.22. Those who continue in sin are worse, then he who falls but once.
Those who sin immediately against God, worse, then those who sin immediately
against man.







But in this point, first Scotus is faulty, who will not fully acknowledge the
truth of it. And

Secondly. Camara Camara. quaest. council. et expos. quae. 175. Page 191.
e Catharino erres here, who says only, that this sin is very hardly, and
very seldom pardoned: Now the reason of this their error was twofold. Namely,

I. Because they placed this sin in any act simply, without those requisite
circumstances thereof, which follow by and by.

II. Because they stretched this sin beyond its bounds, making six kinds
thereof contrary to the six effects of the blessed Spirit, which are these.

First, trust and confidence in God. Secondly, the fear of God. Thirdly, the
knowledge of the truth. Fourthly, joy for the aid of the Spirit, toward our
Brethren. Fifthly, a sorrow for sin. Sixthly, a purpose to repent. Whose
opposite is Desperation. Presumption. A resisting of a known truth. Envy, for
graces, blessings, and endowments which God has bestowed upon our Brethren.
Gloriation, or boasting in sin. An obstinate purpose of continuing in sin.




I. Illumination, Read those two places. Heb. 6.4. and 10.26. If they have been
enlightened, and have had a taste, etc. And again, if after we have had a
knowledge of the truth, etc. Thus there must be a knowledge of our duty, and an
opening of the eyes of our understanding, before this sin can be committed.

II. A Relapse, and falling away, yea a returning unto impurity. Read. Heb.
6.6. and 2. Peter. 2.1.20, 21, 22. and Matthew 12.45. Unto this sin there must
be a turning with the Dog to his vomit, and with the Swine which was washed to
the wallowing in the mire.

III. Malicious presumption, or a hatred of Christ; when a man shall deride,
contemn, spurn, trample under his feet, and blaspheme Christ, his Word, Law
and truth, Religion, and the like, which he has formerly professed, it is an
argument of this unpardonable sin Math. 12.31. Heb. 6.6. and 10.29.
. Here we must carefully observe, because I say presumption is a sign of this
sin, that there Is a double presumption. De Deo: a presuming too much of the
mercy of God: And thus the godly may presume. Contra Deum, when a man presumes
that he can prevail against God and thus Julian the Apostate, and Herod, and
the Pharisees (Mat. 28.) did.



Fourthly, this sin thus qualified is unpardonable, Mat. 12.31. because it
cannot be repented of.

. 3. Forgive us our debts.]

How does God forgive us our sins?

Two manner of ways, first freely; and Secondly, totally.

First,

How does it appear, that we are not justified

First, the Apostle, says, it is impossible, Romans

Secondly, our best works are imperfect; like a menstruous cloth, Esaias 64.6.
And therefore David desires God, not to enter into judgment with him, Psalm.
143.2.

Thirdly, if our works were perfect, yet they

Fourthly, because if Justification be by the Romans 4.14. Because it cannot be
both of faith and of works, Romans 11.6.

Fifthly, the first mooving cause of our redemption, God so loved the world,
John 3.16. and 1. John 4, 9, 10. that he gave Christ for the salvation
thereof. Secondly, the will of God, Read, Esaias 53.7. John 10 ^5.18. and James
1.18.

Christ has merited and purchased redemption, and justification for us, by his
blood; Therefore how does God forgive us our debts Libere, Freely?

Cor. 6.20.

Free in regard of us, and that I. Because God did it willingly, that is, God
the Father of his own free mercy, and good will sent Christ for the effecting
of this work, John 3.16. II. Because Christ, God the Son, willingly
undertook the work of our salvation, John 10.15, 18. III. Because, this was
done by God and Christ without our asking, or entreating; we did not implore
either God the Father, or God the Son, for this great work of our
redemption; we by nature being dead, blind, averse and reprobate unto every
good work, Read Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3.5.12. Romans 5.10. Acts 2.37. Gal. 1.15. and 1
These. 1.9. IV. Because we by no means or way could possibly deserve this at
Gods hands: and this is the chiefest thing to be observed. For one of these
three things every man must affirm.

First, that either Christ came in vain, because man by his own works might
have satisfied for his own sins, and saved his own soul; which (I think)
no Christian dare say. Or

Secondly, that we could not have been redeemed, justified, or saved, without
Christ; but we deserved that he should do it for us: Here let man plead with
his Maker, and produce his strong reasons; What there could be in a poor,
base, despicable, and wicked creature, which might deserve, that Christ (the
Son of God, God with God, equal with the Father, the Lord of glory, and King
of Kings) should take man's nature upon him, and by his death, and blood
purchase his salvation. Or

Thirdly, man must confess the point in hand, that our sins are remitted
freely by God, for Christ's sake, without any worthiness or works of ours at
all: we neither having I. A price in our hands, by which we could buy this
plenary Indulgence of our sins. Nor II. An adequate merit of heaven; nothing
being in a poor mortal wight, which can deserve that eternal, and
unspeakeable weight of felicity and glory. Neither. III. After grace can we
merit any thing of our selves at the hands of our great God, but must even then
plead guilty before his Tribunal: as was showed in the former question.

James says, that Works justify us, James 2.21, 24.

Show me thy faith by thy works, James 2 18.

James 2.22.

James affirm it.

John says, he who works righteousness is a righteous man, 1 John 3.7.



Evil works merit, therefore also good.

It follows not, because they are free, and perfectly wicked, so are not
these: but of this elsewhere.

Our works are accepted in Christ.

It Is true, but that is after we are justified,

Fides sola, faith only does not justify us, Iam.

Faith only justifies without works, Galat. 6.5. But justification is
ascribed solely to faith, not at all to works.

This doctrine, that our works do not justify

It Is false, for works conduce much; that is,

First, works are necessary and that in a threefold regard, namely; I. because
our duty must be discharged, which is obedience unto God, Ephesians. 2.10. II.
because thankfulness must be showed unto God for all his mercies, and that by
obedience Psalm 116.12.
. III. Because God is glorified by our good works, Mat. 5.16.

Secondly, works are profitable, and that in these respects, to wit; I. they
confirm our faith, hope, confidence, and assurance in the mercies of God. II.
they are acceptable unto God, yea by works we please him. III. They shall be
rewarded, even to a cup of cold water.

Thirdly, but they merit not this reward, Luk 17.10.

What is required of us unto the assurance of

We must labor truly to repent, Manasses, Saul's, (called afterward Paul,)
and the thief upon the cross? and yet these repenting found remission. Whose
sins are greater then David's, Lots, Noah's, Peter's? And yet upon their
repentance these were received into favor. Wherefore repent, and all our
sins shall be blotted out, Esaias 1.18.

How must we be truly disposed unto this repentance?

First, delay it not, but while it is said to day

Secondly, labor to change thy affections;

Thirdly, learn to change thy life and conversation Gal. 6.15. Cor. 5.17.

Fourthly, labor for faith in Christ, because

Fifthly, use the means unto humiliation;

And thus we have seen how the Lord pardons our sins freely.

Secondly, God forgives our Debts, Totaliter, wholly: Or, the Lord remitts unto
the faithful, both the whole sin, fault, and guilt, and the whole punishment.





I. Obliviscendi, Of forgetting: I will pardon them, and I will remember them
no more, Read Esaias 43.25. Ierem. 31.34. Ezech. 18.22. and Heb. 10.17.

II. Of washing and clensing. I will make you as white as wool, Esaias 1.18.

III. Of peace; Thy faith has saved thee, go in peace, Luke 7.50. And Christ
has made peace between us and God, through his blood, Col. 1.20. Now if God
have forgot our sins, and washed away our sins, and is in Christ at peace
with us, then certainly both the sin and punishment is pardoned.

Heb. 10.2. And therefore both the sin and punishment are taken away together.

Thirdly, either all punishments are remitted

Fourthly, because our sins are not twice Esaias 53.56. and therefore with the
guilt the punishment is taken from us.

Is a man bound then to make no satisfaction

There is a double satisfaction: first, by action,

First, there is a satisfaction which consists in action, or doing.

This is twofold, to wit, either To our neighbor; this is necessary, for the
sin is not pardoned, nisi restituatur ablatum, except the injured person be
recompensed. To God, which is either of Thankfulness; What recompense shall I
make the Lord for all his mercies, this is lawful, and our duty, Psalm. 116.12.
Atonement, this is unwarrantable; because Christ by his death has done this.



Secondly, there is a satisfaction which consists in Passions, or suffering;
and thus we cannot satisfy the justice of God for our sins.

David, and then punishes him. 2 Samuel 12. and therefore the justice of God
must be satisfied by temporal punishment.

David was punished for man's sake, not for Gods, who never respects what is by
past, after it is once pardoned. God corrects David, not for the satisfying
of his justice (for that was fully satisfied by the sufferings of Christ) but
that the enemies of God might not blaspheme, and that others by his afflictions
might learn to fear to offend the Lord. Hence then Purgatory is but a mere
trifle, because after we are washed from our sins by the blood of Christ,
we have no need of a second purging, 1 John 1.7.



Solomon sin, God will visit his sins with a rod, and his iniquity with a
stripe, Psalm. 89.32. but yet this correction shall be in love, Psalm. 89.33.
and 2 Samuel 7.15. For God loves his always, John 13.1.

Jobs tribulation, and Paul's temptation, 2 Cor. 12.9. Or II. The Churches
satisfaction, as he did in punishing of David, 2. Sam. 12.14. Or III. The
benefit and good of the person afflicted: Here then observe, Affliction is
profitable in these three regards, viz. First, it saves and preserves from
condemnation; ye are corrected, that ye may not be damned, 1 Cor. 11.32. The
spirit of bondage leads us unto repentance 2 Cor. 7.9, 10.
. Secondly, it increases the hatred of the bypast sins: David sees not his
sin until affliction be threatened, 2 Samuel 12. and then he cries out, with
loud clamours, Psalm. 51. Thirdly, it preserves from future sins: hence
David's tribulation made him, more wary for for the future time, Psalm. 119.67.
and Paul's temptation kept him from pride 2 Cor. 12, 8.9.
. Fourthly, it teaches us the ways of the Lord. Now in affliction have I
learned thy law Psalm 119.71.
. Fifthly, it breeds in us a wearines of the world, and a tediousness of this
life, Phil. 1.23.


VERSE. 13. And lead us not into Temptation;
This is the last petition, which some cut and divide into two, distinguishing
it diversely.

First, into Spiritual temptation, and Temporal evil. Canisius.

Secondly, into future evils not to be induced, and present evils to be
removed.

Thirdly, into the effect, Temptation: and the cause that evil one: and this
is most probable.

Fourthly, here is the Evil, or danger, and that is Temptation, and the
remedy, which is, a freedom from evil.

And lead us not into temptation.]



1 Cor. 10.13.
.

Secondly, we desire, that when Satan sifts,







Apoc. 3.3.

Seventhly, we desire, that in temptation God Peter, and from the desperation
of Saul.

Eighthly, we entreat the Lord, not to punish one sin with another, by
permitting us to be led David to number the people, 2 Samuel 24.1. Or by giving
us over to our own hearts lusts, Psalm. 81.3. Or by giveing us over to a
reprobate sense, Romans 1.28. or to work wickedness and that with greediness,
Ephesians. 4.18. Chemnit, harmon. Chap. 51. page 621.

What is meant by temptation?

(...), to tempt,

First, properly it signifies to try, prove, or make trial of. Hence

Secondly, it is taken for the trial or probation of God, when he proves our
patience, faith, and obedience, as was showed before, Chapter 4.

Thirdly, it is taken for the tentation of satan: when he tries, whether he
can deceive and seduce us or not.

What is the meaning of this word lead?

(...), it is not to constrain,

Here then four things offer themselves to be considered of; viz. First, that
it were needless to pray against temptation, except there were both fear and
danger of it. Secondly, that except we move God by our prayers, we are in
danger to be led into temptation. Thirdly, that seeing prayer is to be offered
up in faith, we may therefore hope, that this request shall be granted.
Fourthly, that the devil has many ways to deceive us, when God leaves us in
his power. Fifthly, Christ teaches nothing in vain unto us, Job 7.1. and 1
Pet. 5.8. and 2 Cor. 7.5. and 1 Timothy 1.18. and 2 Timothy 4.7. and 2.3.4. and Heb.
10.32. Iam. 4.1. and 1 Pet. 2.11.

Why is our life so full of temptations?

First, because we must not be received into

Secondly, because we must not be crowned

Thirdly, because afflictions and temptations

Fourthly, because those who are not tempted, Heb. 12.8.

Secondly, by our Saviors teaching us here to pray against temptation, it
appears that God himself (except he be moved and persuaded by our
supplications) does sometimes lead into temptation.

Does God tempt any? Does not Saint James let not any man when he is tempted,
say he is tempted of God; for God tempts no man, James 1.14.

Abraham was tempted, Genesis 22.1. Israel, and Exodus 15.25. and 16.4. II. Evil
temptations come from satan. But

First, we pray not against good temptations but evil; the former being not
only allowed but also requested, Tenta me, prove me, says David, Psalm. 26.2.

Secondly, yea God sometimes permits evil Temptations for trial: thus he
tried Israel by false Prophets Deuteronomy. 13.3.
, and thus he tried Hezekiah. 2 Chronicles. 32.31.

Vrsians. But this does not fully satifie the question, concerning the Actor or
Author of temptation.

Thirdly, some distinguish between the actio^ and Camara. page 71.
, Deus agit materiale peccati, non formale, etc. God is the author of the
action, but not of the obliquitie of the action. Camara. ibid.

Fourthly, some distinguish here of tempting

First, generally, and that both, By directing them unto a good end: Thus all
things work together for the best, Romans 8.28. Moving them in the beginning:
For in him we live, moove, Act. 17.28.
and have our being.
Secondly, particularly, and that either by Exciting the means; thus God moves
the Angels, and good men, by quickening and enclining the will. Permitting the
means; and thus he permitted Ahab to be tempted (1 King. 22.21) and Job 1.9.
and 2.4.



Therefore to conclude, God tempts these ways. I. By moving, and causing the
action, in as much as it is an action. II By regulating and disposing of it to
a good end; to wit, to his glory, though it be the death and destruction of
the sinner 3. By permitting satan to tempt; as was showed before in Ahab and
Job. IV. By taking away, or withdrawing his grace for a time; as he did in
Hezekiah 2 Chro 32.31.
.

But these following ways God tempts not, to wit, Neither I. By compelling or
forcing satan to tempt any. Nor II. By moving the heart unto sin: This Saint
James says, comes from our corrupt nature and not from God, James 1.13. Nor
II. By propounding the occasions and allurements unto sin, thereby to bring
us unto death, for so satan tempts.

Acts 5.3. Romans 1.24.28. These. 2.10. and 2 Timothy 2.25. Sometimes we provoke God
by our sins, and therefore he gives us over to work all manner of wickedness:
Sometimes we incense him by despising his mercy, Romans 2.4.5. sometimes by
greeving the holy spirit; And therefore he withdrawes his preventing grace
from us; giving us over to a spirit of slumber and sleep. And therefore we
should be principally careful, not to provoke our heavenly Father, who only
is able to preserve us from temptation.





First, ignorance of God; or a foolish heart and sottish full of darkness,
To. 1.21. and 2 Cor. 4.4.

Secondly, wavering, staggering, and inconstancy in religion, Ephesians. 4.14 Romans
1.25.

Thirdly, a neglect of Gods call, abusing the tender of grace and extinguishing
the motions of the blessed Spirit, Prove. 1.24. etc.

Fourthly, a not fearing the terrors of the law, or threatenings of God, Prove.
1.29, 30.

Fifthly, an hatred of the word of truth in the mouth of the Prohets; as Ahab
did, 1 King. 22.8.

Sixthly, a cleaving unto sin, and delighting in iniquity, Romans 1.26.29. 2
Pet. 2.12, 13.

Seventhly, a returning unto our vomit, and former sins, 2 Pet. 20.21.2^.

Eighthly, a calumniating, and scandalizing of God and religion, Romans 1.21. and
2 Pet. 2.2.

And therefore if we desire not to be led into temptation, let us carefully
take heed 1. of Ignorance, 2. Inconstancy in religion, 3. Of neglecting the
day of our salvation, that is, either the call of the word outwardly, or the
motions of the Spirit inwardly; 4. Let us learn to fear Gods means, 5. To
delight in the word of God, though it should reprove us; 6. Let us forsake and
avoid all sin; 7. Let us never turn unto our old sins: But lastly, labor
to glorify God, and adorn that profession which we have undertaken.

Thirdly, prayer is to be offered up in faith, therefore our blessed Savior
by teaching us here to pray against temptation, does show that we may believe
that this shall be done for us which we desire: Or, that the Lord is ready,
and prepared to preserve and deliver us from temptation, if we will but seek
unto him by prayer, Read Psalm 34.4. and 50.15. and 1 Cor. 10.13. and 2 These.
3.3. and 2 Pet. ^.9. and Revel. 3.10.





Jobs body until God gave him leave, he could not take away Jobs life,
because God forbad him, Job 1.2. and 2.4. he could not enter into the swine
without leave, Mat. 8.31. yea Christ dislodgeth him, and casts him out at his
pleasure; And therefore it is plain, that he cannot tempt us, except God
permit, and consequently, that God is able to preserve us from temptation.

Mat. 4. and was tempted that he might succor those who groan under
temptation, Heb. 2.18. II. Christ was offered up for us, and triumphed in the
Cross over death, and him that had the power of death, even the devil, Col.
2.14. and Heb. 2.14. and 1 Cor. 15.55, etc.









Col. 3.5. and 1 Pet. 2.11.





and resist even unto blood, Heb. 12.4. Jam. 4.7. like a stout soldier, 1 Timothy
1.18. and 2 Timothy 2.3. for if we be faithful unto the death, fighting
courageously the battles of the Lord, we shall overcome, and be crowned Read
Revelat. 2. ver. 7.^0.25.26.
.

Quid faciendum? What must we do both to prevent Temptation, and to escape
it, when thereby we are assaulted?



First, the shield of faith, Ephesians. 6.16. and 1 John 5.4. labor by faith in
Christ to withstand all his temptations, whether they tend unto presumption, or
desperation.

Secondly, the sword of the Spirit; for if the word of God abide in us, we
shall be safe, 1 John 2.14: but of this we spoke before, Mat 4.

Thirdly, prayer, and this is frequently to be used, Ephesians. 6.18. yea daily
according to our Saviors direction in this place; where we are taught by him
every day to pray, against temptation.

Fourthly, our Savior by teaching thus frequently and fervently to pray
against temptation. does show, that the devil has many ways to deceive us,
when God leaves us in his power or unto his will. But of this much has been
spoken before, Chap. 4.

. 2. But deliver us from evil.]

What do we generally pray against in these

First, seeing that satan goes about like a roareing Lion, seeking whom he may
devour, we therefore pray unto God, that he would graciously keep, protect,
and defend us from him, and all his deceits, baits, allurements, and
temptations: And that if he should ensnare or entrap us by his craft and
subtlety, that he would be pleased to free us, and deliver us out of his power.

Secondly, we desire, that God would preserve

Thirdly, we pray here against all evils,

I Against the evils of the life to come; namely, eternal punishment, and
condemnation.

II. Against the evils, losses, crosses, casualties, and dangers of this life,
both spiritual and corporal; both external, and internal: And if we be
subjected under any of these evils that he would be pleased to take it away
from us, principally if he see, that it be perilous or pernicious, and not
profitable or beneficial unto us.

Fourthly, because we often desire many

Fifthly, if it seem not good unto God to

Sixthly, because all our protections, preservations, we being no sooner free
from one evil and temptation, but we fall into another; we therefore desire
that God would bring us unto that place, life, and kingdom, where we may be
fully, and perfectly delivered from all danger, temptation, and evil, for ever
and ever. Amen.

Deliver us from evil?

de omni malo, futuro, vel praesenti (August. s.) Of all evil, whether present
upon us or to come.

de malo illo, of that evil one the devil; thus Chrysostom and Beza sup. And
that for these reasons.

I. Because he is the Tempter, and therefore as in the former words we pray
against temptation, so in these against the author thereof Satan.

II. Because (says Beza) (...) does rather signify the person then the thing:
But Beza himself does rather ascribe it to the thing, then to the person, upon
1 John 5.19. yea our Savior himself does attribute it sometime to things: An
evil man out of the evil treasure of the heart (...) bringetb forth evil
things Mat. 12.35.
.

III. Because the Masculine article is here added, and not the Neuter.

IV. Because (...) signifies Satan elsewhere, as Mat. 13.19, 38. and 1 John
2.13, 14. and 3.12.

V. Because Tertullian (lib. de fuga) renders it Malignum; Deliver us from that
malicious creature, who is set upon a mischief.

evil, that evil one, Satan; or those evils which proceed from him; as it is
most generally interpreted.

evil one, whom from we desire to be delivered?

Tempter, Mat. 4.3. The Tempter came unto him: in which title we may observe
these things:

I. He tempts the best, and spares none, he assaults Noah, Lot, Abraham,
David, Joseph, Job, Paul, Peter, yea Adam in Paradise, and Christ in the
wilderness.

II. He ensnares the wicked, taking them captive at his will, 2 Timothy 2.26.

III. He is the father of all sin ( John 8.44. and 1 John 3.8.10.) who sowes
the seeds of all iniquity in the hearts of men, Mat. 13.25.

IV. The place of sin is the habitation of Satan, Revel. 2.9, 13. and 3.9.

V. He hinders the fruit of the word, Mat. 13.19. 1 Thessalonians. 2.18.

Liar, (John 8.44.) and the father of lies, in whose mouth are as many
untruthes as words, all his promises of good which he makes unto us, being
like the promise of knowledge which he made unto Adam.

Thirdly, he is an Accuser, who when he has Luke 10.18. Revel. 12.9, 10.

Fourthly, he desires to destroy us: In this Destroyer we may take notice of
these things.

He was a murderer and destroyer from the beginning, John 8.44.

II. He is like a roaring Lion, who seeks up and down, whom he may devour,
1 Pet. 5.8.

III. He is called (...), the destroyer (Apoc. 9.11.) although I think that
there this is the name of Antichrist, not of the Devil.

How does the Devil tempt and assault us,

Satan comes unto us sometimes clothed, armed.

First, sometimes the Devil comes unto us clothed, and that with the show, 1.
Sometimes of pleasure. 2. Sometimes of riches. 3. Sometimes of glory and
honor. 4. Sometimes of humane Laws. 5. Sometimes of honesty. 6. Sometime of
Religion, tempting unto curiosity and superstition.

Secondly, sometimes the Devil comes against us armed, and that 1. Sometimes
assaulting us by the good things of the world. 2. Sometimes with the terror of
evil things. 3. Sometimes by the example of others. 4. Sometimes by the
counsel of wise men, or persuasion of friends. 5. Sometime by the power of our
own affections and lusts.

And therefore how hard is it for us to resist him? yea, how impossible of our
selves to overcome him? Wherefore let us walk circumspectly, and pray
fervently, that the Lord would deliver us from this evil one.

How does it appear, that the Lord both can evils, and the evil one?

First, he never sleeps, but always wakes, and

Secondly, he knows all things, yea foresees

Thirdly, he always loves them, yea even to John 13.1. therefore will be
careful of them.

Fourthly, he can do whatsoever he will, for Mat. 28.20. And therefore he
either can keep off danger, or deliver from danger, or chain up our enemy.

Fifthly, Nullum tempus occurrit Deo, his help Dan. 6. and in the fire, Dan. 3.

Sixthly, he knows all things, whether they

. 3. For thine is the Kingdom.]

The Papists blush not to affirm that this conclusion

First, some of them say, that we the Protestants have corrupted the Text, and
added these words.



Bellarmine says, that these words, For thine is the Kingdom, etc. are not
Canonical Scripture, but were added by the Gretians.

Valla observes.



First, we will oppose or vie Fathers for Fathers,

Amesius tom. 1. p. 22. Now these words, are in the oldest Greek copies, and
they are older, and more excellent then the Latin copies; yea these Greek
Fathers, Theophylact, Euthymius, and Chrysostom, both upon Matthew, and in his
imperfect work (which is fathered upon him) read these words, yea it was used
always by the Greek Church, which wuld rather certainly give credit to the
Greek Text, then to the Latin.

France, Holland, Spain, and Italy use them, (see defense of reformers against
Master Hutton, part. 1. page 210.) yea these words are found in the copies of
other tongues besides Latin. Munster tells us, he saw an old Hebrew copy,
wherein these words were, and also a Syriack: Musculus says he saw an old
Chaldee copy, wherein they were likewise: And the Christians in Arabia use
this conclusion in general. Beza (sup.) tells us, that the most part of the
Gretians used them; but Erasmus (sup.) says all; and Bellarmine does not much
gainesay it ( de verbo Dei, l. 7. and de bonis operib. partic. 1. 6.)

Hieromes (or the vulgar) Latin Bible has not this conclusion, therefore it is
not authentical.

Hieromes; Bellarmine himself will not undertake to defend and maintain this
quarrel, but ways the cause, in a manner confessing that it is none of his.

Secondly, Hierome has corrected many

Thirdly, I answer the objection with the objection: the vulgar Latin Bible
has not this conclusion, for thine is the Kingdom, etc. Therefore it (that
is, that Bible, or that Interpretation of the Bible) is not authentical. For
the proof of this answer observe,

I. The New Testament was first written in Greek, and this Gospel either in
Greek or Hebrew, as all confess (as we showed before in the general questions
before the first chapter. Question 10.) And therefore if these words be in the
Hebrew copy, and in all the Greek copies, as was showed before; then it must
necessarily follow, that the Latin is not authentical which has them not.

II. If we look but into this very Prayer, which is taught us by our Savior,
we shall find the vulgar Latin Bible to be of small authority.

First, in Luke 11.2. The whole Preface is omitted except father, when ye pray,
say, Pater sanctificetur, etc. Father, hallowed be thy Name.

Secondly, the third Petition, Thy will be done, etc. is wholly left out.

Thirdly, half the last Petition, But deliver us from evil, is left out also.
And therefore this Translation is but a crooked Rule to walk by.

Fifthly, Bellarmine objects; the Greek Fathers, Bellar. de verb. Dei 1.7. and
de bonis oper. partic. 1.6. And he instanceth upon the Liturgy of Chrysostom.

Although this Liturgy which he quotes be adulterate, and none of
Chrysostomes,

Sixthly, they object, Cui bono? what good Hierome, or the Author of the Latin
Translation to leave it out, if it had been of the Scripture, or divine
authority? Or for what end should they do it?

First, I answer hereunto, as Bellarmine does for the omission of the Preface,
and 2. Petitions mentioned Luke 11.2. ( de bonis oper. partic. 1.6. quod vero)
that this conclusion was omitted through the carelessness and oversight of the
Writer or Printer.

Secondly, our venerable Fulke answers, that Fulke, Preface to the Rhomist.. 38.

If the Authenticalnesse and divine authority

First, the matter and substance of the words is borrowed from, 1 Chronicles. 29.11.
Cartwr. resp. Rhem. praef.. 38.

Cartwr. ibid.

Our Father, etc. II. To end in praise, and thanks, and glory unto God; as
here, For thine is the kingdom, etc. And therefore to take away this
conclusion were to make this most perfect form of prayer imperfect, and without
any praise or thansgiving unto God.

(But deliver us from evil) he does therefore in these words encourage us,
For thine is the kingdom, etc. that we might not fear or be dismayed, Erasm.
sup. a Chrysostom. ex aurea catena.

For thine is the kingdom?

Psalm. 22.28. etc. and 24.7. etc. and 29.10. and 103.19. and Rev. 17.14. and
19.16. and 1 Timothy 1.17. and 6.15.

How does it appear that God is the only

First, because he created all things in heaven

Secondly, because he provides for all creatures,

Thirdly, because he gives, and establishes

Fourthly, and all kings, and governors are Romans 13.1. etc.

Fifthly, because he has but only one kingdom, In earth, spiritual, and
militant. In heaven, eternal, and triumphant.


How must we obey this King?

First, acknowledge that thou art bought with

Secondly, deny thy self, offer up, and devote

Thirdly, look unto the laws and ordinances

Fourthly, let his service, and obedience be the work of thy whole life;
striving carefully

What may we expect from this King, if we

First, this life, wherein we hope for, and expect things belonging either unto
the Body, which are twofold, namely, both Providence in all needful temporal
things, for if we serve him, surely we shall be fed. Protection from all evil,
whether enemies, dangers, casualties, sicknesses, or whatsoever.
Soul, to wit, the internal, and spiritual kingdom of grace in our hearts;
and peace of conscience, Phil. 4.7. and joy of the Holy Ghost; and new strength
of the spirit, whereby we may be enabled to live wholly unto the Lord, Gal. 2
20.
Secondly, the life to come, to wit, that eternal, immortal, incorruptible
and everlasting Kingdom of heaven; for which we cry daily with the Saints
under the altar, How long Lord, how long will thou defer thy coming Rev. 6.10
, and with Saint Paul groan so long as we are absent from it 2 Cor. 5.2. 4, 8.
, desiring from our hearts to be dissolved, that we might enjoy it Phil. 1.23.
.


And the power.] We desire here that we may obey the will of God,

First, he who can do all things whatsoever he will, is to be prayed unto;
but God is such a one.

Secondly, he who can be avenged of us when and as he pleases, is to be
feared, but God is such a one.

Thirdly, he who can supply all our wants, and relieve us in all our
necessities, and deliver us from all our enemies, and dangers, he is to be
trusted unto; but God is such a one: Therefore his omnipotency is the
foundation of our prayer, obedience, and trust,

Who must fear the omnipotency, and power

First, rebels and disobedient persons; if the Pet. 3.9.) yet at last, he will
certainly power out his wrath upon them ( Romans 2.5.) when they shall not be
able to endure his anger.

Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. 4. They are not stronger then, God to tie his hands,
when his wrath is kindled, 1 Cor. 10.22.





1. Because he who prays unto him pleases him not in his life and
conversation; and therefore his prayers return back again as an abomination
unto God.

2. Because the petitions which are powered forth please him not; being either
wicked, or worldly, or malicious, or vain, and not heavenly.

3 Because the thing prayed for is not particularly fit or convenient for the
person praying, in regard of some circumstances; or at least because it is not
best for him; but God sees something which is better, in one of these regards,
namely, either;

First, in respect of his glory: Or

Secondly, in respect of the edification of the Church. Or,

Thirdly, for thy self, to wit, either;

I. For the trial of thy patience. Or,

II. For the strengthening, and exercising of thy faith. Or.

III. For the augmentation, and increase of thy experience, grace, strength,
etc.

James 5.16. for that is his cornucopia. First, want thou temporal good
things, then pray, and they shall be given. Secondly, desire thou freedom
from evils, then pray, for there is no time too late for God to help, James
5.16. Psalm. 90.3. Thirdly, desire thou to be preserved from temptation, then
pray, and the grace of God shall sustain thee, 2 Cor. 12.9. Fourthly, desire
thou to be delive, red from Satan then watch and pray. Fifthly do thou desire
increase of grace, peace of conscience, then pray for it. Sixthly, do thou
from thy heart desire that thy heart were made a temple of the Holy Ghost, then
with thy heart pray unto, God first to purge, and then to possess thy soul,
Prove. 21.1. Romans 8.22.

And the glory.]

Our Savior in these words shows, that Gods Glory is to be sought before all
other things: and we must labor to do all things to his glory; but of this
we have spoken before, verse. 9.

. 6. Amen.]

What is the meaning of this Word?

It is used three manner of ways, namely,

First, by way of asseveration; and thus it is rendered Certe, verily; Thus
Christ often; Amen I say unto you, that is, verily I say unto you.

Secondly, by way of professing; and thus it is rendered, fiat, it shall be
done, or I believe it to be true.

Thirdly, by way of praying, and thus it is rendered, fiat, so be it; and this
is the meaning of Amen in this place.

VERSE. 14. For,
For if ye forgive men their trespasses.

Why is this Petition of all the rest only repeated?

First, this Petition is repeated for the difficulty verse.

Secondly, this Petition is repeated for the necessity

When is this duty of forgiving necessary?

First, it is necessary always, so long as we

Secondly, it is particularly necessary in the

I. Because then we are to be reconciled unto God, and stand in need, that
all our sins should be abolished, and blotted out: now if we desire that God
should be reconciled unto us, we must be reconciled unto our brethren; and if
we desire to be forgiven of God, we must forgive them.

II. Because, then we are to be united into one body, and to be made one
Bread: And therefore reconciliation is then principally necessary.

How is this brotherly union and concord to

First, let him who has done the wrong

Secondly, let those who are injured and

Thirdly, let them embrace and love their

I. The Saints, and all holy men in the Lord.

II. All men whatsoever for the Lord.

Fourthly, let both, and all, resolve these

I. Not to remember what is bypast: this belongs principally to the injured
party.

II. Not to provoke any by injuries: this belongs unto the injuring party.

III. Not to be easily provoked unto revenge by wrong: this belongs unto the
person injured.

IV. Not to esteem of earthly things before heavenly, or spiritual: that is,
not so deeply to apprehend a temporal injury, that rather then suffer it, we
will deprive our selves of a spiritual benefit and mercy: like many, who will
rather forbear coming to the Sacrament then pardon their brother: yea rather
let their own sins alone unblotted out in Gods Book, then obliterate their
brothers transgression out of theirs.

VERSE 15. But if ye forgive not men their trespasses,
In this verse our Savior shows, that there is no salvation without
remission, that is, no mercy to be expected from God, without showing of mercy
unto our brother; or there is no hope that God will forgive us, except we
forgive him.

Why will not God forgive us, except we

First, because not to pardon our brother is

Secondly, because not to forgive those who

Thirdly, because not to remit a wrong is

Will not God forgive us our trespasses, except

First, we must not expect to pardon injuries Gal. 5.17.20.

Secondly, but these two things we must

I. Resist even all inward grudges, and spleenes, and disfavours, and desires
of revenge; giving place to none of them, but striving against them, and
withstanding them even unto blood Heb. 12.4.
.

II. Endeavor to corroborate and strengthen thy heart against all such corrupt
relics of anger, dislike, and revenge, by fervent Prayer unto God.

Whether must the injured person, pardon the



If thy brother trespass against thee, and turn again unto thee, saying I
repent, thou shall forgive him Luke 17.4.
that is, if he desire me to forgive him, and to be reconciled unto him;
wherefore I need not forgive him, without this submission and acknowledgement
from him.

First, certainly it is most true, that it is his

Secondly, but if he will not, yet thou must

VERSE. 16. Moreover when ye fast,
When ye fast, be not as the hypocrites.]

What benefit or commodity do we gain by Fasting?

Bellarmine (lib. 2. de jejun. cap. 2.

First, it is profitable for the taming, and subduing of the flesh, and
internal corruption.

Secondly, it is profitable for the disposing and exciting of the mind unto
Prayer, and the meditation of holy and heavenly things. These two we grant

Thirdly, it is profitable unto the worship of God; For it is not the worship
of God in it self, but only accidentally, because it does dispose a man unto
the worship of God, and so it is pleasing unto him.

Fourthly, fasting is profitable (says the Jesuit) for the satisfying of God
for the sins we have committed, and for the appeasing of him, This is false,
as appears thus

I. If fasting could satisfy for our sins, and appease God, then Christ died
in vain.

II. In those places of Scripture where we read, that God turned away his
anger from the persons fasting, as from Ahab, Hester, the Jews, and Ninivites;
even there this is not ascribed to their fasting, but to their praying.

Fifthly, fasting is profitable for the meriting, and obtaining of temporal
blessings, and eternal mercies. For Annah by fasting obtained a Son. 1. Sam.
1. And Christ here promises that God will openly reward those who fast: but
this is false, as appears thus.

I Annah obtained her son by Prayer: for this child I prayed, and the Lord
has given me my petition, which I asked of him: says Annah unto Eli. 1. Sam.
1.27.

II. God gives nothing of debt unto man, because in nothing God is debtor unto
him, as is showed elsewhere.

III. Christ promises unto him that fasteth a free reward, but it is for
prayers sake; for good things are given unto those who pray per se, but to
those who fast, ex accidenti. Now it is manifest, that to him who prays the
reward is given not of merit, or deb^, but of mercy, and favor; for the person
praying is only an humble beggar asking an alms, to whom nothing is owing;
and therefore much less is any thing owing unto him who fasts.

VERSE. 17. But thou when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy face.
But when thou fastest, etc.]

verse?

I will give no other answer unto this question here, but only that which the
Father gives ( August. sermon. 41. ad frat) Christus nos jubet jejunare, lavare
faciem, caput ungere. Christ commands us to fast, to wash our face, and to
anoint our heads; wherein he does point out three Christian duties unto us;
Quid enim aliud jejunare nisi a malo declinare; faciem lavare nisi bonum
facere; caput ungere ni si totum Deo tribuere; What is meant by fasting, but
only to turn and abstain from evil; what other thing is meant by washing
the face, then only to do good: And what can the anointing of the head
signify but this, that we must dedicate our selves wholly unto the Lord; and
ascribe all glory and honor unto him in every good work we do.

When thou fastest.]

Our Savior here does not take away the object, but still grants the use
thereof: that is, he does not forbid fasting, because hypocrites abuse it, but
does notwithstanding allow the exercise of it: from whence I might observe two
things, namely,









Secondly, all external and adiaphorall Levitic. 16.29. and 23.27. and Numb.
29.7 and. Joel. 1.14.2.12.15. and 1 Corinthians. 7.5.

Thirdly, this duty of fasting is to be undertaken

What necessity is there of fasting?

First, we have cause to fear many temporal

Secondly, we have committed many sins Ahab did, King. 21. and Dan. 9.3.

Thirdly, our corrupt nature is rebellious, Romans 7.23 and 1 Cor. 9.27.

Fourthly, naturally we are weak unto (and Acts 13.3. and 14.23.) and that by
these means. I. By quickening and sharpning the sense. II. By taking away
sleepiness, dullness, and stupidity. III. By kindling, and enflaming our zeal.

What is fasting?

It is an exercise whereby we abstain from Aretius, Calvine, this is an
outward Fast.

It is a religious exercise, whereby we deny

How many parts are there of a true Fast?

Three namely, First, the foundation; which is the sense of our poverty,
whether Private either Of our selves. Of others, as David did, Ps. 35.13.

These are either External, as a calamity either Fallen out already, as Josh.
7. Judge. 20. and 2 Samuel 1. Hanging over our heads; which is both threatened by
God, Jonah 3.5. and feared by us, Ezrah 8.21.
Internal whether it be through Sorrow for some sin or sins committed.
Fear of temptation, or inward concupiscence. Weakness, in the performance of
good duties.

Secondly, the outward practice thereof. Thirdly, the inward truth, or life
thereof.


Secondly, the next part of a true fast is Praxis externa, the outward practice
thereof, wherein there are these things required; to wit:

First, an abstinence from meat, and drink for a time?

This is either Absolute, from all kinds of meat or drink for the time of the
continuance of the fast: as was observed by the Jews, Hest. 4.16. and the
Ninivites, Jonah 3.5. Or, Respective, which is either in regard of The quality
of the meat; when men abstain not from al sorts of meats, but from all sorts
of pleasant and delightful meats. The quantity of the meat, Multi panem in
pondere, aquam in mensura Isidor.
. Many ate by weight, and drunk by measure, Because In nimio pane non de est
peccatum Bern. de pass. dom. 42.
.



Secondly, an abstinence from all natural delights, Esa. 22.12. Amos 6.6.
Mourning is the way unto repentance, 2 Cor. 7.10. and therefore in the time of
fasting (which should be a time of humiliation) we should rather go unto the
house of mourning then of mirth.

Thirdly, an abstinence from wedlock comforts, Let the Bride go out of her
chamber, Joel 2.16. and 1 Cor. 7.5.

Fourthly, an abstinence from our labors, and works, because employments
distract the mind, Numb. 29.7.

Fifthly, some add, that hereunto is required Alms, Esa. 58.7.

Thirdly, the last part of a true fast is Interna veritas, the internal truth
and life thereof; and this is the marrow of the matter, because the heart is to
be established with grace, and not with meat, Heb. 13.9. Here many things are
observable, but I reduce them unto these three, I. There must be a rending of
the heart. II. A turning unto God. III. A sacrifice to offer up unto God.

First, in the true internal or inward fast there must be a rending of the
heart, and an humbling of the soul Joel 2.13. Rend your hearts, and not your
garments, so Lev. 16.29. and 23.28. Here we should seriously meditate of those
things which might wound, and break the soul, as the corruption of our whole
nature; the multitude and magnitude of our bypast sins; the weight, and
strength of our present concupiscence, the malice of Satan against us; the
danger of hell fire; the many provocations of our God. Oh happy is that man who
can weep drops of blood, and can sink himself (upon the day of fasting) unto
the bottom of sorrow; for such God will comfort, and raise up, 1 Peter 5.6.

Secondly, in the true fast there must be a converting and turning of the heart
unto God, Joel 2.13. Rend your hearts, and turn unto the Lord. In this
conversion there are three things required. I. A turning from sin, both our
old sins, and all sins. II. A hungring after a reconciliation with God, as
the prodigal child did, Luke 15. III. A desire to possess and enjoy God by
faith in the soul; and to be m^de partakers of internal joy by the Holy
Spirit.

Thirdly, in the true fast, we must provide some sacrifice to offer up unto
God. Thus the Lord commands his people upon the day of fasting to afflict their
souls, and to offer an offering to him, Lev. 23.27. and Numb. 29.7.

Sacrifices are now ceased, and therefore what

First, we must offer up unto God a broken Psalm. 51.17. but of this something
was said before.

Secondly, we must offer up unto God the sacrifice

Thirdly, we must offer the sacrifice of mercy Esa. 58.7. Ezac. 7.9.
.

Fourthly, we must offer up the calves of our lips, and sacrifice of our
prayers unto God: for fasting is no fasting without prayer, Ose. 14.3.

Fifthly, we must offer up the sacrifice of Heb. 13.15.) both for those many
mercies he bestows upon us, and those many evils we are preserved from by
him.

Sixthly, we must offer up our selves unto

What time is most fit for fasting?

We fast either for Removing of evils whether Public or Private Here there is
need of the acknowledgment of our deserts, of our humiliation, of the
deprecating of the punishment, and the taking away of the evil which is feared
and deserved. Procuring of good things, as the Church did, Act. 13.3. and
14.23. and our Church now does at the ordination of Ministers.
Spiritual things, and that either for The quickening of our prayers, and that
if we be sensible of Some present temptation, or lust, or concupiscence, and
desire that it may be mortified and subdued. The absence of Christ, whom we
desire should return as the Apostles desired to have him awaked, Matthew. 8.25.
Private meditations, and that whether they be for things By past, as for The
sins of our youth. The loss of our time. The love of Christ toward us. The
bitterness of his death and passion, etc.
Present, as namely the examination of our lives, sins, occasions unto evil,
repentance, faith, and the like.
Holy duties, as the hearing of the Word, the receiving of the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, and the bringing of our infants to the Sacrament of Baptism:
Before all which duties, fasting conjoined with repentance and prayer is very
profitable.




Anoint thy head, and wash thy face.]





I. By head, some understand Christ, and by anointing, Alms: Anoint thy head,
that is, do good unto thy Neighbor; for love is like unto ointment, Psalm.
133. thus Chrysostom. (hom. 9. fer. 4. Ciner. tom. 2.) Vnge caput, id est
Christum, etc. Anoint thy head, that is, Christ with the oil of mercy and
charity, as Mary did, Mat. 26.7. Chrysostom. imperf. s.

II. Some take the head for the sense, reason, and understanding, because that
is the head of the soul; and by the anointing they understand joyfulnesse and
cheerfulness; Anoint thy head, Vt latitiam spiritus sancti intus habeamus,
that within in thy soul thou may have the joy of the Holy Ghost, Chrysostom.
imperf. and Hilary s. and Gualt. s.

III. Some take face for conscience, and washing for cleansing; wash thy face,
that is, purge and cleanse thy heart, August. s. and Hilarie. s.

IV. Some by the face, understand the conversation; which must be washed and
cleansed from all pollutions whatsoever, Philippians 2.15.

V. Some by the face understand both these; Wash thy face, that is, both thy
body and soul from all filthiness of sin. Chrysostom imperf.

Secondly, some understand these words literally, Hierome, Chrysostom,
Augustine, and Hilary, and that for these reasons:

I. Because this was never used either by any converted Jews or Christians.

II. Because thus they should make a greater oftentation of their fasting then
the Pharisees did.

Thirdly, some expound these words literally,

I. Because anointing was accustomed in the times of jollitie and mirth;
therefore we must be so far from showing any heaviness or sadness in our
countenance, that we must rather put on a show of joy and mirth; thus Hilary
sup. But Calvin refutes this, because this were to fall into the contrary
dissimulation.

II. Those signs of cheerfulness which thou show at other times ordinarily
in thy countenance, refuse them not; And this is principally and generally
taken to be the meaning of this place, and to this I assent, because the
inhabitants of the East did use to anoint themselves.

What use was there of Oil amongst the Oriental, or people of the East?

We read of a double use namely, Sacramental, thus the Kings and Priests were
anointed. Extraordinary, as Iam. 5. of which in his proper place.
Ordinary, which was either for Ornament, thus (almost) every day they did
anoint themselves, except it were upon the days of fasting and humiliation.
Read Ruth 3.3. and 2 Samuel 14.2. Mitth and rejoicing, as Psalm. 45.7. this
differs not much from the former, as appears by 2 Samuel 12.20. Reverence,
Psalm. 23.5. thou anointest my head (that is, causest me to be had in reverence
and honor) even is the presence of mine enemies: thus Christ's feet was
anointed, Luke 7.46. and his head, John 12.3. in token of reverence. Sepulture
and burial; thus Christ says, that Mary powered ointment upon him, for his
burial i. Agility, thus their Champions were anointed to make them more
quick, nimble, and agile.



How may this anointing of the head with oil and washing of the face, be
applied profitably to the present duty of fasting?

By an Analogy we may collect from hence an Allegorical description of a
true fast.

For the better understanding, and cleerer confirming of this, observe these
two things:

Romans 12.12. and 14.17. Philipp. 4.4. Remembering, that it is the work of the
Lord, and therefore it must be done cheerfully; yea it is a spiritual work,
and therefore it must be performed in spirit and truth, that is, with the
alacrity of the soul: More particularly;

1. We must labor to perform our fasts with cheerfulness; remembering these
two things,

First, how necessary it is to fast; our sins are many, our estate is
perilous, our enemies are crafty, yea our pleasure does often seduce, and
lead us aside: And therefore very requisite it is, that we should by abstinence
strengthen our selves.



2. We must labor to sanctify our fasts in the Spirit, Romans 5.5. Remembering
that as we do the work of the Lord, so we shall be assisted in our work by
the Lord.

Secondly, our Fasts ought to be pure, and that both

I. In conversation, lest otherwise we should be a disgrace and dishonor unto
Religion.

II. In conscience (Esa. 1.16. and 52.11. and 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. etc.) because no
unclean thing shall come unto God, Ephesians. 5.5. Act. 10.14.



By this, if thou washest thy face in thy fast;

This is Ignotum per ignotius, or at least per aeque therefore how may we know,
whether we be washed and purified from our sins, or not?

This may be known by the examination of these particulars; viz.

First, have thou inquired out all thy sins, both new and old, both of
omission and commission, both substantial and circumstantiall, both of
thought, word, and deed; and that for this end, that thou may mourn for
them, and labor to expel them?

Secondly, have thou put off thy sins, tearing them from thee, as Hercules
did the shirt, sent him by Dejanira; casting them from thee with a full purpose
of heart never to put them on, or to turn unto them again?

Thirdly, have thou learnt the way of sin, that is, all the turnings, and
windings, and movings, and secret passages, and occasions of iniquity, Esa.
5.18.

Fourthly, have thou resolved to fast, and to abstain from all sin as long
as thou live?

Fifthly, have thou by prayer washed thy own soul, both with the tears of
contrition, and the tears of supplication, imploring the Throne of mercy for
spiritual strength against sin?

Sixthly, has Christ answered thee, within speaking peace unto thy heart by
faith? Certainly if these things be in us and abound, we may be certainly
assured, that our fasting shall be rewarded.

VERSE 19. Lay not up for your selves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust
does corrupt, and where thieves break through, and steal.
Capite hoc sexto duo prohibentur. Hypocrisis versu 1. and Amor mundi versu 19.
etc. vel Post exhortationem ad contemptum inanis gloriae, jam hortatur ad
contemptum mundi, Cujus

Cujus tres gradus videtur taxare, viz. Sordida^ avaritiam in qua taxanda duo
ponuntur, Regula duplex thesaurizande, Negativa, ne thesaurizetis super terram,
versu 19. Affirmativa, reponite in coelis, verse. 20.
Ratio quadruplex, quarum Prima, inclusa in praecepto, quia Terrena incerta,
caduca, verse. 19. Caelestia secura, certa, verse. 20.
Secunda, ab effectu; quia cor abstrahunt, verse. 21. Tertia, ab alto effectu,
quia sensum obtenebrant, verse. 22.23. Quarta, ab officio serviendi Deo (vel ab
impossibili) verse. 24.

Nimiam solicitudenem, a qua dissuadet argumentis, aliis Generalibus
naturalibus quae possunt applicari omnibus hominibus Vide Muscul. s ^ag 160. b.
Hic Regula, Ne curate Vitam, quid 1. edetis. 2. bibetis, verse. 25. Corpus,
quid induemini, verse. 25.
Rations tum quia Deus dat majora: Cur haec dubitas, verse. 25. Deus pascit
volucres non laborantes, ver. 26. Cura tua vana, nil potest efficere, ver. 27.
Deus vestit flores, verse. 28, 29, 30.
est argumentum A majori. Ab exemplo Ab inutili. Ab exemploalio.

Particularibus spiritualibus, solis fidelibus applicandis. Hic duo, viz
Prohibitio ubi duo Regula, ne curate cibum, potum, vestes, verse. 31. Rations
duae Prima, ab exemplo contrario Ethnicorum, verse. 32. Secunda, a providentia
patris, vel a spe filiorum 32.

Praeceptum ubi Regula, quaerite primo Regnum coelorum, verse. 33. Iustitiam
ejus verse. 33.
Ratio, omnia addentur, verse. 33.


Minimum gradum curae de futuro, crastino. Hic Regula, ne curate in crastinum,
verse. 34. Ratio, Hodiernus dies dat satis curarum, verse. 34.



Lay not up for your selves, etc.]



Psalm. 37. and 73.) for the time will come when there will be a change, the
wicked being miserable, and the righteous happy.



I. How can they be enemies unto the world, if their heart be in the world?

II. How can they be faithful unto God, if they serve the world and hate God?

III. How can they strive and contend for heaven except their hearts and
affections be there?

IV. How can they but seek their own lucre and gain in all things, if their
hearts be on the earth?

V. How can they dissuade others from the love of the world, if themselves be
guilty thereof?

VI. How could or would they be believed if they should dissuade others, from
the treasuring up of riches, if themselves were given hereunto?

VII. How unfit was it for those times of persecution and trouble, to lay up
treasures?

And thus for these causes our Savior gives this exhortation unto the Apostles.

Why does not our Savior ad, lay not up treasure as he did fore, both in
prayer, alms, and fasting?

First, because not only hypocrites, but all others Gualt. s.

Secondly, because those who were esteemed

Whom does our Savior here speak unto?

Not only unto his Apostles,

What does our Savior prohibit here, when lay not up for your selves treasure?

He does not forbid labor, Ephesians. 4.28. and 2 These. 3.11, 12.) but the love
of temporal things (as follows by and by) which is conjoined with the neglect
of divine worship; and a diffidency or distrust of the providence of God.

. 2. Lay not up treasures,]

Why does our Savior prohibit this?

First, because he who is addicted unto earthly

Secondly, because he who is addicted unto the world does deny the providence
of God,

It is worthy observation, how our Savior does confirm the providence of God
even by the book of nature, as an Antidote against this love of the world: and
that by these Arguments.



Hereunto we might add these reasons.

He Who has not spared to give his Son for us (Romans 8.32.) will not deny us
inferior blessings.

He who has given us bread from heaven, (John 6.) will give us earthly food.

He who has given Christ to be a garment unto the soul (Romans 13.11.12.) will
apparel the body.



The Master of the family, who gives meat to his horse, and oxen, and sheep,
will certaine^y not withhold it from his children. Now if men who are wicked
know, how to give good things unto their children; how much more then our
heavenly Father, Luke 11.





Does our Savior forbid us to lay up temporal





The love of riches, or the setting of our hearts upon them.

Riches are the blessings of God, why therefore

First because it is undecent for an heir of

Secondly, because riches hurt us, and bring

Thirdly, because riches tempt unto many evils,

. 3. On earth.]

Our Savior here by an Antithesis does show, that the love and affection of
earthly things is unbeseeming a Christian.

Why may not the righteous love earthly things?

First, because they are most fit for bruit beasts

Secondly, because we must not remain on

Thirdly, because we have a better country,

. 4. Where the moth and rust does corrupt.]

What is the meaning of these words?

First, the phrase here used is applied to our

Secondly, the meaning is, that all things here

Christ does not here name Lions, bears, shipwreck, fire and the like but
ordinary and weak things, to teach us:

We may see the hand of God in the Moth, Thou shall not steal?

God permits thieves either 1.

If it be thus, then thieves are Gods servants.

Certainly they are, Asshur was the rod of his anger; and Nebuchadnezzar an
instrument to punish the Jews: thieves are Gods servants as the Caldeans, and
Sab^ans, and satan himself was, Job 1. Bur yet these must know that they are
indeed the slaves of satan, and that God will at length cast them into the
fire.

What may we learn from hence?

The Omnipotency and infinite power of God, did not oppress Egypt with Lions,
but with Grasshoppers, and Frogs, and Flies, and the like: And thus often the
least creatures have been great enough to take away the li^e of man. As for
example. First, we may see this in Animate creatures; 1. Popilius, Hatto, and
diverse others were slain by rats and mice. 2. Aristides dyed through the bite
of a weasell. 3. Messalinus, was killed with Horseleeches. 4. Hermonactes was
stung to death with Bees. 5. Pope Adrian was choked with a fly. 6. Cassander
was eaten with lice. 7. Antiochus, and Herod with worms

Secondly, we may see the truth of this in Inanimate things. 1. Alexander Eleus
the Philosopher died with a reed. 2. Drusus, the son of Claudius Caesar was
choked with a pear. 3. Terpandrus with a fig. 4. Sophocles, with the stone of
a grape. 5. Tarquinius Priscus with a fish-bone. 6. Our Earl Goodwin with a
crumme of bread. 7. Fabius with a hair in milk. 8. sampson Sultane of Egypt,
was choked with dust.

Thus we may read as in a Map, Gods Omnipotency, and Man's Impotency: and
learn to fear him, who is able to arm the least and weakest of his
creatures, and make it strong enough to cope with, and conquer sinful man.

VERSE. 20. But lay up for your selves treasures in heaven,
. 1. Lay up for your selves treasures in heaven.]

that life and glory as laid up (to wit by God) in heaven: but here our Savior
bids us to lay up treasure for our selves in heaven; where by treasure is
meant eternal glory?

We must here distinguish between these two things,

First, there is the essence and substance of glory, which consists in the
fruition of the presence of God, in the fellowshippe and society with God the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and with the Angels and Saints: now this the
Apostle speaks of Colos. 1.5. because this is laid up for true believers.

Secondly, there is the degree and measure of glory, which may be laid up, and
may be increased by believers: For they by their good works of faith may
treasure up a greater measure, and degree of glory. True it is, that a greater
reward shall not be given them in heaven for the merit of their works, but of
the mere mercy of God, who in the day of retribution will crown his own
gifts, not our merits: and where he finds a greater measure of gifts; and a
greater measure of the works of faith, there he will in mercy bestow a greater
measure of glory, according to that of the Apostle, He that sows sparingly,
shall reap sparingly, and he that sows liberally, shall reap liberally 2
Cor. 9.6.
. And again, as one star differs in brightness from another, so shall it
be in the resurrection 1 Cor. 15.41.
. Whence it appears that there shall be a greater measure of glory in one
Saint then in another, according to the measure of the works of faith. Now
this our Savior speaks off in this place: lay up treasures for your selves in
heaven, that is, treasure for your selves, a measure of glory; and add one
measure to another: as men in heaping and hoording up riches, add one shilling
and one pound unto another.

. 2. Lay up treasure in heaven, where neither

What is the principal scope of our Savior in

His maine drift, I conceive,

Wherein and how do they differ?

First in temporal things the success, and event

Secondly, In earthly things a man often takes Mat. 10.42. and our least
sufferings shall be crowned with exceeding glory, Romans 8.18.

Thirdly, earthly things are but temporary, transitory Luke 12.33. a treasure
which fails not; because neither by time, use, or any way they can either be
diminished, defaced, corrupted, or made worse; but are durable, perpetual,
eternal, yea a treasure which can never be exhausted, but will remain with,
and make eternally happy the possessor thereof.

VERSE. 22.23. The light of the body is the eye:
. 1. The light of the body is the eye, etc.]

The Papists say, (Liberum Arbitrium and a malo and ad bonum) a freedom of
will, by which we may both do good, and abstain from evil: Amongst many
other arguments our men urge this verse, arguing hence from the corruption of
the understanding.

In man Liberum arbitrium proceeds from the understanding and will, which are
faculties of the humane soul: And therefore it is necessary that Free Will
(Liberum Arbitrium) should be such as the the understanding and will is: The
Argument is drawn from the understanding which is now corrupted, in this
manner.

If the understanding of man be evil, then man's Free Will is not good: If
Free Will be not good, then neither is it free from evil. But the former is
true, therefore also the latter.

The consequence is plain of it self, but more evidently appears from this
verse; The light of the body is the eye, etc. Which place all Interpreters
acknowledge to be metaphorical, drawn from the light of the body unto the
light of the mind; see Chrysostom, Iansenius, and Lucas Brugensis. sup.

The Antecedent (namely, that the understanding in all men naturally is
corrupted, vitiated, depraved, and obscured) is thus confirmed from these
places, to wit. I. From verse 23. If thine eye be evil, etc. Now that the eye
is evil appears from Luke 4.18. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, and
therefore has the Lord sent me to preach the recovering of sight to the
blind: and therefore it appears that all men without Christ are blind, as
Cajetane well observes upon those words. II. From Mat. 4.16. The people who
sat in darkness saw a great light: where we see the state and condition the
Galileans were in when Christ came to dwell amongst them, so Luke 1.79. III.
Hence salvation in and by Christ is described to be a freedom from darkness:
ye are called, that you might show forth the praises of him who has called you
out of darkness, into his mavelous light, Col. 1.13. Thus without Christ
all men are in darkness. IV. Out of Christ all men are darkness, Ephesians.
5.8, ye were darkness, etc. which darkness was wrought in us by Satan, 2
Cor. 4.4.

If the Reader desire to see a further, fuller, and more ample prosecution of
this Argument, I refer him to Chamierus, De libero Arbit. lib. 4. cap. 3 Tom.
3. page 88.

If thy eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light.]

Bellarmine (De justific. lib. 6. cap. 15.) hopes to prove it from this verse,
arguing thus.

If thy eye be single, thy whole body shall be light; And Luke 11.36. (for I
join them as he does both together) If thy whole body be full of light,
having no part dark, the whole shall be full of light, as when the bright
shining of a candle does give thee light.

In these places is described a work perfectly good, both substantially,
intentionally, and circumstantially, both in regard of the matter, intention,
and all the other circumstances; For Oculus simplex, the single eye, is a good
intention; and Corpus Lucidum, the light body, is the good work. Now such a
work our Savior pronounces to be full of light, having no part dark.

But if such a work be a mortal sin of his own nature, as the Lutherans
say, then it should be all dark. For as an evil intention, so any other fault
or defect makes a work evil, although it be in his own nature and kind good.

Wherefore some certain works of the regenerate are so good, that they are
exempted and freed from all sin, defect, fault, and obliquity whatsoever.

First, Bellarmine concludes (extra thesin) that Lutherans) but whether they be
sin by accident or not, that is, through the corruption of the workman: And
this indeed we say, that by reason of the contagion of our nature, there
always adheres something to our best works which of its own nature is evil,
vicious, and contrary to the law of God; and consequently in the rigor and
severity of Gods judgment is mortal and deadly. But we acknowledge, that the
good works of the regenerate in their own nature (that is, as they proceed
from the grace of God within us, and his Spirit assisting us) they are good,
holy, and pleasing unto God.

Secondly, his consequence is naught: Christ If thy eye be single, thy whole
body shall be full of light; this is true, but this proves not that the eye is
so, or if that were granted, no more would follow from hence, then this that
all those actions which proceed only from the mind were pure; for the clearer
taking up of this answer, I lay down these Propositions.

First, in the law of God, the Lord does both to love the Lord with all our
heart, with all our soul, and with all our strength: in which words is
described a work perfectly good, and so our Savior in the places objected,
may give us an Idea of a work full of light having no part dark in it.

Secondly, although the law perscribeth and Amor sapientiae, a love of
wisdom, the perfect nature thereof is described: But we must not hence
presently conclude that the Philosophy of Socrates, or Plato, or Aristotle was
perfect; Thus Christ says, not that any man has a single eye, or a body all
light, but speaks hypothetic^^, si fuerit, If there be a single eye.

Thirdly, by the eye is meant the mind, which

Fourthly, although we should grant that the as Saint Paul proves plainly, Romans
7. And therefore though the works of the regenerate should proceed from a
perfectly pure mind, yet we might not proclaim them perfectly pure and good,
because they are tainted by the body, and polluted by the unregenerate part of
man.

We know in part, and we prophecy in part, 1 Cor. 13.9. and Romans 12.2. and
Ephesians. 4.23. The Apostle exhorts those who are regenerate, to labor to be more
and more renewed in the spirit of their minds.

A part meliori, from their better part, light, now ye are light in the Lord,
Ephesians 5.8. And their works pure, as follows by and by.

the single eye signifies not perfection, but integrity and singleness of
heart, without guile or dissimulation: Thus Augustine acutely distinguishes
between Rectum cord, and mundum cord; right in heart, and clean in heart:
Rectus cord est ut recto cursu, id est, recta fide atque intention pervenire
possit, ubi habitat mundus cord. He is right in heart which endeavors that
with a right course, that is, with a right faith, and intention he may at
length come thither, where dwells the clean in heart August. de perfect.
justit. contr. Celestin.
. Thus in both places objected, by a single eye, we must understand a mind
enlightened and purged by the H^ly Spirit, and by a light body, a life and
conversation shining in righteousness and holiness. F^r if the eye be clear
and quick sighted, a man walks on che^refu^ly, and readily in the right way;
if the eye be blind or vitiated, a man stumbles, and falls, and erres: And so if
the mind be enlightened and purged, the child of God walks on in the right
way of the Commandments of the Lord; but if it be obscured and blinded, then
a man walks in the way of darkness and sin.

Bellarmine erres in saying that a single eye is a good intention: For by the
single eye is not meant the intention (neither is it to be restrained
thereunto) but the pure light of the mind: for a good intention does not
suffice for the producing of a work full of light, as appears by Saint Paul,
who wanted not a good intention when he persecuted the Church and members of
Christ and yet the work was a work of darkness because it did not flow from a
mind enlightened and purged.

Socrates or Aristotle; and therefore they are altogether ignorant.



Seventhly, the light having no darkness Luke) is faith, which wholly
inlightneth the body; as Christ says, He that is washed is clean every whit
(John 13.10.) But this makes not for the perfection of works.

Eighthly, yet the light of faith, though considered Hierome well notes upon
those words, God is light, and in him is no darkness 1 Ioh. 1.5.
. He shows that all other lights are obscured with some blemishes.

Ninthly, Saint Luke says, that the light body

I find this present Objection handled by B. Davenant, de justitia actuali,
Cap. ^6. page 4, 8, 439. By D. Willet, Synops. of good works, part. 3. qu. 2.
fol. 127. By Chamier de oper impe^f. lib. 11. Cap. 22.. 10. fol. 361. ^om. 3.
and Amesius Bellar. ^nerv. tom. 4. page 197. From all which I have borrowed
something.

. 3. If the light that is in the body be darkness,

These words are alleged by Mr. We^mse in the last part of his exercitations,
to prove that the original Text of Scripture is not corrupted ( page 117.) The
Scriptures are the light of the Church, and if the Original Text were
corrupted, how great were the darkness of the body.

The Lord has Instrumenta gratiae Conjuncta. Remota.


Remota instrumenta gratia, are the preachers, and their writings, and they may
be corrupted.

Conjuncta instrumenta gratiae, are the Prophets and Apostles, and their
writings; these the Lord kept from error and corruption for the good of his
Church.

VERSE. 24. No man can serve two masters;
. 1, No man can serve two masters.]

This verse contains a complete Categorical syllogism.

No man can serve two Masters.

But God and Mammon are two Masters.

Therefore neither ye nor any can serve God and Mammon.

The Minor proposition, that God and Mammon are two contrary Masters, our
Master takes as granted; and proves the Major, ab effectis, from the effects of
love, hatred, adhesion, and neglect: If he love the one, he must hate the
other, if he hold to the one he must neglect the other.

No man can serve two masters.

Many men serve two partners, No man can serve two Masters?

First, some expound this of opposite and contrary Masters, that a man cannot
serve two enemies:

Secondly, the Proposition seems universally

1. Distinguish between The Persons The Rule.
For the husband and the wife make but one Master; two Consuls are but one
Magistrate; and two partners are but one Commander. 2. Distinguish between
Help and Service
Namely between An Action The fundamental reason of the action.

For he who serves thee may help thy friend, yea in helping thy friend serves
thee, because it is by thy command. For thus far only a man's servant may
serve another, viz.

First not in all things, but only when his Masters occasions will permit.

Secondly, not when he will of himself, but only with the love and leave of
his Master.

And therefore (these things premised) no man can serve God and Mammon; For I.
They two do not make one Master, or Governor; but are diametrall opposites.
II. They two are not two friends, but enemies, as appears by the hatred of
satan against all the Saints and children of God, and the Dragons persecuting
of the woman. III. Their employments will never permit their servants to serve
one another; that is, the Lord requires, that we should serve him wholly, and
his works we can never fully perform as long as we live: and therefore he
will never permit his servants to serve Mammon, because he is his enemy: his
work and employment will never permit that we should serve another at any
time, because that continually filles our hands, and when we take leave to
work any other work, we wholly neglect our Masters work.

Sam. 7.3. and Deuteronomy. 6.13.14. and Mat. 4.10. and 1 Cor. 10.21.



John 2.16.



Exodus 20.5. Nahum. 1.2. The Romans would not admit of the God of the
Hebrews, because he would either be served alone, or he would not be served
at all; and this is the true nature of God, for he will not part stakes with
any, but will either have all the heart, or none of the heart.

Fourthly, because except we serve God only, These. 4.1. We are obliged unto
the service of God, as a wife is unto her husband, to wit, both affirmatively
and Negatively; she must love her husband, and she must prostitute her self to
none, besides her husband; so we must serve the Lord, and none else at all
besides him.

May we not serve the King?

Yes, but in the Lord, Romans 13.1. Cantabrians answered Augustus, that their
houses, lands, possessions, and riches were his, but themselves belonged unto
none but unto the Gods, and themselves. So we must remember that we are the
servants of the Lord, and may in him and for him serve his substitutes, but we
must serve none against him.

Whether may we enjoy good temporal

First, we may enjoy them in the Lord, in as

Secondly, we may enjoy them, so far forth

Thirdly, we may enjoy them, in so much as

Fourthly, we may enjoy them, giving thanks

Wherein does the service of God consist?

In these three things, namely,

First, in the obedience of his law, statutes,

Secondly, in subjection unto him; we must confess and acknowledge in all
humility, that we are obliged to perform whatsoever he requires of us, being
none of our own.

Thirdly, in a holy profession of his name before men, although it be with
danger, as the three children did, Dan. 6.10.



ab absurda, because it is grossly absurd to serve any other: for the
confirmation, and amplification hereof observe, That he who serves any other
besides the Lord must do it for some of these causes, al which are absurd.

Namely, either because First, he has more warrant to serve another, then to
serve the Lord: this is absurd, for we are commanded to serve him only, Mat.
4.10. from Deuteronomy. 6.13. Secondly, others have as much interest in us as the Lord
has; this is absurd, because he is our Lord, both in regard of our creation,
redemption, and gubernation. Thirdly, those whom we serve are better and more
worthy in themselves to be served then the Lord is; this is absurd, because God
is Optimus Maximus. Forthly, others are better in regard of our selves; that
is, it is more profitable for us to serve others the^ to serve the Lord; this
is absurd, for he is Optimus the best of all in regard of us; yea our chiefest
good and happiness; and therefore we should do as Cato advised the Romans in
the contention between Caesar and Pompey, serve the best. Fifthly, we love
others more then we love the Lord; this is a shame, for we should love him
above all, as follows afterward. Sixthly, those whom we serve love us more
then the Lord does; this is false, for he is called (...), the lover of
mankind, yea he has not Titulum sinere, for never any showed that love unto
others, which he showed unto mankind in giving his only begotten Son unto death
for them when they were enemies, Romans 5.7.8. Seventhly, others deserve to be
served better then the Lord does; this is absurd: for we have from the Lord
both our bodies and souls, both our being and well being. Eighthly, the
precepts and laws of others are more just, and equal; this is false, for all
his commandments are holy, and just, and good, Romans 7.12. yea his yoke is
easy, Mat. 11.30. Ninthly, others are to be feared more then God: A man is
most careful to serve him whom he is most fearful to offend; now none is to
be feared so much as the Lord, for others only are able to harm the body, but
he can cast both body and soul into eternal destruction, Mat. 10.28.
wherefore he is to be served in fear, Psalm 2.11.


I conclude this with a history: Signior Pyrho di Stipicianae being at the
defense of Carignan in Piemont, valiantly sustained the siege against Mous.
d'Augnian, and all the French Camp, and (after that the Marquise of Vasto was
discomfited at Cerisole, where the Emperors part lost the battle) he before
he would yield, although greatly destitute of victuals, held them out forty
days, and at the length, having no hope of succor he was constrained to
yield; and so departing from Carignan, went (according to the oath he had
taken) unto the King of France, who greatly honoring his virtue, albeit he was
his enemy, offered him great preferment if he would serve him: But Signior
Pyrhus rendering thanks to his Majesty, refused all offers made. Afterward
upon this he had figured for his Impresse the horse of Julius Caesar, who would
never suffer any other rider: His Motto was, Soli Caesari, faithful only to
the Emperor. Thus let us do, neither through fear, or for riches, pleasure,
honor, preferment and the like, serving any other; but with all fidelity and
constancy serve the Lord all the days of our life.

. 2. He must hate the one:]

Our Savior in this place shows that the love of the world does induce us
unto the hatred of God.

Why does the love of the world make us to hate God?

First, because the love of riches leads us unto Mat. 4.9. yea hence
coveteousnesse is called Idolatry, Ephesians. 5.5. and Col. 3.5.

Secondly, because there is a contrariety of

The Lord is pure, just, immovable, eternal, and good:

The world is polluted, unjust, mutable, temporal, and evil, Gal. 1.4. and 1
John 5.19.

The world hated Christ, John 7.7. The world hated not you, but me it hates.

The Lord hates the world; although not as it is his creature, but as it is
our Lord, bearing rule in our hearts, and usurping or taking up the chiefest
room in our affections.

Thirdly, because God and the world are contrary Si esurientem a cibo abigat,
a^uantu irascerit (Plaut.) A man would hate and be angry with him who should
drive him from a well furnished Table, when his stomach were in folio: so men
hate God, because he prohibits those things which the world lays before them,
and which they lust after, and long for.

The world leads and persuades unto pleasure, honor, mirth, idleness, and
peace.

The Lord leads, and persuades unto patience in injuries, losses, and crosses;
to suffer persecution, to go into the house of mourning, to deny our selves,
and pleasures, and the like: And therefore no wonder if the love of the world
make us hate God.



Job. 27.16. etc. Prove. 12.27. and 20 21. and 2.16.

Esa. 57.17. Prove. 15.27. Ierem. 6.11.13. and 22.13.

Esa. 57.17. as Mat. 5.4. and 2. Peter 2.14.



I. A covetous man cannot pray heartily for any thing, but for his ships, and
corn, and cattle, and debtes, and estate, and the like.

II. A covetous man can neither hear aright, nor heartily desire the Word of
God, This people says the Lord come unto me, as my people, and sit before me
as my people, and hear my Word but do it not, for their heart goes after
their covetousness Ezech. 33.31.
. So our Savior says that the thorny cares of this world choke the seed of
the word Mat. 13.18.
. Wherefore David prays, incline my heart Oh Lord unto thy Law and not unto
covetousness Ps. 119.36.
.

By what means may we be freed or preserved

Psalm 33.18, 19. Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him: to
deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine.

Timoth. 4.8. Yea to him who once gains, and obtaines them, they will really
appear to be more precious then gold.

Ti. 6.6.







First, if we take most pains for the world, Mat. 6.25.31, 32.

Secondly, if we will rather forsake God, and the ways of righteousness, then
these worldly Matthew. 10.37, 39. and 19.20.

Thirdly, if we judge those happy, who abound in riches and worldly affluence,
then it is an argument,

. 3. And love the other.]

Our Savior in these words shows, that the Zelus renuit consortium amoris
contrarii in amato, si invenerit, dedignatur and nititur repellere quantum
potest.

Why does he who loves the Lord hate the world?

First, because worldly things withdraw and take off the heart from God:
therefore he who

Secondly, our love unto God is showed by our obedience; but worldly things (at
least)

Thirdly, he whose heart is inflamed with the love of God, thinks worldly
things unworthy

Fourthly, Nullum datur vacuum; The love of God does fill and replenish the
soul, which Jacob: I have enough.

What worldly things must we hate?

These things.

I. The sins of the world.

II. The allurements of the world.

III. The impediments and lets of the world. And

IV. Our own corrupt affections.

Why must we love the Lord?

First, because all good things are prepared eye has not seen, nor 1. Cor.
2.9. Read also. Ephesians. 6.24. and 2. Timoth. 4 8. and James. 1.12.

Secondly, because it is a shame for Christians to love the world, and not to
love God. Larkes

The wood- Pecker, is called in Greek (...) for her beauty, and feathers of
diverse colors; but (...) Arist.
she builds her neast in the earth: so there are many men of rare parts
otherwise, who spoil all by grovelling upon the earth, setting themselves wholly
to gather the thick clay of this world together. Now it is a great shame for
those, who would be held the children of God, and members of Christ to love
any created temporal thing more then God.



I. In regard of his Law and that First, because he commands us in his Law to
love him. Secondly, because his Commandments are just, holy, and equal.


II. In regard of his relation unto us; because he is our Father, Master, and
King, therefore we should love him.

III. In regard of his liberality, and merciful bounty unto us, extended both
in our creation, as also in providing for us what is good, in protecting us
from all evil, in bestowing spiritual mercies, and means upon us, yea in
giveing of Christ for us. And therefore we should love him.

IV. If we respect the essence and nature of God, we shall see therein great
cause to love him; and that.

First, in regard of himself, because he is invisible, immutable,
incomprehensible, immortal, the most high, and blessed Lord God.

Secondly, in regard of our selves, because he it the object of the soul, and
there is nothing that can give rest to the soul, but God: The heart of man is
like the needle of the Compass that trembles until it come to the Pole. The
soul of a wicked man is in a sling 1 Samuel 25.92.
; Now that which is in a sling is violently tossed about; and so is the soul
when it is not upon the proper object.

David said Libbi schharchar my heart was troubled, Psalm 38.10. Sohh^r is
called a Merchant which goes to and fro to sell his wares, to show how the
heart of man is troubled about sundry things: yea further the letters here are
doubled, to signify the great care and trouble that David had, when he sought
after these things, as the Merchant seeks for his gain. When the rich man
said in the Gospel, Soul take thy rest, for now thou have much goods laid up
for many years, Luke 12.19. He put the soul then from the right object: But
when David said, Return my soul to thy rest, Psalm. 116.7. Then he set his
soul upon the right object. As light is the first object of the eye, and not
the light of the Sun or Candle. So God is the first object of the soul, but
not this or that way revealed, by his creatures, or by his word: And therefore
he ought to be loved for himself.





Secondly, pray daily unto God, that he

Thirdly, separate thy self from all those

What things let or hinder us from the love

First, the love of sin: Non been convenient; the Arc and Dagon cannot both
stand in one Temple, nor God and sin be in one soul; And therefore labor to
leave, and learn to loath all sins whatsoever, because God will not come,
where sin is wittingly harbored without any opposition, or reluctation.

Secondly, the love of the world: as in this James. 4 4. and 1. John 2.15.
Wherefore love not the world.

Thirdly, the blindness of the judgment: Esa. 7.15
.

How may we know, whether we love the

First, if we hate sin, the world, and

Secondly, if we think and meditate seriously

Thirdly, if we have a high estimation of our Alexander desiring to know,
whether Apelles were in love with Campaspe (whom he had intended for himself)
caused his page (when Apelles was in serious discourse with him) to cry out,
Apelles, Apelles, look about you, your shop is one fire: wherewith he being
afrighted cried out, aye me, if the Picture of Campaspe be burnt, I am undone.

Thus if we can say with him, we are undone, if we loose our God, or with
David, that there is nothing in Heaven or earth that we desire besides him; it
is a comfortable sign of love Ps. 73.25
.

Fourthly, if our love be perpetual, and Gasper de Magno, a Knight of Millan,
bare a Stockdove with a Diamant in her bill, it being the nature of this Bird
never to loose any thing it has once taken, thereby to infer, that he would
never give over to love his Lady, whose name was also Diamanthe. His Motto was,
In aeternum; For ever: Thus it is not enough to love the Lord at times, or for
a time, but if we desire to approve our love to be faithful and unfeigned, we
must love him above all things, and that for ever and ever.

Or he will cleave (or bold) to the one: and forsake the other.

I conceive that our Saviors scope is here to argue from verse. 19. and that
thus;

Lay not up for your selves treasures on earth; because then you will adhere
and cleave to them:

Eccles. 4.8. and 6.1, 2.



Two manner of ways, viz. Voluntary willingly, when a man makes choice rather
of riches then of God and graces: this is shameful and monstrous, for a man
wittingly, and willingly to prefer his body before his soul, the world
before the Lord, and goods before grace. Secondly, Coacte, by constraint; when
his affections are so captivated with the love of the world, that like Birds in
lime-twigs he cannot free himself; but (video meliora, proboque, deteriora
sequer) although he see what is best, and approve thereof, yet still he
follows what is evil. It is a miserable thing for a man to know, that he
runs on the high way to destruction, and yet cannot stay himself.


Why may we not labor to be rich?

First, because riches are not necessary; Natura A little suffices nature; a
little meat will feed us, and a few clothes will keep us warm; And
therefore there is no necessity of being rich.

Secondly, because riches are full of troubles;

Thirdly, riches are full of peril, and danger,

Both for the Body, as shall be showed amply in another place: in the mean
time Read Eccle. 5.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Soul because they hinder us from holy
duties, namely, First, from Prayer, because either First, they distract the
Mind in Prayer; the thoughts and heart being about some worldly things, while
the lips pray. Secondly, or the power of Prayer is conversant about earthly
things; that is, the most (and most fervent) petitions are for earthly things.
Secondly, from following of Christ, as we see in the young man; who chose
rather to leave Christ then his riches. Matthew 19.20. Thirdly, from turning
unto God; riches so bewitching, and enchanting us, that we cannot leave them,
though we dye for it.





Plutarch.
but always beholds the earth; and being violently cast and laid upon the
back, so as that she sees the Heaven, the admiration of the sight thereof
makes her cease her yelling. Thus many live here on earth, as though there were
no other life, as though they should live here for ever, yea as though God had
created them for no greater or higher ends then to be rich.



I. Sometimes they are taken away from us, by some casualtie, either of fire,
water, thieves or the like, Read for the proof hereof, Psalm. 76.3. and Prove.
12.27. and Eccles. 5.11, 12.

II. Sometimes we are taken from them, when we make most account to take
pleasure in them; as we see in the rich man, who had no sooner said, Now soul
take thy rest, but the Lord says, Stulte hac nocte, Thou fool this night
shall thy soul be taken away Luke. 12.20.
.

III. Sometimes they remain with us, and we with them; and yet are taken away
in regard of use and comfort; sometimes a man is so hindered either by
sickness, or imprisonment, or some domestical vexations of wife or children,
or the like, that he has no more joy or comfort in his possessions, or riches,
then if he possessed none at all. And therefore why should we wast and spend
our days in treasuring up that which will take the wings of the morning, and
fly away.

Thirdly, because for the most part they Alexander sent a great reward unto
Phocion, because he heard that he was an honest man: But he refused the
present, and returned this answer. That he thanked the King, for his bounty,
and good conceit of him, and entreated him, to let him be an honest man still;
As if he would say; such a sum as Alexander sent, was enough to corrupt him,
and to make him worse: and therefore he durst not meddle with it. Certainly
riches and the things of this world are snares, impediments, lets, yea the
baits of Satan (as appears by him who had married a wife, and him who had
bought a Farm, and him who bought the Oxen Luke 14.18, 19, 20
) and therefore as we should avoid the coards of vanity, that draw on
iniquity, so we should not heap up, and gather together, that which will be
a means to make us rather worse then better.

Paul say, that he who provides not for his family is worse then an infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. yea does not Solomon say; Be thou diligent to know the state of thy
flocks, and look well to thy herds? Prove. 27.23.



Jacob increased his estate, when he was with Laban, and Joseph gathered
exceeding much riches from Pharaoh.

Thirdly, it is lawful to lay up treasures, and to Tim 5.8. yea it is the duty
of parents, as Saint Paul says, The children ought not to lay up for the
parents, but the parents for the children 2 Cor. 12 14
.



I. That some treasures are lawful, and necessary, to wit, wherein riches
lawfu^ly acquired are laid up, whether publicly in Exchequors, or Halles; or
privately, by private persons, only remembering, that they must be laid up
without injury of any, and with thankesgiving unto God.

II. There are some treasures unlawful, which our Savior forbids, verse. 19.







Quantum quisque sua nammorum servat in arca, tatnum habet and fidei Iuvenal.
. When men by their riches heaped up, hope to be releeved, helped, and
succored come what can come unto them, it is an argument that their hearts are
set too much upon their treasures, and their confidence is too great in them.



First, when he acquireth them by unlawful

Secondly, a man treasureth up riches wickedly,

I. Men sometimes reserve their riches, Sordide, basely, denying themselves
their part of them; when having riches, they want hearts to use them, Eccles.
4.8. and 6.1. Woe be to that man who is so careful to reserve his riches, that
he withholds them in the time of need either from King, Church, Poor, or
himself and his.

Thirdly, a man treasureth up riches wickedly,

. 5. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon.]

Our blessed Saviors general scope is here to teach us, how impossible it is
for a man to serve religion and the world sincerely, and ex animo.

What is meant by Mammon?

First, some say that he is one of the four principal devils which are
opposite to the four cardinal virtues; the first of which devils is Asmodeus,
which is the spirit of luxury and uncleanness, and is opposite to the virtue
of Chastity; the second devil is Beelzebub, which is the spirit of gluttony
and drunkenness, and is opposite to Temperance; the third devil is Mammon,
which is the spirit of coveteousnesse, and is opposite to Charity, and
liberality; the fourth devil is Lucifer. the spirit of pride, opposite unto
Humility Dor^^^secur. Ser. dominica. ser. 19.
.

But certainly Mammon is not a devil, because a man may lawfully make him
friends of Mammon, which he cannot of the devil, as follows by and by.

Secondly, (...), or (...), as it is according Eli^^ and the Chaldeans, and
also the Germans, who derive it from the Hebrew word M^^, which signifies a
reproach; because immoderate, and unlawful gain is worthy of reprehension and
blame. But this is not the meaning of the word, because we may not make us
friends of evil gotten goods (as follows by and by) but we may of Mammon.

Suidas. (...). Mammon is those riches and that substance, which does not
proceed from the devil, but whereof there is no necessary use: This is
probable and likely to be true.



Ye cannot serve God and Mammon.

Tim. 2.26. thus Witches, Enchanters, Sorcerers, Magitians, and the like are
the devils servants. Secondly, there is a service of the servants of the
devil; namely, the service of sin, and of the world, which are thus
distinguished:

I. The service of sin is thus by St. Paul described, the servants of sin 1
yield themselves, and are content to obey sin, Romans 6.1, 617, 19. and 2. are
free from righteousness, Romans 6.20.

II. The service of the world (which is the service here spoken of) is a
willing subjecting of a man's self unto the allurements, and provocations, and
baits of the world, or a yielding unto the inticements unto evil, which are
found in the world: Whence it is that a man cannot serve God and the world.



Nemo repent fit bonus, Nemo repent fit dives: None are quickly good, non are
quickly rich: if a man desire to be good he must accustom himself to a long,
constant, and continual trade of religion; if a man desire to be rich, he must
rise up early, and go late to bed, and eat the bread of carfulness; yea, he
must employ both head and heart: And therefore religion and the world cannot
both be served by one and the same man.









Ioh. 15. yea the children and coheires of Christ, Romans 8.

Fourthly, he who serves Ma^mon must necessarily

How may we know whether we serve our

First, if we use our riches as servants, sending

Secondly, if Mammon First, sends us whether he will, Per mare, if the love of
riches cause us to expose our selves to imminent danger and hazards, he is then
our Master. Secondly, if thou dare not send thy riches abroad when necessity
requires; if thou dare not satisfy the necessities of the poor, although
they cry unto thee for fear of scattering thy riches; then certainly thou art
Mammon servant.


How is Mammon to be cast out?

By the works of mercy,

What is required of us unto this service of

First, a serious labor of the life; we must

Secondly, a generality of obedience, both in Things commanded, we must not
abstain from some sins, or do some things, as Herod did, but labor to
avoid whatsoever is evil, and do whatsoever is good. Times, not obeying of
God, per intervalla, by starts, or for a time; but all our time, we enjoy upon
earth.


Thirdly, fear, we must obey him with Malach. 1.6. If I be your Master where
is my fear: We must stand in awe of him, and not dare to offend him.

Fourthly, a desire to please him, in what he

VERSE 25. Therefore I say unto you,
. 1. I say unto you.]

Why does our Savior give this counsel with an ego dico, I say unto you?

First, because he was their Master, and therefore





Quapropter, wherefore I say unto you.]

(...). therefore; We may observe here how Christ persuades unto, and
disswadeth from nothing without reason; he disswades, from coveteousnesse, and
gives reasons for it, he disswades from carfulness and gives reasons for it,
yea ever and anon does so, as else where, what will it profit a man to gain
the whole world, and loose his own soul? Teaching us hereby,





(Tum very, tum boni, tum aequi, tum justi) both of that which is true, and
good, and just, and equal: for the better understanding hereof observe; that
which is true in one science is not false in another; that which is true in
Philosophy is not false in Divinity; and contrily to that which is true in
Divinity is not false in reason, but only above her reach; yea if any thing
were true in one Science and false in another, then Verum non esset reciproca
affectio entis, that is, that which has a being should not be true, and that
which is true should not have a being

Four things there are here to be distinguished, to wit, Veritas, supra,
infra, juxta, contra rationem.

First, there is a Veritas supra rationem, a verity that is above reason, this
is of things taken up by faith.

Secondly, there is veritas juxta rationem, a verity which is agreeable to
reason; this is of things taken up by reason.

Thirdly, there is veritas infra rationem, a verity which is under reason; and
this is of things taken up by sense.

Fourthly, veritas contra rationem non datur, there is no verity contrary to
reason: It is not against reason to believe that a Virgin conceived and bare a
Son, but it is above reason.

In Jsrael there was a judicatorie of seventy, who judged of matters of
greatest weight; and there was an inferior judicatorie consisting of three,
and these judged of goods, and matters of least moment: that which was truly
concluded in the highest judicatorie, was not false in the inferior; and
although they could not judge of a false Prophet, is the great Synedrion did,
yet they held it not false in the lowest judicatorie, when the great Synedrion
concluded such a one to be a false Prophet.



Demonides a Schoolmaster in Athens did, who having crooked feet, had his
shoes stolen from him, which were made according to his feet: whereupon he
wished, that the feet of those who had stolen his shoes, might become like
unto the shoes which they had stolen. This was a foolish wish, to desire the
straight foot to be made fit for the crooked shoe, whereas the shoe should
be made fit to the straight foot: Philosophy and natural reason is but a
crooked shoe, and therefore to conform Divinity thereunto were to conform
the straight foot to the crooked shoe; Divinity must be the square to correct
that, which is not straight.

Who form or frame a model of Religion

The Church of Rome: Moses on the Mount, but from scholastic speculations; as
for example,

First, because the Mathematickes consider lines, figures, circles, points,
abstracted from bodies; therefore they gather, that accidents may be in the
Sacraments without the subject.

Secondly, because Moral Philosophy establishes neither punishment nor
reward, unless the free will of man go before; hence they infer that there
is free will in man. Again, because moral Philosophy knows no virtues, but
inherent habits and virtues; therefore it is that they set themselves against
the imputed righteousness of Christ. The moral Philosopher calls vice a
voluntary evil; therefore they infer, that concupiscence is not sin,
because it is not altogether voluntary.

Thirdly, from the Politics, in policy, the best sort of government is
Monarchical; therefore the Popes government must be Monarchical. Again, in
Princes courts, men use Mediators to go to their Prince, therefore they
conclude, that we must use the intercession of the saints to God. In policy,
no laws are given, but which the subjects may fulfill; therefore man is able
to fulfill the law of God.

Fourthly, from the Physickes; Physic teaches us that the body turns to
corruption, and dissolves; upon this they infer, that the body of man should
have dyed naturally as it does now, though he had not fallen, if supernatural
righteousness had not kept back corruption; thus making God as well the
author of death, as of nature, considering man only according to the
principles of nature, and not according to this first creation. Again, Physic
teaches us, that the blood always follows the body, therefore they have
taken away the cup from the people in the Sacrament, because (say they) if they
get his flesh, they get his blood, per concomitantiam.

Fifthly, the Metaphysickes teach us that every positive thing is good;
therefore they define original sin to be a mere privation.

Sixthly, I might show, how from the Platonickes they have borrowed their
apparition of spirits; how from the Poets fables they have taken their
Purgatory; and how from the incantations of the Gentiles they have borrowed
their exorcismes, but I enlarge it no further.

May we not oppose Reason to Religion?

No,

But Preachers teach that reason, and humane wisdom are opposite unto God, and
religion; yea Paul himself affirms the same, Romans 8.6, 7, 8.

Contra rationem, against reason: for no such thing is true in Religion. Supra
rationem, above reasons reach; thus we doubt of the magnitude of the Sun,
and we are altogether unable to conceive fully or comprehend God, and things
which are infinite; because we are blind.




Humane, when we reduce or bring back God unto a humane order; not
acknowledging him to be eternal, infinite, and the great Creator of all the
world; this indeed is opposite unto God. Divine, when we know how to
distinguish between God and man; both in his power and equity.


Possibilitatis. Aequitatis.


First, Possibilitatis, whether such a thing be possible unto God or not?

To this Christ answers, unto God nothing is impossible. Indeed ordinarily two
things are said to be impossible unto God, namely;

I. To sin, this argues infirmitly, and impotency, and therefore cannot have
place in God.

II. To be contrary unto himself, for this argues mutabilitie, and variation.

But in these we must not say, God cannot, but God will not; the thing is the
same, but the phrase is more remote from blasphemy.

In this first opposition of Possibility there are two quaeres, namely,

First, An sit? whether any thing be impossible unto God? here with Christ
above we must answer negatively; Nothing is impossible unto God.

Secondly, Quomodo sit? How such a thing may be? here often reason is foolish,
and not able to give an answer, and that sometimes in humane things, sometimes
in Divine.

I. In humane things reason often is not able to give a reason, as why an
Amulet hung about the neck should preserve from poison, or enchantment, or
bewitching? why a bone-ring should preserve from the cramp? how five thousand
could be fed with five loaves, and twelve baskets full left. Many men admire
how the earth can hang in the air; how the Eclipses can be foretold: how the
motions of the heavens can be discerned or understood: how men can go with
their feet against ours; This is a thing so hardly to be believed, that
Virgilius the Bishop was degraded, and expelled his Bishopric, by Boniface,
Pope Gregory, the seconds legate Aventinus.
. Thus reason is blind and foolish in humane things.

II. In Divine things reason is much more to seek, being therein in many
things altogether ignorant. Multa in religione fide credenda, non
demonstratione, rationeve probanda: There are many things in religion which
cannot be demonstrated, or proved by reason, but are only to be believed by
faith; as God to be eternal, a part ante and a part post, without all
beginning, and without all end: and for the torments of hell to be eternal,
that is, without end, although they had a beginning: how can reason demonstrate
the blessed Trinity in Unity ever to be worshipped? when we begin to consider
of these things, we must cry out O al titudinem, O the depth of the riches,
both of the wisdom, and of the knowledge of God; how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out, Romans 11.33.

Secondly, Aequitatis, flesh and blood does here frequently reason against God;
demanding how he can equally and justly do such or such things and th s
troubles us most, because we do not consider God as the Creator of al things,
but as our companion, we equal him with our selves, and then try him by that
rule: God in derision said Man is become like one of us; and Man in his
reasonings and disputes concerning God, makes him like Man. As for example.

I. What reason can there be for eternal punishment for a temporal fault? how
can God punish a man justly with eternal and perpetual torments, for
momentary offenses?

I answer, reason it self does confirm the equity of the thing, for

First, sin is eternal voluntate, in desire and will; a wicked man would
sin for ever, if he did upon earth live for ever: and therefore it is just
with God for ever to punish him

Secondly, sin is eternal iniquitate, that is, out of measure sinful, and
of an infinite merit, because committed against an infinite and eternal God:
and therefore is justly, eternally punished.

Thirdly, reason will say, that there is no reason to deny that unto God which
we allow to men, or to think that unjust or unequal in God, which in men we
hold most just: now man for offenses committed against man punishes eternally,
for sometimes he takes away his ears, sometimes cutteth of his hand,
sometimes takes away his life, which are justly called eternal punishments,
because they can never be restored: the whole world cannot give unto a dead
man life, or unto a mutilated man limbs.

II. What reason is there that God should condemn us for Adams fault?

Reason here answers, that for treason against the King, the Father is
beheaded, and the children disinherited; Why then should we plead against
God? our Father Adam committed high treason against him, yea the covenant was
made with all men in Adam, and therefore justly may the Lord reject us, we
sinning against him in our fathers loins: yea we have the seed of all
corruption in us by nature, and therefore the Lord may justly cast us into Hell
before we live to commit any actual transgression.

And therefore of all these things let us not say, that they are contra
rationem, against reason, but that they are supra rationem, beyond or above
reason; and that the things are true, and possible, and just. and equal, but
we are blind and cannot see how or which way: Wherefore believe (...), that
such and such things are; acknowledge that thou art not able to understand
(...), how they are: Reason tells us, Deus est, that there is a God; but
reason knows not, quid est, What this God is, as Simonides acknowledged. I
conclude therefore this question, Contra rationem nemo sobrius dicit, contra
scripturam nemo Christianus, and contra ecclesiam nemo pacificus. No sober man
will speak against reason, no Christian man will speak against Religion and
the Scriptures, no peaceable man will speak against the Church.



pro imperio, but applies himself to our capacity; showing that he does not
command as a Tyrant, but persuade us as a friend unto that which is good and
profitable for us.

(Ab utili, honesto, aequo, etc.) from the utility, necessity, honesty, equity,
and excellency of the thing; how injurious are we unto our God? how inexcusable
are we in our selves, if we will not be drawn by so many, and so strong
coards?

This is a plain argument that we willingly and wilfully close our hearts,
shut our eyes, and stop our ears, both against the light of reason and
Religion, the one not being contrary unto the other: sometimes the Lord gives
us moral counsel, sometimes divine, and therefore the greater shall our
judgment be, if we be not obedient.





First, Christ dehorts us from seeking the praise of men, and the applause of
the world; and that for these reasons following, namely,

I. Because it is a vain, airy, and unconstant breath; nothing more unstaid,
and unstable then the many-headed multitude, who to day will cry Hosanna, and
to morrow Crucify him.

II. Because the praise of men (in our good works) is unprofitable; seeing not
men but God must judge us at the last day.

III. Because it is a blast which will puff us up and make us swell, and grow
both more proud, and worse then formerly we were.

IV. Because the praise of God is more worthy, and therefore more carefully to
be sought for.

Secondly, Christ exhorts us to avoid Hypocrisy; and that for these reasons.

I. Because we shall not be judged at the last day by outward duties, or
appearances.

II. Because God will never accept of Hypocritical works.

III. Because God requires and sees, and searches the heart.

IV. Because Hypocrites shall only receive a temporal reward on earth, but
not an eternal in the Heavens.

V. Because an hypocritical show of true Religion, makes us not happy; for
virtue (which is the way unto felicity) consists in action.

Thirdly, Christ exhorts us to show forth the good works of sanctity, and
uprightness, and that for these reasons:

I. Because we shall at the last day be judged according to our works: The
judgment of God (says Saint Paul) is (...) according to truth (Rom 2.2.) that
is, (...) according to works. verse 6.

II. Because if we bring not forth good fruits; we shall be hewn down, and
cast into the fire.

III. Because they shall be rewarded with true felicity and happiness in the
Kingdom of God.

IV. Because they are profitable and necessary, both in regard of God (because
he is glorified) and of others (because they are edified) and of our selves,
because they make sure our election and vocation unto us, 2 Pet. 1.10.

Fourthly, he dehorts us from the care of the world; and that by these reasons.

I. Because it distempers, and disturbes the mind, Psalm. 127.3. It will not
suffer a man to sleep.

II. Because it alienates and estrangeth the heart from God, 1. Tim. 6.9.

III. Because it derogates from God, as though he would not, or could not, or
knew not, how to provide for us,

IV. Because it is unprofitable in a double regard, namely. First, we cannot
by our care add one cubit to our stature, Mat. 6.27. Secondly, because God
will Provide for us without our care, Luke 12.30.


Fifthly, Christ exhorts us to seek heavenly things before all things; and
that for these reasons.

I. Because our treasure is in Heaven; and therefore our hearts should be
there.

II. Because Heaven and the salvation of our souls is a matter of the greatest
importance, and weight unto us, both in regard of the loss, and in regard of
the gain: for if we gain Heaven we gain the greatest, if we loose Heaven
we loose the greatest inheritance and possession that possibly can be.

III. Because heavenly joys, glory, felicity and happiness is only
permanent, enduring for ever.

IV. Because only in Heaven is our true felicity, and chiefest good.

And therefore let reason and Religion rule and direct us, and we shall be
happy and blessed for ever and ever.

Therefore I say unto you.]

Our Saviors conclusion is here worth observing: Covetousness leads a man
unto the service of Mammon; therefore I say unto you be not careful; etc.



Principijs obsta, we must give no way unto the water at all.





Nemo statim fit pressimus: as a garden is not quite overgrown with weeds in an
instant, but being neglected a while, they begin to spread and disperse
themselves: so a man becomes not a devil incarnate at once, but sin by
degrees seaseth upon him, and at length wholly surpriseth him: As for example,
from these verses.

I. Comes carfulness for the things of this world: from hence,

II. Comes fear, and doubting least we should want, and be exposed to
poverty: from hence,

III. Comes Oportet habere, we must have something to lay up for the time to
come: from hence,

IV. Omne saxum volvitur, no means is left unsought of enriching our selves,
from hence,

V. Comes a covetous detaining and reserving of what we have; not imparting of
it unto any good use, from hence,

VI. Comes a certain hope and trust in what we have laid up: we begin to
make an idol of our riches, saying unto gold thou art my God, and unto the
wedge of Gold: thou art my confidence. And therefore there is great reason that
we should resist the least motions and beginnings of sin.



First, the least circumstances of sin, we

Secondly, the occasions of sin, for otherwise David by not avoiding the
occasions of idleness, and giving his eyes leave to rove, was drawn unto
adultery.

Thirdly, our internal affections; because

. 4. Take no thought for your life, what you shall

Why does our Savior condemn care about temporal things?

First, because it afflicts the heart: or (as Solomon calls it) is the vexation
of the spirit, Eccles. 1.

Secondly, because it hinders the fructification Matthew. 13. A Philosopher
going to Athens to study, cast away, and forsook all his riches, and
possessions, that his mind might be the more free for the search of wisdom
and knowledge: so when men come to hear, or read, or meditate, or pray, they
had need cast away all worldly care from them, otherwise they will utterly
distract their minds from the duties in hand.

Thirdly, worldly cares make us forget God,

. 5. Is not the life more then meat, and the body

Our Savior implies here in general, that

Wherein does the soul excel the body or

First, it is better, and therefore more to be

Secondly, the soul is better then the body, Martha is daily troubled about
many things, but the soul with Mary should attend wholly upon God, and suffer
nothing to harbor there but what is holy, and pure: yea the soul must love
nothing but God, as the wife with a conjugall love must love none besides her
husband.

Thirdly, the soul is more excellent then the body (and therefore more to be
cared for) in regard of the nature and substance thereof: the body is mortal,
the soul immortal, the body of a corporal substance, the soul of a
spiritual the body partly (and in some sort wholly) from man, but the soul
wholly from God; the body of an earthly nature, the soul of a spiritual.









How does it appear that spiritual graces are

Because whatsoever we desire or long for in temporal things, we may find in
spiritual,

Do thou desire First, Riches? Secondly, Houses? Thirdly, an Inheritance?
Fourthly, friends and good companions, because thou art a sociable creature?
Fifthly, Honor? Sixthly, Wisdom with Solomon? Seventhly, pleasure, as
Solomon once did? Eighthly, Marriage, do thou think a good Wife or Husband a
principal comfort?
Then Remember Godliness is great riches, and the best treasure 1 Timothy 6 6.
. In heaven there are many mansions Ioh. 14.2. 1 Pet. 1.4,
. There is an inheritance immortal prepared for those who serve God. That on
earth thou shall be admitted into the society of the Saints, and in heaven thou
shall have fellowship with God and Christ, and the Saints, and Angels Ps. 16.3.
and Heb. 12.22. and 1 Ioh. 1.3.
. That in heaven thou shall reign, and be endued with a kingdom Romans 8.17 2 Timothy 4.8.
. That in the word is true wisdom; it being able to make us wise unto
salvation Colos. 3.16. and 2 Timothy 3.16.
. That true solid, perpetual, and eternal joy is only to be found in the
Lord, Phi. 4.4 and Ioh. 16.22. That the Lord will marry thee unto himself in
righteousness, in judgment, in loving kindness, and in mercy, and betroth
thee unto him in faithfulness Hos. 2.19, 20.
.


We may here observe our Saviors argument a majori ad minus, God has given
you the greater things, therefore he will give you the less: he has given you
life, therefore he will not deny food; he has given you a body, therefore

That the experience we have of Gods mercies in greater things, should make us
more confidently hope for, and expect the less: Thus David says, He that
delivered me from the Lion and Bear, will deliver me from this Philistine 1
Sa. 17.37.
: As if he would say, it is less dangerous for man to combat with man, then
for man to combat with a Bear or Lion; now God delivered me from the greater
peril, and therefore I dare trust him in the less. Thus Saint Paul says, He
who has given Christ for you, and unto you, will withhold nothing from you,
Romans 8.32.

Why may we so boldly rely upon God for future

First, because the Lord gives nothing casually,

Secondly, because God is never weary of doing

Does our Savior forbid all carfulness for

First, a godly moderate care which is enjoined us by Commandment (Read, Prove.
6.6, and 2 Cor. 12.14. and 1 Timothy 5.8.) The practice of which care stands in
these two things, namely, First, a diligent walking in our calling, dealing
uprightly with all men, only minding honest and necessary things. Secondly, a
committing of the sucesse and issue of all our labors and endeavors to God,
As Genesis 22.8. Exodus 14.13.
Secondly, a distrustful carking care, whereby men trouble themselves about
the issue of their labors, and when they have done their endeavors; dare not
rest therewith, but vex themselves about the success, not relying on Gods
providence for the blessing, but only on the means. Now the effects of this
care are three namely, First, it oppresses the heart, making it exceeding
heavy and pensive, for fear of want; for this care dares not trust God, but is
in fear continually, until he see the success. Secondly, it draws men to
use unlawful means, as lying, fraud, false weights and measures, etc.
Thirdly, it makes men weary of Gods worship, it distracteth the mind in
prayer, and hearing of the word, and suffers it not to bring forth fruit, Luke
8.14. for when the mind is wholly set upon the world, there is no respect to
the matters of God.



VERSE. 26. Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they
reap, nor gather into barnes,
Behold the fowls of the air.]

Christ here sends us to the creatures, that from them we may learn the
goodness of the Creator: Psalm. 19.1. etc. Promisit Deus naturam, submissurus
prophetiam Tertul. de resurre. caru.
. The world is a book, wherein we may read God, in which book are three
leaves, the Heaven, the Earth, the Sea, and there are as many letters and
histories in those leaves, as there are stars in the heaven, creatures in the
earth, and fishes in the sea, ( Clem. Alexand. and Sphinx. page 37.) all which
are (...) ( Rhod. 8.17.) Schoolmasters which will teach us gratis, without any
salarie.







neither sow, nor reap, nor have storehouses, nor barn, and yet are fed,
Luke 12.24. II. When we hear the young Ravens crying ( Psalm. 147.9.) because
they call unto God ( Job 39.3.) for food and he feeds them. III. When the
Hen gathers her chickins under her wings: God offering thus to do with us, if
we will but obey him, Mat. 23.37. IV. When we see the beautiful Lillyes, verse.
28. V. When we have showers in season; that is the former and latter rain,
Ier. 5.24.

Barthol. II. They have many enemies: as First, the Kite, nd (almost) all sorts
of Hawks. Secondly, Cats, and Weasels. Thirdly, Men which are the worst
enemies of all. For first they build in houses and barnes, and Secondly, fly
by flocks, and so many fall together into the net. And yet for all this they
increase extremely: Thus it was with the Martyrs in the Primitive Church; the
more they were persecuted, the more religion flourished and increased.

is dumb before the shearer; Christ being thus for our sakes, Esa. 53.7. Acts
8.32.

Behemoth, and Leviathan, Job. 40. And the Lions, who seek their prey from the
Lord, Psalm 104.22.



Prove. 6.6. II. From the Doves we may learn to be simple, harmless, and
innocent, Mat. 10.16. III. From the Lambs we may learn to be meek, gentle, and
patient, Mat. 10.16. Ioh. 21.16.

Secondly, we may read what we are from Job 8, 9. II. From the Ox at the
stall, we may learn our unthankefulnesse, Esa. 1.3. III. From the Ox going to
the slaughter, we may learn our folly in sin ( Prove. 7.22.) the end whereof
is destruction, although we follow it merrily. Dum ruit ad caedem simplex
lascivit ut agnus.

Thirdly, we may read the danger we are in by Prove. 5.3. II. By fire in the
bosom, which burns him that carries it ( Prove. 6.27.) so he who harbors
temptation in his heart at length is scorched with the flame of sin. III. By
birds escaped from the snare of the fouler ( Prove. 6 5.) because if they had
not escaped, they had dyed, so except we escape from the snares of the Devil,
we perish, 2 Timothy 2.26.

. 2. Behold the fowls of the air, etc.]

What creatures does Christ send us unto to

First, not unto Lions, or beasts of prey, but birds.

Secondly, not unto household fowls, which are

Why of all birds does Christ send us to the

First, because of all other birds almost they are Gualt. s. Or

Secondly; because the old ones never feed the Barthol, 12.11. ex Isidor. And
therefore all the mean time they are fed by the dew of heaven. Barth. ex
August. or with worms and maggots which are bread in the nest: as Sphynx. 85.
Or

Thirdly, because by their old ones they are Plin. 10.12. sic Calvin. Hence the
souls of the air are called Alites, Birds, Non solum quia alatae, sed quia
alitae ab eo qui omnia alit. (Barth. 12.1. ex Isid.) Not only because they are
winged creatures, but because they are nourished by him who feeds all things.
Thus our Savior would have us learn of the birds, because they are more near
unto Gods help, and more remote from man's.

What must we learn of the birds?

First, fowls of the air are of a more pure, light, Barthol. 12.1.) they have
fewer humors, and are less earthly, then beasts or fishes; and are more airy
and hot, and therefore endure the longer. ( Rhod. 2.18.) so we should labor
to be pure, and holy, yea a chosen people, and a royal generation unto God.

Secondly, birds are of a more strong and swift Barth. 12.1.) so our affections
should be quick, and ready, and strong in our obedience, and the fruits of a
new life.

(Barth. ib.) so should we in all spiritual wisdom and knowledge, Colos.
3.16.







Seventhly, they frequent the heavens, and that First, Securitatis causa,
because there they are most safe; so we should fly unto the mountains,
because true security is to be found only in God. Secondly, Delectationis
causa because they delight to be there: the lark mounts with great delight,
and hovers long in the air, with great joy: so we should set our affections
upon those things which are above, Colos. 3.1. and mind heavenly things; having
our conversation and delight in heaven.


Yet your heavenly Father feeds them.]

your heavenly Father?

your father whom you shall hereafter see in heaven, provideth for them, and
therefore will much more for you.

Our Savior teaches us by this phrase, That we never fully and perfectly
possess and enjoy God, until we come unto that heavenly estate, Philip. 3.20.
Colos. 3.1, etc. 1 John 3.1. etc.



Phil. 3.20. Colos. 1.5. Heb. 11.10, 13, 14.16. and 2 Timothy 4.8. and 1 Pet. 1.4.
In all which places is expressed, that the expectation of glory, honor, joy,
and felicity, is in heaven.







Labor for a heavenly conversation; and strive to live and lead a life on
earth, as though thou were in heaven,

Wherein does this heavenly conversation

First, in a heavenly preparation; that we may

Secondly, in a holy and heavenly life, living Gal. 2.20.) that is, walking in
the ways of God, and living the life of faith, and framing our conversations
according to the will of God revealed in his word, denying ourselves, and our
own wills.

Thirdly, in heavenly meditations, and contemplations,

Fourthly, in an heavenly expectation; as Paul did, who expected Christ from
heaven, 1 These. 1.10. and rest with the Saints 2 These. 1.7.

. 4. Are ye not much better then they?]

Our Savior in the foregoing words gives us an example, in these he gives the
application thereof. Fuimus non sumus, we were indeed better then the other
creatures once, but now we are not, but worse then they, and next unto the
wicked Angels, having lost that goodness which was in us at first.

First, mankind (toto genere) in general is better

Secondly, men excel the other creatures by

Thirdly, men are better then the other creatures Adam, and in him the grace of
restitution, and reparation, unto a better state and condition, then they had
in the first Adam.

Fourthly, Chrst reputes us here not as we are

Fifthly, Men are better then the other creatures, Does God (says Saint Paul)
take care for oxen, that is, in comparison of men?

Our Savior then by this interrogation does point out unto us this
observation, namely,

That Gods reputes men the best of his creatures: the rest of the creatures
when they were created, were good, but man was made exceeding good, Genesis 1.31.
Psalm. 8.6, etc. Heb. 26, etc. Mat. 12.12. Luke 13.15.

How does it appear, that God thus highly esteems man above the rest of his
creatures?

reserved, 1 Pet. 1.4. or laid up, 2 Timothy 4.8. but prepared, Mat. 25.34. and 1
Cor. 2.9. yea what is prepared? Mansions, John 14.2. and seats, Mat. 20.23. And
the sin of man cannot frustrate or make void the covenant and decree of God,
Romans 11. because if those fall for whom this kingdom is prepared, God will
restore them again by grace and repentance, Psalm. 37.24.













VERSE. 28. And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the Lillies of the
field, how they grow: they toil not, neither do they spinne.
And why take ye thought for raiment?



procurandae non curanda vestes Garments are to be procured and provided, not
to be cared for.





I. There was no uncleanness, filthiness, or unseemelinesse in the body, in
the first creation thereof.

II. There was no unseasonable weather, nor any hurtfulnesse in the air before
the curse: And therefore till after the fall, there was no use

Secondly, but now garments are necessarily used.







Benjamin five changes of raiment, Genesis 4.22.

Sin, and our present uncleanness thereby. The ornament of the soul; and
how carefully that should be adorned, 1 Timothy 2.9. and 1 Pet. 3 3, 4.


Fifthly, to distinguish First, sexes, women from men, Deuteronomy. 22.5. Secondly,
ages, thus young Joseph had a garment of diverse colors, Genesis 37.3. Thirdly,
orders; Thus sometimes I. The Kings were distinguished by their garments. II.
Sometimes the Priests, Exodus 28.2. and 29.5. etc. III. Sometimes the Rich, Luke
16.15. Mat. 11.8. IV. Sometimes the Poor, Eccles. 40.1. Forthly, occasions,
actions, affections, and times: namely, I. Holy garments, Exodus 39.1. and
40.12. and Levit. 8.8. and 16 4 II. Wedding garments Mat. 22.11. III. Garments,
of mirth, Exodus 33.4. and Esaias 61.3. IV. Mourning garments, sackcloth, 2 King.
6.30. V. Garments used for travelers on foot, on horseback; by men warring,
and sleeping.


VERSE. 29. And yet I say unto you,
. 1. And yet I say unto you.]

Why does our Savior here use this asseveration, Tamen dico, yet I say unto
you?

To teach two things unto us, namely, I. That Christ is of another opinion in
many things then the world is. II.

First, Christ says, I say unto you, as if he would say, Many (and it may be
you also) think otherwise, godliness is great gain; but the world holds gain
godliness. Read, 1 Timothy 4.8. and 5.6.

How does it appear that Christ, and reason,

It is clear by these three things, to wit;

First, Christ is truth it self, but reason is ignorant of the truth;
Philosophy it self looking upon man as pure, and hence affirming, that man
following the conduct of nature cannot err.

Secondly, reason, nature, and the world look too much upon themselves; but
Christ teaches us to look upon God; nature and reason persuades us to
respect our selves more then Gods glory, as Peter said, Master spare thy self,
etc. Mat. 16.22. but Christ teaches us to seek the glory of God in all
things, and above all things, and to deny our selves, Mat. 16.24.

Whether can a natural man be the servant of



What the natural man Can understand: namely these things, First, gain,
glory, quiet, peace, estimation, and the like; Secondly, to avoid, gross,
enormious, and criminal offenses. Thirdly, to be of an affable, meek and
courteous nature, to be true and just in his dealings, and injurious unto none.
Cannot understand: namely, these six things, to with First, what is meant by
the purity of the heart. Secondly, the presence of God to be every where.
Thirdly, the internal conduct, and direction of the Holy Ghost. Fourthly, what
is meant by the internal fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.19. Fifthly, to glorify
God, in every action. Sixthly, to be zealous for Gods glory, and in Gods
service. These things are strange unto him, until he be taught them by
Christ.



Secondly, Christ says, I say unto you, as if he would say; it matters not
what the world says, Ioh. 10.4.27. and 8.51.



Ioh. 1.1.14.

Esa. 40.8.

Iam. 1.18. and 1 Pet. 1.23.

Psalm. 19. and 119.

Ioh. 12.48. and Romans 2.16. and 2 These. 1.8.

Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.]

Lillies exceed Solomon in glory?

Solomon in all his glory were but artificial, but the clothing of the
lillies are natural; and look how far nature exceeds art, (for art is but
an imitratrix of nature, and her perfection is to imitate nature) Therefore the
Lillies exceed Solomon in all his glory.

Solomon when he was so gloriously decked; was beholden to many creatures, he
was beholden to Egypt for his linen, to the earth for his gold, to the
silke-worme for his silk, to the shellfish for his purple, and had nothing of
his own; so that if every one of those should have claimed their own, he
would have stood like Aesops crow, stripped of all, when every one of the fowls
craved their own feathers which they had lent her; But the Lilly is beholden
to no other for its beauty, and therefore does exceed Solomon in all his glory.

Solomon, was clothed thus, it was but a remembrance to him of his fall, and
he had as little cause to glory in these ornaments, as a man has to glory in
the velvet patch or plaster that covers his wound; but the beauty of the
lilly is natural, it covers not the shame of it; Therefore the lilly
exceedes Solomon in all his glory.

Fourthly, Solomon in all his glory was but one, lillies of the field are so
clothed; Therefore the lilly exceeds Solomon in all his glory.

Fifthly, Solomon was arrayed in all his glory they exceed Solomon in all his
glory.

Sixthly, Solomon was thus arrayed by men,

VERSE. 30. Wherefore if God so cloth the grass of the field, which to day
is, and to morrow is cast into the oven: shall he not much more cloth you, O
ye of little faith?
1. Shall he not much more cloth you?]

The scope of our Savior in this verse is to Matthew 12.12. and Luke 13.15. and
14.5.

Why will God give good things much more

First, because man is a more durable creature

Pronaque cum spectant animalia caetera terram
Os homini sublime dedit, caelumque videre
Iussit, etc.
The eye of man up to Heaven is cast,
The eye of beasts upon the earth is placed.
Secondly, because God has given man rule, and dominion over the creatures,
Psa. 8.6, etc. Heb. 27.

Cor. 3.21.



does God (says the Apostle) take care for oxen? Romans 9.9. that is, not in
comparison of men. And therefore all these considered, we may be certainly
assured that if we do not ponere obicem, provoke the Lord by our sins, he
will not withold from us those good things, which he bestows upon the other
creatures, or have less care of us, then he has of them.

Is not the love of God perfect? and if so

Although the love of God be perfect in it self, yet it is graduated in the
creatures, according to the decree of God, who in this order has determined to
love, namely,

I. Before all things his glory best.

II. Next unto his glory, the elect.

III. Next unto them, mankind, or the rest of men.

IV. And lastly the creatures.

How may we obtain from God those good

We must do as the children of God were wont to do of old, to wit, beg them
at his hands,

Do thou want or desire First, bread to eat? Secondly, that thy estate may
be increased, and multiplied? Thirdly, that thou may be blessed in thy
undertaking of marriage? Fourthly, Children? Fifthly, freedom from thy foes?
Sixthly, instruction in any doubts? Seventhly, the continuance of of life?
Eighthly, the pardon of thy sin? Ninthly, freedom from temptation?
Then do as did Jacob. Genes. 18.20. Isaac for Jacob, when he went to Padan
Aram Genesis 28.^.
. Eliezer, Abraham's servant in the behalf of Isaac when he went to Nahor Genesis
24.12.
. Hannah. 1. Samuel. 1.10. Hezekiah, Esai. 37.14. David, Psalm. 73.18.
Hezekiah, Esa. 38.2. David, Psalm 32.5. Paul. 2. Cor. 12.8.
Pray unto the Lord, and thou shall be heard, and answered graciously.

Oh ye of little faith.]



First, our Savior does not here tax infidels,

Matthew 8.26. and 14.31. and 16.8.



Esa. 42.3. and Matthew 12.20.



Psalm 22.1, 2.





Twofold, namly either. First, in apprehension; when the knowledge is weak.
Secondly, in application; when a man cannot certainly lay hold upon Christ; but
is like him in the Gospel who said; Lord I believe, help my unbelief, Mark
9.24.


How may a weak faith be known to be

First, the weak true faith is but of short time; Peter. 2.1. where there is
life in an infant there is daily growth, insomuch as from a child it comes to
be a man, except it be a dwarf or monster in nature: And therefore they should
suspect the truth of their faith, who are always children, and both weak in
knowledge and application.

Secondly, the weak true faith is humble,

Thirdly, true faith though weak yet brings Galath. 5.6. Iam. 2.14.

What are the effects of weakness of faith?

As infidelity in toto, tanto causes much evil; as for example.

First, weakness of faith, sometimes drives unto the use of wicked means; a
fear to want things necessary often hurryes men unto coveteousnesse,
oppression, usury, and covenant breaking.

Secondly, often it brings men to murmuring fears, terrors, and sorrows unto
death, 2 Cor. 7.10.

Thirdly, it hinders from the hearing of the word in part, because they are not
sure of the presence of God with the word, not of the aid and assistance of
the spirit in the hearing thereof.

Fourthly, it makes prayer tedious; because we are not sure, that thereby we
and therein we talk with God, as a man with his friend.

Fifthly, weakness of faith cannot bring a man unto peace of conscience,
Phil. 4.7.

And therefore it is not enough to examine, whether we have faith; but we must
also examine whether our faith increase and be strong or not.





First, can thou in all things cast thy self into the arms of Christ, and
commit thy self wholly unto him?

Secondly, can thou hope and expect, and see the presence and help of
Christ, even without means, and contrary to means? do thou walk by faith
not by sight?

Thirdly, can thou in crosses, afflictions, and temporal disasters (for
Christ's sake) rejoice, Romans 8.35.

Fourthly, can thou despise and contemn the world, using it as though thou
usedst it not 1 Cor. 7.30.
? because thou have built thy nest in the Rock, and placed thy confidence upon
a surer stay then the world is, namely upon Christ, who has promised never to
fail or forsake thee.

Fifthly, do thou daily increase both in faith, love, obedience, zeal, and
all graces, 1. Peter. 2.2.



Romans 10.17. Iam. 1.18. and 1 Pet. 1.25. And also careful privately to read
it. Psalm. 119.

Secondly, purge the conscience, and purify the heart, James 4.8. And examine
both thoughts, words, and works, by the Word of God.

Thirdly, meditate daily, upon these things, namely,

I. How true and faithful God is in all his promises.

II. How unspeakeable the love of Christ has been and is toward his children.

III. What experience the Saints have had of the care and love of God and
Christ toward them.

IV. What sweetness there is to be found in Christ: to wit, in the fruition and
possession of him in the soul by a lively faith, Psalm 34.8.

Cantic. 1.3. 5.8 and 8.6.7. And 2. perseverantly and patiently ^oth continuing
in Prayer. Romans 12.12. And expecting until the Lord comes: for faithful is he
who has promised, who will come and will not tarry.

VERSE. 31, 32. Therefore take no thought saying, what shall we eat, or what
shall we drink,
. 1. Therefore take no thought.]

Why does our Savior so often repeat this

First, sometimes repetitions are used for the excellency of the thing; as
rejoice in the Lord always 4.4. But not so in this place.

Secondly, sometimes repetitions are used for for three transgressions and for
four he will visit Damascus, Tire, Edom, Moab, Israel, and Judah. Amos. 1.3,
6, 9, 11. and Thus Christ often in one speech cries out; woe be unto you
Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites. Matthew 23.13, 14, 15, 16.23.25.27.29.

Thirdly, sometimes repetitions are used for he, that has ears to hear let
him hear, Mark 4.9, 23, 3. And thus this prohibition is repeated in this
place; because the duty is so hard in regard of our nature.

Who are faulty in this particular, or who

First, those who acquire riches unjustly, and

Secondly, those who are basely covetous,

Thirdly, those also who are inwardly troubled

I. Their faith is but weak, if they have any. And

II. That earthly things take up their mind too much.

May we not take care for necessary things?

First, we may cura providentiae, with a provident

Secondly, we may not cura diffidentia, with

I. Because the Law of God is of more worth then our lives; and the glory of
God then our safety; and therefore no necessity must cause us to infringe the
Law of God, or to dishonor him.

II. Because our distrustful care helps us not at all, neither does us any
good. Quae stultitia de ijs solicitum esse quae habebis non solicitus; and de
ijs non, quae non nisi solicitus Chrysostom op. impers. s.
. What folly is it for a man to be careful for those things, which he shall
have without his taking care for them (verse 33.) and to be careless of those
things; which he has no promise to obtain without carfulness: as in the
next v^rse, there is no hope of spiritual graces or eternal glory without
seeking, and therefore we are commanded to seek them, but concerning temporal
things we have a promise, that they shall be given unto us without our
seeking, that is, without our caring for them: And therefore we are forbidden
to take thought for them in this verse.

III. Because these temporal things help nothing for the salvation of the
soul; A man in regard of his spiritual estate is neither better by having,
nor worse by wanting these outward things: And therefore by no means must we
distrustfully care for them?



Iam. 2.9.





Saying, what shall we eat, or what shall we drink, etc.]

Our Savior here shows, that God observes and takes notice of our very words.



First, because he takes notice of all things





What words does the Lord hear and

First, all our evil and wicked words, namely,

I. All our murmurings, grudgings, and repinings, Exodus 16.6.7.8. and Numbers
14.27. and 16.41.

II. All our blasphemous, and atheistical words, Ps. 14.1. and 53.1.

III. All our insulting words, Ezech. 35.12, 13.

IV. All our bragging and boasting words, Ps. 10.5, 6. and Esa. 47.8.

V. All our threatening, and cruel words, 2 Kin. 19 23. and Esa. 37.29.

VI. All our idle words, Mat. 12.36.

Secondly, the Lord hears all our good

I. All the Prayers we offer up unto him. Psalm. 50.16. Esa. 65, 24. Apoc. 8.3.

II. All our mournful ditties, Psalm 56.8. Exodus, 3, 7.

III. All our penitential words, Jeremy 31.18.

IV. All our pious, and religious words, Mala. 3.16.

VERSE 33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God,
. 1. But seeke]

Our Savior having showed, what we must not do, does now teach what we must
do: this verse being a prolepsis.

If we must take no thought for the world,

To this Christ answers, nothing less,

How may this verse be divided?

Into two parts, viz. First, the things which are to be sought for. The
Kingdom of God. The righteousness thereof.
Secondly, the manner of attaining them, viz. by. Seeking of them. Seeking of
them first.

A Promise. And all these things shall be added.


I plainly divide this verse, because some thing shall be said of every
particular thereof.

Seek?



seek the Lord, and ye shall live. Amos. 5.8. And I have sought thee with my
whole heart.

Thirdly, Seeking is a diligent act, and an act Seeking demonstrates labor,
industry, and pains.

Who are commanded here to seek the Kingdom

All men, of all sorts, ages, and degrees.

Why must all seek the kingdom of God?

First, because it is simply necessary unto happiness, and blessedness, as
follows afterward.

Adams fall we have lost this kingdom, and are deprived of it, Romans 3.23.

Chron. 15.2. Mat. 7.7. And therefore it is necessary that all the sons of
Adam should seek God.



Deuteronomy. 4.29. Heb. 4.11. Luke 13.24. and 2 Pet. 1.5.10. and 3.14. It is hard to
live well easy to die well; hard to obtain heaven; easy to keep from thence:
he that adventured at the Olympik games must overthrow all difficulties, so we
in our journey to heaven. The old painters drew Timotheus the Athenian Captain
in lively colors; harnessed and well weaponed, and so sleeping and abiding in
his tent; and fortune catching Cities and Regions for him in a Net. We must not
think that we may take our pleasur and be negligent in the work of God, upon a
foolish expectation, and hope, that fortune will catch heaven for us.



viribus naturae, by the strength of nature.

Archelaus the Philosopher learning Geometry of Hipponicus, was so dull, and
yet so well learned therein, that Hipponicus would say, surely Geometry fell
into his mouth as he gaped. We must not think that heaven will come with an
idle expectation, or fall unto our share unawares, for it must be sought, or
it can never be found.



Seek and ye shall find Mat. 7 7.
.

gratis, or not, for it seems he does not, if we must procure it with labor
and pains.

The gift of God is eternal life, Romans 6.23.) we being no way able to deserve
it, and that both because our works are imperfect, as also because they are
but debts which we owe unto God and a man merits nothing for paying what he
owes.

But heaven is called wages or reward, Mat. great is your reward: And there-it
is not given gratis, but ex debito, of debt,

First, the Lord is pleased to use this phrase of

Secondly, it is rightly called a Reward, but First, to a workman is given a
condign reward, which he has deserved, but to a child is given more then he
has deserved: As a father thinks a small punishment enough to give a child for
a great offense; so also he thinks not a great reward too much to give for a
little obedience. Secondly, to a workman wages is given, if he deserve it, but
to a child if he do but endeavor to do what his father commands, although he
is not able to do it. And thus the Lord does with us, giving the Kingdom of
Heaven to those who labor for it, though by their own labor they are never
able to procure it.


Thirdly, although the Lord is pleased to encourage Inheritance 1. Pet. 1.4.
because that is derived from the father unto the son, by virtue of his
sonship, and not for any deserts.

Why cannot heaven be procured without labor

First, because temporal things cannot be had

Impiger extremos currit Mercator ad Indos,
Per mare pauperiem fugiens, persaxa, perignes.
The careful Merchant sea and land does trace,
That by that means wealth may flow apace.
Secondly, because Christ does not save us

I. God has given unto us faculties of the soul, that by them we might
glorify him. We differ from inanimate things by nature, shall we not
therefore differ from them in action? they are always merely passive, but we
should be active. God who has given the belly for the conveighing of
nourishment to the whole body, has also certainly given the soul for some
end and use; for he made nothing in vain.

II. Certainly God works in us, but not without us. Faith is a grace infused
by God, or an action taught and imprinted by him; and yet it is our mind which
believes, our will which chooses God, our affections which love him: Hence it
is said, that he draws, but whom? those that are willing; he does not dragge
any by force; he first bends and inclines the will and affections and then we
willingly follow, hence Augustine says, Non salvabit te sine te, God will not
save us without our selves.

III. The Scripture does clearly show this, Thus Esaias speaks unto Edom, If
ye will inquire inquire ye, return, come Esa. 21.12.
: so again unto all, Ho every one that hungers let him come, and who is a
thirst, come and Esa. 55.1
and Matthew, 11, 28, and John, 7, 37. our Savior calls: Come unto me: yea
this is the end of our preaching, that men might repent and turn unto God Acts
26.20.
. All which show that Christ will give grace and salvation to none without
their endeavor and pains.

Phil. 2.13.





First, by freeing our affections from the yoke of Satan, and captivity of
sin. Secondly, by turning our affections unto the Creator, that so we may
approach nearer unto him, and with readnesse of heart seek him.


. 2. Primo, Seek first.]

All creatures besides man go with their bodies and eyes to the grownd-ward,
but man was made to go upright; and whereas all other creatures have but four
muskles to turn their eyes round about, man has a fifth to pull his eye up to
heavenward Columb. lib. 5. Cap. 9.
: Which teaches us that howsoever we seek for other things, yet first of
all, and above all, we should seek for the kingdom of heaven and the
righteousness thereof. Or that heaven, Pius the 4. sending his Nephew Marcus
Altempts to Maximilian King of Bohemia, to side with him in the Council of
Trent, with many promises of honors and profits, no less then the succession
of the Empire: he answered that he thanked his Holiness, but his souls health
was more dear to him then all the things in the world Histor. of Council of
Trent page 419.
. Alexander the great was wont to say of Calisthenes that he begged many things
for others, but few for himself: And Julius Caesar of Cicero, that he was
negligent in things belonging unto himself, but diligent and and importunate
in things concerning the commonweal; so we should prise our souls most, and
desire many things for our for our bodies; we should be negligent in temporal
things in comparison of irituall.

Ignoti nulla cupido, we have no knowledge of heaven, therefore what desire can
we have after it? the joys of heaven we are not able to conceive

Totaliter, wholly, both, (...) That there are such things (...) What those
things are. A man can have no desire at all unto these things.
Respective, in part, when We know that there are such things We know not what
they are perfectly These things a man may hope for, and desire.





Those things which we expect in heaven are either Known, and are either
General, namely, First, that there we shall possess and enjoy every good
thing. Secondly, hat there we shall be freed from every evil thing. Thirdly,
that our fruition of good, and freedom from evil, shall be perpetual.
Particular, namely First, in heaven we shall enjoy good things which are
either Internal; as the joy we shall have in the society of God, Christ, and
the Triumphant Church. External, to wit, The glorification of the body. The
perfection of the Soul; In truth, purity, love, peace, and joy.

Secondly, in heaven we shall be free from all evils, whether Temporal; as
from hunger, thirst, cold, sickness, weakness, and the like, Revelat. 7.17.
Spiritual; as from falling into sin; from all base and vile lusts; from the
malice, and temptation of satan; from the fears, and terrors of conscience,
and the like.


Unknown, 1 Cor. 2.9. Thus the joys we expect are expressed sometimes by the
name of a Kingdom, sometimes of a crown, sometimes of an inheritance,
sometimes of light that cannot be approached unto, sometimes of life eternal,
and unspeakeable glory (as was showed before, Mat. 5.48. Sect. last) but
whatsoever they are they pass our understanding, and exceed our capacity in
this life.



Why must we thus earnestly and before all seek heaven?

First, because we are here strangers, and that

Secondly, our inheritance, and riches, and

Thirdly, because God has given unto us a

Fourthly, because if we do not labor for the

Fifthly, because the enjoyment of heaven is a Oswin: in which Bishop Colman
alleged, that it was to be kept upon the fourteenth day of the first month,
because Saint John the Evangelist observed it upon that day; Wilfride the
Priest and his side affirmed that it was to be celebrated always upon the
Sunday which fell betwixt the fifteenth and twenty one day of the first month,
because Saint Peter always celebrated it upon that day: The King hearing of
this concluded and thus decided the difference; for as much as Saint Peter is
the doore-keeper of heaven, I will not gainesay him; but in that I am able I
will obey his order in every point, lest when I com to the gates of heaven he
shut them against me Fox. Acts and Monum. f. 123. 124.
. Thus should we do: fear to do any thing which might hinder, debar, and
deprive us of heaven.

Secondly, because heaven is more excellent the^ In gloria celesti mira
serenitas, plena securitas, aeterna faelicitas. In heaven there is admirable
serenity, ample security, and eternal felicity.

Seventhly, because except we prefer in our Cyrus was of opinion that no man
was fit for an Empire, except he did excel those over whom he ruled (Xenoph.)
So none are worthy of heaven who do not labor and endeavor to excel others
in true righteousness and holiness.

Eighthly, because in heaven only is our felicity

I. Here in this life we are miserable, 1 Cor. 15.19. And all our joys are
but false, and frail, and at the best not to be compared with those above,
Phil. 4.8.

II. There in heaven is joy, that is, rivers of pleasure, and fullness of
delight, Psalm. 16.11. Luke 14.15.

III. Heaven is the perfection of the creature which consists in two things,
namely, First, to be freed from evils, and to have all tears wiped off, and
all cause of grief taken away. Secondly, to be established in a good, happy,
and blessed estate; It is not enough to perfect happiness, to have good things
except a man have them Inconc^^ibiliter, constantly so in heaven our joy shall
never be taken away, John 10.28. and 16.^2.

What things must we seek first?

These things which are in heaven: here observe,

I. Spiritual graces; these come from heaven, and are to be sought for on
earth.

II. Eternal glory, and joy; this is to be had in heaven. Now if we have the
former truly on earth, we shall have the latter surely in heaven.

seek first for heaven and heavenly things?



First, if we desire to have a right and interest in that inheritance, and that
this desire be cordial and real; then it is a good sign that we seek it. On
the contrary, those who are secure, and doubt nothing, are much to be suspected.

Secondly, if we have tender and circumcised consciences, which will not endure
the least thing which God forbids: it is a good sign that we long for heaven.

Thirdly, if we seek heavenly things, as worldlings seek earthly, that is,
spare for no pains for the obtaining thereof; it is a good sign that we
truly long after them.

Fourthly, if we labor to be pure and holy, carefully avoiding all impurity,
because God is pure, and his kingdom pure, and no impure thing can come
therein: it is a sign that we hunger after heaven.

Fifthly, we may know this by our contempt of the world; for the high esteeming
of heavenly things, and the despising of earthly go together. Tanto quisque
minus dolet quod defint aeterna, quanto magis gaudet quod adsunt temporalia:
and qui minus dolet quod desint temporalia, certius expectat ut adsint aeterna
August. de contem. mundi.
By how much the more a man mournes for the loss of temporal things, by so
much the less he greeves for the lack of spiritual: And on the contrary, by
how much the less a man is troubled for the lack of earthly things, by so
much the more he is assured of the enjoying of heavenly.



etc.







I. The word does demonstrate and hold forth Christ unto us, Heb. 1.1.

II. God has ordained the Ministry of the word for this end, that we might
thereby learn how to be saved, 2 Cor. 5.19. and Ephesians. 4.11.

III. The word is the instrument of begetting faith in us, of giving the spirit
unto us, and of sealing us, Romans 10.14, 17. Ephesians. 1.13.

Must we ascribe all this to preaching, and nothing

Certainly,

I. Reading is unprofitable without understanding, as is evident in the Eunuch,
Acts 8.31, but Preaching opens, explaines, and expounds the Scripture, and
makes it easy to be understood.

II. The hearing of the word preached begets the Holy Spirit in our hearts, or
is a means to bring him unto us. As we see, while Peter and Paul preached, the
holy Ghost was given unto the hearers, Acts 10.44. and 11.15.

III. The end of our prayer, when we come unto the house of God, is that our
hearing might be blessed, and made profitable unto us.

IV. Our obedience is blind and lame, except it be directed by the word. And
therefore the word is the true guide unto heaven.

. 3. The Kingdom of God.]

How manifold is the Kingdom of God?

Twofold, of grace, and of glory.

To whom does this kingdom of God belong?

To the elect,

Who are the Superiors and subjects of this

First, the King hereof is threefold, in a threefold

I. God the Father is the King of this kingdom of grace, in respect of his
creation thereof Psalm. 149 5.
.

II. God the Son is the King of this Kingdom of grace in respect of his
redemption thereof Mat. 21.5.
.

III. God the holy Ghost is the King of this Kingdom, in respect of his
sanctifying thereof Psalm. 24.7.
.

Secondly, the subjects of this kingdom is

Thirdly, the statute laws of this kingdom

I. Because it is a rule of our obedience.

II. Because Christ governes us by his word, as Kings govern their subjects by
laws.

Why is the spiritual and invisible Church of

For the privileges, and prerogatives which we have therein as in a kingdom;
as for example.

First, a King in his kingdom has supreme power above all therein: so the
children of God have power over sin, satan, and themselves; they need fear
none, neither the calumnies of the wicked, nor those who can kill the body, but
can go no further.

Secondly, a King may have whatsoever his heart desires; so the children of God
have absolute contentation; and hence it is called a kingdom, because it has
the commodities, and benefits, and good things of all towns, and cities, and
we are Kings, and Lords of all, through contentation.











n d the righteousness.]



First, sometimes it is taken for righteousness by faith; but not so here.

Secondly, sometimes for righteousness

That heaven is in vain expected, follow peace and holiness without which no
man can be saved. Heb. 12.14. Tit. 2.11. The Rhodians and Lydians made a law
that vicious sons of virtuous parents should not inherit; thinking it an
unfit thing, that those should inherit their fathers lands who did not inherit
their fathers virtues: So the Lord has made a law that no wicked man shall
have any part or portion in his kingdom at all, 1 Cor. 9.10. The heathen
thought that when good men died, they were sent to the fortunate Islands, but
the wicked, to the Isles of vengeance called Tartarus: And thus indeed God
has determined that Qualis vita finis ita, every man's reward and portion shall
be according to his work, Romans 2.6. as follows by and by.

How does it appear that heaven cannot

First, from the ordinance of God; God has ordained heaven for his glory, and
the blessedness of his children and servants; and therefore none shall be made
partakers thereof, but only those who glorify God in their lives, loving him
above al things (as becomes sons) and obeying him in all things, as becomes
servants. Secondly, from the justice of God; who will judge every one according
to his works at the last day, 2 Corinthians 5.10. And therefore where the life
was wicked, the doom shall be wretched. Thirdly, from the mercy of God, who
loves the righteous, but not the wicked: The righteous Lord loves
righteousness, and righteous men: and therefore only such shall be saved.
Fourthly, because where there is imapiety, there is no Religion, Romans 12.17.
Philippians 4.8. and for the irreligious there is no happiness. Fifthly; from
the end, Because this was the end, First, of our creation: for we were made,
that we might be holy, Ephesians. 2.10. Secondly, of our redemption: for we were
redeemed unto righteousness, Luke 1.75. and Tit. 2.14. Thirdly, of our
vocation, God has called us unto the fellowship of his Son, that we might be
righteous and holy, 1 These. 4.8. Fourthly, of our election, we were before all
time elected, that in time we might live as vessels elect and precious, holy
and pure, Ephesians. 1.4. Fifthly, of our reconciliation; we were by Christ
reconciled unto God, that we might be righteous and holy, Colos. 1.22.



All men in the world are sinners, shall none then come to heaven? all have
sinned



First, proud, malicious, obstinate, and wilful sinners; who sin against
God, with an high stiff and a brazen face, and a hand neck, and an Adamant
heart.

Secondly, sleepy, and secure sinners, who although they sin daily, yet they
lull themselves asleep with the devils lullaby unto Eve, thou shall not die at
all: and thus through a bald and blind presumption and persuasion shake of all
fear of punishment.

Thirdly, there are humble and contrite sinners; who sin and sigh for their
sins, yea pray unto God with tears in their eyes, and sob in their soul, for
the pardon of their sins.

These sinners, and these only shall be saved; but the other who wilfully,
willingly, and wittingly remain in their sins, shall never be made partakers
of the kingdom of God or of Christ; This appears thus,

I. It is the condition of coming unto him to be holy and righteous in life;
to him who orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of the
Lord, Psalm. 50.23. And therefore those who are wicked and so remain can never
be saved.

II. Wicked men are not acceptable unto God, but rather an abomination unto
him, Psalm 1.5. and 5.5.
And therefore he being the King, and only giver and disposer of this kingdom
will never give it unto those whom he hates.

III. Christ (the author of salvation) is not acceptable unto them; they
think his yoke heavy, and his saying hard, John 6.60. and they neither can
endure, nor will submit unto his behests: For

First, sin is sweet and pleasant unto them, and they will not leave it,
though Christ bid.

Secondly, to profess Christ openly, and to deny themselves, is as bad as
death it self, and therefore they will not yield thereunto.

Thirdly, Christ requires that they should blame, and condemn their former
wicked life, this they are ashamed to do; and therefore refuse it. Wherefore
Christ the corner stone being unto them a stone of offense, they must needs
perish: For he will be a Savior unto none, but only to those unto whom he
was a King.

And his righteousness, or the righteousness thereof;]



Righteousness may be referred either unto God, or Kingdom.

Why is it called the righteousness of the

First, because this righteousness belongs only unto the children of the
Kingdom: that is, none but the heirs of heaven can show forth this
righteousness.

Secondly, because righteousness is the

I. Of glory in heaven: this all men desire.

II. Of grace, on earth, this few desire: this kingdom must be within us Luke
17.21.
, before ever we can be made partakers of the other.

Why is it called the righteousness of

First, some by righteousness understand

I. Because it is freely given us of God to be our righteousness before him;
and man by any works of nature cannot attain unto it.

II. Because God will accept this obedience of Christ's at the day of judgment
for his elect, as satisfying his justice, and the rigor of the law, which no
righteousness of man can do.

III. Because it is the righteousness of that person which is God; for Christ
is both God and man; and though he obeyed the law, and suffered death as he
was man, yet that obedience was performed by that person who was also God.

Secondly, some understand this of the

I. Because it is commanded, prescribed, and enjoined by God.

II. Because by this righteousness we imitate our God, 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 17.

III. Because this righteousness leads unto God.

. 6. And all these things.

What is meant here by all things?

First, the word (...) all things is not to (Completive sed distributive) of
every particular, and numericall temporal blessings but of all sorts of
needful things: yea it is not to be extended unto the great things of this
life, but only unto food and raiment, and necessary things; Read verse
25.31. of this Chapter, and Proverbes 30.8. and 1 Timothy 6.8.

Secondly, the indefinite phrase (all does show that God is ready and prepared
to give us all things whatsoever we stand in neeede of.





First, to beware of sin, whereby we do displease and offend our God.

Secondly, to depend wholly upon God both for food, raiment, and protection, in
the sober use of lawful means

Thirdly, to seek for the help and succor from God, in all distress and
want, who is very bountiful, Jam. 1.5.

Fourthly, to love so bountiful a God, and to enforce our hearts to all
duties, and expressions of love toward him.

Fifthly, to be thankful unto God, for all the good things we enjoy; for
whatsoever we have comes from his bounty, Psalm. 116.12.13.

Sixthly, labor continually in heart and life to walk worthy of God, and to
please him in all things, being fruitful in all good works, Colos. 1.10.
Perkins sup.
.





For the better understanding of this answer, observe these three things,
namely;



Oh how great (says David) is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them
that fear thee Psalm. 31.19.
; reposuisti; that is, God has treasures always laid up for his children,
although they do not always actually possess them.



I. Generally and Permissively; and thus he gives good temporal blessings to
the wicked.

II. Ex beneplacito, out of love, or as arguments and pledges of his favor;
and thus he gives good things to the righteous; And of these the text speaks.

David was a righteous man, and yet he says of himself, I am poor and needy
(Psalm. 40. last verse) which shows that he wanted many things. Rabbi Semlai
was wont to say, In omni loco in quo invenis pro haereticis objectionem,
invenies quoque medicamentum illius in latere ejus (Pet. Galatin.) wheresoever
thou find a passage of Scripturee which may seem to serve an heretic, to
ground an objection upon, look diligently and thou shall find an answer to the
objection in the same place: It is a proverb, wheresoever you see a Turtle you
may be sure to find her mate within a stones cast; so the Rabbi thought, that
what place of Scripture soever an heretic should produce for the confirming
of an error, in the same verse (or at least Chapter) aman might find, how the
objection were to be answered. I find the truth of this in this present
objection, for in the very same verse there is an answer thereunto.

It is objected, David is poor, and needy. To this he answers, that the Lord
thinks upon him, and is his helper, and deliverer: whereby he manifestly
shows that he trusts in God, and is not perplexed with the care of
distrust, and diffidencie.

The righteous are sometimes exules,

The godly shall always find some place which shall receive them; Moses be
banished, he shall find a Iethro to entertain him; if Elias be in danger, the
crows shall feed him, and the widow shall entertain him; if Jeremiah be in
danger, he shall find either the King or Abimelech to favor him: if David be
forced to fly, he shall be received of King Achish; The providence of God
never sleeps, but he watches still over his, so to preserve and keep them,
that a hair shall not fall from their heads, without his divine providence. We
see when Jacob was in danger of Laban, God warned not to harm him d: When
Abraham had like to have been wronged by Abimelech, God threatens to punish
Abimelech if he injure the Prophet e. Thus God is always ready to take notice
of all the wants, distresses, and dangers of his children, and is able to
succor and redress them when he will.

The righteous have not every all things shall be added unto them. Great was
the want and necessity that Paul was in, 1 Corinthians 4.9.10 11.12. and 2
Corinthans 4.7, etc. and 11.9.23. and 1 Corinthians. 15.19. yea a brother may want,
James 2.15. and many have f.

First, there are many temporal things which are not good for the children
Mat. 13.22.
, and ginnes to ensnare themselves 1 Timothy 6.9.
: and therefore no wonder if God withhold such things from his children.



I. God can give them Analoga, some other things that may be as good for them
as that which they want: Man lives not by bread only, neither is God ever
driven to such a straight that he has but one way left to help his children:
If the children of God be hungry, it is all one to them, for the Lord to give
them bread, or to take away their hunger: now he can do either of these, and
therefore bread is not simply necessary. God can feed Elias by the Crows, and
the Israelites in the wilderness with quails and Manna, and can take away
hunger of Elias, and Moses, and enable them to subsist without meat forty
days.

II. Sometimes God withholdes temporal blessings from his children, but gives
them greater and better things: that is, such internal solace and joy in their
wants and sufferings, that they scarce feel them, or are sensible of them; We
are (says Saint Paul) as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet
making many rich: as having nothing, and yet possessing all things, (2 Corinthians.
6.13. and Romans 8.37.) It is all one whether the Lord take off our heavy
burden, or enable us to bear it; and he can do either, and will do one: And
therefore it is no marvel, if the Lord withholds some temporal things from
the righteous, seeing they are not necessary for them, he being able to give
them other things which may be as good for them or better.



(that all things shall be added unto them) made good?



Secondly, God gives good things to

I. That hereby they might be comforted and encouraged in their labors and
honest callings.

II. Because they have no other comfort besides that which they have here in
this life, the portion of the wicked in the life to come being torments
eternal and insufferable.

III. That hereby they might be fatted unto slaughter. They spend their days
in good things, and in a moment they go down to the pit, Psalm 73.18. Job
21.13.

How does it appear that righteous

First, in general, it is evident thus,

Secondly, in general, God for the (propter quod unum quodque est tale, id
ipsum est magistale) God blessed Egypt for Isreal's sake, and Potaphar for
Joseph's, and Laban for Jacobs, and Zoar for Lots; and therefore the righteous
themselves are much surer of blessings.

Thirdly, and more particularly, God

Fourthly, the truth hereof appears by

I. God gives them for their consolation, that they might not be too much
dejected, or cast down, but comforted and encouraged to walk on cheerfully
in the ways of the Lord.

II. God gives good things unto the righteous, for the instruction of others;
that they may be invited chearefully and willingly to undertake the work of
the Lord, who so graciously rewards the work of his servants.

Fifthly, the righteous shall have heaven, he will not withhold the less
worthy from them.

He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for all: how shall
he not with him also freely give us all things.

For earthly things are the pendents, and appartenances of spiritual, and
therefore go along with spiritual; yea they are a part of Gods covenant with
his children, for he has promised that if they will but serve him faithfully
and sincerely, he will take care both of their bodies and souls, Read 1
Corinthians 3.21. Leviticus 26.3, etc. Deuteronomie 28.1, etc. Psalm 81.13,
etc. Malachi 3.10. and 1 Timoth. 4.8.



I. They are the children of God.

II. The members of Christ.

III. And God loves them as a Father does his children.

First, righteous and holy men are the children of God; the Lawyers observe
that there are four sorts of sons, namely;

I. Some are natural and legitimate, to wit; borne in holy wedlock. Thus
Christ is Gods natural Son.

II. Some are legitimate but not natural; these are adopted Children, and were
called by the Jews (Asuphim) Collecti, from Asaph, Collegit, Congregavit.
Psalm 27.10
When my Father and my Mother forsook me, then the Lord gathered me. Thus the
righteous are the children of God by the grace of Adoption.

III. Some are natural, and not legitimate, as those who are borne of harlots,
but not of common strumpets; and these are called Nothi, Bastards. Thus wicked
men are the children of God by the grace of creation; And are called Bastards
and no sons, Heb. 12.8.

IV. Some are neither natural nor legitimate, as those who are borne of common
harlots; such a one the Hebrews called (Mamzer) and the latins call him
Spurium; and the Lawyers call such Iucertos, quia incerto patre, sed certa
matre: because although the mother was known, yet the true Father was not: And
such as these might not (among the Jews) enter into the congregation. And thus
we see that righteous men are the children of God by Adoption, and therefore
their Father will not see them want.

Secondly, they are the members of Christ, and therefore they shall lack
nothing, all things being given unto him by his Father, for the good of his
brethren.

Thirdly, God loves the righteous as a Father his children, and therefore wlll
not suffer them to lack. Esaias 49.15.
For we know that a loving and natural Father,

I. Loves his child more then his riches, and therefore will not spare them
from him: So our God prizeth and valueth all those who are righteous, above all
earthly things.

II. A Father does protect and provide for his child to his power; and so will
God for the righteous, as he has promised in this verse.

What is the reason that some of Gods

First, sometimes the reason is because

Secondly, sometimes the reason is

Thirdly, sometimes the reason is, because

Fourthly, sometimes because they are

Who do not aright adhere and

First, those who dare trust God with

Secondly, those who dare trust God

Thirdly, those who in great danger means.

Fourthly, those who murmur,



I. The nature of faith is to be sure and certain, and to apprehend an
interest even in temporal things, they being a part of Gods covenant, as was
showed before.

II. Faith is founded upon the truth, fidelity, promise, and particular
providence of God, who governes all things, and therefore it should be firm
trusting God in all things.

II. Faith is not led by sense (for those are opposed, we walk by faith, not
by sight, 2 Corinthians 5.7.) and therefore faith should believe without
means, according to that, Romans, 8.24. For we are saved by hope, but hope
that is seen, is not hope: for what a man sees, why does he hope far. And 2
Corinthians 4.18. Whilt we look not at things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen, for the things which are seen; are temporal, but
the things which are not seen, are eternal.

Wherefore let us learn to be righteous, and confidently to rely upon the
promise and providence of God, and we shall then want nothing which the Lord
sees and knows to be requisite for us.















Wincelaus (or according to some Wincelaijs) King of Hungary, being driven out
of his Kingdom and forsaken of his own, oftentimes used to say, the hope I
had in men hindered me from putting my trust in God: but now that all my
confidence is in him, I assure my self that he will help me by his divine
goodness; as it fell out indeed unto him, being reestablished in his estate
and dignities within a short time after.

And let all the children of God do as Dion did, who being advertized, that
Calippus whom he took for his friend watched opportunity to slay him; went
unto him when he was invited by him, saying he had rather loose his life then
distrust his friend. Thus did holy Job, Though the Lord kill me, yet will I put
my trust in him John 13.15.
. And exitus probat, the event showed that his confidence went not unrewarded
of God.

. 7. Shall be added unto you.]

Is it not lawful to seek riches or temporal things at all?

Having spoken something of this before, verse 24. and 25. I here briefly thus
resolve this quaere.

First, that it is lawful for us

Secondly, it is lawful to possess

I. We enjoy here nothing in outward things, but what is common to bruit
beasts.

II. Nothing here can give the heart content, or peace, and therefore this
should not be our rest Mich. 2.10.
.

III. The things of this life cannot give grace, or spiritual comfort, or
remission of sins unto us.

IV. Riches cannot bring us unto heaven and eternal life, according to that in
the eleventh of the Proverbs and the fourth verse: Riches profit not in the day
of wrath: but righteousness delivers from death.

V. Riches detain a man from heaven, and violently draw his affections
downwards.

Anselme walking saw a bird which a boy had caught, and that she might not fly
away, had tied a stone to her leg: Now observing how the bird would fly up,
and presently be pulled down again by that weight which was hung at her,
made the good old man fall into this meditation; That as the bird was detained
from flying upward by the stone tied to her, so by the weight of riches, the
affections and mind were hindered from spiritual and divine meditations,
contemplations, desires, and the like. And therefore though they should
increase, yet let us not set our hearts upon them, Psalm 62.10.

VI. And lastly, remember that God will provide: for we have here a true
promise uttered by truth it self, that if we make it our chiefest care to
seek after grace, and glory, our Father which is in heaven will take care for
temporal things.

VERSE. 34. Therefore take no thought for the morrow; for the morrow shall take
thought for the things of it self, sufficient unto the day is the evil
thereof.
Take no thought.]









Fourthly, Christ prohibits us to vex but take no thought for the morrow, as
if he would say, use all diligence and care still in your callings, but
trouble not your selves with curious thoughts, what will become of you, or how
you shall be provided for hereafter.

. 2. The morrow shall take thought

What is the meaning of these words?

Some expound them of new things. Some of new provision. Some of new cares.

First, some interpret these words

Secondly, the words may be expounded

How does it appear that God will

First, God foreseeth all things, and

Secondly, God does all things; is And therefore he can help and deliver out
of any danger or evil whatsoever.

Thirdly, God is Philanthropos, a but to do them good: and therefore no evil
shall lie longer or heavier upon his children, then he sees may be for their
good. Read these places, hereof, 1 Corinthians the tenth and the thirteenth,
and 2 Corinthians the first chapter and the fourth verse: and 2 Peter the
second and the ninth. And see the experience of it in Jacob, Genesis 31.24. and
Joseph; and the Israelites, Exodus the third, and the seventh and eight verses,
and the foureteenth chapter and the tenth verse, and Job and Peter, Acts the
twelfe and the seventh verse. And therefore trust boldly in God.





ponere obicem, lay not a block in Gods way; by using any wicked means for
thy relief; or by murmuring and impaciency in thy distresses; or by harboring
any wicked thing in thy heart, for these will hinder the Lord from hearing and
helping thee.



Thirdly, those words (the morrow will care for it self) may be expounded
thus, the morrow will not be without his own cares: our Savior hereby
teaching us, namely,



by many afflictions we must enter into the kingdom of God, Acts the
fourteenth chapter and the twentieth verse, and the 2 Timothy the third
chapter and the twelfth verse, and Philippians the first chapter and the
twentieth ninth verse.





Secondly, to teach us the necessity of

I. Because we daily provoke God unto anger by new sins; and therefore we
may daily expect new rods, and scourges.

II. Because we must daily be weaned from the world; the world will still
afford us somewhat to allure us, and make us think it sweet; and therefore
we must have daily some bitter pills, that may hinder it from relishing with us.

III. Because we are daily to be fitted and prepared for heavenly glory.

Thirdly, to teach us the utility, and benefit

. 3. Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof.]

What is meant here by Evil?

First, (...) the word here used signifies malum culpae, viciousness or
sinfulness;

Secondly, sometimes it signifies affliction (Ragnah) signifies both malum
peccati and malum paena; both the evil of sin and of punishment.

Thirdly, in this place it signifies principally

Two things our Savior then hereby points out unto us, to wit;

First, That the labor, pains, and earned his bread with the sweat of his
brows. Wherefore in the molestations, and toil of our labors we must
remember sin to have occasioned this.









Paul wrought, 2 Thessalonians the third chapter, and the eighth verse, and
Acts eighteenth and the third verse, and twenty, thirty four ver. And the
rest of the Apostles, 1 Corinthians the fourth chapter and the twelfth verse:
and 1 Thessalonians the second chapter and the ninth verse, where he speaks
in the plural number, Laboramus, we labor.





Adam should have done if he had stood, that is, so work that their labor
shall be but like a recreation unto them; but they will not work as Adam was
commanded to do when he had fallen, that is, get his living with the sweat of
his body.

Thirdly, those are to blame also, who will never labor for conscience sake,
but only when they want money; and then for a time they are content to work
hard. These show that

I. They have no care or desire by their labors to help others.

II. That they have no care to provide for their children for the time to come.

III. That they have no care of themselves but in health; not providently
laying up some thing for themselves, against age and sickness comes, which
both the heathens will do, and Christians should do.

Fourthly, they are faulty, who wholly spend their lives in pleasure, gaming,
playing, hunting, hawking, and the like: These should seriously consider these
things, namely;

I. Cui bone? For what end were they borne? what benefit or profit has either
the World or the Church, or the Common wealth, by them?

II. What right or reason they have to partake the labors of others, when none
are made partakers of theirs?

III. What a shame it is that King, Nobles, Judges, Counselors, and
Magistrates, should labor (yea often wake for the good of the state, when
inferior persons sleep) and yet they spend their days wholly in
voluptuousness and delight?

IV. Certainly such a one is not a member either of Church or Commonwealth,
but only an excrement, as the hair or nails are. One member cannot say of
another: I have no need of thee; the body cannot say of any member I need thee
not 1 Cor. 12.21 22.
: But both Church and commonwealth may say of such an Epicure, we have no
need, no use of thee, neither shall find any want, or miss of thee.

Fifthly, those who neglect their callings

I. There are some that remit their callings sometimes on the week days, that
they may hear the word of God: and against these the Atheists of the world
storm: but these indeed are like Mary, who chose the better part, Luke the
tenth chapter and the forty two: and like those in the Gospel, who will sell
all they have to purchase the preaching of the word, Matthew the thirteenth
chapter and the 44, 46. verses. But Omne nimium vertitur in vitium, This may
be done too much; I mean that on the week days a man may neglect his
calling too much, by going to Church, but there are (vel duo vel nemo) but very
few who do it, and those few are to be rancked with the second sort, which
follow.

II. There are some who remitt and neglect all industry in their callings,
under a show of confidence and dependence upon God. But religion makes none
sluggish or idle, neither teaches any such thing: And therefore all such are
worthily to be reproved.

(...)

Judge not.

Verse 1. Judge not, that you be not judged.




August. sup.


What is the meaning of this prohibition, Judge

Hilar.
we must not judge, not censure the Lord for any thing he does, but confess
that he is just in all his judgments, and righteous in all his ways.

Secondly some understand this of doubting quo animo, with what mind and intent
the thing was done, Aug. sup. Chry. sup.

there we must judge the best; for Some works are Manifest, as S. Paul says
some men sins are open before hand, going before to judgment, 1 Timothy 5.24
here we may judge the tree by his fruits. Ver. 2 Doubtful, here we must judge
nothing before the time, that is until it be made manifest. 1 Cor. 4.5.


Luke seems so to expound them: Judge not, and ye shall not be judged;
condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned, forgive, and ye shall be
forgiven Luke 6.37 Chrysostom. imper.


(Calvin s.) because our Savior seems to speak them unto the Jews, whom he
blames for this thing, Math. 23.4.23.24. and 12.2. and 15.2. and Luke 19.7.
Chrysostom. s.

In life, Pleni peccatis alios de levissimis judicant Chrysostom. s.
Some will judge others for small matters, when themselves abound in great,
this we must not do neither judge those whose lives are more unblameable then
our own. In calling, cum Discipuli judicant de Doctoribus Chrysostom. s.
It is not for Scholars to judge their Masters, nor Inferiors to judge
superiors: he that Judges them is God. 1 Cor. 4.4.




Judgment is either Public: this is not here taxed. Private wherein are two
things. First the right use which is not blamed. 2. the abuse which is
forbidden in this place, and is entitled rash judgment.



Hence then we see that there is a lawful judgment, which is not forbidden,
(g) and there is a judgment forbidden as unlawful.

How diverse or manifold is the lawful judgment?

It is either Public,

First there is a lawful public judgment, which i^ threefold, to wit,

I. Political, which belongs unto the Magistrates and that two manner of
ways, namely

First in civil affairs, Read Psalm 72.1. and Esa. 32.1. and Romans 13.1. and
1 Peter 2.13. and there we shall see this Judgment allowed of.

Secondly, in Ecclesiastical affairs: thus Moses, Josias, and Hezekias,
judged even of things belonging unto religion, wherefore S. Paul would have
prayers to be made for all that are in authority that we (under them) might
lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and and honesty. 1. Tim. 2.2.

II. Ecclesiastical, which belongs unto those to whom the Keys are given,
which Keys are two, to wit.

First of preaching, here it is lawful for the Ministers of the word to judge
sins and sinners, as is evidently seen in these places. Esa. 581. John 16.8.
and 1 Timothy 5.20. and 2 Timothy 4.2. Yea we have presidents for it as well as
precepts, and that in the Apostles, Acts 2.23, and 3.13.14. and 1 Cor. 6.10.
and 5.2.

Secondly of Excommunication, whereof we read, 1 Cor. 5.5. Mat. 18.17. and 1 Timothy 1.20.

III. Economicall: thus servants, children, scholars, and the like, may be
blamed and judged

Secondly, there is a lawful judgment which is private, and this is
threefold, namely

I. Of knowledge, whereby we judge between truth and error, this is mentioned
John 10.4 and 1 Cor. 14.29. and 1 John 4.1. And true it is, that there is such
a lawful private judgment, but it is not spoken of in this place.

II. Of reprehension, whereby we may judge whether men be faulty, and
blameworthy or not. This is sometimes commanded even to private persons.
Levit. 19.17. Exodus 23.4. Deuter. 22.1. and that first sometimes to equals, as
1 Corinthians. 5.12. and 1 Thessal. 5.14.

Secondly sometimes to their superiors: Saint Faul bids the Colossians say
unto Archippus, take heed to the Ministry, which thou have received in the
Lord, that thou fulfill it. Colos 4.17.

III. Of correction, whereby we judge whether a man deserve punishment or not,
for some offense committed against our selves.

There is besides this lawful judgment, one which is rash, evil, unlawful,
and prohibited unto Christians.

What is this evil and forbidden judgment?

Corrupt judgment is either concerning Men when we judge of their estates
either Or Present, thinking 'em to be sinners and that either Out of some
sinister opinion of our own, we being suspicious, think them impious, and also
malicious, for some affliction that lies upon the^; thus the inhabitants of
Melita judged Paul a murderer because a Viper fastened upon him (p) and Jobs
friends thought him an hypocrite, because Gods hand was so heavy upon him. Job.
Future, thinking them to be reprobates; as some perhaps thought of Manasses,
Mary Magdalen, and Paul.
Things, and that either Simply, when we judge doubtful things in the worst
sense. Comparatively, when in regard of The law, we think more hainously of
things then the Law. Our selves, we think things heinous in our brethren, but
small in our selves.








First from Envy: thus Satan out of hatred, malice, and Envy, judges Job an
Hypocrite: we say proverbially, evil will never judge well: so we seldom
judge or think aright of those whom we emulate.

II. From Hypocrisy, because a man knows his own heart to be evil,
therefore he judges his brother to be false, fained, and a mere out side.

III. From pride and self-love, because we would have none to be better then
our selves, therefore we judge sinisterly of those who seem to excel us.

Ierem. 17.9. and 1 Samuel 16.8. And therefore we must leave men unto God* who
will make manifest the counsels of the heart 1 Cor 4.5.
it being altogether impossible for us to know what the hearts of any are,
whose lives are outwardly unblameable.

Thirdly, because it produces nothing but evil effects: First to our Brother,
who is caluminated and depraved thereby. Secondly to that Christian bond of
charity, wherein we should be tied, because that is not suspicious. 1. Cor. 13.
Thirdly to God, because we take upon us to judge and censure his servant, one
who is reserved only to be judged by him. Romans 14.4. Fourthly to Christ,
because the Father now judges no man, but has committed all judgment unto
the Son. John 5.22. Fifthly to our selves, we by this means hasting
judgment to our selves, for if we judge, we shall be judged.


Who are faulty or blameworthy here?

First, those who will censure and judge men for Mat. 9.14. and 12.2. and 15.2.
Ioh. 5.10. and 9.16. But we must not judge one another for these things: He
which eats must not judge him which eats not; nor he who eats not judge
him who eats. Romans 14.3. etc. For these who judge men for adiaphorall
things, for the most part, are either weak or hypocrites, ignorant or
counterfeits.

Secondly, those who will judge and censure men's persons; this is the part of
profane men who will

I. Some say, Oh he looks fair and beautiful without, but within, I fear,
he is bad enough; he is good abroad, but at home no doubt he is like his
neighbors.

II Some say, he is no better then an hypocrite, I warrant you he dissembles
in what he does.

III Some say, he seems as firm and stable in religious performances, as
though nothing could shake him; but if he were once tried, either with fire or
gold, promotion or affliction, you would not see him like gold tried in the
fire, Job 2.4.

IV. Others say, they are idle, they have nothing to do, and therefore they
are so religious: for else, what need is there of all this curiosity?

These are worst of all by much, who deprave men the more, by how much better
they are.

Thirdly, those are faulty, who are suspicious; who judge and censure men, out
of some presumptions,

But here a threefold distinction is necessarily to be observed, to wit, I.
Presumptions are either Weighty, and strong; and here a man may judge light and
frivolous; and here we must not.
II. Judgment is either Public, here it is necessary to judge according to
presumptions, when convincing proofs can be produced. Private, and here we
must be careful, upon what surmises we censure.
III. It is one thing to Examine a matter, for some are good accusers, but ill
Iudgers. Condemn; the former is allowed, but the latter forbidden. A man may
examine upon suspicion, but he must not hang upon suspicion.



Fourthly, those are blame worthy who judge and censure weak Christians, for,

1. It is a great insolency to censure or blame any who belong unto God, and
are precious in his sight, Romans 14.3, 4.

2. Those who thus do, do it, that by the censuring of their weakness,
themselves may be the more commended; building their own fame upon the ruins
of others. As the Pharisee added the more glory unto himself, by the slighting
of the Publican.





Chrysostom. unperf. sup.



1. Some understand it of temporal judgment by men in this life; as if our
Savior would say, judge not others, and ye shall not be judged by others.
Thus Calvin who thinks it is a forcing of the text to apply it to the eternal
judgment of God.

2. Some (namely, Augustine, Chrysostom, and the fathers generally) understand
this place of the eternal judgment of God, as if our Savior would say, judge
not your brethren, for if you do, your father will judge you.





Iudicium libertatis, and potestatis, of freedom and power: our Savior
speaks of the former, when he says, Judge not, and of the latter, when he
says, left you be judged.

John 7.24. Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous
Judgment.



he which kills with the sword, shall perish by the sword?

Calvin answers, that God will justly suffer men, unjustly to judge him, who
unjustly judges others. 2. We must distinguish Matter of judgment which is
either Rigor and Severity, called summum jus, Mercy and pardon.
Adjuncts of Judgment, namely hatred, cruelty, iniquity, self-love, and pride.


Now God does not here threaten the same adjuncts of judgment, that he which
judges another maliciously, etc. shall be so judged by other: but the same
matter of judgment, with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged, that is,
if you judge mercifully, ye shall be so judged, but if you judge rigorously
and severely, others shall so judge you.

Ver. 3. And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye,

. 1. Why beholdest thou a mote etc.

What is the meaning of this Verse?

First by the mote is meant our Brothers small

2. The eye is the most tender part of the body,

Is it not lawful to look upon our brothers sin? why beholdest thou the
mote?

It is not forbidden;

Are our brethrens sins always motes (that is beams, or great?

First, our Savior speaks not here of all men, but

Secondly, our Savior is pleased to use this phrase Are wont to judge others?
to wit to trample upon them for small sins. L. Ought to judge others? to wit,
we must think their mountains mole-hils, and their beames-motes. M.
L. First, our Savior by this phrase would teach Matthew. 12.2.
for the man to carry his bed upon the Sabbath day, and for Christ and his
Apostles to eat with unwashen hands. Matthew. 15.2.

Whence comes this that we are so ready to amplify

First, sin in it self, and in his own nature is

Secondly, this proceeds from our own pride;

Secondly, Obser. 2.
Christ by this Phrase of a Mote seen in our brothers eye, etc. would teach
us, That we must be ready to excuse our brethrens sins, and to condemn our
own.

Why must we be ready to excuse other men's

First, because we do not see his heart, nor know his inward man; we may see
our brethrens faults, rash to accuse them but ready to excuse them.

Secondly, our work is to judge ourselves. 1. Corinthians. to their own Master.
Romans 14.4. And therefore we should sit as Judges upon our selves, but not upon
them, except to acquit them.

First, of faith for our selves. Secondly, of charity for our brethren.


We must not palliate our own sins, but lay them open before God, and make
them as ougly and deformed unto our selves as possibly we can: but if we
extenuate, and excuse our brethrens failings, it is an argument of Christian
love in us, because love covers a multitude of sins. 1 Cor. 13.



Our Savior seems here to make a twofold comparison between these censurers
and their brethren.

First, thou art a man (not an Angel) and he is thy brother, 1. Brother.
a member of the same body. 2. Mote.
Secondly, he has a mote in his eye, and is tainted with some lighter sin;
thou have a beam in thy eye and art guilty of greater sins.
And yet thou judge and ce^surest him.











James 1.



Revel. 3.18.

Verse. 4. Or how will thou say to thy brother, let me pull out the mote out of
thine eye, and behold a beam is in thine own eye?













Fourthly, when they are done corruptly, that is, with a heart not purged (as
here): for if we regard iniquity in our hearts, nothing that we do can be
acceptable unto God.

. 2. And behold a beam is in thine own eye.

We may learn hence,

Why may not a man reprove another, although

First because then the party reprooved will answer, Physician, heal thy self.

Secondly, because such a man by reprooving an Romans 2. And God will judge him
out of his own mouth.

Thirdly, because such an one reprooves through

1. If such an one did but see the danger, and fearful consequents of sin,
he would labor to avoid it himself, as well as admonish others of the danger.

2. If such an one did but see the filthiness of sin how loathsome a thing it
is in it self, and how deformed it makes us in the sight of God, he would
eschew it himself, as well as advise another to beware of it.

3. If such an one did seek the glory of God, he would then glorify him
himself, by his own life. And therefore it is clear, that he who reprooves
sin in another, and retains it in himself, does it neither because sin is
perilous nor because sin is a horrid thing, nor because he desires the glory
of God, but only out of hatred to the person whom he reprooves, or some
supercilious humor, and therefore those who ^re guilty, themselves, ought not
to reprehend others.

Who are faulty here?

First those who condemn the sins of others,

1. The prodigal condemns the covetous, and he the prodigal, but neither of
them look to examine themselves, or their own ways.

2. The drunkard reproves the adulterer, and is reproved by him again, but
neither of them blame or amend themselves.

Secondly, profane persons are here to be blamed,

Verse 5. Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye, Verse
5.
and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye.

(...), Eijce, cast out the beam.

The beam as was showed before, signifies sin, and the phrase here of casting
out, does intimate violence; as if our Savior would say sin cannot be
expelled, except valiantly, and by force it be cast out: for he who strives to
overcome sin must fight against it, resisting it even unto blood. Hebr. 12.4.

How does it appear, that sin cannot be overcome

First, sin is fixed in our hearts naturally with

Secondly, hence from this original corruption

Thirdly, sin is like a fair, fawning, fl^ttering out: and therefore it is
not easily forsaken.

Luke. 11.20. And therefore cannot be conquered without strong resistance.

Fifthly Sin is backed, aided, corroborated,





1. Carnal men, who say, let us sin that grace may abound. Or

2. Familists, and Libertines, who say, God will dispose of their sins to his
glory.





1. How fast time flies,

2. How their hearts grow daily harder and harder.

3. How sin gets daily more strength in them, and over them.

4. How daily they approach nearer and nearer unto death. And therefore they
are much to blame.





Esa 5.18.



Romans 13.12.14.















First to hate sin with a perfect hatred, because without this we can do
nothing to any purpose in this work, read Psalm. 97.10. Romans 12.9. Psalm. 45.7.
Amos 5.15. Proverb. 28.16. Psalm. 36.4. the truth hereof evidently appears
thu^.

1. A man cannot come unto Christ, except he hate his father and mother Luke
14, 26.
and every thing else which would keep him from Christ; and therefore, without
the hatred of sin, we cannot come unto God, neither do any thing pleasing
unto him.

2. The fear of the Lord is to hate evil Prove. 8.13.
therefore without the hatred of evil, we cannot obey God, who is to be served
with fear. Psalm. 2.11.

3. If we do not hate evil, we hate good, for Contraria non possunt esse in
eodem subiecto) A man cannot serve two masters. Mat. 5.24. And therefore until
we have learnt truly to hate sin, we have learnt truly nothing in Religion.

Secondly we must resolve never to be reconciled unto our sins any more,
never to be overcome by the allurements thereof, but still to take off the
visard of sin, that we may see it in its own colors.

By what means may we attain to this hatred of sin, and resolution against
it?

First consider the original from whence it comes, Genesis 3.1. And therefore when
we give way to sin, we give way unto Satan, and yield our selves to his
subjection, dominion and power, becoming his children, and servants, the
consideration hereof will be a means to make us loathe sin, and resolve to
leave it.

Secondly consider thy place, and self, what thou Cor. 6.11. And therefore it
is a shame to wallow any more in sin: remember thou art like a City set upon a
hill. Mat. 5.14 And therefore should be pure, glorifying God by thy unblameable
life. Ephesians. 5.27. Phil. 2.15. Mat. 5.16. For what fellowship has light with
darkness, or God with Satan. 2. Cor. 6.14. Thus all Christians should
remember what they are, for this will be a means to make them the more to
hate sin, and endeavor against it.

Thirdly, consider the danger of sin, both in regard

1 Consider the dangerous effects of sin in others; how it wounded Adam, slew
Cain, Cham, the old world, the ten Tribes, Ephraim, Judah, Genesis 6.5. Hosea 13.1.
yea sin was the occasion of Christ's death.

11. Consider the woeful effect of sin in all things.

1. It corrupted our nature, and obliterated Gods Image in us, yea, so
contaminated us, that from the Crown of the head, to the sole of the foot,
there is nothing but boyles, sores, and putrifi'd corruptions Esa 1.6. Genesis
3.8.10.


2 Sin brought shame into the world: when Adam had eaten the apple, the^ he was
ashamed, not before.

3. By sin, Adam, Genesis 3.8.24.
(and all men naturally in him) lost that familiarity with God, which formerly
he had.

4. Sin cast man out of pleasant Paradise, into the wide, and weedy world. Genesis
3.23.


5. Sin was the cause of death, bringing that into the world also. Genesis 2.17.
Romans 5.12.

III. Consider the dangerous c^ndition that thou art brought into by reason of
sin, and that in many regards, namely,

First, it has corrupted the fountain, thy whole man, so that nothing but
unclean streams can issue from thee; mala men's mal^^ animus, thy heart is
corrupted, and therefore all thy actions favor of sin. Read Matthew. 15.19.
Genesis 6.5. Iam. 1.14.15.

Secondly, thy sins has set a separation between thee and thy God, and made
thee his enemy. Jsa. 59. 2. James 4.5.

Thirdly, sin cries for vengeance. Genes. 4.10. and 18.20. and James 5.4. the
many transgressions thou have committed, sends forth loud clamours daily unto
God for justice, judgment, and revenge.

Fourthly, sin daily rebels against thee. Romans 7.17.23. Galath. 5.17. And
has gotten such strength and sure footing in thee, that thou can not of thy
self expel him.

Fifthly, sin hinders and withholds good things from thee. Ierem. 5.25.

Sixthly, sin has disinherited thee of thy heavenly inheritance, and deprived
thee of eternal glory. Roman 3.23.

Seventhly, sin obdurates and hardens the heart, and takes away the sense of
it. Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati.

And thus if we desire to cast this beam of sin out of the eye of the
soul, we must begin with the heart and inward man.

quaeres Quae facienda? Quomodo?




Reluctandum, strive, struggle, wrestle, and resist sin. Galath. 5.17. that
is, endeavor against it, subdue thy affections, and do not with thy will
consent thereunto.

Vincendum, labor to overcome it: to this is required strokes, wounds, blood
( Hebr. 12.4.) for otherwise we can never conquer it; sin is to be
assaulted and labored with many blows, and wounded with many deep and deadly
wounds or it cannot be overcome. And therefore we must be diligent in
hearing, reading, and meditating of our duty toward God, and Gods mercy
toward us, that the consideration thereof may make us to resist sin more
manfully.

Vinciendum, bind and tie it fast, when thou have overcome it, by the coardes
of resolution, circumspection, daily watchfulness, and particular promises and
vows unto God.

ejiciendum, having bound it, then cast it out; and labor to become a new
creature, entering into a new covenant with God henceforth to serve him only
and always with a full purpose of heart, and praying unto God to enable thee
to perform what thou have promis^d.







Toties quoties; as long thou have any enemies outwardly to assault thee, or
corruptions which inwardly strive against thee, so long thou must labor
carefully and courageously to resist them: And this will be as long as thou
live.

Verse 6.

. 1. Give not that which is holy unto the dogs.

Bia^ being asked by a wicked man, what piety was? held his peace: whereupon the
other demanded the reason of his silence? I hold my peace (says he) Quia de re
tibi non conveniente quaeris, Laert. lib. 1.
Because thou inquire after a thing which concerns thee not: as if he
would have expressed that which was by Christ here uttered.

Turpe rosas suibus, sanctum dare turpe catellis Sphinx Theolog. page 30.


Cast not pearls before swine, neither give holy things unto dogs.

If holy things must not be given to dogs, then why

First, we preach unto the wicked, to see perhaps

Secondly, we preach unto mixed assemblies, because

Thirdly, because we should not lightly despair

What is meant by holy things, and pearls?

First, some understand these of the deep mysteries John 16.12. and 1 Cor. 3.1
2. August. S.

Secondly, some understand these of the sacred mysteries Chrysostom. S. and
Muscul.

And these ^wo are here Thirdly, some understand them of Fourthly, some
understand here Reproof (Guali. S.) as if our Savior would say, reprove not
those who either laugh at, scorn, or contemn it. T.


P First, these words are to be understood of the viz. I. That the word is
holy Q. II. That the word is a pearl R. III. That the word is ours. S.

Q. First, the word of God is pure and holy. Psalm. Proverb. 30.5.

How does it appear, that the word is holy and pure?

First, it conteines no impure thing in it, but is the

Secondly, it is the Image of God, who is most

Thirdly, it gives unto us that holy One, and Lamb

Fourthly, it sanctifier us; Christ prays, Father 17.17. and pronounces them
pure. Now ye are clear through the word which I have spoken. John 15.3. 1 Thessalonians. 4.3.4.


Fifthly, by the word the creatures are sanctified unto us, 1 Timoth. 4.5. And
therefore it is plain that

Who sin against this pure word?

First those who draw polluted things from thence, as the spider does poison
from the most wholesome flower, or the ventricle, who corrupts the best me^t,
when it self is corrupted: these are they who turn the grace of God into
wantonness. Jude 4. Men of corrupt minds, 2 Timothy 3.8. and polluted
consciences. Titus 1.15. And are either,

1. Libertines, who pervert the Gospel, Gal. 1.1. Or,

2. Profane persons, who from the Scriptures draw arguments for
lasciviousness, uncleanness, profaneness, usury and lying. Or,

3. Heretics, Schismatiks, etc. who produce scripture for the bolstering up of
errors, falsehoods, and untruths, either against religion or humane society.



Thirdly, they offend here also, who use not the

1. Ministers, who do not teach unto sanctification, but preach themselves, or
for their by-ends.

11. People, who do not hear unto sanctification, that is, labor not so to
hear, that they may be purged, ( John. 15.3.) and transformed into the same
Image of Christ. (2 Cor. 3.18.) And therefore Ministers must principally labor
to present their people as chaste virgins unto Christ (2 Cor. 11.2. and Ephesians.
5.27. And people must labor to be holy, both in word, work and thought,
because otherwise they do not hear this pure word aright.

Psalm. 19.10. and 119 Psalm. verse 72.103.127. Ezech. 3.3. Ierem. 15.16.

Wherein is the word of God like unto pearls, or precious stones?

Psalm. 119.105. Thy word is a light unto my feet, etc. so Heb. 4.12 13. and 2
Pet 1.19.

Aurichalcum, Copper metal, when it is first dug, seems more like gold,
than gold it self: so the splendor of worldly things, seems more rare to the
carnal eye then spiritual things do. The preaching of the word is
foolishness, and offensive unto some 1 Cor. 1.18.21.
but it is a precious jewel of more worth, then all the things in the world.
Mat. 13.45.46.


Thirdly, Pearls are cordial, and generally sovereign, Elexis says of
Diambra, Diamargariton, and Manus Christi, So the Word of God is.

I. Profitable unto the sight, or understanding. David admired at the
prosperity of the wicked, and could not understand it, til he came to the house
of God. Psalm. 73.17, 18.

II. It cooles the heat, and allayes the burning of the affections, whence it
is called dew. Deuteronomy. 32.2. and water, John 7.37.

III. It heales the wounds of our affliction. Romans 8.37, it affords us many
comforts and comfortable promises, by which we are supported in the day of
tribulation.

Who offend against this precious word?

First those who are provoked by the reproves of

Secondly those who (susque deque habent) are

Thirdly those who (plus satis habent) wish that

Fourthly those who prefer thick clay, and

S. Thirdly, this word which is so pure and precious, is Ours, cast not Your
pearls before Swine, as if our Savior would say, the Gospel is the proper
inheritance and riches of the godly.

How does the Lord call the Gospel Ours? does

First, sometimes it is a appropriated unto Christ, 2 Cor. 4.4.


Secondly, sometimes it is appropriated unto the according to my Gospel, Romans
1.16. and 16.25. and 1 Thesal. 1.5. and 2 Thesal. 2.14. and 2 Timothy 2.8. And our
Savior, I pray not for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on
me, per verbum eorum, through their word. John 17.20.

Thirdly, sometimes it is appropriated to the

What is required of the godly in regard of this

First some despise the hearing thereof, but they

Secondly, some run after their sins, and

Thirdly others run after seducing spirits, Esa. 8.20.

Thus we have showed how by holy things, and Cast not your pearls before
swine, neither give holy things unto Dogs: that is, reprove not those any
longer who deride, scoff at, or spurn at reproof; wherein our Savior does
imply two things, namely

First that brotherly reproof is in it self a holy thing, and a Religious
action. This Solomon plentifully proves, Proverbes 25.11, 12. and 27.5. and
28.23.

Secondly, that reprehension ought to be holy, precious, and ours: Holy, that
is only for Gods sake, but of this more by and by. Precious and rich, that is
adorned with the pearls of the word, and divine sentences, because, Scriptum
est, it is written, is a strong argument. Ours, that is, such as we labor to
follow our selves; when a man reprooves swearing, Sabbath breaking,
drunkenness, uncleanenesse, and the like, and avoids them himself, giving no
other counsel to his friend then he desires and labors to take himself,
this is called his reproof.

Reprehension? or what do we gain thereby?







reprehension is an excellent caveat for him that reproves, to beware of that
which he blames in another.

holy reproof from ordinary fault finding? or how may we know (when we
reprehend our brother) whether our reproof be holy or not?

holy reproof arises out of a zeal to Gods glory: because God is dishonored
by sin, therefore the child of God reproves sin: this is a godly reproof.

holy reproof arises out of an hatred of sin; because the child of God
hates sin in it self, therefore he reproves it, where he has any power or
warrant so to do.

holy reproof arises out of love unto our brethren; because a Christian loves
his brother with a Christian love, therefore he does reproove that in him,
which he knows is obnoxious, pernicious, and hurtful for him.

holy reproof arises out of a fear of God, and a conscience of our duty
unto our brother; the child of God knowing what God requires of him toward his
brother, dares not neglect it, for fear of offending God.

holy reproof is accompanied with an humble remembrance of our own
weakness; Christians must not reproove one another proudly and arrogantly,
but humbly, remembering that they themselves should fall as foully if they were
not supported and prevented by the Spirit of God.

holy reproof is given or performed prudently, and circumspectly; a man must
be careful when he reprehends his brother, to watch his opportunities, to
take the best, and fittest times, when he will hear him with the right ear,
taking reproof as a precious balm; yea we must so reprove our brethren that
their faults be not divulged or published the more by our reproof.



We see here clearly, that wicked men, and those who contemn preaching and
reproof are so odious unto God, that he compares them to dogs and swine;
because following brutish affections at length they become brutish.



First, dogs and swine are ravenous beasts, as appears thus.

Isa. 56.11.) and herein are like unto oppressors, who grind the faces of the
poor, through covetousness.

2. Swine will eat their young ones Plin. 8.51.
, so many will undo utterly their own Nephews, and Neeces, and nearest
kindred, defeating them, and cheating them of their estates if possibly they
can: Again they may be resembled to swine in this particular, who beggar and
undo their children by idleness, or play, or riotous living, or the like.

Secondly, they are most filthy and impure creatures;

1. Swine will wallow with great delight in filthy and stinking puddles; so do
voluptuaries.

2. They will eat filthy things, namely, Husks, carrion and the like.

3. Dogs will return to their old vomit; Proverb. 26.11. So men unto sin
for a time forsaken. 2. Pet. 2.20.

3. Swine trample under foot, and defile whatsoever is cast unto them; so to
the wicked nothing is pure, but even their mind and conscience is defiled.
Titus. 1.15. Jude. 10.

Thirdly, dogs fiercely and angerly bark at all

1. To those who speak evil of those who are in authority, reproaching with
opprobrious speeches, the Lords anointed, and substitutes, as Shimei did. 2 Samuel 16.9.


2. To those who hate all who are not of their opinion and judgment; this is
frequent with all sort of Separatists, who like, love, allow, speak well of
none who are not of their strain and strange opinions.

3. To those whose bark at, and hate the righteous quatenus righteous, because
he is not of their society, and as wicked as they are. Psalm. 22.16.

Whom does our Savior principally mean by Dogs, and Swine in this place?

First, some by Dogs understand heretics, and by Swine Gentiles, because Swine
are cloven hoofed, but do not show the cudde. Hilar. S.

Secondly, some by Dogs understand froward and Swine those who wallow in the
pleasures of the world, Chrysostom. S.

Thirdly, certainly the scope of our Savior by

1. That there are some to whom we must not rashly communicate holy things, of
this elsewhere.

2. That it is altogether unprofitable to do it, therefore we must forbear
it. Give not holy things to dogs, etc. as if Christ would say, give not such
things to such men, for your labor will be in vain. Teaching us hereby.

That our corrupt nature, and froward and perverse disposition, does both
hinder us from showing forth the fruits of our hearing, and also from
repentance, and conversion. 2 Peter. 2.10. Matthew. 23.37. Ierem. 5.^. and 2.30.
and 6.28.

Whence is it that natural men are so detained

It is hence because First, they seek not how they may be amended; they
enquire not with David wherwithall (and how) they may cleanse their ways?
Psalm. 119.9. but s^^epe securely, only casting about and excogitating with
themselves how they may fulfill and satisfy their own wills, and pleasures.
Secondly, the violence, and vehemence of the mind will not endure to be hindered
or bridled. From hardness of heart proceeds ignorance, senselessenesse,
wantonness, and that with greediness. Ephesians. 4.18.19. and Ierem. 19.15. and 2.
Tim. 3.13.






First, their ulcers and soars are very malignant, sore, and tender. And

Secondly, the word bites, being like salt, or a corrosive, or an incision
knife: And Hence

Thirdly, they grow angry, and become enraged against the preachers of the
Word, like mad men falling upon the Physician who would cure them.

Verse 7. Ask, and it shall be given you; seek and ye shall find: knock
and it shall be opened unto you.





(Ask and ye shall receive) is true, and is Christ's; but the consequence
(therefore we may receive any gift that is good of God, if we pray for it) is
false. The untruth of the consequence appears thus.

Gods gifts are of two sorts, namely:

First, Common to all who believe, and necessary to salvation, as faith,
repentance, obedience, and the fear of God.

Secondly, special gifts not given to all, nor necessary to salvation, but
peculiar only to some, as health, wealth, continency, single life, etc. Now
this promise of our Savior, ask and ye shall have, is meant of things
necessary to salvation, and not of particular and special gifts.

Ask and ye shall have?



First, that of and from our selves we have no good thing at all, but
whatsoever we have which is good comes from God the Author and fountain of
every good gift and every perfect being. James 1.17.


Secondly, that if we desire to obtain any thing at Gods hands, we must pray
unto him for it, I omit altogether this second observation here, having else
where to treat of it; and I will speak but a word or two of the first.

There are three phrases in this verse, all which show, that of our selves we
have no good thing in us at al: The phrases are Asking, seeking and knocking;
Now

First, we beg, and pray for those things which belong unto others, and are
nor our own.

Secondly, we seek that which is lost, as follows by and by.

T^irdly, we knock there where the doors are shut against us.

How does it appear that we have in us no good

First, when we come into the world we are miserable,

1. All creatures almost can help themselves, either by swimming, or running,
or cre^ping, a^ soon as they have life; only man is shiftl^sse, and
altogether unable to help himself.

2. The other creatures are armed, either with horns, or shells, or teeth, or
nails, or stings, or wings; only man is borne without defense or armor.

3. All the other creatures are clothed, only man is borne naked. And
therefore these things considered we may safely say, that we are destitute of
whatsoever is good.

Secondly, those things which we have are transitory,

Thirdly, no good thing that we have can be

Fourthly, in spiritual things we are most miserable, Isa. 43.4. being
altogether sensual and carnal. John 3.7. being corrupted in our minds. Romans
12.2. and spirits. Ephesians. 4.23. being strangers from God, and grace, and
spiritual knowledge Ephesians. 2.12. and 4.18.
. And therefore it is (these things considered) as clear as the day, that we
have in us no good thing at all by nature.

. 2. Seek, and ye shall find.

What is the meaning of these words?

Seeking, is spoken of those things which are lost, finding. A man is said to
seek for that which he has lost, or to seek after that which he does not
enjoy, and that for this end that he may find and enjoy it.

Does this Relation always hold between Seeking Finding? are they Relata
mutua?

First, there is a fourefold Seeking, to wit,

1. Unprofitable, when a thing is sought in vain, or sought but not found.
Jerem. 5.1.

2. Profitable, when a man seeks and finds; this is promised here.

3. Sluggish and lazy, when a man seeks carelessly, slightly, for the fashion
sake, and without all care or pains; this is falsely called Seeking, which is
an industrious act.

6. There is a true Seeking, which is accompanied with sweating, and endeavor,
as the man sought his sheep, and the woman her groate. Luke 15.4.8. And of
this Seeking our Savior speaks in this place.

Secondly, there is a double finding, namely.

1. Idle and casual, when a man finds that which he sought not, and this is
fourefold.

First, when a man finds that which he would not find; as Ahab found Elias,
have I found thee oh mine enemy?

Secondly, when a man finds that which he would not seek: I am found of them
(says God,) that would not seek me. Isa. 65.1.

Thirdly, when a man has long sought a thing, in vain and afterward casually
finds it when he looked not for it, as Jnachus did Io, Tu non inventa reperta
es. Oftentimes men cannot find that which they seek, when they seek it, but
find it when they seek it not.

Fourthly, when a man finds that which he is glad of, but never sought for,
neither thought of. As when one finds a treasure, or a jewel, or the like
accidentally.

2. Laborious, and industrious; when a man seeks diligently; and in his search
finds that which he sought for. And this finding is here only to be expected:
Whence we may learn,

Chronic. 22.19. and 28.9. Luke 13.24. and 2. Timoth. 4.7. and 1. Corinthians.
14.12. and Hebr. 4.11. Romans 12.8.11. and 2. Timoth. 2.15. and Heb. 6.11. and 2.
Pet. 1.5.10. and 3.14. Matthew. 6.33. Colos. 3.1. and 1.29. Deuteronomy. 4.29.





Matthew. 6.33. And therefore God will give it to none, who give not all
diligence to acquire it.





1. To rejoice too much, in any temporal things or to set our hearts upon any
thing we possess ( Psalm. 62.10.) or to trust in what we have. Job. 31.

2. To be too careful for the things of this life, or to labor too much to be
rich. Prove. 23.4.
It is a wonderful thing that men should so earnestly, and greedily, and
greatly, seek those things which,

First, our Savior himself says are thorns. Math. 13. And which

Secondly, S. Paul says (from God) are snares. 1 Timothy 6.10. And which

Thirdly, both John and James say are enmity with God, and makes us the
enemies of God. 1. John 2.16. James 4.4. And which

Fourthly, experience shows does hinder us from seeking heavenly things; as
Dem^^ who embracing the present world forsook the profession of religion 2 Timothy 4.10.
.

Secondly, those stand guilty here as transgressors

How may we know whether we seek after grace

First, is this always in thy heart? do thy hearty

Secondly, do thou postpone all other things in

Thirdly, do thou seek deliverance, and freedom

1. Temporal, and that not from witches, or by revenge, or the like, but only
and humbly from God.

2. Spiritual, whether they be,

First, by past, as the pardon of our sins already committed. Psalm. 51.6. Or

Secondly, present, as the inherent relics of corruption yet remaining within
us; as Paul cried out. Romans 7.24. oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me? Or

Thirdly, to come, when we desire to be freed from Satan, hell, and the wrath
of God.

Fourthly, do thou seek the fruition and possession

1. Temporal, Give us this day our daily bread; And,

2. Spiritual, now these graces are many, to wit,

First, the Kingdom of glory: thus Paul desires, to be dissolved and to be
with Christ Philip. 1.23.
.

Secondly, the Kingdom of grace, admission into the Church, and effectual
vocation, and the renovation of the mind, and the grace of adoption and faith.
Ephesians. 1.13.

Thirdly, the riches of Gods grace, and sanctification (1. Cor. 14.12.) to wit,

1. True spiritual, and saving wisdom whereby we may know the will of God.
Prove. 2.4. and 15.14. And,

2. Strength, whereby we may be able to work the work of God. Psalm. 51.11.
And

3. The holy Ghost, by which we may be both directed and assisted. Ephesians.
3.16.17.

4. God himself, that we may be filled with his fullness. Read. Psalm. 24.6.
and 27.4. and 63.1. and Cantic. 3.1. etc. and 2. Cor. 3.18. Ephesians. 3.19.

Thus we may know whether we be seekers or not, if we examine our selves by
these things, namely, by a hearty desire after grace; by the valewing of it
above all earthly things; by praying unto God for the removeall of temporal
evils, and preservation against them, as also for spiritual, to wit, both for
pardon of our former sins, and for strength against present corruptions, and
for freedom from the devil, hell, and the wrath of God; yea we must examine
our selves by our pains in seeking unto God for temporal blessings, and
spiritual graces; we must try whether daily we implore the throne of mercy,
for mercy at the great day, that then we may be made partakers of glory, that
now we may be made partakers of grace, both the grace of effectual vocation,
and spiritual sanctification, and real renovation, and celestial wisdom,
and internal strength, and comfortable fruition of the presence of God.



Tempus arripiendo, be seeking them betime, while they are to be found ( Isa.
55.6.)

diligenter conando, by seeking them earnestly until we have found them. Luke
15.8.

abstinendo, by abstaining from all sin; every man that striveth for the
mastery, is temperate in all things, 1 Cor. 9.25. So if we desire to obtain
grace we must labor and strive hard for it, and avoid all things that are
evil.

Spernendo remoras, by trampling under our feet all the lets and pulbacks we
meet withal, fighting manfully the Lords battles. Romans 8.18. and 1 Timothy 6.12.

Implorando, by imploring the aid and assistance of the blessed Spirit. Colos.
1.29.





Romans 6.21.
1. How unseemely, yea how ougly a thing sin is, in it self; if we could but
see sin in its own colors, unmasked: What pleasure had you then (says
Saint Paul) in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? as if he would say;
sin is so shameful a thing, that any man would blush to commit it, who did
but see it at full view.

2. Remember how ungrateful a thing it is, for us by sin to provoke so
gracious and loving Father, who takes care both to provide for us, and to
protect us.

3. Remember how perilous a thing it is: as it is an unthankefull part to love
sin, which our God hates as his deadlyest enemy; so it as a dangerous thing
to love that which God hates; for the wages of sin is death. Romans 6.21.

4. Remember how foolish and sottish a thing it is for us to love sin, and
thereby to serve Satan, who seeks nothing so much as our eternal destruction.
Thus seriously meditate upon these things, that thereby we may be excited
unto the hatred of sin.



Romans 8.26. Coloss. 4.12. Jonah. 3.8. And let our prayers be,

1. Vehement; David cries unto God, Psalm. 22.2. and 32.3. and 77.3.

2. Perseverant: thus David and the Apostles continue in prayer, Psalm. 88.1.9.
Acts 1.14. and 2.42. and 12.5.12.



knock?

Luke 18.1. Psalm. 105.4. Romans 12.12. and 1. These. 5.17.

Why must we continue thus long knocking? why may we not give over if the gate
be not speedily

First, Because the Lord stands long knocking at Read Cantic. 5.2. etc. and
Apoc. 3.20.

Secondly, God opens not at first unto us, that he

Thirdly, we knock for our own ends, and call

Can we knock, or call, or pray, without God?

Not at all, or at least, not aright;

Verse 8. For every one who asks receives;

Against this verse it is objected, Zebedees children prayed unto Christ, and
yet suffered a repulse; Saint Paul desired to be freed from the buffet of
Satan, but obtained not his request. Experience also witnesses that we daily
desire many things at Gods hands which we obtain not.

This promise is to be understood with a double restriction, or limitation;
namely,

First, that prayer and supplication be made as it ought, in regard of the
manner of it; to wit, in faith, and in the name of Christ, in whom all the
promises of God are yea and Amen, and shall in Gods due time be certainly
performed: yea our prayers must principally be powered forth for this end, that
God may be glorified by us on earth, and we glorified with him in heaven.

Secondly, we must desire those things which God has promised to grant; we
must not pray for evil, hurtful, unprofitable, curious, or unwarrantable
things; but for saving and necessary, which God only has promised. Now if
either of these conditions be awanting, no wonder if our prayers be not heard:
that is, if either for the matter we beg those things which God has not
promised to grant; or for the manner, we desire them not as God has
prescribed; then the Lords promise made here in this verse is not falsified at
all. For when Christ says ask and ye shall receive, he means, if we ask
such things as God has promised to give, and in that manner which himself
has enjoined.

Verse 9.10.11. Or what man is there of you, whom if his Son ask bread will he
give him a stone? or if he ask a fish will he give him a serpent? If ye then
being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more
shall your Father which is in heaven, give good things unto them that ask him?





First, to teach us the natural affection of parents to their children. V.
Secondly, what our duty is to







Herodes monstrum (Macrobius) Herod was no better then a monster in nature, who
slew his own children (as was showed before Chapter 2.) For the most cruel
and ravenous birds and beasts are careful both to feed and defend their young
ones.



A natura prima, from uncorrupted nature.

Secondly, First, Simpliciter, as it is inherent in us: and thus it is
laudable. Or Secondly, Respective, as it guides the will, and governes our
external actions; and so often it leads us into by paths, and wrong ways.
For affections must not govern, but be governed by right reason.


Who are here blame worthy as transgressors against

All those who are unnatural unto their children. Romans 1.30. Tim. 3.3. as for
example,

First, some are unnatural only unto some of their children not unto all, and
that either in affection or countenance; some are different in their love,
affecting one child much more then another; some are more sharp in their
words and corrections, and more sour in their looks toward one then another.
And why? because they give one suck not to another. Indeed I never read in
Scripture that these were separated: we read that a certain woman hearing
Christ, cried out, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps that gave
thee suck Luke 11.27.
: And our Savior himself says, that the time will come, when men shall say,
blessed is the barren womb which never bare, and the paps which never gave
suck Luke 23.29.
where we see bearing and suckling, bringing forth of children, and nursing
and bringing up of children go both together; as if the Holy Ghost would say,
those whose wombes God opens, and enables to bring forth, should open their
breasts, and enforce themselves to give their seed suck which they have
brought forth. Sarah and Hannah give their sons suck Genes. 21.7.
And they who are able and may conveniently, and will not, are worse then
Dragons.

Secondly, 1 Samuel 1.23. Lament. 4.3.
some parents are unnatural unto all their children in suffering them to
perish, or by undoing them through their idleness, or pleasure, or lust, or
gaming, or prodigality, and the like.

Thirdly, those are unnatural who make their children bastards, who beget
offspring in a polluted bed, and so (as much as in them lies) labors to bring
down from heaven a curse not a blessing, upon their issue.

Fourthly, they are unnatural, who through covetousness will either not give
fitting education and and breeding to their children, or who will not labor to
prefer them (according to their abilities) either in callings and trades or
marriages. Some there are who will be at no charge with their children to
bring them up according to their rank and quality, neither will afford them
means to set them up in the world, or to advance them by matrimony: These are
very unnatural: For whom do men labor, if

Fifthly they are most of all unnatural who destroy and murder their young
infants. And thus much for our Saviors first scope.

Secondly, our Savior here in saying, What man does teach us, that we ought
in temporal things to ask at Gods hands only moderate things; because great
things are not necessary for us; neither do we know whether they be
profitable for us or not; and that they are perilous we may be certainly
assured of.

. 2. If ye then being evil, know how to give

Our Savior in these words shows that evil men can give good things.

How does this appear? for S. James says, that from a bitter fountain cannot
come sweet water; and Christ himself elsewhere says, that an evil tree
cannot bring forth good fruit.

Those things which evil men give are not their own, or proceed not from
themselves:

. 3. Unto your children?

Our Savior shows here expressly, that evil men may give good gifts unto
theirs; implying thereby.

That men may be good parents temporally,

How does this appear?

First, because this is but a natural goodness, not

Secondly, because herein men respect not so much



Good things are twofold, viz. Spiritual, and these a wicked man cannot give.




Christ our blessed Savior here argues from man unto God; teaching us,



First, whatsoever man has which is good proceeds essentially from God;
Quicquid est in Deo, est ipse Deus; and quicquid a Deo, est Deo simile,
Whatsoever is essential in God is God himself; and whatsoever proceeds from
God is like unto him.

Secondly, hence man was created after Gods own Image. Ephesians. 4.24.



There is a threefolde Image, First, Spiritus, of spirit; thus man was created
in righteousness and holiness of truth Ephesians. 4.22.
. Secondly, Animae, of soul; thus man was endued with knowledge; and of this
the Lord speaks when he says, Man is become like one of us, to know good and
evil Genes. 3.22.
and of this Image we speak in this place. Thirdly, some add Corporis, of
body; Os homini sublime dedit, but this is curious.


Verse 12. Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to
you, do ye even so to them: for this is the law and Prophets.

. 1. Ergo, therefore.

This Illative, arguing some dependence upon something going before; it may be
demanded.

What coherence, and connection this verse has with the former, and whereupon
it depends?

First, Aretius. S.
. But Christ teaches us from our own will in regard of man, not in regard of
God: What you would that men should do unto you, do ye the same unto them.

Secondly, some refer these words to the same Verse 9. but otherwise, namely
thus, you shall receive from God what you ask, upon this condition, that you
do unto others what you would they should do unto you Chrysostom. S.


Thirdly, Musculus upon these words tells us, that some refer them to the
first verse, Judge not.

Fourthly, some think this verse to be a general Muscul. Aretius. S.

Fifthly; some think this verse to be an answer whatsoever you would that men
should do unto you, etc. Thus Gualter S. expounds; the words; And the rather,
because Christ had showed before that there were many laws evilly understood.

Sixthly, Calvin thinks that this Ergo, Therefore,

In this 7. Chapter our Savior both shows What we must not do; namely,
First, we must not judge our brethren. Verse 1. Secondly, we must not give holy
things to dogs. verse. 6.
What we must do: wherein are two things First, a preparation which is partly
Exhortative, Pray -- verse 7. Promissive. And ye shall receive verse 7.
Secondly, an exhortation unto two things, namely. First love toward our
brethren. verse 12. Secondly, holiness toward God, where Christ First,
teaches that we must enter etc. verse 13. Secondly, admonishes that we
should take heed. First, of false teachers. verse. 15. Secondly, of all
hypocritical shows. verse. 21. etc.







Divines and Schoolmen observe that there are two sorts of Principles, namely,

First, Principia primo-prima; first principles, and these are made up in the
hearts of man.

Secondly, Principia secundo-prima second principles; and these are deduced out
of those.

There are some Primo-prima principia in the speculative faculty, and some in
the practicke: as for example, this is a principle in the speculative faculty.
Omne totum est majus sua part. And this is a principle in the practicke
faculty, the will, Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye
even so to them.

Whether is this precept natural or not?

It is both natural and also plainly divine, Luke 6.31. But yet
notwithstanding concerning this precept three things are to be observed,
namely,

First, that it speaks not of that whole jus natural, but only of that part
thereof wherein is contained out duty toward men.

Secondly, that every kind of will of ours, is not a true rule of performing
our duty toward others. [For so he who desires that another should make him
drunk, may make another drunk; and he who would have another to invite him
unto Fornication or Adultery, might invite and allure another unto
uncleanenesse:] but this precept speaks of the natural Will well ordered (and
by no perturbation infected) whereby we wish that which is truly good unto our
selves.

Thirdly, our Savior in this principal, commands us not, to do all things in
particular to others which we desire should be done unto us from others [for
so Masters should serve their servants, and cease to be Masters, if they
should do as much, and the same works for their servants, as they expect from
them.] but this precept injoynes the same things proportionably; as we would
have them behave themselves as servants, so must we carry our selves as
Masters: Or this precept injoynes the same works conditionally, namely, if we
were as they are; And thus this verse is most usually understood. Children must
obey parents so as they desire to be obeyed if they were parents; Servants
must be so faithful and trusty and diligent, and respectfull of their
Masters, as they would have servants unto them, if they were Masters: and so of
all other degrees and conditions.

. 3. For this is the Law and the Prophets:

We see here that CHRIST does not neglect Matthew. 5.17.
ratified appeals thereunto: Teaching us that CHRIST did not abrogate or
dissolve the Law of God.

Did CHRIST make void no law ordained and

First, we distinguish between the Ceremonial and Judicial Laws, and all
those ordinances which were Typically given; Moral, wherein we distinguish
between the laws Strength and power, and that both Salvanda, in saving us,
which it was altogether unable to do. Romans 8.3. Galath. 3.24. Damnando, in
condemning of us: now the children of God are free (by Christ) from the curse
of the Law. Galath. 3.13.
Direction; and here I distinguish between the exaction of, Perfection, which
was first by the law required. Galath. 3.10. Sincerity, which only now is
injoined. Acts 11.23.





So hence we may collect, that the Types and Figures have ceased; and also the
condemning power of the Moral Law unto those who are in CHRIST; because God
now of them requires not that the Law be perfectly and exactly fulfilled
according to the strict rigor thereof, but that they moderate and regulate
their lives thereby, laboring in sincerity of soul, and with a full purpose
of heart to obey him in all things whatsoever therein is required. And this
sincere obedience God (for Christ's sake) does accept as much as if it were
perfect.

The coaction and constraint of the Law, this we are freed from by Christ. The
voluntary Obedience: this we are taught (1 John. 2.27.) And the love of God
constraines us now to obey the Law, and not the terrors thereof 2. Cor. 5.14.
and love is stronger then fear. Cantic. 1.3. and 8.6. etc.




Romans 6.1.
These must know that without grace there is no glory, and without repentance,
and conversion, no favor or mercy. Read Matthew. 3.10. Zach. 1.3. Isa. 1.16.
Acts. 2.38. and 3.19. and 17.30.

Secondly, the dogmaticall libertines, who care Hebr. 12.14.) and where there
is no works, there shall be no reward.

But say thy faith justifies, and therefore what

Faith works by love ( Gal. 5.6. James 2.17.

The Law was not given to the righteous man. 1. Tim. 1.9.

It was not given Contra justum;

But charity and love suffices without works;

Certainly it is most true that love suffices, for it is the fulfilling of
the Law. Romans 13.10. But,

First, John 3.18.

Secondly, not a pretended love unto Christ in his own person, but a love
extended also unto his members. Matthew. 25.45.

Thirdly, we cannot love Christ except we obey him; If you love me (says
Christ) keep my Commandments (John 14.15.) where we see that according to our
Savior himself, there can be no true love of him, without obedience to the
Commandments of God.

This is the Law and the Prophets.



For first, they placed the marrow of the Law in ceremonies; as in their
Phylacteries, and the observation of the Traditions of the Elders, and the like
Mat. 23.5.23. and 15.2.9. Luke 16.14.


Secondly, in the mean time they neglected judgment, and the works of the
Law, Math. 23.1.23.

Thirdly, hence the Prophets call them from Ceremonies, Esaias 1.11. and 58.1.2.
Amos 5.22. Deuteronomy. 10.16. and 30.6. And this is the scope of Christ, to withdraw
them from outward things, to the inward marrow of the Law, (as Matthew 9.13.
Joel 2.13. Mich. 6.6. etc.) Romans 13.8. etc. God is love (1 John 4.10.) and
the Law is the Image of God; Therefore the scope and end thereof must needs be
love.

The just says Habakkuk, shall be saved by his faith) yea does it not exact
holiness, righteousness, and sobriety? Titus 2.11.



Matthew. 19.19. Romans 13.9.

Thou shall do unto others as thou would have them to do unto thee: then
what need so many books and Prophets, and Epistles, and Sermons as there are?

Certainly, the Prophets, and Sermons of the Preachers speak nothing against
this rule: yea this might suffice for the directing of us in our duty toward
men, if we were not too perverse: But because we neither will understand,
neither be subject, it is therefore necessary that we should be exhorted unto
three things, namely,

First, Ad judicandum; we will not confess what is just; And therefore it is
fit that we should be exhorted to judge between man and man, thing and thing,
and that with equity and reason; yea, according to some prescript rules.

Secondly, Ad obligandum; general words will not bind rebels, and therefore
many particular Laws are added, whereof there were no need, if we would be but
subject to this precept. We see the Lord gives a particular charge concerning
lending, Deuteronomy. 15.2. and giving, verse 7. and alms, verse 9. etc. and the
like, because our understanding is so blind, our wills so perverse, and our
nature so corrupt, that we will not be instructed with general rules.

Thirdly, Ad commone faciendum; we are very forgetful; and therefore we stand
in need of many Laws, and rules, and instructions, and exhortations, and all
little enough.

Whether is honesty and upright dealing betwixt

Honesty is greatly esteemed by God.

First, Honesty is in it self a good thing, and commanded to all men,
Whatsoever things are good, whatsoever things are honest, etc. labor after,
Philip. 4.8.

Secondly, Honesty is necessary, not only in respect of men ( Romans 12.17.
Provide things honest in the sight of all men) but also in respect of God,
because he hates all sins.

Thirdly, Honesty is acceptable and grateful unto God; yea,

Fourthly, shall be crowned with a reward, if it be true, and rightly
performed; that is, if accompanied with Religion in the life, and proceeding
from a sanctified heart.

Who are blameworthy here?

Those who defining the works of Religion,

First, the Pharisees were here faulty, who placed the observation of the Law
in ceremonies: as was showed before, quest. 3.

Thirdly, Hypocrites are here guilty also, who place Religion in the
observation of the first Table, who will fast, and pray publicly, and perform
some works of outward holiness. Indeed these are to be done, but those are
not to be left undone, Mat. 23.23.

Wherein does the Law of God excel humane

The Law of God does establish the affirmative part of the precept, as well as
the negative;

There are Laws established against murder and theft, a man must not kill his
brothers person, nor steal his brothers substance; for if so, he shall be
punished: But men are not commanded by the Laws of men.

First, to visit the sick, who by reason of his affliction stands in need of
solace. Or,

Secondly, to lend to the poor, and those who want, that so their necessities
may be relieved. Or,

Thirdly, to feed the poor when he is hungry, or give him drink when he is a
thirst. Or,

Fourthly, to reduce the wandering traveller into the right way. Or,

Fifthly, to pardon and forgive those who injure, and wrong us. Or,

Sixthly, to give counsel to the ignorant, or comfort to the comfortless;
These things the Law of man does not oblige all men unto; But the Law of God
command^ them all, and that unto all. Whatsoever thou would that another
should do unto thee, do thou the same unto them. And therefore let us
acknowledge these two things, to wit,

First, that it is alike necessary, and generally commanded, to do good unto
our brother as well as not to hurt him. A man sins by the Law of God that
harms his brother, yea he sins no less who will not help his brother when
he may do it.

Secondly, he is no Christian (whatsoever he thinks of himself, or seems
unto others) who toward men is either false, or hard, or hardhearted, or the
like.

Verse 13.14. Enter ye in at the strait gate,

I have occasionally often said, that the salvation of our souls is a matter
of greatest importance, both in regard of the loss, and i^ regard of the
gain: No greater misery can come unto us then to be deprived of Heaven; no
greater felicity can we be made partakers of, then to be made partakers
thereof: And therefore I have propounded and resolved with my self to treat
something more particularly and more amply of these two verses, then of any
either preceding or following.

What was the occasion of these words?

Christ had taught love, and equity toward man

First, the multitude of sinners: And secondly false teachers who seduce men
into wandering ways and by paths; Our Savior therefore meets with them both;
First, the multitude of sinners in the present Text: Secondly, False-teachers.
Verse 15. etc.

How are these verses divided?

Naturally into these two parts, namely a Precepts, wherein are three things,
to wit, First there is a way that leads unto heaven. Secondly this way is
straight. Thirdly it is to be entered into, enter in at the straight gate.
Reason, which is twofold, taken either from the Broad way wherein are three
things. First there is a broad way, and a broad gate. Secondly it leads to
destruction. Thirdly, many (notwithstanding) enter therein.
Narrow way wherein are three things. First there is a striait way, and a
strait gate. Secondly it leads to life. Thirdly, few there are who find it.






These words are a Metaphor, whereby Christ shows, that our life is a way, and
that naturally we love to walk in the broad, common, and most easy way. We
have a journey to go, two ways leading to the end, one broad and smooth, the
other strait and craggy, the one is vice, the other virtue, the one full of
hazard, the other void of peril; and we leave the way of godliness, that
leads to heaven, and take the way of wickedness that conducteth to hell. Were
we called to a feast, two dishes set before us, one of sweet Sucket, but full
of poison, the other of sour olives, but very wholesome: would a wise man
refuse the Olives, to eat the Sucket? we are called to a feast where are two
kinds of meare, Christ and Satan, God and Belial, salvation and damnation,
sin and righteousness set before us; whereby the one seems pleasant but is
fraught with death, the other sour but is the savor of life. Yet we choose
the ways of sin which is death eternal, before the reward of
righteousness, which is life everlasting; as our Savior lively expresses in
these two verses.

Some Heretics have objected this place against Narrow is the way which
leads to heaven, and few find it; but broad is the way to destruction, and
many enter therein. Where it seems that God made for the nonce one narrow way,
that fevv might walk in it to life: and the other broader, that more might
give themselves that way, so hastening unto death. What kind of Providence
therefore is this?

My ways are not as your ways, nor my thoughts as your thoughts. Wherefore
man's judgment is deceived, while he expounds, that those things which belong
to the most beautiful order of the whole, and to the last end (which is the
glory of God) does belong to disorder. This answer should suffice any godly
man, yea every one ought to say with the Prophet: How wonderful are thy works
oh Lord! thou have made all things in wisdom.

Orpheus the heathen Poet saw and confessed, when he said, (...) Of God, all
are made good, and suffers only the evil to be. Hill. Fifth Book of the
Providence of God page 497. 501.

enter referred?

It is either referred unto the A. Gate, and so is given unto the spiritual
man: of this elsewhere.








First, he is a stranger from this way in knowledge: as appears thus.

I. His affection lusts after evil, and he desires not the knowledge of divine
things: they being foolishness unto him, 1 Corinthians. 1.18.

II. His reason cannot reach, nor take up spiritual things, they being
spiritually discerned 1 Cor. 2.14
otherwise the Philosophers had learnt Christ.

III. The hearing of the Word (the ordinary means of knowledge) is neglect, by
natural men, until God open the heart, as he did Lydia's Acts 16.

Secondly, they are strangers from this straight way in Practice; for who can
walk in this narrowpath in the dark. John 12.
There are twelve hours in the day, wherein men walk and work, but when
night comes, then men cannot see to walk. And therefore natural men being in
blindness and darkness cannot walk in the straight way of God.



First, from these Scriptures, Psalm 95.10. Romans 3.10.23. Ephesians. 2.12. and
4.18. and Genes. 6.5.

Secondly, every natural man is lead by Satan, Esa. 61.1.2. Ephe. 2.2. and 1
Ioh. 3.8.18.

Thirdly, the carnal man has no union nor communion with God, neither
partakes any thing with him, John 3.36. and 1 John 5.12. And therefore he must
needs be a stranger from this pure but painful path.

Fourthly, by nature we are all deprived of the Romans 5.8.12. Psalm. 5.5. and
11.5.


How may we know whether we are natural or

First, try, and examine it by thy words: our Ephraimites, who to save their
lives could not say, Shibboleth, Judge. 12.6. Vox index animi, the tongue is the
best interpreter of the heart; and therefore if our words beworldly, or
blasphemous, or profane, or silthy, or scandalous and slanderous, or lying, or
boasting; it argues a heart possessed by Satan, and not by God. On the contrary
if our words be seasoned with salt, fit for edifying, adding grace unto the
hearers, and that our lips daily utter good things: it is a good argument of a
sanctified soul Ephesians. 4.29. Colos. 4.6. Frov. 10.


Secondly, do thou know thy duty both toward Ephesians. 5.8.) art thou not
ignorant of the doctrine of Faith, repentance, obedience, and purity?
Certainly there is hope then that thou art more then natural, and that flesh
and blood revealed not these things unto thee.

Thirdly, examine what thy sense of smelling is?

Fourthly, examine thy actions, for they must judge John 8.31.32. And. 1. John
3.8.10.) or the deeds of darkness? John 8.44. for if so, then thou art yet
his slave: But if thy life he replenished with righteous and religious works,
it is a good argument of a regenerate heart.

. 2. For wide is the gate, and broad is the way.

What is meant by the broad way, and wide gate?

First, the way and the gate may be thus distinguished; the way signifies
life, the gate death.

Non per portam in viam, sed per viam in portam. (Chrysostom. imperf. Men do not
go through the gate unto the way, but by the way unto the gate.

Hercules his double path: Vt Hercules in bivio aut sequere aut fuge: these two
ways (to wit, of virtue and vice) are like the two Masters which Christ
speaks of, Matthew. 6.24. for both those ways cannot be walked in at once,
neither both these Masters served at once: Again, they expressed this double
way by Pythagoras his Y. Thus Hesiod, Xenophon, Virgil, Cicero. But these
Philosophers did not hit the scope and true meaning of these two ways, For,

1. They erred in the way it self; interpreting the right way always, either
of arts, or learning, or knowledge, or virtue. But we of the fear and
knowledge of God, and of a spiritual life.

2. They erred in the purpose: For, for the most part they understood the
election and choice of the way only, or the ingresse thereinto: But we
understand it of walking in the way of religion seriously, and perpetually,
through the whole course of our lives.

3. The Philosophers erred in the end: for they made choice of the way of
virtue only for this end, that they might attain unto fame and honor, and
acquire thereby reputation and credit in the world: But we labor to walk in
the narrow path, that at length we may see God, and be made glorious with him
in heaven.

4. They erred in the power of walking: For they walked in the way of moral
virtues through the strength of their own judgment, following Reason as their
guide, placing her as a Queen in her throne, and persuading themselves that so
long as their actions were ruled by reason they could not err. But we walk
not by our own strength but only by virtue of the grace of God in us: for we
know that in us, that is, in our natures dwells no man n^r of thing which is
good (Romans 7.18.) And although to will be present with us, yet to perform we
are not able: Only by the grace of God we are what we are. 1. Cor. 15.10.

via Mundana and Christiana: the way of the world, and of Religion; the former
is broad, the latter narrow.

broad?

broad way.

broad, because it is the readiest way unto honor, riches, and pleasure.

broad, because the most part of the world walk therein; as follows
afterward. This way of sin, and the world is called broad for two other
causes (whereof something more largely) namely, First, because it has many by
paths. B. Secondly, because it is a plain and easy way both to be found and
walked in. C.

Fourthly, this way of worldlings is called broad,

Why may we not adhere unto our own opinions.

First, because many err when they think they Pharaoh thought it was no hurt
to commend Sarai unto their Lord, and yet God plagued them for it. Genes.
12.15.17.
Abimelech thought that he did not ill in taking Sarai, but yet God threatens
him for it. Genes. 20.2, 3.
Other examples we may see hereof, in these places, to wit, 1 Samuel. 13.9.
and 15.13. and 2 Samuel. 6.6 7. Yea certainly many observe diverse superstitious
customs, and yet think they do well in it. Many think scurrilous words to
be honest jeasts. Many think that lawful recreations may be followed as men
follow their callings: and that there is no hurt in them although they spend
too much time, yea are thereby often moved unto anger and oaths. And therefore
seeing it is so usual for men to sin when they think they do no such
thing, we had need not to rely too much upon our own opinions.

Secondly, Satan will not suffer us to see our errors,

Thirdly, we should be very cautelous and circumspect

There are sins First of the Right hand, as heresy, superstition, blind
zeal, and the like. Left hand, as Atheism, profaneness, impurity,
injustice, intemperance, and the like.
2. Both Internal of the heart. External of the tongue and life.
3. Both Omission, and neglect of our duties. Commission, doing that which we
should not.
4. Both Circumstantial, as the occasions, and appearances of evil.
Substantial as the breach of any precept of the moral law.



broad, because it is a plain and easy way, both to find, and to walk in,
when once it is found: Circe said to Ulysses, that he need not ask the way to
hell, because it was as easy to find as to run down a hill. There is a stone
in Egypt which will quickly receive a form, but never lose it without
cracking. The Adamant and the Iron are soon joined, but hardly dissevered: the
coin has his stamp in a moment, but cannot be taken out without melting, so
the way of sin is easy to find, but hard to lose, quickly learnt, not
quickly left.

How does it appear that the way of sin is such

First it is outwardly beautiful, and therefore Ulysses passing by the
Syrenian Woman, tied himself to the mast of the ship, that he might; not be
enticed by them into the Sea, and so be destroyed: thus the way of sin is so
delectable to our natures, that all we can do is little enough to keep us
from thence: so easy a path it is.

Secondly, as sin seems fair, so we are easily James 1.14. Gal. 6.1.
Peccatum est inimicus blandiens, ante actionem, dulce venenum in action,
scorpio pungens post actionem. Before sin is committed, it seems beautiful
to the eye when sin is committing, it seems sweet to the taste; but when it
is committed it is bitter in the belly. At first before it is acted, it is like
a fawning and flattering friend, afterward in the acting it is like sweet
poison lastly, being acted it is like to a deadly draught, or a poisonous
potion, or a death wounding Dragon, and therefore as it is easy in regard of
its false and counterfeit show, and outward appearance; so it is also in regard
of our natural love and affection thereunto.









Job 15.25, are travelers in this broad way.

Job 15.27.

Job 15.31.

Fifthly, they who conceive mischief, and bring forth vanity, are tracers of
this path. Job. 15.35.

Sixthly, they who love sin, but hate it not,

Seventhly, those in whom sin is as strong and

How may we know whether sin be as strong

By these plain marks, namely.

1. Are thy affections as strongly set upon sin as ever they were? do thou
love sin as well as ever thou did? then certainly thou art yet sins slave.

2. Are thy temptations as frequent as ever they were? does the devil tempt
thee as often as ever he did? then it is an argument, that he has too much in
thee.

3. Art thou as stupid, dull and blind, in seeing the craft and subtlety of
Satan, as ever thou were, art thou still as ignorant of his devices as ever?
it is a sign then that sin has a commanding power, in and over thee.

4. Art thou as unable to resist sin as ever thou were? as weak as ever? as
naked as ever? as feeble and faint-hearted as ever? this shows that corruption
is too strong in thee, On the contrary, if we find that our love is not so
much unto sin as it was, but that the edge of our affections is taken off: if
temptations be more rare in us, and we more quick sighted unto Satan's
subtlety, and more strong to resist him, both by Faith, Prayer, and the Word,
then it is a comfortable sign that sin is grown weaker in us, and our feet
reduced from this broad way.

3. That leads unto destruction.

Our Savior in these words shows that the broad way of sin brings at last
unto perpetual pain.

How does it appear that sinners shall perish,

First, it appears evidently from Christ's own Broad way is perdition Narrow
way is salvation
And therefore it matters not what others think.

Secondly, it appears from other plain and positive Psalm. 9.17. and 11.6.
and 83.10.13. and Jsa. 5.24. and 1 Corinthians. 6.9.

Thirdly, sin is the foundation of condemnation; Isa. 50.1. and 59.2. and
Ierem. 5.25. Hose. 13.1. Romans 6.23. Psalm. 1.5. and 5.4. and 34.16. Prove. 16.4.
Isa. 3.10 11.

Fourthly, the arrows of the Lord are levelled against Psalm. 34.16.

Fifthly, the reward of sin is death: The locusts Arist.) so lust having
conceived brings forth sin; and sin when it is finished brings forth death.
James 1.15. and Romans 6.28.

Sixthly, otherwise God should not be just: For,

Genes. 2.17. In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall dye the death.
Pope Julius the third, caused this sentence to be written about his coin.
That nation and people shall perish which will not obey me; so the Lord has
made a law, and threatened to inflict condign punishment upon all those who
disobey it.

Romans 3.23.
2. Mankind has broken this Law in Adam, and wicked men daily break it
themselves in their own persons: And therefore the justice of God requires
that they should be punished whose sins are not done away in Christ.



None who continue to walk in this way until they come to the end thereof:
For,

Isay. 41.2. Daniel. 5.27.

Secondly, Wisemen shall be punished, if they thus play the fools. Exodus
1.10. and 15.7. and Romans 1.22.

Thirdly, Proud men shall be ruined notwithstanding all their high conceits of
themselves. Malach. 4.1.

Fourthly, Hypocrites shall perish, who walk in this broad way secretly, and
unseene. Matthew. 23.





Acts 15.9.) and the heart being purged the life must needs be pure; Wherefore
there is no truth of faith where sin is not forsaken.











Cor. 7.10.







The Impediments are these. First, insensibility; when a man is not sensible of
his sin, he is not careful to forsake it. Secondly, presumption; when men
either presume that they are not sinners, or that their sins are small, or
that (though great) yet they shall be pardoned; it makes them more careless,
and fearelesse of sin, and more slack to leave it. Thirdly, Procrastination,
and delay, when we promise repentance, but put off the performance thereof
from day to day. Fourthly, key-coldnesse in performing and perfecting of the
work; not striving against sin unto blood. Hebr. 12.4.
The Remedies are these First, a tender, and circumcised heart, which is
sensible of the least touch of sin. Secondly, a godly fear; remembering that
we are sinners, yea great sinners, and neither able to satisfy for our sins
our selves, not sure that they shall be pardoned in Christ, except we strive
to forsake, and leave them. Thirdly, not to defer, but while it is said to
day to turn from our sins, and turn unto the Lord our God. Fourthly, zeal,
alacritis, and industry in the resisting of sin; striving against it with
manfull wrastlings till we have prevailed.


. 4. And many there be which go in thereat.

What is the meaning of this word Many?

Our Savior shows hereby, Multi, Many, is Plurimi the most by much.

Whereunto is this word Many to be referred?

It is to be referred both unto the Way. Gate,
as if our Savior would say, Many walk in the broad way. D. Many enter in at
the wide gate. E.


D. First, by Many our Savior would have us to take notice of the Multitude of
sinners; as if he should say, the most part of men walk the ways of sin,
read Psalm. 14.3. and 53.2. and 1 John 5.19. and 1 Cor. 1.25. Numb. 16.4.

How does this appear, that the most men walk

First, It may be illustrated by a double Emblem,

1. The locust is an Emblem of wicked men; she is called in Hebrew (Arbeh)
of the numbers and multitudes of them; for (Rabah) signifies to multiply: And
hence the Scripture it self expresses the number of wicked men by the
locusts. They came as locusts (or Grashopers) for multitude. Judge. 6.5. And
again, They are more then the grashopers and are innumerable. Ierem. 46.23.

2. The Mouse is an Emblem of wicked men; because she increases
exceedingly. (...), etc. (Arist.) both in number and speed.



1. Profane persons, who are given to gross, and enormous sins. 1 Timothy 5.24.

2. Hypocri es, who have a form of (goodness, and) godliness, but in their
hearts have denied the power thereof. 2 Timothy 3.5.

3. Carnal men, who are not egregious sinners, but only mind the world, and
outward things, not regarding the hidden man of the heart at all.

4. Righteous, and holy men, who being truly regenerated, become burning and
shining lamps. Romans 12.11. And these are but few in comparison of any of the
rest.



Cor. 15. First comes that which is natural; and afterward that which is
spiritual; we were all conceived and borne in finne; and nature and sin works
in all, grace but only in a few.



the god of this world. 2 Cor. 4.4. And therefore he draws the most part of
the world after him.







Many here is referred to the broad way.

Many may be referred to the wide gate: Now by the Gate (we showed before) was
meant Death; so that the meaning of these words (Many there be which go in
thereat) is, that that the most men dye unto condemnation, or enter in by death
at the gates of hell. We see there were but only eight out of the whole world
preserved and saved in the Arc, amongst which small number was wicked Cham.
We see that ten righteous men could not be found in five populous Cities of
Sodom. Genes. 18. Yea we see that of six hundred thousand of Israelites there
were but two only that came into the holy Land: And one Nicodemus only we
read of amongst the Senators.

How does it appear that the most part of men are

It appears most evidently thus. First, John 17.3. and 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. Secondly,
there are many who contemn and despise the word, which is the means to bring
them unto saving knowledge. Thirdly, there are many, who although they do not
contemn it, yet susque deque habent, they neglect it, and do not much regard
it. Fourth, there are many who care for no hing but the world, and honors, and
pleasures, and riches. Fifthly, many are ensnared and entangled in sin, and
wholly serve either some public or private lust. Sixthly, many boast and brag of
their own righteousness, and feel no want, neither stand in any need of
Christ. Seventhly, there are but very few who feel their sins to be a burden
unto them, and desire to be eased of that load by Christ. And therefore these
things considered, we may safely say* that it is as clear as the Sun, that
the most of men enter in at the wide gate of destruction.


Whence comes it, that the most perish?

First, from the weakness of our nature: Nature (by grace only we are saved)
and hence it is that so few are saved and so many damned.

Secondly, this comes from the nature of sin, and Achan, in Korah, and his
company, in the man who gathered sticks upon the Sabbath day Number. 15.36.
and in him who blasphemed. Numb. 24. We see how at once for one rebellion
there dyed four and twenty thousand. 1 Cor. 10.

Thirdly, this comes from the nature of our enemies,

Fourthly, this comes from the nature of the multitude,

1. Some who prefer their friends before heaven; Thus many Papists refuse to
embrace our religion (although they be convinced that they are in an error)
because their Fathers and Grandfathers were Papists. Thus many will rather
displease God then their friends, and do that which God forbids, if their
associates and acquaintance persuade them.

2. Some know not that they are miserable; but think (Omnia been) like the
Church of Laodicea, who thought she was rich and stood in need of nothing (h).
These are either;

First, those who are blind and ignorant of their duties unto God: Or,

Secondly, civil honest men, who because they are good in the worlds eye,
think themselves good enough in the Lords: Or,

Thirdly, presumptuous men, who presume either of the smalnesse of their
sins, saying with Lot, my Zoar is but a little one, and therefore
(notwithstanding that) my soul shall live. Or who presume of Gods mercy,
though their sins be great.

3. Some are not sensible of their sins, and therefore are careless of them.
Now this is either,

First, because they do not examine themselves, ways, and works: Or,

Secondly, because custom of sin has so hardened them in it, that they are
become men of seared consciences. Or,

Thirdly, because they are deceived with a general presumption of Gods mercy.

4. Some are sensible of their sins, but yet are not truly reconciled unto
God; Now this is either, because the sight of their sins brings them.

First, to desperation, as we see in Cain, Judas, and Julian the Apostate. Or,

Secondly, to a lukewarm conversion only (not to a true cordial compunction,
contrition, and repentance) as we see in Saul, Herod, and Agrippa: Or,

Thirdly, unto a fained conversion: the stony ground seemed at first to be good
ground, and Ahab seemed from the heart to be humbled, and many seem to leave
and forsake their sins with a great deal of sorrow and hatred of them, who
yet afterward turn with the Dog to his vomit, and with the swine which was
washed to the wallowing in the mire. 2 Pet. 2.20. And thus we see whence it
comes that the most part of men perish, and enter in at the broad gate of
perdition.





No, for there are many hard ways which lead unto hell, as for example,

First, there is a Mountainous way, or the way of the Mountains; this way is
very difficult, as is proved by experience; for men commonly sweat, and are
weary with ascending and walking in such ways, and therefore decline them as
much as they can. This Mountainous way is morally the way of proud men, who
seek to bear rule over others, to be esteemed great by others, to be exalted
and raised above others, to depresse others, and extol themselves. This is
certainly a hard and difficult way, but not the way to heaven, for humility
leads thither, and pride unto destruction.

Secondly, there is a thorny way, or way of tho nes, which a man cannot walk
in, but he is apprehended, laid hold upon, and catched with the thorns, and so
both stayed in his journey, and defaced in his garments, and hurt in his flesh;
This thorny way is the way of covetousness, and of the world, which pierces
the heart through with many sorrows, and distracts the head with many cares,
and takes off the mind from good things, and good thoughts, as was showed
before, Chapter 6.24. Certainly this is a hard way, for nemo repent fit
dives, none can be rich (at least ordinarily) without much pains, and care;
but yet this is not the way to heaven, but to hell. James 4.4. and 1 John 2.15.

Thirdly, there is a miry way, or a way full of clay, and mire, which is a hard
way, because a man is sometimes ready to slip in such a way, and in danger of
falling, sometimes his fee^ sticks fast in the mire, and sometimes he is
molested and disturbed through difficulty of passing through; yea such ways
make men sometimes like beasts: this way is the way of luxurious persons, who
cannot pull the feet of their affections from this clay of uncleanness and
pleasure, but like bruit beasts defile themselves.

Fourthly, there is a blind or dark way, when a man walks in the dark; this
is a hard way; for a man is enforced to grope as he goes, lest he should fall
into some pit, or the like dangerous place which he sees not: yea in such a
way a man is afraid to be assaulted, and seized on by thieves at unawares. This
is the way of envious men, who are blind and dark, as appears by the
Etymology of the name: Invidus, quasi non videns, Envious is as much as one
that sees not; because such cannot see or behold the goods, good things,
blessings, and prosperity of others, without envy, repining, afflicting of
themselves. Envious men are always in fear, lest God should bless, or good
things be conferred upon others. This is not the way to heaven, although it be
a difficult way.

Fifthly, there is a tumultuous way, a path wherein many walk, which is truly
called hard, and difficult, because the travelers by reason of the multitude
do one hinder, trouble, and molest another, and one throng upon another. This
is the way of angry men, who by reason of their anger are afflicted, trampled
upon, and trodden down, by diverse and sundry contumelies, clamours, brawles,
contentions, threatenings, hatreds, and the like. This is a hard way, but yet
leads not to life.

Sixthly, there is a costly way, when all the Innes and provision, and things a
man shall use in such a way are very dear, and chargeable; this all men think
to be a hard way. This is the way of drunkards, gluttons, and prodigals, who
cannot satisfy their appetites without expending much; this way certainly is
not the way to salvation Anton. part. 1. Tit. 5. de poenis inferni. cap. 3.
And thus we see that every strait and hard way leads not unto life.

What is this strait way, that leads unto heaven,

First, some understand the Cross to be the take up our Cross, Math. 16.24.
but affliction, tribulation, and persecution are but only the thorns that
grow in the way, not the way it self.

Secondly, some by this way understand the if thou will enter into life, keep
the Commandments, Math. 19.17.

Thirdly, some by this straight way, understand faith; because both in the Old
and New Testament it is said, The just shall live by faith.

Revera, Christ is the way, John 14.6. I am the way, the truth, and the life:
yea he is the new and living way, Heb. 10.20. and the door also, John 10.9.



1. To walk in Christ, is to walk in faith; St. John says, To as many as
received Christ, God gave power to be called his children; that is, to as many
as believed in his Name, John 1.12. and again, God sent Christ into the world,
that as many as believed in him might be saved, John 3.16.

2. To wa^ke in faith, is to fructify in love; for faith works by love,
Galath. 5.6.

3. To walk therefore in this strait way, is to believe in Christ, and to
adhere unto him, as that we oblige our selves in all things to observe and obey
his will in holiness and uprightness Luke 1.75.
.



durus sermo, a hard saying to flesh and blood; and therefore this way is truly
(in this regard) called strait.



Corinth. 15.19.





via stricta, sed via lata, not a strait way, but a broad.

For the true understanding of this, mark these particulars.

1. Christ is a broad way in respect of his omnipotency and power; For all
power was given unto him both in heaven and in earth, Math. 28.18. And
therefore being of unlimitted power he can do what he will, and save whom he
will.

2. Christ opened the Kingdom of heaven to all believers, Cantic. Ambros. Te
Deum.
and therefore in this regard also he is a broad way.

3. Christ fulfilled the whole Law for us; and took all the stumbling blocks
out of the way; yea, he was made sin for us, that so in him our sins might
be done away; And therefore in this respect also Christ may be called a broad
way.

4. In respect of the condition, Christ may indeed truly be called a strait
way: for hell receives all sinners and unclean persons whatsoever, both those
who swell with pride, and those who are infected with the leprosy of impurity;
but Christ only receives those who are naked and stripped from all trust and
confidence in their own works; and truly depressed with humility, and godly
sorrow of heart, and who are also pure in life. Act. 10.14. And in this respect
Christ is a straitway because he exacts strict obedience at our hands.

Secondly, this way of piety which leads unto

1. In regard of the obscurity thereof, because it is hard to find. F.

2. In regard of the difficulty thereof, because it is hard to walk in when
once it is found. G.

First, the way unto heaven is strait, Respectu in regard of the obscurity
thereof, because Corinth. 2.14.

How does it appear, that this way unto heaven

First, it is evident by the guides and conducts Canaan, three guides, namely
Moses, Aaron, and Miriam.

1. Miriam was the meanest of the three; for she was a woman, of the infirmer
sex, and she murmuring against Moses, was stricken with leprosy.

2. Aaron was the second guide, but in some things he proved a blind guide to
them, for he set up a golden Calfe before them.

3. Moses was the third and best guide, but he could not bring them to Canaan,
for it was Joshua who brought them to their rest.

Thus there are three guides which direct men in this world, namely;

First, corrupt nature, or Natura non suscitata, that is, nature not wakened or
stirred up by learning: this guide is but like unto Miriam, and oftentimes it
murmureth against Moses, the Law of God.

Secondly, Ratio suscitata, reason wakened and stirred up, and somewhat refined
by learning and humane sciences; yet this is but a blind guide, and oftentimes
it murmureth and repineth against Moses, as well as leprous Miriam.

Thirdly, the Law of God, which shows us the way to Canaan and our eternal
rest: but it is impossible that the Law should save us, for that is the work
of our spiritual and heavenly Joshua, Romans. 8.3.

Secondly, it is evident and apparent by the ways which lead unto life; Here
observe,

That the ways which lead unto life are these, namely First, the Knowledge of
the word, and law, and testaments of God: for they are conjoined Isa. 8.16.20.
and 51.47. But natural men are ignorant of the Law of God, and the way of the
Lord they have not known. John 5.24.39. and 2 Timoth. 1.10. and 3.16.) but
wicked and natural men contemn and despise it. This is life eternal, to know
thee (John 17.3.) that is, the true knowledge of the true God, is the way unto
life; but naturally men are ignorant of the true God. Romans 8.6.7.8. Experience
shows most plainly how averse nature is unto religion and God even in the
smallest things. Fifthly, Faith fructifying in love, and sanctity. Romans 13.11.
Philip. 1.27. But wicked men believe not, neither obey; and therefore they are
strangers from life. Sixthly, Christ is the way unto life. John 14.6. Acts 4.12.
But wicked men are without Christ, and therefore it is evident that this strait
way of piety is unknown unto them.


man may now be compared to the beasts that perish. Psalm. 49.12. Ierem. 10.14.
and 51.17. And therefore undoubtedly is ignorant of the way of life.



1. The best clerk, and wisest natural man is but a fool, so long as he is
not taught spiritually and instructed from above. Romans 1.22. Prove. 16.22. and
1. Cor. 1.20. and 3.19.

2. The natural man is but childish in religion. 1 Cor. 13.12. Ephesians. 4.14.

3. He knows not what heaven and life eternal is. Haec est vita aeterna, ubi
possumus Deum videre facie ad faciem; ubi est sanitas sine infirmitate, requies
aeterna sine labor, pax sine timore, laetitia sine moevore, veritas sine
errore. Life eternal is that place where we shall see God as we are seen,
face to face, where we shall have health without sickness, rest without
disturbance, peace without fear, joy without sorrow, and truth without
error. This nature is altogether ignorant of.

4. He knows not how heaven, and life eternal may be acquired; nature can
neither teach how heaven may be had, nor procure it. And therefore we may
hence collect how necessary it is for every member of old Adam to labor, and
endeavor to be free from this natural condition wherein he is, and to be
regenerated and engrafted into Christ.

Why must we thus earnestly desire to be changed,

First, Because naturally we are blind, and cannot

Secondly, because naturally we are foolish, and

Thirdly, because by nature we are but evil

Fourthly, by nature we are void and destitute Ephesians. 2.1.) and therefore if
we desire that we may be recovered, and the grace of God again quickened in
us, we must labor to be changed and transformed after the Image of Christ.

Fifthly, because by nature we are the members of Ephesians. 2.3. And therefore if
we desire to be made the members of Christ, and the children of God, we must
labor to come out of our natural estate and condition.

By what means may we be freed from this miserable

I answer here from the second answer of the former question save one: use
these means.

First, study the word of God, Means of regeneration.
labor for the knowledge thereof; for that will teach thee thy misery.

Secondly, obey the word of God: when thou know the will of God then labor
to do it; abstain from all evil prohibited, observe every good duty
enjoined.

3 Thirdly, love the Lord above all things; he only regenerates by his holy
Spirit, and therefore love him with all thy heart, and with all thy soul.

4. Fourthly, labor for Christ, for he sends the Holy Spirit unto us; he is
the alone Mediator between God and man, and all grace which is conferred upon
us by God, is in and through Christ; And therefore no mercy is to be expected
but by him, and for his sake.

Fifthly, pray unto God, that he would be graciously pleased to wash us from
our sins, to plant and engraft us into Christ, and to sanctify us by his
holy Spirit. Thus we have heard the first cause, how the way of piety which
leads unto life is strait in respect of the Obscurity thereof it being hard to
find.

G Secondly, the way of piety which leads unto Respectu difficultatis, in
regard of the Acts, 14.22. and 2 Timoth. 3.12. and 2 Corinthians. 4.

How is the way to heaven hard, when as 1. God Esaias 55.1. And 2 Rejects none
that comes? James, 1.5. And 3. gives his word unto all? Acts 20. Which word is
a bright and clear light, Psalm. 119.105. And 4. reveals himself unto all
those who seek him?

We say the way is hard, for these causes, to wit,

Romans 8.6, etc.



Romans 9.31.



1. That there is imputative righteousness, Psalm. 32.1.

2. That we must deny our selves, and submit our selves wholly to the will and
pleasure of God. And therefore this way may truly be called hard.



1. From the world, lest otherwise he perish with the world: this is very hard
for a man to be in the world, and not of the world, for so he shall be scorned
by the world.

2. From himself, and his fore-passed life; this is extreme hard and
difficult, for a man to forsake his own sense, judgment, will, affection, and
whatsoever is contrary to the good pleasure of God.



1. Sometimes we are tempted to have a care of our fame and credit; and
therefore to forsake the profession of the Gospel, because it is derided, and
scoffed by wicked men.

2. Sometimes we are tempted unto pleasure, as unto drunkenness, gluttony,
wantonness, adultery, pride, contention, revenge, and the like.

3. Sometimes we are tempted unto profit, as to covetousness, lying,
deceiving, and the like. Now if we would walk in this way of piety, which
leads unto life, we must abstain from all sin whatsoever, though never so
pleasant or profitable unto us. And this is no easy thing.



1. Of humility toward God; we must in this way patiently permit and suffer
our selves to be directed, lead, taught; yea if we stray, to be reduced,
reproved, corrected by God, and suffer all patiently, and humbly at his hands.
And this we shall find a hard task.

2. Of humility toward men; we must not be proud, or ambitious, or haughty,
but make our selves equal with those of the lower sort, although it be
something hard to submit unto.

3. Of watchfulness; in this way we must never sleep, lest while we sleep,
the enemy sow tares. Math. 13.25. Nay, we must not so much as look back,
lest the plow slip out of our hands. And this circumspection will be something
difficult.

4. Of suffering we must suffer in this way all crosses, afflictions,
tribulations, and vexations whatsoever, yea death it self (if we be called
thereunto) patiently; Philip. 1.28. Math. 16.24. Hebr. 12.3. And this is very
hard for flesh and blood to do.

Eighthly, this way of piety is hard, in respect of Solon.
rare and excellent things are hardly attained: and therefore if we do but
seriously consider the glory, excellency, and felicity of heaven, we will
easily assent unto this truth, that the way of piety which leads thither must
needs be hard and difficult to walk in. Read Math. 5.48. last, for this
purpose.

Is every hard way the way of piety?

There are hard ways which neither are pure, Colos. 2.18.23.) The devil is
Gods Ape, and therefore will imitate him: every herb in the garden (almost)
has his counterfeit in the field; as there are good and profitable Time, and
Sage in the Orchard, so in the fields there are wild Time and Sage; As God has
a hard way which leads unto life, so has the devil a hard way which leads
unto death. As for example.

First, Baals Prophets walked a hard way, when they cut themselves with knives,
and Lances 1 King 18.


Secondly, the heathen Gymnosophists walked a hard way, when they sacrificed
humane flesh, and virginity unto their Idols, or false Gods. Indeed these are
very hard ways, but none of them leads unto life.

How may the true hard way be known?

By these two things, to wit,

First, by the purpose of the heart; he who purposes with himself, and
propounds unto himself the most strict rule of the will of God, resolving
not to please himself, but the Lord, and to obey him according to that Law
which himself has prescribed; that man certainly walks in the true hard
way.

Secondly, by the practice of the life, if this resolution lead thee unto all
kinds of mercy, justice, and holiness Mich. 6.8.
. Then certainly thou art one of that small number who walk in this true hard
way.

It is a hard thing to walk in this hard way,

First, remember although this way be hard to

Secondly, remember thy labor shall be rewarded. The Soldier exposes his
life to danger in hope of victory, and a reward. And therefore why should not
we endure the difficulties and inconveniences of this hard way, seeing we are
sure that our labor shall not be in vain, but liberally rewarded? 2 Cor. 4.18.

Jacob with the one hand, but upheld him with the other, and therefore Jacob
was able to hold out, even until the morning: so God will direct us by his
Spirit in this narrow path, which leads unto life, and we shall always hear a
voice behind us, saying, this is the way, walk in it: God will strengthen out
ancle-bones, and enable us to run with patience, constancy and
cheerfulness, the race that is set before us: God will arm us with might and
strength in the inward man, and enable us both to overcome our enemies which
labor to oppose us, and to perform those works in some measure, which he
requires of us. And therefore seeing we are assured, that the grace of God
shall sustain us, 2 Cor. 12.9.
and his blessed Spirit assist us in all the dangers and difficulties of this
hard way, we should be encouraged the more cheerfully to walk therein.



Bartimeus cast away thy cloak, and those sins which hang so fast on and
cleave so fast to, and do so easily beset thee: Hebr. 12.1. Mat. 5.29. Ephesians.
4.22. A man can never walk in this way, except he lay aside this old man of
sin and corruption.



Pet. 2.11.) resist all thy corrupt affections and labor to bring every
rebellious thought in obedience unto the Spirit.

To. 13.14. Phil. 2.5.

Who are here to be blamed and reproved?



Mat. 11.29.) but labor, and pains, and watchings, and prayers, and fastings,
and examinations, and reedifying of old ruins and decays, in our bodies, so
long as we live. In this life, we must strive to enter into the true rest (
Hebr. 4.11.) and this striving and labor must last for term of life; for
there is no rest from labor till after death; Blessed are the dead which die
in the Lord, for they rest from their labors Reve. 14.13.
where we see that there is no resting from the works of Religion, or the
labor of the Lord till death. Neque hic requies spiranda neque ibi tristitia
timenda Chrysostom. s.
. As we must not expect rest in this life, so we need not fear labor and
pains in the life to come.





To teach two things unto us, namely,

First, that life is the end of the strait and narrow way. H.

Secondly, that this mortal life is not worthy to be called life; heaven only
being the true life. I.

H. First, our Savior here teaches us that true Rom 8 17. and 2 Timothy 1.11.
and 4.8. and 1 John 3.1. Duke Cosmo de Medicis, warring upon the enemies of his
Master the Emperor, bare in his shield the Eagle, which signified Jupiter and
the Emperor, holding out in herbeak a triumphant Crown, with this Motto,
Jupiter Merentibus offert, by which he signified, that his Highness deserved
each glorious reward for his worthy virtues; but we may apply it thus, that
God will give a Crown of glory to every one who labors in his Vineyard
faithfully, and fights manfully his battles against sin and Satan. When
Vrsicinus a Physician endured martyrdom for religion, a Soldier perceiving
his courage begin to fail, spoke boldly unto him; Do not now Vrsicinus cast
away thy self, that has cured so many, nor after so much blood of thine
spilled, lose the reward prepared for thee. Thus should every Christian
encourage himself, in this narrow path, that the end thereof is life, and his
obedience shall be rewarded.

Is salvation then of merit, or of works?

First, certainly, it were of works, and merit, Romans 7.10 Galath. 3. Rom 2.13.
But Adam brake the covenant, and violated the Law; And therefore now we cannot
be saved thereby. Romans 3.23. and 8.3.

Secondly, now having broken the Law in Adam, Ephesians. 2.5.8. Rom 5.21.

Thirdly, although we cannot merit salvation by

1. Salvation is the reward of faith, John 1.12. and 3.16. and 1. Pet. 1.9.

2. Faith is to be prooved and tried by works, Gal. 5.6. James 2.17.26.

3. Therefore the Spirit of faith works sanctification in us, and then crowns
that his own work, Romans 6.22.

Life eternal is called an inheritance, and a reward;

First, it is called a reward Propter similitudinem,

1. In respect of the time; wages or the reward is given when the work is
done; so heaven is not given until after death.

2. In respect of the measure; to him who works more, or takes more pains, a
greater reward is given: so he who is more careful to exercise and stir up
the gift and grace of God within him, and more diligent in the work of the
Lord, shall have a greater measure of glory in the Kingdom of heaven; for
there are degrees of glory in heaven according to the measure of grace on
earth. And although heaven be not given for our works, yet it shall be given
according to our works.

Giacopo Sauzaro, being long in love, bare for his devise a pot full of little
black stones, without white amongst the rest; with this Motto, Aequabit nigras
candida una dies.

Meaning, that the day of marriage would contervaile all his black: and cloudy
days. So should we do, call to mind that day of refreshing, and remember that
when that comes, we shall be married unto our Lord Christ, with such absolute
and complete joy, that all our labor, pains, toil, care, and watchings,
shall be quite forgotten, and abundantly rewarded.



Or how may we know whether we be godly or not? and whether this true life
belong unto us or not?

Eye has not seen, nor care heard, nor ever enterd it into the heart of man,
once to conceive the things which God has prepared for those who love him. 1 Corinthians. 2.9. And therefore we must seriously examine, whether we love the
Lord or not above all? yea so love him, that we hate every thing which is
opposite unto him, and hated by him.

Joh. 3.3.) He that desires this hope, let him purge himsefe, even as Christ is
pure. And therefore we must try whether we desire to know what is sin, and
what is sinful in us, that we may labor to leave all sin, and forsake our
own.

Timoth. 2.20.) And therefore we ought to examine by our actions, what vessels
we are; whether we bring forth the fruits of Religion, thereby approving our
selves to be vessels of honor; or the fruits of rebellion, thereby showing our
selves to be vessels of dishonor.

Isaiah shows most plainly to whom this true life belongs. Esa. 64.4.5. For
since the beginning of the world, men have not heard, nor perceived by the
ear, neither has the eye seen, oh God, besides thee, what he has prepared
for him, that wayteth for him. Thou meetest him that rejoices, and works
righteousness, and remembers thee in thy ways. In these two verses the
Prophet lays down four particular marks of an heir of heaven and eternal
life; namely,

1. Those who wait for him; that is, those who watch for him and sleep not;
those who hunger after him, but do not unwillingly or impatiently brook his
delay.

2. Those who rejoice in him, and not those who delight themselves in the world.

3. They that work righteousness; that is, do not good now and then, but make
it their work.

4. They who remember the Lord in their ways, or in his ways: that is, not
those who remember the Lord in the ways of sin, and when they commit evil,
think upon him as a Judge who will punish it: but those who remember the Lord
in their ways, possessing their hearts always with an apprehension of his
presence, and having the God of Jacob always before their eyes: Or those who
remember the Lord in his ways, that is, walk continually in the ways of the
Lord, calling him to mind as a liberal rewarder of the works of his
children. And therefore we should from the bottom try our selves by the
signs laid down in these two verses: whether we patiently, and constantly
wait for the Lord or not? whether we rejoice in the Lord above all other
created delights? whether we work righteousness incessantly? and whether we
always remember the Lord our God, not only as a just Judge who will punish
sin; but as a pure God who cannot endure sin; and a gracious God who will
abundantly reward the sincere obedience of his servants? Thus we have heard the
first cause, why our Savior here says, Strait is the way which leads unto
Life, and not, which leads unto Heaven; because true life is the end of this
strait way.

I Secondly, it is said here which leads unto

How does this appear, that this life is not true

First, from Scripture, where,

1. Affirmatively we may see, that spiritual and John 11.4. and John 5.24.26.
and 6.33.35. and 10.10. and 20.31. Romans 5.17.18. and 2 Cor. 5.4.

2. Negatively, we may see that this natural life is not true life; as Joh.
3.36. and 6.53. Heb. 13.14.

Secondly, from the names, or things whereunto it is resembled; as for example.

1. It is resembled sometimes to dust, as Genes. 3.19. and Psalm. 103.14.

2. Sometimes it is likened to smoke, as Psalm 102.3.

3. It is compared sometimes in regard of the brevity of it to a hand-breath,
as Psalm 39.5.

4. Sometimes it is resembled to the grass and flowers of the field, as Esa.
40.7. Job 14.2. and Psalm. 102.3.11. and James 1.10.

5. It is said sometimes to be like a shadow, as Psalm 102.11. and 109.23. Job
8.9. and 14.2.

6. Sometimes it is compared to a sleep, ( Psalm 90.5.) sometimes to a
vapor, ( Jam. 4.14.) sometimes to a thought, Psalm. 90.9.



1. This life is full of evils, having in it more gall then honey, more sorrow
then joy, more evil then good. There is to be gathered in India, Arabia, and
the Holy Land, a certain herb of an extraordinary sweet smell, with leaves
broad, fat, and juicie, which being pressed, yields both Aloes and honey, but
more Aloes then honey: from whence this Metaphorical Proverb was used, Quod
plus molestiae quam voluptatis gignit, it is more troublesome then profitable;
thus Juvenal says, an evil wife has more of Aloes, then of honey; and
Plautus says most truly, that the life of man tastes more of Aloes then of
honey.

2. This life is full of labors, and pains; man being created unto labor,
Job 5.7. Eccles. 1.8. If the King should bestow upon one of his Favorites one
of his stately Palaces, charging him to keep it in repair: the Favorite could
not but take it as a great favor and esteem, the gift highly in regard of the
giver; but in regard of the care, cost, trouble, and pains, which he must be
at in the dressing, repairing, and maintaining thereof, he had better be
without it. So this life is to be esteemed in regard of the author, and giver
thereof; but in regard of the labors, and evil, which it is fraught withal,
it rather deserves to be laid aside, then retained; to be lost then found.

3. This life is but a pilgrimage unto death, and every day we come nearer our
journeyes end then other; and therefore it may better be called death then
life, as follows by and by.

4. In the best sort of men, this life is but a pilgrimage unto true life,
where there is perfection of felicity ( Genes. 47.9. and Hebr. 11.13. and 1
Pet. 2.11.) and therefore it cannot truly be called true life it self.



1. Natural, this is falsely so called, because it is common unto brute beasts.

2. Spiritual, this is Typically so called, because it gives unto us hope of
true life, Ephesians. 2.5. And therefore is only life in hope.

3. Eternal, and this only is truly called life; because true life consists
in the perfection of the soul, to wit, in eternity.





First, that natural men have no true life in them, their life being either,

1. The life of brute beasts, which consists in the delights of the belly, and
in satisfying carnal appetites: Or,

2. Worse, consisting in gluttony, revenge, drunkenness, murder, and the like:
Or,

3. Foolish, unconstant, vain, consisting in the delights of honors, riches,
and pleasure.

Secondly, that natural men are dead, until they be changed and regenerated,
and that in this regard.

1. They are dead in understanding; for now they cannot take up spiritual
things. 1 Cor. 2.14.

2. They are dead in quiet; for now there is no peace at all to them, so long
as they are natural. There is no peace to the wicked, says my God, Esaias,
48.22.

3. They are dead in comfort and spiritual joy, the holy Ghost being given
unto none but unto those who are spiritual.

4. They are dead in purity, being altogether corrupted with sin and
uncleannes, which has covered them as a garment, both in body and soul.

5. They are dead in regard of spiritual society, being strangers from God,
and from the Commonwealth of Israel. Ephesians. 4.18.

6. If this life be not the true life, then who

1. First, those who so highly prize this life, that is, either.

2. Neglect life eternal for it; prefers

3. Set up their rests here; oh who would take up his habitation and abiding
place in an Inn? Who would set up his staff in a strange place, that is upon
his journey to his native Country, and his natural kindred, Mich. 2.10. Or,

4. Heap up treasures, and build, and plant, as though we should live here for
ever. Oh let us consider how sottish we show our selves so long as we thus
adorn, beautify, value, and overprize this life. Heraclitus the Philosopher
spoke very wittily of the bow and the arrow, applying it to the thing in hand.
A bow in Greek is called (...), coming from (...), which signifies life;
because men were wont to get their living with their bow; Now the bow does not
give life unto, but rather kills those creatures which it shoots at.
Wherefore Heraclitus said of it, It has in word a name of life, but indeed a
work of death. So this life is called life, but more properly might be termed
death, and therefore is not thus out of measure to be esteemed.

Secondly, they err here who are so careful to

1. Nescit mori, there is no necessity of this life; and therefore better loose
it, then save it by unlawful means.

Math. 16.25.) that is, he that by sin saves his natural life, by that sin
exposes body and soul to eternal death!

Thirdly, they are faulty here, who are so unwilling to depart out of this
life: For this life is but only a journey, and death puts an end thereunto,
bringing us to our wished Port. Now we do not this in other things; For,

1. Every man who has a long, tedious, and dangerous journey to go, is glad,
not sad, when his journey is finished. Why should we then be sorry, when God
puts an end to our miserable life, which is so full of labor, and evil, as
was showed before.

2. A man is content to leave his fathers cottage to be entertained into the
Kings service.

3. A Scholar is well pleased to go from the University to a great Benefice.
And therefore why should any of the children of God be unwilling to go from
earth to heaven? from labor to ease?

Some desperate and discontented spirit may be will here enquire, if he may not
rid himself out of the world? For if this life be not true life, but only
falsely called life; and neither worth esteeming, nor by any unlawful means
to be kept, nor unwillingly to be parted withal; then what great matter is it
for him to cut the throat of his own life?

For the full satisfaction of this question we will lay down three things,
namely,

First, the causes why some have done it. (K).

Secondly, the causes, why none must or ought to do it. L.

Thirdly, the punishment of those who ha^^ or will do. K
M.

Reasons of self murder.
K. First, we have to consider the causes why some have miserably shortened
their own days, to wit,

Gentiles that when men were come to such an age, that they were not able to
work any longer, they should be sent into a wild, and uninhabited desert,
where they should either kill themselves or suffer themselves to be devoured of
wild beasts. This is barbarous indeed, and monstrous inhumane.

M. Pertius Latro, being wearyed out with a quartaine ague, which he could not
get rid of, killed himself. This we must not do, because the cross which
God lays upon us must be borne, whether it be long or short, heavy or light.

Euphrates the Philosopher obtaining leave of Adrian, murdered himself, because
he was very old, and very sickly: But this is not to be done, because the Lord
only is the Lord of life, and therefore no King or Monarch has power to
dispense with this, or tolerate any to lay hands upon themselves.

Cloanthes, Chrysippus, Empedocles, Zena, and Cato minor. But this we must take
heed of, because at the soul is immortal, so there is immortal death, and
eternal destruction, whereunto this opinion a ^eades: and it is only the
godly, who are made happy by death.

5. Some have been self murderers by reason Rev. 14.13.
thus Lucretia being ravished by Tarquin, murdered herself. This we must not
do, because the fault is enlarged, not lessened by this means, this life
being the space and time of true repentance.

6. Some have laid violent hands upon themselves,

7. Some make themselves away, that so they

L. Secondly, Reasons against selfe-murder.
let us now consider why we must

1. It is contrary unto the Laws of the Land;

2. It is contrary to the Law of nature; Omne every creature by the instinct
of nature desires the preservation both of the Species and Individuum.

3. It is contrary to the Law of God; as appears

First, the Law is, Love thy neigbour as thy self, but he who kills himself
loves not himself: yea, if it were lawful for a man to kill himself, he
might argue thus, I must love my neighbor as I love my self; but I care not
to kill my self, And therefore I may murder him.

Secondly, the Law is, Thou shall not kill: It is worth observing, that the
Lord in the ninth Commandment says, Thou shall not bear false witness
against thy neighbor; but here the Lord speaks indefinitely, Thou shall not
kill, that is, neither thy self, nor thy neigbour. Indeed it is lawful for
men to kill beasts, and therefore the Law is, Non hominem occides, Thou shall
kill no man; but he who kills himself, kills no other then a man: therefore
it is a direct breach of this Commandment.

4. When thou killest thy self, either,

First, thou murdrest an innocent man, and so becomes guilty of innocent blood:
Or,

Secondly, thou murdrest a guilty man; now this is unlawful. Suppose a man
have privately to b^ bad or murdered his brother, it is not lawful, therefore
for him to go hang himself, because he must neither be his own judge, nor
executioner, nor deprive himself of the space of repentance.

Joseph, David, Job, and we shall set them to have been sometimes a very Map
of misery; but yet they never went about (that we read of) to lay violent
hands upon themselves, but patiently underwent, and endured the cross: Saint
Paul being extremely grieved and perplexed by reason of those strong
remainders of corruption which were in him, cries out, Me miserum quis
liberabit? Oh wretch that I am who shall deliver me? he does not answer
himself, Ing^^^m, a halter shall deliver me. Indeed this practice has
presidents in Scripture, and may be patronized by the example of wicked men;
for wicked Soul falls upon his own sword Sam. 31.4.
treacherous Achitophel hangs himself 2 Samuel 17.20.
and traitorous Judas, together with unjust Pilate murder themselves; but no
righteous men have done so in all the word.

Sampson who pulled the house upon his own head; I answer.





Punishment of selfe-murther.
namely,

1. The Athenians punished him who did attempt to murder himself, but was by
some means prevented, with the loss of the right hand, cutting it off.
Rhoding.

2. The Ancients held that death of all others most infamous, and did forbid
burial unto such, by this law. Qui sibi manum admoverit, insepuleus jaceat
(Rhoding.) Let not him be buried (but cast into the high way like a dead dog)
who lays hands upon himself.

3. God is angry with such, as a Master with his slaves who kill themselves: If
a man buy slaves that they may work his work, and enrich him thereby; he
cannot but be exceedingly incensed if they should kill themselves, and by that
means frustrate his expectation: So the Lord, has both created and redeemed
us for his service: and therefore he is sore offended with him, who by the
shortning wilfully of his days, defraudes him of his expectation, and declines
his work.

4. This sin is greater then disobedience, and therefore shall be more
severely punished, He who kills himself in the battle is more exceedingly to
be blamed, then he who denies to fight; for he may disobey and repent; as
the younger son in the Parable, who said I will not, and yet afterward went:
But he that cuts the thread of his own life, can never do service any more.

5. God will reject such a soul so sent unto him; Josephus being hid in a cave
with fifty ^^re who would have killed themselves, dissuaded them from it by
this argument; If we send our souls unto God before he call for them, he
will not receive them when they come. Showing most truly that we must expect
Gods time for the dissolution of our lives, as good old Simeon ^^d: Lord now
lithe^^ thi^ thy servant depart in peace (Luke 2.29.) the word here used is
(...), which the Siryach renders Ianuam c^ncura aperis, Lord now thou openest
the prison doors, So. S. Paul says, I desire to be dissolved, Phil. 1.23.
to wit, of the Lord. And therefore we should patiently endure all
afflictions, and temptations, and trials, whatsoever, and avoid this monstrous
self cruelty, as we would the torments of hell.

. 7. And few there be that find it.

How are there few that walk in the strait way,

First, absolutely there are many in heaven. Isa. 60.4.16. * Matthew. 8.11.
Revel. 7.9.

Secondly, but comparatively there are but few: and thus our Savior means in
this place, teaching us, that there are but few truly pious, or religious in
comparison of the wicked; Or,

That there are but few who walk in the narrow and strait path of piety, in
comparison of those who walk in the broad and wide way of sin and iniquity.
Read. Matthew. 20.16. and 22.14. and Psalm. 14.3. and Isa. 53.1. Romans 9.27.

How does it appear that there are but few who

First, from divine examples; we read of eight Pet. 3.20. of two only who
came into the Land of Canaan, of all those who came out of Egypt. Numb. 14.30.
of Lots fa^^ly only in wicked Sodom. Genes. 19. of Elius only in the sight
of the world. 1. King. 19.10.

Secondly, this may be proved from experience, vel duo vel nemo. Good
Christians are to be esteemed among us, as good Publicanes were in Rome; where
a faithful Publicane was so rare, that Sabinus for his honest managing of that
office, in an honorable remembrance thereof, had certain Images erected with
this superscription. (...) to the faithful Publican, I dare not say as an
Athenian said, who being commanded by the Roman Ambassadors who came to
Athens, to go call the honest men of Athens to come to the Ambassadors, went
to the Tombs, and bid the dead men come; and being demanded the reason
thereof? ansvvered that the honest men of Athens were dead, and that there
was not one now to be found alive. This I most not say, but I may truly and
safely say, that in comparison of the bad, the good are very rare; almost like
the Phoenix in Arabia, who is but one; or the Philadelphi in Arays never above
two.

Thirdly, the truth of this appears by the multitude with the dog to his
vomit, and with the swine who was washed to the wallowing in the mire. 2
Peter. 2.20. Suppose that there were more godly, then there are drunkards, or
adulterers, yet not more then there are hypocrites, and formal professors,
much less then all these.



1. It is a very obscure and blind path, and therefore is hard to find, but
easy to miss.

2. It is a laborious and painful way, many things are therein to be done, as
follows by and by.

3. It is a dangerous way, in regard of the enemies which lurk and lie in
wait therein.

Which are First, very strong, like a roating Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8. or a stout
warrier armed, Luke 11.22. Secondly, very crafty, and subtle; as appears by
his deceiving of Eve in innocence, and paradise. Thirdly, very industrious, and
never weary, but seeking night and day, and going too and fro, to seduce and
betray.


4. It is a hard way to flesh and blood, both in regard of renouncing all our
former sins, and in denying of our selves, and our own wills.

Esa. 10.21. Romans 9.27.



1. We must devote our selves unto the service of the Lord, and submit our
selves wholly unto his will.

2. We must take up our cross, and patiently endure all the afflictions and
tribulations which we meet withal in the way, whether they be long or heavy.

3. We must run with patience, cheerfulness, and constancy the race that
is set before us.

4. We must deny all ungodliness and unrighteousness whatsoever. Tit. 2.11.

5. We must cloathe our selves with righteousness and obedience, as with a
garment.

6. We must resist all out corrupt affections and lusts, 1. Pet. 2.11. Now
whosoever does desire, resolve, and endeavor to do all these, will find it a
very great and Herculean labor.



Acts 21.20. and 22.3. and Romans 10.3. and 2 Peter 2.2.

Psalm. 78.36. Isa. 29.13. Ezech. 33.31.

John 6.44.65. Matthew. 11.27.
trusting either,

1. To a moral life, and some outward reformation, and abstinence from some
gross sins. Or,

2. To some false dreams of faith.



How may we know whether we be of this number or not which walk in this
strait way? Let us examine our selves by these marks or signs,

First, by the truth of our covenant:

Secondly, by the truth of our zeal; whether is our pretended zeal for Gods
glory true or not? that is,

1. Whether is it perpetual or not? It is good (says the Apostle) to be
zealously affected always in a good matter Galath. 4.18.
we must not be zealous per interva^^a, sometimes, but always;

2. Whether is thy zeal resolute or not? do thou resolve, that although
none else should serve the Lord, yet thou will? with Elias 1 King. 14. and with
Joshua, Chapter 24. do thou purpose in thy heart, with Peter not to forsake
Christ, though all the world should forsake him?

Thirdly, we must try our selves by the truth of our lives and conversations;
and here examine,

1. Whether do thou labor to abound in every good work through the whole
course of thy life?

2. Whether do thou labor daily to increase in obedience, and in every good
work?

Fourthly, let us examine our selves,

1. Whether do thou endeavor to subdue all gross sins or not? whether
anger, lust, pride, drunkenness, and the like?

2. Not only these, but also to subjugate, and bring under thy internal
affections, corruptions, and lusts? If we find those things in us in truth,
they will be comfortable arguments unto us, that we are of this small number
who walk in this strait way of Piety, and which shall enter in at the narrow
gate of felicity, when the Lord by death takes us out of this world.

Verse 15.

. 1. Beware. Cavete.

Sometimes we are bidden to take heed of our selves, now we are bidden to
take heed of other.

Whereby our Savior would teach us: Paul would not have us to become
companions of those who might seduce us. Ephesians. 5.7.

Why must we beware of others?

First, because we are easily carried away with Viviruus legibus non exemplis,
we should live by laws not by examples, but we are more ready to follow
examples then precepts: And therefore we must beware of those who go about to
seduce us.

Secondly, naturally we are Athenians, and desire Acts 17.21. and Ephesians. 4.14.
And therefore we had need be so much the more wary of all those who by
novelties and strange doctrines go about to mislead us.

Thirdly, false Prophets (like the devil) can Cor. 11.13.) and therefore there
is great need that we should be very wary of them.

. 2. Of false Prophets.

Acts 20.29. and 1. Tim. 4.1. and 2. Pet. 2.1. and 3.3. Jude 4.18. verses.

From whence comes it, that the Church is never

First, from the malice of Satan, who is Gods Revel. 2.9.) And will sow tares,
where God sowes corn.

Secondly, this comes from the justice of God; Thessal. 2.11. and 1 King. 22.
They would not believe the Lords Prophet, and therefore a lying spirit in the
mouth of their false prophets deceives them.

Thirdly, from the wisdom of God: who permits Cor. 11.19.

How many sorts of false prophets are there?

Timeth. 4.1. and 2. Peter 2.1.

Secondly, ignorant persons, who desire to be Timoth. 1.7. And so both deceive
others, and are also deceived themselves, 2 Timoth. 3.13.

Thirdly, proud, as Diotrephes, who loved the John.

Fourthly, contentious; Some (says Saint Paul) Philip. 1.15.16.

Fifthly, covetous; who go about to deceive for Romans 16.17.18.

Sixthly, hypocritical, as follows afterward.





Elias in regard of his attire is called an hairy man, 2 King 1.8. and John
Baptist Math. 3.4. And the false Prophets did counterfeit the true in their
attire for this end, that they might more easily deceive the people: as Zachar.
13.4. the Lord says of them they shall wear a rough garment to deceive; for
when they wore such course attire, made either of sheep skins, or sheep
wool, wherewith the true Prophets were usually clothed; they sought hereby to
persuade the people, that they had the hearts of the true Prophets, when as
indeed they were full fraught with damnable errors. Now Christ's meaning in
this allusion is to show that false Prophets have plausible pretenses for their
damnable doctrine, and therefore are the more dangerous. Perkins. S.

Second, the true meaning of these words is this,

1. They shall saine Revelations, as Mahomet, David Georgius, the Anabaptists,
and Basileans did.

2. They shall cite Scripture for their opinions, but corrupt it, as the devil
did, Math. 4.

3. They shall boast of miracles, as the Egyptians did in time past, and the
Jesuits at this day Read Deuteronomy. 13.1.2. and 2. These. 2.9.
.

4. They shall have an outward show of holiness and sanctity; as Socinus had
in Polinia, and the Jesuits where they come. This kind of garment Paul calls
hypocrisy. 1 Timoth, 4.2. 2 Timothy 3.5.
.

5. They shall brag of succession, as the Papists do; And thus come clothed
in sheep skins.

. 4. But inwardly, are ravening wolves.

Christ in those words shows, that there are many Ministers devour, tear,
and destroy, but feed not. Acts 20.28.29.


Why are they called Wolves?

First, for their covetousness, because they are Romans 16.17.

Secondly, for their cruelty; because they labor Acts 20.29.

How may they be known?

First, by their pride; they exalt themselves: but

Secondly, by their covetousness, they seek

Thirdly, by their carnalitie, they are so much

Fourthly, by their entrance. Ierem. 23. coming Romans 10. and 2. Timoth. 3.6.

Fifthly, by their doctrine, if it be either erroneous,

Sixthly, by their endeavor, or end; if they labor Acts 20.30. verse 16.

. 1. Ye^ shall know them by their fruits.

What is the meaning of these words?

Christ means not so much the fruit of their lives (for that in outward
appearance,

What are the fruits of true doctrine?

The fruits are many;

The Papists here object, Churches, bring forth evil fruits: Many Protestants
live wicked lives.







First, we affirm, that the impuritie of life which is in some Protestants,
proceeds not from the doctrine of our Church; and we confirm it thus.

1. Because we daily inculcate into the ears of our people those Apostolical
precepts, and assertions; Those who are in Christ Jesus have crucified the
flesh, with the affections, and Lusts; Galath. 5. And, those who hope to be
saved by Christ must purge themselves. 1 John 3. And that they must put off the
old man, and put on the new. Roman. 13.12.13. Yea follow after holiness,
because without this none can be saved. This our Church teaches; and this many
(although not all) in our Church practice.

2. Because by the doctrine, and discipline of our Church, and Land, those who
will not obey but will be wicked, are punished.

Secondly, concerning the Papists we say; that great is the security,
impiety, and profaneness, in the Papacy and Church of Rome; and that it
proceeds from and is occasioned by the doctrine and tenants of the Church: we
prove it thus.

First, they occasion impuritie; while they command all their Priests to
remain unmarried, when scarce either one or other of them has the gift of
continency; And so necessarily follows fornications, adultery, Sodomy, and
all manner of uncleanness, among their Friars, Monks, Nuns, Priests and
Jesuits.

Secondly, they teach perfidiousnesse, and truce-breaking: that neither word,
promise, or oath is to be kept with those who are not Papists as they are,
Guicciardinus, De jure belli, lib. 3. ca. 19. page 662.

3. They teach tyranny; when they arm Kings against the faithful; provoking
the^ to kill those who never were convicted either of heresy or blasphemy. Mr.
Fox in his Monuments, and those histories which write of the Spanish
Inquisition give abundant examples hereof.

4. They teach Idolatry, while directly they command prayers to be made to
the Virgin Mary, and to the rest of the Saints; and with tooth and nail
maintain such Idolatry to be lawful. Greg. de Valent. de Idol. lib. 2. cap. 7.

5. They teach rebellion and treason; while they suggest unto their hearers the
odiousness of a lawful Magistracy; and as it were arm them with fire and
sword, to burn up, murder, or depose lawful Christian Kings; as they have
done more then once in France; and attempted often in England. And therefore by
these fruits of their Doctrine they are easily to be discerned.

How many sorts and kinds of fruit are there?

First, fruits are either good (whereof by and by) or evil.

Secondly, evil fruits seem here expr^sly to be

1. Thorns; these are of evil juice; and signify Heretics.

2. Thistles; these are vain, light, and chaffie, signifying those who swell,
and are puffed up with vain glory.

3. Corrupt trees, whom a putrified heart has corrupted, both in -- Teaching
and Living. But the words are not to be wrested.

Thirdly, there is indeed a fruit, namely,

1. Dogmatum, of Opinions, which is either,

1. Against God; and that either,

First, against the persons, and Trinity; as the Arrians, and Vorstius held
diverse things.

Secondly, or against salvation by grace in Christ. Or,

Thirdly, against the glory of God; and that either by the invocation or
adoration of the creatures. Or,

2. Against his word, and the dignity thereof; as the Papists who hold it
imperfect, and insufficient unto salvation, without humane or Ecclesiastical
traditions.

3. Or against the zealous profession of religion: as many do, who holds all
those nice, and foolish people, who are careful to fulfill all righteousness,
and make conscience of committing the least sin.

2. Vitae of life; as those Preachers whose lives and conversations are
scandalous.

. 2. Do (...) gather grapes of thorns?

Whether are these words to be understood of

First, it seems general, because Saint Luke adds them to the prohibition of
hypocritical judgment. Luke 6.42.43.

Secondly, Calvin thinks them to belong to false Luke does there conjoine
things which are disjoined and separated in time.

Thirdly, I conceive the words speak of both:

1. Christ's scope is to admonish us of false prophets. And,

2. His admonition is urged from a general rule. And,

3. That he concludes generally, verse 20.

Although I believe (as I said even now) that these words may be taken both
generally and particularly, yet in this verse I will only handle them as
spoken to false teachers.

What Prophets does our Savior here speak of?

First, a Prophet properly signifies one who foretells

Secondly, a Prophet sometimes signifies one who Hulda was called a prophetess.

Thirdly, a prophet sometimes signifies him, who Luke 24.27.

Fourthly, and lastly, a prophet signifies one who teaches Christ (the end of
the Prophets) in the Ministry Paul says, He that professes speaks unto
men to edification, and exhortation, and comfort. 1 Corinthians. 14.3. And thus the
word is taken in this place.





First, there are good prophets; whereof two things are predicated, namely,

1. That he fructifies in good fruit. And,

2. That he cannot fructify in evil fruit. Whereby is taught by our Savior,
to wit, That he is not to be esteemed a good Minister, who does not show and
shine forth in good works: for it is required of a Minister that he should be
faithful, etc. 1 Cor. 4.2.
read 1 Corinthians. 9.15. and 2 Timothy 4.2. And therefore they must be
extraordinary careful of two things, to wit,

1. Of their doctrine; that they teach, truly, prudently, fitly, holily, and
diligently. And,

2. Of their lives: wherein two things are to be regarded, namely,

First, negatively they must not so live that they disgrace either the
profession of religion, or that high calling whereunto they are called. Romans
2.24.

Secondly, affirmatively, they must so shine in good works, that God may be
glorified in them, and by them. Matthew. 5.16.

Secondly, there are evil prophets; In whom two things are pointed out, to wit,

1. That they are thorns, and thistles, and corrupt trees:







Hebr. 6.8. as follows by and by, verse 19.

2. That false prophets cannot bring forth good fruits.



First, sometimes they speak from the heart, and freely; and then they speak
as they are, that is, evilly, as they are evil. If,

1. They be heretical or schismatic. Or,

2. If they be impure, and given unto the world. Or,

3. If they be ignorant of Christ. Or,

4. If they be barren fields void of all grace; And speak as they think;
then without doubt they must needs speak coldly, and amiss.

Caypha^ prophesied when he was High Priest; and Saul, when he was amongst
the Prophets.

Whether can false teach^ is truly convert a^y

First, it is not safe to answer negatively, and say

1. There is a dogmati^^^ I knowledge of Christ which they may have, although
they have not the practical, which is mentioned. John 17.3. This is life
eternal to know thee, and hi^^ whom thou have sent Jesus Christ.

2. The power of the Word does depend upon the ordinance of God whose^ ^s it,
and not upon the worthiness of the man who brings it. Hence Paul seems to
intimate that a man may preach profitably unto others, and yet not to him
self: 1 Corinthians. 9.27. Yea God sometimes works with evil ^o^les, and by bad
means or instruments; as we see he sent his word by Balaam, and directed
Caiphas to speak true; yea Satan himself confesses Christ. An evil King
may govern well, and a false teacher save others and yet damn himself; as
they did who built Noah's Arc.

3. The power of regenerating, is not in man but in the Word ( James 1.18.) the
spirit aplying it to the soul, 1 Cor. 3.6.

4. If an evil teacher may not convert, and benefit others, then why are we
commanded by Christ to hear such. All therefore whatsoever they bid you
observe, that observe an^ do Matthew. 23.3.
.

Secondly, such certainly, cannot preach zealously, with a true affection, and
good heart; but either

. 3. Neither figs of this^^es.

Our Savior shows two things in these words, namely.

First, if the tree be bad, the fruit cannot be good; if the tree be a Thistle,
the fruit cannot be Figs; of this something has been spoken, and more
remains to be spoken verse 18.

Secondly, if the fruit be good, we must not judge the tree to be bad: if the
fruit be figs we must not judge the tree to be a Thistle: For men do not
gather figgs of Thistles.

Why are not they to be suspected or judged, who

First, because we should imitate our God; now

Secondly, because none are rashly to be judged John 7, 51. James 4.11.

Thirdly, because judgment belongs unto God, Corinth. 4.5. And therefore this
is to take the sword out of Gods hands, which is dangerous unto any, and a
thing full of peril. Romans 14.4.10.13.

Fourthly, because charity is not suspicious, 1 Cor.

Fifthly, because the heart is unsearcheable, Ierem.

Sixthly, they who bring forth good fruit are not to this verse, and verse 20.
ye shall know them by their fruits; where our Savior would have us to leave
the heart unto God, and where we see good fruits, there to judge the heart,
and tree, to be good also.



Jobs friends: And thus do both Jews and Gentiles, Luke 13.2. Acts 28.4.

Matthew. 10.25. and 12.24. Luke 7.34.

John 9.16.

Romans 1. last verse, and 2.1.

Verse 17. Even so every good tree brings forth good fruit: but a corrupt
tree brings forth evil fruit.

Our Savior speaking here of the regenerate and unregenerate man, may move
this question,



Gal. 5.15.25. Philip. 1.27.

What trees are there in the Church which thus fructify not?

First, hypocrites, who have only a form of Timoth. 3.5.) drawing near unto
Matthew. 15.9.

Secondly, Back-sliders, who start aside like broken Read, Gal. 3.3. Revel.
2.5.

Do the regenerate then not sin at all?

First, certainly they sin, 1 John 1.8. And therefore

Secondly, but they walk not in the ways of

Verse 18.

. 1. A good tree cannot bring forth evil

Saint Hierome (s. Galath. 5.) thinks this place is not spoken of men, but of
the fruits of the flesh, and Spirit.

Two things are here directly pointed at, namely,

First, that a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit. N.

Secondly, that an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit.. 2.

N. First make the tree good, and then the fruit cannot be evil; For a good
tree cannot bring forth evil fruit.

Who is a good man, or a good ^ee? does not Matthew. 19.17.

Goodness is either Abusive; and that either by Or The phrase or propriety of
speech; when goodness is taken for beauty, Genes. 6.2. 1. Samuel. 9.2. 2 Pet.
2.21.
or propernesse of person; The sons of God saw the daughters of men that they
were good (so the Latin has it) that is, beautiful: So Saul was a choice
young man, and a goodly; that is, a very personable and proper man. Or,
Comparison; Thus S. Paul says; That it had been good for those who relapsed,
if they had never known the ways of God. Now it is not so simply good for a
man to be ignorant of the ways of God, but comparatively; he had better not
have known them at all, then after they have known them to forsake them. We
have the like speech used Proverb. 17.1. and 21.9.19.
True; and this is either Natural; which is either Absolute; thus man in his
first creation was very good. Or, Genes. 1.31.
Respective; thus a thing is called naturally good, when it is profitable, as
Genesis 49.15. Exodus 18.17. Mark 9.50.
Spiritual which consists either in Th ngs: thus all virtues, and graces of the
holy Spirit are called good. Or, Persons: which goodness is either Infinite, and
is in God alone. Mark 10.18. Finite, in the Church Triumphant. Respective,
which is either in Some one singularly; Far a good man some would even dare to
dye; not for every good man; but for some one singularly good both in himself,
and unto others. All the faithful generally: A good man (that is every good
man) brings forth good things: And so the word signifies in this place.






Matthew. 3.8. and 13.23 Cant. 2.11. and Col. 1.9.10. and 2.6. and Romans 6.4. and
7.4.



Twofold, exuere, induere; to put off the old man, Romans 13.12. Ephesians. 4.17.24.
more particularly the good fruits of a good tree are either,

First, Negative, to abstain from sin, and whatsoever is evil. Romans
6.12.14. Ephesians. 5.11.

Why must the regenerate abstain from all sin?

First, because sin is a leaven; and will pollute the whole man, 1. Cor. 5.7.

Ephesians. 4.30.

Colos. 4.5. and 1 Thessal. 4.12.

Secondly, Affirmative, to abound in every good work, and to be conversant
and frequent in every good duty; And of these the present text speaks.



Matthew. 25.18. The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
withal: 1 Cor. 12.7.
vessels are made that they may hold liquor, fruit trees are planted not for
show, but to bring forth fruit; and we are regenerated that we might be
holy. God plants, and prunes, and digs, that we might fructify, Matthew.
21.34. etc. And therefore we must not be slothful, and negative Christians (
James 1.23.) But industrious, remembering that God made man for labor, not for
lazines and created him not for speculation only, but for practice; The Lord

1. Enlightens the mind and the understanding. And,

2. Moves, and persuades the affections. And,

3. Imprints faith in our hearts by his holy Spirit. Romans 8.16. and 1 John
^.10. And,

4. Gives graces and good habits unto us, and al for this end, that we might
reduce all into act, and bring forth good fruits. And therefore we must not
frustrate his expectation.

1 Peter. 2.1.
.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is fruitful ( Gal. 5.21. Ephesians. 5.9.) and therefore
if we desire to approve our selves to be guided and directed thereby, we must
be fruitful also.

Matthew. 5.16. John 15.8. Phil. 1.11.

Titus 2.7. and 3.8. and 1 Pet. 2.12. and 3.1.

Prove. 11.30. Romans 6.22.

John 4.36. Romans 1.13. Hebr. 13.17.

In what works must we labor to abound?

We must labor to abound in these two things,

First, in Internal desire, love and fervor of the heart, toward every thing
that is good; we must labor to increase daily in the love of every good
thing, and in zeal, and in uprightness, and in sincerity of heart.

Secondly, in External actions; that is, both,

1. In an Abstinence from all evil works. And,

2. In obedience unto that which is good: And herein three things are to be
observed, namely,

First, we must obey every kind of good work: whether belonging to the first
or second table.

Secondly, we must obey every good work in a frequent custom, and assiduous,
and daily life.

Thirdly, we must obey the Lord perseverantly, continuing in his service unto
the end: We must not serve the Lord with our hearts only, (as some say they
do) and not with our bodies; neither with our bodies only, (as many do) and
not with our hearts; but we must labor to be trees bearing good fruit both
in bodies and souls. We must not abstain from sin only (as many do) and
do no good: but we must cease to do evil, and learn to do well. We must
not do some sorts of good works only, or sometimes by aguish fits, or begin
in the Spirit, and end in the flesh; but we must ensue after whatsoever is
good, and that through the whole course of our life.

. 2. Neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good

Our Savior expressly here teaches, Matthew. 12.34. and 2 Pet. 2.14. A
Gentleman perceiving that he could not thrive in his own country Piacenza,
went to Florence to live there, hoping to find that place more prosperous unto
him; and being there he figured for his devise a Peach-tree laden with fruit,
which in the proper soil, wherein it first springs, yields forth poisoned
and unpleasant increase, but being transplanted in some farther Coast becomes
wholesome and fruitful: his Posie was Translata proficit arbos. We are just
like this Peach-tree, for so long as we are in our natural condition we can
bring forth no good fruit; but if we once were transplanted and engrafted into
Christ then we should abound.

How does it appear, that the evil tree can

First, their fountain is corrupted; sin wholly Genes. 6.5. As the Aethiope
cannot change his color, no more can man of himself his nature. And therefore
so long as he is natural he is not able to bring forth good fruit.

Secondly, it appears further thus; If the remainders Romans 7.23.) then much
more the wicked must be wholly subdued, seeing that concupiscence and sin in
them is in his full strength and vigor, not wounded, or weakened at all.

Thirdly, natural men are not sensible of sin, but are past feeling, Ephesians.
4.19. and 1 Timothy 4.2. And therefore they do not cease to sin.





First, Original, which was derived unto us from Adam: and this is natural,
and cannot be laid aside; but sticks to our natures, and that continually so
long as we live.

Secondly, actual, when we pollute our selves by some sins, 2 Corinthians. 11.3.
and 2 Peter 2.12. And so long as we are natural we cannot cease thus daily to
pollute our selves.



1. Condemn, and dislike the sins of other men. 2. Blame, and confess his
own sins. Yea, 3. Leave diverse sins for ever; and sin publicly more
seldom.




1. They cannot devote themselves wholly unto the Lord, both in soul and body,
1 Cor. 6.20.

2. They cannot please God in any thing they do; because without faith (which
they are without) they cannot please God, Hebr. 11.6.





Cor: 2.14.



1. We cannot possibly restrain or bridle our selves from sin; Neither,

2. Prick and spur our hearts forward unto that which is good, Ierem. 42.1.
and 43.2. and 44.16.





We neither know First, where we are, or what we are. Nor, Secondly, our danger
wherein we are. Nor, Thirdly, see how we walk; whether right or wrong. Nor,
Fourthly, can discern between good and evil; or know what things are truly
sweet, good precious, or profitable for us. And therefore with Pharaoh we
should take no rest until this palpable Egyptian darkness be removed.






Fourthly, because so long as we are natural, we In Carnali est ig^^
avaritiae, fator Luxuriae, tene brae ignorantiae, vermis conscientiae, sitis
concupiscent^ae. In the natural and carnal man there is the fire of avarice,
the filth of luxury, the darkness of ignorance, August. Verse 19.
the worm of conscience, and the hunger and thirst of concupiscence.

Verse 19. Every tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn down, and
cast into the fire.

This commination or judgment may either be referred to false Prophets in
particular. O. Or, to all

O. First, Ierem. 14.14.15. and 23.1.2. and Ezech. 13.8.9. and 34.10. and 2
Peter 2.2.3.

Why must all false prophets be destroyed?

First, because they are unsavourie salt, Matthew. 5.13.

Secondly, because they go about to bring destruction Ezech. 3.17. and 33.7.)
Then much more those who sow cushions under their elbows: If those who sing
peace unto their people, lulling them asleep in a carnal security, be
condemned already, then much more those who go about to seduce their flocks.

Thirdly, God is jealous over his sheep; and therefore he shall not go
unpunished that goes about to cause the^ to err from the shepherd of their
souls.

We distinguishing between the law and the Gospel, among other things say
that they differ herein. That the law engenders terror and fear; the Gospel
peace; Bellarmine de ^^s this difference, and thus bends his force to
overthrow it. Every tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn down,
etc. And so the Apostle says, the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against
all ungodliness, Romans 1.

The Gospel then reveals the wrath of God; and consequently works fear.
Bellarm. de justify. Lib. 4. cap. 2.


First, a^ whatsoever is contained in the Old Testament,

Secondly, the places alleged do prove only, Peter Acts. 2. and 3. And the
rest of the Apostles in their sermons tempered the threatenings of the Law, and
the comforts of the Gospel together; by the one drawing the people to
repentance, by the other ministering hope of remission of sins; the same
course ought the Ministers of the Gospel to take in teaching the people now;
first in humbling them by the Law, and then comforting them by the Gospel; but
all this shows only a joining of the Law and the Gospel in use, not in
nature or property.

per accidens, not of it self, but accidentally and improperly; as Saint Paul
says, the Gospel is the savor both of life unto life, and of death unto
death. 2 Corinthians. 2.16. That is, properly and of it self it works unto life,
but not so unto death, for that is not the proper effect of the Gospel, but is
only caused by the wilful contemners, and disobedient hearers of the Gospel;
by whose perverse nature, the sweetness thereof is turned to bitterness. So
then to the faithful and believers, the Gospel brings comfort and peace;
and if it do not so unto others, the fault is in themselves; But the law
brought terror to all, even to the righteous; for Moses trembled and quaked at
the delivering of the Law. Hebr. 12.21. Willet Synopsis fol. 101 3.


P. Secondly, this threatening may be referred unto all; that every tree which
bears not good

We have here two things to be considered of: 1. The Persons Judged. 2. The
Judgment.

Every tree.

Omnis arbor, our Savior teaches, That none of those shall escape judgment
whatsoever they are, whom God finds guilty; Every man shall be judged by God
at the last, who will give to every one according to his works, 2 Cor. 5.10.
and cast all that are guilty into hell. Psalm. 9.17.
Many are the examples which we have to prove this truth, that none shall
escape who are but corrupt and fruitless trees; namely,

First, he spared not Kings, as we see in Ahab, Saul, Balthazar, and Herod.
Neither,

Secondly, Prophets, as we see in Balaam, and 850. of Baals priests. Neither,

Thirdly, his most dear and beloved people; as we see in Ephraim and Judah.
Hos. 14.1. Isa. 5. Neither,

Fourthly, Apostles as we see in Judas. For the Lord is no respecter of
persons, but when all shall stand before him, will deal justly with all in
judgment, neither respecting the person of the poor, nor of the rich.

Every tree that brings not forth good fruit.





First, there are some trees that bear obnoxious, hurtful, and poisonous
fruit.

Secondly, some that bears only leaves, and no fruit at all.

Thirdly, some trees bear idle, vain, and unprofitable fruit: Now these seem
to be the best because they endeavor to bring forth fruit; but because their
fruit is not good and profitable, they are therefore destroyed also. Our Savior
hereby teaching us,

That none can be secure from the wrath and vengeance of God, Matthew. 3.10. etc.
Act. 2.38. and 3.19. and Luke 13.6. and Isa. 5.5. and John 15.1.2. and Luke 3.8.

Why shall none escape the anger of the Lord, but

First, because a tree is good for nothing else, but Ezech. 15. This is spoken
of the vine.

Secondly, because Gods expectation is for fruit, Matthew. 21.19.

Thirdly, God expects fruit, and that good fruit,

1. Some bear evil fruit; as the wild Olive, and the wild vine. These shall
presently be cut down, and cast into the fire. Jsa. 5.5. etc. Heb. 6.8.

2. Some bear no fruit; these are spared a time to see if they will bear, but
if not, at length they are cut down also and thrown to the fire. Luke 13.6.

3. Some bear good fruit, but it is but little, and that little in part
rotten; And these are pruned, and dug about, and manured, that they may
bring forth better fruit, and more plentiful. John 15.2. And therefore we
should examine whether we be of this number or not.

How may we know whether God will approve

By these four signs, namely,

First, examine thy estate and condition wherein thou art: say thus unto thy
self: If God should now call me to give account of my steward-ship, what
should I say? what should I do? should I show my God my gold that I have
heaped up together? or my pleasure that I have so greedily followed? or my land
which I possess? what do I daily? do I make it my chiefest care to glorify
my God? do I think that day lost (and grieve for the loss thereof) wherein I
do not either bring some glory unto my God? or some good unto my own soul?
or some benefit unto my brethren? Thus let us examine what we do daily, and
what our actions are, if the Lord should call us to account.

Secondly, examine thy bypast zeal; if it have not vanished in leaves, and
vain shows; has not thy zeal been more for things circumstantiall and
rituall, then for substantial and real? or more against an indifferent
ceremony, then a direct sin?

Thirdly, examine whether thy obedience, and fruits have increased, as thy
knowledge did increase? or whether thou were as careful to perform thy
duty, as to know it?

Fourthly, examine thy present religion; whether it lead thee unto constancy
and increase in holiness and good works, that so thou may be ripe unto
harvest? or whether it make thee remiss or careless? Certainly, if we be
careful over our ways and consider well how we spend our time; If we be
truly zealous for the glory of God, according to knowledge; If we labor
daily to increase in knowledge, for this end that we might be bettered in
practice: And lastly, if we strive daily to add one measure and degree of
grace unto another, casting that behind us which we have attained, and
striving hard unto the mark; Then we may be comfortably assured, that the Lord
will look upon us as good trees, and accept our obedience as sanctified fruit.

It shall be hewne down:

These words may be considered either generally.

Jude 5. Psalm 50.21. and 62.12. and 96.13. and Matthew. 16.27. Acts 17.31. Romans
2.2.6.16. and 1 Pet. 1.17. Revelat. 22.12. Deuter. 10.17. Besides these places
we may recoll^ct these examples; namely,

1. Of the Angels who kept not their first stations. 2 Pet. 2.4. etc.

2. Of the old world, after 120. years threatening: 1 Pet. 3.20.

3. Of Sodom (after Lot was departed) and the other four Cities there, Genesis
19.

4. Of the Israelites, whom the Lord preserved in, and delivered from Egypt,
and yet afterward destroyed when they sinned against him, Jude 5.

5. Of Balthazar, who was punished at length, although long spared, Daniel 5.

6. O Babylon, and Antichrist; who although God has suffered already long, and
we know not how long he may yet suffer; yet this we know, that at length they
shall be destroyed. Revel. 18.7. etc.

Why will the Lord punish the wicked at the last,

First, because otherwise he should not be just, Romans 3.5.6. hence it is
said, that Mercy and Truth are met together, righteousness and peace have
kissed each other: Because the time will come when he will judge the sons of
men with justice and truth; as here he spares and forbeares, in mercy: for
otherwise how could his justice appear?

Secondly, because God has decreed, and ordained Adam, either by their
conversion, or by their confusion; And therefore it is just that those who will
not glorify him on earth by a holy life, and consequently in heaven by a happy,
should glorify him in hell by a wretched and miserable. Read, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.8.
and 2.12.



who cry peace, peace, while sudden destruction hangs over their head. 1 Thessalonians. 5.3. who make a covenant with hell, and are at an agreement with death
Esa. 28.15. But let us not deceive our selves, for what we sow such shall we
reap. Gal. 6.7. and 1 Cor. 6.9.

Extrem^ gandii luctus occupat. The end of that mirth is heaviness, Prove.
14.13.

Chrysostom upon this verse elegantly resembles us to Children; and that in
many regards; viz.

1. They build houses of sticks, and slates, and cards, and the like; making
also feasts in them: but neither will their houses keep them warm, nor all
their dainties and provision, which they think curious, fill their bellies.
Thus we lay out our money upon that which is not bread, and spend our labor
and pains for that which profits not. Isa. 55.2.

2. They wail and mourn as though they were quite undone if their houses be
thrown down, or their unsavory provision broken and defaced; and we laugh
at their folly, and yet indeed are the worse children, and most foolish of the
twain; For we mourn as much for the loss and want of some temporal things,
which we may live well enough without, and which comes as far short of
spiritual graces, as childrens houses do of the most sumptuous and stately
Palaces.

3. They will do any thing rather then learn; they had much rather do some
painful work, then go to their books: So we think the word of God a hard
saying, yea although it be that one thing which is necessary. Luke 10.41. yet
we can take more delight in hearing vain, and unprofitable tales, or books
read or told unto us; then we can do in hearing or reading, or meditating upon
the word of God.

4. They please themselves a long time in these vanities, but at length they
profit them nothing; so we delight our selves in the things of this world, and
trifle away our time for the trash thereof, which profits us nothing ( Proverb.
10.2.) neither can deliver or preserve us in the day of wrath. Proverb. 11.4.

5. They repent them afterward of their lost time; crying out daily, Oh mihi
praeteritos referat si Jupiter annos; If their days were to begin again,
they would spend them better then they had done. S^ will we (when it is too
late) wish that our lives were to begin again, that we might work out the
work of our salvation with fear and trembling.

6. The only difference between us and children is, that their vanities end
in jest, ours in earnest, theirs tend unto play, but ours unto perdition: For,
we shall be cut down.

R. Secondly, these words, shall be cut down,

What is meant by this phrase of cutting down?

It may signify two things, to wit,

First, a cutting off from this life. S.

Secondly, a cutting off from Christ, heaven and

S. First, by hewing down is meant a cutting off from this life; as if our
Savior would say, every tree which brings not forth good fruit, shall be
cut down before his time. Or, The life of the wicked shall be shortened. Read
for the proof hereof. Job 21.21. and 15.32.33. Psalm. 55.24. Pro. 14.11. and
15.27. and Psalm 37.20. etc. and 73.18. etc. Ioh. 5.3. etc.

Why shall the days of wicked men be shortened

Exodus 20.12. Deuteronomy. 25.15. and 1 King. 3.14. Prove. 3.16. and 9.11. and 10.27.
and 28.16. Psalm. 91.16. and 128.6.7.

Job 4.8.) but iniquity is a kind of grain; and therefore he who sowes
iniquity reapes the fruits of the same, Job 31.12. Galath. 6.7.



1. If God only should punish wicked men in the world to come, then this
present world would not see his judgments or justice; which is necessary
sometimes to be. And hence therefore,

2. He lets them flourish for a time, and then suddenly cuts them down (
Psalm 37.20. and 73.18. and 92.7.) That the godly may see it, and seeing it,
say, verily there is a God that judges in the earth. Psalm 58.11.



First, sometimes he cuts them off in just vengeance, and anger. Thus he hewed
down the Spies, Numb 14.37. and Pharaoh. Exodus 10. and Jeroboam. 1. King.
14.12 and Baasha. 1 King 16.3. and Ahab. 21.21. and Achan. Josh. 7. and
Hananiah. Ierem. 28.16 Secondly, sometimes he cuts them off by some sudden
casualtie; as the Prince who was trodden under foot, ^ King. 7.17. Thus many
have been taken away by some accident in their drunkenness, and duels, and
when they have been blaspheming, and the like. Thirdly, sometimes God shortneth
their days by letting them fall into some sickness or disease; and thus often
drunkards take surfeits, and unclean persons impure and loathsome diseases
which bring them to their end, Prove. 23.29. Fourthly, sometimes the Lord
suffers them to be their own executioners, and to cut the thread of their own
lives. And thus he did with Judas and Achitophel.






First, Idolatry: thus he cut off Nadab and Abihu. Levitic. 10.2. and Oza, or
Vzza. 2 Samuel 6.7.

Secondly, Blasphemy: thus two and forty children were sudde^ly destroyed for
blaspheming of the Lords Prophet. 2 King. 2.24. And a girl of twelve years
old here in England, mentioned by M. Fox. For he is a swift witness against
such. Malach. 3.5

Thirdly, Treason; thus Achitophel came to an untimely end. 2 Samuel. 17.23.
and Judas. Matthew. 27.5.

Fourthly, Persecution of the godly; thus Pharaoh and Haman were taken quickly
away for their malice and rage against the people of God.

Fifthly, Perfidiousnesse, unfaithfulness, or false dealing; thus Senacherib
came to an untimely end; And often God l^ts men fall into the net that
themselves have laid.

Sixthly, Lust; this brought Sampson into the Philistines hands; and brings
many daily into filthy loathsome, and incurable diseases, and sudden death.

Seventhly, Drunkenness; many have come to their end, by some sudden mischance
in their drunkenness.

Eighthly, Desperation; the conscience oppressed with the burden of sin,
does often find out this lamentable remedy, of murder as a means to put an
end to that torture; which indeed does put but a beginning to it; as we see in
Judas. Matthew. 27.3.5. And thus we have seen how this phrase of hewing down,
may signify a shortning of this temporal life which we live on earth.

Secondly, this phrase may signify a cutting off from Christ, heav^n, and all
hope of mercy or felicity: Certainly, it may mean

1. A c^^^ing off from all hope of heaven and salvation. And,

2. A c^^tting off from Christ as he is offered in the word. But.

3. Not a cutting off from Christ himself; because they were never grafted
into him. 1 John 2.19. But this coming to be considered of in the next
section, I here omit it.

. 4. And cast into the fire.

What is the meaning of these words?

By this phrase is signified eternal punishment;

How does it appear that the Punishment prepared

First, it appears by the language of the holy The fire of hell, Matthew. 5.22.
sometimes, a fire that cannot be quenched or extinguished. Matthew. 3.12.
sometimes an eternal fire. Matthew. 18.8. and 25.41. sometimes a worm that
never dies, and a fire that never goes out. Mark 9.43.44. Sometim^s the
Scripture tells us what is there, that we might the better conceive of the
insufferablenesse of the torment: In hell there is weeping, and wayling, and
gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 13.42.50. In hell there is fire and brimstone. Apoc.
19.20. In hell there is (negatively) no rest. Revelat. 14.10. but
(affirmatively) torments day and night. Revel. 20.10.

Secondly, it appears by the place. Hell is a place

Thirdly, it is clear from the persons that are Depart hence I know you not.
Oh how miserable is the condition of those poor souls whom God will not own,
whom God does not pity, but rather rejoice and laugh at their destruction.
Prove. 1.24.



1. Our eternal enemy, and a foe never to be reconciled.

2. An enemy that excels, and exceeds in envy, and malice.

3. A foe powerful, and able to inflict unspeakable torments.

4. An enemy who has no other comfort then this, that he has copartners in
his misery. And therefore he will make them as miserable as may be.



1. Light, to comfort the eye. Nor,

2. A drop of water to cool the tip of the tongue; Nor,

3. Any confidence or courage to support the heart.



1. There shall be most sharp and unsupportable tortures exercised upon the
body.

2. The heart shall be wholly dejected through sorrow, wholly devoted unto
sorrow, and wholly devoured, and consumed by, and with sorrow.

3. The conscience shall for ever presage terrible things. And therefore the
torments of hell must needs be exquisite, that thus are extended, both to body,
soul and conscience.

sine intervallo without any intermission or interruption: The Papists feign
some Lady days to be observed in hell, when the souls play, or make holy
day: but this is but an idle dream, for (as was showed before from the
Scripture) there is there no rest, nor ease, nor cessation of torments. Yea
these torments shall be eternal (Semper) and endured for ever and ever; for
neither the torments, nor the tormentor, nor the tormented, shall ever be
consumed, or ended, but shall endure and last for ever. Semper moribundus,
nunquam mortuus, robore vacuus, sensu plenus, ut quod far non possis, semper
feras in aeternum. In hell men shall be ever a dying, but never be dead; ever
weak and void of strength, but full of sense of smart; and that which they
can never suffer with any patience they must ever suffer with insufferable
pain.

(Ergo, similes, ex se dignoscuntur mutuo. Stapleton.) And therefore the
knowledge of the one will help us to the understanding of the other. Now, eye
has not seen, nor care heard, nor ever entered it into the heart of man once
to imagine, the joys that God in mercy has prepared in heaven for the
righteous man, 1 Corinthians. 2.9. And on the contrary; eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, nor ever entered it into the heart of man once to conceive the
torments that God has in his just anger and indignation prepared in hell for
the wicked and ungodly man.

Ninthly, this appears from the names given unto vessels of mercy; and
therefore they shall be filled full of all joy and felicity; the wicked are
called vessels of anger; Romans 9.22.23.
and therefore they shall be filled to the brimme with anguish and sorrow. To
the righteous, in heaven shall be given good measure, pressed down, shaken
together, and running over Luke 6.38.
of joy and happiness. And,

To the wicked shall be given in hell, great measure, pressed down, shaken
together, and running over, of pain and torments. And therefore of all griefs
this is the greatest.

Tenthly, the torment of hell is the consummation,

Lastly, a mortal body is not capable of such torments;

Where is hell?

Certainly,

Whether is this fire of hell a material fire or not?

Certainly, as the joys of heaven,

What are these insufferable torments which

First, the Monks dispute, and affirm much of

Secondly, the holy Scriptures show forth unto us

Namely First, of sense, to wit sorrows, either in -- Body, which are
signified, or expressed by fire. V. Soul, which are signified or expressed by
gnashing of teeth. W.
Secondly, of loss, to wit, an excluding, and extruding out of heaven, never
to have any place, or portion, or inheritance therein. X.


V. First, there is Poena sensus, the punishment of sense which is first, Dolor
corporis, the pain and anguish of the body; I cannot better express, nor more
fully illustrate this torment then thus:

1. Let us meditate and remember the most grievous pains, and tortures, and
sicknesses, the mortal body of man is subject unto, whether headache or
toothache, or collicke, or stone, or gout, or whatsoever. Then,

2. Let us suppose all these to be in one man, at once, and that in extreme
manner. Then,

3. Remember that the least pain and torment which thou shall suffer in thy
body in hell will be greater, then the greatest, yea then all these. And,

4. Meditate upon the eternity of these torments, and remember that thy body
must not be subject unto them only for ten, or twenty, or thirty, or forty,
or fifty years, but for ever and ever, world without end.

Dolor animae, the internal pain and anguish of the soul, which far
exceeds the former torments which are inflicted upon the body. Here three
things are to be ruminated upon, namely.

1. In the beginning there is a horrible expectation of some unsupportable
misery; At the day of judgment the heart will presage such terrible things,
that it will cry to the mountains and to the hills, to cover it from the
dreadful face of the irefull Judge. Read Psalm 50.2. Isa. 13.9. Joel. 2.2.
Abac. 3.9.10.16. For to the wicked.

First, the face of God is terrible; the poor soul sees, that it is a
fearful thing to fall into his hands Hebr. 10.31.
because he is a consuming fire Hebr. 12, 29.
.

Secondly, hence the frighted soul will cry, Oh where shall J hide me from
the face of this angry God. If Balthazars knees smote one against another when
he saw but a hand writing against him. Daniel. 5.6. etc. How will that poor
wretch tremble that sees the angry face of God frowning upon him? Yea,

Thirdly, hence he will wring his hands, and with bitter tears cry out, oh
how wretched and miserable am I now become, that cannot appease the Lords
anger, nor pacify his wrath. Thus we see the beginning is miserable, let us
now therefore proceed, and consider whether the fear be greater then the
danger, or the evil every way answerable to the fear and fearful
expectation.

2. After this dreadful presage of mourning, follows nothing else but
perpetual lamentation: For then continually these things will come to their
remembrance; to wit,

First, all the sins that ever they committed in all their lives.

Secondly, the time of grace which they neglected, and lost, and trifled away;
and the ofers of mercy, which they contemned and despised.

Thirdly, the eternity of the misery which they have acquired: for every
moment the miserable soul will call this to mind: Thus am I tormented, and
thus shall I be tormented for ever and ever: And hence comes those double
clamours ve, vae, woe is me, woe is me, that ever I was borne; If ever thou
have (I speak here to the wicked) been drowned or drenched in desperate
tears, wishing for nothing so much as the medicine of death to rid thee out
of thy horrid fears; yea in thy desperation have gone about to shorten thy
days either by poison, or knife, or halter or the like; think but how great
the horror of thy conscience then was, and yet how little it is in comparison
of that horror of soul and conscience which thou shall feel in hell. For,

First, the eye of the understanding is more quick fighted there then it is
here; and can more fully conceive of, and apprehend the misery which is
measured out and allotted unto it to suffer, then now it is able. And

Secondly, the sight thereof causes all hope of mercy to fade and fall to the
ground. And therefore the greatest horror of conscience that can be in a man
on earth, comes far short of that which the damned feel in hell.

3. To this beginning, and progress add eternity; that it is not for a
thousand years, as Origin thought, but for ever. In other molestations or
afflictions there are sometimes some mutations, or mitigations, or cessations,
or at least death puts a period to them: yea in the greatest temporal evils a
man may appease the wrath of God: But in hell a man though ever dying yet never
dies; and though with tears of blood he ask pardon, mercy, and
reconciliation, yet he shall never obtain it. Hebr. 12 17.

X Thirdly, there is Poena damni; X
the punishment of loss, and this is by much the greatest. If a man should
suffer the torments of a thousand hels, yet it were nothing to this. Chrysostom.
S. There is no voice in hell so irksome to the ear, or so doleful to the
heart, as this J know ye not depart from me. Matthew. 25.12.41. For,

1. If God were present, he would love, and comfort in the most grievous
torments: hell would be no hell, if God were there: the fire could not scortch
us if God were in the fire. Daniel. 3.

2. But God being angry with wicked men does absent himself from them, and
thereby deprives them of all hope of help, comfort, succor, relief, or mercy.

Verse 21.

. 1. Not every one that says unto me Lord,

What is the meaning of these words?

First, this may be understood of profession: Not

1. Gross hypocrites, which profess Christ with their mouth, and yet in heart
and life renounce him; of this sort is,

First, the common Atheist, who only for fear of the Magistrates laws
professes Religion. And,

Secondly, the Epicure, that is, such an one as bears Christ's Name for the
fashion sake, and yet his belly, and his pleasure is his God. And,

Thirdly, the worldling, who spends the strength of body and mind, and all he
has on the world, for earthly things. Now none of these three sorts thus
living and dying can be saved.

2. There are another sort who are more close hypocrites, who profess the name
of Christ in truth, and have in them some good gifts of God, by reason whereof
both before men and in their own conceit, they are reputed members of the
Church, and yet are but hypocrites which shall not enter into the Kingdom of
heaven.

Secondly, this may be properly understood of Not every one, etc. As if he
would say, It is a good duty to pray unto God, but there are some who do it
not well: it is a good beginning, but many do not proceed: And therefore the
action is to be established, but the evil performers thereof are to be
blamed.

Two things here are then to be considered of, to wit,

1. That prayer unto God is in it self a good work. A.

2. That the prayers of many are not accepted of God. B.

A First, The invocating of God and Christ is an acceptable action of religion,
where it is truly and religiously performed. Read to this purpose these
places, Psalm 50.15. Romans 10.13. Psalm 116.13. Joel. 2.32. Acts 2.21.



some (says David) trust in chariots, but we will remember the name of the
Lord our God (Psalm 20.8.) that is, we will trust in him, and by prayer
implore his help. Thus Saint Paul exhorts Timothy to follow righteousness,
faith, and love, with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart. 2 Timothy
2.22.


Sam. 22.7. Psalm. 107.6.15. Prove. 18.10. Psalm 34.6.



Paul would have all men to pray, and all men to be prayed for, 1 Timothy 2.1.8.
And indeed they are unworthy of mercy who will not beg it.



Thirdly, those who rashly approach unto God; intruding themselves into his
presence without due and fitting preparation.



Psalm. 3.3.5. and 5.2. and 18.2.3. and 63.1.

Soliloquie with God; and then we may be assured that he will hear us, when by
prayer we speak unto him.



1. Understanding, we must pray with our understanding (1 Corinthians 14.) that is,
we must not only know what we say, but we must knowingly offer up our prayers
unto God; or as Saint Paul says, make our requests and desires known unto
him, Philip. 4.5.6.

2. The Spirit; we must pray with the Spirit, that is, fervently, and
powerfully, Romans 12.11. and 1 Peter 3.21.

3. Faith; we must pray in faith (James 1.6.) and then we shall obtain any
thing at Gods hands.

4. Purity; we must labor to hate sin, and to serve the Lord, and then the
Lord will hear our prayers 1 Timothy 2.8.

B. Secondly, many pray unto God, whose Lord, Lord, which never shall be saved,
says our Savior here; and the Holy Ghost in diverse others places, as Jerem.
7.4. etc. Proverb. 1.24. Psalm. 18.42. Jer. 11.11. Ezech. 8.18. Mich. 3.4.

Why are the prayers of many unprofitable?

First, because many will not hear God when he Proverbs 1.24, etc.

Secondly, many pray and are not heard, because Esaias 55.6 If we desire to be
heard, we must take the Lords time and call upon him in an acceptable season,
and then we shall be heard.

Thirdly, the true cause why some pray and obtain Math. 15.9. Or else coldly
and carelessely, not intending the holy work in hand.

Who err here?

First, those who remain in their sins, and John 9.31.

Secondly, those who have but only an hypocritical show of Religion in them,
and yet fully persuade

How may we know that our assurance and confidence

Prove and examine thy self by these signs,

First, have thou made the Lord thy God? both by receiving from him the seal
and earnest of his love, the evidence of his Spirit, and by giving thy self
wholly up unto him, and his service, John 8.34. and 1 Cor. 6.20.

Secondly, does the Lord dwell and inhabit within in thy heart, that is,

1. Is his love there? do thou love him unfainedly, and desire and long for
him above all other things? Psalm. 27.4. and 42.1. and 63.1.

2. Is his fear there? do thou tremble before him? are thou fearful to
offend him? art thou ashamed, and affected with blushing for thy former sins?
art thou smit with an awful reverence of Gods presence?

3. Is his comfort there? do the comforts of the Lord refresh thy heart? If
these things be in us, then certainly God is within us, and when we pray,
will surely listen unto us.

Thirdly, whether are these things perpetually in thee or not? art thou not one
of these, who remembers the Lord, and the Lords work only upon the Lords day?
or do thou always remember thy God, and serve him in a constant practice of
life? Certainly if the Spirit of God witness unto our spirits, that we have
addicted our selves wholly unto God; and that the Lord has his residence in our
hearts; and that we labor to serve him in a constant course of Religion all
our lives; we may be then confidently assured, that the hope we have to be
heard when we pray, is neither carnal nor hypocritical, but true and
spiritual.



What is the meaning of these words?

he shall not enter, many understand

The Kingdom of heaven, is commonly meant eternal joy; as if our Savior
would say, It is not so easy a thing to enter into eternal bliss, as many
suppose it to be, 1 Peter 4.18.

But this is handled sufficiently, ^ Math. 6.33. and 7.13, 14.

Verse 22. Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord,



Illo, is a relative, but it has here no Antecedent; And therefore it is to
be understood, (...) of the end of the world, or the last day: wherein two
things are implied, to wit,

First, that there is a day of judgment, C.

Secondly there is a time when all shall be judged. D.

C. First, our Savior by these words, In that day, does teach us, That there
shall certainly be a day of judgment, we have elsewhere amply handled this,
and therefore here I insist not upon it; I only entreat the Reader for the
proof of the proposition to read these places, Act. 1.11. and 17.31. Romans
2.16. and 2 Thessal. 2.2.



Pet. 4.7. and 2 Pet. 3.10.12.

Mat. 25. But of this in the next proposition.

time no longer. Revelat. 6.10.

D
D. Secondly, our Savior by these words, In teaches us, That there is a time
when all persons, all actions shall be judged. Revelat. 20.12. and 2. Corinthians.
5.10. Romans 14.10.12.

Why will God judge all at the last day?

First, because otherwise (if with reverence I Psalm 73.17.

Secondly, because otherwise the Lord should

What is required of us in regard of this day?

First, meditate daily and hourly thereof; remember Hebr. 9.27. For this will
make thee more careful of thy actions, when thou remembrest that one day all
will be told thee whatsoever thou have done, and thou shall be judged according
to that which thou have done.

Some may object here,

Though it be thus, Eccles. 7.4. But further, whosoever is dejected and cast
down with the remember of rhis day, it is for one of these causes, namely,
either,

1. Because the world is dear unto him; that is, because he is married either
unto his pleasure, or treasure, or honor, or his own will and ways; and
these he delights in here, and whether he shall have such delights in the other
world or not, he knows not; and therefore the remembrance of leaving this to
go unto that, makes him afflict himself: Or,

2. Because his sins amaze him; and for his sins his heart presageth
terrible things: Or,

3. Because he is not prepared for that day; not having yet entered into a
covenant with God, not being yet reconciled unto God; not being sealed by the
Spirit of God unto salvation.

Certainly there is nothing so Sure, as death, or that we must die. Unsure, as
when, or how quickly we must die. Necessary, as the meditation of death, and
what will become of us when we die.


Secondly, we must prepare our selves so for this

How may we know whether it will be well

Surely it shall go well with the righteous;

First, are all thy sins pardoned, and blotted out in Christ? art thou washed
clean in the blood of the Lamb? Psalm 32.1. Rev. 7.14.

Secondly, has the Spirit of God taught thee to call God Father? art thou by
the Spirit assured that thou art a child of God by adoption? Romans 8.15. Galath.
4.6.

Thirdly, art thou clothed with the garments of Christ's righteousness? and
do thou show forth the fruits of holiness in thy life and conversation, 1
Cor. 6.10. Rev. 19.8.

Certainly, to him who is assured by the evidence of the Spirit of his
remission, adoption, and justification in Christ, and of his sanctification by
the Holy Ghost; the last day will be a day of refreshing, and unspeakeable
consolation.

Have we not prophesied in thy name.

Two things are here observable, to wit,

First, that wicked men may prophecy in the name of Christ? E.

Secondly, that those who prophecy in the name of Christ, and are false
Apostles, are the worst of all. F.

E. First, in these words, we have prophesied in thy name, our Savior shows.
That wicked men may prophecy in the name of Christ; or, that the only
profession of the name of Christ is not sufficient unto salvation, 1 Cor. 9.27.
And hence it is that wicked men who will not be reformed are forbidden to take
the word of God in their mouths, Psalm 50.16.

How does it appear that a man may both profess,

First, this appears Ab origin, from the original, ground, or cause thereof;
For it may proceed,

1. From covetousness, that they maybe provided for, and maintained: Or,

2. From vain glory, that they may be praised, and applauded: Or,

3. From hypocritical pride, that they may reprehend

Secondly, this is evident, Ab effectu; from the effects, because such an one
by his preaching and profession, does often amend, reclame, and reform others,
but not himself, Psalm 50.16. and 1 Cor. 9.27.

F. Secondly, Christ by these words, We have prophesied in thy name, does
teach us, That those who prophecy in the name of Christ, and are but false
Apostles, are the worst of all; because they deceive unstable souls under
Christ's name: Or, they deceive the most dangerously, who do it Colos 2.18.23.

Why are they the worst who under a color of Religion deceive others?

Because such deceive the good; or those who are well minded, and judge
according to the outward appearance, Math. 24.24. and 2 Cor. 11.13. If Satan
should show himself in his colors when he tempts, the very conscience of man
would abhor his temptations, and for fear, fly unto God. And therefore
those who go about to deceive under a color of Religion, do most nearely
resemble the devil, who transformeth himself into an Angel of light when he
would deceive.

In thy name we have cast out devils.

Our Savior in these words shows, That a man may have power over Satan, and
yet not be saved, Luke 10.20. The Apostles say, the devils were subdued unto
us, now amongst them was Judas, who I am persuaded cast out devils as well as
the rest: yea it is clear that Simon Magus, and Elymas the sorcerer had power
over Satan, as shall be showed more by and by.



First, this power is given for the confirming of others; Signs are for those
who believe not, 1 Corinthians.

Secondly, this power is given for the magnifying

How manifold is this power which false Prophets,

There are principally three sorts of men who have power over Satan; viz.
either, 1. by the permission and concession of God: Or 2. by the contract of
the devil: Or 3. by the virtue of means or second causes.

First, some have power over Satan, concessione Dei, by the concession and
permission of God; And this is twofold, to wit, either annexed, and tied

1. To the Apostolical Ordination; and thus Christ promises them this power,
and performs his promise unto them; for in the name of Christ they cast out
devils. Acts 16.

2. This permission or concession is annexed unto faith; by the means of
prayer, the word, and striving, struggling, and wrestling against Satan, Ephesians.
6. and James 4. and 1 Pet. 5. Now this power is altogether good; and every man
ought to labor so diligently, and industriously in the use of these means,
that the Lord might give this power unto him.

Secondly, some have power over Satan, Contractu Satanae, by some compact or
agreement which is between them and the devil; thus Witches have power over
the devil, by some contract either openly, or secretly made betwixt them. Now
there are two sorts of these witches, namely good and bad, hurting and helping
witches, as they usually are termed by the vulgar sort; but indeed they are
both bad; because they use the help of the devil, to the disgrace and
dishonor of God, as though he were not able to help them. Now indeed neither
the hurting nor helping witch has power over Satan, but only seems to have:
for while they seem to cast him out of others, he does possess them
themselves.

Thirdly, some seem to have power over Satan, Ex vi and usu Mediorum, by
virtue of some second causes, and the use of some means; thus Inchanters, and
Conjurers, have power over Satan. Augustine tells us August. Civit. Dei 10.11.
that Porphyrius would boast, that the Magicians could afright the devil, and
make him tremble and quake like an Aspen leaf. But these are but trifles, for
he according to his wonted subtlety, does feign himself timorous and cowardly,
that he may the easier overcome and prevail against those who seem audacious
and bold.

. 4. In thy name we have done many wonderful works.

Christ our blessed Savior would by these words have us to know, that the
faith of Miracles does not make (nor assure) a man to be the child of God,
neither does it always prove, or argue true Religion or sound doctrine; This
appears by the example of Jannes and Jambres; and also by these places, Math.
24.24. and 2 These. 2.9, etc. And therefore God admonishes his people not to be
seduced, although some should work miracles for the confirming of their false,
superstitious, and Idolatrous doctrine, Deuter. 13.1.2. etc.















1. Some say, I have lived thus long, and yet I was never brought into any
poverty or want: And therefore without doubt, I am precious in the Lords eye
sight.

2. Some say, my riches increase daily, I prosper in whatsoever I take in hand;
and therefore I persuade my self, that I am one of Gods beloved ones.

3. Some say, I languished in such or such a sickness or disease, from which
there was so small hope of recovery, that the learned Physicians had given me
over; and yet contrary to all hope, and beyond all strength of nature, the Lord
raised me up again to my perfect health and strength; And therefore this his
gracious dealing with me, does assure me that I am one of those whom he has
promised never to forsake, fail; or leave.

4. Some say, I escaped such or such a danger which was extraordinary, and
almost miraculous; may I not therefore assure my self that I am one of Gods
children, seeing he was so ready to help and protect me in the time of need?

Thus many lean upon the staff of Egypt and trust to such deceivable hopes as
will utterly fail them, and frustrate their expectation: For many notorious
wicked men have bin preserved from want and poverty; have bin blessed with
riches and abundance; have been restored unto health, and recovered from some
extreme sickness; yea, have been preserved and protected from some eminent
danger; And the Wiseman in general tells us, that neither love nor hatred
is known by any external thing, Eccles. 9.1.

By what kind of faith does wicked men work Miracles?

There is a threefold kind of faith, namely,

First, a faith which consists of humane opinion, Livie, Suetonius, and those
who writ of n w and unknown Islands. This kind of faith in many things is
common to the Turks and Jews: And therefore by this faith false Prophets do
not work Miracles.

Secondly, there is a faith, whereby verily, vively and efficaciously, we
assent to the promise of the mercy of God, being incited, and stirred up by the
divine blasts, and motions of the Spirit of God: This is justifying faith, and
therefore by this wicked men do not work Miracles.

Thirdly, there is a faith which is called miraculous, or the faith of
Miracles, by which no change is wrought at all in the party in whom it is,
neither is he made one hair better thereby: This faith is a vehement motion
and persuasion of the divine Spirit whereby a man is incited to work Miracles,
and to beg this power of God, wholly believing, that it is Gods will that they
should be wrought, and that that which they desire shall be granted. Now those
which adhere unto this belief, sometimes obtain what they desire Pet. Mar. in
Judic. c. 6. ver. 37, 38. page 87. 6. Verse 23.
. And by this kind of faith it is that wicked men, and false Prophets work
Miracles.

Verse 23. And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: Depart from me
ye that work iniquity, I never knew you.

Where we must observe that Christ says not, Non nosco vos nunc, I know you
not now, to wit, when your hypocrisy is detected and discovered; but nunquam
novi vos, I never knew you, to wit, not then when you professed the faith, or
prophesied, or wrought Miracles in my name. Now Nosse here does not signify a
bare knowledge, but approbation; I never knew you, that is, I knew you, and
took notice of you, but I did never approve of you.

How can they work Miracles, who are unknown unto God? For usually and truly
we distinguish of Miracles, that they are either,

First, false, as 2 Thessal. 2.9.11. And these are but Impostures, and
delusions; Or,

Secondly, true; and these are wrought by faith. Now does not Christ know
these, that by faith in him work Miracles?

We must distinguish of faith in this manner,

In faith there are two acts, to wit, First, a certain assent or apprehension:
this is historical, a faith which the devil may have, Ja. 2. Secondly, an
application of the thing believed; and this is twofold, either First, weak,
and unstable as is in the -- Presumptuous faith; And Temporary faith.
Secondly, solid, apprehending either Whole Christ, or Christ in part, which is
called Saving faith. Miraculous faith.






Now (as was affirmed and confirmed before) a man may have a Miraculous faith,
and yet be unknown unto Christ, but those in whom is wrought this saving faith
are known unto him. Whence

Luke 18.11, etc. Many works show themselves good outwardly, which proceed
not from a true root: as appears, Hebr. 6.4.5. and 10.26. and 2 Pet. 2.20, etc.



Cain, and Judas, and Ahab did.



Cor. 13.2.

Simon Magus, Acts 8. and Saul when he prophesied 1. Samuel.

Herod did, Mark 6.20. All these things a man may do, and yet not be a whit
benefitted thereby unto salvation, because they may be in an unregenerate man.





First, let us labor to be truly begotten and borne anew of the holy Spirit,
John 3.5.

Secondly, let us labor to be baptized with fire.

Thirdly, let us labor for internal light, and peace, and that we may be
filled with the fullness of God, Jerem. 31.34. Phil. 4.7. Ephe. 2.1^

Fourthly, let us consecrate and dedicate our selves wholly up unto the Lord, 1 Corinthians. 6.20. This is done two manner of ways, namely,

1. Voto, by vow; This many promise to do, vowing and promising to serve the
Lord.

2. Praxi, in performance; And thus we must principally study, how to serve,
and glorify our God in all things,

Verse 24.25. Therefore whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them,
I will liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock: And the
rain descended, and the floods came, and the wind blew, and beat upon that
house, and it fell

. 1. Whosoever hears these sayings, and does them;

Our Savior not saying barely whosoever hears, but adding, who so hears
and does these things; may move these questions, namely,



hear the word, but do it not.



Thirdly, some hear the word, and are thereby persuaded to eschew evil, but
not to do

Fourethly, some hear the word, and seem to

Fifthly, some hear the word, and labor in sincerity

Who is the best, and most blessed hearer?

He that hears the word of God, and does it,

How may we know whether we be such blessed

We may easily know that we are hearers and doers by these signs; namely,

First, if we hear the word with joy; as Jeremiah did; Thy words were found,
and I did eat them, and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine
heart, Jerem. 15.16.

Secondly, if we do with the word, as with Physic sent unto us in our
necessity and sickness; that is, neither reject it, nor apply it unto others,
but unto our selves only.

Thirdly, if we concoct, and digest all things well which we hear; laboring
to suck some good juice out of all we hear: It is an excellent sign of a
good hearer, to come away from the word, either better, or more learned; either
more humbled or more comforted; either taught some lesson which formerly he had
not learnt, or more confirmed in some truth which formely he had heard.
Certainly it is a sign of a sound body, to turn all good meat into good
blood, moisture, and nourishment.

Fourthly, if we be reproved and checked by the word, and endure it patiently,
not being a whit provoked or incensed thereby, but loving reproof better then
flattery; it is a sure sign of a good hearer; For flesh and blood cannot teach
this (it being opposite unto nature) but it is the work of the blessed Spirit.

Fifthly, if we do not only patiently hear reproof, but also desire
corrosives and reprehensions, yea, come unto the word, with a desire that God
would lay open and manifest unto us whatsoever in us is displeasing unto him:
it is an excellent sign of a good hearer. And therefore if we desire to be
such as build their houses upon the true rock, let us hear the word of God
with joy, not with wearisomenesse; let us apply it unto our selves, not unto
others; let us lay up in our hearts and practice in our lives what we hear in
the word; let us love, nor hate those who reprove us; yea, let us desire God
(when we come to his house) so to direct the mouth of his servant who from him
is to speak unto us, that the word preached, may be as a glass, wherein we may
clearly see all our blemishes, and whatsoever is amiss.

How may men gain by their hearing? or, what

First, they must meditate and ruminate seriously

Secondly, they must pray fervently unto God;



Our Savior here conjoyning hearing and doing together, would have us know
that neither of them are sufficient alone; we must not hear and refuse to
obey, for that is but dead hearing; we must not obey, and refuse to hear, for
that is but blend obedience.

hear, and do, the word of God?

Esa. 8.20. Colos. 3.16.

honey, Ezech. 3.3. to wine and milk, Esa. 55.1.2. yea, it is much sweeter then
honey (Psalm. 119.103.) and more precious then gold, Psalm 1^9.72.127.

Romans 4.23. and 15.4. and 1 Corinthians 10.11.) and therefore there is great reason
that we should be both diligent in hearing, and careful in the practice
thereof.

hear and obey the word, because it is the best weapon against Satan. God is
stronger then Satan, and his word is more powerful then the devils assaults;
as we see. Math. 4.7. and Ephesians. ^.7 and 2 Timoth. 3.16. and Hebr. 1.3.

hear and do those things which the word teaches, because it is the
foundation or ground work of our salvation ( Acts 13.16. and 28.28.). As
appears thus.

1. The word is the means to beget us, James 1.18. and 1 Pet. 1.23.

2. The word is the means to work faith in us, Romans 10.17.

3. The word does feed and nourish us as well as beget us; for ex iisdem
nutrimur ex quibus generamur, 1 Pet. 2.2.

4. The word is the sword whereby our spiritual enemies are overcome, Ephesians.
6.13.

5. The word is a light, and a Lantern to direct our steps by, Psalm. 119.105.

6. The word is the mighty power of God unto salvation, Romans 1.16. and 1 Cor.
1.18.21.



I will liken him to a wise man.



He that hears my words and does them, I will liken him (says Christ) to a
wise man; So the Lord says (by his servant Moses) unto his people, if you will
be obedient unto my Laws, ye shall be the wisest Nation under heaven, Deuter.
4.6. and Proverb 2.1. unto the 9. verse, and 4.1. yea, that obedient hearing is
true wisdom is verified by Psalm 32. which is entitled Maschil, or David's
learning, and is indeed a notable Psalm of learning, containing the sum of
all Religion; which is by David reduced to these two heads, his Repentance, and
his new obedience; And hence it is said, that the fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom Psalm 111.10. and Proverb. 1.7.

Why is obedient hearing true wisdom.

First, because it makes us wise, Psalm 119. Part 13. yea, wise unto
salvation, Colossians, 3.16.

Secondly, because it is the All-wise God that If any lack wisdom, let him
ask it of God, who gives to all, Jam. 1.5. Colos. 3.16. Prove. 2.6.

Thirdly, because the whole nature of wisdom

1. For a man to be careful of himself. And.

2. For a man to prefer the best, most excellent, and most profitable things:
Now he that hears and obeyes the word of God, has true care of himself, and
his estate and condition; and does give the pre-eminence to the best things:
For what will it profit a man to win the whole world and lose his own soul?

How may this wisdom be obtained?

First, Be a fool, that thou may be made wise, Corinth. 3.18.19. Acknowledge
that hitherto thou have been foolish, preferring vain and idle things before
divine. There are two signs of foolishness, to wit,

1. To prefer childish things, as babies, bables, ratles, and the like,
before that which far excels them, as gold, jewels, or possessions of land.

2. To deride and scoff at those things which are both good in themselves and
good in regard of us. Now there are also two sorts of mockers, namely.

First, open and impudent, which with a black and diabolical mouth scoff at
holy things.

Secondly, secret, who say nothing, but inwardly,

Secondly remember that true wisdom comes from above, Jam. 3.17. and is
opposite to the wisdom of the flesh, Romans 8.6, etc. and Jam. 3.15.17. And
therefore is to be learnt in the word by prayer: The word is a Caskenet wherein
this rich treasure of wisdom is locked, and the Lord has the key thereof;
for he only makes men truly and aright to understand the word: Wherefore
we should be frequent in the hearing and reading thereof, praying fervently
unto God for that eye salve whereby we may be able to understand it.

Psalm. 122.1.

And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat
upon that house.



Luke 16.25. Acts 17.31. and 1. Corinthians. 3.13. and 2 Cor. 5.10. Romans 2.6.16.
Apoc. 20.12.



Psalm. 73.18. So there are some hypocrites, whose works seem outwardly good;
And therefore it is necessary that they should be brought to the touchstone,
and fiery trial, to see whether they be true gold or gilded copper.









water and flood? where is said, the water descended, and the floods came?

David says, he hadeth me beside the still waters (Psalm. 23.2.) that is,
waters of quietness, peace, and joy; but water does not signify thus in this
place.

Secondly, sometimes water and floods sig ifie affliction, and pers^cution, and
danger, and sickness, Psalm. 18.16. and 32.6. and 46.3 and 69.14.15. and
88.17. and 124.4.144.7. Lament. 3.54: Ezech. 26.19. Revel. 12.15. And thus
water and floods are taken i^ this place; whereby our Savior would teach us,
That afflictions, persecutions, Psalm. 66.12. etc. and 34.19. Acts 14 22. and 2
Timoth. 3.12. Revel. 12.13. and 1. Pet. 4.12.

Why must the godly expect affliction?

First, because it is their lot and portion. Hebrew.

Secondly, because it is the condition of glory; Romans 8.17. If we suffer we
shall be glorified, etc. 2 Timothy 2.12

Thirdly, because Satan (the sworn enemy of all the elect) will labor by
these means of overthrow

Fourthly, God often by this means tries what Job, who in his heavy
affliction promises not to forsake God though he kill him. And therefore
seeing that both Satan thus tempts, and God tries, we had need to expect
afflictions, and to prepare our selves for them.

What afflictions must we expect?

First, sometimes violent winds; that is, external

Secondly, sometimes floods; that is, the wicked

Thirdly, sometimes showers; that is internal lusts,

These we must expect, and these we must labor carefully to arm our selves
against.

1. We must be watchful over our internal desires, and take heed of the
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. 1 John 2.16.
for these are shrewd showers.

2. We must take heed of the persuasions, and examples of men; For,

First, some persuade unto heresy, and schism.

Secondly, some persuade unto iniquity and sin, as drunkenness, adultery,
theft, and the like: and that sometimes by word, sometimes by example. And
these sometimes are strong streams.

3. We must expect, and prepare against persecutions; for these are winds,
and storms; whether they be First, open persecution. Or,

Secondly, hatred, loss of goods, or some inferior punishment. Or,

Thirdly, scoffing and deriding: as Ismael persecuted Jsaac.

. 4. And it fell not.

We may see here the security of the godly; our Savior himself saying, that
those who hear and do his words are like a house built upon a rock, which
the winds and storms of temptations and afflictions cannot overthrow:
according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 15.5. He that does these things shall
never be moved: Psalm. 125.1.
And again, They that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Sion, which cannot
be removed, but abides for ever. Psalm. 125.1. Yea the phrase or words here
used are worth observing for the further proof of this: In this 25. verse, the
word (...) is used: in verse. 27. (...); the first signifies properly to fall,
the second to cut off: To show how that affl^ctions,

Fall upon The righteous, as the storms, tempests, and floods fall upon the
rock; who notwithstanding all their fury stands immovable, and is not cut or
broken in pieces by them. The wicked, and hypocrites, as the axe falls upon the
wood, which is cut in pieces by the weight and sharpness thereof, read. Job
38.11. Psalm. 104.6. and 46.1.


For it was founded upon a rock.







Three, namely, first, That it be the first thing in the building.

Secondly, that it bear up all the other parts of the building; And

Thirdly, that it be firm and immovable: For as Christ says, If the eye that
is the light of the body, be darkness, how great is that darkness? Matthew.
6.33. So, if that which is to support and bear up all, do fail, and shrink,
all must needs be shaken and fall a sunder.



all the promises of God being in him Yea and Amen. 2 Cor. 1.20. 1 Cor. 3.11.
And in this sense the Apostle S. Paul says. Other foundation can no man lay,
then that which is laid, even Jesus Christ.

Is there no other Foundation of the Church but

First, in general, In respect of some particular Foundations, both in respect
of the spiritual building of the Church; and in respect of the frame and
fabrique of virtue, and well-doing raised in this building.

Secondly, the first and principal virtue, namely Faith, upon which all other
virtues do stay themselves, and from which they take the first direction that
any virtue can give, is rightly named a foundation.

Thirdly, in respect of the form of Christian doctrine, Hebr. 6.1.

Fourthly, in respect of the confession of the true foundation; And in this
sense Peter's faith, and confession is by diverse of the Fathers named the
Churches foundation (Leo, in Annivers. Assumpt. sermon. 2.) But they understand
not by the faith and confession of Peter, either the virtue, and quality of
faith abiding in his heart and mind, or the outward act of confessing, but the
form of confession made by him when he said, Thou art the Christ, Matthew.
16.16.
the Son of the living God: upon which form, as being the rule of all right
believing, the Church of God is builded.

Fifthly, in respect of the supernatural knowledge foundation, upon which the
faith of all after-commers is to stay it self, De pont. Romans lib. 1. cap. 11.
Revel. 21.14.
and from which in all doubts they must seek resolution. And in this sense
Bellarmine says truly, that the Apostles may be named foundations of the
Church, according to that description, in the Revelation of Saint John, of the
wall of the City of God, that had twelve foundation-stones upon which it was
raised, and in them written the names of the Lambs twelve Apostles: And in
these respects these things may be called foundations, but the maine and
principal foundation of the Church is this rock Jesus Christ.

Verse 1. When he was come down from the mountain, great multitudes followed
him.

Many we heard came unto Christ. Chap. 4.25. follow after him.

Why do so many follow after Christ?

First, because his fame was spread abroad, and great Math. 4.24.

Secondly, because his words were sweet and gracious, Luke 11.27. Matthew. 7.28.

Thirdly, because many were sick, and diseased: And therefore because he
healed such, many followed after him. Matthew. 4.24.



Isa. 53.1.



John 9.41.
John. 9.41. Yea hence it is that,

1. We do not hear the Word of God with joy, but with weariness; because we
feel no want of it. Malach. 1.13. Neither,

2. Do we hear it with carfulness; that is, so hear it, that we may lay
up what we hear carefully in our hearts, and practice it diligently in our
lives? Acts. 2.37. and 8.6. and 10.33.



John. 6. and many of his followers afterward cry, Crucify him, Crucify him.

Many are called, and but few chosen; and therefore all these were not good,
Matthew. 20.16. and 22.14.



1. Some follow Christ, only to be healed, and cured of their maladies.

2. Some follow Christ only that they may eat of his loaves, or be fed by him.

3. Some follow Christ only, that they may see and behold his miracles.

4. Some follow Christ only that they may accuse him; or that they may hear
or see something by which they may ensnare and entrappe him. And therefore all
that follow Christ, do not follow him out of true zeal.











Verse 2. And behold there came a Leper, and worshipped him, saying, Lord if
thou will, thou can make me clean.

. 1. And behold there came a Leper.

What, and how many things are observeable in

Three, viz. First, the person, who was a Leper; There came a Leper unto him. S
condly, the Action; he worshipped him, and called him Lord. Thirdly, the
petition; which is folded up in the form of a Profession -- Thou can cure
me If thou will.



This verse is an history of a Miracle wrought by CHRIST, not long after his
sermon, to teach us,

That the end of Miracles is to confirm the doctrine taught and delivered.

Is this the only end of Miracles?

No; for there are in all three ends of Miracles;

First, to confirm the Doctor, and teacher: Thus Nicodemus acknowledges
CHRIST to have come from God, because of the great works he did. John. 3.2.
To this end read these places. John. 4.29. and 6.2.14.30. and 7.31. and 9.16.
and 10.38. and 11.47. and 12.18. Acts. 2.22.

Secondly, to confirm the doctrine which is taught; Read for the proof of
this these places. Exodus 4.2.6. Mark. 16.20. John. 2.11.23. and 4.48. and
20.30. Acts. 2.43. and 4.29.30. and 6.7.8. and 7.36. and 8.6.13.

Why then are not Miracles wrought in our

Because Miracles are not given to believers, Cor. 14.22. Romans 15.19.20. and 2.
Cor. 12.12.

Thirdly, another end of Miracles is to show spiritual cures by temporal:
Christ heales the sick, to show that he is the only Physician of the soul:
read Matthew. 11.5.6. etc. and compare it with Isa. 35.5. and 61.1. etc.

And therefore when we read this, or any other Miracles of this kind wrought
by Christ and recorded in the Gospel; we should make this use of it, namely,

1. Acknowledge God in Christ. John 17.3. and 10.38. And,

2. Acknowledge the truth of the Gospel. And,

3. That all the infirmities and maladies of our souls are cured only by
Christ.

What manner of disease or sickness was the leprosy?

First, it was a most loathsome sickness:

1. Those who were Leprous were to be separa^ed from the society of men. Levit.
13.46. Number. 5.2.

2. The Leper must have his clothes burnt. Levit. 13.52.

3. If any of the Priests become Lepers they must be separated, and not
suffered to offer sacrifice, until they were healed. Leviticus. 22.4.

Leprosy was a contagious and infectious disease; and hence it was that they
must be separated, and their garments burnt, and the house, and walls, and
stones removed. Levitic. 14.

Leprosy was an hereditarie disease; as we see in Gehezi. 2 King 5.27.

King 5.7.) because it was sent by him as a punishment; as we see in Ioah, 2.
Samuel 3.29. and Miriam, Numb. 12.10. and Gehezi 2. King 5.27.

Leper should diligently observe and do whatsoever was enjoined him by the
Priest, or Levite, for curing of his Leprosy. Deuter. 24.8.

Leprosy for our instruction?

Peter's wives Mother; and ^n Paul 2 Cor. 1.8.





Cornucopia unto us, from whom we might have whatsoever is good either
external or internal. Romans 8.32.



Leprosy was a disease scarce cureable, and yet Christ cures it; to teach us,
That unto him nothing is impossible: Christ came in the power of the Father,
John 10.38. And therefore he can heal all our diseases, Psalm 103.3.
Wherefore none should be terrified with the greatness of danger, whether
Temporal (for God can deliver David from the Bear, and Daniel from the lion,
and the three Children from the fire) or Spiritual, for whether our sins be
many, or great, or of long continuance, yet the Lord can take them away, and
pardon them. Isa. 1.16. Ezech. 18.)

Leprosy is a Type and Figure of sin: and that in many respects. viz.

1. Of all other diseases Leprosy is conceived to be the greatest: The falling
sickness, the Palsy, the Convulsion, the Plague, are great evils; but either
they are not perpetual, or not di^turnall, or at least a man is not separated
for these; but the Leprosy is a cleaving evil, and so abominable, that he
who is taken therewith is excluded from the society of men. Thus of all evils,
sin is to be esteemed the worst, and greatest. Poverty, imprisonment,
sickness, and death are evils; but yet such evils, that either a man may be
delivered from them, or else they may become unto him the end of evils; but
sin is an evil which endures with us, and at length brings us (without
repentance) to eternal misery. And therefore we should not slight sin as
the most do, thinking it no great matter; but conceive it to be some great,
and infinite thing, yea the very Epitomy of all evils: and consequently a
thing which can never be hated, abhorred, or detested enough.

2. The Leprosy is an hereditary evil; a disease which the child has from
the Father, and which is again by the child derived to posterity. So we,

First, receive sin from our parents. And,

Secondly, contaminate our posterity by sin. And therefore both for our own,
and our issues sake we should take heed of sin.

3. The Leprosy is a most loathsome disease, odious both to God and men; for
the Leper must be separated from Gods sanctuary, and man's society; So sin is
unto God so abominable that he cannot endure either to see sin, or to hear
a sinner: Iniquity makes man more odious and deformed in the sight of God,
then any monster or dead Carcass. Ierem. 5.25.

4. The sent and smell of a Leprous man is of all other diseases most grievous
and irksome unto the nostrils of any, because all the humors in such are
vitiated and corrupted; thus although by reason of our corrupt nature, sin
stink not thus in our nostrils; yet certainly of all noisome smells (unto the
Lord) it is the worst. Hence the Lord complains of the wicked, Psalm. 5.9.
That their threat is as an open sepulcher: that is, as from a sepulcher,
wherein lies a dead rotten carcass, issues forth a most vile stench, and
unsavory, and unwholesome smell, when the grave is open; So from a man whose
soul is dead by reason of sin proceeds nothing but loathsome sents.

5. The Leprosy has his root within, but yet does putrifi^ and corrupt the
body outwardly, making the skin loathsome both to the eye and nose: So sin
is rooted in the heart, but buds forth, and shows it self in the life and
conversation. Romans 7.18.

6. The Leprosy grows, creeps upon men, and acquires strength by little and
little; So sin by little and little increases both in strength, and number:
that is, one sin taking root in us, at length we become to be hardened
therein; and being once thoroughly captivated by one sin, we become shortly
after slaves unto others. And therefore Principi^^ obsta, strangle sin in the
birth, and stop the course thereof at first.

7. The Leprosy was contagious, and infections; Levit. 13.45.
and therefore when the Leper went abroad he had his mouth covered with a
cloth, and when he saw any, he cried, J am unclean, I am unclean; that so
all men might learn to avoid him. Thus sin is infectious. Regis ad
exemplum; the sin of the Father easily corrupts the children; the sin of
the Master his servants; the sins of superiors which appears unto men, is a
great snare unto inferiors; and therefore every man should labor so to
suppress his sins that they may not be perceived by others, and so infect
others; and Magistrates should be careful to punish those who like Sodom
hide not their sins, but discover them to the world. And for these properties
in the Leprosy, the person infected must be careful to use diligently all
means for the redress, and cure thereof. Deuter. 24.8. etc. And so must we
in sin.

Leprosy to be cured? how is sin to be healed?

Cast out the mote, adding only a word or two out of this verse. This Leper
desiring to be cured repaires unto Christ, and so is healed; and thus must we
do; fly unto Christ the sole Physician of the soul, and then we shall be
safe. None are cured by Christ but those who come unto him; wherefore he
calls, and exhorts men to come, Matthew. 11.28. John 7.37. And therefore we
should prepare our selves by prayer, meditation, and hearing, and then (with
the Leper) come unto the Lord.



Leprosy and sin; none comes unto Christ (as unto a Physician) but those who
are sick, and Leprous, and diseased; for the sound need not the Physician but
the sick Matthew. 9.12. We are selfe-lovers; and therefore we ask daily Cui
bono? and enquire what benefit it will be unto us? And where we feel no
want, we have no w^^, neither labor for the thing awanting unto us; Wherefore
we must be sensible of our misery, and of the want of Christ, or else we
shall never (with this Leper) run unto him.





Leper.

And he worshipped him, saying, Lord.

Leper only of all the multitude worship Christ?

Leper



Samuel 6.22. and Psalm 2.11. and Isa. 66.2.



1. Most vile creatures in our selves, and in comparison of our God; being
worms and no men. Job 25.6. and Psalm. 22.6.


2. We come unto God to buy temporal and spiritual provision, for our bodies
and souls; or rather to beg it, for we have neither money nor money worth.
Isa. 55.1.
And therefore being such vile, and contemptible creatures in regard of God,
and so poor and indigent in our selves, we cannot come with too great
humility and reverence before the Lord.

3. We come unto God, or into his presence, as Malefactors, yea as traitors.
Daniel, 9.7. etc.
And therefore if we desire to find favor we must come humbly: If a rebel
coming before the King should show small or no submission and reverence unto
the King, all beholders would say, he deserved no mercy or pardon from the
King. And therefore if we either consider God or our selves, we must needs
acknowledge, that humility, and humiliation becomes us when we pray.

Thirdly, God looks upon those who pray, marking, Isa. 57.15. and Psalm 138.6.
And therefore humiliation and humility becomes us in prayer, if we desire to
be accepted of God.

Fourthly, Humility helps us in prayer; For it is

1. To curb, and restrain, and keep back evil affections, and wandering
cogitations, when we pray. Yea,

2. It is a means to help, and rectify our good affections; to wit, both
humiliation, and fervor.

Does every reverend gesture in prayer please God,

First, a man may hypocritically show forth some therewith, nor approve
himself unto God thereby: because he does it for the praise of men.

Secondly, some in their prayers seem outwardly

Thirdly, some, conjoyne these together; that

What gesture did the Saints (in holy writ) use

First, sometimes they prayed with their garments David did, 2 Samuel 12. and
Hezekiah, Isa. 37.1. etc.

Secondly, sometimes they prayed being arrayed Jonah. 3.8.9.

Thirdly, sometimes they prayed with their hands stretched forth, or lifted up.
1 King. 8.22. and Exodus 17.11. and 1 Timothy 2.8.

David 2. Samuel 12.16. and Elias. 1 King 18.42, and Christ. Matthew 26.39.
Luke 17.16.

Leper invocate Christ with so great vehemency, as is here expressed?





First, the danger we are in by reason of Satan, who like a roaring Lion
seeks whom he may devour. 1 Peter. 5.8. And is always watchful and never
weary.

Secondly, let us consider our unknown sins; how many they are, both of
thought, word, and deed.

Thirdly, let us take some notice of our blindness, and drowsinesse in the
ways of the Lord.

Fourthly, let us observe the nature of the world wherein we live, how ready
it is to alienate and estrange our hearts from God.

Fifthly, let us consider that none can preserve us from Satan, or the world,
or our sins; or redress that natural, and innate blindness that is in us,
but only Christ: That thus being sensible of our lack of Christ, we may cry
the more fervently after him.

If thou will.

Leper speak doubtingly?



1. In respect of the Hypothesis, because he had no promise that CHRIST would
heal him. Calvin s.

2. Or in respect of the Thesis; he might doubt of the love of Christ toward
him; and that one of these four ways, to wit, either,

First, through infirmity, and weakness of faith; Or,

Secondly, because he was conscious of his own unworthiness, that Christ
should do it for him. Or.

Thirdly, by reason of the greatness of the work; Leprosy was in a manner
held incurable (as was formerly affi med) And therefore the nature of the
grief might make him doubt of the cure. Or,

Fourthly, through the greatness of the desire he had to be healed: an
earnest and longing desire aft^r a thing, does always bring doubting along
with it, and therefore no wonder if the poor Leper doubted through the strong
and earnest desire he had to be healed.

Secondly, but he does not seem to doubt of the

1. The phrase is used in the certainty both of the Thesis; who knows
whether he will repent, and turn, and leave a blessing behind him Joel. 2.14
that is, certainly he will, if you do but rend your hearts and turn unto
the Lord, verse 13. Hypothesis; thus Caleb says unto Joshua, If so be the Lord
will be with me, then I shall be able to drive out the Anakims. Joshua. 14.12.


2. Here the Leper does acknowledge that as it is with God, so it is with
Christ, namely, that his power is governed by his will (if thou will thou
can) but in men it is contrary, for they must only do those things they
can, not what they would.

Why does not the Leper plainly beg this at

First, because there was no need of it; and that

1. Because his malady and disease spoke for him.

2. Because a faithful heart is manifest and open

Secondly, because he was modest; he had des^rved nothing at Christ's hands,
and the thing which he desired was great, wherefore he does only insi^uate
what he would have.

Thirdly, because we ought not peremptorily to Daniel. 3.17. Teaching us,

That we must not peremptorily desire any gifts from God, but refer our
selves unto his will: when thou prayest, say, Thy will be done: and thus he
does himself, Father if it be possible, let this cup pass from me, yet not as
J will, but as thou will, Matthew. 26.39.

Why may we not peremptorily desire good gifts,

First, because it is our duty to prefer the will

Secondly, because God is infinite in wisdom; he

Thirdly, because God is infinite in love and good

Fourth, we should not peremptorily beg any temporal things, as some are
wont to do peremptorily; but modestly, and submissively; as for example,

1. Some beg riches at Gods hands, never considering that they may become
poison unto them Pro. 20.8.
.

2. Some pray for honors, never remembering that they are slippery places Psalm.
73.18.
.

3. Some desire freedom from some calamity, although perhaps it be a precious
balm unto them for the cure of, their sick and diseased souls. Wherefore let
us confess and acknowledge, that we know not what is, and may be good for us;
and therefore refer our selves wholly unto the Lord, to be guided, directed
and disposed of by him as he pleases.







This is the confidence that we have in Christ, that if we ask any thing
according to his will, he hears us 1 John 5.14.
. Before we pray, we should seriously consider whether those things we are to
beg be agreeable unto the will of God or not; for if they be not, we can then
have no hope to be heard at all.





Thou can make me clean.

In these words the Leper does express the strength of his faith.



First, by his coming unto Christ, as the only

Mark says) or his face, as says Saint Luke, for this was not only a civil
reverence, but a true religious adoration; because he did not honor him only
as a Prophet, but adore him as a God, as appears plainly by his prayer unto
him.

Leper does express his faith, Oh Lord (says he) if thou will thou cast make
me clean; in which words are laid down a clear confession of his faith,
trust, and confidence in Christ; For,

1. He calls him Lord, and that not only as a title of honor, but as belonging
unto him as God.

2. He ascribes divine Omnipotency unto him; that he can do what he will; yea,
he can if he will expel and drive away his Leprosy: where we see that he is
certainly assured of Christ's divine power, neither does he doubt of his will;
and yet he will not presume, but refers himself wholly to the will of Christ,
as if he would say, Oh Lord if thou will thou can, if thou will not I
prescribe nothing, but leave it to thy free will to dispose of.

Oh Lord thou can, and thou will make me clean?

First, because he had no express promise that he should be heard, or healed
of this particular

Secondly, because he knew that God will have

Thirdly, he will not peremptorily say, thou or positively desire that Christ
would reduce his power into act, and heal him, because he was not ignorant,
that we are oftentimes ignorant what may be truly good and profitable for us:
Faith dare go no further, neither presume any more of God then is expressed
revealed, and promissed in the word; now from the word the Leper is,

1. Certainly assured of Gods omnipotency and power, that unto him nothing is
impossible, yea,

2. Of the good will and mercy of God toward his children in spiritual
graces: yea,

3. He doubts not of Christ's love and mercy toward him in temporal and
corporal things; but yet he will not presume so far, as to prescribe any
thing, but submits himself thus wholly unto his will; That he can do wh^t he
will, and he knows he will do what may be for his own glory, and his poor
servants good.

What is the nature of true faith?

First, not only to assent unto, or to believe the

S^condly, the nature of true faith may be lively seen in this Leper; who,

1. Does acknowledge Christ omnipotent, and merciful: And,

2. Does deny himself, humble himself unto Christ, and acknowledge his
uncleanness, and unworthiness that Christ should glorify his power and mercy
in him: And,

3. By a sure trust and confidence does apply the promises, and power of God
unto himself; that as Christ can do all things, so he will also do what may
be for his glory and the good of his unworthy vassaile.

Verse 4. And Jesus says unto him, see thou tell no man, but go thy way, show
thy self to the Priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded, for a
testimony unto them.

Clichthoveus (a Papist) objects this verse for humane satisfactions, thus;
Leper to observe them now when he is cleansed, saying, Go show thy self unto
the Priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded for a testimony unto them:
where by showing of himself is meant secret confession, and by the oblation is
mystically meant satisfaction.

First, the argument being Allegorical is of no showing and offering do
signify confession and satisfaction?

Secondly, if we should grant that this precept Typical, yet we would not
grant that by this offering were signified any satisfaction: and that for these
reasons, viz.

1. Because no oblation in the Law of Moses was instituted for a punishment,
but for a Type.

2. Because Christ himself when he commanded the cleansed Leper to offer,
adds the cause, For a testimony unto them: Maldonate expounds the place thus,
See thou tell no man, but show thy self unto the Priest, and offer the gift
that Moses commanded, that they, (to wit, the Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees)
who most of all oppose me, may be the first witnesses of my Miracles, that so
by their own testimony, their own incredulity may be reproved. And therefore
we deny that Christ here imposed any punishment upon the Leprous man after he
was healed; or any thing in the stead of punishment; or that in this precept
there was any Type of punishment Chamier Tom. 3. de satisfact. l. 23. cap 12..
37.38.39. fol. 1009.
.

And when Jesus was entered into Capernaum there came unto him a Centurion,
beseeching him, and saying, Lord, my se^vant lies at home sick of the palsy,
grievously tormented.

And when he was entered into Capernaum.

Christ (who knew all things) knew that Capernaum was a most corrupt place; and
yet he comes thither to abide there for a while.

Capernaum?





Chron. 36.16. Zach. 1.3. Prove. 1.24. etc. Math. 23.37. Rev. 3.20.



1. The first scope of our blessed Mediator is our conversion; and this
proceeds from the will of Christ.

2. The second scope of Christ is the confusion of the wicked; and this
proceeds from necessity, or their obduration: because they will not be
converted. And therefore we must needs acknowledge with the Prophet, that our
destruction is from our self Hos. 13. Object.
.

But it may be objected by some, that they seek, and pray, and yet are not
converted.

Math. 15.9. Or



Romans 12.12. Jam. 5.12. For undoubtedly, if we seek Christ, and pray unto him
sincerely, purely, fervently, and perseverantly, he will in his good time
convert and heal us.

Capernaum, to hasten vengeance upon the rebellious; or that all excuse may be
taken away from them.



First, certainly it is a blessed thing in it self to The feet of those
blessed who bring the glad tidings of peace, Romans 10.

Secondly, but it may be unto a people a heavy

1. The word it self will condemn those who have enjoyed it, but not rejoiced
in it, neither been obedient unto it, Ezech. 2.5.

2. The word shall be taken away from those in judgment, who will not obey it:
Acts 18. The Apostles shake the dust off their feet and depart; and Acts 19.9.
Paul separates the Disciples and sends them away. And this (from whom the word
is taken) becomes thus twice miserable; for

First, they are deprived of the word, which is a treasure more to be prized
then all the world.

Secondly, the word being once taken away, all judgments both temporal and
spiritual will certainly follow.

3. Those unto whom the word was never preached shall be punished less, then
those amongst whom it has been: Tire and Sidon shall be more favorably dealt
withal then Capernaum, at the day of Judgment; and therefore it is evident,
that the word accidentally may be unto a people a heavy judgment.

4. The more grace and favor God has showed unto any nation or people, the
greater and more heavy shall their condemnation be, if they despise or slight
the word. Capernaum was lift up unto heaven, by reason of the mercies and
means offered unto her; Math. 1.^^.
but because she made not such use of them as she ought, she was therefore
plunged the more deep into hell. And thus it is clear that all are not happy
who enjoy the word, but some thereby become much more miserable.

Who are made more miserable by the word?

First, those who only receive it; Capernaum Galathians receive Paul Galath.
4. and yet become enemies unto him.

Secondly, those who hear it, but believe it not, Hebr. 4.2.

Thirdly, those who say unto the Prophets prophecy not: and forbid Ministers
to preach.

Fourthly, those who neither are allured by the promises, nor terrified by
threatenings of the word Chronic. 36.16.

Fifthly, those who are weary of the word, and begin to loath it, Malach.
1.13. Certainly,

How may we know whether we make such good use of the word, that we may be
assured it is blessed

Examine these things viz. First, Acts 2.37. or those who cried out, What shall
we do? Luke 3.11. Secondly, do thou hear the word with joy, as Samaria
did? Acts 8.8. Thirdly, do thou grow up, and increase, both in knowledge, and
mortification, and faith, and all graces, by the word? 2 These. 1.3. Fourthly,
do thou with a full purpose of heart, continue and persevere both in hearing,
and obeying of the word of God, without weariness or irksomeness? Certainly
these are signs that we are better by the word, and it blessed unto us.


There came a Centurion unto him.





First, a Centurion sometimes was a Captain over fifty, as 2 King 1.9.

Secondly, sometimes a Centurion had the governing and leading of 128. men.

Thirdly, the ordinary Centurion was Captain over 256. men, Alex. ab Al. 350.6.

Fourthly, the Soldiers every morning went to the Centurions Tent to salute
him, Alex. ab Al. 359.8.

Luke 7.3.
Fifthly, this Centurion was above the Elders of Israel (as appears by his
sending of them to Jesus,) and yet he humbles himself to Christ, as follows
afterward, to teach us, that not only poor and base people, but the greatest
Potentates must humble themselves to Christ.



salvation was of the Jews, Romans 3.2. and 9.4. But yet we see Christ respects
him, Ephesians. 2.14.
to show that the partition wall was now broken down; and that God was not
only the God of the Jews, but of the Gentiles also, Acts 10.34. and 13.26.47.
and 22.21.

Came unto him.

The Centurion came not himself unto Christ, but came only by messengers,
Luke 7.3. that is, by the Elders of the Jews, who were his Intercessours.
Comestor. And hence the Papists urge the necessity and warrantablenesse of the
intercession of the Saints unto Christ for us: Objecting Eliphaz bids Job call
upon the Saints. Job, 5.1 therefore it is lawful to do it.

Eliphaz is reproved by God, for not speaking the thing which was right.

Eliphaz derides in that place, then commands such invocation.

The Angels rejoice at the conversion of a sinner (Luke 15.10.) therefore they
know what is done

First the Angels are ministering spirits for our good, and not the Saints;
wherefore it follows not, the Angels rejoice at our conversion, therefore the

Secondly, the consequence also is false another way: They know what is done by
us, therefore they

The Saints pray for us; therefore we may pray

First, for the Antecedent, I grant that the Saints pray in general for the
accomplishing of the body of Christ, and the gathering together of the

Secondly, for the Consequent: I say it is false; they pray thus in general
for us, therefore we in particular, and for particular blessings may pray unto
them, follows not. See before, Math. 6.9.

Math. 18.10.). Therefore we may pray unto them for particular blessings.



Dives in hell prays unto Abraham, Lu. 16.23.

First, this is but a Parable, and no real history.

Secondly, Dives prays but prevails not, neither

Thirdly, the scope of the Parable is to show that

Fourthly, the Papists say, that Abraham was in Limbo, not in heaven; and
therefore this example will not avail them at all: Dives in hell prayed to
Abraham in Limbo Patrum; therefore the children of men on earth may pray to the
Saints in heaven; this follows not.

The Papists distinguish here, saying that here is a double Mediation, viz.
First, of Redemption; and this Answer. But they give even this Per Christi
sanguinem, by the blood of Christ, but Per Thomae sanguinem, by the blood of
Thomas Becket: not per merita Christi, not for the merit of Christ, but per
merita Pauli, for the merits of Saint Paul. Secondly, of Intercession; and this
Answer. But Christ is our only Intercessour, Romans 8.34. Hebr. 7.25. and 9.24.


The Centurion here sends Legates, and Intercessors

First the office of Christ was not as yet made manifest Hebr. 10.21.22.) was
not as yet clearly published, but now it is, and therefore this example proves
nothing.

Secondly the Gentiles did seem to be without Ephesians. 2.12. and hence the
Canaanitish woman did count her self but as a dog, who had right only to the
crumbs that fell from the childrens table, and not to the childrens bread: yea,
hence it is probable, that this Centurion sends the Elders of the Jews unto
Christ, and comes not himself, because he was a Gentile: but now Christ calls
all, both Jews and Gentiles, to come unto him, Math. 11.28. And therefore this
example will help the Papists nothing.

Thirdly, these Elders of the Jews which the

Fourthly, Non est par ratio, the case is not alike,

1. The Centurion sends living men unto Christ, the Papists pray unto those who
are dead.

2. The Centurion speaks unto them; and before them; the Papists pray unto
those who are not present with them, but in heaven.

3. The Centurion perceives these Elders hear what he says, and are willing
to assent unto his request, and to go unto Christ for him: but we are not
sure when we pray unto the Saints, of these things; but may justly doubt
whether they hear us always or not? whether our requests be pleasing unto
them or not? and whether they will mediate and intercede unto Christ for us or
not? for all these will be hard to prove.

4. The Centurion (as was said before) was a man of greater dign^ty then these
Elders of the Jews; and therefore he commands them to go unto Christ in his
behalf, and not entreats them; but the Papists dare not command, but only pray
the Saints to mediate for them. And therefore from this place the Papists can
prove nothing.



1. The Centurion sends rebellious and wicked Jews unto Christ; and so do the
Papists, when they pray unto some whose souls perchance are in hell.

2. The Centurion gains nothing by their intercession. Non propter personam
Sacerdotum, sed fidem ipsius Chrysostom. imperf. sup.
Christ condescended unto the request of the Centurion, not for the Jewish
Elders sake, but for his faiths sake. So Christ hears the prayers of the
faithful when they pray for themselves, but not the prayers of the Saints for
unbelievers.

Beseeching him.

Centurion come so humbly unto Christ, seeing he was so great a man, and in so
high place? Naaman the Assyrian would not thus abase himself, 2 King. 5.





Numbers, 21.5.6.7. and 1 Samuel. 7.7. and 13.9.



Sic volo, sic jubee. But affliction pulls us down, as we see in Rehoboam. 2 Chronicles. 12.1. unto the 7. verse, and in Jeroboam. 1 King. 13 4.6. and in
Nabuchadnezzar. Daniel. 4.27.34.

Joseph's brethren. Genes. 42.21. and in David toward Shimei. 2 Samuel. 16.10.

Psalm. 107.17.18.19. and in David, Psalm 30.6. etc. and in Manasses. 2 Chronicles.
33.12.



Luke 18.11. and Isa. 65.5.) But in adversity we acknowledge our sins, and
our selves justly punished for our sins. Micah. 7.9. and Eccles. 7.5. and we
have examples hereof in Cain, Genes. 4.13. and Adonibezek. Judge. 1.7.

Secondly, it mollifies and softens the heart, making Esau who weeps for the
punishment, Genes. 27.34. and in David who laments for his sin. 2 Samuel 12. and
Psalm. 22. and 32.

Thirdly, it rectifies the life, Read Psalm. 119.67.71. Chron. 33.14.16. in
which places we shall see that both David and Manasses were made better by
affliction.

Fourthly, it makes the blessings, and gifts of God

. 5. My servant lies at home.

What is here meant by lies?

To lie, signifies not to be unable to rise;

What is here meant by home?

By home he means his own house;

That those servants who are sick are not to be forsaken in their sickness
by their Masters: or,

Why must masters keep their servants when they

First, because it is a work of Religion: to visit Matthew. 25.37. therefore
much more to relieve and care for those who are sick.

Secondly, because Christians ought to be Lazarus, John 11. and for Jerusalem.
Luke, 19.41. Paul weeps for Epaphroditus. Philip. 2.27. and would have us to
be tender over one another, as members of the same body. Romans 12.14.

Thirdly, because otherwise we should be worse Centurion.

Whence comes it that some are so hard hearted as

First, it proceeds from this, that we respect our own proper profit, and not
brotherly love: this Centurion does not thus, but speedily sends the Elders of
the Jews unto Christ humbly beseeching him to cure his servant.

Secondly, it springs from hence, that we do not Ephesians. 6.9. Coloss. 4.1. For
if he should extrude us out of his presence when we are disobedient or
unprofitable servants, what would become of us? yea how miserable should we be?

. 6. Sick of the Palsy.

These sicknesses which ever and anon are healed by our Savior, are types and
figures of the diseases and maladies of the soul: from whence we may observe,

That our souls are sick of the palsy,



Revel. 3.20. but the hard heart will not open. Psalm. 95.8. and Romans 2.5.] Now
hence from the stopping of the pores proceeds these things. viz.

1. Insensibility; for sense is taken away from the nerves, except only when
there is some heat commixt with them, and then the palsy is painful: so
naturally we are insensible, and past feeling Ephesians. 4.18 s.
except only then when the conscience is warmed with the sight, and sense of
sin, and then we become desperate like Cain and Judas.

2. By the stopping of the chinkes and pores of the nerves, so that the animal
spirits cannot pierce into the sinews, is taken away motion. For,

First, when sense is taken away, there is a numnesse; And,

Secondly, when sense and motion are taken away, then comes the palsy and
shaking of the hand or head. Thus it is with us, for naturally,

1. All power of doing good, is taken away, from us. And

2. All motion, that is, we have naturally no power to move our selves unto
good, or to remove evil from us.

3. Those who are sorely taken with the palsy, seem to be very well so long
as they lie quiet; but if they once endeavor to walk, or work, then they
either fall, or feel their impotency, and inability to do that which they
desire. Thus is it with us, so long as we lie quiet in the bed of sin, we are
well enough, and happy enough, thinking that we lac^e nothing, but are rich,
Revel. 3.17.
abounding with all things: but if once we desire and endeavor to lay hold
upon Christ, and to work out our salvation, we shall find that of our selves
we are not able to speak a good word, or think a good thought, or do any
good deed.

4. Those who are taken with the palsy, may dream that they are well, and can
walk, and work, but when they awake there is no such thing: So men lulled
asleep with carnal security persuade themselves, that they are in an estate
of salvation, but when their conscience is awakened they find it otherwise.
Thus much for the place of this disease.

Acts 19.9. Hebr. 3.13. stiff necks hardly bend to the yoke of obedience.
Acts 17.51. and hard hearts will not easily relent. Mark 16.14. but easily
become rebellious and gainsaying. Jerem. 44.16.





1. Sometimes one side, or one member called the dead palsy; which if it have
so thoroughly seized upon or settled and taken root in that part, that it cannot
be removed, at length it kills the wh^le body. So one reigning and remaining
sin is suffi ient to bring both body and soul to eternal perdition and
destruction.

2. Sometimes the palsy goes from one side to the other, and from thence to
the head: So our natural corruption leads us from one sin and degree of
sin unto another, until at length it bring us unto final impenitencie.

3. Although this tough and clammy phlegm which is the cause of the palsy,
settle more in one place then in another, yet is it spread and dispersed
through all the body: so there is a general corruption in out whole nature,
which shows it self more particularly in some sin then in other.

4. There is a kind of palsy called (...), that draws the sinews of the leg^
together, and makes lame. And this I conceive was the cause of his lamenesse
whom we read of Acts 3. So sin makes us lame and unable to walk in the
ways of God, and to run the race that is set before us.

Fifthly, we may consider the cure of the Palsy;

1. The cure of this disease is hindered, and the disease it self made worse
by the air, if it be either cold, moist, thick, or cloudy: but is helped by
the air, which is warm, dry, pure, and clear; So sin is cured by these
means, viz,

First, by a warm and hot zeal against sin and for Gods glory. And,

Secondly, by labor, industry, and endeavor, and not by ease, and idleness.
See before Math. 7.5. And

Thirdly, by purity, and sanctity in our lives and conversations. And,

Fourthly, by the comforts and consolations of the blessed Spirit. And
therefore, let us labor for the fire of true zeal, striving against all sin,
and endeavoring after all grace, fervently and frequently, and then we may
expect the internal joy of the holy Ghost in our souls.

2. The neglect of diet does display, and cause this disease to spread abroad
it self, even unto the benumming of the party: So to be negligent in avoiding
the occasions of sin, to be inconsiderate in our actions and to be void of
care and circumspection in our lives and conversations, does at length bring us
to insensibility in sin. Ephesians. 5.16. And therefore we must be wary,
circumspect, and prudent in all our actions, examining what is good and what is
evil, what is helpful, and what is hurtful for us; and carefully avoid both
sin and the occasions of iniquity.

3. The palsy generally, and every kind thereof is very difficult to be
cured at any time, but if it be once settled, perfected, or the nerves
perfectly closed it is incurable. So sin cannot easily be expelled, or overcome
at any time, but when it is perfect, and ripe unto harvest it is not to be
removed, except the Lord be the more gracious, plucking us as brands out of the
fire: And therefore let us labor to prevent it betimes.

What is required of us? or how may we be free

First, in general come (as this poor man did) unto

Secondly, let us come into the air, that is, 1. Into the warm air. 2. Into
the dry air. 3. Into the pure air. 4. Into the clear air.
That the Spirit may Renew us. Strengthen us. Lead us into al purity. Comfort
us.






1. If we be so pervers in our will (Non persuadebis etiamsi persuaseris:) that
we will not cease from sin although the Lord dissuade us by unanswerable
arguments.

2. If we be so hard in our hearts, that we are moved with nothing, changed in
nothing.

3. If our hearts be so benumbed, and senseless, that we hear the word of
God, and all wholesome counsel, as in a dream or dark speaking.

4. If we be cold in zeal, either against sin, or for God. These are certain
signs of an abiding, and cleaving palsy.



1. If our numnesse be changed into sensiblenesse, that we begin to have a
feeling of our estates.

2. If our motion return: that we can in some sort walk in the ways of God,
and work out our salvation.

3. If we can move vigorously, like that recovered man, who skipped, and
leaped, and praised God Acts 3.7. etc.
if we can run with patience, cheerfulness, and strength, the race that is
set before us: rejoicing in the service and work of the Lord, above all the
ways of wickedness Isa. 58.13. and Psalm. 4.7.
. And thus by the sense of our sins, and estates, and by our repentance, and
new life, and true obedience, we may know that by Christ we are healed of our
palsy.

Verse. 7. And Jesus faith unto him, I will come, and heal him.

And Jesus says unto him.

We may here see Christ's facility, who does not deny to come, neither defer
it, who neither says, I will not come, nor I will come to morrow, but answers,
and assents presently to their desires. Teaching us,





Numb. 12.4. and 2 Samuel 12.13. and Psalm. 32.5. and 107.17.18 19. Isa. 30.19.
Agge. 1.12.13.



1. That we might depend upon him, and his good providence. Deuteronomy. 8.3. And,

2. That being helped, and relieved by him, we might glorify and praise his
name. Psalm. 121.1.2. And therefore we may be certainly assured, that when in
our necessity we call upon God, he will hear and grant our requests.

Cantic. 5.2. Revel. 3.20. And therefore we may be sure that when we knock at
the gate of his mercy, he will hear, and open unto us.

Fourthly, that which God forbids us, he will not [Say not unto thy neighbor,
go, Proverb. 3.28.
and come again to morrow, and I will give thee, if thou have it by thee] And
therefore certainly the Lord will not put us off with delays, but will grant
our requests.

Fifthly, God has ordained prayer as the way and C^ll upon me (says the Lord)
in the time of trouble, and I will hear. Psalm. 50.15. And, ask and ye shall
have. Matthew. 7.7.
And therefore we may easily know, what the reason is that so many are not
delivered and freed from some misery wherein they are, or some malady which
lies upon them, namely, because they pray not unto God. Ye have not, because
ye ask not. James 4.2.

Does God hear all suitors? and if not, then whom

First, God hears not the prayers of wicked men. Prove. 15.8.29. John 9.31.
Psalm. 18.41. and 66 18. and. Isa. 1.15. and Ierem. 11.11. and 14.12. Ezech.
8.18. And therefore if we desire that we may be heard, we must lay aside al
impiety and ungodliness whatsoever.

Secondly, God will not hear the prayers of hypocrites. Matthew. 15.9. Ezech.
33.31. And therefore we must put off the cloak of hypocrisy, and cloth our
selves with the garments of sincerity, if we desire to be heard.

Thirdly, God hears the righteous. Psalm. 6.8. and King. 13.6. And therefore if
we desire that the ^^quests which we offer up unto God may be heard and
granted, we must labor to be made holy and righteous.

Does God hear all prayers, and if not, then what

He hears only godly prayers, John 5.14.

How must we pray?

Pray according to these three rules, to wit,

First, in general pray in faith for whatsoever thou Matthew. 21.22. James 1.5.
etc.

Secondly, when thou prayest for spiritual graces

1. Beg them in the first place: not as the Poet says, quaerenda preunia
primum, but as our Savior says, Socke first, the Kingdom of heaven, and the
righteousness thereof. Matthew. 6.33.

2. Beg them earnestly, and ardently, yea with a true and unfaigned cordial
desire, like Esau who sought for a blessing with tears. Genes. 27.34. And
therefore we should labor to set an edge upon our prayers, and to cry
mightily unto God, as Psalm. 27.4. and 42.1.2. and 84.1.2.10.

Thirdly, when thou prayest for temporal blessings,

1. Rather deprecate, and pray against evils, then desire pleasant things, like
Hezekiah who prayed against his enemies ( Jsa. 37.) and against death. Isa.
38.2. or Jacob who prayed against Esau. Or, Hannah, who desired that her
reproach might b^e taken away. 1. Sam. 1.10.

II. Be not desirous of temporal blessings: that is,

First, love not temporal good things too well, prize them not too highly:
neither

Secondly, complain too much of evils, or crosses; that is, neither fear them
too much, nor sorrow for them too immoderatly.

III. Confess, that thou have deserved greatest evils then lie upon thee; if
thou want any good, or necessary blessing, confess, and acknowledge, that God
justly does withold it from thee: if thou praiest against any evil,
acknowledge that thou have not deserved, that it should be removed, or taken
away from thee, but that it should cleave unto thee, until it had consumed
thee, Daniel 9.7. etc.

IV. Pray with this reservation: Thy will be done, Matthew. 6.11. and 26.39.



Non ad voluntatem, voluptatem; he does not always hear us according to our
desires, because we often ignorantly desire a Scorpion, instead of fish, Luke
11.11. Sick men, mad men, and children often call, and cry for those things
which are hurtful for them, but parents and friends will rather deny them,
then grant to give them, because they know they are hurtful: And thus our
All-wise Father deals with us.

Ad bonum; that is, in those things which tend both to our good, and his own
glory.

I will come.]

I will come, when it is evident by the consequent verses that he came not to
the Centurions house?

Non corpore, sed potentia sanandi (Co^nestor) not in person, but in power;
because he healed him, although he came not at him.

Luke says) and came near unto it, not staying until the Centurion hindered
him by another message.

I will come, is Promissio ben^^olentiae, non assertio operis (Carthus.) a
promise of good will, not of work; or of what he was content to do; not what
really he would do. And thus Christ's promise is true, either Potentialiter, or
Intentunaliter, or C^^dilionaliter, potentially, or intentionally, or
conditionally.

J will come?

Ruler, John 4.49. but promises to go to this poor servant, although this was
not desired of him, as appears by the second message.

Secondly, Christ promises to come, although this be not requested, to show
how that he is ready to give us more then we desire, or pray for: Ephesians. 3.20.
And we have examples, both of his power and love, in Solomon, giving him
wisdom in a greater measure then he desired, and over and above riches which
he desired not, 1 King. 3.13. As also in David, 2 Samuel 7.18. and 2 King. 3.18.

Why does God give us more then we desire?

First, because he loves us more then we love

Secondly, because he knows better what we

Thirdly, because we often want what we are

Wherein does the love, and mercy of God

First, in that he bears with, and suffer us, with

Secondly, the love of God appears in this, Read Amos 2.13. Ezekiel 18.31, 32.
and 33 11.

Thirdly, Gods infinite love, and mercy shows

But God often gives not unto his children what they desire; for Paul prays
often, Cor. 12.8.

First, if God give us not that individual, and Paul, not taking away the
temptation from him, but assisting him so with his grace, that he was not
overcome thereby; which undoubtedly was the greater grace, and more rare
blessing.

Secondly, although God do not give us what Romans 8.28. Now it is much better to
draw sweet out of bitter, then to take away the bitter thing; much better to
make our affliction good, and profitable for us, then to take it away from us.

VERSE. 9. For I am a man under authority,
1. For I also am a man under authority.]

What comparison does the Centurion make between Christ and himself?

First, he compares the person of Christ, and Majoris and minoris: For I am a
man; intimating, that Christ was more then a man: He does not compare himself
with Christ, as equal, out as inferior unto him; he does not deny that
Christ is a man, but acknowledges also that he is God.

Inferioris and superioris; I am a man under the authority of another; to wit,
of the Colonel, General, and the Emperor Tiberius: But thou art subject to
the power of none, but like God himself, art of absolute power.

Majoris, and Minoris: I have soldiers (a cruel kind of men) under me, and I
say unto one man go, and he goes, unto another come, and he comes; and to
my servant do this, and he does it: And therefore I know that sickness and
death, will much more obey thy word; and if thou say to the palsy, depart, it
will depart; and to health return, it will return, Pareus. s. p. 676.
.

When Jesus heard it, he marvelled, and said to them that followed, verily I
say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel.

I have not found.]

The phrase here of not finding, does denote a seeking, from whence two things
might be observed, viz.

First, that Christ does search diligently, and mark all our actions.

viz.





Job 34.21. Psalm 14.2. and 33.13.14. and Prove. 5.21. and 15.3. and Ierem.
32.19. And



I. A veil, or covering hinders men from seeing of things; but all things are
open unto the eyes of the Lord, and from his sight nothing is covered.

II. Absence of a thing hinders a man from the sight thereof; but all things are
always present with, and before God, because he is every where.

III. A multiplicitie of objects hinders a man, and that three manner of ways;
namely, either.

First, it hinders his sight: a man that has many objects to behold, cannot
see them all together; but God sees all things at once. Or

Secondly, it hinders his observation; for he who has many objects to look
upon, can observe nothing diligently, or at least his observation is so much
the less: but God observes all things that are done at once, as diligently, as
if his eye and mind were intent but upon some one particular action. Or

Thirdly, it hinders his remembrance; a man that has many things to behold,
does easily forget many things, because one thing drives out another: But God
forgets nothing at all, having Rowls and Records in heaven, wherein all things
are writ that are done on earth.

. 2. Tantam, so great faith.]

Our Savior seems here to imply, that he had found faith in some Israelites,
and although it was much less then the Centurions faith, yet he did not reject
it: Teaching us,

That God does not reject Infants, Matthew. 12.20. and 19.14. True it is, that
we ought to be.

First, Ardentes zeh, hot through true zeal, as Elias, Christ, and Paul were.
And

Secondly, Lucentes vita, pure, and immaculate, in our lives and conversations,
Mat. 5.16. Phil. 2.15. Yea

Thirdly, Fortes constantia, strong, resolute, and perseverant in the practice
of Religion, Colos. 1.25. and 1 Pet. 5.9. Yet Christ passes by, and pardons
many sins in us, and bears with many infirmities, not rejecting us because we
are weak in faith: And therefore tender consciences may here find comfort in a
threefold distress; to wit.

I. Art thou dejected, and in heaviness, because thou have been a great
sinner? then remember, that such were Mary Magdalen, and Zacheus, and the
thief, and many Publicans, unto whom Christ showed mercy: And therefore he will
be gracious also unto thee, if with them thou do repent, and believe,

II. Art thou dejected, and drenched in tears, because thou art weak in faith;
then remember that Christ has promised, that he will not break bruised reed,
nor quench the smoking fla^.

III. Art thou cast down, because thou art weak in sanctity, and obedience?
then remember that Christ has promised to give th^e life, and light ( Ephesians.
5.14.) and to cure all thy infirmities, Psalm 103.3. And to prune thee, and
enable thee to bring forth much fruit. John 15.2.


What does God require of us unto this comfort?

First, that we have a good foundation, viz. a

Secondly, that we endeavor, and strive unto

How is there a greater faith, and a less, or in

First, sometimes in diverse men: thus the time Peter's faith was greater, and
Thomas his faith less.

Secondly, sometimes in the same man, but at Paul saw clearly, sometimes but in
a dark speaking, 1 Cor. 13. Our faith is more quick sighted at one time, then
at another.

Thirdly, there are diverse degrees of faith, as of men of ripe years: Thomas
his faith at first was very weak, but afterward a strong, and comfortable,
applicative faith. Read 2 Cor. 10.15. and 2 Thessal. 1.3. and Ephesians. 1.13.

Fidem, so great faith.]

Mat. 9.22. and Mark 25.



Luke 18.8.

Let us sin, that grace may abound, Romans 6.1.







First, faith is a certain persuasion, as appears Romans 8.38. Heb. 10.22.

Secondly, it is given, or wrought by the Holy Ghost, as is clear from Romans
5.5. and Ephesians. 1.18.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost works faith in us by the means, and ministry of the
word, John 17.10. Romans 10.17.

Fourthly, the Holy Ghost having by the word of God wrought faith in us, hence
we are renewed, and changed into new creatures, John 1.12.13. and 2 Cor. 5.17.

Fifthly, we being renewed, and our hearts cleansed, Christ vouchsafes to
dwell in us, as is evident from 2 Cor. 6.16. and 13.5. and Galath. 2.20. Ephesians.
3.17. Revelat. 3.20.

Sixthly, Christ dwelling in us, our faith becomes an active, and operative
faith, Gal. 5.6.





First, faith is the work of the Holy Ghost, wrought by the word: And
therefore all those who believe, follow the conduct of the Spirit, Romans 8.9.14.
framing their lives according to his will revealed in the word: and not
according to the lusts, and desires of the flesh: for the proof of this
observe,

I. All men are the vessels of God, Esaias 52.11. and 1 Thessalonians 4.3 and 2 Timothy 2.20.

II. But there are two things wanting in us; to wit,

First, we have no oil; we are naturally but empty Lamps. Neither

Secondly, are we able to receive oil, for the natural man cannot understand
the things that be of God, 1 Cor. 2.14.

III. Therefore against this vacuity, and emptiness, God has given a remedy:
namely.

First, the word, this is the oil which enlightens us. And

Secondly, the Holy Spirit opens the heart, Act. 16.14.
as he did the heart of Lydia, and makes it capable to receive this oil, and to
understand this enlightening word. And

Thirdly, then infuseth this oil of grace, and spiritual knowledge into our
hearts, Romans 5.5.

IV. And hence comes the effectual vocation, when we answer to Gods call. For

First, the word calls us, Rom 10. but we refuse to hear it, Esaias 53.1.

Secondly, the Spirit of God opens the heart, enlightens the eyes, and gives
unto the mouth a taste, and relish of the word of God, and heavenly things: but
we are ready to relapse, and fall from all these graces, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.

Thirdly, the Spirit does imprint, stamp, and set on the seal: so sealing us
unto the day of our salvation, 1 Cor. 1.21, 22.
. And being thus sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise, we then believe,
Ephesians. 1.13. And thus we see that faith is the work of the Holy Ghost, and how
it is wrought by the word.

Secondly, faith being once wrought in us by the Spirit, we are then confirmed,
rooted, grounded, and established in the faith, Coloss. 1.25. and 2.6.7. Whence
proceeds,

I. Internal peace of conscience, Philippians 4.7. And

II. Spiritual joy, and rejoicing, Romans 5.1. and 14.17. and 1 Pet. 1.8. And

III. External profession of Christ, Religion, and of our faith in Christ, 2
Cor. 4.13. and 1 Timoth. 6.12.

Thirdly, faith being wrought, and infused in us, and we established in faith,
then we are renewed, and sanctified, both in heart and life: for Faith purges
the heart (Act. 15.9.) and the heart being purged, the life will be pure:
wherefore faith is called a holy unction 2 Cor. 1.21.
; because from hence,

I. We have victory both over Sin, Romans 6.14. Sin shall no more have dominion
over you, because you are under grace. And the World, 1 John 5.4. This is the
victory that overcommeth the world even your faith. And the Devil, 1 John 2.13.
and 1 Pet. 5.9. and Romans 16.20. Ephesians. 6.16.


II. Hence we have power of fructifying in good works, and the fruits of
obedience, and sanctification, John 15.2.3. and Gal. 5.6. And therefore there
is little sign of any faith, where either sin raigns, or God is coldly, or
remissy served.

Fourthly, faith being wrought in us, and rooted in us, and we renewed and
sanctified thereby, hence we have hope, according to the Apostles prayer. Now
the God of hope fill you with all joy, and peace in believing; that you may
abound in hope, through the power of the Holy Ghost, Romans 5.13. and 1 Peter
1.5. And hence from this confident hope, and assurance that we have (in God) of
eternal life, we hunger, and desire, and long to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ, Philip. 1.23. and 2 Corinthians. 5.2. etc. And therefore let us judge our
selves, and our faith, by these things.

Not in Israel.]

Israel?

Hier. s. But that this is not the meaning, will appear by and by.





I. In respect of the person Plus est idiotam pauca sapere, quam virum multa
Chrysostom. imperf. s.
It is more for a child to understand a few things, then for a man, many.

II. In respect of the means, it is more for an illiterate man to understand
some few hard, and difficult things, then for a great, and deep learned
Scholar to understand many: it is more for a man to be good in bad and
ignorant places, where he has neither good examples, exhortations, nor
instructions, then in good places; where he has many shining lights, and holy
means. And therefore, although this Centurions faith in it self, were but
equal to the faith of many Israelites; yet in regard that he was a Roman, and
they Jews, he not enjoying those means which they did, his faith may be said
to be greater then theirs. Thus some, I say, expound these words, and indeed
this has a fair gloss, and helps something; but there is something more in
the words, for his faith was greater, Revera; as follows by and by. Now these
three Expositors interpret the word Nimis stricte.

Abraham, nor any other. True it is, that this phrase is sometimes thus used,
as in Matthew. 11.11. Among them (says Christ) that are born of women, there
has not risen a greater Prophet then John the Baptist; that is, not any as
yet: But yet it is not thus taken in this place, because here our Savior
speaks of the time present only; that as yet in his preaching and journeying,
he had not found one in Israel of greater faith; except those which follow.

Nimis stricte, so these two latter Nimis late: for we must neither extend
them to all times, nor to all persons of this age, whereof Christ speaks; as
though the Centurions faith were greater then Peter's, John's or the blessed
Virgins: for certainly Mary's faith was greater and Peter's, for he walked upon
the waters: And therefore this is to be understood of the auditors, and hearers
of Christ, and not of his family.

How was the faith of the Centurion greater

First, Respectu temporis, in regard of the time, Quia Deitas Christi nondum
mundo agnita, (Calvin. s.) Because the Deity of Christ was not as yet known
unto the world; but he acknowledged it.

Secondly, Respectu personae, in regard of the person

I. A Heathen, not a Jew.

II. A Soldier, not a Scribe, or Pharisee, or Doctor of the Law.

III. A man who was a stranger from the means of knowledge; for he was not
(that we read of) a Proselite, or Disciple, or hearer of the Scribes, and
Expounders of the Law: And yet he believes.

Thirdly, his faith was greater, Respectu laboris, at contemplatur (Chrysostom.
s.) but yet he was no stranger unto internal spiritual, and divine
meditations, and contemplations, but therein more frequent then Israel.

Fourthly, the Centurions faith was greater, Respectu humiliationis, in regard
of his humiliation; he does think himself unworthy that Christ should do any
thing for him, verse 8.

Fifthly, and lastly, his faith was greater, Respectu in regard of the strength
thereof, for he does not seek a sign (as the Jews elsewhere did) but rests
only in the word Speak but the word, and my servant shall be whole, verse 8.
he does not say, Come quickly, as the Ruler did, John 4.49. but only makes his
case known, and so leaves it; Lord (says he) My servant lies at home sick of
the Palsy, grievously tormented, verse. 6. Yea, his faith does exceed the faith
of Martha (who scarcely believed, John 11.21.24.) and of Philip (who knew not
the Father, John 14.8.) and of Thomas Didymus (John 20.25. who would not
believe without some ocular evidence) but this our Centurion believes in
Christ, boldly, confidently, and fully, Speak but the word oh Lord, and it is
enough: say but to the Palsy depart, and to health return, and then I know my
servant shall be whole.

If the Centurions faith were thus great, then Luke 73. where it is said, He
sent unto Jesus the Elders of the Jews, beseeching him that he would come,
and heal his servant.

First, it may be, he staggered in faith, and doubted at first, and afterward
repents him of his weakness, and doubting.



Luke 7.6.

that Christ would be merciful unto his servant; Christ answers that He will
come unto him, and heal his servant: now the promise of Christ's coming was
more then the Centurion desired, or more then he thought himself worthy of: And
therefore when he perceives Christ's purpose, and hears his promise of coming
unto him, then he sends this second message: Lord speak but the word, and my
servant shall be healed.

Mat. 2. And in those Publicans and Harlots, who entered into heaven, when the
Pharisees were shut out, Mat. 21.31. etc.









Ex part Dei, on Gods part, the lack of the means is supplied by internal
grace, 2 Corinthians 3.17.

Ex part nostra, on our part, the want of the means, is supplied by
contemplation, prayer, and the exercises of piety; as we may perceive in the
Eunuch, and Cornelius.



First, Contemplando, in contemplation; for that supplies the lack of the
means, where they can not be had, as rumination does nourish the means, where
they are bad. Mary is commended, because she ponders those things in her heart
which she heard; and it is not enough to hear, or read much, except we
seriously meditate of those things, which we read and hear. Secondly,
Humiliando, by thinking basely and contemptibly of our selves: here observe two
times, viz. I. In the entrance into the profession of Religion, and then many
are lowly, as the Monks, when they first enter into o^ders, or when they aim at
some great future preferment. II. After they are s^aled with the Spirit of
promise: now for men to be truly humbled with a sense of their infirmities, and
weakness, after they are eff^ctually called, and truly assured of their
election and calling, is both good and pleasing unto God, Phil. 3.13. etc.
. Thirdly, in the measure, and strength of his faith, we should learn so
confidently to believe in God, that we durst commit our selves unto him
wholly, cheerfully, and by and by.


VERSE. 11. And I say unto you, Verse. 11.
that many shall come from the East, and West, and shall sit down with
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven.
. 1. Many shall come.]

They are said to be but few, Mat. 7.14. Abraham, Genesis 12.1. And of two in the
host of Israel, Caleb and Joshua, Numb 14.30. Therefore how does our Savior
say, that many shall come unto heaven?

First, they are few comparatively, in regard of John, We are of God, and the
whole world lies in wickedness. 1 John 5.19.

Secondly, but absolutely they are many: as Genesis 33.16. and 15.5. and Revel.
7.9. And more particularly thus.

I. It were opposite to the glory of God, not to have many to glorify him in
heaven. And

II. It were opposite to the death of Christ, not to have many saved thereby. And

III. It were opposite to the ministry of so many millions of Angels, who are
made ministering Spirits, Heb. 1. God made all things for his glory: and
therefore certainly he would decree, and ordain many to glorify him in heaven,
where he is most truly glorified. Christ's bloodshed, suffering, and death were
of infinite value, and himself of infinite price and esteem with God: and
therefore undoubtedly the Lord would appoint many to be ransomed, redeemed and
saved by him. The number of the Angels which stand about the throne of God, is
ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands, Rev. 5.11. And
therefore certainly God has many Saints, for whose good these hoasts of Angels
are employed; and consequently, there are many who shall come into the Kingdom
of heaven.

From the East and West.]

from the East and West?

Esa. 49.6. and Luke 1.32. Acts 9.15. and 13.47. and 22.21. and 26.23. etc.
Romans 3.29. and 9.22. etc. and Chap. 11.



Act. 10.35. and 13.26. And therefore we should highly esteem the hearing of
the word of God, it being the means of our vocation, and of the opening of our
heart, Act. 16.14. and of the removal of the vail of ignorance from our eyes,
2 Cor. 3.16.

Abraham, and makes the Gentiles his sons.

And shall sit down.]

sitting?

sitting signifies Loco manner, to abide in a place, as Mark 14 34. Sit ye
here (that is abide in this place) and watch.

fit, sometimes signifies to be quiet.

fit, sometimes signifies to possess glory: Then shall the Son of man sit
upon the thron of his glory, Mat. 25.31.

fit, sometimes signifies to feast and banquet, as Matthew. 14.19. Luke 7.36. and
12.37. and thus in this place it is taken for our feasting, and banqueting in
heaven, as is plainly expressed, Luke 13.29.





There is a threefold banquet: to wit,

Symbolicall, in the Church; namely, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, because
the children of God are there made partakers of the body of Christ, which is
meat indeed, John 6.51.55.

Secondly, Spiritual, in this life; this banquet is described, Prove. 9 2. etc.
and Cantic. 8.2. Luke 14.16. Psalm 63.5.

Thirdly, Celestial, hereafter in the kingdom of heaven, Revel. 27, and 7.17.
and 19.9.





What must we meditate of?

First, remember that there is a period, and end It is appointed unto all men
once to die, Heb. 9.27. And,

Secondly, that we have lived long already; and

Thirdly, remember how great horror is prepared

Fourthly, meditate daily of the sudden approach These. 5.2, 3.

Fifthly, meditate continually of those things

What, and how great things are in heaven?

First, although what they are we know not Optima, the best things that ever
we enjoyed, or can wish to enjoy, Psalm 36.8.

Secondly, in heaven we shall enjoy good and repletionem, to the replenishing,
and satisfying of our souls: for there we shall want nothing that we can
wish for, Psalm 22.26. and 17.15.

Thirdly, we shall enjoy the joys of heaven Psalm 16.11) for there is full,
complete, and perfect joy.

Fourthly, this joy and felicity shall be perpetual, Psalm. 16.11. Ezech.
47.12. Revelat. 22.2. And therefore let us so seriously meditate of these joys,
that we may be careful so to live here, that whenever the Lord shall take us
hence, we may be sure to be made partakers of them.

Are the children of God miserable in this

They are blessed even in this life, viz.

First, they are endued with knowledge: so long as they are natural, the word
is unto them as a strange language which they cannot understand: but when once
they are anointed with spiritual grace, then the eyes of their understanding
are opened, and they enabled to see, and perceive spiritual things.

Secondly, they are endued with strength in some measure, to perform what they
know to be their duty, Psalm. 65.12. and Ier. 31.12. and John 7.37. etc.

Thirdly, hence they have a good conscience, which does not accuse, but excuse
them; for from sincerity of obedience arises peace of conscience, Proverb.
15.15.

Fourthly, even in this life the righteous have internal blasts v that is,
Cant. 4.16.
not only the motions of the spirit, but also the joy of the Holy Ghost, and
some sweet, and comfortable taste, of the powers and joys of the world to come.

Fifthly, the children of God are most happy men even in this life, by reason
of their society with the Saints on earth, and their union and communion wirh
Christ by faith, and the fruition and possession of the Holy Ghost in their
souls, who remains and abides with them, to direct, instruct, strengthen,
counsel, comfort, and enlighten them, all the days of their life.





First, that the Table, is the Table of God; and therefore called the Lords
Table.

Secondly, at that Table Christ serves; who gives food, and dainties to all his
welcome guests.

Thirdly, the food he gives, and which we there eat, is his body.

Fourthly, the guests are the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles; for they all
ate the same spiritual meat, and all drank the same spiritual drink, 1 Cor.
10.1.2. etc. and Heb. 12.22.

Fifthly, the fruit of this feast is most weighty; For it is either,

I. A seal unto life, and salvation: Or,

II. A testimony against us unto condemnation, 1 Cor. 11.31. And therefore we
had need be careful so to prepare our selves unto this Holy Table, that we may
receive the pledges of love, and seals of life from Christ, and not arguments
of our condemnation.









I. Labor to hate all sins with a perfect hatred, in regard, both of sin it
self, and the punishment thereof, looking upon it with horror, hatred, fear,
and disdain.

II. Pray fervently, and heartily unto thy God, that he would enable thee to
leave, and forsake al sins, and preserve thee from the love of any, so long
as thou live.

Matt. 11.28.



. 4. With Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.]

Whether were the Patriarchs in heaven, or in Limbo before Christ came?

They were not in Limbo Patrum.

The Papists to prove the contrary hereunto, that they were, object many
things, of which briefly.

The Prophet David prophesying of Christ, that he shall lead captivity
captive; that is, shall bring the Fathers out of their prison, wherein they were
detained, and lead them unto heaven, Psalm 68.18.

First, this cannot be understood of the Saints

Secondly, the place is plainly meant of Christ's

It is said plainly of Christ, that He brought forth 9.11.) Now out of hell
there is no redemption; and therefore the Fathers were in Limbo until Christ
came.

This place is urged by the most of the Papists, Limbus, which they fain for
the Fathers; for in Limbo Patrum was nothing but quiet and peace, but in this
prison (mentioned by the Prophet Zachary) is sorrow and pain, as the Papists
confess: and therefore this place, as unfitly alleged for the confirmation of
the present controversy, according to the opinion of their best Writers, I
pass by.

Saint Peter says, Pet. 3.19. etc. Therefore until Christ's coming the Fathers
were in Prison.

Having elsewhere amply to consider of this place, I here leave it with this
answer; Noah's preaching unto those, who were now in hell.

But the same Apostle says, that the Gospel Pet. 4.6. And therefore the
Fathers were in Limbo, for who else can be meant but they?

The Apostle there means those who were dead in their sins,

How does it appear, that Limbus patrum is but

By these few and plain Arguments, viz. First, because the Spirit, Eccles.
12.7. And this was affirmed by Solomon before Christ came. Secondly, because
Christ would have the souls of his children to be where he is. John 17. Now he
was in heaven, not in Limbo; yea, he is the God of Abraham, as he says
himself elsewhere; and the Text calls the place, where Abraham was, the
kingdom of heaven (a title never given to their fained Prison, or Cell:) And
therefore the Fathers were not in Limbo. Thirdly, because the Scriptures speak
only of two places, heaven and hell, Mat. 25. of two sorts of vessels, of anger
and mercy, Romans 9. For both Abraham's bosom, and Paradise signify Heaven, as
Augustine most truly affirms. Fourthly, because we and the Fathers are saved
both one way, and by one and the same faith: hence Christ says, Abraham saw
me. John 7. And the Apostle says, that we and they were made partakers of the
same Sacrament, 1 Cor. 10.1. And therefore why should they be debarred so long
out of heaven, more then we? Fifthly, because the death of Christ was
powerful, and effectual, before he was crucified; he was a Lamb slain from
the beginning of the world, Revel. he is one and the same to day, and to
morrow, and for ever, Heb. 13. And all things are present with God, he being
immovable: And therefore they were saved by faith in Christ to come, as well as
we by faith in Christ already come.


Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob?

the God of Araham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.

Stephen, Act. 7. from verse 2. begin at Abraham, and so proceed unto the r^st;
that they might not say, he preached novelties, and strange things unto them.

Paul also insists so much upon the example of Abraham, Romans 4. Whence we may
learn.

Abraham, and not the sacrifices, and ceremonies of Moses: Read for the proof
hereof the Epistle to the Galathians, and to the Hebrews, and the three first
Chapters unto the Romans: and besides, remember that there were never two ways
unto salvation: true it is, that the means were diverse, for the Lord instructed
his servants, sometimes by Apparitions, sometimes by Visions, and sometimes by
his word, Heb. 1.1. But there is but one way only of faith unto salvation.
Read John 8. how Abraham desired to see Christ; and Heb. 11. how all the
faithful were saved by faith in Christ; and how Moses refers them unto the
Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18. which is Christ, Act. 3. and 7. and Philip. 3.9. etc.

In the Kingdom of heaven.]



First, certainly it may be extended unto the sitting signifies rest.

Secondly, but it is to begin in the kingdom of Venient, They shall come.

From whence we may learn:

VERSE. 12.
. 1. The Children of the Kingdom.]

What is meant here by the word Kingdom?

The Church Militant.

Why is the Church Militant called a Kingdom?

First, because it is the only way unto the

Secondly, because it is the peculiar Kingdom

For as he is God, so he rules over all the world, and is called the King of
Kings, and the Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy 6.15. (...), God and man, so he raigns
over his body, the Church; thus he is said to reign over the house of Jacob,
Luke 1.33. And we are said to be translated into this his kingdom, Colos. 1.13.
which at the last day he will deliver over to his Father, 1 Corinthians
15.24.27.


We may from hence learn, Romans 1.5. Deuteronomy. 18, 19.

Why must we be subject to the laws, ordinances,

First, because of that relation which we have Ephesians 5. Our Father, Esa.
9.6. Our Head, Ephesians 4. Our God, as is expressed in the Creed: And therefore
there is great reason that we should be subject unto him.

Secondly, because he has deserved this subjection: Luke 1.75. Titus 2.14.
Philip 2.7. etc. When Kings ransom any it is for their service, and so does
Christ, who redeemed us, that we might henceforth serve him in righteousness,
and true holiness, Romans 6.18.22. all our days.

Thirdly, we must be subject unto Christ, because Romans 2.8. Ephesians. ^.6. and 2
Thessal. 1.8.

Why are these who shall be cast out called Children?

First, because they were born of Abraham according



Ierem. 22.5.24. and 44.26. John 8.33.41. and 9.40. Act. 6.14.



Habak. 1.13. Jeremiah prays for the people, but God answers him, they have
sinned grievously, and therefore he will not hear his prayer, neither must he
pray any more for them Ier. 14.10. etc.
: So also the Lord answers Ezechiel, Their sin is very grievous, and therefore
my eye shall not pity them Ezech. 9.9. etc.
.

Ierem. 5.25. Esaias 59.1. and 38.1. Romans 11.22. Ezech. 18.26. and 1 Samuel 2.30.

Many there are among us, who have diverse Egyptian R^eds to lean upon, which at
length will deceive them: As for example.

First, some say our Fathers were enlightened, and delivered from the darkness
of popish blindness, and made Partakers of the truth: And therefore we may
hope that God will still continue to be gracious unto us, and continue the
means of grace and salvation among us. But woe be unto us if we have no other
stafte to trust unto, but only this; for God did thus unto Judah, and yet at
last took away the Hedge, and laid waste the Vineyard, Esaias 5 27.

Secondly, others say, our Fathers forsook Popery, and embraced the truth; and
we have done so also, still cleaving unto the same Religion, abhorring the
Whore of Babylon with all her trash; And therefore we may hope for mercy: But
alas this is but a broken Reed, for we may profess the truth Ore tenus, and
draw near unto God with our lips, having our hearts far from him, and near unto
sin, and then he will not regard us, Mat. 15 9.

Thirdly, some say, oh but we have entered into a Covenant with God, to serve
him with all our hearts, and with all our souls, 2 Chronicles. 15.12. But this is
worth nothing, except we perform our promises, and pay our vows, continuing
and abiding in the service of God unto the end, for this only has a promise of
blessedness and mercy.

Shall be cast out.

He will not quench the smoking flax: and St. James 2.13. says, that mercy
rejoices against judgment: yea, election, which is the foundation of God, is
firm and sure, Romans 11.29. and 2 Timothy 2.19. How then does our Savior here say,
That the Children shall he cast out?

First, in general, the foundation of God

Secondly, true it is, that Christ's mercy is infinite,

Thirdly, none are threatened here to be cast

But those who are threatened to be cast out, are

First, he will not, he does not; as appears

I. He confesses that salvation is of the Jews, and belongs unto them, John
4.22. Hence

II. He denies the Canaanitish woman her request at first, because mercy was
proper unto the Israelites, Mark 7.27.

III. He commands his Apostles to go unto the Jews, not unto the Gentiles,
Matthew. 10.5.6. Yea,

IV. The Apostles obey, first confessing that the tender of mercy belongs
primarily unto the Jews, Romans 3.2. and 9.4. And then practicing their Masters
mandate, Act. 3.25. and 10.14. and 11.19.13.46.

Secondly, the Jews were rejected for their Esaias 1. and Amos 1.3. etc. and
2.4. etc. and Romans 2.28.

For what sins were these children of the Kingdom,

First, for their Incredulity, because they Romans 11.

Secondly, for their contempt of the word of

Thirdly, for their obstinacy, hardness of Esaias 48.4 Mark. 3.5. Act. 7.5, and
13.45.50. and 14.19. and 17.5. and 18.6.12. and 21.27. and 25.2. From hence we
may learn,

That obstinacy against,

How does this appear?

First, plainly by these places, Esa. 5.24. and Ier. Ezech. 7.10.

Secondly, because God hates those who are Psalm 95.8. Romans 2.5. Esaias 65.2.
and 5.24. Ier. 6.10.11. and 28 32.

Thirdly, God loves those who tremble at his Esaias 66.2, 5.) and therefore
contemners thereof shall find no mercy.

Fourthly, God does ordinarily convert men King. 22.19. Ezech. 11.19. and 2 Cor
3.3.) and therefore there is small hope of the conversion (but great fear of the
confusion) of those who despise this ordinary means of salvation.

Fifthly the word is powerful and sharp, like a two edged sword, which is able
to divide betwixt the marrow and the bones (Heb. 4.12.) And therefore when it
does not mollify, and humble, it is a sign of a heart come to an exquisite
hardness. Wherefore we should (when the word works not upon us) complain of
the hardness of our hearts, and labor for the redress thereof.



First, obstinate, and perverse, as Ier. 44.16. The word that thou speak
unto us in the name of the Lord, we will not do; but we will do whatsoever
proceeds out of our own lips. Secondly, blind, and ignorant; hence it is
said, that our Savior was angry, (...), for the hardness, or blindness (for
the word bears both) of their heart, Mark 3.5. And hence also he taxes their
dullness, and slownesse of heart, Mark 16.14.


Into outer darkness.



They shall be cast into outer darkness; that is, into the corporal, and
palpable darkness of the infernal prison, presently after their death, in
regard of the soul; and at the day of judgment, both in r^gard of soul and
body.

Darkness is no other thing then a privation of light; now light is twofold:
namely,

I. Spiritual, as wisdom, grace, and truth: Now the privation of this light
is internal darkness, and ignorance, in the spirit, and inward man.

II. There is a sensible, and corporal light, whose privation is outer
darkness: and this is the darkness spoken of in this place: For although
there be fire in hell, yet it is a dark, and smokie fire, and not clear;
except only so, as the damned may see one another, for the greater increase of
their misery Carthus. s.
.

VERSE. 13. And Jesus said unto the Centurion, go thy way, and as thou have
believed, so be it done unto thee: And his servant was healed in the self same
hour.
Go thy way.



Sam. 14.8. Mark 5.34. Luke 17.19. Whence we learn,





vix. First, from these places, Esaias 57.19 and John 14.27. and 2 King. 5.19.
Mat. 15.28. John 4.50. Secondly* because he is the God of peace, 1 Thessal.
5.23. Philip. 4.7. Thirdly, because peace is the effect of Justification, Romans
5.1. Whence the Angels sing peace on earth, because they who are justified by
him, have true peace, Luke 2.14. Fourthly, because this peace is our armor,
and weapons against affliction, John 16.33. And therefore certainly the Lord
will give peace at length to all that sue, and seek for it at his hands.


How must we wait, and expect for this peace

First, patiently, I waited patiently (says David) for the Lord, and he
inclined unto me, Psalm. 40.1.

Secondly, industriously; we must not expect Cantic. 3.1. but in his ways and
ordinances.

Thirdly perseverantly, knowing that our

VERSE. 14.
. 1 He saw his Wives Moth^r.

What may we say, or think of the Popish

First, that it is opposite to Scripture, which says It is better to marry th^n
to burn, 1 Cor. 7.9. Yea, and that when marriage is less convenient, verse
26.32. And therefore even then they may marry, verse 2. But now with the Papists
fornication is better then marriage, for the former violates not the vow, but
the latter does, as they say Bellar. de Monach. 2.30. f. 1265. A.
: though Saint Paul say, It is honorable, and Whoremongers God will judge,
Heb. 13.4.

Secondly, it is opposite to Antiquity to forbid

I. The authority of this Prohibition, from whence it was: here observe,

First, the Apostles did only approve of single life and commend it unto us by
their example.

Secondly, they did not positively herein ordain, or establish any thing: Pope
Siricius being the first that did directly command it. See 82. Did.. plurimos,
et gloss. Litera i.

II. Observe the degrees of this Prohibition, how far it differs from the
Prohibition of those of former times: For

First, the Ancients did enjoin a separation of the Minister from his wife; but
this separation was not total, that they should never come together again, as
appears by Ephesians. 5.32. and Canon. Apost. 5. and 28. Did.. Si quis doceat, et.
Si quis disceruit.

Secondly, the Ancients did prohibit the Minister the knowledge of his wife;
but this prohibition was not perpetual, that he should never know her (as
appears 28. Did.. de Syracusan, and 31. Did.. Quoniam) but that he should not
know her, Tempore of ficij diebus ministerij, when he was to undertake, and
discharge his ministerial function: And this the Fathers thought decent, 28.
Did.. de Syracusan.

Thirdly, the Ancients did prohibit the contracts of the Ministers; but this
prohibition was not universal (28. Did. de Syracusan. and. Diaconi) as though
they might not be contracted at all to any; but only that they might not be
contracted a second time (that is, might not marry twice) neither to a widow,
nor to an infamous person.

But the Papists now adays, do not only forbid Bigamy, or marrying with
widows, or infamous women, but all contracts and marriage; yea all carnal
knowledge of their wives, if perhaps they have been married before they entered
into orders; yea a total separation, for they cast the wives out of their
husbands house, and habitation, directly contrary to the Canons, and all
antiquity.



I. Adulterous, and unclean Ministers were to be cast out of the Ministry,
28. Did.. Presbyter si. But the Papists now adays observe not this; for if
all unclean Priests were cast out, they would have but few left in their
Cloisters.

II. Episcopus fornicationem pretio permittens suspendendus, (83. Did.. Si
Episcopus) If any Bishop shall by any license, or for any bribe, tolerate, or
permit fornication, or whoredom, he shall be suspended, this was the ancient
Law: But now it is other wise, as appears by the hundred grievances of the
Germans.

And sick of a fever.]

Hilary allegorizeth this verse very acutely, Peter's house signifies the body,
his wives mother signifies Infidelity, whose daughter (Free Will) the soul
marries, but the presence of Christ cures it (Hilar. s.) But me thinks the
Mother in law should rather signify the Will, and the Fever signify
Infidelity, which are cured by Christ: But passing by this, I will instance but
only upon one thing in general: Before we showed how sin, and the sickness
of the soul was like unto Leprosy, and the Palsy; we will now show, how
sin in the soul may be resembled to a Fever in the body.

Fever?

Fever, Respectu originis, in regard of the original thereof: For

I. The Fever arises within, in the bowels, and intrals; and although the
Symptoms be without, yet the cause lurks within. So the cause of all actual
transgressions, which appear in the life, is that original corruption, which
is within in the heart, Romans 7.23, 24.

II. The Fever arises from a threefold cause; namely, either

First, from some pestilentiall, and obnoxious air without: Or

Secondly, from the society of those who are infected, or sick of a Fever. Or

Thirdly, from some internal corruption in the body, or humors; and this is
the cause for the most part. Thus sin either comes,

I. From the infection of Satan, (1 John 3.8.) and the allurements of the
world 1 ^o^^ 2.16.
: Or

II. From the society of wicked men, 2 Cor. 6.14. Ephesians. 5 11. Or,

II. From the internal corruption, and concupiscence of the heart, Romans 7.5.
Iam. 1.14.

Secondly, sin may be resembled to a Fever, in regard of the nature thereof.
For

I, The substance of the Fever is a heat besides nature, which extinguisheth
the natural heat: So the fire of concupiscence, and lust of sin, does
extinguish the fire and heat of zeal: For where sin is hot, there zeal is
cold.

II. The Fever arises diversely, from diverse humors; to wit, sometimes from
choler, sometimes from melancholy, sometimes from blood; and yet it is one,
and the same Fever. So sin sometimes arises from the lust of the flesh,
sometimes from the lust of the eyes, sometimes from the pride of life (1 John
2.16.) And whatsoever the root is, the fruit is sin.

III. There are two kinds of Fever; a continual Fever, and a Fever with some
intermission: now this has his seat in a more ignoble place, but that in the
vessels themselves, and veins, and blood. This is diversely expounded: to wit,

First, some expound it of the diverse degrees of sinning; Some sin with some
intermission of repentance, some sin perpetually.

Secondly, some expound it of Adam, and us who are now corrupted by Adam: H^e
at first was pure, and therefore sin in him was with some intermission, but in
us it is continual, because in sin we were conceived, and brought forth in
iniquity.

Thirdly, some expound this of the sins of natural, and regenerate men: The
unregenerate sin continually, the regenerate but sometimes: Sin in the natural
man has his seat in the vessels, in the whole nature, a capite ad calcem. from
the head to the heel; but in the spiritual, and regenerate man, sin has his
seat only in the ignoble part (the flesh) In me, that is, in my flesh dwells no
manner of thing that is good, Romans 7. And therefore natural men must labor to
be renewed in the Spirit of their minds, Romans 12.2. Ephesians. 4.23. Now this
intermissive Fever again is twofold: namely,

First, Ephemera, which lasts but for one fit, or one day, and comes no more:
Thus the best sometimes fall into some one grievous sin or other once, but
are never after overtaken therewith; as Noah, who was once drunk, and Lot once
incestuous, and David once adulterous; and as Peter who once denied his Master.
And

Secondly, Putrida, when the humors being partly corrupted, upon every
distemper, the Fever is ready to return: And thus both the regenerate, and the
unregenerate are often overcome by some one sin or other; we carry a body of
sin about us, and we have the relics of sin in us, which oftentimes prevail
against us.

Thirdly, sin may be resembled to a Fever, Respectu modi procedendi, in regard
of the manner of

I. The Fever begins with the heat, and warmth of the body, that being the
first thing that sensibly it ceazeth upon, and infrigidates, and makes cold the
whole body: So sin first ceazeth upon zeal, making that first lukewarm, then
by and by stone cold.

II. At the first the Fever makes us cold, but by and by we burn. So at first
we are afraid of sin, by and by fearlesse thereof; at first our affections
freez, afterward fry in the love of sin; at first we abstain from sin, and
are hardly drawn to the committing of sin, but by and by custom makes it
habitual, and natural unto us, and us insensible of it.

III. In a Fe^er, when we are cold, yet even then we are hot within, though we
are not so sensible of that heat: So even then, when the natural man fears,
and trembles to commit sin, there is the fire of evil concupiscence, which in
time sets on fire the whole course of nature, and shows it self outwardly in
the practice of sin.

IV. The Fever inflames the whole body, even to the very toes of the feet: So
sin wounds and enfeebles us, from the crown of the head, to the sol^ of the
foot, Esaias 1.6.

Fever, Respectu effectuum, in regard of the effects: For

I. The Fever, (in membris) in the parts of the body works this effect, it
debilitates and weakens the whole man, so that he cannot walk forth of doors;
nay, be cannot walk within his own house, neither is able to stand, but
forced to sit or lie, and keep his bed: So by sin we are so weakened, that we
are neither able to walk in the ways of God, nor run the race that he has
set before us, nor work out the work of our salvation, with fear and trembling.

II. The Fever (in intellectu) in the understanding works this effect, it
disturbs and takes away the use of reason; making a man not know what he says,
or does: And this is for the most part (or at least very often) mortal and
deadly. So when men grow obstinate, and bold in sinning, and are neither
sensible of sin, nor punishment, but will do whatsoever they will ( Ier.
44.16.) it is an argument of a soul not distant from death.

III. The Fever (In appetitu) in the appetite produces these effects: namely,

First, it loathes the most wholesome things: So sin makes us to loath both,

I. Good works, and duties, and exercises of religion; like the Jews, who
cried, when will the new Moons, and the Sabbaths be done, that we may return
unto our sins? Malach. 1.13.

II. Good Counsel, for that we think to be a hard saying, and we cannot
endure it, Ioh. 6.60.

Secondly, as the Fever loathes that which is wholesome, so it longs for that
which is unwholesome: So we loath the heavenly Manna of the word, and
spiritual graces, and love the vain pleasures of sin, although they be but
for a season, and the end thereof destruction, and death, Romans 6.23.

Thirdly, In a Fever there is a thirst not to be quenched, or satisfied, but
insatiable, having no moderation in drinki^g, if it can come unto liquor: So
many are furious in sinning, and cannot cease to sin, 2 Pet. 2.14.
although they see oftentimes, that

I. The thing is childish, and of that nature, that it is a shame for a man to
be besotted therewith. Yea,

II. That the event is perilous, and dangerous. And,

III. That both the estate is lessened, and impaired, and the body enfeebled,
and enervated thereby. Thus no feverish man is more mad after drink, then wicked
men are after their sins.

Fourthly, Potus factitij, made drinks quench not the thirst (in a Fever) but
now pleases the Pallat, and by and by displeases it, it being only cool
things which allaieth, and asswageth the heat thereof, although often they kill,
because the stomach is not able to bear them. So it is not ordinary comforts
that appease the soul (because they cannot fill the soul) neither can they
allay the heat of a wounded spirit; but it is the word, and the comminations,
and promises thereof, which afford ease and peace to the troubled heart: And
yet sometimes this cooling Cordial does kill, and drives accidentally to
desperation, as we see in Cain, Genesis 4. and Judas, Mat. 27.

Fifthly, sin may be resembled to a Fever, Respectu finis, in regard of the
end thereof. For

I. Sometimes it ends in health, and life of it self; that is, a man recovers
sometimes out of a Fever, without the use of any means, or help of any man.

II. Sometimes the Fever ends in health, and life, by the use of good means,
and the help of the Physician.

III. Sometimes the Fever ends in a sickly, and weakly estate; that is, when
the Fever leaves a man, oftentimes he falls into deafness, and swellings, and
boyls, and the like.

IV. Sometimes it ends in death: Fevers often bring men to the period of their
life; now this is twofold, viz.

First, sometimes a Fever brings a man to a speedy death, when he dies thereof.

Secondly, sometimes it brings a man unto a lingering death; and that either,

I. By an H^ctick Fever, which inflames the heart, or lungs: Or,

II. By bringing a man into a Dropsy. Now to apply this.

First, sin herein differs from a Fever; this (as was said) sometimes ends in
health, and life, without the use of physic, or help of the Physician; but
never that, for sin cannot be cured, or healed of it self.

Secondly, sin is cured and healed by Christ, who is the only Physician of the
soul.

Thirdly, if sin end not thus, in health and life by Christ, then it ends
either

I. In a dry Hectic Fever, and a barrenness of all good fruits: Or

II. In a cold Dropsy, or Lukewarmnesse in Religion. Or

III. In a deafness, and unwillingnesse to hear the word of God. Or,

IV. In filthy Ulcers, and putrified Boyls of actual transgressions.

V. The safest Crisis, or conflict of nature in this sickness, is evacuation,
and that either by vomiting, purging, sweating, or bleeding: So we must labor,
either to vomit up our sins by Confession, or sweat them out by Contrition,
or purge them out by alienation, and separation, or else (if the Lord love us)
he will bleed us, and make us forsake sin by affliction: as he did by David
and Manasses.



By these plain signs: namely, Secondly, if the fire of concupiscence kindle
thy affections unto evil, although as yet it does not appear by thy actions,
and outward man. Thirdly, by examining what drink pleases us best; whether is
the word of God unpleasing to our taste, or not? c^rtainly if we be refreshed,
and comforted with the pleasures of sin, and that the word of God relisheth not
with us, we are feverish. Fourthly, by examining whether Christ has cured us
or not: whether we be freed from the Fever of sin, or not? For this Fever of
the soul differs from the bodily Fever: there being many in health of body,
and free in body from the corporal Fever, but none at all from the Fever of
sin; for therewith all the sons of Adam and children of men are infected: And
therefore two things are to be enquired after: to wit, I. Whether have thou
sought unto Christ, the Physician of thy soul, or not? have thou made thy
case, and grief known unto him; and desired him to heal thee? II. Whether
has Christ answered thee in thy request, or not? whether has he healed all
thy sins, and cured all thy infirmities: so weakening the relics of corruption
in thee, that now it cannot prevail against thee? Fifthly, examine whether
thou be changed or not, from sickness to health? can thou say with Paul, I
was given to such and such sins, but I found mercy 1 Timothy 1.13.
; the Lord plucking me as a brand out of the fire? do thou find a change,
both in thy affections and actions, from evil unto good? Sixthly, examine
whether art thou sound, well, and healthful in thy limbs and members? can
thou walk in the ways of God cheerfully, can thou run the race that is set
before thee swiftly, and constantly; can thou work out the work of thy
salvation thoroughly? Seventhly, art thou not enclining to a Hectic Fever, or a
Dropsy, or deafness of ears: that is, art thou not barren of grace and all
goodness? or at least Lukewarm, in the service of God; or of deaf and dull
ears to hear the word of God? Certainly by a serious examination of these
things; we may know, whether with Peter's wives Mother, (before Christ came) we
are sick of a Fever, or by Christ cured and freed from our Fever, as she was.


VERSE. 16. And when the Even was come,
We may learn hence: Luke 11.21.

By what means are we freed from the Devil,

First, the Heathens used charms and enchantments,

I. Either by magical words: Fernel. abd. cause. Or,

II. By the Picture of Solomon in a Ring. Josephus. Or,

III. By the herb Cynocephalia, which is very effectual against poison.
Appion. Gram. Plin. 30.2. Or,

IV. By Amulets hung about their necks, Plin. ib. Or

V. By the art of Nicromancy; and conjuring. But all these are too weak to
produce such an effect as this is, to deliver, or preserve from the Devil.

Secondly, the Papists persuade themselves, Iacobus de Chusa, and Wyerus.

Thirdly, God does deliver, preserve, and free

How does Christ cure those who are possessed

By these means, viz. First, Secondly, by disarming, and weakening the power of
Satan. Thirdly, by casting of sin, and Satan out of our hearts. Fourthly,
by arming us, both with off nsive, and defensive weapons against Satan, Ephesians.
6.12. Enabling us so to resist him, that he is forced to flee, or to be
foiled, Romans 16.20.


VERSE. 17. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the Prophet,
saying, himself took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses.
It may here be objected, the sick, and dispossess those who were possessed;
for this end, that the Prophecy might be fulfilled: for then if the Prophet
had not foretold it, he would not have done it, Muscul. and Gualt. s

Mat. 2.15.) and his return into Nazareth ( Mat. 2 23.) and the Soldiers
casting lots about his garments ( Mat. 27.35.) and that a bone of him should
not be broken ( John 19.33.) and diverse other passages. From whence we may
learn,

Act. 2.23. and 3.18. and 4.28. and 13.27. And besi^es, remember that it is the
will of God, not the will of men, which is the rule of the world, Daniel 4.32.
Hence it is said, Man purposes, but God disposes. For

I. If the purpose and in^ention of man be according to the will of God, then
God ^il direct it; Thus Assure was Gods rod, Esaias ^0 But

II. If man's purposes and intentions diss^nt from the purpose, and will of God,
then God corrects it: Balaam at first had a desire to go to Balak, but God
forbids him: afterward he had a desire to curse the Israelites for Balak, but
God Number. 23. It may here be demanded, whether we desire to establish and
maintain Stoicall fa^e, and a necessary series of causes? For this is
heathenish, and unbeseeming Christians to avouch; Absit a fidelium cordibus,
fatum aliquid dicere, Greg. hom. 10. Vide Thom. 1. qu. 116. etc.





Respectu originis, in regard of the original thereof, because Stoicall Fate
does depend upon the influence of the stars: And therefore Thom. denies it,
ibid.

Respectu ascensus, in regard of the ascent; because Stoicall Fate does tie the
gods themselves, and subject them thereunto.

Respectu descesnus, in regard of the descent, because the Stoicall Fate binds
all second causes. And therefore we should avoid the name of Fate: Si quis Dei
voluntatem vel potestatem Fati nomine vocet, sententam teneat, et linguam
e^rrigat August. civit. Dei 51.
: If any shall call the will, or power of God, by the name of Fate, let him
hold still the opinion, but amend the phrase.





First, that there are many things mutable in regard of us, and many things
casual, which fall out contrary to our expectation; as Inachus said of Io, Tu
non inventa reperta es, he could not find her, when he sought for her; and
when he thought not of her, then he found her: So a man digging a grave may
find a treasure.

Secondly, nothing is contingent, in regard of God, but all things are
certainly ordained.





I Because God has ordained, that by the use of the means we should attain
unto the end.

II. Because God has commanded the use of the means, if we desire to obtain
the end.

III. Because we tempt Gods providence, if we neglect the means, Matthew. 4.

Secondly, but we must not use the means for Esaias 46.10.) but that we may be
excused. And therefore the use, both of evil, and doubtful means is altogether
inexcusable.

And thus much for the first general answer unto the Objection.

Secondly, it was necessary that Christ should Matthew. 11.5 and 26.54. Mark.
14.49. Luke 22.27. and 24.44. John 18.9.

Thirdly, our Savior by his miracles, and healing

As in the Gospel, corporal things denote spiritual; as for example;

I. Leprosy denotes the corruption of our nature, and Christ by healing
Lepers, does show that it is he, and he only that takes away, and heals the
leprosy of sin.

II. Christ gives unto the blind their sight, to show that he is the light of
the world, Mal. 4.2.

III. Christ by making the deaf to hear, does show, that he is the Doctor of
the soul.

IV. Christ by curing Fevers, does show, that it is he only that allayes the
fire, and the heat of concupiscence within us.

V. When Christ opens the mouth of the dumb, he would have us to learn, that he
only teaches us to cry Abba Father, Gal 4.6.

VI Christ by healing those who were sick of the Palsy, and restoring the Lame
unto their limbs, would have us know, that he is the only Physician which
corroborates, and enables us, to work the work, and walk in the ways of God.

VII. When Christ dispossesseth, and drives away devils, he would have us
know, that first he is that seed of the woman, who was of old foretold, should
break the Serpents head, Genesis 3. And Secondly, that it is only he, Romans 16.20.
that enables us to trample Satan under our feet.

VIII. Christ by raising the dead unto life, does teach us, that it is he who
gives the spiritual life of grace unto us, and who for us purchased life
everlasting.

So in the Prophets spiritual things are applied unto the body; as in this
verse: When^e we might learn: That it belongs unto the Messiah, not only to
cure souls, but bodies also, Psalm 103.2, 3.

Why does it appertain unto Christ, to cure and heal bodies, as well as souls.

Cor. 6.20.

Romans 12.1.) And therefore (as our Lord and Master) it belongs unto him to be
careful of both.



Verse. 18. Now when Jesus saw great multitudes about him, he gave commandment
to depart unto the other side.
When Jesus saw great multitudes.





Mat. 3.7. and 7.21, 22. and 8.1. and 12.15. and 13.2. and 14.13. and 15.30.
and 19 2. and 20.16, 29.



I. Because many followed Christ for some temporal gain, to wit, either that
they might be healed, or fed by him, Ioh. 6.26.

II. Because many heard him for novelties sake; as the stony ground, who
rejoices at the first, and falls away, and relapseth at the last, Mat.
13.20. and Ioh. 6.66.









I. That thou may there worship, and serve God, by prayer.

II. That thou may feed thy soul, by hearing.

III. That thou may gain something either for thy information, or
reformation, or consolation, or corroboration, or instruction, or direction in
the way of grace.

He commanded them to depart unto the other side.

Non cadit in bonitatem Salvatoris circumcursantes linquere Hilar. s.
. How can this stand with the goodness of our Savior, to depart from, and
forsake those who run up and down to see and hear him?



Secondly, perhaps Christ was weary, and Heb. 4.15.) whence he prays against
death.

Thirdly, because there were great multitudes, Chrysostom s.) Teaching us
hereby, to avoid and shun all vainglory, as much as we can, Philip. 2.3. Gal.
5.26. and 1 These. 2.6.

Why may we not seek the praise of men, in the

First, because the applause of the world, is the Matthew 6.2, 5, 16.

Secondly, because this would argue us to be Luke 18.11. And she was but a
poor, and blind, and miserable Church, who boastingly said, She was like a
Queen, wanting nothing, neither should ever be moved, Revel. 3.17. And those
who know themselves, know with Paul, that in them (that is, in their flesh)
dwells no manner of thing which is good; for they have no good thing in them,
but what they have received from God: and therefore it were great pride to be
proud of it, and insolent arrogancy to boast of it, as though they had not
received it.

Fourthly, he departs, because he would not be Ephesians. 6.18. Mat. 7.7. Col. 4.2.

Fifthly, Christ leaves this multitude, and departs,

Sixthly, he departs from this multitude, lest Ioh. 6.15.

Seventhly, he commands his Apostles to put

Eighthly, Gualter (sup.) gives another reason of verse 24. we find, that they
were in peril, by reason of a great tempest upon the Sea.

Verse. 20. And Jesus says unto him,
. 1. But the Son of man has not where to lay his

Christ here calls himself (...), the Son of man, not (...) the Son of a
woman, and therefore he was born, and begotten of man's seed.

the Son of man is an Hebraisme; for [Ben Adam] the Son of man, signifies no
more than [Adam] Man, as evidently appears thus, because Adam himself is called
[Ben Adam] The son of man, although he was neither begotten by a man, nor born
of a woman.

Nazianzen answers, Christ is called (...), The Son of man, in the singular
number, because he came from man only, ex una part, in regard of his humane
nature, which he took from his mother Mary, and not from man: But others are
called (...), the sons of men, in the plural number, because they have their
bodies both from Father and Mother.

Augustine answers, Christ is called the son of man, that he might manifest,
and show unto us, the great benefit which man has received, by his taking man's
nature upon him.

the son of man, that so his Humanity may be distinguished from his Deity.

Tertullian answers, he is called the son of man, that so we might acknowledge
him to be true man, as well as true God. But the true sense of the words is
gathered from the Hebrew phrase [ Ben Adam, i. e. Adam] the son of man, that
is, Man.

We see here how Christ calls himself, the son of man, although the phrase be
elsewhere a phrase of contempt, as Job 25.6 and Psa 8.5. to teach us,

Prove. 11.2. and 16.19. and Mat. 11.29. Genesis 28.17. Phil. 2.7.)



Prove. 25.7. and Luke 14.10.

Psalm. 18 27. and 34.18. Prove. 22.22.

Psalm 33.20.

Jacob, Joseph, and David, Psalm 131.1.

Prove. 18.12. and 29.23.

Psalm. 10.17, etc. and 102.17. and 138.6.

Our Savior by these words, The Son of man has not where to lay his head,
does show the poor





First, if we look upon Christ, we shall find him in his Nativity born in a
stable, and laid in a manger, ( Luke 2.17.) afterward nourished and maintained
by others, ( Luke 8.3.) not having money to pay Tribute withal, ( Mat. 17.27.)
yea robbed of his garments, ( Mark 15.24.) and destitute (when he was dead) of
a sheet to be wrapped in, of a Sepulcher to be laid in, of sweet odours to
embalm him Ioh. 19.38.
.

Secondly, if we look upon the Patriarchs Heb. 11.36, etc.
or Apostles, we shall see them to be as poor as their Lord and Master Acts 2.
and 4. and 3.6.
.

Why does the Lord permit Christ, or the Saints, to be poor, seeing he has
promised his

First, Christ was made poor, that he might Cor. 8 9. And.

Secondly, the Saints are often poor, that they Tim. 6.6, 8. And

Thirdly, the Lord permits Christ and his children

Fourthly, the Lord lets the righteous fall into

Fifthly, Christ was poor, that so the prophesies David says, He was poor, and
in misery: and herein he was a Type of Christ, or (as some think) speaks it
prophetically of Christ Carthus. su^.
. And

Sixthly, Christ was poor, that so he might Carthus. s.

Seventhly, Christ was poor, that not only by

Eighthly, Christ was poor, left it should have

Ninthly, Christ was poor, to teach us, that his

. 2. Jesus says unto him.

In this verse is contained Christ's answer to the Scribe, who offered to follow
him; and in the answer two things are observable; viz.

First, the sum of it; wherein is showed First, what the creatures have; The
Foxes have holes. The Birds have nests.
Secondly, what Christ has not, The Son of man has not where, etc.


Secondly, the Application of it, in these words, Jesus says unto him. And
therefore, although they be first in show, yet they are last in the order of
nature, which order I here now observe.

Our Saviors answer to the Scribe, seems to be not pertinent; and indeed, it
does not hansomly square with the words of the Scribe, but with his mind,
meaning and understanding most properly, which Christ shows is not hid from
him; but as he hears the words of the mouth, so he sees and knows the
thoughts of the heart; whence we may learn:

Psalm 7.9. Zach. 4.10. Heb. 4.12, 13.



Psalm 33.15.

Ier. 17.9, 10.

Ier. 16.16.17. and 17, 10. and 32.19.

VERSE. 21, 22. And another of his Disciples said unto him, Lord suffer me first
to go, and bury my Father: But Jesus said unto him, follow me, and let the
dead bury their dead.
And another of his Disciples said unto him.

Disciple?





Beza, that this was none of the twelve; but whether he was one of the
seventy, or not, I know not.





Another of his Disciples said unto him, etc. which seems to imply, that this
Scribe whom Christ answered, was one of his Disciples also.





That salvation depends upon the mere mercy, and free grace, and dispensation
of God. Read James 1.18. and Titus 3.5. and Romans 9.18. and verse 15. and Exodus
33.19. Luke 17.34. Yea, our disposition unto good, is not the cause of Gods
love toward us, but the effect.

Suffer me first to go and bury my Father.





Romans 7.23, 25. and 2 Corinthians, 12.8, 9.



Exodus 20.20. Judge. 2.22.

Secondly, sometimes to humble us; that having Chron 32.25.

Thirdly, always to exercise us; God would Adam idle in Paradise, but he must
dress the Garden, Genesis 2.15. Much less must we be idle in this wicked world;
and therefore that we may be always employed, the Lord has left us enemies,
that we might be the more watchful, and careful over our selves, and more
courageous against our enemies. Read Job 7.1. and Ephesians. 6.12. etc. 2 Timothy
4.7. etc. Heb. 12.14. and 1 Pet. 2.11. And therefore the best, and all the Saints
have their duties required of them, as long as they live: namely,

I. To weed, and root sin and vice out of their hearts. And

II. To hold fast what they have, whether grace, or strength against sin,
Revel. 2.11. And

III. To labor daily, to grow, and increase in grace, and strength more and
more.

For how long time did this Disciple ask

Only for a small time,

To teach us, that we must not absent our selves

Why must we never depart from our Lord

First, because in Negative Precepts we are obliged, Semper, and ad semper, we
must never do any thing which is forbidden us, as long as we live.

Secondly, because we are always in danger of

Must we never sin at all? this is too strict. May

First, sin is poison, and therefore as a man

Secondly, sin is a Serpent; and therefore if

Why did this Disciple desire to depart?

To bury his Father.

Whether was his Father dead (as Chrysostom Gualter imagines, and also Calvin?
Whether was he Mortu^s, or Moribundus?

It matters not much whether,

If his Father were dead, was it not a good work to bury him? and if he were
old, was it

Levit. 19.3. Prove. 23.21.22. and it is an unchristian thing not to bury the
dead.





I. His natural affection unto his Father, might estrange his affection from
his Master. Or

II. With Demas, the world might draw him away; that is, the inheritance, or
riches which he should enjoy by his Fathers death, might bewitch and ensnare
him, Chrysostom. s.

Chrysostom. s. Whence we may learn,

Luke 14.18.

Why must nothing withold, or withdraw us from Christ?

Cor. 6.20.

Cor. 9.27. etc.



Follow thou me.

This Disciple desires leave to depart, but Christ will not permit it: Teaching
us,

calls some ( Prove. 1.20. etc. and 8.1. and 9.3. Esaias 55.1. Matthew. 11.28. John
7.37. Revel. 22.17.) so he recals others, Ier. 3.1.12.



John 4.9. and Paul, Act. 9.

Sam. 7.5.

Chron. 30.

Naaman, 2 King. 5.13.

Judge. 2.2.



Ezech. 18.23.32. and 2 Pet. 3.9.

Secondly, because he does not destroy the Ezech. 34.6.7. and 2 Chronicles. 36, 16.
Romans 2.5.

Thirdly, Christ will not suffer his to depart Adam;) But he has promised to
refrain them, and curb them from sin, and keep them: Yea, to be a Physician
unto them, Matthew. 9. and by his Spirit to direct them in the ways of grace,
John 14.

How does God refrain, and keep back, or call

First, sometimes by a preventing grace: My 2 Cor. 12.9.

Secondly, sometimes by affliction, as he did Iehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 19.2. and
Manasses, 33.12, 13.

But many are corrected, Proverb. 1.24. etc.

First, certainly it is most true, as we see in the Ier. 44.16. and 51.9.) and
in Pharaoh, who were hardened under the rod, Exodus 9.

Secondly, but there are in correction two

I. It is an excellent sign when affliction does curb, and call us back; and
with Peter, makes us weep bitterly, Mat. 26. and with Paul, be obedient to Gods
voice, Act. 26 19. and Gal. 1.16. and with David to humble our selves, 2 Samuel
12. And on the contrary, it is an ill sign, not to be reclaimed by
correction, but more hardened.

II. For a wicked man not to be corrected, but be permitted to sin willingly,
without any bridle of restraint, is a most miserable sign of a man in a most
deplorable estate, and condition: yea, of a Bastard, and not a Son, Heb. 12.8.

How must we follow Christ?

First, some follow to prosecute, and slay, thus Asahel followed Abner, 2 Samuel
2.19. but we must not thus follow Christ.

Secondly, some follow to imitate; thus we Exodus 23.1 but are commanded to
follow Christ; for we must strive and labor to imitate him, 1 Pet. 2.21. But
yet this following is not meant in this place.

Thirdly, some follow that they may be protected, then they shall continue
following the Lord their G^d (1 Samuel 12.14.) that is, then God will still
continue to protect, and provide for them. Thus many followed Christ, that they
might be fed by him; but this following is not spoken of in this place.

Fourthly, some follow Christ, as Disciples, and

From whence we may learn, that we ought to bodies, and souls Read Number.
14.24. and 32.15. and Deuteronomy. 13.4. an^ 1 Cor. 6.20.



a man can not serve two Masters, Mat. 6.24. and 19.27. and John 10.5. and 1
King. 18.21.

Mal. 1.6. John 14.4 27.

Deuteronomy. 28.14. and Ier. 48 10.



Luke 1.75. Titus 2.14.





I. Soldiers will follow their Captain; and therefore we should follow Christ,
who is our Chieftain, and Leader.

II. Orphans should follow their Guardians; and therefore we ought to follow
Christ, our only Defender, and Protector.

III. Children should follow their Parents; and therefore we ought to follow
Christ, our everlasting Father, Esaias 9.6.

IIII. Scholars should follow their Masters, and Pupils their Tutors: wherefore
it is our duty to follow Christ, our Doctor and Teacher.



Question 5. That is, let us examine our selves, by these signs; namely,

First, whether do we forsake all things for Christ? that is,

I. All our sins: because we know that sin is contrary to the service of
Christ: yea, directly opposite unto Christ; therefore for Christ's sake we desire
to abstain from sin, and whatsoever is evil, Deuteronomy. 8.19. Hos. 2.7. Romans
6.2.18.22. This is a good sign of a good servant.

II. Do we for Christ's sake deny our own wills, submitting our selves wholly
to be guided, and directed by him? ( Numbers 15.39. and Job 31.7.) Certainly it
is a hopeful sign, of a happy servant: Thus we must examine our selves,
whether we acknowledge Christ only to be our Master, or whether Satan, the
world, sin, or our own wills, be our Master.

Secondly, examine whether thou carriest thy self as becomes a servant: for
it is not enough for a servant to acknowledge such an one to be his Master,
but he must behave himself also like a servant, both in mind, humbling
himself unto his Master, and in life, doing the work, and service of his
Master, and that not with eye service, but in singleness of heart. So the
servants of the Lord must serve him with their minds, and hearts, and inward
man (1 King. 14.8. Mat. 8.19. and 15.9 Deuteronomy. 30.10. Romans 7.15, 19) and also in
their lives, working the Lords work, and not their own, Mat 5.16. Psalm
38.20. Ephesians. 4.1. Philip. 2.15. and 1 Timothy 6.18. and 1 Pet. 2.19.

Thirdly, examine we, whether we work the work of the Lord industriously, or
negligently; servants must be both painful, and careful, and constant, in
their Masters service: And so must we.

I. Be diligent in the service of the Lord, and the exercises of Religion; not
performing them remisly, superficially, or slightly, ^ut diligently, and
industriously, Phil. 2.12: an^ 3.12. Heb. 12.4.

II. We must be careful, as w^ll as painful, lest through carelessness,
heedl^^n^sse, or forgetfulness, we do something, which we should not, or leave
undone something, which we should do, Ephesians 5.16.

III. We must be constant, and perseverant in the service of Christ, as well as
industrious, and careful. We must not take the Plow of God in our hands, and
lo^k back; we must not begin in the spirit, and end in the flesh; we must not
begin the Lords work, and give over: But we must continue running till our
race be finished; we must continue fighting, until the last enemy Satan b^
overcom^; we must continue working, until the Evening, and Sunset of our
life, Number. 14.24. and 32.11. Deuteronomy. 1.36. Josh. 14.14.

How must we follow Christ?

First, in faith; walking by faith, not by sight, Cor. 5.7.) placing our whole
confidence, and affiance in him 1 S^m. 12.14.
: Bu^ this is Christ's work, ( John 6.29. Philip. 3.14.) he only enabling us
hereunto.

Secondly, as we must follow Christ by faith, Deuteronomy. 13.4. John 14, 15.

Thirdly, we must follow Christ in prof^ssion, Romans 10.10.

Fourthly, we must follow Christ in imitation, Philippians 2.5. and Ephesians.
5.1. Hebr. 12.2. and 1 Pet. 2.21. and 1 John 2.6. and 1 Cor. 4.16. and 1
Thessal. 1.6.

Wherein must we imitate Christ?

First, in humility, for he was humble, Mat.

Secondly, in patience; for he was as a Lamb These. 2.14.

Thirdly, in love toward our brethren; for he John 3.16.

Fourthly, in love unto our enemies; for he Mat. 5.44.

Fifthly, in freedom from fraud, and deceit; Pet. 2.22.

Sixthly, in the love of goodness, and good Luke 22.39.

. 4. Let the dead, bury their dead.

Is the burying of the dead to be neglected, and omitted as evil,

Genesis 25.9. and 35.29. and 47.29. Josh. 24.30. Amos 2.1.



Genesis 49.29. Genesis 50.25.
.

Let the dead hury their dead, but follow thou me: As if he would say, thou art
n^w called from amongst the dead, and therefore let them alone, and meddle no
more with them, but follow m^e. In these words then our Savior Christ would
have us to observe,









Luke 15.24.32. John 5 25. Romans 6.13. and 2 Cor. 5.14. Ephesians. 2.1. and 5.14.
and Colos. 2.13.

Romans 3.23. and 5.12. Here two things are to be observe, viz.

I. God created us pure, good, and living creatures, both in soul, and body;
giving unto man a double perfection; to wit,

First, Natural; and thus in his body he had strength, agility, nimblenesse,
soundness, health, beauty, and the like; and in his soul, reason, will,
memory, judgment; yea all the faculties thereof perfect.

Secondly, Spiritual, which consisted in these two things: namely,

I. An immunity from sin, man in his first creation being without spot, or
wrinkle.

II. In strength unto good, man in his first forming, being able to perform
whatsoever God required of him: Now this spiritual perfection is called in
Scripture, sometimes Uprightness, as Eccles 7.29 sometimes Glory, Romans 3.23.
and sometimes Honor, Psalm 8.5.

II. The sin of Adam has corrupted all the sons of Adam both in soul and
bo^y: Vulnera tur in na^^^tibus, and expoliatur in gratuitis Beda Gloss. ord s.
Luke 10.
: Mankind by the sin of the first man, is wounded in his natural faculties,
but killed outright in his spiritual; as appears thus.

First, although our natural faculties remain, yet they are wounded with a
deep, and double wound, viz.

I. H^betantur in tanto, they are dull, senseless, blockish and brutish in
regard of what they were at first before the fall.

II. Divertuntur a vero objecto: All the members of our bodies, and faculties
of our souls, are now as so many instruments of the service of sin and satan;
man by nature rebelling against God, both in soul and body.

Secondly, our spiritual faculties, and graces (whereof the present Text
speaks) are wholly, and altogether killed, and that in this order.

I. Adam by sinning, forsook and left God: August. civit. Dei. 13.13.
^ence Thomas calls original sin, Ablationem men^s a Deo; and aversionem
voluntatis (Aq. 1.2.82.2.) An alien^tion of the soul, and aversion of the will
from God.

II. Adam having forsaken and left God, loses original righteousness: Hence
Aquinas Thom. 1.2.82.1. ex Ansel.
says, Originale peccatum est carentia justitiae originalis; Original sin is
a deprivation of original righteousness.

III. Adam having lost his original righteousness, is then forsaken of God,
Desertus ab eo prius Aug. civ. Dei. 13.14
, whom first he forsook; for as God was primus in Amore, so he was ultimus in
desertione: that is, God loved us before we loved him 1 Ioh. 4.10.
, but God left us not until we had left him. Deseruit Adamum Deus, id est,
abstulit gratiam, qua stare potuit Aug. de corr. and gratia.
; God forsook Adam, that is, withdrew from him his grace, whereby he might
stand. And this was true death. Illud (Genesis 2.17.) intellige, cum anima
deseritur a sua vita, viz. Deo Aug. de civit. Dei. 13.15.
. That death which is threatened, Genesis 2.17. is a spiritual death, when the
soul is separated from her life, that is, God Ephesians. 4.18.
.

IV God having left and forsaken man, hence follows these two things; to wit,

First, corruption impacta, sin and uncleanness does seaz upon man radically
and hereditarily; insomuch as the Father now does derive sin, as well as life,
unto his child; as Gehazi did leprosy to his posterity 2 Kings 5.27.
: yea every man is contaminated and corrupted from the crown of the head, to
the sole of the foot, (Esa. 1.6.) the very imaginations and cogitations of man
being evil, Genesis 6.5. and 8.21. Omnes animae parts inficit, Sin has now
tainted and polluted all the parts of the soul, says Thom. 1.2.82.8.3. and 3.3.
Thomas: yea four deadly wounds did man receive by sin, said Beda, (Glos.
ordin. s. Luc. 10) In ratione ignorantia, In voluntate infirmitas, In
irascibili malitia, In concupiscibili concupiscentia.

I. In his reason II. In his will III. In his irascible faculty. IV. In his
concupiscible He was wounded with Ignorance. Weakness. Malice. Lust and
concupiscence.


Secondly, Potestas boni ablata; God having lef^ man, he left grace, and the
power of doing good: so that now, though he would do good, he cannot; and
though he would not do evil, yet he does it daily, Romans 7.18, 19. Postquam
anima Deum deseruerat, samulam (carnem) subditam omnino non habebat Aug. ^iv.
Dei. 13.13
: After the soul ran away from the Lord her God, her servant (the flesh) would
be no longer subject, or obedient unto her; but as she rebels against her
Master, God, so the flesh rebels against her Mistress, the Soul. So that now Man
by his own strength can neither

I. Do any thing that is good, Romans 7.14, 19. Neither

II. Have any good desires; for God gives the will, as well as the deed, Phil.
2.13. Neither

III. Think a good thought, 2 Cor. 5.3.

Adams fall, which were these;

I. Satan (under the form of a Serpent) tempts man, Genesis 3.1, etc. Heb. 2.14.

II. Adam is overcome by the Tempter, and sins against God, Genesis 3. and Rom
5.12, 14.

III. Adam by eating of the forbidden fruit, violates and tramples the Law of
God under his feet, Genesis 2.17.

IV. From the violation of the Law, springs up corruption; that is, the Law
being broken, man became to be corrupted, Job 15.14. and 25.4. Psalm 51.7.

V. Man's nature being corrupted, sin presently shows it self in the life and
actions, growing and increasing in strength daily more and more.

VI. Hence we were detained in the chains of death, and sat in the shadow of
death, ( Luke 1.79.) as condemned persons are reserved unto the day of
execution.



Instrumentum operans, and Anima movens: First, the work wrought; then
secondly, the first mover of the work: The action performed, must be good, and
such as the Law commands; and the intention must be good also, in the
performance of the work, for otherwise the action is not accepted. Simon Magus
made a dead body to stir the eyes, head, and body, but it was far from true
life: so, a Moral man may perform a Moral good work, but yet it is but a dead
work, because it proceeds not from the life of Grace, Heb. 9.14.



viz.

I. They can do nothing that good is, ( Romans 7.14, 18.) All their works being
either foolish, or proud, or counterfeit, or hypocritical, or pharisaicall, or
weak, or performed for fear of God, or man.

II. They cannot cease to sin, 2 Pet. 2.14. Romans 7.5.

John 8.21. and Romans 6.16, 21, 23.

Prove. 2^ 34.
, and neither perceive, nor conceive, nor fear danger: but when he awakes, he
will with terror and amazement, consider of his peril: so, Natural men may
lull themselves in a carnal security, and cry peace, peace, unto themselves,
but if ever they awake, they will have an horrible expectation of wrath to come
Heb. 10.^7.
.

Fourthly, they are dead in regard of sense: for

I. They are not sensible of their evil condition, nor perilous estate, Esa.
28.14. Revel. 3.17. Nor

II. Are sensible of their wants, or of those good things which they are
deprived, and disinherited of: and therefore, not being sensible of the lack of
them, do not earnestly endeavor for them, or seriously desire them, Psalm
42.1. and 63.1. and John 3.19.

What things must not the natural man trust

First, not to his natural strength, in performing Job 14.4. and 15.14.

Secondly, not to his wit or wisdom, in understanding Cor. 2.14.

Thirdly, not to his wisdom, in avoiding of

Fourthly, not to the strength of his resolution;

Fifthly, the natural man may not trust to his

Sixthly, he must not trust to his conscience,

I. Often the natural man condemns another man's sins, but not his own. And

II. Often erects a false repentance; as the Drunkard after his Cups, and the
Swearer after his Oaths, will cry God mercy, and beat their hands upon their
breasts; and think this their repentance will serve the Lords turn, and procure
from him pardon. Yea

III. Oftentimes, the natural man seems to express a great measure of hearty
sorrow; but it is for the punishment, not for the sin, as Ahab did, 1 Kings 21.
And therefore God will not accept of it.

Seventhly and lastly, let not the natural man trust to his confi^ence or
faith, in believing; for Esa. 28.18. Thus I say, the natural man must neither
trust to his strength in working, nor to his wit in understanding, nor to his
prudence in avoiding, nor to his power in resolving, nor to his honesty in
obeying, nor to his conscience in repenting, nor to his confidence in
believing; for in all these he may be deceived.



The natural man may do these things; to wit Ephesians 4.19. he may run on unto
sin, as a horse unto the battle. Secondly, he may perform natural works; as
eat, drink, sleep, and the like. Thirdly, he may perform politic and civil
works; as buying, selling, trading, purchasing, etc. Fourthly, he may perform
Moral works, or the acts of virtue; he may give Alms, forgive offenders, love
true and honest dealing, be chaste, and temperate, and the like. Fifthly, he
may perform religious actions, quoad materiam informem, in regard of the dead
letter, or livelesse outward work; for he may hear the word, he may pray, he
may fear the wrath and anger of God, he may be pricked in heart, yea (with
Herod, Mark 6.20.) he may obey in many things. Read Heb. ^.4 5, 6. But
Sixthly, he can do nothing well, quoad formam form lly, or in regard of the
manner of d^ing: This form of goo works, is faith, and wit^out this nothing we
do can be plea^^^g unto God ^.
* Deus r^^u^e ^ator Adverbiorum ^.
. God rewards Been, only that which is w^ll done, in regard of the manner. And
therefore natural men being without faith, all their works are but like Sodoms
fruit, or deaf Nuts, or (as Bellarmine says) a carcass which has strong, and
well set members, but wants life.




Of another, not Of himself;
and that Miraculously; not Naturally, or Physically.


A man that is dead, cannot infuse life into himself, but he may be restored
unto life by another, (as many were, whereof we read in holy writ) But even
this is above nature, and plainly miraculous, for any to restore a dead man to
life: So is it with natural men, they are dead in sin, and it is not i^ their
power to quicken themselves, or to infuse the l^fe of grace into themselves;
but it is the work of another, namely, of Christ, and that not by any natural,
but by a supernatural work, who regenerates us by his Spirit, Ioh. 3.3, 4, 5.

How may dead men be revived, and restored

They must do as Martha did, when she desired, Lazarus might be raised up to
life: that is,

First, they must fetch Christ unto the dead soul: Then

Secondly, they must pray, that the stone of insensibility may be removed; that
is, that their hard hearts may be mollified, and softened, and made sensible of
sin.

Thirdly, pray that he may hear the voice, and call of Christ, and word of
God, which calls him from the grave of sin, and perdition.

Fourthly, pray, that being called, and hearing Christ's voice, he may come out
from the grave of sin, forsaking it, and leaving it for ever.

Fifthly, pray that his face being unbound, he may see Christ, John 11.44.

Sixthly, when he is raised up by Christ, and sees him, then let him sup with
him, and stay with him, and never depart from him, Revelations 3.20.

Seventhly, by how much longer he has laid in the grave of sin, or death, or
by how much the worse he stinks, in regard of his wicked life; by so much the
more fervently, and constantly pray, until he be raised, and restored.

How may we know, whether we are spiritually

Examine in thee these things: namely, First, art thou given to thy pleasure;
John. 6.60.
? Then certainly thou art but a dead man. Secondly, art thou glewed unto the
world, and thy wealth, and profit? James 4.4. 1 John 2.15. Undoubtedly then
thou art yet dead in sin. Thirdly, art thou puffed up with worldly wisdom,
which is contrary to the wisdom of the Spirit? then it is a sign that thou
art not as yet quicked, Romans 8.6. etc. These three hold men diversely: to wit,
First, pleasure luls men asleep. Secondly, the world compels men (as in
chains) to obey, and serve her. Thirdly, wisdom deludes, and deceives men,
with false shows.
Fourthly, art thou not as yet regenerated, and changed? then certainly the
life of grace is not as yet infused, John 3.5. Fifthly, do thou not as yet
believe? then it is to be feared that thou art yet alive in nature, but dead in
grace.


Wherein must natural men labor to acquire

First, in general, in the whole man; that is, Ephesians 4.24. and 1 Thessalonians.
5.23.



I. In sensu, in our sense and apprehension: Nothing comes unto the
understanding, which was not first in the sense; and therefore we must labor
that our understandings may be enlightened, and that the scales of ignorance may
fall off from our eyes, because sense is the outer gate of the soul, Ephesians.
1.18. Romans 11.8. and 1 John 2.11. In a word, he that desires the light of
grace, must labor first to be sensible of the blindness of nature; and he who
longs for spiritual life, must strive to be sensible of that spiritual death,
wherein he lies buried, Luke 11.34.

II. In fide, in our faith, and confidence; faith is the eye whereby we see
God, Mat. 5.8 faith brings us to saving knowledge, John 17.3. and works in us
true experience of the love of God: Philip. 3.10.
And therefore let us not content our selves with dead dreams, or carnal
conjectures, but labor for a true, lively, working, and applicative faith.

III. In robore, in our strength, and power; that is, labor that we may be
strengthened with might, and power, in the inward man Ephesians. 3.16.
, not contenting our selves with the power of nature, which is but impotency it
self. Now this living, or lively power which we must labor for, is
threefold: namely,

First, Potestas pugnandi, power to fight against sin, and Satan manfully,
until we have prevailed Heb. 12.4. and 1 Pet. 2.11.
.

Secondly, Potestas obediendi, power to obey God in some good measure, in that
which he requires of us, in a new life.

Thirdly, Potestas amandi, gaud^ndi, power to love God, and good duties, and to
rejoice in the performance thereof, Esaias 58.13.



Esaias 25.8. Hos. 13.14. Romans 4.17.

Luke 1.78.79. John 1.4. and 2 Cor. 5.15. and 2 Timothy 1.10.

John 6.63. Romans 8.10, 11. and 1 Cor. 6.11. And therefore let us invocate God
the Father, in the name, and mediation of God the Son, to infuse this
spiritual life of grace into us, by the operation of his blessed Spirit.



Ephesians. 5.15.) for grace is not found in the way of security, or with sleeping
upon the bed of case, Colos. 3.1.

John 5.24, 25. and 2 Timothy 1.10. Now there are two things to be heard: namely,

I. The Law; this we must hear that we may be humbled thereby, Romans 7.9.

II. The Gospel; this we must hear, that we may be counseled and comfort
thereby, 2 Cor. 2.16.

Generatio unius est corruption alterius, the vivifying of grace, is the
mortifying of sin: And the more grace increases, the more sin decreases, Romans
6.11. and 1 Cor. 15.36.

Now there are two kinds of death: namely, First, Concupiscentiae, of sin and
lust ( Colos. 3.5.) for all sins, evil affections, and lusts, are to be
mortified. Secondly, Confidentiae, of hope and confidence; for we must deny
our selves, and not trust at al in any thing we do.


Fourthly, we must labor to believe, John 8.24. Colos. 2.12.

Fifthly, we must persevere in all these as long Revelat. 2.11. Ephesians. 6.13.

What shall we gain by this spiritual life,

First, if we be made partakers of this life Romans 8.17. Ephesians. 2.6.19.

Second by this spiritual life, we gain spiritual Cor. 3.17.) from sin, Romans
6.14. and 8.11.

Thirdly, by this life we gain light, and knowledge, Esaias 9.2. Luke 1.80. and 1
Pet. 1.8. And therefore it is worth all the pains.

VERSE. 25. And his Disciples came to him,
. 1. His Disciples came to him.

This action of the Disciples, in coming to Christ, may teach us the degrees
of our coming unto Christ.

How do we come unto Christ?

First, the carnal man is absent from Christ, Mat. 18.11. Luke 15.13. Ephesians.
2.12. and 1 Pet. 25.

Secondly, therefore God sends affliction; as Psalm 107.

Thirdly, and then we come to him ( Psalm. 119.67.71.)

I. By prayer, as the Disciples here did, crying, Lord save us. Or

II. By repentance, as the Prodigal did: Father I have sinned against heaven,
and against thee.

. 2. They awoke him.

Christ indeed is sometimes absent from his children, which is here expressed
by his being asleep.

How is Christ absent from his children?

First, sometimes he is absent from them, by Peter, and David, for a time.

Secondly, sometimes he is absent from them, grievous afflictions; thus he
absented himself from Job for a time, and from David, Psalm 22.

Save us, or we perish.

The Disciples here in their distress pray unto Christ, and are preserved:
whence we may learn:





Daniel 3.17.

Romans 8.28.

Benjamin, who was overcome once and again ( Judge. 20.21.25.) although God bad
them fight ( verse 18.23.) but at length they wholly overcome them, verse 35.
etc.

VERSE 26. And he says unto them, why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith?
Then he arose, and rebuked the winds, and the sea, and there was a great calm.
Why are ye fearful?





First because they were fearful, and cowardly; for the righteous should be as
bold as Lions, Prove. 28.1.

Secondly, because they doubted; and that,

I. Of safety, save us, or we perish. And

II. Of Christ's care of them: Carest thou not that we perish, Mark 4.57.



Paul did: The Apostle says, though he was absent in body, yet he was present
in care, Colos. 2.5. and 1 Cor. 5.3. And therefore certainly much more is
Christ: yea, in regard of his Deity he is every where present: And therefore
there was no need of their running unto Christ, to put him in mind of their
danger.

And they awoke him, saying, Master save us: as though with the body, and
humanity, the Deity had slept: when as indeed, He that keeps Israel, does
neither slumber nor sleep, Psalm 121.4.

Why are ye fearful? Yea, if it be not good to fear, then why does Christ
sleep, and by sleeping thus terrify them?



That disturbing, and disquieting fear, Luke 12.32.

How many sorts of fear are there, that we

There is a twofold fear, to wit, First, of God, which is a godly fear.
Secondly, of men, which is a worldly fear: herein observe these two things;
First, Genesis 32.9. etc. Secondly, dangers are not to be feared with a
Distracting fear; for that is here forbidden, and Matthew 10.28. and Luke
1.74. Esaias 8.12.



Why is this distracting, and disturbing fear

First, because this fear arises from sin, Genesis

Secondly, because this fear is threatened as a Deuter. 32.25. Job 18.14. Prove.
3.24.

Thirdly, because it is a sign of diffidencie, and King. 6.14, 15. Daniel 3.
and 6. Psalm. 3.7. and 23.4. and 27.1. and 46.3. Wherefore this fear argues
either, I. No faith. Or II. a false faith; or III. A sleepie faith, or IV. A
weak faith.

Fourthly, because this terrifying fear shall be Revel. 21.8.

Fifthly, this fear is to be expelled, because Esaias 41.14.

Sixthly, this fear deters us from the profession John 9.22. and 12.42.

What must we fear?

First, we must fear God: and that

I. Lest we offend him, and provoke him unto anger by our sins. And

II. Lest we neglect to glorify him in our lives, and conversations. And

III. Lest we should forget him, and not have him always before our eyes.

Secondly, we must fear our salvation. And Ephesians 5.15. And II. Lest we
should be temporally punished for our sin, as Ier. 36.16. and 1 Corinthians
11.32. And III. Lest we should be eternally tormented for our iniquities,
Deuteronomy. 28.66. Heb. 4.1.3.

. 2. O ye of little faith.

Our Savior by this phrase, would have us Matthew. 6.30. and 16.8. and Luke
12.28. and Mat. 14:29. Mark 9.24. Cum fides in Objecto, non errat, sed illud
in medijs trepid ^tionibus cum fiducia quantumvis languida apprehendere
expetit, and conatur, debilis fides est, vera tamen. Chemnit. 1.185. a.



Ephesians. 2.8) yet it is not given miraculously, but by the means of the word,
Romans 10.15. etc. Hence it is said, the sower sowed seed, Mat. 13.1. and the
kingdom of God is like unto a grain of mustard seed, Mat. 13.31. which
grows up by little and little, Mark 4.26. etc. And hence it is sometimes
greater, and sometimes lesser. For the better understanding of this observe,

First, the Schoolmen say, that faith is less, in a double regard: namely,

I. Quoad objectum, in regard of the object; because expressly some believe
fewer things then others do, Them 2.2.5 4.

II Quoad participationem, in regard of the participation; and that either

First, Ex part intellectus, because some have lesser understanding, then
others. Or

Secondly, Ex part voluntatis; because some have,

I. Lesser promptitude and readiness in believing then others; some being more
dull, lazy, and sluggish then others are. Or

II. Lesser devotion; some being less zealous, then are others. Or,

III. Lesser confidence, and trust; some being more fearful then are others.

Secondly, our Divines affirm faith to be lesser in a double regard also: to
wit,

I. Fructibus, in regard of the fruits thereof; as holiness, strength, zeal,
constancy, joy, and the like.

II. Gradibus, in regard of the degrees, or nature of faith; as in
apprehension, and application. Perkins. And therefore Chemnuius observes, that

First, sometimes faith is great, as Mat. 8.10. and 15.28. And

Secondly, sometimes faith is small, as Matthew. 14.31. And

Thirdly, sometimes faith is weak, and that either in Acknowledging, Romans 14.1.
Or Trusting, Mark. 9.24.


Thirdly, observe, faith is lesser sometimes, in regard of Others; that is, one
man's faith is greater then another, as one star differs from another in glory,
1 Cor. 15. and Romans 14.1. and 15.1. A man's self; that is, sometimes faith in
one and the same man is greater, and sometimes less, and that either,
Ordinarily; and thus a man's faith is less, when he is newly regenerated, then
afterward, Heb. 5.12. Extraordinarily, in the hour of temptation; which is
occasioned, either First, by reason of some sin committed 2 Samuel 12. Psalm.
22. and 32.
: Or Secondly, because the Holy Spirit of God is grieved Ephesians. 4.31.
: and that either, 1. By the love of sin: or 2. By the neglect of the exercises
of Religion: or 3. By the extinguishing of the good motions of the Holy Spirit.
Or Thirdly, because God with-draws his grace, and spiritual light for a time 2
Chro. 32.31. Psalm. 51.11.
.




Oh ye of little faith, that faith is accepted, but weakness is reproved:
whereby our Savior would teach us: That the children of God should labor that
their faith may grow ripe, and increase unto perfection. Read Ephesians 4.13.15.
and 2 Pet 1.10. and 1 Pet. 2.^, 3. and Mark. 4.40.



This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom be has sent, John 6.29.
Yea this is the function of a Christian; for we are called F^^^les, faithful;
because our work is to strive to be rich, and perfect in faith: yea we are
called Christiani, Christians, because we depend wholly upon Christ by faith:
And therefore there is great reason, that we should labor, and endeavor to
grow up, and increase therein.

[This i^ his Commandment, that we should believe on the name of his Son
Jesus Christ, 1 John 3.23.] And therefore it behooves us to labor to be perfect
in faith.

Thirdly, faith is our chiefest armor against Ephesians 6.16.) yea a Breast Plate
(1 Thessalonians. 5 8.) and therefore we must resist this our enemy with faith, 1 Pet.
5.8. Great reason is there then, that all those who desire to be free from
Satan, should labor for faith, and the increase thereof.

Who are blameworthy in this particular?

Those who neglect faith:

I. Those who have not faith, should neither give sleep to their eyes, nor
slumber to their eyelids, until they be made partakers thereof, we being
without God in the world, so long as we are without faith in our souls.

Here those who have not as yet attained unto to wit, I. By faith they shall
have true, spiritual, internal, and solid joy; according to that of the
Apostle, Although we have not seen God, yet we love him, and loving him,
believe in him, and believing in him rejoice with a joy unspeakable, and
glorious, 1 Pet. 1.8. He that believes in God, has the witness in himself,
and is not beguiled with presumptuous persuasions; and therefore has true
cause of rejoicing: but he that believes not can have no true hope, and
consequently no solid joy, Romans 5.3, 4 II Let those who are as yet destitute of
faith, remember, that they cannot more profitably bestow their pains any
where, then here: they cannot labor for any thing of more worth then faith is;
because that is the hand, whereby we apprehend Christ, and apply him unto our
selves, that is the eye whereby we behold Christ; that is the foot, by which we
walk unto Christ: yea, that is the seal, whereby all the promises of the
Gospel are confirmed unto us: And therefore nothing is more profitable for us,
nothing can make us more happy, then faith in Christ can.



What means must they use for the acquiring of it?

Romans 8.14.

Pet. 1.10. That is, he that persuades himself that he believes, must show his
faith to be true and lively, by the fruits of sanctification.

faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17.) and we must be servent, and frequent in
prayer unto God, that he would infuse this grace of faith in us by his Holy
Spirit. II. Those who have faith should not rest, nor content themselves with a
weak, or small measure thereof: But remember, that graces are not given to be
misspent (as the Prodigal did his portion) nor to be kept without any
augmentation, or increase (as the servant did his Talent, which he hid in a
Napkin) but to multiply and increase: For the manifestation of the Spirit is
given to every man to profit withal 1 Cor. 12 7.
: and therefore the servant is condemned, because he did not put out his
Masters money to the Bank, Luke 19.23.



First, by the word of God, Ex ijsdem nutrimur ex quibus generamur; as the word
is a seed to beget those, who are not begotten; so bread to feed those who are
begotten; yea, milk whereby babes become young men, 1 Pet. 2.12. And therefore
we must be frequent in hearing, reading, meditating, and conferring of the word
of God. Secondly, by fighting, and striving against sin, Satan, the world, and
our own corrupt lusts, Heb. 12.4. and 1 Pet. 2.11. and 5 8, 9. Ephesians. 6.13.
etc. Thirdly, by faithful, and fervent prayer unto God; crying daily unto God,
as the Apostles did unto Christ, Oh Lord increase our faith, Luke 17.5. Ephesians.
6.18.


What is faith?

First, Grammatically, Fides a fio; Dicitur fides it is called faith, because
it is made: And therefore faith is twofold, viz. Activa, first active (faciens
veritatem) and is called Fidelity. Passiva, secondly, passive (credens
veritati) and is called persuasion. Hinc fides sacta habita.




Secondly, according to the Greek, (...) and

I. Actively, and thus God is said to be faithful, 1 Cor. 1.9. and his word to
be faithful, 1 Timothy 3.1. and 4.9: and his Ministers to be faithful, 1 Cor.
4.2. Because God works faith in his children, by the word, and Ministers
thereof. Or,

II. Passively; and thus they of the Circumcision, and Timothies Mother, and
diverse believe in God. Act. 10.45. and 16.1. and 2 Cor. 6.15. Now the question
here is concerning the passive, not active faith.

VERSE. 28. And when he was come to the other side, into the country of the
Gergesenes, there met him two possessed with devils, coming out of the tombs,
exceeding fierce, so that no man might pass by that way.
. 1. There met him two possessed with devils.

What is meant here by being possessed?

For answer hereunto,

First, Obsessio quae est duplex; Primo, Corporalis, visu, auditu, tactu.
Secundo, Spiritualis, tentationibus, terroribus.


Secondly, Possessio quae est duplex Primo, Corporalis, cum Satan residet.
Secundo, Spiritualis, in D^minio peccati, 2 Timothy 2.26.


How does Obsession, and Possession differ?

First, Obsession is common unto all, for the

Secondly, but none can be possessed by Satan,

How does the Devil impugn, and assail

First, Tentando, he impugnes him by temptation

laedendo, puniendo, by harming, and punishing of him; and this he does from
God, Thim. Aq. 1.1 14.1.1.







I. Some are afflicted by Satan in their senses; that is, molested, terrified,
or affrighted with some Diabolical sights, or noise, or touching, or the like.
And this we greatly abhor, and fear.

II. Some are possessed by Satan in their bodies: And although this be far
worse, then the former, yet we do not so much abhor, and fear it; and that

First, partly because we are not sensible of it. And,

Secondly, partly because the mind is estranged.

III. Some are possessed by Satan in heart; and this is most perilous, but
most of all slighted, and neglected.



Allegorically it shows us our estate, and condition without Christ: Or, John
8.44. Ephesians 2.2. John 12.31. and 14.30. 2 Cor. 4.4.
.

How does it appear, that naturally we are

Because sin has captivated, Romans 3.23. and 5.12. and 7.14. Sin is

First, the Devils Ensign, or Flag; as in a ship, or Castle overcome the
Ensign of the Conqueror is hung out, so the Devil having conquered us, has
hung out his Flag; that is, imprinted sin in our nature.

Secondly, sin is the law of Satan, John 8.44. Ephesians. 4.27. and 1 John 3.8.
etc. But Christ freeth us both from Satan, and sin, Luke 11.22. John 8.36.
Romans 16.20. Colos. 2.14. and 1 John 5.20. and Revel. 13.4.

How does Satan possess natural men, or

First, in general, as the peace of God abides Colos. 3.17.) so Satan sits
within, and remains in the heart of the natural man, wholly possessing,
wholly directing him.

Secondly, more particularly.

Until we be freed by Christ, Satan possesses us In intellectu, in the
understanding: and that in three regards, viz. First, the natural man cannot
take up, or comprehend God, or spiritual things 1 Cor. 2.14.
: Indeed he may have some outward knowledge after his corrupt manner Romans 1.20.
, but he can know nothing spiritually, or profitably. Secondly, the natural man
is wise unto evil, and very crafty; Adam can cover his nakedness with Fig-leavs;
and Joseph's brethren subtly hide their selling of him; and David craftily
plot the murder of Vriah. Thus by nature we are wise unto wickedness. Thirdly,
the natural man cannot believe the truth of God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9.10.11.
Secondly, In affectu, in the affection, as appears thus. First, the natural
man does not love spiritual things: he regards not the word of God Esa. 53.1.
, but thinks it a hard saying John 6.60.
. Secondly, the natural man is mad upon sin; selling himself to work
wickedness, and that with greediness Ephesians. 4.18.
; and not ceasing to do evil 2 Pet. 2.14.
. Thirdly, the will of the natural man is violent, and obstinate, and
headstrong, and will not endure to be curbed, Ier. 44.16.
Thirdly, In memoria, in the memory, as appears thus. First, good things are
very hardly imprinted in the memory of the naturall-man, Psalm 50.22. and 2
Pet. 1.9. Secondly, evil things are greedily received into the memory, and
strongly retained by it: yea hence comes a custom of sinning, because the
memory does frequently suggest some evil.
Fourthly, In sensibus, in the senses, as is thus most evident. First, they are
easily carried unto outward objects; the eye is easily persuaded to behold
beauty, or to look upon the sparkling of the wine in the Glass: and so of the
rest of the senses. Secondly, the senses being transported by alluring objects,
do draw the judgment also along with them: reason being once captivated, is
easily drawn away from God, and led aside.
Fifthly, In vita, in the life; we are naturally taken captive of the Devil at
his will, 2 Timothy 2.26. for he hurries the natural man sometimes unto
drunkenness, sometimes unto murder, yea unto every kind of evil. Sixthly, In
Ore, in the mouth. For First, the Devil fills the natural man's mouth with
blasphemous swearing, lying, lascivious, and opprobrious speeches. And
Secondly, the Devil does exasperate the tongue of the natural man against
Religion, making him sometimes dispute against religion, and sometimes slander,
detract, mock, and deride the religious.
Seventhly, In imaginationibus, in the cogitations, and thoughts; they being
evil, and that continually, Genesis 6.5. and 8.21.


What must we do to be freed from Satan, who does thus possess us?



First, to enlighten our understandings, that we may perceive those things
which are good. And

Secondly, to change our affections, that we may love those things which are
good. And

Thirdly, to help our memories, that we may retain those things which are
good. And

Fourthly, to set a watch over our senses, that we may delight in nothing, but
what is good. And

Fifthly, to sanctify our whole life, words, and thoughts, that all we do,
speak, or think, may be good. And

Sixthly, that he would be pleased to give us a true sight, and knowledge of
our selves, and wants; and to make us partakers of himself by a lively faith.

They were exceeding fierce.





Esaias 5.29. and 14.16, 17. Revel. 9.7.8, 9, 10. and 12.12.



Pet. 5.8.



Cor. 11.14. that so he may the more speedily, and unexpectedly destroy: The
Fowler hides the net, and shows only the shrap; the Panther hides his fangs,
and holds forth only his sweet, and beautiful skin; the Crocodile cries like a
child, that cruelly he may slay men: And thus bloody cruelty is covered with
the veil of crafty simplicity.







Gehazi; yea set men up in slippery places, that he may destroy them Psalm
73.6.18
, being willingly contented, that they should spend their days in good things,
that thus in a moment he may bring them down into the pit, Job 21.13.

Satan delivers many from pains, and evils,

First, he freeth sometimes from those evils, Non sanando, sed cessando, he
does not properly heal, and cure evils, but only cease from inflicting of
evils, Abdias in S. Bartholomaeo.

Secondly, he freeth men from evils, after they Id. Ibid. And when men are
content to bequeath their souls unto him, for the health of their bodies, then
he is content to cure, and heal their bodies.

But the Schoolmen deny fury, or concupiscence Quia nil in ijs irascibile, vel
concupiscibile, (Thom. 1.59.5.) Quia pertinent haecad appetitum sensitivum, non
intellectivum, Ibid. Yea, sense, memory, and fantasy are not properly in
devils, but only understanding, mind, or will, Aquinas.

Certainly, as these are perturbations,

But the sacred Scriptures witness, that the James 4.7. for otherwise it were
in vain to resist him, Ephesians. 4.27.

First, the Devil is not such a Coward, as many I defy the Devil, and I
fear him not: But these are lamentably deceived; for whilst openly they defy
the Devil, secretly they are possessed by the Devil.

Secondly, the Devil flies only from the faithful, Pet. 5.9. Now this power
comes from heaven, not from themselves; for the Devil is too strong to be
overcome by any arm of flesh, as we may see by those dangerous falls, and
direful foiles he has given to the best of the Saints, when God (but for a
while) has withheld his grace.

If Satan be thus fierce, cruel, strong, and

Oftentimes he would do harm, and cannot, Si posset quantum vult, nemo
justorum remaneret Aug. s. Psalm.
; If he were able to do what he desires, he would not leave a righteous man in
the world; Sathanae voluntas semper iniqua, potestas nunquam injusta; quia
habet voluntatem a se, potestatem a Deo, Greg. moral. The will of Satan is
always wicked, but his power is always just, because he has his power from
the good God, but his will from his wicked self. And therefore as far as his
sleeve, or chain, or power will reach, he is most cruel.

How does it appear, that naturally the Devil

viz. First, from the nature of Satan, or the nature of an Angel: For as the
spiritual Image of God in man was lost by the fall of man, but the natural
Image remained: So in Satan, the natural power of the Angels remains still,
but their spiritual love is changed into hatred: Now the power of the Angels
we know is great, as appears by the slaughter of those 185000. which were
slain by one Angel in one night: And therefore if the natural power of an
Angel remain in Satan, and his spiritual love be changed into implacable
hatred; then without doubt by nature he is fierce, and cruel. Secondly, from
the names given unto him; he is called a Lion (1 Peter 5.8.) a Dragon, a
Serpent (Revelat. 12.3.9. and 20.2. Psalm 91.13.) Leviathan, (Esaias 27.1.)
Behemoth, a strong man armed (Luke 11.21.) a Murderer from the beginning (John
8.44.) Lightning, (Luke 10.18.) An Enemy, Matthew 13.25. (...), an Adversary (1 Timothy 5.14.) Abaddon, and Apollyon, Revel. 9.11. Thirdly, from his works,
consider but how grievously he afflicted Job, in his estate, children, body,
mind, wife, friends, and dreams, leaving no means unsought, to make him
miserable, as far as the Lord would permit him: And in the New Testament we
read how he sifted Peter (Luke 22.31.) and buffetted Paul, 2 Cor. 12.9.






Iacobus de Valentia, (in Psalm. 6.) prescribes unto us three excellent rules,
for the driving him way.

I. He must be cast out, Cum pudore, with shame, and blushing; that is, we must
learn, and labor to be ashamed, and confounded for our sins, whereby we
became the captives of Satan. Read these places, and strive to imitate the
practice of these Presidents, Ezra 9.6. Daniel 9.7, 8 Romans 6.21. and 2 Cor.
7.11. Ier. 31.19. and 3.3. and 6.15. and 8.12.

II. He must be cast out, Cum violentia, with force, and violence; that is, we
must resist sin and Satan manfully, striving against them, even unto blood (
Heb. 12.4.) like Jacob, who wrastled all the night with the Angel ( Genesis
32.24.) that so we may become strong in faith, 1 Pet. 5.9. Nam quo magis videt
rebell^nes, eo acrius expugnare contendit Greg. moral. 29.
. The more earnestly we strive to overcome Satan, the more earnestly he
strives to overcome us: and therefore we must either contend with him, with
manfull wrastlings, or we can never prevail against him: yea we must labor
wholly to expel sin and Satan: Perfecti vincitur, cum men's neque trahitur
ad consensunt, neque delectationem tentationunt. Gregor. Satan is then
perfectly foiled, when the mind is neither drawn to consent to sin, nor to
delight in the temptations unto evil. This is a hard work, but it is a
necessary work, and therefore the more earnestly, and industriously to be
undertaken.

III. He must be cast out, Cum velocitate, speedily, while it is said, to day (
Psalm 95.8.) not sleeping in sin, nor with Satan, Proverb. 6.4 Psalm. 132.
De manu Sathanae non evaditur, nisi ocyus per poenitentiam recurratur, Gregor.
There is no way to make an escape out of Satan's clutches, but by serious, and
speedy repentance. And therefore all those, who desire to be dispossessed of
Satan, and to possess, and enjoy God by a true, and lively faith in the
soul, they must labor to be ashamed of their bypast sins; to fight
courageously, and constantly against sin, for the time to come; and while it is
said to day, turn from all sin, and turn wholly unto God, both with body,
soul, and spirit, 1 Thessal. 5.23.

What is the sense, and meaning of these They were exceeding fierce?

First, some understand them particularly of

That the Devil makes men cruel, but the Lord Esaias 11.6, 7. and 35 9 and 65.25.

Why does the Devil ma^e men cruel?

First, because he hates mankind; and therefore

Secondly, because the Devil knows, that cruel He shall have judgment
without mercy, that shows no mercy, James 2.13.

Thirdly, the Devil leads men unto cruelty,

I. The seamlesse coat of Christ; and therefore it is defaced by rents, and
ruptures: yea

II. The bond which tieth both First, us amongst our selves And Secondly, us
with Christ.
Now this christian bond of charity, Satan earnestly desires to separate and
dissolve.

What may we (without breaking this bond

We may think that First, they are of Satan, Secondly, they are no
Christians; for the Holy Ghost never appeared, (that we read of) in the shape
of a Tiger, or Bear, but of a Dove, Gualt. s. Matthew. 2. Thirdly, they are
odious unto God, and such as he will not spare in judgment.


In what things has Cruelty place?

In diverse things; namely, First, in oppression, Esa. 47.6. Zachary 1.15.
Secondly, in revenge. Thirdly, in pride, Prove. 16.5. Fourthly, in debts; as we
see in him who cruelly handled his fellow servant for the hundred pence.
Fifthly, in punishments; therefore offenders must be beaten with stripes by a
certain number, lest through cruelty they should have been excessive; like the
Turks, who sometimes give two hundred lashes for one offense. Sixthly, in
household affairs; therefore we are advised not to be like Lions in our houses,
nor frantic amongst our servants, Eccles. 4.30. Seventhly, over brute beasts;
a righteous man regards the life of his beast, but the tender mercies of the
wicked are cruel, Proverb. 12.10.


Thus much for the first general Answer to the fifth Question.



Tim. 2.26. and 1 John 3.8, 18. Ephesians. 4.27.



John 8.44. And therefore sinners cannot but obey him in what he commands?



Three manner of ways; namely, Inchoatione, by inchoation, because it was he
that brought sin first into the world, by sinning himself, and tempting Adam
unto disobedience. Secondly, Tentatione, by temptation, because it is he that
yet allures the sons of Adam. Thirdly, Punitione, by correction, because it is
he that obliges the sinner unto his service, and that in eternal pains.






I. Do cast off the garments of Innocence. Gualt. s. And

II. Of Decency and Christian glory. Chrysostom. s. And

III. Of Modesty and Shamefastness, sinning without shame.

Luke 8.27. So sinners do not dwell with the Saints and righteous. But

I. Are conversant with dead works. Gualt. s. And

II. With the works of darkness, as theft, murder, treason, fraud, and the
like, Ephesians. 5.11.

Thirdly, the possessed were never quiet, but Mark 5.5. So sinners

I. Are furious in the pursuit of sin, night and day. Gualt. s. And

II. Are still blaspheming and dishonouring of God. Gualt. s. And

III. Perhaps cry by reason of some internal horror of conscience; as follows.

Fourthly, the possessed cut themselves with Mark 5.5. so sinners

I. Wound themselves with sins. Chrysostom. s. And

II. Waste and consume their estates with following after their sins. And

III. Bring infirmities, and sicknesses upon their bodies by sin. And

IV. Bring inf^my upon themselves amongst men. And

V. Wound and pierce through their consciences with sin, 1 Timothy 6.10. And

VI. Stab, and kill outright their poor souls.

Fifthly, the possessed could not be held, but Mark 5.4. So sinners

I. Will not be compelled to abstain from sin, by the fear of God. Nor

II. Will be curbed by the sword of the Magistrate. Nor

III. Will be made orderly, by Ecclesiastical Discipline. Nor

IV. Will be restrained by the shame of men. Nor

V. Will be kept back from sin, by the respect of their own profit, or danger,
or the good of their children or families.

Sixthly, the possessed are troublesome and None durst come near that way
wherein they were. So sinners are obnoxious unto others, and that

I. By their lewd and wicked examples, which are hurtful in a double regard;
namely,

First, because the good are offended thereby, through a zeal unto Gods glory.
And

Secondly, because the bad are encouraged and emboldened thereby to do the like.

II. Some are hurtful unto others, by their persuasion unto sin. Thus many
entice and persuade others unto drunkenness, adultery, theft, perjury, lying,
and the like.

III. Some are obnoxious unto others by their scoffs and taunts, whereby they
deride the professors, and profession of Religion. And thus we see what
resemblance there is between sinners, who are possessed by Satan in their
hearts, and those who were corporally possessed.

Unto what sin may this fierceness and cruelty

First, Chrysostom applies it unto luxury and

Secondly, but this corporal possession may most pregnantly be applied unto
Covetousness, which is like a Cage of unclean birds, and a very sink of
wickedn^sse: Chrysostom s. gives us a character of a Covetous man, thus
elegantly painting him out unto us.

We must suppose we saw a man,

I. Whose face is like the face of a greedy dog, or ravening Wolf. And

II. Who had fiery eyes, sparkling through rage. And

III. Who had teeth as sharp as a swords edge. And

IV. Whose mouth is a deep devouring gulf. And

V. Whose tongue is a venomous flood, that sends forth streams of deadly
poison. And

VI. Whose voice is some horrid and dismal note. And

VII. Whose arms are two deadly dragons. And

VIII. In whose hands are burning faggots. And

IX. Whose belly is like a burning furnace. And

X. Whose feet have wings upon them. Now the Father having made this man or
monster, does further fain or suppose, that

First, he kills, tears, and devoures all that ever he meets withal. And

Secondly, that the fear of no Law will restrain him, but fearlesly he assails
all. Yea

Thirdly, we may truly conceive the truly Covetous man, to be more horrible
than Chrysostom can paint or imprint (by any description) in our minds: And
therefore beware of Covetousness, which is the root of all evil; for some
seeking after riches, have fallen into temptations and snares, and pierced
their hearts through with many sorrows.

And no man durst pass that way.







First, society with Satan; as Witches, Magicians, Sorcerers, and the like
have: this is desperate. And

Secondly, society with sinners, in sinning: This is sinful, and prohibited,
Psalm. 1.1. Diabolus tentat non solum per se, sed per eos qui nobiscum Greg.
. The Devil does not only tempt us by himself, but also by those who inhabit
amongst us. And

Thirdly, society with wicked men, in regard of our habitation; that is, when
we live amongst sinners: this is dangerous, because evil examples corrupt good
manners.

VER. 29. And behold they cried out saying, What have we to do with thee,
Jesus, thou Son of God? art thou come hither to torment us before our time?
Art thou come hither to torment us?

What torments did the Devils fear?

First, some say they feared to be cast out of that Region: certainly Saint
Mark says, They

Secondly, some say they feared that Christ Luke says, that They besought him,
that be would not command them to go out into the d^ep, Luke 8.31. And without
doubt they would not be captivated and incarcerated in Hell, if they could help
it: for although they carry fire about them, yet in Hell it is much worse with
them.

Thirdly, some say that they feared eternal torments; Why art thou come to
torment us before our time? As though they would say, We know that at the last
day we shall be bound over to eternal and perpetual torments, but why come
thou to torment us before that time?

Fourthly, some say they feared some extraordinary

That the wicked have no other hope or expectation, but of punishment and
torment, Heb. 10.27.

What torments do wicked men expect or fear?

First, for the wicked are prepared Corporal Jude, (verse 7.) Eternal fire.
It is much disputed and controverted among the Schoolmen, how the Devils can be
tormented with this Corporeal fire, seeing they are Spirits; and it is well
concluded of them thus:

I. That in Hell there is a Corporeal fire, as appears thus:

First, because the Scriptures affirm it, Mat. 3.10. and 5.22. and 25.41.

Secondly, because the bodies sinning against God, are to be vexed and
tormented by God, with corporal pains.

II. They conclude, that the Devils are tormented in that fire, because Christ
says so: Go ye wicked into eternal fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, Mat. 25.41.

III. It being demanded how the Devils are tormented in that fire? they answer,
They are tormented, not only

First, with the sight thereof. Or

Secondly, with an imaginary apprehension thereof. But

Thirdly, as an instrument ordained of God, for that end. And

Fourthly, ut locus, locatum continens, and cogens. Tho. supplem. 70.3. corp.
Hell is a fiery Region, or a Region of fire; and therefore the Devils being
contained and included therein, must needs be tormented thereby. Cum Dives ab
igne patiatur, quis neget, animo^ ignibus puniri? Greg. dial. 4. cap. 28.29.

None must question this truth, that souls and spirits are punished by fire,
seeing our Savior himself tells us, that Dives (who was in hell but in
soul^) was tormented in the flame.



I. The conscience of sin: here wicked men persuade themselves, that their
sins are small, but there they shall flatter themselves no longer, but be
horribly sensible, both of the quantity, and quality of their offenses,
committed on earth against the King of heaven.

II. In hell the wicked shall be sensible of the felicity, and happiness they
have lost; for there they are deprived,

First, of the society of the Saints ( Heb. 12.22.) And,

Secondly, of light, and the sight of heaven. And,

Thirdly, of God himself, which by much is the greatest loss, Chrysostom. s.
And therefore herein the Devil, and reprobate Angels are worse (I conceive)
then men are; because they have more knowledge of the sweetness of God, and
his gracious, and blessed presence, then men have; they being once partakers
thereof in heaven, which man was never. Indeed, if any should say, that at the
day of judgment it shall be revealed unto the wicked, how glorious the Lord
is, and how unspeakably hap^y all they are, who enjoy that beatificall vision
of his face in heaven; that the remembrance of that loss, may add to their
spiritual torment: I could not tell how to gain say it, but should be forced
to subscribe unto it; both because the evil Angels enjoyment of heaven was but
short; and also because there shall be nothing wanting, to make wicked men
perfectly miserable. Hence

III. In hell arises an envying of the happiness of the Saints in heaven: And
here I conceive, that the Devil does exceed, and excel all reprobate souls
in envy; because the righteous are perfectly, and perpetually happy, and can
be harmed, and molested by him no more Ioh. 16.11.
.

IV. In hell there is a desperation of help, and mercy: for all hope of
favor, or compassion from God there fails them. Hence

V. The mind is dejected, and cast down, being destitute of all courage to
support it, under so insupportable a burden. And thus we may conceive what
the torments are, which are prepared in hell for the disobedient, both in body,
and soul.



First, by insensibility; as a man asleep, not being sensible of the danger
wherein he is cannot be so careful, as he ought, to avoid it: So those who
sleep in sin, and are neither sensible of the evil of sin, or of punishment,
cannot be careful to break off their sins, or to avert these torments by
repentance. Secondly, by presumption: as they who are fully persuaded that they
go right, are careless to inquire after the right way; so those who presume
they are good enough, are negligent in the preventing of this insufferable
evil, John 9.40. Thirdly, by Procrastination, and delay: Modo, Modo non habet
modum (August) many cry by and by, and put off God with delays, until he cuts
them off with death: Many promise to repent to morrow, and the next day to
become new men; but the new day brings new delays, and they still remain the
old men. Fourthly, by coldness in the perfecting of the work: many are
content to repent, and to turn from their sins, and to turn unto God, but they
are too lukewarm, remiss, and negligent in the performance thereof; not
striving against sin, even unto blood. Heb. 12.4
And therefore if we desire to be free from these insufferable torments, let us
labor I. To be sensible of our sins, and the miserable condition we are
brought into, and the punishments we are liable unto, for our sins. And II. Let
us not presume of mercy, and remission, without faith, and true conversion:
Yea, III. Let us not delay our conversion, but go about it out of hand, Esaias
55.6. And IV. Let us not undertake this difficult work of repentance,
negligently, remisly, or slightly, but diligently, and industriously;
remembering that the curse is not taken off, but more surely set on upon such:
For cursed are they that do this work of the Lord negligently Ier. 48.10.
. And V. Let us seek unto the Lord by prayer, and powerful supplication (
Joel. 1.15. and 2.17.) that he who alone is able, would be graciously pleased
to pluck us as brands out of the fire, to convert us unto himself, to avert
from us those temporal judgments, that we have deserved, and to preserve us
from those eternal torments, which we have just cause to fear.


How may we know, whether we shall be free

For answer hereunto observe,

First, some are affected with horrors, and desperate fears; as was Cain, and
Judas, Matthew. 27.5. These are infinitely miserable.

Secondly, some are insensible, sottish, and blockish; fearing nothing, though
they run on in their sins: these are equally, and alike miserable with the
former.

Thirdly, some presume with their mouths, but they lie with their lips; they
say they fear not the flames of hell, they being assured of a part and
interest in heaven: but the Spirit of God does not witness this unto their
spirits it being only the suggestion of Satan, and a false persuasion; And
therefore these also are miserable, because although they deceive themselves,
yet they cannot deceive God, Gal. 6.7.

Fourthly, some have a true, and living hope to be freed from painful misery,
and to be filled with perpetual mercies, 2 Timothy 4.8. And these are truly, and
of all these sorts only blessed, and happy; wherefore betwixt God and our own
consciencs, we should seriously examine, of which of these sorts we are.

Before our time.

The Devil seems here most falsely to tax Christ of injustice, in these two
phrases, viz.

First, What have we to do with thee, Jesus thou Son of God? As though

I. Christ had had no power over Satan. Or, as though,

II. Christ had divided his Empire with Satan. Divisum imperium cum Jove
Caesar habet. Or

III. Because Satan had not invaded the parts of Christ, but only the
Gergasenes, who were strangers from him; and there fore he says, Quid mihi
tecum, what have I to do with thee? as if he would say, I harm none of thine.

Secondly, why art thou come to torment us before our time? As though

I. There were a time of punishing prescribed unto God; and that he could not
justly punish when he would. Or as though,

II. It were not now time to subdue, and bring under Satan, Luke 10.18. or to
cast him out, either of the bodies of those, who were corporally possessed: or
out of the mind of those, who were spiritually possessed, Act. 26.18. or out of
the Kingdom of the Gentiles.



that of that day and hour, knows no man, no not the Angels of heaven; and
therefore much less the Angels of the bottomless Pit, Mat. 24.



Matthew. 24.50. and Job 21.13. and Psalm 73.18. and Job 34.20. and Proverb.
6.15. Esaias 30.13. and 47.9. Ier. 51.8. and 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.

Nondum maturum tempus ad poenam, Calvin. s. They desire that they may be
suffered yet a little longer to tempt the wicked, and to try to hurt the
righteous, and not so quickly to be hurried unto judgment, and eternal
punishment.

VERSE. 30. And there was a good way off from them, an herd of many Swine
feeding.
Gordonus objects this verse, to prove that the vulgar translation (vulgarly
called Hieromes) is Authentical, and only to be adhered unto; And a good way
off from them, there was a herd of Swine; but in the Latin more truly (says
Gordonus) it is said, Non long, and not far off from them, etc. Nec dubito
latinam lectionem incorruptiorem esse, Neither do I make question (says
Maldonat) but the Latin Text is most true; because both Saint Mark, and St.
Luke says, Erant autem ibi; And there were there: that is, in that place: and
Saint Luke says, (...), on the Mountain, Luke 8.32. and Saint Mark says,
(...), nigh unto the Mountain, Mark 5.11. which was certainly near unto the
Sea, because the Swine run into it presently upon their possession, as also
because Christ permitted, and consented, that the devils should go into the
Swine; for this end, that those who were present with him, by the destruction
of the hogs, might know how many, and how cruel the devils were; which they
could neither have known, if the Swine had not been there, not have seen, if
they had not been near: And therefore the Latin Bible, which says; And not
far off from them there was a Herd of Swine feeding, is to be preferred
before the Greek Testament, which here says: And a good way off from them,
etc.

First, all Greek Copies, (says Beza) run thus;

Secondly, there is no incongruity, or absurdity, Maldonat) had been far off,
then those who were present with Christ could not have seen what was done: let
him here define (...), long, and see what space of ground it contains,
whether one mile, or twenty? for until this be determined, nothing can be
concluded. Are nothing long, a good way off, but only those who are further
then can be perceived by the eye? I think the contrary; and that that may be
said to be long, which is within sight: It is said, Luke 15. (...). And when
he was yet afar off, his Father saw him. So Mat 26. Peter also followed
Christ, (...), Procul, a far off, but (I hope) the Papists will not say, out
of sight. And therefore I hold the Greek text to be most authentical, and
sincere.

Thirdly, the several words used by these three Matthew uses, and (...),
which Saint Luke uses, and (...), which Saint Mark has; for it is not
likely, that the hogs were mixed amongst the men; that is, that the Swine were
feeding in the same place, where Christ, and the rest were; but some space
distant from them; to wit, not feeding in the very shore, where Christ was, or
at least near unto the Tombs, but in the skirts of the mountains.

VERSE. 31, 32. So the devils be sought him, saying, If thou cast us out, suffer
us to go into the Herd of Swine: and he said unto them, go.
We have here the Devils petition, and Christ's concession; omitting the former,
I will propound only two questions briefly of the latter.

God bears not sinners? John 9.31.







First, because it was just, and that both, in regard of The Gergesenes, and
that in a double regard, viz. I. For their trial, whether they would patiently
endure temporal losses, for the gaining of Christ. And II. For the justifying
of their rejection, who preferred their hogs before Christ.
Christ, who destroyed nothing but his own, for the Father had given all
things into his hands, Psalm. 8.6. And therefore he may do what he will with his
own, Mat. 20.15.
Secondly, because it was honorable unto Christ (or tended unto his honor)
and that in these three regards, viz. First, because hereby his power was
showed forth: he being able to rule, oversway, and command such cruel, and
fierce devils, and so suddenly destroy so many Swine. Secondly, to prove the
truth of the Miracle; for the departure of the devils show, that the men were
truly possessed. Thirdly, because hereby the Miracle was more divulged, and
made known: For if the devils being dispossessed, had not thus entered into the
Swine, there had but a few known of it; but now the Swine-herds run into the
City, and the Citizens come forth unto Christ; and the greatness of the loss
makes it take the deeper impression in their minds.
Thirdly, because it was profitable unto the Gergesenes; for they hereby might
learn the malice of Satan, who next unto man hates the creatures, and by the
destruction of these bruit beasts, shows his malice unto mankind: and knowing
this they might learn to run unto Christ (who had this commanding power over
Satan) for help and succor against him hereafter, both in regard of their
temporal, and spiritual estates. Fifthly, because it was profitable unto the
Demoniacks, or men who were now dispossessed; for they hereby might see what
would have happened unto them at the last, if they had not been helped by Christ:
yea, hereby learn to fear Satan's power, to rejoice, and be thankful for their
deliverance from him, and to serve Christ faithfully, who had freed them, all
the days of their life. Sixthly, because it was profitable for us, and all
that shall hear, or read of it, in the Allegorical scope; for two things in
the Allegory may be observed; to wit, I. That the end of hogs (that is,
brutish, and wicked men) is at length to be destroyed by Satan. II. That two
men are more dear unto God, then two thousand hogs.


VERSE. 33. And they that kept them, fled,
. 1. And told every thing.

That which includes all things, excludes nothing: now our Evangelist by
saying; They told every thing; means, they related and declared the whole
History to the Gergesenes, both of the drowning of the Swine, and of the
casting of the devils out of the two men: This certainly Satan had rather
should have been concealed, then divulged; whence we learn.

That God directs the actions, Esaias 46.10. Prove. 19.21. Esa. 48.14. and 14.24.
etc. Daniel 4.32.

How does it appear, that God directs the endeavors,

First, it appears thus, because nothing fal^

Secondly, it is plain, because God is wiser

1. God does not only consider the means, but also the end; and thus also does
Satan, and wicked men.

II. But God also can fit, and make able the means unto the end; he ordaines
physic for the recovering of health, and he can give power unto physic to
work this effect: This neither Satan, nor man can do. For God only is
Omnipotent.

III. And he knows what will come to pass hereafter. This neither man, nor
Satan knows: And therefore he suffers Satan, and wicked men to do much, but
converts, and turns it to his own ends.





Whether it be, First, for the helping of themselves, as Pharaoh thought to
work wisely for the preventing of a mischief, Exodus 1.10. Certainly, this is a
reluctancie, and struggling against God, who will never suffer himself to be
overreached by the wisdom of men, Romans 1.21. But such as thus strive against
him, or his will, shall either* I. Be overcome by their enemies, Ier. 19.7. Or,
II. Undone, and weakened by domestical, or intestine broiles, and jars, Esaias
19.3. Secondly, for the ruin and destruction of others: These that thus strive
against God, shall not prevail, but their plots shall either, I. Be turned
unto the destruction of themselves; as Pope Alexander 6. was poisoned with that
s^m^ draught which he intended for others, Or, II. Their plots shall be
revealed, as was the treason of the Aquilij and Vitellij against the Consuls
Theatr. 24 11. a
, and of those who were suborned to slay Tim^l^onies. Theatr. hum. vitae, 3465.
b. Or, III. It shall be hindered by some other way, or means. Or, IV. It shall
be punished by their enemies: Thus Alexander the Great punished Bessus for his
treason: and Soliman flayed N^dastus alive, for betraying the City unto him,
upon promise or one of his daughters. Or, V. Their plots, and treasons shall be
punished by God; as we see in Rodulphus.


CHAPTER IX.
VERSE 1. And he entered into a Ship, and passed over,
. 1. And he entered into a Ship.

We may see here how mildly Christ's bears himself: the Gergesenes desire him
to depart out of their coasts; and what does he? not call for fire and
brimstone from heaven upon them for it Luke 9.54.
, but quietly enters into a Ship, and departs: to teach us,

That we ought to be meek, and gentle in suffering of injuries. Mat. 11.29.
Romans 12.12. Mat. 5.39. and 1 Thessal. 5.14. and consider how patient God is
toward us, though we provoke him daily, Amos 2.13. Ier. 3.1. yea, how meek,
and patient Christ was, Luke 23.34. that prayed for his Murderers 1 Pet. 3.23.
, as did also his first Martyr, Saint Stephen, Act. 7. and his holy Apostles, 1
Cor. 4.12.

Why must we be meek, and patient in suffering

First, because revenge belongs unto God, not Romans 12.19. And therefore he who
goes about to revenge himself, is

I. Injurious unto God, taking the Sword out of his hands, to whom properly it
belongs. And

II. Shall not be revenged of him, by whom he has been injured; for by
m^eknesse and patience only, we heap coals of fire upon our enemies heads,
Romans 12. and are sure that God will take our cause in hand, and revenge us,
Luke 18.7. yea, free us from their rage Revel. 3.10.
.

Secondly, we must be meek and patient in suffering Cor. 13.4. And

Thirdly, because God has promised a reward Moses endured patiently his
tribulations, and wrongs, having an eye to the recompense of reward Heb. 11.26.
: and so also did our meek, and Lambe-like Savior, Heb. 12.2. Romans 15.3. etc.
and 2 Cor. 4.16.

How many sorts of patience are there in the

Patience is fire-fold: namely, either First, Coacta, constrained, patience
perfor^e: Vana sine viribus ira, many not being able to revenge injuries, do
patiently brook injuries: This is not Christian patience. Secondly, Vulpina,
Fox-like, when a man seems patient, that so he may the more subtly, and
suddenly be revenged. Thirdly, Asinina, Asse-like, when a man is so timorous,
fearful, and cowardly, that he dare not so much as mutter against those that
have injured him. Fourthly, Columbina, Dove-like; when a man brooks all
injuries, and wrongs with a cheerful mind: This a moral man may do. Fifthly,
a Christian ascends a little higher, that is, rejoices in injuries, wrongs,
tribulation, and persecution, Acts 5.41. Romans 5.3. For I. He acknowledges
this to be his crown and glory, to be made partaker of the afflictions of
Christ. And II. He expects a reward from God, according to his gracious
promises Luke 21 19. and Iam. 5.7.
. And III. He sees (by faith) Christ present, prepared to help and assist him
in all things, as far as may stand with Gods glory and his good, Philip. 4.10.


And passed over.







Ioh. 11.8
, and the Nazarens to cast him down a high rock; yet he does not give over
preaching: They of Lystra stone Paul, and yet he returns again.











Into the Greatest dangers we may boldly intrude our selves, if we have a
calling thereunto from God. Least dangers we may not intrude our selves,
without a calling.


For First, some sin by too much boldness and presumption, without a calling.
And Secondly, others offend by too much fear in their calling; as Moses did,
Exo. 4.


Exodus 14. and made Peter walk upon the water, Matthew. 14. and therefore could
he not have done so now himself?

Non^geb^^ navi, sed navis illo (Chrysostom. hom. 12. de variis locis) The ship
stood in need of him, and not he of the ship.

. 3. And came into his own City.

What City was this whereunto Christ came?

First, some say it was Nazareth, (Hier. s.) but Mark contradicts this, chap.
2.1.

Secondly, some say it was Capernaum, (Calvin, and this is the truth, as
appears Mat. 4.13.

Why is it called his City?

First, some think, because he was born there:

Secondly, some think, because he was free of certainly false, so this is
uncertainly true.

Thirdly, the reason of the phrase is, because Mat. 4.13. Christum Bethlehem
tulit, Nazareth educavit, Capernaum erat perpetuum habitaculum (Chrysostom. s.)
Christ was born in Bethlehem, brought up in Nazareth, and dwelt in Capernaum.

Why did Christ make choice of Capernaum to

First, because the Nazarites had cast him out Luke 4.29. Muscul. s.

Secondly, because many of his Disciples dwelt Peter and Andrew, Math. 4.18.
James and John, verse 21. to teach us, That Christ will dwell with those who
are his, ( Ioh. 17.21, 26. and 14.23. Rev. 3.20. and 1 Ioh. 1.3, etc. and 2
Cor. 6.16. Ioh. 12.26. and 14.3. Rev. 14.14.) And by his communion and
fellowship, make them happy and blessed.

Wherein does the happiness of the Saints

First, If Christ be with them, he will enlighten

Secondly, restrain and keep them from sin.

Thirdly, reduce them from sin by Repentance.

Fourthly, excite them unto cheerfulness, in

Fifthly, corroborate and strengthen them,

Sixthly, will fill them with ineffable joy and Pet. 1.8.

VERSE. 2. And behold they brought unto him a man sick of the Palsy, lying on a
bed: And Jesus seeing their faith, says unto the sick of the Palsy, Son, be
of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee.
In our Saviors speech unto this sick man, are expressed three great and
singular benefits and prerogatives of the Faithful; namely,

First, their filiation, expressed in this word, Son,. 1. And

Secondly, their joy, employed in these words, be of good cheer,. 2. And

Thirdly, their remission and reconciliation, laid down in these words, Thy
sins be forgiven thee,. 3.

Son.

Luke 12.30.



I. Averse and obstinate sinners, which will not repent, Ier. 3.12. And

II. Penitent sinners, who turn from their sins, Zach. 1.3. Those are not sons,
but These are: as 2 Cor. 3.17, 18. Thus a Physician is the Father of those sick
persons whom he takes care of. Now we see that this sick man comes by faith
unto Christ; the Text saying plainly, Jesus seeing their faith, that is, both
of the persons bringing, and of the person brought.



I. He had Faith, as aforesaid. And

II. Christ had pardoned and forgiven his sins, as here.

Brother, not Father, Psalm. 22.22. Matthew 25.40. and 28.10. Romans 8.29. and
Hebrews 2.11?

Brother, as he is Man; and our Father, as he is God: for although there be
three persons, yet there is but one Deity: whence the Son is said to adopt
sons; Thom. 3.23.4. yea we pray unto Christ and the holy Ghost, Our Father.
Thom. ibid. for whatsoever God the Father does unto us, God the Son does also,
that is, in all things co-operates, and co-works with the Son. Besides, Christ
himself says, Behold me, and the children which thou have given me: where
implicitly he calls himself a child, or Son, and that for a double cause;
namely,

First, to show that he is God with the Father, My Father and I are one. And

Secondly, Ioh. 1.12.

Are those that come unto Christ only then

This phrase, or title of Son, is used diversely;

First, sometimes Son signifies, the son of God, by nature and generation: and
thus Christ is the alone and only begotten Son of God.

Secondly, Son signifies sometimes those who are the sons of God by a
particular ordination, and thus Magistrates, Judges, Rulers, and Princes are
called sons, I have said ye are the children of the most high, Psalm. 82.6.

Thirdly, sometimes by this title Son, are meant those who are the children of
God by Grace.

And that either by the grace of Creation; and thus First, all men, Deuteronomy
32.6. And Secondly, the Angels, Job 1.6 Job 38.7 and Psalm. 89 6.
. And Thirdly, all creatures, Job 38.28. Are the children of GOD.

Covenant; and that either First, external; and thus the children, and members
of the visible Church (although they be rebellious and disobedient) are called
the Sons of God Genesis 6.2. and Esa. 1.2. and Mal. 1.6.
. Or Secondly, internal; when by the grace of adoption we are brought unto
God; as Esa. 43.6. Psalm. 73.15. and Hos. 1.10. Or Thirdly, eternal; when we
are received into everlasting glory Romans 8.19, 21.
. Thus thinks Thom. 1.33.3.
Sanctification; by a particular imitation of God and Christ, Matthew 5.9, 45.
Hebrews 12. and 1 Peter 1.14, 17.


Now the faithful and penitent sinners, are called children by the grace of
the Internal Covenant, that is, by Adoption, Romans 8.14, 17. Gal. 3.26. and
4.6. and 1 Peter 1.17. and 1 John 3.1, 2, 9, 10.



Romans 8.17.) and admitted into a fraternity with Christ.

Titus 3.5. James 1.8. and 1 John 3.9. And hence are said to be regenerated
according to the Image of God, Ephesians 4.24.







I. They are brought from darkness into light, Acts 26.18.

II. They are brought from Satan unto God, Acts 26.18.

III. From strangers unto God, they are made acquainted, familiar, and his
household servants, Ephesians. 2.12. Hence

IV. They may have access unto God by prayer in all their necessities. And

V. They shall be protected by God, from all evil; for the faithful are as
the apple of his eye.

VI. They shall be provided for; God will not see nor suffer his servants and
children to want any thing, which they stand truly in need of, and which he
sees is good for them Esa. 65.13. and Luke 12.30.
.

VII. They shall have fraternity with Christ: whence proceeds the communion of
love, good things, yea all things; All things are yours, because ye are
Christ's, 1 Cor. 3.21.

VIII. They shall be made partakers of that eternal inheritance in the
heavens, when others are sent to hell; they shall be received, when the rest
shall be rejected, Matthew. 25. Revelat. 21.8. and 22.15.





I. The Person adopted must be a stranger: for a natural son cannot be
adopted, Ephesians. 2.13.

II. There must be love and favor in the person adopting: for none will adopt
a stranger to be his heir, except he love, like, and respect him.

III. There must be an inheritance, unto which the person is adopted, and which
he is to enjoy.

IV. This inheritance must be confirmed, and made sure unto the party adopted
by some writ, and seal, from the person adopting.

V. There must be a change of the name of the adopted person, into the name of
him that adopts him.



I. Whether do we conceive our selves naturally to be strangers unto God, or
not? do we labor to go out of our selves, confessing that by nature we have
no right unto any of the good blessings of God? Many are not sensible of this,
and those who are not, have small hope of their filiation, and adoption.

II. Whether do we before all things seek the love of God, and grace and
favor of Christ? Many care not much for this, and those who prefer other
things before it, cannot be sure of their filiation, and adoption.

III. Whether do we rejoice in this inheritance, whereunto by the love, and
grace of God we are adopted? and daily long, desire, and wish for the
fruition, and possession of it? Romans 12.12. and 2 Cor. 5.2. etc.
.

IV. Whether is our adoption sealed unto us, or not? does the Spirit of God
witness unto our spirits, that we are the sons of God? Rom 8.15. If we be not
assured of this seal, then let us seek it, expect it, and implore it
instantly, and uncessantly at Gods hands.

V. Whether do we now live as domestics of the Lords, or not? do we change our
names, and natures? do we forget our former kindred, and our Fathers house?
do we labor to be made Partakers of that divine nature, and live as becomes
new men? do we associate our selves with the Lord, and depend wholly upon
him? for thus it becomes the Lords adopted sons, 1 Pet. 1.17.

Be of good cheer.



Musculus renders the text, Bono animo esto. Gualt. Confide. Hilary. Consta^s
esto: Now I conceive that the text bears both, first and second; as if our
Savior would say, be confident, and cheerful; For he has a double scope in
these words: to wit,

First, to require confidence, and a sure hope, in the party to be cured. And,

Secondly, to afford joy, and comfort unto this sick man: Whence we may learn
two things, viz.

I. In general; That Christ is not only a Hippocrates gives three short notes
of a good Physician, he must cure Cito, Tuto, Suaviter.

First, he must cure quickly, and not let the party long languish under his
hands; thus Christ here, does speedily recover this sick man.

Secondly, he must cure safely, and thoroughly, because relapses are dangerous;
he must not skin a sore quickly over, and leave it unhealed at the bottom, for
so the party is made worse then at first: Thus Christ he heales thoroughly, and
perfectly, where he takes the cure in hand.

Thirdly, he must cure with the most gentle plasters, and pleasing physic
that may be; and be cheerful himself, comforting his Patient, as much as he
can. Thus Christ cures not by cutting, or lancing, or the like; but with a
word, and by that word affords both health unto the body, and comfort unto the
soul.

II. Particularly, we may learn hence,

That great is the joy, and comfort, which they feel, which are brought unto
Christ, and made Partakers of him, Romans 5.1, 2. and 14.17. and 1 Pet. 1.8. and
Esaias 30.26. and 61.7.

What joy do they feel, that are brought unto

They are made Partakers of a threefold joy;

First, Initiall; this is a hope of obtaining help, and succor from him: So
when the babes of Christ do not as yet see him within, yet they have some hope,
expecting, praying, and preparing themselves to meet the Lord, that they shall
enjoy him, and see him at the last, which hope begets joy within.

Secondly, those who are brought unto Christ, are made Partakers of a final
joy, which is a hope of glory, Romans 12.12.

Thirdly, those who are brought unto Christ, are made Partakers of a
spiritual, and mystical joy; that is, internal peace of conscience, ( Phil:
4.7. and Ephesians. 3.19. and 1 Cor. 2.11.) and joy of the Holy Ghost: and this
indeed is that Manna, and white stone, which is promised to al those that
overcome sin, Satan, and their own corruptions. Revel. 2.17.

. 3. Thy sins be forgiven thee.

Why does Christ here answer to that which Thy sins be forgiven thee.

First, Gualter answers, that this sick man was

Secondly, Chrysostom answers, that Christ thus

Thirdly, I conceive that Christ thus answers,





It appears thus: namely, Secondly, by blaming those who being corporally
cured, were negligent of their spiritual duties; where (says he) are those
nine Lepers? Thirdly, because the cure of the soul is Christ's principal end,
and last scope, and the cure of the body is but a means hereunto. Read Mat.
4.16. Luke 1.79. John 9.39. Esaias 9.2. and 29.18. and 42.7.16.


Thy sins be forgiven thee: we see here that Christ does not reproach him for
his sins, neither altogether silence them: whence I might observe;

Sam. 12.24. and Esaias 59.1. and Ezech. 3.17. and 33.7.





Heb. 13.17.



I. Observes the errors, and straying of their flocks, with sighs, tears, and
heaviness. And

II. Admonishes them of their errors, and sins with gentleness, and in the
Spirit of meekness.

Thy sins be forgiven thee: Our blessed Savior shows here the root of this,
and all evil; thereby teaching us: That the cause of all affliction, and
sickness, is sin, Esaias 59.2. Ier. 5.25.

Neither has this man sinned, nor his Parents, but that the works of God
should be made manifest in him. Job. 9.3. yea, experience shows, that the
best, and most holy are often under the scourge; as we see in Abel, Joseph,
David, Ioh, Paul, and the rest, Heb. 12.8. and 2 Timothy 3.12. And therefore sin
is not always the cause of affliction, but sometimes we are afflicted for our
trial, and sometimes for the terror, and example of others: Non p^^^^vit hic
paralyticus (Hilar. s.) sin was not the cause of this man's Pulsie.

Luke 13.2.3. etc.) Neither that God does inflict some remarkable, or
extraordinary, or particular punishment always, for some heinous, or
particular offense.

Secondly, there may be, and are, other causes of affliction besides this; but
this is always one: yea, Causa sine qua non: sin is one cause, though

Who are blameworthy here?

They who do not in every evil repair unto God, reconciling themselves unto
him,

First, some being injured, are enraged against their brethren, who do them
wrong; like the Dog, who bites at the stone, which is thrown at him.

Secondly, some fly in the face of those who reprove them, although for the
sins reproved, Gods hand be upon them.

Thirdly, some repair unto wicked, and unlawful means; as poor men do to
stealing, and sick men often to charming, enchan^ing, and the like.

Fourthly, some have access to lawful means, but without God; as Asah sought
to the Physicians, but not unto God for a blessing, upon those lawful means,
which were administered unto him by them, 2 Chronicles. 16.

What is required here of us?

We must in all afflictions generally, King. 8.38. Deuter. 28.22. John 5.14.
and 1 Cor. 11.30.

What are the fruits, and effects of sin?

First, sin separates us from God, Ier. 5.25.

Secondly, sin subjects us unto Satan, Romans

Thirdly, sin subjects us unto punishment,

Fourthly, sin wounds the conscience, and

What does Christ require of us, to the pardon of our sins?

These things, viz. First, that we should hear his word, Esa. 55.3. Secondly,
that we should go out of our sins, Esaias 52.11. and leave them, Ezech. 18.21.
Thirdly, that we should go unto God; that is, repent, Act. 2.38. and 3.19.
Mark 1.4. Fourthly, that we should believe in him, who justifies the ungodly,
Romans 4.3. etc.


Although our Savior did not require of this

First, certainly confession is very excellent,

I. Sometimes it signifies a praising of God, as Psalm 44.8. and 99.3. and
107.8.15.21. etc.

II. Sometimes it signifies a profession of Christ, or Religion: and that
either,

First, r^ligious, as Romans 10.10. Or,

Secondly, hypocritical, Tit 1.16. Or,

Thirdly, a bare protestation: Thus it is said of John, He confessed, and
dented not, that he was not the Christ Ioh. 1.20.
: Now none of these belong any thing to the confession of sins.

Confession of sin, are ambiguous, and equivocall also. For

I. Sometimes they signify the confession of our sins unto God alone, Psalm.
32.5. etc. And

II. Sometimes they signify the confession of our sins unto our brethren; and
that either

First, who are offended with us, that so we may be reconciled unto them, and
forgiven by them: As Number. 5, 6. Mat. 5.24. and 18.18. Or,

Secondly, unto our brethren in mutual, friendly, and private conference,
James 5.16. But these belong not unto the Priesthood.

III. Sometimes they signify the confession of our sins unto the Church, and
Ministers thereof: and this is either,

First, general, namely, when men confess themselves to be sinners in
general, but name no sins in particular; as Levit. 16.21. and 1 Samuel 7.6. Or,

Secondly, particular; which is either,

I. Public, in the Assembly, and Congregation; and is called Omologefis; and
belongs not to the present question. Or is

II. Private, in the ears of the Priest, and of this is the question in hand.

Chap. 3.6.



I. Ob Coactionem; because they compel men to confess their sins: whereas it
should be left free unto the will, and conscience of the Confitent, or person
confessing.

II. Ob Enumerationem; because they enjoin a particular enumeration of all
sins, affirming that it is sin to omit any; whereas the Confitent should only
confess those sins, which trouble and burden the conscience.

Here observe diligently; that our Church enjoins, or rather persuades the
confession of sin unto the Minister.

I. When the conscience is troubled in, or with any thing. And,

II. That their solicitude, fear, and doubting might be established in faith,
and they better assured of their spiritual estate, and condition. Or

III. That those who confess, may be the better directed in the work of
repentance: For a knowing Minister seeing their sin, can better particularly
direct them how to come out of it.





Secondly, and we ought by some penance to

Thirdly, we must cut off our sins by repentance.

Fourthly, but no satisfaction that we make,

Fifthly, neither does God reserve any satisfactory Augustine (s. Psalm. 32.)
and Saint Chrysostom (s. Philem. hom. 1.) and Chemnit. 4.63. b.

VERSE. 3. And behold,
Some observe this distinction betwixt the Scribes, and Pharisees; the
Pharisees in their preaching pressed Traditions; but the Scribes clave to the
written word, whence they were termed Text-men, or Masters of the Text Drusiu^
de trib. sectis. l. 2. Cap. 13.
: To this purpose it is worth our observing; that whereas both the Scribes, and
the Pharisees sought to fasten accusations upon Christ in this Chapter, yet
they did not both accuse him for one, and the same thing, but for diverse: for
the Scribes accused him of Blasphemy in this verse, and this accusation was a
breach of the Law; the Pharisees accused him of eating with Publicans, and
sinners, verse. 11. and this accusation was a breach of traditions.

VERSE. 4. And Jesus knowing their thoughts, said, Verse. 4.
wherefore think ye evil in your hearts?
Wherefore think ye evil?

We may observe hence,

How does this appear, for the Proverb is, Thought is free?

First, it appears by these places, Proverb. 15.26. Esaias 59.7.

Secondly, it is evident from this, God requires Prove. 23.26. Psalm 51.6. And
therefore he absents himself, and departs from those, who pollute their hearts
with wicked thoughts.

Thirdly, the heart is the root of all things:

I. All other things are nothing without the heart; as that tree is but dead,
that has no roots. And,

II. All things we do are infected and tainted; for an evil heart poisoneth
all things: Wherefore it is clear, that evil thoughts separate us from God.

Ierem. 5.2 5.) but an evil thought is a sin, Ier. 4.14. Therefore an evil
thought separates betwixt us and God.



Oh Jerusalem, wash thy heart, that thou may be saved; how long shall these
vain thoughts lodge within thee? Ier. 4.14 Hic labor hoc opus est, this is no
easy matter, but except we do this, we do nothing to purpose; for if we
do not cure the heart, we are but bad Physicians, all the temptations unto sin
proceeding from thence. Cogitation kindles Delectation; this inflames Desire,
and Desire urges unto sin: And therefore let us keep, and preserve our hearts
from evil thoughts.

David, meditating upon the law of God, Psalm 119.48.148. verses, and 1.2. and
19.14. and 63.6.77.6. A full vessel will receive no more; and therefore let
good thoughts fill our hearts, and there will be no place left for evil.

why think ye evil? were not their thoughts true? was it not blasphemy for
any mere man (and such they conceived Christ to be) to forgive sins? And if
their thoughts were true, then how were they evil?



I. They thought (and that aright) that it was the Lords prerogative to pardon,
and forgive sins.

II. It is a most strong argument, whosoever arrogates that power unto
himself, which is the peculiar privilege of God, is a Blasphemer.



I. Extra, in the thing it self, and the manner of their arguing, for they
collect, and conclude falsely: They argue thus: Only God forgives sins; this
man forgives sins; therefore he is a Blasphemer: whereas they should have argued
thus,

Only God forgive sins; this man forgives sins; therefore he is God.

II. Intus, in their intention; because this cogitation sprung from an evil
root, and original, viz.

First, from Satan (Gualt. s.) that thus he might fasten some disgrace upon
Christ. And

Secondly, from envy; the Scribes consenting herein unto Satan. And

Thirdly, from covetousness; because he remitted sins without the sacrifices
of the Law, Gualt s.





And it did not belong unto, or concern them: And therefore their envy shows
it self in meddling with that, which concerns them not.

Secondly, they ought first to have asked Christ the reason of his so speaking,
before they had

VERSE. 5, 6. For whether is it easier to say,
. 1. That ye may know.]

We see here how maliciously the Scribes go about to detract, and deprave
Christ; and on the contrary, how mildly, and gently he answers them: This was
done that ye might know: from whence we may learn,

That the scope of Ministers should be, Tim. 2.25. and Psalm 45.10. and Colos.
1.9.

Why must Ministers be so careful to teach

First, because preaching (the ordinary means Timothy 2.4. And therefore woe
be unto those to whom are committed these rich treasures of wisdom, grace,
and knowledge, if they be careless in the distributing of them to their
peoples edification.

Secondly, because the preaching of the word,

Our Savior here mildly teaching, and not satyrically the Scribes may move
this question, who are to be reproached, and menaced, in the preaching of the
word?

First, tart threatenings do not belong unto

Secondly, unto the perverse, and obstinate,

I. Will not know their duty: or are ignorant, because they will not learn,
being proud, and unbridled in sin, as Ier. 43.2. and 44.16. Or

II. Who will not understand; as the obstinate Recusants, Psalm. 82.5. and 2.
Pet. 3.5. Or,

III. Who neglect to remember those things which they hear, and understand, as
2 Pet. 1.9.

. 2. He said unto the sick of the Palsy.

We see here that our blessed Savior has one salve for all sores, one remedy
for all things, and that is, Dixit, his word: thus we read, be said unto the
Pharisees, and he said unto the Fever, and he said unto the wind, and he said
unto Satan, Matthew. 4.3, etc. this word Dixit, he said, is sufficient for all
things, Matthew. 8.8. Job. 18.6. Whence we learn,





It appears by these particulars; viz. Exodus 20.19. and 1 King. 17 4, 9. Psalm
33.6, 9. Esa. 40.8. Mat. 24 35. Heb. 1.3. Secondly, because all the power of
Christ (as of God) is within in himself. And therefore it is sufficient for him
to express his will by his word. Now there is a twofold word; to wit, I.
External, uttered with the voice. And II. Internal, conceived in the mind.
Now neither of these can be falsified, but either

First, by the mutability, and change of the mind of him that speaks or
thinks: but with Christ there is no mutability, nor shadow of change, James
1.17. Or Secondly, by reason of the debility, and weakness of him that speaks
or thinks, he not being able to do what he has promised or intended: but unto
Christ all power is given, both in heaven and earth, Matthew. 28.20 Luke 1.37.
Psalm. 148 8.
. And therefore he is able to do whatsoever he says. Thirdly, because the word
of Christ is accompanied with the holy Ghost, ( Ioh. 6.63) and therefore it is
sufficient unto all things, and effectual in every thing it speaks, Esa. 55.11.




Acts 8. and to Lydia, Acts 16.



Paul, 2 Corinthians. 12.9.

Heb. 12.24. and adoption, Romans 8.15.16.



Verse. 8.
VERSE. 8. But when the multitudes saw it, they marvelled, and glorified God,
which had given such power unto men.
Unto Men This must necessarily be understood of the Ministry of Absolution,
or remitting of sins: whence we might observe, That God has given to the
Church power to forgive sin. Read Mat. 16.19. and 18.18. Job. 20.23. And
besides, remember briefly this, That God and Christ, have given the Gospel for
our comfort: now to be assured of the pardon and forgiveness of our sins, is a
main and principal comfort (yea we can have no true joy in our hearts, until
we be assured hereof) and therefore without doubt, Christ would not leave his
Church under the Gospel, without this power to afford such comfort unto his
people.

How is this remission,

Three manner of ways; namely, First, by the preaching of the word, Mat.
16.19. and 2 Cor. 5.19, etc. and that either I. Generally; when remission is
preached by Christ, to every truly penitent sinner. Or II. Particularly; when
remission is applied to any particular person, upon the conditions of faith,
repentance and obedience. And certainly whomsoever the word loses, they are
truly loosed; for all the promises of the word are true.
Secondly, by Absolution: for the Church I. Excommunicates obstinate, and
perverse sinners, 1 Cor. 5.5. and 1 Timothy 1.20 And II. Absolves sorrowful and
penitent sinners, 2 Cor. 2.7, 8.
Thirdly, by Indulgences and pardons: And this comes from the Church of Rome,
and it came in by steps and degrees. For I. These Indulgences were only for
the remitting of the penance, and punishment enjoined. II. Afterward they were
given (or rather sold) for the remitting both of the sin, and punishment in
this life. And III. At length these pardons were not given to some who seemed
penitent, but to all that would buy them; yea not only as profitable for this
life, but as helpful for those who are in Purgatory.



VERSE. 9. And as Jesus passed forth from thence,
. 1. And Jesus passed forth from thence.

As Jacobs hand holds Esaus heel, Gal. 6.10. and 2 Thessalonians. 3.13. Gal. 5.7.

How does it appear, that our life is thus laborious?

First, because we have Enemies always; so long Ephesians. 6.11, 12. Gal. 5.^7.
Romans 13.12. and 1 Pet. 2.11. and 5.8.

Secondly, it appears that our life is full of labor, thereunto are we called,
as is evident from these phrases following; namely,

I. Our life is called a warfare, Job 7.1. and 1 Timothy 6.12. and 2 Timothy 2.3, etc.
Yea

II. Our life is called a Watch, and we are commanded to watch so long as we
live Job 14.14. and 1 Pet. 5.8.
. And

III. It is called a Race or course, the end whereof is death; and therefore we
must not stand still, or sit down, but run swif ly and cheerfully, until we
come to our journeys end Psalm. 119 32. and Cant. 1.4. and 1 Cor. 9.24.
.



Gal. 6.10. and Rev. 2.10. and 3.13. and 14.13.

Genesis 32.24. and 2 Cor. 12.9. Heb. 6.10.









I. That we might merit our salvation, as the Papists would have it. Nor

II. That they might be as idle appearances, or skar-crows; as some unjustly
calumniate us to hold. But

III. That they might excite us unto labor, giving us hope of help, and
assistance from God: we are commanded to labor, to work out our salvation with
fear and trembling, Philip. 2.12. and then we shall be aided by God, who works
in us both the will and the deed, verse 13.

viz.

The event is To be expected from God, if we labor and endeavor: for Conanti
aderit Deus. Not to be cast upon, or left unto God, if we neglect our duty, and
sleep. That is,


Let us do our endeavor, and as God has commanded: and then we may leave the
success and event unto him. But to leave the issue to him, and to be negligent
in the use of the means, is to tempt his providence, and (as a thing altogether
unwarrantable) is without all hope of good success.

Wherein must we labor?

Labor is twofold; viz. First, internal of the heart, Secondly, external of
the life, whereby we labor both to abstain from all evil, to be rich in good
works, and to be industrious in the outward duties of Religion.


. 2. He saw a man named Matthew.

Faustus from this verse objects, Matthew, but by some other; because of
Matthew it is written in the third person; he sees a man named Matthew,
sitting at the receipt of Custom.

To this Augustine answers, Faustus may as well conclude, that Saint John writ
not his Gospel; for he thus speaks of himself, Peter turning about, sees the
Disciple whom Jesus loved (that is, John himself) following; and he said unto
Jesus Master, what shall this man do Ioh. 21.20, 21.
? August. contr. Faust. lib. 19. cap. 7.

Here i^ Matthew observe two things, namely,

First, that he had two names; for here he is called Matthew, and Mark 2.14.
and Luke 5.27. he is called Levi. Musoulus thinks that he was a Jew, and from
the first was named Levi, and afterward took unto himself the name of Matthew,
which was a heathenish name, and now was better known by Matthew than by Levi.

Secondly, Matthew writes these things, and yet neither omits nor mitigates his
own blots and blemishes. Whence we might learn two things, namely,

First, that the failings and errors of the Saints, Noah's drunkenness, nor
David's adultery, nor Abraham's dissimulation, nor Lots incest, nor Peter's
denial, nor Paul's contention with Barnabas, nor Matthews being a Publican, can
detract, or derogate any thing from the truth of the word of God.

Secondly, from S. Matthews humility, we may Cor. 11.30

Why do the truly humble and humbled,

First, because they rejoice to have escaped (olim haec meminisse juvabit) as
we see in Saint Paul, I was a reviler, and I was a persecuter, but (blessed be
God) I found mercy, 2 Timothy 1.13.

Secondly, because the light which is in them, Ephesians. 5.13. which before they
neither saw nor knew.

. 3. Sitting at the receipt of Custom.

What is meant by Matthews sitting at the receipt

The holy Ghost would hereby have us know, that he was a Publican, as Mat.
10.3. Luke 5.27.

Publicanes?

Publicanus, a Publican, is derived, a Publicis quia publicis utuntur --
publica vectigalia, etc (Perott. Calep. ex V^p.) because they gathered up the
common Tolls, Customs and Tributes.

viz. either

I. Among the Gentiles: and thus the calling of a Publican, was a very
honorable and high calling: for in time past, among them, Publicans were of the
highest and chiefest orders of Knights Alex ab Alex. page 107. and Calep.
So Cicero (pro Planco) says, Flos equitum Romanorum, ornamentum civitatis,
firmamentum Reipublicae, Publicanoru^ ordin^ continetur: The Publicant were the
prime of the Roman Knights, the ornament of the City, and the chiefest stay,
and supporters of the Commonwealth. If we read Josephus 12 4. fol 324. he
will tell us, how all the chief m^n of all the Cities, both of Syria and
Phaenice, came to Ptolomy to buy the Customs and Tolls. Or

II. Among the Jews: and thus the calling of a Publican, was most base,
despicable, and contemptible: and in this consideration our Savior does oppose
them so often to the Pharisees, Mat. 5.46. and 21.32. and 18.17. and Luke
^8.13. For

First, it was an unworthy thing for the Jews to pay Tribute to the Romans, who
were Gentiles, Mat. 22.17. for they (s they said to Christ) were never
servants, or in bondage to any man, Ioh 8.33.

Secondly, it was a more unworthy thing for the Jews to serve the Gentiles, in
so base and vile an employment as this, yea in a calling which was injurious
unto them: And yet many of these Publicans who gathered up the Taxes, and
Tributes for the Gentiles, were Jews, as we may see in Matthew, who was a
Publican, although a J w.

Thirdly, none usual, undertook this employment, except only, either

I. Those who were of the lowest, and basest sort of the common people. Or

II. Those who were of a corrupt life, and of unbridled lib^rty: wherefore they
are called Publicans, and harlots, in the next verse, as also chap. 11.19. and
Luke 18.13.

Fourthly, these Publicans carried themselves covetously, and greedily in their
places, yea unjustly and cruelly, Luke 3.13. and 19.8. And therefore, for these
regards they were justly contemned, hated, and despised of the Jews.

Publicans; to wit,

I. Redemptores; those who farmed the Customs, Tolls, Taxes, and Tribute of
the Romans: now these were more noble, or of a higher rank and quality, and
such a Publican I conceive Zacheus to have been, because he is called Princeps
Publicanorum, the chief of the Publicans, Luke 19.2.

II. Collectores, Exactores; those who gathered this Toll, or Tribute either up
and down in Markets, or at Bridges, or the like: now these were of the lowest
sort of the people, and for the most part, were greedy and unjust: and of this
sort of Publicans I conceive this our Evangelist to have been.

. 4. And he says unto him, follow me. And he

We may from hence observe two things; to wit, First, whom Christ calls.
Secondly, what sort of people the Apostles were.


First, we may observe what manner of persons Cor. 1.26. Mat. 21.31. Acts 9.1.

Why are the inferior sort of people, sooner

First, not only because the judgment of man John 7.48. The Rulers and the
Pharisees would not believe on Christ.

Secondly, but rather, because the conscience, Luke 18, 13. when men see
nothing but their sins, and themselves to be miserable, then they are sooner
persuaded to confess their sins, and to leave them, and to repent of them, as
2 Samuel 12.14. On the contrary, a good opinion of our own wisdom, knowledge, and
goodness, does hinder us from confession, contrition, and conversion, as Luke
18.11. John 9 41. Because the whole need not the Physician, but the sick only.

How must we truly deject, debase, and humble

First, let us confess and acknowledge, that Esa. 29.8. The frantic man
thinks not himself sick; and therefore it is a good sign, when a man feels and
acknowledges his sickness.

Secondly, let us confess, that hitherto we are Pet. 2.14.) for miserable are
those blind souls who do not see their sins.

Thirdly, let us acknowledge, how we are Psalm. 127.1, etc.) spiritual things
being wholly neglected by us.

Fourthly, let us confess, that without in our

Fifthly, let us acknowledge, that within in

I. Neither is our Repentance solid; but either

First, intentionall; vult and non vult piger: we resolve to repent, but
resolve not when: and therefore it is procrastinated, and delaid from day to
day. Or our Repentance is

Secondly, temporary, during for a time, and afterward returning with the dog
to his vomit, and with the swine to his wallow, 2 Pet. 2.20.21.

II. Neither is our faith lively; for carnal persuasions will not cause us to
rejoice, with that joy unspeakable, and glorious; nor give us that peace of
conscience, which passes all understanding.

III. Neither can we solidly desire, and hunger after Christ: a natural man
may with Balaam, desire to die the death of the righteous, and desire that
Christ may be his Savior, but not hunger after him as his Lord, and Master,
whom he desires to serve.

Thus we should labor to confess, and contemplate the deformity of our
natures, and lives; and labor to go out of our selves; acknowledging our
selves to be wicked, and miserable: And then hope that Christ in his due time,
will mercifully raise us up unto joy, and comfort.

Secondly, we may observe hence, what manner of persons those were, whom our
Savior Cor. 4.9. etc None of all the Apostles were learned, except only Paul,
neither was he made choice of, that he might boast of his learning, but that
Christ might be glorified by the conversion of one, who was so learned,
zealous, and obstinate in a false way.







I. Men choose those who are strong, able, and every way fit for the work they
have to do for them: Because they stand in need of their strength, and
ability. But,

II. Christ chooses those who are weak; and then gives strength unto them,
making them able Ministers 2 Cor. 3.6.
, that so all the glory, and honor of the work may be given unto him, unto
whom al belongs.

VERSE. 10. And it came to pass, as Jesus sat at meat in the house, behold
many Publicans and sinners,
Came and sat down with him.

Although undoubtedly many came unto Christ, who were not truly converted unto
Christ, yet we see be re^eives all that come, without any strict examination of
them: Teaching us,

That Christ receives, Esaias 55.1. John 7.37. For the better understanding
hereof, observe three things: namely,

First, there is a double Church; to wit, external, and visible; internal,
and spiritual: Now Multi in, non de; many are of the former, which are not of
the latter: As here was a traitor, and Devil amongst the Twelve; so many were
received in outward society by Christ, who inwardly were rejected.

Secondly, there is a double reward for those, who are in the Church of Christ;
namely, a reward of hypocrites, which is given to formal Professors; and a
reward of children, which is given to those, who are sincere.

Thirdly, these hypocrites which are not of the spiritual Church, neither
shall be made partakers of the reward of children, are yet notwithstanding
suffered, and permitted to be in the visible Church, because they are
profitable unto the faithful, and members of the invisible; although the
stalk of the corn be hollow, yet it is strong, and supports the corn; and
although the chafe be light, yet it keeps the corn warm, and nourishes, and
preserves it. So there are many in the Church, no better then chafe and
straw, and yet are profitable, and helpful, and beneficial, unto the children
of God.

Who are here to be reproved?

They who are too rigid, and austere, that is,

First, the Anabaptists, and Brownists,

Secondly, the Novations, who deny repentance unto those, who sin after
Baptism.

Thirdly, those who exclaim against other men's sins, and reproach the sinners:
Indeed Ministers are enjoined to instruct, and that with meekness, those who
oppose themselves 2 Timothy 2.25.
: And people have this charge given unto them by the same Apostle, To bear one
another burdens; and to restore in the spirit of meekness, those who are
overtaken in a fault, considerihg that the best may be so tempted, as that they
may be overcome Gal. 6.1.2
.

Fourthly, they are faulty here, who exclude from the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper all sinners; whereas only notorious sinners (that is, either those who
are hardened in sin, or those who often apostatize, and relapse into sin) are to
be kept back, and debarred.

Fifthly, they also are too blame, who deny all communication, conversation,
association, or fellowship with wicked men; whereas it is not unlawful to
associate the wicked, with this desire and endeavor; that we may reclaim them
from their wickedness, and be as Physicians unto them.

Paul has forbidden us to keep company with wicked m^n, 1 Cor. 5.11.



Paul in the place objected prohibits, If a man be wicked, eat not with him.

Paul in that place, speaks not of all sinners, but of those only who are
excommunicated.

Paul in that place does not forbid them to keep company with Heathens, but
only with Professors who were wicked: If any man which is called a brother be a
Fornicator, or covetous, or an Idolater, etc. keep him not company, eat not
with him.



VERSE. 11. And when the Pharisees saw it, they said unto his Disciples, why
eats your Master with Publicans, and sinners?
Why does your Master eat with sinners?

We may observe hence two things; namely. First, that Christ is blamed for an
Adiaphorall thing. Secondly, that he is taxed for a good thing.


First, the Pharisees blame Christ for an indifferent thing; to wit, for eating
with sinners; whence we may observe,

Romans 14.3.



Cor. 6.12. and 10.23.) and therefore we must not rashly judge our brethren for
the use of such.

Ier. 17.10.) and such stand or fall to their own Masters. Romans 14.4 And
therefore we must not judge the conscience.



What liberty is warranted, or allowed in adiaphorall

There is a double liberty; to wit.

First, from the judgment of God: this liberty I dare not proclaim; that is,
free any from the judgment of God, in indifferent things; because often sin
lurkes in, and under them: And therefore Caveat quisque, let every one take
heed, with what mind and affection, or for what end he does those things, which
may be evilly interpreted, or give offense to the weak.

Secondly, there is a liberty from the judgment of men; and this I wish, and
desire, that no man would be rash to judge, or censure his brother for
adiaphorall things; because they are to be judged according to the intention of
the heart, which man is not to meddle withal, but must leave unto God.

How many kinds of judgments are there, in

In adiaphorall things there are diverse sorts of judgem^^ts: namely, First,
Secondly, when outwardly appear no signs of an ill intention: Now for a man
to judge and censure his brother here, is a malicious practice, and contrary to
Christian charity. Thirdly, when outwardly appear signs of an evil intention;
and here there is a double judgment, viz. I. Of censure, which is true: for a
man may censure his brother, for doing that which is of this nature; that is,
for doing that which is indifferent for an evil intent. II. There is a
judgment of excuse; when a man goes about to excuse his brother, although
palpably there appear an evil intention in the action done: Now this judgment
is both foolish, and false: But yet these four things are further cautelously
to be marked: to wit First, except the signs be very evident of a bad
intention, in indifferent actions; it is a laudable folly to excuse those
actions. Secondly, if the signs be very evident, and apparent, that the
intention is evil; yet before we judge, and censure, we must consider our
calling: for except we have a particular calling thereunto; we sin against that
rule, Judge not another man's servant Rom 14 3. and Mat. 7.1.
. Thirdly though the signs be so evident, of an ill intention in the
performance of an indifferent action, that it be false and foolish to excuse
it; yet it is agreeable to Christian charity to cover it, or silence it, and
not by judging, and censuring to blaze it abroad 1 Pet. 4.
. Fourthly, we must observe, and remember this general rule, that our own
actions are to be judged with the judgment of faith and certainty, but our
brothers, with the judgment of hope, and charity; for we seldom sin by our
backwardness in judgeing of those who are not under our care, and charge, or
for whom we must not give account: but we soon sin by our pronenesse, and
readiness in judging, and censuring our brethrens actions; as the Pharisees
here did.


Thus we have heard how our blessed Savior was judged, and censured for an
indifferent action: It remains now in the next place to show, that he was
taxed for a good thing; because he eat with Publicans and sinners for a good,
yea, an excellent end; namely (as was said before) that he might take occasion
to teach, convert, and heal them: whence we may learn,

Daniel was taxed for praying unto the true God; and the three Children,
because they would not worship a false God: Thus Christ himself was taxed for
a Sabbath-breaker, and sometimes judged to be a Glutton, and a Samaritane, and
a companion of sinners, as though he had been a Patron of sin.



John 14.) therefore the wicked are transported with hatred, and malice against
them.

Contraria juxta se posita clarius elucescunt, the righteousness of the
righteous makes the wickedness of the wicked so much the more apparent; and
therefore the wicked by all means labor to deprave, and detract the righteous.

Bulling. s.

VERSE. 12. But when Jesus heard that, he said unto them, they that be while
need not a Physician, but they that are sick.
. 1. He said unto them.

Why does Christ answer when he is not asked?

First, Christ answers, because these were

Secondly, he answers, to show that he is always Mat. 9.15. and 12.3. and
15.3. and Ioh. 14.18.

Thirdly, Christ answers, because the truth

. 2. They that be whole need not a Physician.

The Pharisees were here faulty in a double regard, to wit,

First, being proud in themselves, they contemned, and despised others. And,

Secondly, they did not consider our Saviors office, who was sent to call
sinners unto repentance. Now our Savior answers to both these, (Calvin. s.) to
the first in this section; to the second in the next.

Were the Pharisees so whole, and righteous, The whole need not the Pbysician?

Christ here speaks ironically;

That the opinion of our own righteousness drives us, and keeps us from
Christ, Luke 18.11. John 7 47. and 9.41.

Why does the persuasion of our own righteousness

First, because such an opinion makes us swel, Luke 18.11.) Now we should come
humbly unto Christ, as the Publican did, Luke 18.13.

Secondly, because such an opinion hinders us Luke 18.11. whereas we should
come unto the Lord, that we might become humble suitors unto him, for mercy,
pardon, favor, and grace, as the Publican did.

Thirdly, because such a persuasion will hinder Mat. 11.^8. But those who are
opinionated of their own righteousness, can find no such cause of sorrow, or
need of r^pentance.

Fourthly, the l^^ cause, why an opinion of unto Christ, is taken from Christ's
omming into the world. For,

I. Christ came not into the world to approve the righteous by his first
coming; for this is the work of his second coming, and belongs thereunto.
But,

II. He came first for this end, to help the dead, and those who were
miserable; this being the proper end of his first coming; And therefore those
who desire to come unto Christ, must labor to find themselves to be sick,
wounded, and miserable, or else they come not aright unto him.

But those who are sick.

In the literal sense we see here, that those who are sick stand in need of
physic, and the help, and advice of the Physician: From whence we may observe,

Eccles. 38.1.16.

Chron. 16.12. And 2. God hinders their effect, and often will not give a
blessing to the use thereof, Ier. 46.11. And therefore physic is not to be used.

Asa is blamed, not because he used physic, but because he trusted in it.







Deuteronomy. 8.3. And therefore in taking physic, these three rules must be observed,
viz.

First, turn from thy sins, which are the cause of thy sickness, Eccles.
38.10. Then

Secondly, use physic, the ordinary means which God has appointed, for the
procuring of health Eccles. 38.12.
.

Thirdly, then pray unto God for a blessing upon the means; and that he would
be pleased, to make them good means for the effecting of health, Eccles. 38.9.
Numb. 12.13. Psalm 6.3.



viz. First, because God has created many medicinable herbs, roots, and fruit;
which are not for meat, but only for medicine: Now God created nothing in
vain. Secondly, because God has ordained all these for our use: As the Lord
made man the Lord of all the creatures; so whatsoever good thing was created,
was made for man's use; either that it might be good for man's food, or for
apparel, or for houses, and habitations for him, or for medicines to cure, and
recover him, Psalm 104 14, 15. Thirdly, because God has given unto man the
knowledge of herbs, trees, roots, plants, and the like, and all for this end,
that man might use them for his good, and admire, and glorify the great
workman of them, 1 King. 4.33. Ecclesiastes 38.6. Fourthly, because the Lord
himself has used means: Thus the Prophet from the Lord uses meal for the
healing of the deadly pottage 2 King. 4.41.
, and salt for the healing of the waters 2 King. 2.20.
, and a bunch of figs, for the breaking of Hezekiahs plague sore, Esaias 38.21.
and Moses from God cast a tree into the waters at Marah, whereby they became
sweet Numb. 15.25.
.


But those who are sick: In the figurative sense of these words we may learn
two things: to wit,

First, that by nature we are sick.

Secondly, that except Christ heal us, we cannot be healed.

First, by these words: [Those who are sick stand in need of the Physician] our
Savior would teach us,

That the natural man is sick in soul by nature; Adam, Romans 5.12. and by him
wholly corrupted, both in soul and body.

What Analogy is there between sick men, and

First, sick men have the cause of their sickness

Secondly, sick men have but bad, or no stomachs

Thirdly, the longer a man is sick, the weaker

Fourthly, so long as a man is not cured, the

Fifthly, except those who are sick, have help of necessity perish: for we are
not able to cure, recover or heal our selves.



viz. First, that our hearts are void, and empty of grace, and dark, and
destitute of knowledge, without Christ. Secondly, that a most profound, deep
and deadly corruption, does occupy and possess our whole hearts. Thirdly, that
our best works are but like a menstruous cloth, being performed in love unto
our selves, and for some end of our own. Fourthly, that our sighs and tears for
sin are but adulterous, and our repentance hypocritical. Fifthly, that our
hearts are not truly subject, or subjugated unto God; for so long as we are
natural we are free from God, Romans 6.20. Sixthly, that we have made a false
Covenant with death, and are at a wicked agreement with Hell Esa. 28.14.
.


Secondly, our Savior by these words (The sick have need of the Physician)
would have us learn,

Deuteronomy. 32.39. Psalm. 30.2. and 103.2. and 107.20. Mat. 11.28. Esa. 6.10. and
57.18, 10. Ier. 3.^2. Our sins are the sicknesses and sores of our souls, and
these are healed only by Christ's stripes, Esa. 53.5.



Three, all which are clearly to be seen in Christ our P^ysician, namely,
Cardiognostes, the searcher of the heart; he sees the very intentions,
thoughts, purposes, and maladies of the heart, as well as the actions of the
life, or words of the mouth. Secondly, a good Physician ought to be able to
cure the sickness, as well as know i^, and to remove the cause of the
distemper, as well as discern it. Herein also Christ is the best Physician of
the soul; for none is so able to cure us, as he is, we having no other means
under heaven to heal and recover us, but only him Acts 4.12.
. Thirdly, a good Physician must not only be able to find out what the
sickness is, wherewith his patient is afflicted; and to know how to apply fit
physic for his recovery: but he must also be careful, and diligent, in
visiting and attending upon him, that so no good means may be neglected, and
that all things which might be hurtful for him, may be prevented, and kept
from him: oftentimes the patient is endangered, yea dies through the negligence
of the Physician, and therefore it is required in a good Physician, to be
careful and diligent. In this particular also Christ is our best Physician,
for he rises early, and sends unto us 2 Chro. 36.14.
; yea all the day long does he stretch forth his hand unto us; desiring that
m^n would feel themselves sick, and ^ome unto him that he might cure them, Romans
10.^1. And therefore let us go unto Christ, as David did unto God, and say,
Lord, (...) merciful unto me, and he^l my soul, for I have sinned against
thee, Psalm. 41.4. And he will certainly cure us.


How may we know whether we be cured by

First, examine, whether ever did thou feel Ier. 1.1, 13.
, feeling them to be painful, and grievous unto us; for so long as we feel not
the burden of sin lie heavy upon us, we will not haste to this Physician of
our souls, and consequently cannot be cured.

Secondly, examine, whether ever did thou Heal me, O Lord, for my soul i^
wounded, and my spirit is fore troubled within me: we must not only be
sensible of our sins, and sorrowful for them, but we must also desire Christ
to remit and cure them; and remember, that he has promised to heal those who
are contrite, and humbled in spirit, Psalm. 147.2.

Thirdly, examine, whether do thou attend

Fourthly, examine, whether thou followest do it? whether we attend carefully
unto the word of God that we may obey it? whether we desire earnestly to know
the means which Christ has appointed for the healing of us, for this end, that
we may submit to a willing, and constant, and religious practice thereof? we
must examine whether we have taken Christ's Physic, and digested it well in
our hearts or not? whether we have received some new internal strength from
the holy Spirit, which works a change in our lives, and by which we are
enabled in some measure to obey and serve God.



I. If his pains abate, and are weakened.

II. If his strength or body increase; and that he can now stand, or go.

III. If he have a better stomach and appetite to his meat, then formerly.

IV. If his meat digest well with him. And

V. If he can be more jocund, and cheerful than formerly. By these then let
us examine our selves, viz.

First, are the assaults of sin and satan, fewer and weaker than formerly they
were? does not sin reign in thy mortal body? this is a good sign of saving
health.

Secondly, does thy strength of Grace increase? art thou able to walk in the
ways of God, yea to run the race of his Commandments, and to work out the work
of thy salvation with fear and trembling? this is a second good sign of health.

Thirdly, have thou a greater desire, and more hungring affection after
spiritual duties, than formerly? does thy heart long after Christ, and thy
soul delight in hearing, reading, meditating, praying, and the like? certainly
this is another good sign of spiritual recovery.

Fourthly, do thou suck some good juice, and nourishment out of all the food
thou take? is thy faith still more increased by the receiving of the blessed
Sacrament of the Lords Supper; is thy joy increased, by thy prayers unto God;
is thy soul daily bettered, and more instructed by all thy hearing and reading?
undoubtedly this is an undoubted sign of health.

Fifthly, do thou daily increase in spiritual peace of conscience, and in
internal joy of the holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. then thou may be certainly
assured that Christ has cured and healed thee: for flesh and blood cannot work
these things in thee.

VERSE. 13. But go ye, and learn what that means, J will have mercy, and not
sacrifice: for I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.
Go and learn quid sit, what this is.

The words alleged here by our Savior, are the words of the Prophet; whereby
our Savior would teach us,

That all doubts are to be solved by, Ioh, 5.39. Esa. 8.20. Mic. 6.8. Ier.
23.28.

Why must all the knots of Religion be solved

First, because of all other writings, only these

Secondly, because these are given unto us for Tim. 3.16.

It is usually questioned, whether the breaches of

To this we answer, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice: where the Lord does
not prefer the duties of the second Table, to the Moral worship of the first
Table simply, for spiritu^ll duties are more excellent than corporal duties*
as the spirit is more excellent than the body: if a man be like to starve for
hunger, then it is better to feed him than to teach him, but simply it is
better to teach him, than to feed him.

. 2. I came not.

Christ by saying here Veni, I came, does intimate, that he was not sent for by
men, but came freely of his own accord, as John 3.19. and 10.18.

Wherefore did Christ come into the world?

First, he came to be a Physician, and to cure

Secondly, he came to give spiritual and living John 6.51.

Thirdly, he came to redeem us from sin and satan, Luke 1.74.

Fourthly, he came to bring us out of darkness, Mat. 4.16. Ioh. 9.39. and
12.46.

Fifthly, he came to be a Mediator unto us, John 2.1.

Sixthly, he came to give life unto us, John 10.10.

. 3. To call.

Christ in saying here, that he came not to call, Romans 8.29.

How does it appear, that except Christ call

It appears thus, viz. Secondly, and faith is to be given, before we can be
saved; for I. There can be no salvation without faith. And II. There can be no
faith except it be given from above; for it is not to be acquired by any power,
or strength of nature, but is the gift of God. Thirdly, we are called unto
faith, Act. 15.9. And therefore ex^ept Christ vouchsafe to call us; we cannot
be saved.




Cor. 1.9.

Pet. 5.10. whence (elsewhere) it is called a glorious calling.

Ier. 13.11. and 1 Cor. 1.8. And hence we are commanded to make our calling
sure, because if that be certain, then have we cause of exceeding joy.



Esaias 5.4. John 6.45.

Act. 15.9. and 16.16.

Act. 2.38.

Tim. 1.13. And therefore we must examine our selves, whether,

I. We be enlightened, and taught by God, those things that concern his glory,
and our good. And

II. Whether God have opened our hearts, and sanctified our affections. And

III. Whether we be truly contrite, and broken hearted for our sins. And

IV. Whether we be truly, and totally changed, both in our affections, and
actions; for these are sure signs of an effectual vocation.

The Righteous.





he came not to call the righteous?

Cor. 1.30. Philip. 3.9. But our own, false, and painted righteousness is Luke
18.11. Do sinners please Christ, better then those who are righteous? or why
does he prefer them in his society? associating himself rather with
Publicans, and sinners, then with Scribes and Pharisees? for by this it
appears, that the Simonians and Gnostics were in the right, and not erroneous.



Secondly, there were many causes why Christ did rather associate himself with
sinners, then

I. Because hereby he showed his humility, and lowliness of mind.

II. Because hereby occasion was offered unto him of preaching the word, the
work for which he was sent.

III. Because hereby he showed the power of his preaching; that it was able to
convert the worst.

IV. Because sinners were more apt, and fit to hear the word, then those who
were conceited of their own righteousness: for they were more humble in
themselves, and more quickly brought to a sight, and acknowledgement of their
sins.

How did not Christ come to call the righteous? James, and pure Peter, who
never eat any unclean thing? did not Christ call good Andrew, and John, and
many other who were righteous? yea does not the Apostle most truly say, that
those whom he predestined, them also he called?

Why then does he here say, I came not to call the righteous?

First, to this Saint Ambrose (sup.) answers, that

Secondly, our Savior here speaks of calling Luke, Chapt. 5.32. and by Saint
Matthew here; for in both places it is said, I came not to call the righteous,
but sinners unto repentance: Now this Call belongs only unto sinners, not unto
Saints, and those who are righteous, Secundum quod tales sunt: Those who were
sinners he called unto repentance, those who were truly righteous, he called
to follow him, that their grace might increase, and they attain unto a greater
measure of perfection in a spiritual life v: Carthus. s.
But the best stand in need of repentance, as follows by and by.

. 5. But sinners unto repentance.

It is controverted betwixt us, and the Papists, whether the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, were properly ordained for remission of sins? or for the
assuring of us of remission of sins? and we affirm, that although that blessed
Communion, and Sacrament have other uses, yet the especial, and principal use
thereof, is to strengthen, and assure our faith of the remission of our sins.
And we prove this thus,

Christ here says, I came not to call the righteous, but sinners unto
repentance: But Christ in the Eucharist, calls us unto him: Therefore he
calls sinners to come to the Eucharist, that thereby they may be assured of
pardon, and forgiveness.

Bellarmine answers, his first calling unto faith, and repentance, not of
inviting unto the Eucharist, Bellarm. lib. 4. de sacram. Cap. 17. resp. ad arg.
1.

I came not to call the righteous, but sinners unto repentance, we must
observe, that he calls all, save only such, as are so righteous, that they
need no repentance: but such there are none in this life: therefore he calls
all.

If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink, John 7.37. But what man
thirsts more, then he who desires to be released of his sins? Neither does
Christ here speak of the first call unto faith, but even of such as did believe
already; as follows in the next verse; He that believes in me, out of his
belly shall flow Rivers of water of life.

Come unto me, all ye that are weary, and laden, and I will ease you, Mat.
11.28. But these are they, which labor under the burden of their sins: And
therefore such are admitted to come to the Sacrament, to find ease thereby,
Willet. Synops. fol. 636. Argum. 2.

VERSE. 15. And Jesus said unto them, can the children of the Bride-chamber
mourn, as long as the Bridegroom is with them? But the days will come, when
the Bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast.
Can the Children of the Bride-chamber mourn?

Our Savior in these words alludes to the custom of the Jews in their
marriages; the rites and Ceremonies whereof were performed in the assembly of
ten men at the least, with blessings, and thankesgivings unto God, whence the
house it self was called (Beth-hillula) the house of praise; and their marriage
Song (Hillulim) praises, and the Bride-groomes intimate friends which
accompanied him, and sung the Epithalamium, or marriage song, were termed (...),
Children of the Bride-chamber: as in this verse; The form of the marriage Song
in effect was this: The chief of the Bridegroomes friends takes a Cup, and
blesses it, saying; Blessed art thou oh Lord our God, the King of the world,
which createst the fruit of the vine: Afterward then he says, Blessed be the
Lord our God, the King of the world, who has created man after his own Image,
according to the Image of his own likeness, and has thereby prepared unto
himself an everlasting building, blessed be thou oh Lord, who have created
him. Then follows again; Blessed art thou oh Lord our God, who have created
joy and gladness, the Bridegroom, and the Bride, Charity, and brotherly
love, rejoicing and pleasure, peace and society: I beseech thee, oh Lord, let
there suddenly be heard in the Cities of Judah, and the streets of Jerusalem,
the voice of joy, and gladness, the voice of the Bridegroom and the Bride;
the voice of exultation in the Bride-chamber is sweeter then any feast, and
children sweeter then the sweetness of a song: And this being ended, h^^
drinks to the married couple.

. 2. But the Bridegroom shall be taken away, and

It is controverted, betwixt us and the Papists; Bellarmine (lib. 2. de bon.
operib. Cap. 14) shows seven causes of the institution thereof; the third
whereof is this; Lent by the Apostles was ordained, and instituted to be
observed, to fulfill this saying of Christ's: When the Bridegroom shall be
taken away, then shall they fast.

First, this saying of our Saviors, was spoken

Secondly, if the words be largely taken, then

Thirdly, if the Papists will expound the taking

Our Savior in this place does expressly teach us; That there shall be a time,
John 13.33. and 16.16. etc. and 14.3.16.19.27.

Which is the fittest time for fasting, because

The true time of fasting and mourning,

First, when we are under some temporal scourge, and chastisement.

Secondly, when the peace is broken between us, and our God; when we have
offended him, and set him against us, by our sins, ( Psalm. 51.8.) and are not
sure of reconciliation.

Thirdly, when some lust, or strong temptation does assault us, and we are not
sensible of the presence, and grace of Christ within us, sustaining us.

Fourthly, when our former light is eclipsed; that is, when the assurance we
had in God, and joy in the enjoyment of Christ is departed, and gone from us:
for as the clearest day has his clouds, so the best sometimes has his
doubtings: the day has his night, and clearest faith his eclipses: And this is
the fittest time for fasting and mourning, because now the Bridegroom is taken
away from us.

How can Christ be taken away from us, or we Mat. 28.20. Behold I am with you
unto the end of the world.

First, Augustine distinguishes generally of the praesentia Deitatis, and
Humanitati^, a presence of his humanity, and this they were deprived of, and a
presence of his deity, and thus Christ was always with them.

Secondly, there is a presence of Christ's Deity,

viz. either,

I. Spiritual; and thus Christ

First, directs, and disposes of the Ministry of the word. And

Secondly, annoints with the Spirit, and fits with gifts, those whom he calls
to the work of the Ministry. And

Thirdly, wounds, and weakens Satan's power in that manner that he cannot
prevail against his Church, Mat. 18. Or,

II. Temporal, and thus Christ

First, sometimes hides, and preserves his children from evil, and danger,
Psalm. 31.20. and 91. And

Secondly, sometimes lets them fall into danger, and then freeth and delivers
them. And

Thirdly, sometimes neither preserves them from evils, nor delivers them out
of evils, but only comfort them in, and under evils; and so as that the
evil of the evil is taken away, Psalm. 30.7.

Sic absens, cum passionis temp^^ advenerit, Hieron. s. And this the Apostles
were deprived of after Christ's suffering: for now the heavens contain him,
Act. 3.21. and 1.11. and 2 Cor. 5.16.





I. In respect of internal strength, when the children of God are assaulted,
and tempted by Satan, and overcome by sin; as was David, 2 Samuel 11. and Peter,
Mat. 27. For

First, we grieve the Spirit of God, Ephesians. 4.30. and quench the good motions
of the Spirit 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.
: And

Secondly, then God leaves us unto our selves, and takes away his hand, and we
fall unto the ground Psalm. 104.29. 2 Chronicles. 32.31.
.

II. In respect of peace of conscience, and joy of the Holy Ghost: For

First, sometimes there is a veil over the heart, and an insensibility of joy,
and comfort; we not feeling the presence of the blessed Spirit in our hearts,
nor sensible of the fruits, and effects of his presence.

Secondly, sometimes the children of God are sensible of his wrath, and ire,
Psalm. 27.9. Deuteronomy. 32.20. Esaias 57.17. Now the cause of this is sin, and that
either,

I. Some sin committed already, which is indeed heinous; as was David's, Psalm.
5.1.2.7.9.14. Or,

II. Some inherent corruption, or lust, which is not subdued; and this
certainly is the most grievous condition, Psalm. 120.5. Romans 7.23. when
internal corruptions violently prevail against us, and lead us captive to the
law of sin. And thus we may learn, when and how, Christ is absent from, and
present with his children on earth.

VERSE. 16, 17. No man puts a piece of new cloth unto an old garment; for
that which is put in to fill it up, takes from the garment, and the rent is
made worse. Neither do men put new wine into old vessels; else the bottles
break, and the wine runs out, and the bottles perish; but they put new wine
into new bottles, and both are preserved.
. 1. No man puts new wine into old bottles.

What is the nature of wine? or what is observeable in wine?

Many observe many things, viz.

First, some say, that if wine be degenerated, and sour, it is unwholesome, and
of corrupt spirits.

Secondly, if wine be removed, or shaken, then it is unwholesome, by reason of
its mixture with the lees thereof.

Thirdly, some say, that Rhenish wine quickly passes through a man, and affords
no nourishment at all unto him.

Fourthly, some say, that white wine is an enemy unto the head. And,

Fifthly, that red wine does inflame the blood. And

Sixthly, that wine in general makes men oftentimes drunk, Ephesians. 5.18.

How manifold is wine?

There is a double wine; namely,

First, old wine; this men love, Luke 5.39. So naturally men love that best,
which savours most of the old man: but the Lord knows, that the old man is
corrupted, and therefore he would have us to put it off, and to lay it aside.

Secondly, there is new wine; and this is that which the text in hand speaks
of; and it has a double property: namely,

I. It revives, quickens, and refreshes the spirits. And

II. Nourishes, and makes men able for labor: So the children of God by his
grace are enabled to work his work, or to perform good works.

What works are required of those vessels, into

First, in general, they must labor to abound

I. In the works of the heart; as in zeal, patience, humility, love, frequent
meditation, and the like.

II. In the works of the mouth; as in profession, lauding of God, and words
fit for edification, Colos. 4.6.

III. In the works of the life; and in these we must be rich, 1 Timothy 6.18.

Secondly, more particularly, many are the to instance upon some of the most
ordinary, and usual.

I. They must give themselves wholly u^ unto God; confessing, and acknowledging
themselves to be his servants, ( Romans 6.19. and 1 Cor. 6.19.) offering up
themselves, and theirs, wholly unto his service; and learning in humility of
soul, to deny their own wills. And,

II. They must labor to hate, and deny all things which would draw them from
Christ, Luke 14.26. They must cleave so close unto the Lord, that neither her
pleasure, profit, the world, nor any thing else may separate them. And

III. They must depend wholly upon God, adhering unto him, and relying upon him
in all their necessities, and upon all their occasions, Psalm 73.28. Job 13
15. This is hard, but needful, John 6.29. And

IV. They must wrestle, and fight, against all carnal lusts, and inbred
corruptions, Gal. 5.17. and 1 Pet. 2.11. And,

V. They must labor to walk in love, toward all the faithful; loving the
brethren; and servants of Christ, John 13.35, Romans 12.18. etc. Ephesians. 5.2. And

VI. They must walk in sanctity, humility, and simplicity, John 1.45. And

VII. They must be liberal and charitable, ready to do good unto all, Gal.
5.22. And

VIII. They must delight themselves in the law of the Lord, Romans 7 22. that is,

First, delight to meditate therein, as David did, Psalm. 119. And

Secondly, delight in the observance, and practice thereof. And

IX. They must undauntedly confess, and acknowledge Christ to be their Lord,
and boldly profess his name before men, 1 Timothy 6.12. This is Vinum odorum: I
believed, therefore I spoke, 2 Cor. 4.13.

X. They must remain, and persevere in all these unto the end, Mat. 24.13. John
8.31.

Men put new wine into new bottles, would teach us,

That the grace of the Holy Spirit is unto the heart, as wine is unto the body,
Esaias 55.1. Prove. 9.2. Ephesians. 5.18.

Wine and Grace? or wherein is Wine like unto Grace?

Wine is reputed one of the best creatures, ordained for the comfort of man;
hence Abraham offers it to Melchisedech Genesis 14.18. and Isaac thus blesses
Jacob; The Lord cause thee to abound with plenty of corn, and wine, Genesis
27.28. yea, hence Wine is reckoned amongst the chiefest delicates, Cantie 5.1.
and Psalm 4.7. Thus Grace is the principal thing which belongs unto the
soul, and which is most necessary, and of most use, and benefit, and comfort
unto it.

Bartholomeus from Pliny tells us, that in Populonia (a City of Het^uria, near
Pisa, that is now called Plumbinum) there was a statue of Jupiter, made of a
vine stock: and almost all Writers agree, that of all Trees, the wood of a Vine
is most durable: Durat in perpetuum. We need not doubt (however Vines are with
us) but that they come sometimes to be great Trees; if we do but consider, how
Sir Walter Ralegh (and he has it from Strabo) tells us, that there have been
Clusters of Grapes, two cubits long: and that we may credit this the better,
let us remember that bunch which was brought by the two Spies, Numb. 13.24.
Thus, as the wood of the Vine dures long, so does the Grace of God: for, whom
God loves, he loves unto the end, John 13.1. And his gifts and graces are
without repentance. A man cannot loose Grace, except God take it from him: now
he has promised, that he will never repent him of giving Grace unto any, Romans
11.29

Thirdly, Wine taken inwardly, that is, drunk,

I. It is profitable for the stomach, and that in these respects, viz.

First, it helps to digest other meat; so the Spirit of Grace, does digest and
concoct all our cogitations and actions, and like salt seasoneth both
prosperity and adversity unto us.

Secondly, wine quenches and allayeth the thirst, so Grace restrains the
heat of carnal appetites, and desires, and subdueth the affections.

Thirdly, Wine helps, and strengthens the appetite, and whetteth the
stomach: so Grace increases our desires after Grace, and strengthens our
appetites after a greater measure of sanctification; for he in whom Grace is,
will desire and endeavor to be more and more holy.

Fourthly, wine breeds the best blood, and gives the best nourishment to the
body: so Grace affords the best nourishment unto the soul, and thereby only do
we grow up, and become strong men in Christ.

II. Wine is profitable for man in the veins, as well as in the stomach: for

First, it opens stopped veins, and is good for obstructions: so Grace does
facilitate the way unto spiritual duties, and takes away the obstacles. We are
naturally backward unto every good work, but by Grace we rejoice in that which
is good.

Secondly, wine does dry up crudid humors in the veins, and qualifies them: so
Grace does ripen, corroborate, and perfect all weak and infirm cogitations: at
first we are not able to do what we desire, but with Saint Paul complain, The
good which I would do, I cannot, Romans 7.14. but by Grace, at length we are
enabled in some measure, to perform the will of our heavenly Father.

Thirdly, wine does expel evil humors out of the veins, because it
strengthens the expulsive faculty: so Grace does expel all evil desires,
thoughts, and lusts, out of the heart.

Fourthly, wine does fill the veins with good humors, yea the best moisture:
so by Grace we are filled with the Spirit of God, ( Ephesians 5.19.) and all holy
desires.

III. Wine is good for the body, and that in a double regard; namely,

First, it cures some diseases, and inward griefs: so by Grace all our wounds
are cured, and diseases healed, Psalm. 103.2.

Secondly, wine increases the strength of the body, Psalm. 78.65. so by Grace
we grow up from children to men, and increase daily in spiritual strength.

IV. Wine is profitable for the spirits, and that in many respects: to wit,

First, it penetrates into the most inward parts of a man: so the word of
Grace, Heb. 4.12, 13. pierces to the heart; and the God of Grace searches the
heart, and tries the reins, Psalm. 7.9. And Grace it self diveth, and takes
root in the inward man.

Secondly, wine expels sorrow and pensiveness; whence the kingly Preacher
exhorts us, to give wine to those who are of heavy hearts, Prove. 31.6. So the
com orts we have by the Grace of God, does refresh our hearts in our greatest
sorrows, whether temporal or spiritual: for if outward afflictions press us,
we are assured that they shall be rewarded, and changed into an eternal weight
of glory, Romans 8.18. And if we be dejected for our sins, the spirit of Grace
will assure us of pardon, and reconciliation through Christ, 1 John 2.1, 2.

Thirdly, wine expels fears, and makes men bold: so Grace overcomes all legal,
and desperate fears and terrors, and passions of the heart, and makes us
confidently to rely upon the mercy, love, power, and promises of Christ, 1
John 4, 18.

Fourthly, wine cheers, and makes glad the heart Psalm. 104 15.
, both of God and men Judge. 9.13.
; viti^ dicitur quasi vitae, vel quia vivificat. Isidor. So by Grace we have
that peace of conscience, which passes all understanding, yea that joy of the
holy Ghost, which is unspeakable and glorious, Zach. 9.17. and 10.7. Philip.
4.7. Romans 14.17. and 1 Pet. 1.8.

Fifthly, wine begets good spirits, and increases the radical heat: so by
Grace our zeal unto Gods glory, and good works, is daily increased, Ephesians 5.19.

V. Wine is profitable also for the mind; and that in these two regards, viz.

First, it sharpens the understanding, Psalm. 73.18. Vinum moderate sumptum
^^^it ingenium: so by Grace our intellectuals are bettered, and we thereby
enabled to understand those things which concern our peace, and the welfare of
our souls 1 Cor. 10 2. and 13.12.
.

Secondly, wine betters the mind; and makes the coward strong, and bold, and
resolute, and the covetous man bountiful. Barthol. and Alex. ab Al. 5. 21. so
Grace works a true change in our natures, and makes us unlike our selves,
Ephesians. 4.23, 24.



I. Inwardly taken, it warms, but outwardly apposed, it cools: so Grace does
increase all inward spiritual gifts, but does diminish all carnal desires.

II. Wine cures wounds: whence the Samaritan powers wine and oil; because as
oil does purge, cleanse and close up a wound, so wine does assuage the pain,
and comforts the wound. Here we must observe these two things; namely,

First, that there are three sorts of wounds: to wit,

I. Painful and smarting wounds: these are the accusations, and worm of
conscience.

II. Itching wounds, which allure men to scratch, although scratching causes
smarting: these are temptations, and allurements unto sin, the end whereof (if
we give way unto them) will be the gauls and accusations of our consciences.

III. Insensible wounds, in which are much mortified, and dead flesh: these are
blind and hard hearts. Now Grace cures all these wounds; for thereby we are
assured of the pardon of our sins which are past, and of preservation against
sin, and of knowledge, and mollified, and softened hearts, Ezech. 36.26, 27.

Secondly, there are three sorts of Ulcers; namely,

I. Swelling, these must be broken, although it be painful: this is internal
concupiscence, which makes men often break forth first into sin, as in David, 2 Samuel 11. and 12. and afterward into bitter fighs, tears, and groans, as the
same kingly Prophet did.

II. Matterish, and running Ulcers, which must be dried up: this is the custom
of sin, which is very hardly left.

III. Cacoethes, a Bile ill to be cured, by reason of the long continuance
thereof, and the dead flesh therein: and here there is need of Corrosives; by
this is meant such a trade, and hardness in evil, that a man cannot cease to
sin, 2 Pet. 2.14. Romans 7.14, 19. And this is most frequently cured by sharp
afflictions, as we see in Manasses. Thus by the Grace of the Spirit, we are
brought unto the confession of sin, and unto contrition for sin, yea to the
leaving of sin, though it have been customary unto us, and we long continued
therein.

Fifthly, wine was used in sacrifices, and divine Exodus 29.40. so the
sacrifices, and oblations of our prayers must be mixed, and offered up with the
grace of Faith, or otherwise they will not be pleasing and acceptable unto God,
Ephesians. 6.18. Jude 20.

And thus we have seen how in some things the Grace of Gods Spirit resembles
wine, and that as wine is unto the body, so Grace is unto the soul.

Our Savior saying here, that men put new wine into new Bottles, may occasion
this question,

Whether the W^^^ (...) the Bottles be all one,

Some think they (...) me thinks without truth or reason;

First, some say the wine and the vessel differ in degree; because the new man
is perfected simul and semel, at once, by the revelation of Faith: but the new
wine (which is the strength of Grace) does grow and increase daily, we not
being perfect in grace so long as we live, Philippians 3.10, etc. I dare not
subscribe to this difference, because as Grace, so also Faith grows, and
increases daily, 2 Cor. 4.16. and 3.18. and 2 Peter 3.18.

Secondly, some say the wine and the vessel differ in Re, even in the very
things themselves, because the one Grace is a quality in God, and is only
revealed, and by illumination communicated unto us: but the other Grace is a
quality imprinted in us, whereby we are sanctified. I dare not subscribe to
this difference neither, because the communication of divine Grace, does remain
and abide imprinted in us, as well as the other.

Thirdly, the wine and the vess^ll differ in nature, in regard of the action:
for the one is once only imprinted, the other daily augmented. Now these two,
to beget and nourish, to live, and to execute the actions and functions of
life, differ clearly enough. And these were foreshewed in the Types, namely, in
Circumcision, and the Passover, in Baptism, and the Lords Supper; the one
prefiguring our new Birth, the other our growth and increase. And therefore as
the Tree differs from the fruit, so does the vessel from the Wine. Unto the
work of God there is required a preparation and a disposition; as the Priests
did first wash, and then sacrifice. And we are

I. Planted, and admitted into Gods house. And then

II. We work his work; for, if we live in the Spirit, we must walk in the
Spirit Gal. 5.25
. And thus, as the Lord first makes us good Trees, and then enables us to bring
forth good fruit; so we are first made good Bottles, and then enabled to hold
and show forth good Wine; for, new Wine is put into new Bottles.

Colos. 2.6. Romans 6.4. and 7.6. and 1 Pet 4.2.



Romans 6.2. and 8.10, 11.



Romans 7.23. and 1 John 1.8. from whence we are taught daily to pray. Forgi^e us
(...) Trespasses, Mat. 6.12.

Gal. 5.17.



John 13.1. and 10.18. Romans 14.4. 1 Cor. 1.8. Phil. 1.8.

H^b. 6.4. and 10.26 and 2 P^^. 1.9. and 2.20.

VERSE. 20. And behold a woman which was diseased with an issue of blood twelve
years, came behind him, and touched the hemme of his garment.
Whether was this woman the same, which Mark, and Saint Luke make mention of?
Mark 5.26. Luke 8.43.

The woman whom Saint Mark, Luke make mention of, was not diverse from this
woman, spoken, of by Saint Matthew in this pl^ce (as some think) but is all
one, and the same: for they all set down the same term of the continuance of
her disease; namely, twelve years, and the manner of her healing, by touching
the hemme of Christ's garment: only the other two make mention of some other
circumstances, as that she had spent all among the Physicians, and was nothing
the better.

What woman was this which was healed?

This woman was not Martha, Mary Magdalene, as Ambrose seems to think ( de
S^lom. Cap. 5.) nor healed in Jerusalem (as Tostat, qu. 9. in Mat. 4.85.) for
Christ was then in Galilee, whither he was returned from the country of the
Gadarenes, and she seems to have been a stranger, because Christ sends her
not to the Priest, to present the offering prescribed Levit. 15.26. etc. as he
did the Lepers. Some think that this woman name should be V^ro^^^^, in whose
vail Christ left an impression of his Image: or Bernice, who by Herod's license
set up a brazen Image of Christ at Paveas, in memory of this fact, under the
which grew an herb, which as soon as it touched the skirts of the Image, had
a virtue to cure all diseases; but these I leave as uncertainly true, or rather
as certainly false, though confidently reported by diverse Authors, cited by
Lorinus. Indeed Eusebius writes, that this woman was of Caestre^, called
before Paveas, and placed in memory of this her deliverance, two brazen Images
at her door, one representing Christ, the other a woman touching his garments,
but without any adoration of them: for the same Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea,
surnamed Pamphilus, being written unto by Constantia the Empress, to send her
the Image of Christ, returned this answer; Quis gloriae, and dignitatis
^^centes splendores, and fulgurantes. ^ffigiare mortuis and inanimatis
coloribus posset? (Nice^. 2. Action. 6. nu^ 4.) who can with dead, and unlively
colors, set forth the bright, and shining splendour of his glory, and dignity?
And so he refused therein to satisfy her demand. But to think that the
touching of an Image did give such virtue to an herb, to heal all diseases,
is an idle conceit; for when this woman was healed by the touching of the hemme
of Christ's garment, the Text says, Virtue went out of him: whereby it is
evident, that the presence of his blessed body gave virtue to the garment, and
that, it had it not of it self; much less then must we think, that an Image,
which never touched Christ's body, should have any such miraculous power, and
virtue in it.

Was not Christ polluted by the touch of this



VERSE. 22. But Jesus turned him about, and when he saw her, he said, Daughter
be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole: And the woman was made
whole from that hour.
But Jesus turned him about, etc.

verse. 30. to tell none what he had done unto them; and here by his turning him
about, and speaking unto the woman, he would have all to take notice, how
miraculously she was cured?









verse. 18.) might be the better confirmed, and strengthened in this faith, that
Christ was able by his word to cure his daughter.

Virtue is gone out of my garment, but virtue is gone out of me; that is, by my
divine power, and virtue, this woman is healed, not because with her hand she
touched my garment, but with her faith my self.

Woman be of good cheer, thy faith has made thee whole.



First of all, this woman with the bloody issue, unto whom Christ here says,
Be of good cheer, (or Confide, be confident) thy faith has made thee whole.
Now what manner of faith was this? Saint Matthew here tells us, The woman said
within her self, if I may but touch the hemme of his garment, Servabor, I
shall be whole: And this certain confidence of hers we see Christ commends, and
praises.

Secondly, it is said of Abraham, that he believed God, and it was counted unto
him for righteousness, Romans 4.3. Now what manner of believing was this? Saint
Paul afterward most clearly explicates thus ( verse. 18, 19, 20, 21.) For
Abraham against hope believed in hope, that he might become the Father of many
nations: according to that which was spoken, so shall thy seed be. And being
not weak in faith, he considered not his own body now dead, when he was about
an hundred years old, neither yet the deadness of Sarahs womb. He staggered
not as the promise of God through unbelief; but was strong in faith, giving
glory to God: And being fully persuaded, that what he had promised, he was able
also to perform. In these words is described an extraordinary confidence in the
divine promises of God, which Abraham believed should altogether be fulfilled;
yea fulfilled in him, although (if he had consulted with flesh and blood) he
might have opposed, and objected many things; and therefore there was not only
Confidentia objecti, but also subjecti propter veritatem divinam.

Thirdly, of Saint Paul, who writing unto Timothy says: For the which cause I
also suffer these things: nevertheless I am not ashamed: for I know whom I
have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have
committed unto him against that day 2 Timothy 1.12.
; the meaning of the words is plain; for the Apostle herein does describe the
hope that he has for the time to come, by which hope he is sustained, and
upheld in the midst of so many, and so great afflictions, and calamities as lie
upon him: Here he says, he is not ashamed, and Romans 5.4. he says, Hope makes
not ashamed; and therefore he is certain of the event. Whence comes this
certainty? I know (says he) whom I have believed, and that he is able to keep
that which I have committed unto him; that is, I am certain, that at the last
day he will render, and restore unto me what I have committed unto him to
keep. And thus from these examples we may (according to the truth) hold and
maintain a certainty of faith, and a particular application of the divine
promises unto our selves.

VERSE. 23, 24. Verse. 23.
And when Jesus came into the Rulers house, and saw the Minstrels, and the
people making a noise, he said unto them give place; for the Maid is not dead,
but sleeps; And they laugh^d him to scorn.
. 1. And when Jesus saw the Minstres.







David ever and none testifies in the Psalms; and as our Savior intimates,
when he says, we have piped unto you, but you have not danced, Mat. 11 17.

in sacris, in holy duties, and divine worship; as appears plainly by these
places, 2 Samuel 6.5. and 2 Chronicles. 5.12. and Psalm 71.22.





First, some to testify their sorrow; of which in another place, because the
present text speaks not of these. And

Secondly, some to augment their grief; these were

I. Minstrels, who with their sad tunes inclined the affections of the people
to mourning. Now of these there were two sorts; namely,

First, some playing on pipes. And

Secondly, others sounding Trumpets.

At the Funeral of Noblemen, or old men, they used a Trumpet, at the Funeral
of the common people, or children, they used a Pipe: In this respect it is said
here, that Jesus when he raised Iairus daughter, cast out the Ministrels.

II. Women there were which were hired at burials, to sing for the same
purpose, viz. to augment their mourning, and to incline the affections of the
people to sorrow: Now these women besides singing, did likewise u^^ some
outward significations, and expressions of sorrow, to move the company, and
more strongly to affect them: Call (says the Prophet) for the mourning wom^n,
and send for the skillful women, Ier. 9.17. These women the Romans called
Preficas, quasim hoc ipsum praefectas, Chief, or skillful Mourners: Now these
customs we read no where commanded by God unto his people; but were only
borrowed from the practices of others.





First, Civil, to honor and adorn Funerals; whence also they used sometimes
great pomp, and did sing songs of the praises of the deceased persons, as we
see in Tabitha, Act. 9.39. Now this Cantus in general, was twofold: namely,
Encomiasticus, and Threneticus, Rhod. 27.26.

Secondly, Philosophical, to show that when any is taken out of this miserable
world, there is cause of joy. Let the Reader read Alex. ab Alex. 128. 129.
where he shall see this confirmed by the example, both of the Grecians, and
Thracians: Whence we may learn,

That in the death of those who are good,

Why must we rejoice in the death of our good

First, because death is better to such, then life, Eccles. 4.2. etc.

Secondly, because death is best of all unto such; as appears thus;

I. This world is an evil world in it self, Gal. 1.4. and evil unto the
righteous, 1 Cor. 15.19.

II. So long as we are here we are strangers from the Lord; that is, absent
from him, 2 Cor. 5.2. etc. but when by death we are dissolved, we shall
possess, and enjoy him, Philip. 1.23.

Thirdly, Solaminis, their next use of music was, that thereby the minds of
those who mourned, might be lightened, and comforted; because we are prone to
exceed our bounds in all things, whether in joy, or sorrow.

Fourthly, Idololatricus, they had an Idolatrous use of Music at their
funerals; and this was either,

I. Cruel, and bloody, that the sound or yels of those whom they sacrificed
might not be heard; and for this end the Jews had all sorts of loud
instruments (in a manner) which sounded when they offered up their children
unto Mo^^^^; that so the cries of the babes might not pierce the Parents cares.
Or

II. Their custom was superstitious, viz. for the pacifying, and appeasing of
their gods; this was most usual with the Gentiles, and is most dangerous to be
imitated by Christians.

. 2. And the people making a noise.

Whether was this action of these in making

First, in general it is lawful to mourn for the

I. From the practice of the Fathers, Zach. 12.11. Genesis 23.2. and 1 Samuel 25.1.
and 2 Samuel 1.24. and 11.26.

II. From the approbation of our heavenly Father, 1 King. 14.13.

III. From the Apostles warrant, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13. etc. Philip. 2.27.

IV. From the making of the book of Lamentations, 2 Chronicles. 35.25.

V. From our blessed Saviors example, who wept for Lazarus, John 11.35.

Secondly, these here transgressed, and sinned

I. Because they did not observe a mean, or moderation in their mourning; but
mourned as they do, who are without hope: from whence we may learn.

That we must not mourn immoderately for the dead, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.

Why may we not exceed in our lamentations

First, because they and we at the last shall rise David weeps not when the
child is dead, because he shall go to him, 2 Samuel 12.

Revel. 14.13. Ier. 22.10. Non deflentur pucri, nec senes quinquagenarij. Alex.
ab Al. 132. b.

II. This sort of mourning was evil, because a multitude, or great many wept
and mourned, Multitudo tumultuans: Now it is good to weep with those who
vveep, etc. Romans 12.14. if it be cordial; but if (as here) only for a form,
or fashion sake, without any true sense of sorrovv, then it is blame-vvorthy.

III. There was another fault in this mourning; namely, that they hired,
procured, and brought together others to mourn for those who were dead.
Alexandria conducti Threnodes. Rhod. 17.21.

And he said unto them, give place, or depart.







I: That Christ separates, and calls whom he pleases: And,

II. That these were unworthy to stay with him, because they were only led with
sense; and that either,

First, external, regarding only their vanities, and accustomed superstitious
solemnities: Or

Secondly, internal; being carried away, and transported through sorrow, for
the death of the Damsel: Now the way unto Christ is to estrange the eyes from
the world, and to lift them up unto heaven.





The Maid is not dead, but sleeps.

The Maid is not dead, but sleeps: now the Damosel was naturally dead; and
therefore the words must be understood with this mental reservation; In respect
of my power and will Parsons. Mitig. Page 365
.

Conscide, page 32.
And therefore this example is unfitly brought for the confirming of the
doctrine of equivocation Amesius, lib. 5.
.

Secondly, the sense of our Saviors words is clear, and manifest enough by the
circumstances thereof, without any mental reservation at all; Amesius, ibid.


Thirdly, the Papists exposition is true, that in respect of Christ's divine
power, they that are Tolet in hunc locum.) So that this speech is not
equivocall, but Metaphorical; and the Metaphor of calling Death a Sleep, was
most familiar with the Hebrews, and is most aptly used by our Savior, in this
verse, seeing that the raising of a dead woman to life, was no more difficult
unto him, then the awakening her out of sleep, which he intended presently to
do: And therefore, both his denying her to be dead, and his affirming that she
was but asleep, were but verbal Amphibologies, which all they might have
understood, who were not scornful, and incredulous contemners of his sayings.

Fourthly, the Popish Priests equivocation, as I am no Priest, meaning, as
ordained to kill a Calfe, or such like, is so far beyond the horizon, and
sight of any man's capacity, that he may sooner claspe hold of the man in the
Moon, then by any intimation of words, or circumstance of speech, reach unto
such a reserved conceit Mort. encount. l. 2. cap. 10. p. 144
.

For the further clearing of this Objection, I propound this question,

What is the true sense, and meaning of these words; The Maid is not dead, but
sleeps?

First, some understand them literally; as though

I. By swounding, and fainting, Lipothymia Or,

II. By some deep, and dead sleep, whereby all the senses are bound; arising
either from drunkenness, or much watching, or extraordinary labor, and
weariness. Or,

III. By some invincible Lethargy. Or,

IV. By the suffocation of the Matrix. Or

V. By some beginning Apopl^xie. But none of these had place in this Maid, she
being truly dead.

Secondly, some understand these words Miraculously: Morieris, to Hezekiah,
thou shall die, Esaias 38.1. and afterward vives, thou shall live, 2 King. 8.10.
But these words imply something more; for they do not belong only to this
D^mosell, but also unto us, Muscul. s. Offendit naturam mortis piorum. Guali. s.

Thirdly, some understand these words Philosophically, in regard of the soul
which dies not, and Men's cujusque est quisque. And therefore death is called a
dissolution, because the soul dies not, but returns unto God that gave it,
Eccles. 12 7. And therefore David commends his soul unto God, Psalm 31.5. as does
also Christ, Luke 23.46. and Stephen, Acts 7.59. But these words imply
something more than this, because this opinion neither affirms, nor proves
any thing concerning the Resurrection, and therefore may be maintained by a
Sadduce.

The Maid is not dead, but sleeps, may be expounded Theologically, because
the whole man shall live again hereafter in the Resurrection: and that either

I. Generally; because at the last day, the body of every one shall be raised,
and united again to the soul. Or

II. (...), Because only the godly shall live for ever a life of felicity and
glory. Ergo docet quae conditio mortis -- and spem resuscitationis. Gualt. s.
In these words our Savior teaches us the condition of death; namely,





The truth hereof appears by these particulars; viz. Secondly, because those
who dye are said to sleep; as appears I. By the godly, before the Law, Genesis
47.30. And II. By the godly, under the Law, as 2 Samuel 7 12. and 1 King. 2.10.
and 11.43. And III. By the wicked, under the Law, as 1 King 14.20, etc. and
verse 31. and 15.8. Esa. 14.18. And IV. By the Saints under the Gospel, John
11.11. Acts 7.60. and 1 Cor. 11.30. and 15.18.
Thirdly, because sleep is like to death; for so it binds all the senses, that
it makes the body seem to be livelesse; because in sleep the body moves not,
perceives not, regards not, either wife, or children, or possessions, or
employments, or affairs, or pleasure, or beauty, or health, Psalm. 76.5. And
hence Sepulchers are called (...), Dormitories, or sleeping houses. Fourthly,
because death is like unto sleep; for we sleep for a time, and then awake and
rise. So we shall all arise from the grave of death. Read Job 19.25. Psalm.
16.9. etc. Daniel 12.2. and Mat. 25.32, etc. John 5.28. and 2 Cor. 5.10.




Mat. 5.8. and that in fullness, B^^n. ex Psalm 34.8.



Thirdly, and their very bodies at the last day Cor. 15.

What is required of us in regard of this sleep,

Let us prepare our hearts for a happy Resurrection, ( Psalm. 57.7.) doing as
men do,

First, before they sleep, they shut, bolt, and lock the doors for fear of
Thieves: so let us bolt, and lock the doors of our hearts, that satan do not
enter; let us seek to be secure from him by Christ, that is, let us labor that
we may be certainly assured, that Christ is our Mediator, Intercessour, and
Advocate, who will obtain for us at Gods hands, remission, and pardon of all
our sins.

Secondly, before men sleep, they hide, lock up, or make sure their purses, and
money; so we must be careful to lay up our treasure in heaven, Matthew 6.

Thirdly, before men sleep, they provide and prepare something to cover them,
lest they should take cold: so we must labor, that we may be clothed with the
covering of Christ's righteousness, Romans 13.12.13.

Fourthly, men, before they sleep, dispose, and lay ready in order their
garments, that they may find them, and cloth themselves with them when they
awake, lest they be found naked: so we must labor, that we may have the
garments of sanctity and sincerity, otherwise we shall be found naked, and like
him without a wedding garment, cast into everlasting fire.

And thus, if we desire, that death may be a happy sleep, and our Resurrection
a happy awakening, we must be watchful against satan, and careful to adorn
our selves with sanctity and piety, but principally careful, that Christ may
be our Mediator, and we clothed with his righteousness, and then death shall
be but like a sweet sleep, and the last Trump like a joyful sound, summoning
us to our Coronation, and everlasting inheritance.

. 5. And they laughed him to scorn.

Christ we see here both speaks and does; promises and performs, and yet is
derided: for which they are justly excluded, and caused to depart; to teach us,

That deriders, mockers, and scoffers, Genesis 21.9. Gal. 4.29, etc.

Why shall these be put out from Christ?

First, because on their part it argues pride, Prove. 13.1.

Secondly, because this scoffing, and derision is

I. Against God himself, as Gal. 6.7. Or

II. Against Christ, as Luke 22.63. and 23.11. Or

III. Against Gods word, as Act. 2.13. and 2 Pet. 3.3. Or

IV. Against his Messengers, as 2 Chronicles. 30.10. L^m. 3.14, 15. Or

V. Against the godly, or the true Church, as Psalm. 22.7. and 35.15. and
119.51. Esa. 37.23. Or

VI. Against the poor and weak, who has no helper, 1 Samuel 17.42. Now against
which soever of these derision be directed, yet it is terminated in God: and
therefore no scoffers shall come, or be suffered to abide in Christ's presence.



Culpae, Poenae.


Now wicked men sometimes deride their brethren for evils; either First,
Active, of sin: thus the Ammonites laughed, because the Sanctuary of the Lord
was profaned, Ezech. 25.3. Now Charity covers a multitude of sins 1 Pet. 4.8.
, and therefore Christians should deride none for this kind of evil.
Secondly, Passive, of punishment: thus Job complains, that base persons
disdained him, when Gods hand was upon him Job 30.1.
. Now the difference between these two derisions, is this; the latter is
Dog-like, but the former Devill-like.


viz.

I. They who mock and scoff at those who reprove them, Ier. 20.7, 8. Heb.
13.22.

II. They who laugh at those who exhort, admonish, counsel, and advise them.

III. They who deride the professors of the Gospel, as Michol, 2 Samuel 6.16. And

IV. They who laugh at the faithful, because they trust in the Lord, Mat.
27.43. Psalm. 14.6.



Men laugh at Christ, either from Understanding, because in their judgment, the
things spoken by Christ, appear to be (...), foolish, absurd, and impossible:
and this was the cause of the derision here mentioned; they laughed at Christ,
who said, she was but asleep; for they knew that she was dead, Luke 8.53.


VERSE. 25. But when the people were put forth, he went in, and took her by the
hand, and the Maid arose.
When the people were put forth.



Mark 5.37. And of those which did, only three entered in with him Luke 8.51.
.

Secondly, some say, only the companions of Iairus, and himself, and wife
entered in with Christ (Calvin. s.) The truth of this appears (with him) does
rather appertain to Christ, then unto Iairus; The words are these, as recorded
by Saint Mark, Chap. 5.40. When he had put them all out, who laughed him to
scorn: He takes the Father, and the Mother of the Damsel, and them that were
with him, and enters in where the Damsel was lying. Erasmus, and the vulgar
translation reads, Cum illo, id est, Patre Puellae: Them that were with him;
that is, with the Father of the Damsel; and thus Calvin seems to understand
it: but I rather think, that by Him is meant Christ, and it seems to be plain
from Mark 5.40.

Thirdly, it is most certain that these were viz. to wit. 1. Three Apostles. 2.
The Father, and the Mother of the Maid. And 3. Besides these none at all; as
Saint Luke does plainly express. And when he came into the house, he suffered
no man to go in, save Peter, and James, and John, and the Father, and the
Mother of the Maiden, Luke 8.51.

Why did our Savior permit the Maids Father,

First, that they might be eyewitnesses of the

Secondly, that seeing what Christ did unto,

I. It was a joy unto them to see her restored from death unto life. And,

II. It was they who desired this of Christ. And,

III. It belongs unto Parents to take care of and for their children: And
therefore they seeing that to be done by Christ, which they desired, were more
obliged in thankfulness unto him to have the greater care of her, to educate,
and instruct her in the fear of God, and knowledge of Christ.

From this action of Iairus we may learn,

That it is the Parents part to bring their children unto Christ,

What is the duty of Parents toward their

First, they must bring them unto Christ in

Secondly, Parents must earnestly endeavor, Ephesians. 2.1. And therefore Parents
must labor as much as in them lies, that their children may be raised from the
spiritual death of sin, unto the life of righteousness.

Thirdly, Parents must rejoice, when their children are revived by Christ, as
undoubtedly the Father and Mother of this Maid did; that is, when Parents see
good beginnings, and hopeful blooms, and religious fruits to show themselves
in their children, they should rejoice, and be thankful, and bless God.

Because in the second answer it was said, that, Parents are bound in duty to
labor, and endeavor that their children may be raised up from the grave of
sin, to the life of grace.



Job 1.5.

Exodus 13.8. Deuter. 6.7. and 11.19. and 32.46. Psalm 78.6, 7. Genesis 18.19. and
1 Chronicles. 28.9.



I. To the hearing, reading, meditating, and observing of the word of God.

II. To ordinary, and public prayers; Parents must both teach their children
reverently to pray in the house of God, with the holy Congregation, and also
privately at home, as soon as they arise, and before they sleep. This is too
much neglected by Parents, yea some with fair seeming reasons can dispute
against it.

III. To the practice of virtue, Parents must accustom their children to the
love of truth, both in word and deed, to the honoring of Religion, to the
sanctifying of the Sabbath, to be careful to avoid all filthy, and
blasphemous speeches; and to labor that their words may be gracious, and
seasoned with salt.





And he took her by the hand.

Mark 5.41. Luke 8.54.) to teach us thereby the manner of the conversion of a
sinner; or that the strength of our conversion does consist in the voice, and
hand of Christ; whereby only those who are spiritually dead, are restored to
life.

How does it appear that we are converted,

It appears thus, First, because his word is strong, I. It created the world,
and all that therein is, Genesis 1. and John 1.1.2. II. The word shall raise us up
at the last, John 5.25. III. The word overcomes Satan, Mat. 4. and makes the
Soldiers fall to the ground. IV. The word converts us, John 5.25. Romans 1.16.
James 1.18.
Secondly, because the hand of God signifies his power and providence.


What method does Christ use in the conversion

First, we are dead by nature, Ephesians. 2.1. and Romans 7.14.18. and 2 Cor. 3.5.

Secondly, Christ speaks unto us in his word; Luke 24.) and our consciences are
awakened, Act 2.37.

Thirdly, then he takes us by the hand; and Cantic. 1.3.) bending, and
enclining our wills to consent unto his;

Fourthly, then we rise from sin to grace, and

. 3. And the Maid arose.

It is controverted between us, and the Church of Rome; whether the prayers of
the living, or any other works of theirs do profit the dead? And they hold,
that the souls who are tormented in Purgatory, do find great ease by the
prayers of the living, and therefore we ought to pray for them ( Bellarm. lib.
2. de Purg. Cap. 15.18.) Now they undertake to prove this (because we deny it)
from this verse, thus.

Christ while he lived profited the dead, Luke 7. and Lazarus, which were dead:
Therefore even so the members of Christ ought one to help another, the living
the dead. Bellarm. ibid.

First, they must prove these to have been in

Secondly, if they were able (which indeed is Lazarus, and some others from
death unto life; Therefore we ought to pray for the dead: Or thus, Christ by his
divine power did recall the soul again unto the body, either from heaven, or
Purgatory. Therefore the prayers of the living will help the souls of the
dead, which are in Purgatory torments, and afford them some case. These are
strong Arguments, and follow fair and far off.

Augustine tells us, that Christ is not to be imitated in such works as
these: Non hoc tibi dicit, non eris Discipulus meus, nisi ambulaveris supra
mare, aut nisi suscitaveris quatriduanum mortuum, etc. He says not unto thee,
thou shall not be my Disciple, unless thou can walk upon the sea, and raise
one unto life, who has been dead four days: But learn of me, for I am
humble and meek.





Cor. 13.7.) And we ought to hope the best of the dead; to wit, that they are
at rest: but in praying for them, we presuppose they are in misery, and so
need our prayers: And therefore in so doing we hope not the best of them, as
charity wills.

VERSE. 26. And the fame hereof went abroad into all that land.
Mark 5.43. Luke 8.56.

Muscul. s. Or,

Musc. s.

(Gualt. and Calvin. s.) that is, they were for a time enjoined to conceal it,
and afterward to publish it. Or,

Gualt. s. Or,

Fifthly, our Savior did rather forbid them to Calvin. s. Or,

Sixthly, some thought (tesie Calv.) that our Savior Nitimur in vetitum. But
this I would have none to believe.

Seventhly, Christ prohibits the publication

VERSE. 27. And when Jesus departed thence,
. 1. And when Jesus departed thence.

Whether is this the same History which is mentioned by this same Evangelist,
Chap. 20.30.

The time when this was done,

First, these two mentioned in this place.

Secondly, many when Christ speaks of John Baptist, Luke 7.18.

Thirdly, a possessed man, who was blind, and dumb, Mat. 12.22. Luke 11.14.

Fourthly, many in the Mount of Galilee, Mat. 15.30.

Fifthly, one near to B^^hesda, Mark 8.22.

Sixthly, two near to Jericho, Mat. 20.30. viz. Barthimeus, Mark 10.46. Luke
18.35.

Seventhly, many in the Temple, Mat. 21.14.

Eighthly, one that was born blind, John 9.1. etc.

Ninthly, Saint Paul, Act. 9.17.

Tenthly, Elimas, who was restored to his sight, Act. 13.11.

. 2. Two blind men cried.

We see here the manner of their desiring mercy, Cl^mant, they cried unto him;
whence we might learn,

That I. Prayer is necessary; and II. That Prayer ought to be fervent: but I
conjoyn them thus; that vehemency, and fervor of prayer is the best means for
the obtaining of grace, Romans 12.11. James 5.16. Jude 20. and 1 Cor. 14, 15.
Ephesians. 6.18.

How does it appear,

It appears thus, namely, First, Psalm 42.4. and 1 Samuel 1.10.16. and 2 King.
22.19. and 20.3. and 2 Samuel 12.22 Secondly, Prayer ought to arise from these
three roots; namely, I. From a sight of danger. And, II. From fear of the
danger which is seen. And, III. From a vehement desire, and endeavor of
praying. Read Ezra 9.5. unto 10.1. and Neb. 1.4. and Psalm. 6.6. and 55.2.17.
Mark. 9.24.
Thirdly, because prayer has his fruit; that is, God will hear ( Psalm. 6.8.
and 42.3.) And will be bent, and mollified with prayers, Ose. 12.4. And
therefore he that poures forth his heart, in hearty prayers unto God, out of a
true sense of his sins, and a sincere desire of mercy, shall never be sent from
the Lord empty away.


Have mercy upon us.





1. Animum benevolum. II. Impertire cum effectu. III. Impertire libere sine
merito.

First, Mercy implies Animum benevolum, a willing mind, or a mind ready to do
good; as if these blind men would say, Oh Lord, we know that thou art
merciful, and gentle, willing, and ready to give, and therefore open the door
of mercy, and be merciful unto us: Hence we might observe,

Ierem. 31.20. Luke 1.78.

Secondly, Mercy intimates Impertire cum effectu, the effects of mercy; as if
these blind men would say; Oh Lord we know thou art merciful in thy own
nature; and therefore we beseech thee show the effects thereof unto us: Hence
we might learn,

Matt. 14.14. and 15.32. and 18.27. and 20.34. Luke 7.14. John 11.36.) For the
true nature of compassion, or mercy consists in these four things: to wit,

First, simul sentire, we must remember them that are in bonds, as bound with
them, Heb. 13.3.

Secondly, simul dolere, as we must be touched with a sense of our brethrens
miseries: so we must also sorrow with them, and for them; weeping with those
that weep, Romans 12.15.

Thirdly, Mal^^ ablatum cupere; as we must be sensible of our brethrens
burdens, and sorrowful for them, so we must also desire, that their evil and
grief were removed from them.

Fourthly, pro virili conari, we must not only desire this, but endeavor it
also with the utmost of our strength: And therefore this being the true nature
of Mercy, we may boldly conclude, that upon whomsoever the Lord takes
compassion, he will also help, and deliver them out of all their misery, and
evil.

Thirdly, Mercy implies Impertire libere, to bestow a thing freely, without any
merit, or desert at all: This also these blind men acknowledge: for by their
prayer they show, that they are unworthy, that Christ should remove their
blindness from them. Hence then we may learn,

That the grace of Christ is given unto us, without Author Christus, medium
fides, status gratia: Grace is given unto us by faith, from Christ, Romans
5.2.17.20. Ephesians 2.5.8. Gal. 2.16.21. Romans 3.20. unto 28. and 4.14. etc.

How does it appear, that grace is given undeservedly

It appears most evidently by these Arguments, to wit, First, Secondly, there
is no proportion betwixt any work we do, yea all our works, and the reward of
eternal glory. Thirdly, our works are debts, and therefore cannot merit, Luke
17.10. Now whereas the Papists say, that our works merit not, (Natura sua, sed
de compacto) of their own nature, but in regard of the Covenant, and Contract
which is betwixt us and God: we answer, that this very Covenant, and Contract
is of mere grace, favor, and mercy. Fourthly, our works are imperfect, and
therefore they can merit nothing at Gods hands. To this the Papists answer,
that it is true, our works merit not in themselves, but only as they are
sprinkled with the blood of Christ: But the virtue of Christ's blood is to give
life eternal unto us: yea, the blood of Christ, is Ipsum (...), the price, and
satisfaction it self: and therefore there is no projection thereof (as they say
Opera merentur quatenus fit projectio sanguinis Christi.
) which makes our works meritorious. Fifthly, the good works we do are not
ours: and therefore thereby we can merit nothing. The strength whereby we are
able to perform any good work well, is given unto us from God, 1 Cor. 4.7.
And therefore what merit can there be in frail, and weak man? Sixthly, our good
works do not go before, but follow after our Justification: and therefore no
work of ours does merit grace, or is the cause, but only the effect thereof:
For, I. The Author Christ, gives grace unto us. II. Then follows faith, and
then we are justified. III. Lastly follows love, the fruit of faith, 1 Timothy
1.14. Gal. 5.6.



Who are here to be blamed?

In general, all Merchants of Merit, or Meritmongers; whereof there are diverse
sorts, namely,

First, some who are grossly erroneous, and will tell God he owes them such and
such things, because for his sake they forsook such things: these we spoke
something of in the fifth Chapter, verse 7. and now as palpable, pass by.

Secondly, some weave a garment of Linsey-wolsey, and hope that God will approve
of them, yea fall in love with them for it: these are they who tell us of a
first Justification wrought by God, and of a second wrought by our selves. But
these two Justifications are like the Ark and Dagon, who will not stand
together; or the feet of Daniels Image, which were part of Iron, and part of
Clay, and would not solder together, Dan. 2.42. yea this distinction is
directly denied by Saint Paul, (Romans 11.6.) and therefore must not be admitted
by us.

Thirdly, some tell us that our good works merit, by the sprinkling of the
blood of Christ upon them, or by some extending or stretching of his merits
unto them. But (as was said before) the merit, and blood of Christ, is the
(...) it self: for by his death and bloodshed, we are saved.

Fourthly, they have another merit, which frees from temporal punishment:
whence comes Purgatory and pardons: but God pardons all together, and reserves
no anger when he remits, but forgives and forgets at once.

Certainly, all merit of man derogates from Christ: for if we could by our
works have purchased salvation, then Christ died in vain, Romans 4.13, 14.



Philippians 2.12, 13. Hebrews 12.4. Ephesians 5.14. and 2 Peter 1.5. etc. and
1 John 5.18.) But of this, largely before, chapter 5.

VERSE. 28. And when he was come into the house, the blind men came to him: And
Jesus says unto them, Believe ye that I am able to do this? They said unto
him, Yea Lord.


That faith which Christ required, and confirmed by Miracles, was a justifying
faith.

But that was no particular persuasion, or assurance of special mercy; but
only a general belief in the power and omnipotency of Christ.

Therefore a justifying faith requires no such particular persuasion, or
confidence of special mercy.

The Assumption Bellarmine proves from this place ( lib. 1. de Justify. cap.
8.) where Christ says to the blind men, Believe ye that I am able to do this?
They answer, Yea Lord: whereupon Christ adds, According to your Faith, so be
it unto you.

First, I answer to the Major, that it is not universally true: for a temporary
faith

Secondly, to the Minor, we say, that many Chamier. Tom. 3. f. 408, 409. lib.
13. de fide. cap 4.. 1. ad. 8.

Thirdly, to the receiving of a temporal benefit,

Fourthly, these blind men believed not only Oh Son of David, have mercy
upon us.

Verse. 29. Then touched he their eyes, saying,
. 1. Then touched he their eyes.

Why did Christ touch their eyes?

First, certainly it was not by reason of any

Secondly, neither was this an idle action, or a

Thirdly, I conceive therefore, that he touched

I. Perhaps, that he might show, that he himself was the Author and Actour of
this Miracle: for

First, neither can man restore sight unto the blind, John 9.30, 31. Neither

Secondly, can a Devil open the eyes of the blind, John 10.21.

II. Christ touched their eyes, to show, that he stood not in need of second
causes, or medicines, but that his touch was sufficient for the effecting of
what he desired, or curing of what malady soever: As with his word, at other
times he stills the raging of the waves.

III. Christ touched their eyes, that by the use of a visible, or sensible
means, he might help, and strengthen their faith; for certainly this was of
great power, as we see in Naaman, I thought (says he) the Prophet would have
laid his hand upon the sore, and have stricken it over the place, and called
upon his God, and so have cured my leprousie, 2 Kings 5.11. As if he would have
said, If he had thus touched me, I should have believed that he would have
cured me, but now I have no hope of help from him. And thus I say, Christ
teaches these, that thereby their faith and confidence may be the greater.

IV. Christ touches them, that he may teach both them and us the excellency,
and

God has ordained First, meat and apparel for the preservation of life.
Secondly, medicines, for the preventing of sickness, or procuring of health.
Thirdly, repentance, sorrow, and hearty contrition, for the breaking of the
power of sin. Fourthly, the preaching of the Word, for the illuminating of the
heart, and the begetting of faith. Fifthly, prayer for the procuring of good
things, or as a general Antidote against all evils.








Hebrews 12.4.



Thessalonians 5.17.

Corinthians 13.5.



Ephesians 5.15.

Pet. 1.5.

Peter 3.18.) striving to the measure of perfect men, Ephesians. 4.13.

V. Christ touched their eyes, to teach us, Samuel 10.26. and 1 Kings 19.5.
Esa. 6.6. Jeremiah 1.9. Daniel 8.18. Acts 16.14. And besides, consider these
two things; namely,

First, that Christ is the light of the world, Esa. 42.6. and 49.6. Psalm
146.8. John 1. 4.5, 9. and 8.12. and John 9.5. and Luke 1.79.

Secondly, as Christ is the light of the world, so he gives light unto us by
touching: And hence touching has been always of great consequence; to wit,

I. The very touch of a man; for, if he touch but any thing that is unclean, he
is made unclean thereby: Read Exodus 19.13. and 29.37. Numb. 19.11. Agg. 2.16.

II. Much more then is the touch of God of great respect, and worth, as appears
by these places, Psalm 104.32. and 144.5. Job 19.21. Judge. 6.21. Hence it was,
that the Lord ordained, that Aaron should have his ear, and thumb, and great
Toe touched, Leviticus 8.23. And hence our Savior sometimes touched the ears,
sometimes the tongue, sometimes Infants, sometimes the dead body, sometimes the
eyes, as here: because there was great virtue therein.

How manifold is the touch of Christ now in

Threefold; viz. First, either improfitable, Hebrews 6.6. or profitable, and
efficacious, Canticles 5.5. Secondly, either weak, as the smoking flax; or
strong, when we come to the measure of perfect men, Ephesians. 4.13. Thirdly,
either unto humiliation, or consolation, Cant. 4.16. For, there is the spirit
of bondage and Adoption.


We have heard why Christ Touched them: It

Although they did not express particularly their desires,

That Christ needs not much to be taught, Hebrews 2.17. and 4.15. and 5.2.

If it be thus, that Christ knows all our wants



First, to teach God, for he knows what we stand in need of Luke 12.30. Nor

Secondly, to move, or change the mind, or decree of God; for he is
unchangeable, James 1.17. But,

I. Partly, in respect of God; we pray, lest we should tempt his providence, by
neglecting the means, which himself prescribes: now he has ordained prayer,
as a part of his worship, and as a means for the obtaining of whatsoever we
want. And,

II. Partly, in regard of our selves, we pray unto God in our necessities, and
distresses:

First, to demonstrate with a prostrate mind, the sense of that evil which
lies upon us: and hence comes loud clamours, and bitter complaints: For if we
should not pray against evil, we should seem not to be sensible of any evil.
And,

Secondly, we pray, to show our earnest desire of deliverance, and freedom;
and hence comes zealous, and fervent requests: for if we did not pray against
our evils, or for a removal of them, we would seem not to care to be freed
from them.





First, because our sins, and impenitency, or hardness of heart hinders him
from doing us good. Or,

Secondly, because we are either negligent in praying, or cold in our prayers:
for sacrifices were to be offered up with fire, and prayer is to be offered up
with zeal, otherwise it is not acceptable unto God. Or,

Thirdly, because faith is wanting; for want of faith hinders us from
blessings, as follows in the next. And therefore if we be in misery, and are
not presently helped, or delivered, let us not think that the cause is in God,
but that it is in us, either because we are not children; that is, are without
justifying faith, or because we are wicked, and disobedient, or because the
thing which we desire is not good for us, or because we are careless, or cold
in praying for it.





First, knows their wants and necessities: And

Secondly, that he is able to help, deliver, or relieve them. And

Thirdly, that he is as willing to help them, as he is able. And

Fourthly, that he is their Father: for he that knows these, knows enough to
raise him up to comfort in the greatest evils, and wants.

Saying, according to your faith, so be it unto you.

In these words our Savior shows the reason, why these blind men's prayer was
heard: namely, because they believed, whence we may learn,

That the measure of blessings is according to the proportion of our faith:
Mat. 21.21. James 1.6.

Why does God measure his mercy by our

First, because without faith we cannot pray: Romans 10.14.

Secondly, because a weak faith is able to do Mat. 8.26. and 14.30. and 17.20.
And therefore if we be destitute of any blessings, let us remember that the
reason hereof is, either want, or weakness of faith. For,

I. To unbeleevers nothing is given, at least in love; because faith is the key
of Gods treasorie, and the vessel of the Fountain, whereby water is conveyed
unto us: And therefore if faith be cold, carnal, idle, empty, and sleepy, no
wonder then if the reward be such. And,

II. To children, is given according to the proportion of their faith, more or
less.

How is it elsewhere then said, that God gives

It is true,

What is required of us about, or concerning

First, we must labor that our faith be a true,

Secondly, we must labor that our faith may

Thirdly, we must labor that our faith may be Cor. 5.7. By faith we must
expect Christ, and the Holy Ghost; and exercise our faith by a daily dependence
upon God.

VERSE. 30. And their eyes were opened;
. 1. And their eyes were opened.

The blind men desire mercy, and Christ touches their eyes, whereupon their
requests were perfectly granted, and their eyes opened: whence we may learn,







Cor. 3.15.16. Yea renewing them in knowledge more and more, Colos. 3.10.





I. The word of God is rather the Book which teaches knowledge: All spiritual
wisdom being contained therein. And,

II. Hope, and expectation ( Ephesians. 1.8.) are included in the knowledge of God.
And therefore there remains only the knowledge of God, and of our selves.

III. But we must acknowledge a difference, betwixt the ^^ing s^ene, and the
power of seeing, between knowledge, and the things known; and therefore we must
yet go further.



I. I pass by the distinction of a spiritual, and natural knowledge: because
we speak only of the spiritual.

II. There are two parts of knowledge: namely, To apprehend. To judge between
things that differ.


First, to approve things which are more excellent ( Philip. 1.10.) I here take
rather to be an effect following knowledge, then a part of it; and therefore I
here pass this by.

Secondly, concerning Apprehension, it is demanded, whether we can apprehend,
and know God, and Christ? And we answer, that certainly there is a double
knowledge, viz.

I. Qu^d est, (...), that there is a God: This is approved, and given, Romans 1.
That is,

First, God has so revealed himself, that he may be known.

Secondly, the light of nature is not so darkened, but it has the faculty of
seeing, and understanding. But

Thirdly, although a man have the faculty of seeing, yet he cannot see in the
dark, but it is necessary first, that the air should be enlightened, and that
there should be light, before he can take up an object: So besides our natural
knowledge, or faculties, it is necessary unto the true knowledge of the true
God, that we should be enlightened by the Word, and Spirit.

II. Quid est, (...), what this God is? now this knowledge has two degrees,
viz.

First, (...), and this knowledge of God is revealed in the Scriptures.

Secondly, (...) (Zach.) to know Christ to be our Redeemer, and to rejoice
therein, Ephesians. 1.18. etc. And this is life eternal, to know God to be our
Father, and Christ to be our Savior, John 17.3. Ephesians 3 18 etc.

How may we know, that our spiritual blindness

We must examine carefully these four particulars: namely, First, whether can
thou see, or not? Colos. 3.16. for the carnal man cannot, 1 Cor. 2.14. It is a
sure sign, that a man is not in a sound, and hail constitution of body, when
meat is loathsome to his taste, and stomach, when flowers are not sweet to his
smell, nor sugar to his pallat; Thus when men find no sweetness in spiritual
things, but rather abhor them, it may justly be feared, that they do not
understand them. Now to the true understanding of spiritual, and heavenly
things, it is necessary that the midst, the air should be enlightened by the
word; but the word does not produce this effect, except it be mixed with faith,
Heb. 4.2. Secondly, whether can thou discern or not? is not only thy
understanding enlightened, but also thy judgment informed, so that now thou
can approve of things, which are more excellent? Children are faulty in a
double regard; namely, I. They see too much; that is, they approve, like, and
allow best of toys, and childish vanities. II. They have no desire unto the
greater, and better things; a child has a greater longing after an apple, then
a talent of gold; and had rather have some fair seeming Picture, then leases,
or deeds, or charters of some fair Lardship: Thus we, so long as we are
natural, and carnal, overvalue earthly things, and under-value heavenly: and
desire more temporal blessings, then spiritual graces. But the spiritual
man, whose understanding is enlightened, and judgment informed, does First,
relish best spiritual things; his appetite being now amended, and rectified.
And, Secondly, hence does contemn, and despise childish things, and all
created delights.

Thirdly, whether is Christ made thine or not? can thou truly say, I am my
beloveds, and my beloved is mine, Cantic. 2.16. And with Paul, I was a stranger
from Christ, but I found mercy? 1 Timothy 1.13. Art thou so assured of this, that
no danger, or distress can cause thee to distrust thy Christ? Job 13.15.
Certainly where this sweet and bright light is within, there is a certain
neglect of all temporal things; for the sweet taste they have of Christ, does
wean them from the world. Fourthly, whether do thou apprehend, and see the
recompense of reward, being so certainly assured thereof, that thou live by
hope, and weepest so long as thou art in the flesh, and absent therefrom,
desiring to be dissolved, and to be with Christ?


See that no man know it.



verse 26. where this same question is propounded; and answered: I only here
add three short particulars; to wit,

First, that Christ did seriously prohibit the publication of this miracle; as
appears by the very phrase; He straightly charged them, saying: See that no man
know it.

Secondly, but seeing the reason of this prohibition is not expressed we
should not too curiously enquire after it, Muscul. and Gualt. s.

Thirdly, that these blind men, of their own judgments, should not have taken
liberty to do that which was forbidden them.

VERSE. 31. But they, when they were departed, spread abroad his fa^e in all
that country.


Whatsoever the Lord commands, we will do, Exodus 24. For the will of God in
all things is just, and holy, and all his commandments are pure, and good; and
therefore none are to be disobeyed by man.





I. They did it with a good intention; therefore it was well done.

Answer It follows not, for Vzz^h had a good intent in staying the Arc, but
he died for the doing of it: yea many shall think they do God good service,
when they kill his own servant, Job. 18.2. and therefore a good intention is not
enough to make a good action.

II. They did it in zeal unto Christ: therefore it was well done.

Answer. This follows not neither, because there is a zeal, which is not
according to knowledge.

III. Christ did not punish them for it; and therefore he did approve of it; and
if it were approved of by him, then it is good.

Answer. It follows not, Christ did not punish it, therefore Christ did approve
of it; for he did not punish that we read of, the nine Leper^, Luke 17.
neither did he approve of them: Christ healed a man at the poole of Bethesda,
who after he was healed, went and told the Scribes, and Pharisees Ioh. 5.15
: that it was Jesus that healed him; undoubtedly, out of an evil, and
treacherous intent; and yet Christ does not punish him for it.

IV. This was thankfulness in them (Chrysostom. s.) And therefore is praiseworthy.

Answer. This is true, if Christ had not prohibited it: for we must not serve
God with will worship: And therefore Christ forbidding it, they should not have
done it; but have showed their thankfulness by love, obedience, and internal
duties.

V. Elsewhere Christ commands this: for having dispossessed a man, he says,
Return to thine own house, and show how great things God has done for thee,
Luke 8.39. And therefore these blind men are not to be discommended for thus
doing:

Answer. If they had had a direct precept enjoining, or no direct prohibition
forbidding, then they might have done it: But he being commanded the
affirmative, and they the Negative (Non est par ratio) the case is altered, and
the reason not alike.

VI. Those things which belong unto the praise of our Selves, are to be
suppressed. God, are to be divulged.
Chrysostom.

Answ. This is generally true, if no contrary command from God does cross it,
but we must not seem to be wiser then God; but submit unto his will in all
things.

VII. If Christ had not had a desire, or (at least) would not have had his
works, and miracles to have been published: then certainly,

First, he would have enjoined all to have kept secret what was done. And

Secondly, he would have done nothing in public.

Answ. we must not (as was said in the former verse,. 2.) too curiously demand
of a reason of Christ's actions, seeing he may do, and command, or forbid man
what he pleases.

VIII. It was profitable, and necessary, that the Gospel should be published,
both for the redemption of men, and glory of the Redeemer. And therefore they
did well.

Answ. I. We must never do evil, that good may come of it: we must never
disobey God for some good consequence, or effect which is likely to be thereby
produced.

II. It was not simply necessary, that the Gospel should be published by them,
for Christ had other men, and means to do it by: and therefore they should not
have disobeyed Christ.

III. Nathan thought it a good work for David to build God a house, and bade
him do all that was in his heart, (1 Chronicles 17.^.) but presently after told
him, verse 4. that although the intent were good, and the work good, yet he
must not do it, but it must be done by Solomon his son. And therefore every
good work is not to be done by every one: for if so, then every man might
preach (it being a good work) whereas indeed none must, but those who are
called as Aaron was.

Quod de duobus caecis affertur, non urget: pessime enim a Dei, id est, Christi
praecepto discesserunt, and non carent peccato, etsi sit ^elus. Danaeus, ethic.
Christ. lib. 2. cap. 1. page 127. b. Although these blind men spread abroad the
fame of Christ, out of zeal, yet they did amiss, yea sinned, in swerving from
Christ's precept, or positive, and strict prohibition. Whence I might observe,

Romans 8.6, etc. Matthew 16.23.



First, from their thankful mind: That a thankful mind, or man, or
thankful minded man, will always respect and reverence him, by whom he was
helped.

Secondly; from their profession of Christ: That those who are truly converted
and enlightened, will not fear to profess Christ: as we see in the bold blind
man, John 9. and in the Apostles, Acts 4. and 5. and in the three Children,
Daniel 3. and in Daniel himself, chapter 6.







First, for Gods glory; because he is honored thereby, Mat. 5 16. Philip. 2.15.

Secondly, for the example of our brethren; because they are edified thereby.

Thirdly, for the confirming of the truth of our own faith, Gal. 1.10.

VERSE. 33. And when the Devil was cast out, the dumb s^^k^ and the multitudes
marvelled, saying, It was never so seen in Israel.
. 1. And when the Devil was cast out.

We see here that until Satan was cast out, his mouth was not opened, nor his
tongue unloosed: whence in the Allegory we may learn, Luke 11.20. and 2 Timothy
2.26. And until we are freed from him, we cannot serve the Lord, Luke 1.75.

How does this appear?

It appears by the consideration of these three particulars, viz.

First, John 3.8. And therefore, until we be free from him, we cannot be free
from sin. Secondly, because this was the end of the preaching of the Gospel,
Acts 26.18. And therefore until we be delivered from Satan, we cannot serve
God. Thirdly, because all sin comes from Satan: and therefore the best way to
be freed from sin, is to be delivered from Satan. The Schoolmen make the devil
to be but only Causa procatorcti^^, non proegoumena; the impulsive cause of
sin from without, not from within; and that I. Because by the corrupting, and
conquering of Adam, he has begot and bred in all men a pronenesse, and
inclination unto sin. And II. Because sin often proceeds from the motion of the
free will. Satan cogitatio^^^ malan^^^ non inumissor, sed incensor. Beda.
Satan is not the sender, but the Incendiary of evil thoughts. Indeed the
Devil is three manner of ways the Author of sin; namely, First, because the
beginning of sin was from him, ( John 8.44.) for he only tempted Adam. And
Secondly, because he always urges, prepares, fits, and objects allurements
unto us: for the world and the flesh, are but his instruments, whereby he
works. And Thirdly, because he further instigates our concupiscence. Si non
insanis satis ^^s^^^. If he see that our own concupiscence do not carry us
headlong fast enough unto evil, then he will spur it forward. Hence he is said
to walk to and fro, (1 Peter 5.8.) and hence he is called the Temp^es, 1
Thessolonians 3.5. and 2 Corinthians 2.11. and 11.3. Multitude dom^^^ causa
(...) Di^^s. de di^^^ (...). The multitude of devils in the air, is the cause
of the multitude of evils in the earth. Omnia mu^tia i^^^^tia a Diab^^
e^^gitato Damasc. li^. 2.^.
Unto what evils does Satan tempt and

In general, he tempts unto all sin, particularly to these: to wit, 1 to
pride, 1 Timothy 3.6. and 2 to uncleanness; and 3 to anger, Ephesians. 4.27. and 4
hinders us from every good work, 1 Thessalonians. 2.18.

The dumb man spoke.

The dumb spoke?

viz. The dumb man; and this was very frequent in those places and times, to
retain the same name, although there were some change wrought in the person:
hence mention is made of Matthew the Publican (when he was none) and Simon the
Leper (when he was cured) and harlots and sinners, when they were converted.







We see here, that as soon as the Devil is cast out, the dumb man speaks, to
teach us,

Cor. 4.13.



I. By that opposition; or contrariety of nature, which is betwixt Christ and
Satan: for I. Satan, linguam vel compescere, vel corrumpere. (Muscul. s.) he
will either corrupt the tongue, by corrupt and evil words, or he will
endeavor to curb the tongue, from good and gracious words: So long as the
devil is in the heart, so long the tongue is fruitful in wicked, but barren
in good and holy words. But II. Christ does first open the mouth, and untie the
tongue: And then Secondly, does sanctify the tongue, and make it a special
instrument of Gods glory, filling it with holy and heavenly speeches. Secondly,
by the benefit of speech: we have elsewhere to speak of the utility of the
tongue, and therefore There only name two special ends, and uses thereof;
namely, I. Therewith praise, and worship we God, James 3. And II. Thereby we
communicate both our selves, and our counsels unto our brethren.






I. If thou have no tongue to praise God. And

II. If thou have no tongue to profess Religion. And

III. If thou have no tongue to pray unto God, James 2.4.

IV. If thou have no tongue to explain thy mind, or to communicate counsel
unto thy brother; but art dumb in all these, then it is a sign that Satan is
not cast out; for if he were, then (as here) the dumb would speak.

Secondly, examine if thou have not a filthy, Mat. 15.19.

How must we so speak, that thereby we may

First, let us praise, and honor God with our

I. For all his works of mercy showed toward us, whether spiritual or
temporal; whether concerning our election, creation, redemption, vocation,
justification, or sanctification.

II. We must praise and honor God, by acknowledging him only to be the true,
and ever-living, and everlasting God, who is most worthy to be praised and
served.

III. We must praise, and honor God; by professing his name and truth before
men, and that in the most perilous times and places, Dan. 3. Acts 4. and 5.
Psalm. 69.30.

IV. We must praise and honor God with our tongues, by holy exercises,
delighting to sing Psalms, and to confer, and to speak of God.

Secondly, let us pray unto God with our Hanna spoke not aloud, yet she spoke
when she prayed, as appears by the moving of her lips, 1 Samuel 1.

Thirdly, let us reconcile our selves unto our Mat. 5. let us pacify their
anger with our soft answers, Prove. 15.

Fourthly, let us comfort our brethren with

Fifthly, let us counsel and advise our brethren

I. Amanter, lovingly, not in anger or hatred, but in love. And

II. Prudenter, wisely, from our hearts, and out of good understanding. And

III. Confidenter, boldly, not fearing their anger, or hatred, if we have any
warrant, or call so to do.

Sixthly, we must speak purely, and gravely, that so our words may add grace
unto the Ephesians. 4.29. and Colos. 4.6. For by thus using our tongues, we shall
approve our selves to be free from Satan.

And the multitudes marvelled.

The phrase b^re used (the people marvelled) does mean, that they admired the
thing, and wondered at it, knew, not what to say, but some thought one thing,
some another: From whence in general we may observe,

John 9.16. and in the cloves tongues, Acts 2.12, 13.







I. If the mind be weak, then the judgment will be foolish: for, the fools
mouth utters folly, Prove. 15.14. and 16.22. and 24.7. and 26.7. Thus when
Christ in his agony and passion, cried Eloi, Eloi, etc. The ignorant Roman
soldiers said, He calls for Elias, Matthew. 27.47. yea, hence it is that we
say Caeci non judicant de coloribus; Blind men cannot judge of colors; and
ignorant men cannot judge aright of that whereof they are ignorant. And
therefore unto right judgment is required an understanding heart, and
enlightened mind.

II. If the mind be rash, the judgment will be uncharitable: as we see in good
old. Eli, who through rashness censureth an holy woman to be drunk, (1 Samuel
1.14.) And those of Melita, holy Paul to be a Murderer Acts 28 4. and 2 King.
5. ^ (...) Job. 11.37.
. And therefore our Savior says, Judge not according to the appearance but
judge righteous judgment, Ioh. 7.24. Whence we may see, that unto right
judgment is required a staid and charitable mind.

III. If the mind be unjust or unequal, then must the judgment needs be most
corrupt. Now the mind is said to be unequal or unjust three manner of ways;
to wit, either

First, through partiality: thus the Papists dislike and condemn many things in
us, and St^pl^t^^ in Calvin, which they like, and approve of in men of their
own Religion. Or

Secondly, by reason of covetousness, or corruption: and thus Festus did with
Paul, Or

Thirdly, through Envy: thus the Jews said, that John Baptist had a devil
Luke 7.33.
. And that Christ came not from God, because he did not keep the Sabbath, Ioh.
9.16: When choler flows in the eyes, it makes all things look yellow, and when
in the Palate, nothing tastes sweet: when the humors are corrupted in the
ventricle, they corrupt the best meat, and a red or yellow glass makes all
things seem of that color. And therefore unto a right judgment it is required,
that the mind be free from partiality, covetousness, love of bribes, and
envy.

How must we, or may we judge?

We must judge warily, wisely, consideratly,

Why did the multitude marvel?

Because of that great and extraordinary change, First, the devil did possess
him. Secondly, his judgment was extinct. Thirdly, his voice was suppressed.
Fourthly, his tongue could not speak.
But now The devil is cast out. His judgment is restored. His voice heard. And
His tongue untied.


VERSE. 35. And Jesus went about all the Cities,
. 1. Teaching in their Synagogues.

What is meant by this word Synagogue?

First, the word is a Gr: word, but yet frequently

I. C^^ger^, to gather together, or to assemble. And

II. Compoto, to drink, or banquet together: from the custom of so doing,
which was amongst them, (Rh^ding.) Hence the place of public meeting for the
exercises of Religion, and worship, was called by the Gentiles, Synagogium; and
by the Jews, Synagoga; and by the Christians, Synaxis.

Secondly, this word Synagogue, sometimes was Acts 13.43.

Thirdly, some distinguish between a Synagogue, Syn^dri^^, or S^^bodrim; by the
former understanding a place for religious worship, and by the latter, a place
for Courts, and the dispatch of politic and civil affairs: But this
distinction is not generally true, because they are sometimes united and joined
together in the Scripture, and the Jews did both judge, and punish in them
both. They will (says Christ) deliver you up to the Councels, and will scourge
you in their Synagogues, Mat. 10.17. Mark. 13.9.





What I tell you in secret, publish you upon the house top, Mat. 10. and 28.20.
Now this was in respect of the Gospel, and that in a double regard; viz.

I. That it might equally be communicated unto all, Mark 14.9.

II. Lest he should have been calumniated, and slandered, if he had taught in
corners, Ioh. 18.20.

Acts 5.20. Mark 16.15. and 2 Timothy 2.9. Acts 9.20. and 13.14, 44. and therefore
we must pray, that it may be freely permitted, 2 Thessalonians. 3.1.





Romans 1.16.) and the ordinary means of begetting faith, and of bringing us unto
salvation, Romans 10.14. and 1 Cor. 1.18. etc.

Cor. 2.16.

Mat. 7.6. Now the preaching of the word is a Pearl: And therefore it is not to
be published to all.

Acts. 16.6. and ^^.22. and hence Paul would not stay to preach to them who
were obstinate, Act. 18.6. and 19.9.





Pet. 2.1. Jude 4. Here observe, that I do not speak

First, of private reading, or conserving together of what has been publicly
taught. Nor

Secondly, of teaching, exhorting, and instructing of men's own families. But

Thirdly, of doctrines which hate, or at least fly the light; as the
Priscillianists, who hide themselves and conceal their faith whereas they
should give an account of their faith, to every one that shall demand a reason
thereof, 1 Pet. 3. Certainly, great and heavy is the calumny that arises by
unlawful Conventicles, and therefore woe be to such as are justly guilty
hereof; for they will be found to be of that number, who do evil, and
therefore hate the light, John 3.20. Christ we see, teaches in the Synagogues,
and the Apostles in the Temple, Acts 14 and 15 and 16 and 17 chapters.

That is not by and by, or always true, which

First, it is a suspicious thing, for a man to be

Secondly, that which is publicly preached,

Thirdly, they who meet in corners, and slight

I. Teach that which is false, and erroneous; and then do wickedly: Or

II. Teach that which is true, and orthodox; and then they are either malicious
and envious, in desiring to conceal the truth, or cowardly and timorous, in
fearing to profess, and justify, and own the truth; yea if men do no evil,
then why need they conceal and hide themselves?

. 2. Healing every sickness, and every disease.

What is the sense and meaning of these words?

First, (...) signifies healing, or curing.

Against this it may be objected,

According to the Physicians, it is true,

I. To give Physic, is called (...) and this may be without effect: for many
Physicians use the means, when they do not restore unto health.

II. To give Physic with good success, is called (...) or (...).

III. (...) signifies to cure, though without second causes. And

IV. (...) signifies also to heal, whether by means, or without means. And

V. A man is most properly said to heal, when effectually he cures, or
recovers, whether by Physic, as earthly Physicians do, or by a word, as our
heavenly Physician here does: And therefore he is truly said to heal.

Secondly, (...) and (...) (the words here sickness and disease, thus differ;
(...) is such a sickness as casts men down; (...) such a one as only weakens
a man, and therefore is not so great as the former. Now (...), sicknesses are
of three sorts, namely,

I. Some are more easily cured, and healed. And

II. Some are more hardly cured, and healed. And

III. Some are incurable, and impossible by men to be healed: but Christ ^^^es
All Sicknesses. Diseases.


Thirdly, All (healing All sicknesses) is thus to be understood; namely,

singula generum, all that were sick of all sicknesses; for there were many
blind and deaf, and dumb, who were not cured. Nor

II. That he healed genera singulorum, some of all kind of sicknesses; because
there was not at that time in the whole world (much less in the places where
Christ came) some sick of all sicknesses, or all kind of sicknesses which are
now: for I conceive that the world then knew neither the sweating sickness,
which was once rife and brief here in England; nor the Neapolitan, or French
disease.

III. It may be that Christ did not heal some of all kind of sicknesses which
the world then knew. But

IV. That he healed every sickness, and every disease, of all those who either
came unto him, or were brought unto him, or in whose behalf he was sent unto.
Whence we may see,

First, that nothing is impossible nothing is difficult unto Christ. And

Secondly, that Christ sends none away uncured, that comes unto him; not those
nine unthankful Lepers, or that most ungrateful and treacherous man, who
being cured of his eight and thirty years disease, did afterward discover
Christ unto the Jews.



Cor. 5.19. Act. 10.38. John 5.36.) For otherwise he could not have been a
Redeemer.

Tit. 3.5.) and he is no respecter of persons, Romans 2.11:

Gal. 6.10.) and not be unfruitful in good works; remembering that we were
created unto labor, and to be helpful unto others? And therefore we must
neither be hard-hearted, nor close-fisted unto those who stand in need; but to
our ability and strength, helpful to them in all things.

Matthew. 8.17.) and cured all the maladies of our souls, Psalm. 103.2. For as
there is no infirmity so great, but he can cure it; so there is none so small,
but he will take care of it, and succor it: Grace was given unto him out of
measure, that he might be able to heal all our infirmities.

Verse. 36. But when he saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion them,
because they fainted, and were scattered abroad, as sleep having no shepherd.
. 1. He was moved with compassion on them.

Why was Christ moved with mercy toward

The Text says, Because they were as sheep without a shepherd: whence we may
see, that it is a great misery to be deprived of Preachers, and a great mercy
to be made partakers of preaching: Or, the preaching of the word is the great
mercy of God, being given for this end, that scattered sheep might be gathered
to the chief shepherd of their souls, Romans 1.16. and 1 Cor. 1.18, 21.

How does it appear, that the preaching of the

By these dependent particulars, viz. First, man by nature is in the state of
death, Romans 5.12. Secondly, man by nature cannot free himself from this estate,
nor avoid death. Thirdly, naturally we are so blind, that we cannot truly see,
and know the danger wherein we are. Fourthly, as we cannot perceive our danger,
so naturally we cannot understand the remedy against it, 1 Cor. 2.14. Fifthly,
but the word of God is a light unto our feet, and a lanthern unto our paths,
Psalm. 119.105. And therefore Christ has given a charge to the Ministers, to
preach, ( Mat. 28.19.) and Saint Paul denounces a woe against him that shall
neglect it, (1 Cor. 9.15.) because indeed their feet are happy, who bring the
glad tidings of peace, ( Romans 10.15.) and reconciliation, 2 Corinthians. 5.19.
Wherefore undoubtedly it is a great mercy of God, for any people to enjoy the
preaching of the word.


How must we hear aright the preaching of the

First, we must hear it with love, and delight,

Secondly, we must hear it diligently, and attentively,

Thirdly, we most hear it so, that we may correct Psalm. 119.9. And this is the
sum of all.

. 2. Because they fainted, and were scattered abroad.

What is the meaning of these words?

First, sometimes this phrase of being scattered is understood of the Civil
government; when people are without a politic head, or Governor, as 1 King.
22.17. Judge. 17.6. and 18.1. and 19.1. and 21.25.

Secondly, sometimes this phrase is understood

Thirdly, the Text is diversely read. For

I. Some Copies have (...), vexati; They Chrysostom: O Hier. s. But they were not
vexed or grieved, but wearied with daily labor, and travel; Beza. Because
they were without a Shepherd to lead; and teach them. Whence we may observe,

That a man may be wearied in seeking of Hos. 5.6. Mich. 3.4. Luke 13.24.
Matthew 7.22. and 25.11.



Romans 10.1, 2, 3. and Philip. 3.9.

Prove. 8.17. Esa. 55.6.

retain their sins, and to gain their Savior. And therefore no wonder if they
never find him; for he will not be found of such as will not leave their sins
for his sake.





Philip. 3.8.9.

Heb. 12.8. Mat. 16.24



Esa. 8.20.

Cant. 3.1. but diligently, and industriously, Prove. 8.33.

II. Other Copies read, and that more truly, (...), loosed, untied, or
scattered abroad; because things being untied, must needs be dissipared: the
meaning therefore is, the people were without a Shepherd, therefore they went
astray, and were scattered to and fro, hither and thither. Ier. 2.5, 8. and
10.20, etc. and 50.6. Zach. 10.2. and 11.10, 15, etc.



Numb. 27.17. And therefore, where there is none to take that ear, or to
discharge that calling, there the people must needs err: For I take it for
granted, that man by the light of nature, or by the power of any natural
goodness that is in him, cannot find out, or walk in the way of truth.

Acts 20.28. and Heb. 13.17.

III. Others read Disjecti. And expound it thus, viz.

First, Errantes, they wandered to and fro, scattered here and there, out of
order and rank.

Secondly, Fluctuantes, they wavered, not knowing what to hold, nor what to do,
( Ephesians. 4.14.) but were like the Waves of the sea, tossed to and fro.

Thirdly, Iacentes, stertentes, dormitantes, securi, they were secure, and fast
asleep: to teach us,

That those who are loosed from the Ministry of Preachers, become secure; or
none are so secure

First, the Ministers are Watchmen, set over people, to keep them from sleeping
in sin, Ezech. 3. and 33.

Secondly, there is in people a natural pronenesse unto peace, and quiet, and
carnal security. And therefore when those are gone which should keep them
awake, they must needs sleep.

Verse. 38. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest,
. 1. Pray ye.

We see here, that although it be a good and necessary work, to send forth
laborers into the harvest, yea a work pleasing unto God, and profitable unto
men, yet we must not expect it without prayer. To teach us,

That prayer is the only way to obtain blessings, and good things at Gods
hands, Mat. 7 7. Luke 18.1. Act. 6.4. and Ephesians. 6.18. and 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. and 1
Pet. 4.7. and 5.9.

How does it appear, that we cannot truly hope

It appears thus, viz. First, Elias, without it, could not obtain rain, 1 King.
18. Secondly, because prayer is the approbation of our faith; if with a strong
confidence and assurance, we make our requests known unto God, it argues faith
in us. Thirdly, because by praying unto God for good things, we show that I. He
is the Author and fountain of every good gift, and every perfect being, Iam.
1.17. And II. That we depend upon him only for those good things which we
lack. And therefore, as without prayer we cannot be assured of any good thing,
so by prayer we obtain whatsoever is good for us.


What need is there of prayer, feeling God

As he has decreed the end so he has decreed the means: he who sows not,
cannot reap;

God knows what we want, and therefore what

We pray, Non ut docea^, sed ut desiderium auge^^^ (August. de orand^ Deum) not
that we might instruct God,



Father, not as I will, but as thou wilt.



Ioh. 16.23, etc.

Pharmacum generale, the most general means: for

I. Prayer pierces, and penetrateth the heavens. And

II. Is a means to obtain victory in the day of battle, Exodus 17. And

III. Thereby rain may be procured in the time of drought, 1 King. 19. And

IV. It is a means to make the barren Womb bear, 1 Samuel 1.10. And

V. By prayer we may obtain pardon of our sins, Luke 18 11. Yea

VI. It changes a revealed threatening, Ion. 3.10. For Jonah had proclaimed,
Yet forty days, and Ni^i^eh shall be destroyed: But the King proclaiming a
Fast, and commanding prayer, changes the Commination and sentence, into
mercy. And

VII. It works miracles; for by prayer Joshua obtained, that the Sun should
stand still, and Elias, that the dead should be raised unto life. And

VIII. It takes away evils, and delivers out of prison, Acts 12.5.12. And

IX. It expels, and drives away Satan, Luke 10. And

X. It ties Gods hands, that he cannot punish, Exodus 32.10. Let me alone, says
the Lord, that I may destroy this people. Ligatum habent sancti Dominum ut
(...) punia^, nisi ca^^ permiserini ipsi Bern. s. The Saints have the Lords
hands, by prayer, so fast manacled, that he cannot punish the wicked except
they will give him leave. And therefore these things considered, there is great
reason, that we should pray for whatsoever good blessing we stand in need of,
whether temporal or spiritual.



Acts 6.4.



General Rules.
The Rules for prayer are either General; or Particular.


First, the general Rules to be observed in

First, we must pray with the Understanding that is,

I. Not in an unknown language, as the Papists do, who pray in Latin.

II. Not without attention; Qu^^^d^ and Deo audiri speras, cum teipsum non
attendis? Cyprian. How can a man hope to be heard of God, that does not himself
mark what he utters? The Papists here give a double distinction; to wit,

First, betwixt a perfect and a weak attention: and this distinction, as true,
we admit; because we are imperfect in all services, and weak in the best
performances: And therefore at best, our Attention in prayer is but weak and
imperfect, yet we must strive unto perfection, and labor that our minds in
prayer may be wholly taken up with heaven, and heavenly things.

Secondly, they distinguish betwixt an Initial, and perpetuated Attention; that
is, Men (they say) must have an Intention to pray, and an Attention to what
they pray, when they begin their prayers; but there is no necessity of
continuing this attention, unto the period of their prayers. This distinction,
as foolish and false, I reject, because their aim and meaning herein seems to
be this, That men must be attentive at first, when they pray unto God, that so
they may procure the Lords attention to their prayers; and when once God
attends to what we pray, then we need attend no more unto that which we power
out: because God will hear it, though we do not mark it.

Secondly, we must pray only for good things, John 5. carefully avoiding all
petitions, which tend to the hurt either of our selves, or our neighbor, or
our God, or our Religion. For if God hear from us, and grant unto us such
requests, it is in anger: according to the fiction of Myd^s his golden prayer,
or wish.

Thirdly, we must pray in faith, ( Mark 11.24. James 1.6.) being assured that
God loves us, that God hears us, that God is able to help us, yea that he will
help us, in as much as may stand with his glory, and our good.

Fourthly, we must pray with the Spirit, 1 Cor. Jude 20. Romans 8.26. For if our
requests be the signs and groans of the Spirit, or dictated, and suggested unto
us by the Spirit, then they shall be both pleasant unto, and prevalent with our
heavenly Father.

Fifthly, we must pray in humility, Luke 18.13. Latrones, and Errones docent ^e
orare. Hier. in vitas patrum: As Beggars pray for an Alms, and Thieves for a
Pardon, so must we for those things which we stand in need of.

Sixthly, we must pray penitently: How can we Non prodest medicamentum d^^
ferr^^ in ^^h^^re. Isidor. In vain is the plaster applied to the sore, so long
as the Bullet or iron is in the wound: In vain no we pray for mercy, or any
blessing from God, so long as sin is not forsaken, hated, and repented of.

Seventhly, we must pray perseverantly, Romans

Eighthly, we must pray in the name and mediation John 16. Acts. 4.12. And that

I. Because he is the only beloved Son of God, with whom God is well pleased,
and in whom he is pleased with us, John 11.42.

II. Because Christ by his office is our Advocate, 1 Ioh. 2.1.

III. Because he only merited pardon and redemption for us.

particular Rules.
Secondly, the more particular Rules to be observed in prayer, are these; viz.

Luke 18.1. and 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.

Psalm 5.5.

James 5.15. for victory, rain, and the like, as was before said: and that

I. By an acknowledgment of thy duty; that thou ought to pray unto God, and
thou were unworthy to receive any good thing from him, if thou should be
negligent herein. And

II. We must pray particularly, upon a sure hope that we shall obtain what we
want, if it be good for us, and the rather, because we pray for it, which is
the Lords own ordinance, appointed for the obtaining of what is awanting unto
us.

Unto the Lord of the harvest.

We see here, that our prayers must be made unto God: for

First, Christ is the Lord of the harvest, as appears by his sending forth of
Apostles and Disciples Mat. 10.1 and Luke 10.1.
. Yet

Secondly, he names not himself, but the Lord, that he may show that laborers
come from him. Psalm. 50.16.









Job. 3.16.

Paul prays the brethren, and men daily pray and petition Kings, and great, and
rich men, and that lawfully; how then do we say, that we must pray only unto
God?



First, in general, for every petition and request; and thus indeed it is
true, that we may petition, sue, and make requests unto men: but it must be for
some temporal, not for spiritual things: and these requests must be made unto
living and mortal men, not unto the dead and glorified Saints.

Secondly, prayer sometimes is understood, (...), for prayer for spiritual
graces, and eternal glory, and thus understood, we must pray only unto God.



Secondly, because the harvest is gathered in by him. Whence we may learn,

That the collection, and gathering together

First, Election is his Decree, and the calling of men unto the truth, first
came from him.

Secondly, as it came from God, so it ends in him; for the calls men to the
profession of Religion for his own glory. Read Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6:

Thirdly, all things which serve hereunto, are but Gods instruments; whether
the word, or Spirit, or Ministers, or Day (the Sabbath) or Temple (the Church)
yea, or Christ himself: All these are the instruments of God, for the gathering
together of men unto the faith. And therefore our Savior here commands us to
pray unto the Lord of the harvest.

. 3. That he would send forth laborers.

How manifold is the sending of Ministers?

It is either First, Extraordinary, Secondly, Ordinary; and this is two fold;
viz. I. An internal vocation, and call from God: and this has in it these two
things; namely, First, God excites, and stir^ up such to have compassion upon
the Church, and Children of God; and to desire, that they were able to serve
God in this great work of gathering in his harvest. Secondly, then God makes
them able Ministers, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit, 2 Corinthians. 3.6. II.
An external calling from men, appointed for this end: For the gatherers of
this harvest, must be both missi, and permissi; sent by God, and allowed by men.



By the name of Laborers, which our Savior here gives to Ministers; we may
observe,

That the Ministers of the word are ordained unto labor.

How does it appear, that the calling of a Minister

First, it appears by the names given unto them; Fishers, Mat. 4.19. Luke 10.2.
and commanded to be painful and faithful Shepherds, Ioh. 21.15, etc. Act.
20.28. and 2 Timothy 4.2, 5. They are called Soldiers, and Planters, and
Builders, and the like, 1 Cor. 9. and 3.7. and 16.10, 16. and 2 Cor. 6.1, 5,
etc. and 11.23. Philip. 4.3. and 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. and 1 Timothy 3.1. and 2 Timothy 4.5.

Secondly, by the work of the Ministers, it appears

I. To preach the word publicly, Mark 16. 16. and 1 Timothy 5.^7. and 2
Timothy 4.2.

II. To labor, by preaching, to make th^^^ people perfect men in Christ Jesus,
2 Cor. 11.2. Colos. 1.28.

III. To love their people with their hearts, and inwardly to be careful of
them, and to pray for them, Gal 4.11.

IV. To suffer affliction, and persecution (if need require) for the good of
their flocks. Read 1 Cor 4.11, etc. and 2 Cor. 4.8, etc, and 11.23. and 2 Timothy
2.3, etc.





These. 2 12.) in care, labor, and study; and in comparison of the time
therein spent, spends but little in refreshing of himself.



Perd^dimus diem, and grieve for the mis-spending of any one day, wherein he
has not brought some glory to God, or good to his Church, or benefit or
comfort to some of his children.

Luke 5.5. and Heb. 13.17.

Into his harvest.



First, in every age of the world, there is a double labor of Ministers;
namely, first, Se^d-time; then secondly, Harvest-time: first they must sow,
then they must reap, Romans 15.20. and 1 Pet. 2.25.

Secondly, as in America there is a perpetual harvest, there being something
ripe every month in the year, in some part or other of it: so is it with the
Ministers (...) for always so long as the world lasts, there will be a
perpetual harvest; some still ready to be gathered to the faith, and the
profession of Religion.

What are the works which God requires of these laborers?

God requires of them these diverse and several works, viz. First, to sow the
^eed, that is, Secondly, to water it, that is, to nourish and cherish what
begins to take root, or to labor daily that the Word may be the more clear to
the understanding of the hearers; and that they may grow up, and increase in
knowledge [Ego plantavi, hoc est, initia p^sui, quia primus ^ester ^^^tor fui.
Apollos vero ^igavit, hoc est, been positam doctrinam illustravit, and ^^^it
Aretius in 1 Cor. 3.6.
] Thirdly, to hedge in the corn, that it be not trampled down; that is, labor
to fence them about with Domminations and Threatenings, and legal fears, that
thereby they may be kept from sin: and to hedge them in with sound Doctrine, ^
that the viperous brood of Heretics may not seduce them. Fourthly, to labor
to ripen the corn, that is, to strive, that they may be the surer fixed, and
rooted in faith, and built up in all holy and spiritual knowledge, Ephesians 1.18.
Fifthly, to harrow the field, and to break the clots; tha^ is, to labor to
break and humble the obdu^^^^, and obstinate hearts of hardened sinners, by the
hammer of the Word. Sixthly, to gather in the Wheat; that is, to gather men unto
the Communion of the Saints: for there is a double gathering of the righteous;
namely, I. By the Ministry of earthly Ministers, the Preachers of the Word;
when they are gathered unto the faith, and profession of Religion and the true
Church. II. By the Ministry of heavenly Ministers, the Angels, when by them
they are gathered into Gods gainer; that is, the Triumphant Church in heaven.
Seventhly, to cast the Tares into the fire; that is, to give over unto Satan
those who will not repent: This we do unwillingly, and always but
hypothetically, because we are commanded to be merciful and charitable, and to
hope the best.


TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
CHRISTIAN READER, If thou know me, I know thou stand amazed (and no
wonder) to see the insolency of this our Age; and how truly the Poet
prophesied, when he said, Scribimus indocti, doctique poemata passim.

That with the Cripple in the Acts, we are running, and leaping, Acts 3.8.
Hebr. 5.12
as soon as ever we have found our legs: yea, undertaking to teach others, when
we have need our selves to be taught. Indeed, great may their boldness be
thought, that seek without fear to set forth their knowledge, (or rather, as I
have done, their ignorance) and suffer their doings to be seen, they care not
of whom. For, not only thereby do they bring men to think, that they stand
much in their own conceit; but also they seem to assure themselves, that all
men will like whatsoever they write, which is a great folly to imagine. Now the
best way for an Offender (in this kind) to find favor, is to pretend a good
intent, and if a good intention happen to produce an evil action, then to
accuse himself, and not to stand upon his own justification. And therefore
(having by this Book both betrayed my own folly, and given great occasion unto
others to talk largely of me) that thy censure may be the lighter, I will
Article against my self: My intention in the publication of this imperfect
Piece, was sincere; namely, that by these my weak endeavors, God might gain
some Glory, and his people (my Countrymen) some profit; and these were a pair
of such sharp Spurs, and prevalent Motives in, and unto me, that I fear many
will either say, or think, that (according to the Proverb) I made more haste
than good speed.

Skillful Musicians are hardly induced to play, but unskilful Fiddlers will
scrape before they be entreated, verifying the old Proverb, None so bold, as
blind Bayard. Our great and learned Scholars (when they write) excuse
themselves in their Epistles Dedicatory, or to the Reader, that they were
unwilling to be seen in print, and were induced to write, being overcome with
the importunity of their friends, who would take no Nay: But I cannot thus
excuse my self (and therefore am so much the more inexcusable) for I was not
provoked, nor persuaded to make my self a public Spectacle to all English
eyes, by any friends, but willingly put my self upon it, deserving therefore
the whole blame for it. Indeed the first Movers of this work, was Gods glory,
and the Churches good; and therefore (whatsoever I deserve) let me entreat thee
(Christian Reader) not to take that with the left hand, which was given with
the right; nor sinisterly to censure what was dexterously meant, but to accept
it in good part. The Lord commanded, that those who could not bring gold, or
silver, or purple, or scarlet, or fine linen, Exodus 25.3, 4, 5.
for the making of the Tabernacle, should bring Goats hair, or Rams skins, or
Badgers skins; and promised, that their offerings should be accepted, not
according to the worth of the thing offered, but according to the ability, and
estate of the offerer. Yea, God is graciously pleased to accept of a Mite, at a
poor woman's hands, and of two Talents increase, where he gave no more:
Wherefore do thou imitate thy Father herein, taking thankfully, and blessing
God for a weak work, from a weak workman: And as Charity covers a multitude of
sins, so show thou thy self to be endowed with this Christian virtue, by being
more ready to cover, than discover a fault, more ready to excuse, than accuse
the faulty.

I will entreat thee briefly to take notice of two or three particulars, and so
I will commend thee to the Lords gracious protection, and this Book to thy
Christian consideration.

First, I do not propound in this work, to teach Teachers, or to instruct those
from whom I might receive instruction; for both the language, and method, and
matter, and style thereof show, that it was written ad vulgus, only for the
help, and benefit of the unlearned, although perhaps the wise may learn
something therein.

Secondly, I do not profess my self to be an Interpreter; and therefore I do
omit some Verses wholly, and some in part; picking and choosing what I
understand best my self, and what I conceive may be most profitable and useful
for thee.

Thirdly, a Gentlewoman having wrought in silk a curious Rainbow, another
viewing of it, thus carped at it, that the Rainbow should have all colors in
it, and this was defective, not having such or such: To whom the skillful
Sempster thus subtlely answers, That she saw but one side of the Bow, and
therefore those colors she could not see, she must suppose them to be on the
backside. Let me entreat thee (courteous Reader) to do thus, and if thou
meetest with any Question, or Objection slightly answered, to suppose that it
is either more fully answered in some other place of this Tractate, or is to be
handled more amply in the ensuing Evangelists.

Fourthly, some places I have handled herein something largely, either because
I have publicly treated of them, and so my Meditations have been enlarged, or
because my helps have been more therein. Now if in those places some necessary
things (as thou conceivest) be omitted; Remember, I saw only with my own dim
eyes, and conceived with my own dull heart; and if I had the eyes, fancies, and
understanding of all, the work certainly would have been by much better than it
is.

Fifthly, if thou meetest with any thing which thou can not understand and at
once reading over, then read it twice, that thou may understand what thou
read; for otherwise thou will not benefit thy self by thy reading: Legere
and non intelligere negligere est; A man reads no more to purpose, than he
understands. And if thou can not read the divisions, and subdivisions which
ever and anon thou shall meet withal, then repair to any Minister, or
Scholar, and they will easily teach thee.

Sixthly, if thou find any thing which dislikes thee, either in the Method,
or Matter; Remember, this is not the work of any of our Antistites, or mighty
men, or Worthies of our Church; but of one who is no old man in years, and but
a child in Understanding. And therefore (I say) if thou spiest any faults in
this untimely and imperfect Book (as many will be spied by seeing eyes) then
do with them as Appelles did who covered Venus mole with her finger that it
might not be spied. Where the bear cannot find Origanum to heal his grief, he
blasteth all other leaves with his breath: So many reject whatsoever they
read, if their expectation be not fully answered in every thing: But this is
no pious practice, and therefore I entreat thee not to imitate it; but make use
of that which is good, and labor to hide and conceal what is amiss.

Seventhly, refuse not to buy this Book because the Author is alive; for thou
needst not fear any additions at all. Epistle to the Reader.
Master Wilson having set out the Art of Rhetorique and in Rome being in danger
of his life for it, was entreated when he came home, to amend it, that it might
be reprinted: Whereunto he answered, That his Book should mend it self, if it
would, and make him amends for the danger he was brought into by reason of it;
for, for his part he would own it no more. So say I, take this as it is, for I
assure thee, having exposed it to the wide world, I will never receive it, nor
intertain it any more; but as Beggars do with their Brats, let it shift for it
self. Artificers are sometimes enamoured of their own works, as Archidamus of
his wooden Dove, Pigmalion of his Ivory Image, and Arachne of his wooden Swan:
resembling herein Narcissus, who d^ated upon his own shadow. Believe me, I am
none of these, for I am so sensible of my own inabilities, that none can
dislike what comes from me, more than I do in my self; neither have a lower
conceit of me, than I have of my self. When I call to mind, how the Arabians,
being stuffed with perfumes, burn Hemlocks; and in Hybla, being cloyed with
honey, they think it dainty to feed on Wax; and how the Eagle, fearing to
surfeit on spices, stoopeth to bite on wormwood: Then I confess I have some
hope that this Book will please some pallat; for we do so surfeit, and are so
cloyed with rare, learned, and Scholler-like Books, that plain ones, and
unlearned perhaps will relish with us.

Eighthly, although there be many defects which may occur unto thee in this
Miscellany, yet excuse them and me, thus; That as the Vine is more regarded,
that bears Grapes, than the Ash that has nothing but leaves; and the Deer
that increases the Park, more than the barren Do; and the Orchard that is
fraught with fruit, than that which has nothing but Bloom^* So it is better
for a man to have but a little Learning, and to employ it wholly to the good of
others, than to have much buried in him, and learned only unto himself: for
Bonum quo communius eo est melius.

Ninthly, some scapes thou will meet withal, which were committed through the
negligence and eversight of the Printer: but they are rectified and amended in
the end of the Book, in the Errata, whereunto I entreat thee to turn, when thou
find any fault, and having found the correction, to amend it with thy Pen.

Tenthly, and lastly, thou have a profitable Index at the end of the Book,
wherein thou may see what is contained in the whole Work, and how readily to
find out any of the things contained. Thus entreating the Lord to enlighten
thy understanding, that thou may understand what thou read; and to
sanctify thy affections, that thou may put in practice what good duties thou
understandest; I bid thee in the Lord,

Farewell. Thine in CHRIST JESUS, R. W.

CHAPTER X.
VERSE. 1. And when he had called unto him his twelve Disciples, he gave them
power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of
sickness, and all manner of disease.
He called unto him his twelve Disciples.

Disciples, not by their new, Apostles; that he might teach us, That Apostles
are not chosen, but only out of Disciples: or, that we must first be
Disciples, before we can be Apostles.



Four several times: viz. Mat. 4.18, etc. Mar. 1.16. Luke 5.10. Secondly,
when the twelve were separated from the other Disciples, unto the future
Apostleship, and were called Apostles, Mar. 3.13. Luke 6.13. John 15.16. Mat.
19.28, etc. Thirdly, when they were initiated into a particular office, and
sent only unto the Jews: and of this the Text speaks, as also does Mark. 6.7.
and Luke 9.1. Fourthly, when they were fully sent, by a perpetual ordination
unto the Gentiles; as Matthew. 20.19. and Mark 16.15. and Luke 22.36. and Acts
13.46. And thus we see how they were called, and sent by degrees.


Disciples, before they be Apostles? the servants of Christ, before they teach
others?



Sam. 19.20. and 2 Kings 2.3, 5. And Paul tells us how he was brought up
under Gamaliel, and how himself taught Timothy, Aquila and Apollo: yea, hence
it was that Universities were founded in those places where Christianity was
embraced. And therefore, those who despise Learning and Literature, are unfit
for the Ministry; neither savor of the Spirit of God.

And gave them power.





Chron. 29.12. James 1.17. John 19.11. Mat. 6.14. and 1 Timothy 6.16.

Romans 3.23.) being now so impotent, that we cannot so much as think a good
thought, 2 Corin. 3.5. And therefore it is evident that all power comes from
God: and the true way unto God, is,

First, to go out of our selves, and to confess and acknowledge that we have
no power nor ability at all unto any thing that is good: we should confess our
own naughtiness, and nothingnesse, and cast our selves at the feet of God, as
good Origin did, confessing that we are but unsavory Salt. Then

Secondly, let us beg, and entreat new strength from God; praying with David,
Teach (Oh Lord) my hands to war, and my fingers to fight.

Thirdly, it is evident that all strength is from

I. Preaching is unprofitable, without a calling, and sending from God, Romans
10.14. How can he preach (that is, profitably; or by his preaching beget faith
in you) except he be sent? And therefore except God shine in us, we cannot
enlighten, 2 Cor. 4.6.

II. Hearing is unprofitable, except God imprint, and infuse Faith in the
Hearers: for if the Word be not mixed with Faith, it cannot profit, Heb. 4.2.
Now it is God that both opens the heart, ( Act. 16.14.) and gives a blessing to
the Word, 1 Cor. 3.7. Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but God gives the
increase.

Fourthly, it is apparent that all power is from

To whom did Christ here give power?

To his Apostles, and in them to the Church.

What power did Christ give to the Church?

First, he gave a limited power, not absolute:

Secondly, he gave (...), authority unto them, Luke 9.1. Men can give the
former unto Men, but not the latter; that is, Authority, but not Power; but God
gives both.

I. He gives (...), authority over every hurtful thing, Luke 10.19.

II. He gives (...), Power: he promised it when he was ready to ascend up into
heaven, Act. 1.8. And he performed presently after; read Act. 3.12. and 4.33.
and 6.8. Romans 15.19. and 1 These. 1.5.

Thirdly, he gave a miraculous power, or power Acts 10.44. and 19.6.

To how many of the Apostles did Christ give

Unto all, to Judas as well as the rest: He called unto him his twelve
Disciples, (now Judas was one of the twelve, verse 4.) and gave them (that is,
all of them) power, etc.

Whence we may learn, That wicked Men Matthew. 7.22. and 23.1. and 1 Cor. 9.27.)
Balaam prophesies, and God often uses the Ministry, and service of wicked
Men; bad Ministers may strengthen the feeble hearts of the righteous, as the
stalk upholds the Corn; and yet when the Wheat is gathered into the garner,
with the straw, they shall be burnt in unquenchable fire.

Over unclean spirits, and to heal sicknesses and diseases.

They might cast him out, They might cure sicknesses and diseases,
Because Satan wrought in them.

Whence we may observe, That where evils are either brought, or continued,
there Satan is the cause thereof: for he provokes David to number the people, 2 Samuel 24. he tempts unto sin, that God may punish; he hinders sinners from
repentance, because he knows that would turn away wrath, and appease the anger
of God, Jonah 3.3. yea, sometimes he is the Minister of God to inflict
diseases, as we see Job 2. and Luke 13.16.

VERSE. 2. Now the names of the twelve Apostles are these; The first, Simon, who
is called Peter, and Andrew his brother, etc.
The names of the twelve Apostles.

Our Evangelist here intimates the degrees of the Apostleship; for in the
former verse, they were called Disciples, but here Apostles, after they are
called, that they may be sent abroad. But yet we see, that it is only these
twelve who are called Apostles, and not the seventy (although they were also
sent to preach the Gospel) for they are still called Disciples, Luke 10.1.

Ioh. 6.70. Mat. 19.28. and 1 Cor. 12.28, 29. and Ephesians. 4.11.



Those who maintain a parity, and equality of all Ministers: Indeed as
Noblemen and inferior Justices are equal; and alike, in regard of their
conjoynt charge, when they are joined together in Commission: so Ministers are
equal, in regard of the Ministry; but in regard of eminency and dignity, all
are not alike; for the degree of the Apostleship did excel the Disciples and
all others.

Jesus going up to Jerusalem, took the twelve Disciples apart in the way,
(Mat. 20.17.) And again, He called his twelve Disciples together, and gave them
power, etc. Luke 9.1.

Disciple, is a general name unto both: for Apostles and Disciples, are not
membra dividentia, but Genus and Species; for all Apostles are Disciples, (as
was showed in the former verse) but all Disciples are not Apostles: And hence
our Savior sometimes calls the twelve, Disciples, (Luke 9.1.) and sometimes,
Apostles, Luke 9.10.



First, the name Apostle is used diversely, namely;

I. Sometimes (...), for Christ; consider the Apostle, and high Priest of our
profession, Hebrews 3.1.

II. Sometimes extraordinarily: thus S. Paul is called an Apostle, although he
were not one of the twelve, yet because he was extraordinarily called by Christ
to the work of an Apostle.

III. Sometimes the word is used generally, for all those who labor in the
work of the Ministry: thus Titus is called an Apostle, and also the rest who
were employed in the Lords work: Whether any enquire (says S. Paul) of Titus,
or our Brethren, they are (...), the Apostles of the Churches, 2 Corin. 8.23.
And thus Epaphroditus is called (...), The Apostle of the Philippians, Philip.
2.25.

IV. Sometimes the name is used abusively, They that boast are false Apostles,
deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, 2 Cor.
11.13.

Secondly, although the name Apostle be thus When it was day, Jesus called unto
him his Disciples; and of them he chose twelve, whom he called Apostles, Luke
6.13. where we see the name Apostle distinguished from Disciple, and given as
proper, unto the twelve.

The Apostleship, or place of an Apostle, is extraordinary;

First, it does not seem that the place of an Paul show many extraordinary
callings, and places, and things in others, besides Apostles, 1 Cor. 12.28, 29.
yet he omits them all, Ephesians. 4.11. speaking there only of ordinary places,
and yet even there Apostles are mentioned. But

Secondly, the best rule of perpetuity, is Use,

I. In the Apostles, there were some things which were extraordinary; as to
work Miracles. And

II. Some things ordinary; as to govern Churches, to call Councels, to
determine of Controversies, and points in difference, Act. 15. Now although the
first were peculiar unto themselves, yet the second is communicable unto
others; that is, principally to those whom God has raised to greater
eminency, and dignity in the Church.

. 2. The first Simon, who is called Peter.

How many names had this first Apostle?

Three; namely, 1 Simon, Staplet. s. Mar. 3.) or obedient. 2 Peter, a petra,
from a Rock; namely, either from Christ, or from his confession of Christ,
Matthew. 16.18. 3 Cephas, a Rock, or a stone, Ioh. 1.42.

When was he first called Peter?

Andrew unto Christ, Ioh. 1.40. Neither

Andrew, from mending the Nets, Mark 1 16. But

Mark. 3.13, 14.

Mar. 6.7.

Because it is here said, primus Petrus, The first, Peter: the Papists collect,
(though falsely) That Peter was the Prince of the Apostles, and that he was
Primate of them, and had pre-eminence above them: And they object for the
proof of Peter's pre-eminence, many things; namely,

Peter was the first that confessed and acknowledged Christ to be God:
therefore he is the Prince of the Apostles.



He that first confessed, and acknowledged Christ to be God, is the chief of
the Apostles.

But Peter first confessed, and acknowledged Christ to be God.

Therefore Peter is the chief of the Apostles.

The first proposition they prove not, either because it is too hard to do; or
else because to prove the truth thereof, is to overthrow the second
Proposition, which they fight mainly for.

The 2d proposition is false, That Peter was the first who acknowledged Christ
to be God. For

First, he was acknowledged by John Baptist; Behold the Lamb of God, Ioh. 1.36.

Secondly, he was acknowledged by Andrew; We have found the Messiah, the
Christ, Ioh. 1.41.

Thirdly, he was acknowledged by Philip, before any confession from Peter, that
we read of; We have found him, of whom Moses in the Law, and the Prophets did
write, Jesus of Nazareth, Ioh. 1.45.

Fourthly, he was most plainly acknowledged by Nathaniel; Rabbi, Thou art the
Son of God, thou art the King of Israel, Ioh. 1.49. And therefore, if the Major
of this Argument be true, then the Minor is false: and if the Major be false,
then the Minor follows not from it, but is plain Nonsense. For if he who first
acknowledged Christ to be God, be the chief of the Apostles, then John
Baptist, or Andrew, or Philip, or Nathaniel, are rather than Peter. Now if this
Major be false, That he that first confessed and acknowledged Christ to be God,
is the chief of the Apostles; then this is true, That he that first confessed
Christ to be God, is not the chief of the Apostles: to which, add their
Minor, and the Conclusion will be this; Therefore Peter is not the chief of
the Apostles.

Fifthly, Peter's confession is made in the name of all the Apostles, or the rest
of the Apostles did confess, together with Peter, Christ his Deity; as
appears by the Plural number, We believe, and are sure that thou art that
Christ, the Son of the living God, Ioh. 6.69. If we consult with Cyprian,
Hilary, and Beda, concerning Nathaniel, they will tell us, Eum agnovisse
Christi divinitatem: That he acknowledged Christ's Deity. If we ask Augustine
and Primasius, what they think of him; they will tell us, Confessionem eand^m,
quam Petrus diu postea professus: That his confession of Christ was the same
with that which was made by Peter, long after. See Fulke against Rhem. S. Mat.
16.18.

Sixthly, I might take the Papists first Proposition; and from thence (by
adding, and proving this second, That the devils confessed Christ before Peter)
deduce a horrible, and impious Conclusion: but I forbear it.

Secondly, they object again, Peter is called Cephas;

This is too great audaciousnesse and presumption, in divine things, (quidlibet
e quolibet) any thing of any thing, to prove any Tenet by any Text: but it is
here inexcusable, to wrest that which the holy Ghost has expounded; and to
call that a Head, which he calls a Stone, ( Ioh. 1.42.) and to make that a
Greek word, which is a Chaldean.

Thirdly, they object again, He is called Peter; Mat. 5.1. and Mar. 3.13.

First, it is uncertain when he took this name Peter. But perhaps

I. It was included under Cephas, which was given him, Ioh. 1.42. Because the
one signifies a Stone, and the other a Rock. Or

II. Perhaps this name was imposed upon him, when he was called with his
Brother Andrew, to be a Disciple of Christ, Mat. 4.18. Or

III. Perhaps afterward, when he made his confession of Christ, Mat. 16.18.

IV. But I care not to grant what they desire; viz. That this name, Peter, was
given unto him when the Apostles were ordained; because it may seem so from
Luke 6.13, 14. where it is said, that Jesus chose twelve, whom he called
Apostles, Simon, whom he also named Peter, etc.

Secondly, he was then called Peter, (Ad distinguendum that he might be
distinguished from the other Simon the Canaanite.

Thirdly, there is a difference between Peter Petram, a Rock; because Petra
either signifies Christ, 1 Cor. 10. or Peter's confession; as many of the
Fathers expounded it.

Fourthly, if Peter be not the Rock it self (as Rev. 21.14. Ephesians. 2.20. and
1 Pet. 2.5, etc.

Fourthly, Maldonat objects here, That Judas is Peter was named first, because
he was the best of all, and most worthy.

First, it is no plausible arguing from a Traitor

Secondly, grant it, that Judas was the most unworthy, Peter the most worthy,
in regard of age, or eloquence, or a grace in ready speaking, or the like; yet
this is nothing to the purpose, because we speak not of intrinsicall dignity
and worthiness, or eminency of parts, but of authority and power.

Chrysostom be to be believed before Maldonat; for he says, That Judas is not
named last of all for his wickedness, but perhaps because he was last called
of all the Apostles, or because Christ placed him so; and that, neither in
regard of dignity or power, but of order. For it is requisite and necessary, in
all troops or multitudes, that there should be a first and last.

Peter, (...), the First, in this verse: this is the objection of Bellarmine,
lib. 1. de Pontif. cap. 18. and of Stapleton. s. Peter is named first, and that
by all the Evangelists; who, although both Mark, and Luke vary from Matthew,
in the placing of some of the rest, yet all three name Peter first: whereby it
is apparent that he is first, in regard of dignity and power.

Peter is named first: therefore he is the chief, follows not; for Priscilla
is not better than her Husband, because she is first named in the Text, and
Aquila after her, ( Acts 18.26.) S. Paul himself saying, that the man is the
woman's head, 1 Cor. 11.3.

Theophylact interprets) has reference to his brother Andrew, who was called
before, and Peter after: for these two Brothers were (...), the two first that
were called.

Peter only is? Let them give a reason of it, without begging the question.

Revel. 21.19. the twelve Apostles are compared to twelve precious stones,
whereof the Jasper is the first; but Exodus 28.20. where the twelve precious
stones are named, which should be set in Aarons Breast Plate, the Jasper stone
is the last. Now if the Jasper, for the dignity thereof, do signify Peter in
the Apocalypse; how then is it placed last in Exodus? And therefore we may here
say with Origin, who thus writes of the order of the twelve Patriarchs;
Sciendum est quod in singulis locis, etc. Hom. 17. in Genesis It is to be marked,
that every where, where the Scripture makes mention of the Patriarchs, there
is great diversity in the order: for there is one order observed in their
nativity, ( Genesis 29.) another in their going down into Egypt, (Genesis 46.)
another when they are blessed of Jacob, (Genesis 49.) another when they are
numbered to do any thing in the wilderness, ( Number. 1.) another when the Land
of Canaan was divided. After the same manner, when the twelve Apostles are
named, they are not always set down in the same order; as follows by and by.

Stapletons (alleged also by Bellarmine, lib. 1. de Pontif. cap. 18.) that
Peter every where is named first, though the rest be not set down always in
one order. I answer, so is Reuben the first named of all the Patriarchs, in
those five several places noted by Origin, in the former answer; he is the
first borne, first enters into Egypt, first blessed, first numbered, first
divided; yet Reuben for all this, was not the chief among the Patriarchs:
neither by this reason, is Peter the greatest among the Apostles.

Sixthly, Peter is not always named first; for James is named before him,
Galath. 2.9. And when James, Cephas, and John perceived, etc. Two shifts
Bellarmine has for this; the first is gross, the second is good.

I. He denies the Text, saying, It should be read Cephas, James and John: but
this is gross, to cut a knot, which he should, but cannot untie. Or

II. He says, James is read first, because he was Bishop of Jerusalem: this
reason is good, because hereby he directly overthrows himself; for if James be
mentioned first, because he was Bishop of Jerusalem; then at Jerusalem, Peter
was not before James, but next unto him; and consequently not Prince of the
Apostles.

Thus also his Brother Andrew is named before him, Ioh. 1.44. and he not named
first, before the rest, but only with the rest, Mat. 20.24. When the ten
(whereof Peter was one) heard this, they disdained.

Seventhly, Peter is named first, because he was Hierome says, asking the
question why Peter was preferred before John; Aetati delatum est, quia senior
erat: His age was preferred, because he was the elder Lib. 1. Advers. Iovin.
.

Eighthly, the Catalogue of the twelve Apostles, Theophylact, who says, (...),
Indifferenter sic recenseri; nulla dignitatis vel potestatis ratione habita.
The holy Ghost names the Apostles indifferently, not having therein any respect
either unto their dignity, or power. Vides non ex dignitate nominatos, quia
Iacobus ante Iohannem Chrysostom. s.
; We see the order of dignity is not observed in the reckoning up of the
Apostles, because James is named before John. Ne quis ob hoc (quod Prius
nominatur) primum faciat Petrum P asm. s.
. Let none think Peter to be the chief of the Apostles, for this reason,
because he is named first of all.

Ninthly, I conclude and confess, that there Sed ordinis, potestatis,
confessonis, non honoris Ambro. s.
. But it is of order, not of power; of confession, not of honor: and thus we
grant Peter to be Chief of the Apostles.

Sixthly, and lastly, Maldonate upon this verse, Peter is called here (...),
First, absolutely, and none are called the second, or third; therefore First
does not denote a Primacie or Precedencie, but only an Order. For if any had
been called second, he might then have rather seemed to have been inferior
unto Peter, who is called first: as the second in the kingdom or the next unto
the King, is inferior unto him.

Corinth. 15.47. And yet the first is not the chiefest, or most honorable, or
of most power, and dignity; for the first man is of the earth, earthy: but the
second man is the Lord from heaven: And therefore the Jesuit may as well prove
hence, Adam to be more worthy then Christ, as Peter to be more worthy than the
rest of the Apostles Pareus. s.
.

VERSE. 5. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying, Go not
into the way of the Gentiles, and into any City of the Samaritans enter ye not.
Go not into the way of the Gentiles.



Way is taken Math. 5.25. and 7.13. John 14.4. Secondly, sometimes by the way
of the Gentiles is meant, wicked manners, and vain customs; Read Psalm.
1.1.6. and 10.5. and 14.3. etc. Ioh. 24.23. and 34.11.21. Esa. 59.7. etc.
Ierem. 10.2.3. Thirdly, sometimes by the way of the Gentiles, is meant, the
ways, or paths, by which men went unto the Gentiles. As Ierem. 2.18. Esa.
7.3. and 9.1. and 11.16. And thus it is taken in this place.




Ephesians. 2.12.14. etc. and 4.18.

Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and therefore the Israelites were called the people
of the Covenant, Psalm. 110.2. Esa. 2.3. Mich. 4.2. yea hence Christ is called
the Minister of the Circumcision. Romans 15.8. etc. And the Oracles of God are
said to be committed unto them, Romans 3.2. and 9.4.

Math. 28.19. and Mark. 16 16.
.

salvation is of the Jews, (Romans 9.4.) And that the Gentiles partake of their
spiritual things, Romans 15.27 1 Cor. 9.11.
.

Galath. 4.4.) and therefore God as yet suffered them to walk in their own
ways Acts. 14.16.
.

Romans 9.12.25 Yea hence it is said, that it was necessary the Gospel, should be
first preached unto the Jews, Acts. 13.46.

. 2. Into the Cities of the Samaritans enter ye not.

Why does not our Savior say here as before, enter not into the way of the
Samaritanes, but into

First, perhaps it was, because the Gentiles being more remote from them, they
must necessarily Go not into the way that leads unto the Gentiles. But the
Cities of the Samaritanes were nigh at hand, wherefore he says, enter not into
them. Or

Secondly, perhaps it was, because he could not prohibit them the ways and
paths of the Samaritanes; being situate betwixt Judea, and Galile, (John 4.4.)
Gualt. s. and Joseph. Bell. Iud. 3.2. And therefore our Savior says, enter not
into their Cities, and not go not into their ways, for they could not avoid
that when they went too and fro betwixt Judea and Galile.

Why does our Savior speak here in the singular enter ye not into the City of
the Samaritanes?

First, some think that here is Numerus pro the singular number for the
plural.

Secondly, Erasmus thinks our Savior to speak

Thirdly, others say (and Erasmus does not Samaria it self.

Fourthly, but there were other Cities besides Samaritanes, as appears plainly
John. 4.5. And therefore the meaning plainly is this, that the Samaritans must
not be taught, which Inhabited those places, which once belonged unto the ten
Tribes.

Here we may observe these few short particulars namely;

First, that the ten Tribes were separated from the other two under Jeroboam.

Secondly, that Samaria was built by Omri, 1 King. 16.24.

Thirdly, that it was made the head of the ten Tribes.

Fourthly, that it was depopulated, and the inhabitants carried into captivity
by Hoshea, 2 King. 17.

Fifthly, it was destroyed by Hircanus, and reedified by Herod, and called
Sebaste. Joseph. 13.18.

Sixthly, who these Samaritanes were, follows by and by.

Why must not the Samaritanes be taught, or preached unto? was not the promise
made to the twelve Tribes?

Four reasons may be given hereof. To wit,

I. Because they were Apostates. M.

II. Because they were odious to the Israelites. N.

III. Because they were not Jews at all. O.

IV. Because thus the rejection of the Jews is justified. P.

M. First, M Answer. 1.
the word must not be preached unto the Samaritans, because they had relapsed,
and fallen from the profession of the true Religion; and that

I. Under Jeroboam, (1 King 12.28. etc.) and all his successors until Hoshea.
And

King. 17. Whence we may learn, that those who forsake Religion, shall be
rejected and cast off; when the Church had married an harlot (Gomer) the issue
was Lo-ruchama, and Lo-ammi, Hos. 1. The meaning is, that when any particular
Church shall fall from God unto Idols, from the worship of the Everliving God,
to the service of false Gods, and Idolatry; that then they shall be no longer
the Lords people, nor pityed of him, or made partakers of mercy by him. We see
this in Ephraim, Hos. 13.1. and 14.1. And in the parable of the Vineyard which
must be let out unto other Husbandmen. The end of all Gods Ordinances, is to
bring us unto Religion, and to make us subject thereunto: For this end we were
separated, Tit. 2.14.
elected, called, 1 These. 4.8.
and created Ephesians. 2.10.
. And therefore we need not go to search the secret will, and hidden decree of
Gods predestination; neither must we too much press or enforce the words of
an external Covenant; but we must examine faithfully, whether we have addicted
our selves unto Religion, or separated our selves from it.



Peter, I have prayed for thee, that thy faith should not fail, Luke 22. This
should remember, that the Covenants which God makes with a people or nation,
are always conditional, as is evident, Romans 11.22. yea he will rather raise
up Children to Abraham of stones, than have wicked Children, Math. 3. For
although the promises were made to Israel, yet not to Israel according to the
flesh; as we see by the rejection of Ephraim, Hos. 13. and Judah, Ezeck. 16 And
therefore the Church of Rome, in stead of boasting of promises which wrestedly
are applied unto them; they should examine, whether they be not separated from
the true Religion? namely;

I. Whether the authority of the word of God, (with them) be whole, and sound,
or corrupted rather by their false expositions, and wicked additions of
Traditions, which they equal with the Scripture, and hold as available and
sufficient to build an Article of faith upon, as the word?

II. They should enquire if they have not diminished, and lessened the merits
of Christ, as insufficient to save us from punishment, without our own humane
satisfactions.

III. They should examine, if most palpably they have not given the worship due
only unto God, to Idols; and set up the abomination of desolation in the holy
place?

IV. They should mark, if they have not invented other sacrifices, besides
Christ, by which they hope to be saved; as the Church treasure, and the Popes
pardon, and merit of their own works, etc.

V. They should consider if they have not diminished, and lopped off an
essential part of a Sacrament from the Church; taking away from their Laity
the Cup, although the contrary was both plainly prescribed by Christ, and
practiced by his Apostles. If they consider these and many more things, wherein
they have degenerated from the primitive Church, they will have small cause to
boast.

Secondly, they err here, that boast of their Romans 8.30. 1 Cor. 6.11. Thus we
have the first reason, why the Apostles must not preach to the Apostate
Samaritans.

N. Secondly, the word must not be preached to Samaritanes, because they were
odious to the Israelites; according to the woman's speech, The Jews have no
commerce or Communion at all with the Samaritanes, John 4. And hence the
Samaritanes would not receive Christ into one of their Cities, because they
perceived he was going to Jerusalem, Luke 9.53. And the Jews thought that they
could not disgrace Christ more, than by calling him a Samaritane Ioh. 8.49
. So inveterate was the hatred betwixt the Jews and the Samaritanes.

Why were the Samaritanes so odious unto the

First, because they being Gentiles, possessed King. 17.

Secondly, the Jews hated them, because they

I. Under Jeroboam 1. King. But

II. More under Salmanassar; for he brought in amongst them, five Nations, or
five several sorts of Heathenish people, with their household, and Country Gods
Joseph Antiq. 9.14.
, or rather seven sorts of Idolaters (2 King 17.) who ceased not from their
Idolatry, though they were extremely punished with Lions.

Thirdly, the Jews hated the Samaritanes, because Ezra 41.2.10. Nehem. 41.
etc. Yea when the Jews were in affliction, Joseph Antiq. 9.14. and 11.4.8.
the Samaritanes denied that they were Jews, or any thing of kin unto themv.

Fourthly, the Samaritanes were hateful unto Pentaten^h, or five Books of
Moses, Carthus. s. And

Fifthly, because in imitation of the Jews Temple Samaritanes built one in
Garizim: which was founded by Sanballat, in the time of Alexander the great,
and dedicated to Jupiter the defender of strangers, 2 Macch. 6.2. and Joseph.
Antiq. 11.7, 8. And about this the woman disputes with Christ, John 4.20. Our
fathers worshipped in this mountain, and ye say that in Jerusalem is the place
where men ought to worship: Now the reason why they thought that God was to be
worshipped in this mountain, was this, because Jacob erected there an Altar
unto the Lord, ( Genesis 33.20.) And because Simeon, and Levy, and Judah, and
Issachar, and Joseph, and Benjamin, stood upon this mountain Gerizzim, to
bless the people when they came over Jordan, Deuteronomy. 27.12.

Genesis 15.14. Psalm. 129.5. Exodus 23.22 Deuteronomy. 33.29. Esa. 29.7. and 41.11. and
60.12. Ierem. 12.14. Acts. 7.7.



Deuteronomy. 32.9. etc. Psalm. 17.8. Zachar. 2.8. and 12.2.3.9. and 14.12. Judge.
5.31. and 2 King 19.22. Esa. 49.25. Joel 3.2. Philip. 1.28.

Egone ausim vel joco lacessere. August.

Saul persecuted, and opposed the Professors, and profession of religion, Act.
8. And yet he was no Reprobate.

Tim. 1.13.



Accusando, by accusing of them unjustly of any crime.

Deridendo, by deriding and scoffing them for their religion.

Impediendo, by hindering the progress of Religion, and their progress in
Religion, by taking away in toto, or lessening in tanto, the preaching of the
Word.

Odiendo, by hating them in heart. And thus we have the second reason, why the
Apostles must not preach to the Idolatrous Samaritanes.

O. Thirdly, the word must not be preached to the Samaritanes, because they
were not Jews at all, but Gentiles; for all the Israelites were carried
captive (2 King. 17.6.18.20.23.) and all the Cities were replenished with
Heathens, either by Salmanassar, (2 King. 17.24.) or by Esar Haddon, 4.2.
Against this it will be objected, that they profess themselves to be
Israelites, John 4.20. yea at the least, they were mixed with Jews: for in
such cases, when they led any Cities into captivity; they were wont always to
leave some, and to reserve some remainders of the true Inhabitants, as Ierem.
52.16. and 2 King. 24.14. and 25.12.

Ier. 52.16. And therefore where no such thing is expressed, we are not bound
to believe it.

Secondly, they do not seem to be mixed; and that,

I. Because none knew the external worship of God, (2 King. 17.26.) As
appears by this message sent to the King of Assyria; The nations whom thou
have removed, and placed in the Cities of Samaria, know not the manner of the
God of the Land, etc. And

II. Because the King of Assyria upon this message sent one Priest unto them,
to instruct them, 2 King. 17.28.

Thirdly, their professing of themselves to be Antiochus Epiphanes, then they
said that they were not Jews, Joseph. Antiq. 9. 14. and 11. 8.
but Sidonians v.

Fourthly, the Samaritane woman speaks unto Ex professione, non origin, that
they were of the seed of Jacob, or Joseph, by profession, but not by descent
and lineage.

P. Fourthly the word must not be preached

VERSE. 6. But go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
Who were these who are here called Israelites,

The word Israel is diversely taken; namely,

First, generally for the twelve Tribes, before Ieroboams time, Deuteronomy. 4.20. and
9.26. Esaias 8.14.

Secondly, for the ten Tribes under Ephraim and Samaria; and this is frequent
with the Prophets after Ieroboams time.

Thirdly, sometimes for the people of Judah and the two Tribes, 1 King. 12.17.
Esa. 1.1.3. and 4.2.3. and 5.7. Zeph. 3.14. Zach. 1.19.

Fourthly, Israel sometimes signifies the Elect, and Predestinate nation, and
people, and thus it is taken diverse times in the Epistle to the Romans.

Now it is taken in this place in the third sense, for Jerusalem, Judah,
Benjamin, and the Levites there; and not in the first or second acception,
because (in the former verse) they were forbidden to go unto the Samaritanes;
nor in the fourth signification of the word, because then all the Jews should
have been permitted, and many who were elected among the Gentiles, and so
Samaritans prohibited and debarred of the Word.

How can these be called Israel? For

I. The name was given unto Jacob, and derived

II. After the twelve Tribes were divided into Ten and Two; the name Israel was
given to the ten; and the two Tribes, Judah and Benjamin were called by the
name of Judah, or Jews. And

III. There were by many more, in the ten Tribes, than in the two; for as
Ephraim was the greatest, so Benjamin was the least. And therefore how can the
people of Judah, the two Tribes, be called Israel?

Cor. 10.18.) and this is frequent in the New Testament. But this seems not,
because then all the Elect among the Samaritanes and Gentiles, should be denied
the word of God.

Judah, in a double regard; namely,

I. Because it is the name of the Covenant; but the Covenant was made with
Judah, Zeph. 3.15. And

II. Because the ten Tribes were carried into captivity; and if any remained,
they were polluted with Idolatry among the Heathens: whence we may learn,



First, not multitude; for evil men and Heathens may be as the sand by the
Seashore Romans 9.27.
.

Secondly, not glorious names and titles: for All are not Jews that are so
called Apoc. 2.9
.

Thirdly, not outward prerogation: For To the Jews were committed the Oracles
of God: and yet they were rejected at last for their disobedience, Romans 3.1.2.
and 9.4.6. and 10.3.



Sam. 16.8.



Zion, Jerusalem. Hence observe,

Romans 16.18. Jude 19. Yea hence profession and society are joined together,
Heb. 10.23.25. The truth hereof more particularly appears thus.

First, the Church is but one house, yea one body. And

Secondly, Union and Unity is a sign of the true Church, Act. 5.12.13. and
1.14. and 2.42. and 4.32.

Thirdly, Union is a sign of our union with our head, 1 John 1.3. And
therefore Christ wishes it, and prays for it, John 17.11.22.





First, general, in profession this is mentioned, Heb. 3.1. and 4.14. And

Secondly, particular, in the worship of the Temple: for the Lord loves public
assemblies.





Is all kind of separation evil, and to be avoided?

First, wicked men must be severed from the assemblies Ier. 15.19. Ephesians.
5.7.11.

Secondly, we must go out from among wicked Esaias 52.11. and 2 Corinthians.
6.14.17. and Revel. 18.4. And this is blessed, Luke 6.22.

Thirdly, but we must not separate our selves Tim. 2.14. yet it is, not from,
but into the society of the Church, 1 Pet. 2.

Secondly, those who refuse the holy worship Psalm. 68.26. and 96.6. and 100.4.
and 111.1. and 122.1. and Act. 2.46. and 1 Corinthians. 11.18. and 14.34.

Why were the Apostles sent unto Israel to

First, because Christ would have it so; or that Romans 9. Whence we may learn,

That God directs, Ad placitum, whither he himself lists, Act. 14.2. and 16.6.
And the reason hereof is, because by sin, death is due unto all, and pardon
or mercy unto none, except it be of mere grace and favor: Now the preaching,
and Ministry of the Word is the way unto salvation; and therefore God gives it
(and justly may) to whom he pleases.

What is here required of all men?

First, those unto whom God has not sent the

Secondly, those who through Gods mercy

I. Confess and acknowledge the great goodness of God, in sending it unto
them. And

II. They must remember, that they are to give an account for the Word, which
they are made partakers of; for God expects fruit from such: and woe be to
those who frustrate his expectation, Heb. 6.7. etc. And therefore such must
examine,

First, If they deride, and mock the Word which is sent unto them, Act. 19.9.
Or

Secondly, If they kill, and persecute the Preachers of the Word. Or

Thirdly, if they be hardened, obstinate, and rebellious, refusing to hear,
Romans 10.20. Or

Fourthly, if the Word heard, be not mixed with faith, Heb. 4.2. Or

Fifthly, if they begin in the Spirit, but end in the flesh, Gal. 3.3.
Certainly heavy is the account which those have to make, which show forth no
other fruit of Preaching than these.

Secondly, the Apostles must go now only to they might have no exception
against him, saying, He sent his Disciples to the Gentiles and Samaritans, who
were thought by the Jews, to be most vile. Hier. s.

Ergo leni phrasi demulcet: Oves (non sponte errantes sed) seductos-perituros,
etc. And hence he calls them Sheep, but not such as wilfully wander; but such
as are seduced, and led aside, and ready to perish.

Judea, as in Palustra, that they might afterward be more fit to endure the
lists of all nations. Christ s. hom. 33. And

Hilar. s.

Calv. s.

Acts 3.25.) to whom the promises were made, ( John 4.22. Acts 13.26. Romans
9.4.) And as yet the Kingdom of Heaven (as Ambrose sings in his Te Deum) was
not opened to the Gentiles: neither was to be opened, until Christ pronounced
Consummatum est, It is finished: for the Gospel was to be published to the
Gentiles, when the partition wall should be broken down, which yet stood
betwixt the Jew and Gentile; the breaking down of which partition, was
signified, when the vail of the Temple was rent asunder at the time of Christ's
passion. Thus this gate of the Kingdom of Heaven was opened unto the Gentiles,
two manner of ways; namely,

I. By the Resurrection of Christ. Calvin. s. Ioh. 4.4. and Ambros. s. Mortum
-- resurrexit.

II. By the obduration of the Jews, Romans 11. And therefore it was necessary
(says Saint Paul) that the Word of God should first be preached to the Jews:
and when they would not receive it, then to offer it to the Gentiles, Act.
13.46.



Mat. 13.31.) and as a holy lump, ( Romans 11.16.) And would certainly have
endeavored to do, as Christ's commands Peter, namely, being converted, to
convert their Brethren, ( Luke 22.) the Gentiles.

VERSE. 7. And as ye go, preach, saying, The kingdom of heaven is at hand.
. 1. And as ye go.

From these words many things are by many collected; namely,

First, some collect hence the office of an Evangelist, or Preacher of the
Gospel, to wit, to go from place to place, and not to remain or abide always
in one place, as we now do.

Secondly, others deny this, and that for these reasons, viz.

I. Because the Churches are every where now established: and therefore it
becomes not us (like begging Friars) to go preaching up and down.

II. Because this (to go from place to place) is the work and office of an
Apostle, and not of an ordinary preacher of the Gospel.

III. Because it is unworthy the office, and place of a preacher of the Gospel,
to go up and down begging for his meat, as the Mendicants do.

IV. Because Ministers must expect a command, or calling, sending, or at least
a permission from that Church wherein they live.

Thirdly, (as ye go) we may rather collect, That the preaching of the word, is
not to be limited to a few places, but to be extended unto all, Mark 1.38. This
was the fire that Christ came to kindle, Luke 12.49. And this was meat and
drink unto him, to preach, publish, and propagate the Gospel, John 4.34.

What is here required of Ministers?

To snatch, and lay hold upon every occasion,

First, our Church should send us to preach and plant the word in some
foreign place of heathenisme: as they did, Acts 13.3, etc. Certainly if Rome
had not caused a corrupt Religion to have been preached in India, she had
deserved praise for sending preachers thither. Or

Secondly, whether the reverend Prelates should allow Sermons upon the
weeke-dayes (as has been in diverse Shires, principally in Yorkshire, in the
time of that famous Prelate, Bishop Matthew) at those Churches which have no
settled preachers. Or

Thirdly, whether occasion extraordinarily offer it self: Now in all these
cases we must willingly and readily offer our selves to preach and promulgate
the Gospel: If our Church would send us abroad, we must go; If our Prelates
would permit us to preach to those upon the week day, who have no preaching
upon the Lords day, (nor unto whom we can then preach in regard of our own
particular charges) we should not be backward, but every one in his course
helpful, and ready to uphold, and further it. If we should be entreated (when
we are provided, and not employed) either by a Pastor, or his people, to
preach, we should not lightly refuse it. If any extraordinary occasion should
invite us to preach, we should not decline, but embrace it: That is, if a
Minister should come to a ^^ll congregation upon the occasion of some
Baptizing, or Marriage, or Burial, or Fair, or the like; if he were provided,
and permitted, it were Christian-like done to preach: For when Christ saw a
multitude, he began to preach, Mat. 5.1. upon which words Musculus observes,
Quando datur frequens congregatio excitantur Ministri ad concionandum. And thus
Peter, Acts 3. and Paul, Acts 17. take occasion to Preach Christ.

Certainly, if

First the obedience of the Church be observed, that we have a commission, or
at least a permission to Preach from the Church wherein we live. And

Secondly, if the rule of decency be observed. And

Thirdly, if scandals, and giving of just offenses be avoided: Then the word
may be preached always, and every where, in season, and out of season, 2 Timothy
4.2. both because it is the word of God, and seed of salvation; and also
because herein we imitate our Lord Christ.

Preach.

We see here that lost and wandering sheep must be reduced, and brought home
again: and that by the Preaching of the word, to teach us,

Romans 1.16. and 16.25. and 1 Corinthians. 1.18.21. Titus 1.3. But more plainly by
these particulars, namely;

First, because as God gave his word, so he gave also Preaching ( Romans 10.8
and 1 Pet. 1.25.) and Preachers, Ephesians. 4.11.

Secondly, because God forbids those to Preach, who are not sent, Romans 10.15,
etc. or not called, as Aaorn was, Hebr. 7.

Thirdly, because God blesses, and assisteth those whom he calls, and sends:
that is,

I. He enables them by his grace in some measure, for that great calling;
making them able Ministers, 2 Cor. 3.6. and 4.6. And

II. He blesses their labors with good success, making them profitable, and
powerful, for the reducing of lost sheep unto Christ, Acts 2.47. Romans
15.29. and 1 Corinthians. 3.6, etc. 2 Timothy 4.17.

Fourthly, because where he will not have those who go astray, to be reduced,
and brought back, there he denies the word, Amos 8.11, etc. Acts 16.6. and
19.9.

Fifthly, because still those who are converted, are converted by Preaching.
Read the places in the margent Acts 2.41. and 4.4. and 8 6.35, etc. and 10.34
etc. and 11 19.20.26. and 13.42 etc. and 17 11. Object.
.

But it may here be objected, This is but a temporal precept to preach the
word: and therefore it is not the means now of bringing us home unto Christ.

antecedent: because it is not a temporal precept, but an eternal; continuing
from the beginning to the ending: as may be thus proved.

First, God himself preached diverse ways, and after manners, unto Adam,
Abraham, and Jacob, Heb. 1.1.

Secondly, God has enjoined, and commanded the Prophets to preach unto his
people, Esa. 40.9. yea to lift up their voices, and reprove them, Esa. 58.1.

Thirdly, the Lord sanctified John Baptist in the womb, for this end, that by
preaching he might bring many children unto their fathers, Mal. 4. Luke 4.
Matthew. 3.1. etc.

Fourthly, Christ himself preaches, yea spends his time wholly in preaching
and working of miracles, Matthew. 4.17. and 9.35. and 11.1. Ephesians. 2.17.

Fifthly, here he commands his Apostles to preach to the Jews, and the lost
sheep of Israel.

Sixthly, afterward he makes this precept concerning preaching, general for
all people, Matthew. 28.20. Go and teach all nations; and promises to be with
them, and to assist them, Mark 16.16.

Seventhly, and to the Churches which are established, he has given Pastors
and Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11. unto whom he has committed the care of his flock,
Acts 20.28.

Eighthly, yea this he has ordained until the end of the world ( Ephesians. 4.13.
etc.) and his second coming, 1. Tim.

Who are here to blame?

First, those Pastors who being called unto Paul enforced himself to preach,
and did strive therein, ( Romans 15.20.) because he knew that a woe belonged unto
him if he did not preach, 1 Corinthians 9.15.

Secondly, those are here faulty who neglect,

I. Through tediousness, and wearisomnesse: this is so common, as nothing
more; men usually are so weary of the word, that they slight and contemn it,
Amos 8.11. Or

II. Through an opinion of another Spirit: or as though the Spirit of God would
teach them without the word. Indeed it is said, that the faithful under the
Gospel shall be taught of God, Ierem. 31.32. but this is by his word, and the
preaching thereof, as was showed in the proof of the point. Or

III. Through curiosity; except the word preached be sweetened: Here

First, hearers are to blame, who having itching ears, despise sound doctrine,
loving, and liking only quaint, and rhetorical, and humane learning.

Secondly, speakers, who vaunt themselves, or seek only for praise, and
applause, by their acute, neat, and eloquent discourses? Not like Paul, who
desired only to preach in the demonstration of the Spirit: Nor like Peter's
preacher, who must speak as the Oracles of God, yea so as that God in all
things may be glorified through Jesus Christ 1 Pet. 4.11.
.

Thirdly, they are very faulty here, who hinder Matthew. 23.13. and Acts 14. For
they still withstood, and hindered the word of God, and the preaching of
Christ: And this is too great a fault now in our days, and places: For

I. Some dissuade others from the preaching of the word: as the Papists, and
Seminaries do.

II. Some forbid others the preaching of the word: Now these are either masters
of families who will never, or very seldom suffer their servants to come to
Divine Service, or Sermons: or else idle Ministers, and dumb dogs, who neither
will, or can teach their people themselves, nor suffer them to go where they
may be taught: This is as much as in them lies, to hinder them from conversion,
Christ, and salvation.

III. Some calumniate, detract, and slander the godly Ministers of the word,
that so their mouths may be stopped, and they hindered from preaching.

Iere. 51.9. Luke 5.5.

preach?



First, that preaching is a work publicly to be performed. And



That the chiefest office, duty, and work of a Minister, is publicly to teach
his people the Christian faith: here two things might be distinguished, namely;

First, Quomodo docendum? how must they teach? they must teach them publicly;
not secretly, John 18.20.
but on the house tops, Matthew. 10.27.

Secondly, Quid docendum? what must they teach? they must teach the doctrine of
faith, and the mystery of the Gospel, Romans 6.25. For thus did the Apostles,
Acts. 2.29, etc. 3.13, etc. and 8.5.35. and 10.36, etc. and 4.10, etc. For
herein is perfected, and performed the promise of God, that the world should be
enlightened by the preaching of Christ, Luke 2.32. Romans 10.18, etc. And hence
salvation is called knowledge, John 17.3.





First, some private duties, namely,

I. To watch, attend, and be careful over their flocks, Acts 20.28. Hebr.
13.17.

II. To admonish them lovingly alone, 1 These. 2.11.

III. To reduce and bring home those who err and go astray: For although to
admonish an offender, and to labor to reclaim him, be a Christian office,
general, and common to all Christians (as appears by these places, Coloss.
3.16. and 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. Heb. 3.13. and 10.24.) yet the Ministers are
principally, and more particularly obliged and tied hereunto, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12.

Secondly, some public duties there are also required of Ministers, beside
public preaching; namely,

I. To pray for them, Act. 6.4. And

II. To administer the Sacraments unto them, Matthew. 28.20. And

III. To reconcile, and make up breaches, between those of their flock: and
to labor to compose jarres, and to quench all sparks of grief. And

IV. To confute those errors, and false opinions, which their people hold.

V. To use the power of the Keys, whether unto binding, or loosing, as just
occasion offers it self. But

VI. Chiefly Ministers must exhort, 2 Timothy 4.2. and publicly admonish, 2 Pet.
1.12. etc. and 3.1. And therefore often, to Doctrine is added Exhortation, (
Act. 2.38.40. and 3.19.) But the Principallest of the two is the declaration of
the mystery of Christ, and godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16.

Who are here to blame?

First, those who neglect the preaching of the

Secondly, they are faulty here, who excite, and stir up the affections
without knowledge; for Paul labors, that the Colosians may be first rooted,
grounded, and established in the faith, Colos. 1.9.10. and 3.16. I will not
here dispute, whether the Judgment should first be informed, or the affections
awakened? For certainly, as faith and Repentance do mutually beget one
another, and are reciprocally begotten; so does knowledge and affection: And
yet there is a sort of knowledge, which seems to be first; because Ignoti
nulla cupido, a man cannot love that which he knows not: And again, the
affection being inflamed, kindled, and excited, does draw us to a more sublime,
and inward knowledge.

VERSE. 8. Heal the sick, cleanse the Lepers,
. 1. Cleanse the Leper.

Why is the Leper here separated from the sick? Heal the sick?

First, this was not because the Leprosy was an Sick. Yes, the Leprosy it
self was not incureable.

Secondly, but Sickness and Leprosy are here separated, because they differ
in signification: For

I. Sicknesses signify the weakness of the mind, and the want of health in
the heart. But

II. Leprosy is condemned as an impure thing, by God; and therefore such must
be extruded out of the Congregation of the faithful: And therefore it is said
here, Cleanse the Leper: but Heal the sick; to teach us; that,

First, in sickness we receive strength from God, and are freed from the
weakness and infirmities of the soul; and corroborated, both in our
understanding, affection, and obedience. And

Secondly, that in Leprosy, we are received, and restored unto the love of
God, and the assemblies of the Saints.

Freely ye have received.

Our Savior here commands them to give freely, because he has sent them, and
given power unto them freely; imitating herein Kings, who are wont to adorn
their Ambassadors, and Embassages, for the praise of their own munificence,
and bounty: For Christ,

First, in his Legates, shows his munificence; and that thus, viz.

I. He does not adorn or honor them with nobility of stock, or rich attire,
or precious stones, or send them in Chariots, bravely accompanied, and attended
upon; because his kingdom was not of this world, John 18. And therefore his
chief Ambassadors, John and Peter had no no gold to give the poor man, ( Act.
3.) so poor were they themselves. But,

II. He sends them adorned with the power of Miracles, enabling them to do
those things, which no other could do, Luke 10.17. and Act. 3.

Secondly, Christ shows his glory, and bounty in his Embassage; for,

I. By his Ambassadors, he offers great gifts unto all; namely,

First, temporal, and spiritual health; he offers to dispossess, heal,
cure, recover, and restore the dead unto life: Kings are wont to cast money
abroad among the poor: but what Monarch can heal the sick? or cleanse the
Leper, or raise the dead, or cast out devils, as Christ here gives his legates
power to do?

Secondly, but all this, and more than these, are nothing in comparison of that
kingdom of heaven, and eternal felicity, which he offers in the life to
come; for gold is corruptible, but this joy is perpetual, and endures for ever
1 Pet. 1.24.
.

II. These great gifts, Christ by his Ambassadors offers to give freely, if we
will but come unto him: How great, and immense therefore are the riches of God?
Ephesians. 1.18.

Christ by these words, Quia accepistis, because ye have received, would teach
us,

James 1.17.





First, it comes aliunde, from some other; and therefore from God, who is the
Author, and giver of every good thing; the cattle on a thousand hills, being
his, ( Psalm 50.) yea, he giving and governing our nature so, that in him we
live, and move, and have our being, Act. 17.28. Or

Secondly, it is in our selves; and is either

I. Evil in it self, as the concupiscence of the heart, Genes. 8.21. Or

II. At least good, but corrupted; like wine in a poisoned cup. And therefore
it is clear, that these good things which we have, comes from God.

Who are here to be taxed?

First, those who expect heaven, and hope for Romans 5.5.

Secondly, those are egregiously faulty, who

I. Temporal, as riches, honor, knowledge; and the like: Or

II. Spiritual, as grace, faith, sanctity; and herein the Papists fail: For

First, none prohibits men to labor and endeavor, after a greater measure of
sanctification: for this is commanded positively by Saint Paul, Phil. 4.8. Nor

Secondly, is it forbidden men to rejoice, in the testimony and evidence of the
holy Ghost in their soul: But only

Thirdly, we are forbidden to ascribe that to our merit, or to boast of that,
which we have received: What have thou (says the Apostle) which thou have not
received: and if thou have received it, why do thou boast as though thou
had not received it?

Why does God give good things unto us?

Not to hide in a Napkin, but to improve,

First, does God give us riches, and possessions? then we must be liberal,
bountiful, and free unto every good work.

Secondly, has the Lord raised us to dignities, and honors? then we must use
our countenance, friends, and place for the good, and patronage of the
profession, and Professors of the Gospel.

Thirdly, has the Lord endued us with prudence and wisdom? then we might
counsel, advise, and instruct others; so helping those who are weak in
understanding, knowledge, policy, and the like.

Fourthly, has the Lord enriched us with Religion? then we must so shine
before others, that by our light of a holy life, they might be brought out of
darkness, Mat. 5.16. 1 Pet. 2.12 and 3.1.
.

Fifthly, if the Lord has bestowed upon us Confidence, Boldness, and
magnanimity; we must not use it (as many do) for our own revenge, or only in
our own private affairs, but also, and especially, for our brethren, or the
public good.

How did the Apostles receive Gratis, Freely?

First, in respect of the gifts; because they

Secondly, in respect of the price: because the

Thirdly, in respect of the persons; because the Apostles were n^ better then
others; yea rather of the most abject sort, 1 Cor. 4.9. Whence we might observe;



First, otherwise grace were no more grace, Romans 11.6. Yea,

Secondly, otherwise God should not be the only Fountain of good; for all
merit is good; and therefore if merit came not from God, he should not be the
only Fountain of all good.

Freely give.

Freely?

Adverbie non Adjective, and signifies two things, namely,

First, that they must do the work for which they are sent cheerfully, and
with alacrity; laboring in season, and out of season, 2 Timothy 4.2

Secondly, that they must do their work without any price, or compact: Whence
we may learn,

Cor. 11.7. and 1 Cor 9.15.18. etc.



Charismata, and therefore they must not be, bought and sold: That which
belongs unto Gods house must be free; because his house must not be made a
house of Merchandise, John 2.16. Zachar. 14.21.

Inter Patronum and Latronem, betwixt a Patron of a Living, and a Thief? For
they both often steal men's money out of their purses; and many Patrons dispose
of their livings to them who will best reward them, or to some unworthy friend
or Kinsman. These are thieves to the Church of Christ.



But because some may think Simony a stranger to this place, therefore I do
not enlarge it.

Freely give, because ye have freely received.

Fryth, Tyndall, and Barnes; who were deceived with a temporal precept, as
follows by and by.



I. Because S. Paul himself urges Stipends, and that by diverse strong and
convincing reasons.

II. Because Christ himself seems to revoke this Precept; when he said, But
now he who has a Purse, let him take it, and likewise his Scrip, Luke 22.36.

Thirdly, if our Savior speak of preaching, viz.

I. That we preach the Word cheerfully, and willingly: And

II. That we be contented with necessary things, not seeking for great
things: yet in the mean time we are not prohibited to live upon the Altar, 1 Corinthians. 9.14. Vide Carletonum and Tillesleyum.
Idque honest non sordide. Bucer. And hence the Tithes were consecrated and
set apart for the Priests, both before the Law, and now after the Law, g.

Fourthly, but certainly this charge was given

Why must they work Miracles freely? or

First, the Text says, because they have received

Secondly; whether it was lawful for them to

I. In healing to aim at their own gain and profit. And

II. To covenant for such a sum for such a cure. But

III. Whether here they were forbidden to take any gratuity, which was neither
thought of, nor contracted for on their parts, but freely offered, and given by
the party, or friends of the party cured; I confess my self unable to
determine. Indeed, I do not think that ever the Master took any recompense
for any of his cures; nor do I read that the Apostles did for any of theirs,
and I know how Elias refused to take such a gratuity from Naaman: and therefore
I leave this to the intelligent Readers opinion, to conceit of as he finds
most ground for.

Simon Magus would have given money for this power; that upon whomsoever he
should have laid his hands they might have received the gifts and graces of the
holy Ghost: but Peter rejects him, and sharply reproves him for it, because it
is a work more worth then all the money in the world. II. That only is to be
sold, whereof a man is master; but the Apostles were not lords and masters of
these gifts, but only dispensers 1 Cor. 4.1.
. And therefore it were unjust to seek gain by that which is not their own.
III. In bestowing of these graces they must carefully avoid, shun, and
abstain from gifts, lest the grace of God in them should have been vilified:
For by the free magnificence of God who freely gives such power unto his
servants, and by the contempt of riches, and gifts in the dispensers of these
graces, men will be the more provoked to admire those charismata, and graces,
which are given, and to glorify God the free giver of them, and to believe
that doctrine which is sent from such a Lord, and brought by such servants. Men
usually are wont less to admire, or esteem those things which they know how
to esteem: and therefore the Apostles must freely give them, because people
should the more highly prize them; and see and acknowledge, that no price was
able to purchase and procure them.

VERSE. 9.10. Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses; nor
scrip for your journey, neither two coats, nor shoes, nor yet staves: for the
workman is worthy of his meat.
Provide neither gold, nor silver, etc.

Provide?

Ne possidie, possess not; but this is improper: For 1. The word here used
(...), signifies both, but more commonly to provide, procure, or get. It is
easier (says Oly^^. ^
Demosthenes) (...), to keep those things which thou have then (...), to
procure those things which thou have not: and hence Aristotle calls those
Arts whereby men provide and procure food, Arts (...). 2. Our Savior does not
here command a long custom, but an action, or a law, which is by and by to be
revoked and repealed, Luke 22.35. And therefore the word is unfitly rendered by
the vulgar translation, Possess not.

De non possidendo, of not possessing gold, silver, etc. As the Votaries, and
Franciscanes corruptly would have it. Or 2. De non accipiendo, of not receiving
gold, silver, etc. of their hearers; lest they should seem to preach for their
own gains sake, and not for Gods glory, or the salvation of his people Hier.
s.
. Non dicit ne accipiatis vobiscum, sed ne possideatis (aliunde) Chrysostom. s. Or
3. De non portando, of not carrying about with them these prohibited things.
And this I think to be the true meaning of the place. For, first it is most
like that the Apostles themselves now had no money about them, neither used to
carry any; because Christ bought and procured all things needful for them all;
and Judas carried the bag, and Peter had not Didrachmum (which is not above a
shilling at the most in our money) to pay Tribute withal. Secondly, our
Savior forbids them to go home, to their own houses to provide these things;
for although they have them not now, yet they shall be supplied when they want.
For the workman is worthy of his hire, Luke 17.31.

. 2. Neither gold, nor silver, nor brass, nor scrip,

To this Christ answers no:

Chrysostom observes here the order observed by Christ: he does not first say
carry nothing with you, but first gives them power to work miracles: and then
afterward bids them not to be careful for their journey; he gives unto them,
before he will burden them, that so they may the more confidently, and
assuredly, hope, and trust to be provided for.

How many sorts of money are there, that

There are diverse sorts of money, Ita crescunt nummi decrescunt mores: as money
increased, manners decreased. Aetas Saturnia, aurea, Iovialis, argentea, Nostra
ferrea: Saturn lived in a golden age, Jupiter in a silver, but we in an iron
age: thus resembling Daniels Image, Dan. 2.32. Secondly, money is differenced
in regard of its estimation: for in one and the same time there was a double
use of money; namely, 1. Ad divitias, a man was esteemed rich who abounded in
gold, silver, and jewels; and the estimation they had of these long before the
incarnation of Christ, yea even in the times of Moses, Abraham, Jacob, and
David. 2. Ad emptiones quotidianas, for the buying of necessary, and daily
provision, brass, and iron money was sufficient: And thus in our days, gold
and silver are prized, and yet copper farthings are current, for small things.
Now our Savior here forbids both these, that the Apostles might learn to
depend upon the providence of God, even for necessary things, and not caring
for the morrow.

Scrip? or why does he prohibit the carrying of one?

Bias says (Omnia mea mecum porto) that he carried all his riches about him.
The Philosophers who contemned all worldly things, yet had necessary things in
a scrip, as have also the Hermits, and Franciscanes. David had a scrip when he
was a sheepherd 1 Samuel 17.4.
, and it seems that they used of old to carry corn in scrips 2 King. 4.42.
.

But this our Savior prohibits his Apostles, because they must not care at all
for to morrow, but rely and depend upon God even for necessary things.

Nor shoes, agree with Mark 6.7, 8. where it is said be shod with Sandals?



Two, for the words here may be read thus, ye shall not carry two coats, nor
two (that is, two pair of) shoes: in Saint Mark it is spoken plainly of what
they wear only.

Provide; for the meaning here of our Savior is this, take what shoes ye
have, along with you, but take no care (as Travelers are wont) to provide
better: And hereby also he would have them to depend upon the providence of God.

Nor a staff, agree with Mark 6.7. where plainly he permits one?

Bacculus a Baccho, because drunken men used to stay themselves by sticks.

Ad sustentandum, for the supporting and staying of him who carried it: Thus
Jacob had a staff, Genesis 32. and Elisha, 2 Kings 4. and Moses, Exodus 4. to stay
themselves upon, and to ease them in their journeys. This staff is called
sometimes Virga, and sometimes Bacillus (from whence he who used such an one
was called Imbecillis, quasi invitus bacillo) and this kind of staff was
frequently used, and is by S. Mark permitted, because it was a symball of
poverty. Read for this purpose these places. Exodus 12.11. and 21.19. and 2
Kings 18.21. Zach. 8.4. II. Ad propugnandum, there were staves for defense,
wherewith men did fight; and the Traveller defend himself from those who
offered any injury unto him: For the proof of this warlike staff, read
these places, 1. Sam. 17.40.43. Psalm. 23.4. Esa. 10.24. and 14.5. Ierem.
48.17. Ezech. 39.9. Hos. 4.12. Now this staff is here forbidden by S. Matthew.
Habentes auxilium Dei, cur quaerimus baculi praesidium? v They must not carry
these staves, Hier. s.
but trust unto the careful, watchful, and gracious protection of God.



First, some for the answer hereof fly unto Allegories, thus I. By the purse is
meant the provision or furniture of the Ministry, in which Zona, but yet must
not care for money. Hilar. s. II. By the scrip is meant care for outward or
secular things: and therefore we must avoid it, because if we care for them,
our hearts will be upon them. III. By not carrying shoes is meant, that he
walks safeest, who walks with a bare and naked conscience, for the holy land,
is not filled with the thorns of sin. Hilar. s. IV. By the staff is meant
worldly power. Non egent qui virgam, de radice Iesse. Hilar. s. V. By two
coats is meant simplicity, and sincerity of a Christian; who must not have a
heart and a heart, neither with a double garment, but must put off heresy and
impiety, the love of the word, and sin: and then put on the Lord Jesus
Christ, Romans 13.13. Ephesians. 3.16.

Secondly, omitting the foresaid Allegories, Ioh. 18.36. And II. That hereby
his Apostles might free themselves from all suspicion of covetousness. And
III. That hereby they might be freed from worldly ear, and not distracted from
their work.

For thus their Journey was made (as it were) so much the shorter, and their
work done so much the sooner, when they had nothing else to take care for.

IV. That hereby they might learn to lean and rely wholly upon the
protection, and providence of God, Chrysostom. s.

What is the scope of Christ, in the prohibition

First, to teach us, that worldly power does Rome, does show it to be
Antichristian: The Pope is carried upon men's shoulders, and Potentates must
kiss his Toe; yea, Cardinals are equal to Kings: These things, together with
the rituall pomp, and bravery they have in their worship and service, does
neither become the Apostles of Christ, nor Successors of the Apostles, nor the
Ministers of the Gospel: for Christian worship is to be adorned spiritually,
John 4.24. And they only stand in need of outward pomp, who want the Spirit,
and inward grace.

Secondly, our Saviors scope was herein also

What must not the Ministers of Christ care

First, they must not care for great things, Ierem.

Secondly, they must not care for necessary things,

VERSE. 11. And into whatsoever City or Town ye shall enter,
Enquire who is worthy] What is meant by Worthy? or who is worthy?



I. Of those who are high, and honorable; because these are to be respected.
Or, II. Of Statesmen, or those who are prudent and politic in worldly things;
but Saint Paul overthrowes this, Romans 8.6.8. and 1 Corinthians. 1.26. Or III. Of
those who were rich and able to entertain them: And thus Erasmus understands
it, and renders it Idonei, but is justly taxed both for his translation, and
interpretation by learned Beza. Or IV. Of those who are bountiful, liberal,
hospitable, and given to entertain strangers: These indeed are truly called
worthy, but yet our Savior looks higher than these.



I. Some understand it, De merito congrui, of the merit of congruitie; but it
is not thus to be interpreted, because Christ came to call sinners, Matthew.
9.13. Yea, tells them that Publicans and Harlots shall enter into heaven
before the proud, and boasting Pharisees, Matthew 21.31.

II. Some by worthy, understand the humble, Beza.

III. Some by worthy, understand those, who receive them willingly, and
cheerfully, Muscul. s.

IV. Some understand here those, who are of a laudable, and praiseworthy
conversation, in whom the fear of God, and religion shines, and shows forth
themselves, Calvin. s.

Worthy, is a relation, and therefore we must seek forth his Antecedent, and
enquire who they are, who are esteemed Worthy? namely; either,

I. Those who are worthy of the message of peace, (the preaching of the Gospel)
which was brought by the Apostles: Now these were they, who received them
willingly, admitted and permitted them to preach readily, and heard them
cheerfully. Or,

II. Those who are worthy to receive, and entertain Guests, and such
Messengers, as these were: Now these were such, as were of good name, fame,
credit, and reputation, among their neighbors, with whom they dwell: And these
indeed the Text seems to speak of, because it is said, Enquire; that is, of
others, or of the neighbors. Hence then two things are very worthy our
observing; namely,

First, that we must so live, that our goodness may appear unto others.

Secondly, that we must enquire after peoples worthiness, before we guest and
lodge with them.

First, we must labor so to live, that the worthiness Luke 23.47. and Romans
5.7. Mich 6.8. Ephesians. 5.9. The observation plainly is this:

That we must so live, that we may seem worthy to the Church of God, and the
brethren of Christ: hence we are commanded to procure things honest before all
men, Romans 12.17. And to walk worthy, in regard of those who are without, 1 Timothy 3.7. and 2 Corinthians. 6.4. and 2 Timothy, 4.5. 1 Pet. 2.12 Phil. 6.
.

Why must our lives be thus perspicuous, and

First, because the promises of God are Deuteronomy. 12.28. Ier. 5.29. and Romans 7.16.

Secondly, because it is necessary, that the

I. In regard of our selves; because thus, and thus only, we approve our
hearts, and inward man, to be pure and upright before God: for the fruit shows
the tree; and the streams the Fountain, Matthew. 12.35. Galath. 5.22. And

II. In regard of our God, and religion; because hereby strangers, and those
who are without the Church, will magnify our profession, and honor that God,
whose name we profess, 1 Pet. 2.12. Matthew. 5.16. And on the contrary, if our
lives be wicked, we are a dishonor and shame to our religion, in regard of
the Gentiles, 1 Peter, 3.16. 2 Cor. 5.12.
.

Are works necessary? is it not sufficient to

Certainly, outward works of the life, Ephesians. 2.10. And therefore let none
say; if they have faith, they shall be saved: for although it be true, that we
are saved by faith, and not by works, ( John 6.29.) yet faith alone without
works, will not save us; as appears by Philip. 4.8. Deuteronomy. 6.18. Psalm 37.3.
where we are commanded to serve God in a good conscience. Now there is a double
Conscience, viz. First, of the person, 1 John 2.1. when we are assured of our
remission, reconciliation, and adoption, being able to say with Saint Paul, I
know whom I have trusted. But this alone is not sufficient for us, God himself
enquiring more then this of us.

Secondly, of the actions, when we are rich in good works, 1 Timothy, 6.18.
And this also God exacts at our hands, and expects from us; because the truth
of the other is to be confirmed by this, and faith is to be approved by works.

Whether is it necessary to shine before men,

It is, as it appears by Philip. 2.15.

That Light, or Fame, is twofold; namely, either Evil; now this is to be
avoided, and shunned; and that, both I. In doing that which is evil; according
to that of Saint Paul, The word of God is evil spoken of through your evil
works, Romans 2.24. And also, II. In doing that which is scandalous, and not
seeking Gods glory, and the peace of his Church, and the Edification of our
brethren, before our private ends, 1 Cor. 10.31. and 1 These. 5.23 Good, which
is to be procured; and herein are two things, viz. First, Res, the matter
thereof, which is either I. Toward God, as in Piety; for we must not be like
the Church of Ephesus, who fell from her first love Rev. 2.5.
, but we must labor that others may see our holy hearts, by our worthy
works, and our love and zeal, by our ardent profession. II. Toward men,
which is either, In Justice, and truth, wherein is required these things viz.
First, to do that which is aright, and to be injurious unto none, as 1 Thessalonians.
4.6. And, Secondly, to speak that which is true and right, neither respecting
the person of the poor, nor rich, Gal. 1.10. And Thirdly, to think, and love,
and hold the truth, Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, sed magis amica veritas;
Mercy, which does not consist in giving a crust, or farthing to a poor man,
(although the smallest alms are not to be despised, or neglected) but in the
bowels of compassion, and tenderness of heart.
Secondly, Modus, the manner thereof, which consists in two things; namely, I.
That all these things be done sincerely, as in Gods sight 2 Chro. 31.20.
, and with a perfect heart Esa. 38.3
. II. That they be done fervently, with all the heart 2 Chro. 31.21.
: Herein many things are included; namely, First, we must not be corrupted
with the wicked customs, or manners of those, with whom we live; but like Lot,
abhor, and hate the impieties, 2 Pet. 2.8. otherwise, we do not serve God
with our whole heart. Secondly, we must serve God Interpide, without worldly
fear; no apprehension, or fear of danger must daunt us, or detain us from
the service of the Lord; but like Daniel, the three Children, and Joseph of
Arimathea, we must boldly, and before men profess the Lord, otherwise we do
not serve him with the whole heart. Thirdly, we must serve the Lord perfectly,
in all things, Heb. 13.21. not parting of stakes with him. And, Fourthly, we
must serve him perseverantly, not being weary of well doing, Gal. 6.9.



And thus if we desire so to live, that the worthiness of our conversation,
may appear to the Church of God, and the brethren of Christ; we must take
heed, that we bring no evil report upon our selves; either by doing that which
is evil, or scandalous: And we must labor to procure a good report amongst
men, by being zealous in our profession, and holy toward our God, and both in
word, work, and thought, just and true toward all, and merciful and pitiful
toward the poor, and afflicted; yea, all this sincerely, (not in hypocrisy)
fervently (not key coldy) perseverantly, not by starts, or unconstantly; and
then the Lord will accept of us as worthy, to be made partakers of the
preaching of his Word.

Psalm 1.1. Prove. 1.15. Ephesians. 5.7.11.

First, wicked and profane persons. Secondly, heretical persons. Thirdly,
heathenish, and barbarous persons. Fourthly, excommunicated persons. Here
observe, I. That the two last are alike: the excommunicated person might be
unto us as a heathen. II. That the Gentile, or Heathen, is worse then the
excommunicate person; because we must refuse to converse with him but only for
a time (1 Cor. 5.) For upon his repentance he is to be admitted again unto the
Church, and unto the society of the Saints. III. But it seems, that for the
instant, or during the time of his excommunication, that the excommunicate
person is worse than the heathen man, because with such an one, while he stands
justly excommunicate, it is not lawful to eat; which is not prohibited in or
with a Heathen. But I enlarge not this disputation, because the present Text
speaks of the first sort of unworthy persons; namely, wicked, profane, and
scandalous men.


Why may we not familiarly converse, and associate

First, because as God is a jealous God, so those

Secondly, we must shun all familiarity with to justify them in their
wickedness, and so bring a woe upon our selves, Esa. 5.20. And therefore if we
desire to approve our selves to hate the corruption of sin, we must not love
the company of sinners.

Ioas was good as long as Iehojadah lived, and men learn goodness by
associating themselves with those who are good: And on the contrary, the
company of wicked men begets corrupt and wicked manners; As we see in Joseph
who learnt to swear by the life of Pharaoh.

Psalm. 133.1. But what union or concord can there be betwixt light and
darkness, good and evil?



Four: namely, Secondly, those who are not enormous sinners, neither show
forth any life or power of religion: namely mere carnal men. These are
unworthy to be made chosen of for intimate friends. Thirdly, hypocritical
professors, painted tombs: these are to be avoided and turned away from,
because they wear Christ's livery, and yet serve the devil. Fourthly, there
are sincere professors: These are most and best worthy of our love and society.








lingua jurare (as Eunius said) to swear or say that with our mouth which our
heart never thought; but because, First, promises of friendship, familiarity,
and intimacie, made unto any are to be understood, as long as he shall continue
holy, and religious: but if he turn to be irreligious or wicked, then those
promises are annihilated, and void. And, Secondly, because we are not of our
disposing, but of the Lords, whose wholly we are; and therefore it is not in
our power to make any league of friendship with the enemies of God.

Question 7. it may be demanded, If it be not lawful to associate carnal men.

There is a manifold society, Romans 12.

Secondly, mutually to help one another in our ways, and callings: or to
exercise the office of love and charity one toward another: And this is
necessarily to be done unto all, for in this sense, and respect, every one is
our neighbor, and so to be esteemed.

Thirdly, mutually to use the help one of another in our callings: this is
lawful, with this proviso, that we prefer the godly always when we can
have choice; that is, if a man cannot have the counsel and advice of a good
and godly Physician or Lawyer, he may then make use of a wicked: but if both
may be had, then the good is to be preferred: And so of all other callings and
trades, if we cannot be provided of good, we may make a shift with bad.

Fourthly, we must love others with a true heart; This Christ himself
requires of us in regard of our very enemies, Matthew. 5. Because this is the
root of all the former particulars, viz. a man will hardly live peaceably with
a man, except he love him: a man will hardly help him who is in want, and
necessity, or distress, except he love him: a man will hardly make use of his
neighbors help in his calling, or help his neighbor in his own, except he
love him. And therefore it is necessary that we should love others with a true
heart.

Fifthly, to receive others into intimate friendship and familiarity: or to
profess and acknowledge unto the world such or such to be our intimate, and
entire friends: And this is prohibited us in regard of carnal men.

But it will be here objected; Many things,

Secondly, the vicinitie, neighborhood, and brotherhood we have with them,
because they live near us, or they are of the same company, or calling with
us, and are joined unto us in some place or office.

Thirdly, the offer, and desire of friendship; they desire our acquaintance,
and familiarity, yea, they offer many courtesies unto us, and it is scandalous
not to requite these kindnesses. And therefore we hope we may be intimate and
entire with them, although they show but little religion in their lives.

If these coards tie us unto them,

First, some justify, defend, and maintain the sins of others: at least
connive and wink at them, or seem to approve, or assent unto them: But we
must not do any of these.

Secondly, some are silent when their friends



Thirdly, some slightly, and lightly tax the failings of their friends, but
quickly have done: but we must continue incessantly to inculcate into their
ears wholesome counsel and advice, until we have reclaimed them from their
wandering ways.

Fourthly, if we therefore desire (by reason of some other bond) to continue
the bond of amity with carnal men; we must thus labor to discharge the office
of faithful friends; namely, I. Speak, and reprove what we see in them amiss.
II. Do it candidely, and in love, and meeknes. III. But do it plainly, and
evidently, that he may know what it is we tax him for. IV. Do it unweariedly,
continue to hammer him with our reproves, until we have wrought him to our
will. V. If he will not hearken to advice, counsel, and reproof, then we must
cast off his acquaintance, and abstain from his society, at least familiarly,
and frequently.

Cor. 13.) And therefore why should I judge him to be an hypocrite; and for so
judging of him, reject his familiarity?





Cor. 13.8.



Pet. 4.8.) And therefore why should we shun any man's familiarity because he
has some sin in him?

Job. 3.9. to wit, do not give up themselves wholly unto sin, because the
holy Spirit is their guide and governor, Col^s. 3.15. yet II. They fall often,
and sin in many things; yea, III. They may remain for a time in some
particular sins; either First, through ignorance, or Secondly, through
carelessenesse, as David did in the matter of Bathsheba. And therefore these
things well weighed and considered, makes charity cover a great many of sins
in the faithful flock of Christ.

Secondly, but these sins are to be covered, neither Iustificando, by
justifying, either First, the sin; for that were false witness, condemned in the
Ninth Commandment: Nor Secondly, the person sinning, for that is a plain
respect of persons: Nor II. Acerbi increpando, by sharply reprooving the
reproover, or by recrimination: many when they hear their friends sin
reprehended, fly in the face of him that reproved him, laboring to disgrace
him, by ripping up some sin of his: but we must not thus cover our brethrens
sin. But III. Procurando, by procuring (in humility and modesty) pardon, and
a good opinion of our brother, by lessening, and excusing his sin, and by
showing the weakness of the flesh and corrupt nature, in the best men.

Thirdly, although we must thus cover our

Fourthly, if after such faithful and friendly

But profession and religion will be scandalized,

First, the Religion of God needs not the lies

Secondly, when any profess Christ or Religion

Thirdly, in such a case as this, the right hand Corinthians 5.5.) that so
other formalists may learn to amend.

VERSE. 12. And when ye go into an house, salute it.
We may observe here, that the salutations of the Jews were testified either
by words, or some humble gesture of the body.

First, by words, and then these were the usual forms, The Lord be with you,
or, The Lood bless you, Ruth 2.4. From the last of these, blessing is often
taken in Scripture for saluting. If thou meet any, bless him not; and if any
bless thee, answer him not again, says Elisha to Gehazi (2 Kings 4.29.) The
sense is as our English renders it, Salute him not. Sometimes they said, Peace
be unto thee: peace be upon thee, Go in peace, and such like: When ye come
into an house, salute the same; and if the house be worthy, let your peace come
upon it, but if it be not worthy, let your peace return to you. In this verse
and the next.

Secondly, by gestures; thus their salutations were signified, sometimes by
prostrating the whole body, sometimes by kissing the feet, ( Luke 7.38.)
commonly by an ordinary kiss X^noph. de institut. ^ v^. li. 1. g. ^7. and ^^.
p. 113.
. Moses went out to meet his father in law, and did obeisance and kissed him,
Exodus 18.7. Moreover, Joseph kissed all his brethren, and wept upon them, G^n.
45.15 This Saint Paul calls, an holy kiss, 1 Cor. 16.20. Saint Peter, a
kiss of charity, 1 Pet. 5.14. Tertullian ^ert. de (...) 1. l. 14.
calls it Osculum pacis, a kiss of peace. And these were kisses which a Cato
might give, and a Vestall receive.

VERSE. 13. And if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it; but if it
be not worthy, let your peace return to you.
If the house be worthy:

It may here be objected, that none are worthy; and therefore if the Apostles
must go to none but such, ^^ject.
they must go to none at all.



Ephesians. 4.1. Philip. 1.27. Colos. 1.10 and 1 These. 2.12.

Rei and Personae, a worthiness of the thing ( Luke 3.8.) and a worthiness of
the person.

Luke 7.4. and 1 Timothy 5.17. and 6.1.

word, and Messengers; here I might show two things, but I but name them;
namely,

I. That God does accept of the persons of the faithful, as though they were
worthy. Read Luke 20.35. and 21.36. Act. 5.41. and 2 These 1.5. Revel. 3.5. II.
That God does accept of the works of the faithful, Luke 3.8. Act. 26.20.





Secondly, some are accepted as worthy, and Matthew. 9. because he repented.
Certainly, this place speaks of both these. For, I. The Word is to be
received. And, II. It being received, does teach us how to repent, and what to
do. For the end of preaching, is to convert and repent, Matthew 4.17. Hence we
may note:

That the true worthiness of a Christian does consist in a ready receiving of
the Word, John 8.47. and 10.27. For Christ first offers himself unto us in the
Word, ( John 1.12.) And the end of giving the Gospel, is to frame us after the
likeness of Christ; and therefore we must let it have its perfect work in us,
Colos. 3.16. More particularly;

First, we must receive the Word when it is offered, John 10.16.27. Act. 2.41.
Not rejecting it as some do, nor seeking other ways besides it, as others do.

Secondly, our life is to be renewed by the Word, and we must be built up
thereby, ( Matthew. 7.24. etc.) And this is to receive the Word indeed, John
13.17. Act. 11.1.

. 2. Let your peace come upon it.] What is meant

First, love, and a familiar conversing; this is

Secondly, prayer for their peace; this is true

Thirdly, by your peace, may be meant the preaching Matthew. 7.6. This is true
likewise, but the word implies something more.

Fourthly, true peace is the effect of the Gospel

Against this exposition it may be objected, Veniat, let your peace come upon
it; and let your peace return unto you again.

Certainly,

To teach us, that the Gospel being received, Luke 19.9. Esa. 26.12. and 54.13.

How does this appear, for it seems otherwise;

First, God is called the God of peace, and the Hebr. 7.2.) and therefore they
who embrace his word and truth, shall surely have peace.

Ephesians. 2.14.17.) And the Gospel is called the Gospel of peace, Ephesians. 6.15.
because the Ministers of the New Testament preach peace, Act. 10.36.

Romans 5.1. And therefore the faithful, who are the only true Receivers of the
Gospel, shall certainly have peace.



Hos. 2.19.) with an everlasting covenant, Rom 8.38.

Ephesians. 2.19. yea all members of one body, Romans 12. and 1 Corinthians. 12. And
therefore they have peace among themselves: They are exhorted unto the love of
one another, 1 John, because love is the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.3. Certainly
the Church of Christ is no other then a family of love; for they have not only
sweet society among themselves, but also with Christ their Lord and head, 1
John 1.3. and 1 Cor. 1.9. yea such peace have the faithful receivers of the
Gospel, that we read of three thousand, yea five thousand, that had but (Vnam
d^mum-mensam-animam, Chrysostom. s.) One house, one home, one table, one soul, Act.
2.41, etc. and 4.4.32.

Romans 7.23. yet II. With their minds they serve the law of God, Romans 7.22.25.
and the peace of God bears rule in their hearts, Colos. 3.15. And III.
Although they be sometimes polluted by sin, yet they wash themselves with
the tears of sorrow, as David, Psalm. 51. and Peter, Matthew. 27. did: and then
by the Lord are restored again unto peace of conscience.

Psalm. 27. and 31. and 91. and 2 Timothy 1.12. and 1 John 4.18. And therefore
happy, thrice happy, are the godly embracers and receivers of the Gospel; who
have peace with God, and men, and their own consciences, and assurance that
(Malum qua malum) no evil, as it is an evil, can come unto them.



Examine these things. viz. Pet. 3.14. Secondly, whether our hearing have
united us, in love, unto our brethren, or not? Thirdly, whether does the peace
of God bear rule in our hearts, Colos. 3.15. Fourthly, whether is all fear of
temporal evils expelled out of our hearts, or not? Are we in dangers, as bold
as Lions, carefully avoiding perils, but cowardly fearing none? Certainly, he
who truly hears, and receives the preaching of the word, has peace within
himself, peace with his brethren, peace with his God, and assured hope of
protection and preservation from evils, as such.


VERSE. 16. Behold,
. 1. Be wise as Serpents] It is given as a rule by Medix significationis, and
have a double signification, a Translator must take heed how he translates: as
for example, Gnarum signifies subtle, or crafty, and also prudent or wise: and
therefore an Interpreter must take heed, that he does not give it the one
signification, when he should give it the other: It is said, Genesis 3.1. The
Serpent was Gnarum, now it cannot be translated, more wise than any beast of
the field, but more crafty. So Proverb. 1.4. It cannot be said, To give
subtlely, but wisdom to the simple; so in this verse it cannot be said, be
ye crafty as Serpents, but wise as Serpents. Remigius, s. says, That Christ
does very well admonish the Apostles, to be wise as Serpents, because Adam was
deceived by a Serpent; as if he should say, As the Serpent is crafty to
deceive; So be ye wise to deliver: He praised the fruit of the tree, but
praise ye the cross.

What is the nature of Serpents? and wherein

First, the Serpent is a creature more crafty then

Secondly, the Serpent will defend her head above Hierome says, it is, Quia
ibi vita, because her life lies in her head: and therefore, although she be
sore wounded in the body, yet if her head be whole, she dies not of her
wounds. So we should repose our substance, estates, fame, and life, and all to
danger; and loss, rather then suffer our head (Christ) to be harmed: now our
head is hurt by sin; for when we give way unto that, we dishonor our
Christ; and therefore we ought always carefully to avoid it, and rather the
loss of riches, reputation; yea life, then keep them by sin, because
Christians should prefer the greatest corporal mischief, before the least
spiritual evil: yea, lay down our lives, rather then suffer our Christ to
be dishonored: he that saves his life, shall lose it; but he that loses,
and lays down his life for Christ, shall find it; he that suffers his
body to be wounded, for the safeguard of his head, shall live, and not die; but
he that exposes the head to danger, for the safety of the body, shall die and
not live. He that will rather suffer then sin, and disease himself, rather
then displease his Lord, shall not be harmed by any evil. And therefore like
serpents we must labor to preserve our head whole, and entire, whatsoever
becomes of our bodies, because of our bodies, because our life lies in this our
head.

Ephesians. 4.24. Some writers, (namely, Isidor, Robanus, Dormisecur. de temp.
sermon. 5. and Anton. part. 4. Titul. 2. Cap. 5.. 1.) do express the kind of
Serpent, which is thus accustomed to do; and the time when she does it, and
the manner how she does it. I. Isidor says, that that kind of Serpent which
casts his skin, is called Coluber, a Snake. II. Concerning the time when this
is done, there is some question: For first, some say she casts her skin in
the spring time. Cromwell.

Secondly, some say it is when she finds herself to be loaded and burdened
with poison. Dormisee. s.

Thirdly, the most say it is when she finds her self to grow old and infirm.
Antonin.

Thus should we do, and herein intimate the serpent; namely, I. Cast off
sin, and the old man, in the spring of our years, and remember our Creator
in the days of our youth, Eccles. 12.1. We must give our best days, to him
that best deserves them, to wit, to God: and not as many do, who give their
youth to satan, and their age to God; their strength to satan, and their
weakness to God: their health to satan, and their sickness to God: yea, who
desire to dedicate their life to satan, and their death unto God. We must be
wise as serpents, who neither cast off their skins in Autumn, nor in Winter,
but in the Spring. II. We must labor to find and feel our sins to be a
burden unto us, and then strive to disgorge our selves of them: we must first
labor to hate, and loath them, and then endeavor to leave them: we must first
feel our sins to be a burden too heavy for us to bear, and then case our
shoulders of that load; as the serpent does discharge her stomach of her
poison when she finds it overcharged therewithal. III. We must, when we
feel our selves weak, and infirm, by reason of sin, labor to leave it,
and cast it off; when we find that our sins hang so fast on, and cleave so
fast too, that we cannot run the race that is set before us, Heb. 12.1.
when we find our hands so hard manacled by sin, that we can neither fight
the good fight of faith, nor work out the work of our salvation: when we
find our selves to be so low, and weak through sin, that we have no strength
to the performance of any thing that is good, then it is time for us, with the
serpent to cast off our old coat of maliciousness. IV. The manner of the
serpents casting her skin is this (according to Isidor, Dormis. Anton. and
Raban.) when she desires to cast off her skin, Then first, she abstaines from
meat for diverse days. And secondly, she eats a certain kind of bitter
herb. And thirdly, having eaten that, she bathes her self in the water. And
fourthly, having so done, he seeks out, and chooses a strait hole of a
firm stone; and violently entering therein, and passing through with great
difficulty, leaves his old skin behind him. Fifthly, and lastly, his old
skin being thus stripped off: he then lays himself in the warm sun,
that he might fortify and harden his new skin. This course must they take,
who desire to be renewed in their inward man; namely, First, they must beat
their bodies, and bring it into subjection, both by a corporal abstinence from
meat, and a spiritual abstinence from sin, 1 Cor. 9.27.

Secondly, besides fasting, they must eat the bitter and sour herb of
contrition, humiliation, and godly sorrow; mourning both for the sins already
committed, and also for the power of sin which lies in the soul.

Thirdly, having eaten this sour herb of true sorrow, we must then labor
that we may be washed with the tears of unfeigned sorrow, and bathed over
and over in that Jordan of Christ's blood, which is better then all the rivers
of Damascus to wash in.

Fourthly, if we desire that our youth, and strength may be renewed by grace,
we must go through that strait hole of repentance, entering thereby into that
firm rock which is Christ: or the stone of repentance through which we must
enter, must be firm and stable; that is, our repentance must be accompanied
with a firm and full purpose and resolution, never to return back again unto
sin: for the serpent having once entered, never pulls back his head, but
violently rusheth through though with pain and difficulty. Nihil prosunt
lamenta si iterentur peccata, etc. (August. de paenit.) Our sorrow and tears
for sin profits us nothing, if we return again unto our sins; for wounds
being iterated are more hardly and slowly cured.

Fifthly, having thus humbled our selves by fasting, and true godly sorrow, and
washed our souls with the tears of contrition, and not only repented us of
our sins by past, but fully purposed and resolved never to turn unto sin
any more: then we must lie in the sunshine of Gods grace, assuring our selves
that faithful is he who has called such unto him, and has promised that he
will receive them into favor, and pardon their former sins, and preserve
them from sin for the time to come, and enable them to serve him, as becomes
a new, and renewed creatures.

Fourthly, the serpent stops her ears at the Antoninus (Lart. 4. Tit. 2. Cap.
4.. 1.) says, she lays one care close to the ground, and stops the other
with her tail. Thus must we do; when the devil would seduce, allure, or
inchant us, by any wicked suggestions, or temptations, we must stop our ears,
and thoughts, and affections, lest being allured by his provoking temptations,
we should assent, and consent thereunto: and this we should do in regard of
the end of sin (which is signified by the serpents tail,) namely,
destruction: For the wages of sin is death, and the end of sinners damnation.

Ephesians. 5.15. Colos. 4.5.





Ophites, who because the wisdom of a serpent is here commended, and because
the brazen serpent in the wilderness was a figure of Christ: do therefore
ascribe unto a serpent all knowledge, and worship it, offering bread unto it,
and kissing it, keeping always one for that purpose alive. Epiphan. haeres. 37.



Augustine, the serpent has wisdom in bringing up her young, in the making of
her hole, in the getting of her food, in the healing of her wounds, in the
avoiding of things hurtful, in the foreknowledge of the change of times, in
the love of her fellows. And in these she is to be imitated.





There is a double wisdom, namely I. Arrogant wisdom, when men will
undertake to judge of those hidden, and secret mysteries, which God has
reserved unto himself; thinking themselves wise enough, to render a reason of
all the Lords dealings with men. There is, II. False crafty, and lying
wisdom, which is diametrally opposite; yea, an enemy unto Christian
simplicity, ( John 1, 47.) which must be without fraud, or guile. There is,
III. Cruel wisdom; Mortui non mordent, dead men cannot bite; and therefore
it is good to kill. Irish men never think a man slain outright, till his head
be off; and thieves never think themselves safe, until he be killed whom
they have robbed; because if he be once murdered, he cannot then accuse them;
whereas if such an one should live, he might bring them to the gallows. Our
Savior does not command us to be strong as Lions, and Tigers, but to be wise
as Serpents: and therefore this cruel wisdom is not allowed. IV. There is a
self confident wisdom, when men hide their counsels, and so craftily
conceal their wicked plots, that in wardly they boast, and rejoice, that they
shall prevail: these shall at last be discovered, and God in his appointed
time will infatuate their devices. Secondly good, and this is that wisdom, which
here Christ commands, and co^mends unto us.


What is this good wisdom, which

The properties of this good Wisdom are these; namely,

First, Mala intelligere, to see, perceive, and understand evils, and dangers;
for men must not be willingly blind, but learn to foresee evils to come.

Secondly, Malum non facere, mala ignoscere. Hier. s. to do evil unto none,
but to pardon and forgive those, who offend and injure us.

Thirdly, Suspicari, to suspect evils, from evil men; especially those who
hate us: for Christ himself (we see) would not commit himself unto the
Jews, Ioh. 2.24
.

Fourthly, Tacere, to keep our own counsel; for it is lawful to conceal
some truths, August. A man is not bound by his own babbling to betray himself;
it being the part of a fool to utter all his mind, Proverb. 29.11.

Fifthly, Evitare, to avoid peril, and not to run into the Lions mouth 1 Mac.
^.37.
. It is wisdom, says Hierome, s. Insidias vitare, to avoid the trap, gins,
snares and trains that are laid for us.

Sixthly, Patienter far, to endure patiently, and contentedly the evils which
lie upon us, Musc. s.

Seventhly, Scandalum non dare, so to live, that we give no offense, neither to
the Jew, nor to the Gentile, nor to the Church of God.

Eighthly, sincere profiteri, to profess Christ and religion, in sincerity, not
in show, in truth, not in hypocrisy.

. 2. Be simple as Doves.

What is meant by these words?

The meaning is, be innocent and harmless,

How many sorts of Simplicity are there? and

Simplicity is twofold; namely, First, least he should be hurt, and harmed by
any. Or Secondly, least he should be deceived by error, Ephesians. 4.14. Or
Thirdly, least he should be seduced unto sin, as Genesis 20.5. and 2 Samuel
15.11. II. Sluggish and idle, when a man does not labor. First, for knowledge
and understanding: as Hosea 4.6. Ephesians 5.15. And hence, namely from
ignorance comes errors, and therefore the Papists and some others, persuade
men to neglect hearing, reading, studying, and the means of knowledge, because
as he that is altogether ignorant of the true way may be persuaded to take any
path, and made believe by every man he meets, that every false path is the
right: so those who are ignorant of the divine truth, may be seduced, and
quickly led aside by any into humane errors. Secondly, that is called sluggish
and idle simplicity, when a man does not labor to strive, and wrestle against
sin, and his own corruptions. David bids us to commit our ways unto the
Lord, and and therefore what need we thus strive? Hebr. 12.4.
.




It consists in these four things, viz. Acts 2.46. He therefore who desires to
have this Dove-like simplicity, must not have a heart, and a heart; but must be
sincere and single hearted. Secondly, in a tender conscience, and a fear to
sin or offend God: He therefore who desires this Dove-like simplicity, must
be of a circumcised heart, who is sensible of the least sin, and of a
cowardly conscience who fears to commit the least evil; For this is the best
simplicity. Read these places, and to this purpose imitate the persons
mentioned therein, Genes. 39.9. and Job. 1.1. and 2, 3, Romans 16.19. and 1 Corinthians. 14.20. Phil. 2.13. Thirdly, in a single tongue: he therefore who
desires this dovelike simplicity must avoid all lying, and deceitful speeches,
and take heed of being double tongued. Job. 33.3. and 2 Cor 1.12 2 Cor. 11.^.
and Ephesians. 6.5.
. Fourthly, in a boldness unto that which is good; not being hindered either by
employments or dangers, or fear, but courageously, and confidently professing
and serving God. Read Act. 4.19. and 5.29. Pro. 10.29.


Is the Dove to be imitated in all things?

No,

First, negligence, and foolish curiosity: For while she looks about, and
turns her head deliberating whether to fly, the arrow, or shot meets with
her, before she fly away. (Greg. and Barth. Aug.)

Secondly, Pride; for while she admires her feathers of diverse colors about
her neck or breast, and trimmes, and picks them, so intending that, that she
intends not her own safety; she is often taken, and seized on by the Hawke,
(Plin. and. Barth.) We must not in these two things be like Doves, but must
take heed of delay, and pride, which are enemies unto saving health.

I. We must take heed of Pride, which is a dangerous enemy; for it makes us
unwarie, and spoils all we do, (Destruit omnia August.) When men begin to be
proud either of themselves, or their performances or parts; it makes them
careless of their ways, unthankful toward their God, and haughty and
disdainful toward their brethren: And therefore is carefully to be shunned,
the end thereof being (with Lucifer) to be cast into Hell.

II. We must take heed of Negligence, and Procrastination: many end their ends,
before they have resolved to begin them; and finish their life, before they
have thought of living. And therefore we must not defer the work of our
salvation, putting it off from day to day, but while it is said to day, make
ready our selves to undertake it, resolving that no labor, fear, or danger
whatsoever shall hinder us from it.

Wherein is the Dove to be imitated?

In the Dove are many virtues,

First, she does no evil or hurt unto any, but is,

I. Meek, without beak to hurt, or talent to tear, or Gall to plot or
imagine mischief, or intend harm to any; And therefore if we would imitate the
Dove; we must not be angry, or mischievous, or revengefull; for charity does no
evil Romans 13.20.
nor is angry 1 Cor. 13.5.
but is patient, and ready to remit. Many in their words, deeds, and lives,
show themselves more like Lions, Bears, Wolves, Dragons, Vultures, and furies
then meek Doves: but we must take heed of this, the end of these being
destruction. Ezech. 32.23. Ephesians. 4.32. Colos. 2.8.

II. She is is simple, or innocent without deceit; as in this verse; And
therefore in sacrifice she must not be divided. Genes. 15.9. Levit. 1.14 Thus
we must be true and free from lying, and deceit, every one speaking the truth
unto his neighbor from his heart. (Read Zach. 8.16. Ephesians. 4.25. Colos. 2.9.
and 1 Peter 2.1.) and laboring to be innocent and harmless in his life and
conversation: for God will protect the innocent, but discover and infatuate the
plots of the wicked, who craftily imagine evil against their neighbors.

III. She is humble building her nest in the rock, except some build or
provided a Dovehouse or other place for her to breed and remain in. Thus we
should be without carfulness for the things of this life, laboring that God
may be our Lord; and then, if he provide plentifully for us, or prosper us, or
build us houses, we must take it thankfully, and praise his name: but if
otherwise, we must be content to build in the rock, that is, to live by faith
in Christ, and to learn to want and to abound, Philip. 1.21. Colossians 3.3.

Secondly, she propounds good examples, or examples of good unto us for our
imitation: and that I. Toward God. II. Toward her self. III. Toward others.

First, the Dove is to be imitated by us, or an example unto us of a double
duty toward God: viz. I. She is a very loving creature, yea full of love: Thus
we should be sick of love (Cant. 5.8.) loving our God before and above all
things, and all other things for God, yea our neighbor, because a member of
God. II. She is very fruitful, breeding sometimes ten, sometimes eleven,
sometimes twelve times in a year: Thus we should stir to be fruitful,
bringing forth some good fruit unto our God, every Month in the year, every
week in the Month, every day in the week, every hour in the day, every minute
in the hour; like the trees of heaven, which yield fruit every month, Rev.
22.2. Thus we should be fruitful, but alas, for pity, for the most part, we
are altogether barren, thinking it well if we can but say, Negatively, That we
are neither Thieves, nor Murderers, nor Drunkards, nor the like, although we
cannot say Affirmatively, what we are, or what good we do.

Secondly, the Dove is an example unto us of a fourfold duty, in regard of her
self. For I. She is chaste; Conjugii fidem non violant Plin. 10.24.
: Doves do not couple with any, but with their Mates; Nec cum pluribus cocunt,
nec conjugium initum deserunt. Arist. They will neither wrong, nor change, nor
forsake one another, after they have made their choice; but continue inviolable
this bond of Love: And as they are chaste, so also they are pure in their food,
eating no unclean thing at all, (Hier.) but living only upon Grain. Arist.
Wherefore those are unlike Doves, who seethe the scum with the broth, (Ezekiel.
24.6.) and live impure and unclean lives; for we should labor that we might
be purged from all pollutions both of the flesh and spirit, and perfect
holiness in Gods fear, 2 Cor. 7.1. We should examine our selves, whether we
be Doves or Vultures, Lambs or Wolves, whether with Pigeons, and Dove-like
Peter, Acts 10. we let no unclean thing come into our mouths; or like Swine,
we feed grossly, and wallow filthily. Gualter applies this to superstition, and
not injuriously; for nothing is more impure and filthy in the sight of God,
than to mingle humane things with divine, as a part of Gods worship, Col. 2.18.
II. She is constant, keeping her own common Loat or Dove-house Plin 10.34.
; and although she do fly from it, yet she returns again, Genesis 8.11. Esa.
60.8. Thus we should remain constant in the profession and practice of
Religion, and never start aside, or separate our selves from it. III. She is
wary: Iuxta fluen^a manent Gloss.
, they remain near the water, ( Ergo columba dicitur a (...). Rhod.) that so
in the water they may see the shadow of the Hawke, long before he comes near
them: whence Solomon says, His eyes are as the eyes of Doves, by the Rivers of
water, Cant. 5.12.) Thus we should labor to prevent the craft and subtilty of
Satan, lest otherwise he circumvent us; he is a Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8. and watches
secretly for us, that he may devour us: Now the way to prevent this, is by
living near the waters, that so we may see him afar off. These waters are the
Word, which we must heedfully hear, and religiously read, because it is a
true glass wherein we may see our selves, and estates, and enemies, and
dangers, and the means and ways how to prevent them, James 1.23, etc. IV. She
is patient; for first, they are full of dangers, their young ones being robbed
and taken away from them, and themselves chased, and assaulted, and pressed
upon, both by Hawks and Men. Secondly, they are very fearful and timorous
creatures, seldom or never safe, but when they are in the holes of the rock,
(Hier.) and all their help is in the strength of their wings, and swift flying
away, ( Erasm. chil: 3.6, 48.) Ezekiel. 7.16. Thirdly, their mirth is mourning,
and their songs (as it were) sighs, and sad Ditties: whence the Prophets say,
that they have mourned as does the Dove, Esa. 38.14. and 59.11. Nahum 2.7.
Fourthly, yet they are unmindfull of all these, and builds their nests again,
where they built them before, although (sic vos non vobis nidificatis aves) her
former care was taken for others, and her young ones stolen from her. Thus we
should be like Doves, given to godly sorrow, because the end of this mourning
is mirth: yea, if the Lord afflict us, we should be Doves; that is, not labor
to free our selves by rebellion, or revenge, or deceit, or any wicked means;
for thus we should show our selves to be Hawks, and Kites, and birds of prey,
and not innocent Doves. We must be patient both because it is given us to
suffer. ( Philip. 1.28.) and because our sufferings shall be rewarded and
recompensed with an internal and incorruptible weight of glory Romans 8.38. and
2 Timothy 4.8.
.

Thirdly, the Dove is unto us, an example of a threefold duty, in regard of our
selves: for I. The Male or Cock, governes well his family; Tum foeminam
cogendo ad partum, tum ex trudendo pullos e nido, (Aristot. and Barthol.) By a
certain compulsion he enforces the female and Hen, to lay, and breed; and
as soon as the young ones can fly, thrusts them out of the nest, that she may
breed again. Thus we should not be like those, who are Lions abroad, and
simple Doves at home; who are cruel to others, but too indulgent (like old
Eli) to their children; Tranquillo animo natus, non possum adversari meis; they
cannot cross, nor contradict them in any thing, but gives them all their will.
Doves do not thus, for they beat none but their own young ones, and those
only Ad castigandum, when there is need of it: And therefore Parents must not
spare the rod, and spill the child; but with the rod of correction fetch out
that folly, which is bound in the heart of a child. II. The Doves are sociable,
and fly by flocks, and love to build in Dove-coats, where there are many
together. Thus (like them) we should be affable to our neighbors, and to all;
but principally to those, who are of the household of faith; For (Pares cum
paribus) we should delight only in those who are good, and associate our
selves only with them. Doves build, and breed, and harbor with Doves, not
with Crows and Kites; and therefore it is a sign, that they are no Doves, who
associate and frequent the societies of wicked men. III. If Doves meet with
one, who strayes, they bring it back again to its own habitation: And
therefore, although some think themselves to be Doves, because they tolerate
all sin in others; yet indeed they are not; this not being the nature of this
bird, to suffer any to stray, but to reduce, and bring home those who wander.
Indeed Charity suffers much, and is not provoked, nor angry; but yet it
reproves, (Non ^dio sed amore) in love, not out of hatred; as Saint Paul, who
would have the flesh to be destroyed, that the Spirit might be saved, (1 Cor.
5.5.) because to omit and forbear, reproof is the cruellest mercy.

Be wise as Serpents, innocent as Doves.] Topsell Topsel. Histor. arimaltum.
Epist.
observes here, that the Serpent is on the earth, and by innocence fly to the
heavens; Or, as Serpents we should go slowly about worldly things, but fly
swiftly like Doves about heavenly things: Or, as Serpents, we should be armed
against our enemies, but as Doves, be without gal. Moreover, the Serpent biteth
the heel, so we the roots of concupiscence. That they may be quiet, they live
in bushes, where they may be hid, and not amongst men: So we that we be not
infected with sin, must avoid the company of wicked men. The Serpent swimmerh
with his head above the water; so we must take heed, that we be not drowned in
voluptuousness. The Serpent eats dust, and lies along upon the ground, so
must we through humility be content in the poorest estate.

VERSE. 17.18. But beware of men; for they will deliver you up to the Councels,
and they will scourge you in their Synagogues, and ye shall be brought before
Governors, and Kings for my sake, for a testimony against them, and the
Gentiles.
Beware of men.

men?

I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves; where we see that they are
Men (beware of men) whom he calls Wolves; and this is frequent in the
Scriptures, for the Holy Ghost to compare men to the beasts, that perish, and
dumb creatures; and that in a threefold regard, viz. I. In respect of
himself, and his own nature; and thus, First, in regard of his
contemptiblenesse, and vileness, he is compared to a Worm, Psalm. 22.6.
Secondly, in regard of his foolishness, he is compared to a Horse or Mule,
Psalms. Thirdly, in regard of his sinning, he is compared to an Ox, Prove.
7.22. Fourthly, in regard of his filthy lust, and lasciviousness, he is
compared to a Dog, Prove. 26.11. and to Swine 2 Pet. 2.21. etc. Fifthly, in
regard of his perverseness, he is compared to Vipers, Matthew. 3.7. Sixthly, in
regard of his craft, he is compared to a Fox, Luke 13.32. II. Man is compared
to bruit beasts in regard of others; namely, First, in respect of his pride,
he is compared to a Bull, Psalm 22.8. Secondly, in respect of his barking,
and evil speaking, he is compared to a Dog, Psalm 22.16. Thirdly, in respect
of his covetousness, he is compared to a Wolf, Ezekiel. 22.27. Fourthly, in
respect of his cruelty, he is compared to Lions, Wolves, and wild Boares,
Zeph. 33. Psalm 80.13. III. Man is compared to bruit animals, in respect of
God, and Religion: And thus, First, in regard of his refusal to hear the word
of God, he is compared to an Adder, Psalm 58.4. Secondly, in regard of his
hypocrisy, he is compared to a Wolf, Act. 20.29. Thirdly, in regard of
heresy, he is compared to a Wolf, Mat. 7.26. Fourthly, in regard of his
sluggishnesse, and idleness, he is compared to a Dog in the manger, or a dumb
dog, Esaias 56.10. etc.

Secondly, some by these words, (beware of conceive, that our Savior would
have them to expect all men every where to be their enemies: And it is true,
that the Gospel shall find some enemies, and opposition wheresoever it comes,
Act. 17. and 19. and 28.

Thirdly, but I conceive, that these words signify Beware of Lions, or Tigers,
or Wolves; but beware of men: Homo homini lupus. Hence then observe:

That the nature of man,

Why is the natural man such an enemy to the

First, because he is wholly averse from God, Romans 8.6.7.8. His Motto is, Ais
nego, negos ai^; what God bids, that he will not do, what God forbids, that he
will do, just like the Florentine, who is mentioned in the second Book of the
Courtier, of Count Baldessar Castilio; two enemies being together in the
Councell-chamber of Florence, (as it happens often in those Common-weaths) the
one of them which was of the house of Altoviti, slept, and he that sat next
unto him (for a sport) stirring him with his elbow, made him awake, (although
his adversary, that was of the house of Alamanni, had said nothing at all, as
yet against him) and said unto him, hear thou not what such an one says?
Make answer for thy self, for the Lords require it. Whereupon he of Altoviti,
all sleepie, arose upon his feet, and without any more deliberation, said: My
Lords, I say the clean contrary to that Alamanni has spoken: To which
Alamanni answers, why, I have said nothing. Altoviti said immediately: Then to
that thou will speak. Thus averse is the natural man, crossing and opposing,
whatsoever the Lord does, or shall command. Nitimur in vetita, we desire
nothing so much as that which is denied us; like our Mother Eve, who longed for
no fruit so much, as the forbidden fruit.

Pet. 2.14.) Hence it comes, that we are enemies unto the Gospel, which
forbids and condemns it. Natural men being captives, and slaves, cannot
endure to hear those things which are contrary to their Lord, and Master,
Sin.

Pet. 5.6.) and teach us to deny our selves; and therefore we oppose and set
our selves naturally against it, because we are proud, and lovers of our selves.

Tradent, They will deliver you.

delivering?

They shall accuse you.

Lege, by law, then Vi, by force to oppress, and persecute Christ; because
this will prevail, even with the good; as we see in the King, who, because
there was a law decreed, Daniel. 6.
therefore cast Daniel into the Lions den; although it were sore against his
will.

Daniel, chap. 6. and that Idolatrous Decree, chap. 3. and those Popish Laws
in Italy, Spain, and France; yea, by that Council that condemned Christ, and
that speech of the Jews, We have a Law, and by that Law he ought to die.







Ad Concilia, unto Councels.] There were in Israel, distinct Courts, consisting
of distinct persons; the one principally for Church business, the other, for
affairs in the Commonwealth; the one an Ecclesiastical Consistory, the other
a civil Iudicatory: Now, although the tyranny of Antiochus, and the
troublesome times ensuing, had bred such a confusion in matters of government,
among the Jews, that an evident distinction can hardly be found in the New
Testament; yet some foot steps, and imperfect tokens of both Courts are there
observeable, principally in Matthew 21.23. and 26.3. where the chief Priests,
and the Elders of the people, are named as two distinct Consistories; and each
Consistory seems to be differenced by its proper name; For the Secular
Consistory was termed (...), a Council, and the Spiritual termed (...), a
Synagogue; as in this verse, They will deliver you up to the Councels, and they
will scourge you in their Synagogues.

. 4. Ye shall be brought before Governors, and Our Savior in this verse, and
so forward, does foretell the Apostles of five sorts, or degrees of dangers,
that would attend them, and annexeth (for their comfort) the remedies with the
evils: as for example.

First, the initiall and first degree of evils, is the hatred of the world,
verse 22. Ye shall be hated of all men, for my names sake. Now the remedy
against this evil, is perseverance, laid down in the same place, in these
words; but he that endures unto the end, shall be saved.

Secondly, the next degree of evils is worse, and more perilous; and that is,
that the world shall not only hate them, but also accuse and imprison them;
this is laid down in this verse, and the next. They will deliver you up to the
Councels, and ye shall be brought before Governors, and Kings. Now the remedy
against this evil is Confidence, laid down, verse 19. in these words: When
they deliver you up, take no thought, how or what ye shall speak, for it
shall be given you, in that same hour, what ye shall speak.

Thirdly, the sequent danger is yet worse, and that is, scourging, and
buffeting, under which all kinds of torments are understood: They will scourge
you in their Synagogues, verse 17. Now the remedy against this evil, is this;
It shall be given you in that same hour, what ye shall answer, verse 19. and
that, in being thus handled, you are no worse dealt withal, than your Master
was, verse 24.

Fourthly, the next degree is yet more sad, and this is banishment, and
persecution from City to City; when they persecute you in this City, flee ye
into another; where the evil is, persecution, and the remedy, flight, verse 23.

Fifthly, the last, but not the least kind of evils, is a bloody death for
Christ; Brother shall deliver up brother to death, and the father the child,
verse 21. But the remedy is this, that they need not fear those, who can but
only kill the body, verse 28. Pareus s.
.

VERSE. 23. But when they persecute you in this City, flee ye into another:
for verily I say unto you, ye shall not have gone over the Cities of Israel,
till the Son of man be come.
. 1. When they persecute you, flee.

Our Savior here does expressly teach us;

How does this appear?

First, by these examples, Jacob flees, Genesis 27. Moses, Exodus 2.15. Act.
7.29. and Elias, 1 King. 17. and David often, and the woman, the Church, Revel.
12.6.14.

Secondly, it will appear, by distinguishing Romans 13.1. But II. The use of
this power, comes from the corruption of their own hearts. And yet because
they have their power from God, they are therefore to be obeyed, either with an
active or passive obedience, and not to be resisted, or rebelled against.





Peter to wound with the sword, but checked his too hot and forward spirit: And
hence the Primitive Church, would rather suffer themselves to be led as sheep
unto the slaughter, then take up weapons against their Princes and Governors,
although they were but Heathens Lege Apol. Justin. and Tertul.
. Bellarmine and the Papists obey, Donec vires habeant, until they be able to
make their parties good, but no longer: Indeed, some think that it is lawful
to withstand, if God give lawful power, to repel an unlawful force; the King
of Navarre, withstood King Henry of France, when he raised persecution: But I
confess, I dare not subscribe, or assent unto it; both because Christ our Lord
(who might by a lawful troop of Angels, have overcome all his wicked
adversaries, would not do it, but said his kingdom was not of this world; and
also because Tertullian tells us; that the Christians in the Primitive times,
were able to have driven the Emperor out of his Dominions, and to have pulled
him from his Throne, and sufficiently to have defended themselves, and their
religion from the power of the Tiger, but they would not: And therefore as an
unwarrantable thing, we, and all Christians must carefully avoid it.

Rev, 22.15.
. A beautiful face is unfitly masked, it should rather be seen; now the face
of Religion is fair, beautiful and amiable; and therefore it were a shame to
hide that head and face under a bushel, which should rather (like a City set
upon an hill) be held forth to the view of all Mat. 5.16.
. Christ has nothing in him, whereof we need be ashamed, for he is the best of
all; neither is there any cause why we should fear to profess him; for he is
the greatest of all, and of all others most able to protect and defend us.
There are some commended by the Spirit, and Christ, because they loved not
their lives unto death; and yet we desire to be so commended, we must so
labor to deserve that commendation. Read Act. 20.24 and 21.13.

Fourthly, they are faulty here, who although in the times of persecution, they
do not fall from Tota pulchra, all glorious and beautiful? Then why should
thou be ashamed to profess thy faith? A good face need not blush to be seen,
neither any be ashamed to show forth the face of religion to any. II. Do thou
fear danger, or death? why, remember that we must not esteem our lives in
regard of Christ; we must not to save our bodies, dishonor our head, but
labor to glorify him in life and death; and if he require it, by our death,
as well as our life. III. Art thou not assured of protection? Then remember, if
thou have Christ, thou shall have all things; yea, if Christ be with thee,
thou need not fear, though all the world be against thee, Romans 8.31.32. God
has decreed the end, and determined what shall come to pass: and therefore in
all perils of this nature, we should say with the three children; We know that
our God whom we serve, is able to deliver us; but if he will not, we will
suffer for him, Dan. 3.18.

Fifthly, they are extremely to blame, who think, and stiffely maintain, that
it is not lawful to flee in the times of persecution; when our Savior
expressly here says, If they persecute you in one City, then flee to another.

Is it lawful then to flee in the times of persecution?

First, some hold, that it is not lawful for any (Tert. ad Fabium) because our
Savior expressly bids us, not to fear those who kill the body, Matthew. 10.28.

Secondly, some think, that it is lawful to flee; Athanasius.

Thirdly, Augustine (Epist. 180.) ad Honoratum) Licitum esse non imperatum;
that it is lawful to flee in the times of persecution, but is not commanded
and enjoined unto all. II. For the thing, Aliam fugam esse licitam and
laudabilem, aliam vero illicitam and culpandam; that there is a lawful and
unlawful flight, and a flight to be commended and condemned. And therefore to
flee, is not given as a positive Precept to all, always.

Fourthly, in these, certainly it is lawful to the Pinnacle, Mat. 4. nor
commit himself unto the Jews, John 2.24. We naturally are careful to take
heed of clifts, and rocks, and waters; and therefore why not of the fire of
persecution? If we should see a Lion in the way, we would shun him; yea,
flee from him; why not therefore may we flee from a Lion and Tyger-like
Tyrant, who seeks to quench the fire of his rage with our blood? II.
Affliction is not always determined catigorically unto, or upon us: and
therefore we ought not to betray our selves, or our own lives; but still use
the means, and leave the success unto God. III. There is a time appointed by
God, when his children shall suffer; but they are often persecuted before this
time of suffering comes; and therefore until this appointed time comes, they
may flee. It is said plainly, Christ walked in Galilee, but he would not
walk in Jury, John 7.1. and the reason hereof is given, verse 6. Because his
time (that is, of suffering) was not yet come. IV. If we do not flee from our
vocations, but that they will give us leave, and permit us, then we may flee
persecution. V. If the Church may reap more profit, and God more glory (as it
often times falls out) by our flight, than by our death; we must then decline
persecution, and flee from it. Paul wished that he might live, in regard of
the Church, although death in regard of himself, was by much the best, Philip.
1.23.24. VI. If our flight be no way offensive to the weak brethren, we may
then flee.



If they persecute you (my Apostles, and Ministers of the Gospel) in one City,
flee unto another: so before, verse 16. I send you as sheep amongst Wolves;
therefore be wise as Serpents. II. From the example of Christ himself, who
withdrew himself, when he knew the Pharisees held a Council against him,
Matthew. 12.14.15. So also when he heard that Herod had, beheaded John Baptist,
he departed from them by ship, and went into a desert place, Matthew. 14.13. and
again the Jews sought to take him, but he escaped out of their hands, John
10.39. III. From the example of the Saints; Moses fled, Heb. 11.27. Elias fled,
1 King. 18.13. and 19.3. And the Disciples helped Paul to flee, Act. 9.25. IV.
Si tota Ecclesia cedit, non li et tibi manner post illos August. Epist. 180. ad
Honor.
: If all a Ministers flock should flee away, then by no means is he to stay
behind. V. From the Law of nature, men are taught to defend, and preserve
themselves, and their lives, until manifestly it appear, that God the Lord of
life, requires it; that is, we must be careful of our selves, until either
our necessity, or Gods glory, or the Churches utility, do persuade unto the
contrary.



Thirdly, it is unlawful for a Minister to flee, if thereby his calling be
hindered: For hence it was that Christ would not flee, Matt. 16.23. and Acts.
16.4.
: and therefore when they could not be permitted to preach in one place, they
preached in another; that being their calling, and work, and the calling and
work of every Minister; and is to be performed, and executed in one place or
other.

Fourthly, in a personal persecution a Minister Elias did, but in a common
persecution, it is a shame for a Pastor, (who should be to all his flock an
example of constancy, and courage) to show any fearfulness, or too great
forwardness to flee away.

Fifthly, it is not lawful for a Minister, to flee

Many object many things, against that which we first affirmed; namely, That
persecution is to be declined, and avoided by flight.

First, this Precept, If they persecute you in one is not general, belonging
unto all, but particular, belonging only unto the Disciples; and therefore is
now abrogated, as are also the other two charges given them in the same
Chapter; viz. Go not into the way of the Gentiles, neither enter into any
City of the Samaritans, verse. 5. which are expressly taken away, and made void,
Matthew. 28.19.20. Go and teach all nations; and Mark. 16.15. Go y^^ into all
the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature.

First, there is not the like reason of these Precepts,

Secondly, the Objecter D. Th^merus, apud Aret. Problem. f. 3.
affirms, that this Precept (If they persecute you in one City, flee unto
another) is abrogated, but he confirms it not, which he should do, if he
would do any thing.

Thirdly, it follows not, those two Precepts are corrected; therefore this is
revoked, because Mat. 28.20. Mark 16.15.) but there is no place extant, where
this Precept concerning Flight, is either abrogated or corrected; which without
doubt, Christ would have done, if there had been the same necessity of amending
it. And therefore they falsely collect, those two Precepts are amended;
therefore also this third is amended: for I. This Precept concerning flying,
does not cohere nor depend upon the two former; and therefore it may not be
drawn unto the same rule, and measured thereby. II. In this Chapter there are
many other Precepts, which by the like reason, and same consequence, they may
as well contend to have been amended, than which, nothing is more absurd: I
will first frame their Argument (as it is formed by themselves) and then cast
them some in the same mould.

These two Precepts, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, neither enter ye
into any City of the Samaritans; are corrected, amended, and rectified.

Therefore so also is this, When you are persecuted in one City, flee unto
another: for they are both in one and the same Chapter. Been habet.

Christ in this Chapter, sends his Apostles before him, that they may teach
through Judea; and he gives them a form of instruction, and direction, wherein
are these Precepts:

First, in this Embassage upon which he sends them, he teaches to whom th
must not preach: namely, to the Gentiles, and Samaritans; verse 5. And
secondly, to whom they must: To the lost sheep of the house of Israel, verse 6.
And thirdly, what they must preach: That the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand: or
that salvation is offered unto them by Christ, verse 7. Fourthly, what they
must do: They must heal the sick, and cleanse the Lepers, and raise the
dead, and cast out devils, verse. 8. Fifthly, what wages or reward they must
expect for their Miracles and works: Freely ye have received, freely give,
verse 8. Sixthly, how they shall be provided of necessary things, and things
needful for their journey: They must provide neither gold nor silver, etc. but
into whatsoever City they enter, they must enquire who is worthy therein, and
there abide, verse 9, 10, 11. Seventhly, what they must do unto the rejecters,
and refusers of their message: They must shake off the dust of their feet,
verse 14. Eighthly, what danger must they expect for their great labor in
preaching? Persecution: I send you forth as sheep among wolves, etc. verse 16,
17, 18. Ninthly, to these dangers he adds the Antidotes and preservatives
against them: viz. I. To Simplicity and Innocence, they must join Wisdom,
verse 16. II. In the midst of danger they shall be preserved, and defended,
verse 19. III. They must persevere and endure unto the end, if they would be
saved, verse 22. IV. By Flight, sometimes it is lawful to decline persecution,
and peril, verse 23. Now from one or two of these, I argue:

First, these two Precepts, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, neither enter
ye into the way of Samaritans; are abrogated. Therefore so also is this
Precept, Preach the Kingdom of God. For they are both in one and the same
Chapter.

Secondly, these two Precepts, Go not, etc. are abrogated. Therefore so also
is this, Be wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves. For they are both in one
and the same Chapter.

Thirdly, these two Precepts, Go not, etc. are abrogated. Therefore so also is
this, Persevere and endure unto the end. For they are both in one and the same
Chapter. Now if these be absurd and false consequences, so is also the reason
and consequence of the Objecter.

Secondly, God willingly and wittingly (they

First, I grant that the Antecedent is true, that

Secondly, the Consequence is palpably false:

Thirdly, those who flee in the time of Persecution,

Thirdly, they object again, every persecution

First, every persecution is good; therefore none Bonum aliud est per se, and
sua natura bonum, aliud per accidens, (Aret. prob. f. 4.) one thing is good of
its own nature, and another accidentally good only: And thus things that are
evil in themselves, are made good by accident: as for example, It is good to
dye, and to be with Christ; and yet death may be avoided in his time and place,
it not being necessary that all occasions of death should be taken. Thus it is
with persecution, for it is good accidentally, as God uses it unto good, but
in regard of the enemies of God, which are the instruments of persecution, it
is evil in it self; and therefore it is not necessary that every kind of evil
should be suffered at wicked men's hands, without any laboring or seeking to
prevent it.

Secondly, those words in the objection (Persecution for this end, that his
power may be the more illustrated thereby, while miraculously, and
extraordinarily he does preserve his children from the rage of their and his
enemies, and elude and frustrate all the plots and endeavors of the
persecuters. And therefore the phrase is true in this sense, Every persecution
makes for Gods glory, either by abiding it, or by fleeing from it; but in this
sense the objection is Nonsense. David by flight, escaped the trains which
Saul had laid for him, and his escapes and preservation did more magnify and
illustrate Gods glory, than if he had yielded his neck to the sword of the
persecuter at the first: yea we see what elegant Psalms David composed in his
flight, wherein sometimes he gives thanks unto God, that had made his feet like
Hearts feet, that is, swift to flee away.



Peter a Devil, for persuading him unto it; because then he should have left
the work undone, for which he was sent. Or Secondly, when the will of God is
revealed; and thus Eusebius tells us, that Christ forbade Peter to flee from
Rome, because he should suffer there. Now II. On the other side it is as true,
that it is not always unlawful to flee, and decline persecution, as we see by
Joseph and Mary, who fled, and Paul, Acts 9.25. and 14.6. and 17.14. and Christ
himself, Mat. 12.15.





Jonas did, before he had any just cause: The Text here is plain, When you are
persecuted in one City, flee unto another; and therefore, where there is no
persecution for the Truth, but liberty and freedom given to profess it, and
to enjoy the holy Sacraments, and the divine Ordinances of the Word and Prayer:
there must be no flight, nor departure; for we must not flee for cowardlinesse,
but for conscience sake, because we would not tempt the providence of God.



Thirdly, we must before we flee, respect the offending

Fourthly, we must before we flee, respect our Paul being persecuted, flees,
but he preaches whether soever he goes. Act. 14.6. And great reason there is
for it, because we are thereunto called and sent: For Ministers should
seriously consider the end of their flight, and beware they flee not (with
Jonas) that so they may be free from preaching the Word, and live in ease and
idleness; but if one City persecute them, they must flee unto another; that
is, not cast off the work of the Ministry, but in other places and times, put
out the Lords talent to usury, and labor to improve their gifts to Gods glory,
and the peoples benefit, amongst whom they live.

Fifthly, in our flight, we must respect the enemies Chem. harm. fol. 1043.
medio.
: but more of this by and by, in the seventh Rule.

Sixthly, in our flight, we must respect the place Lots departure did upon the
wicked Sodomites) then we must not be hasty to depart, but labor rather to
stand in the gap, and to withold judgment from them, by counselling,
advising, admonishing, and reproving of them, and by praying for them: yea,
continuing to do this, until either the Lord by some particular command call
us away; or until they come to that maturitie and ripeness of sin, that they
will not endure instruction, admonition, or reproof, but hate us for it, and
set themselves against us, and that not one or two, but generally; yea, in a
manner, one and all; as the Sodomites did against Lot. Now, if in this case,
we may say with the people of God, we would have cured Babell, but she would
not be cured; let us therefore forsake her: And if we have any command, or
vision, or voice from God, as the faithful in Jerusalem had, (who being in the
Temple, heard a voice, saying unto them, Migremus hinc, let us flee hence; or
as Joseph had, Mat. 2.13.) then we must follow the Lords call, and depart.

Chemnitius (harmon. fol. 1043. medio.) is of opinion, (and I dare not
gainsay it) that that Pastor sins against, and breaks the rules of Christian
charity, who knows that the Church is disquieted and disturbed only by reason
of some personal hatred against him; and that the Church might have peace, and
his particular Congregation leave to enjoy as good a Pastor, yea in every
regard as able to edify them as he is, if he were gone; and yet rather than
he will undergo the trouble, molestation, and danger of exile, will stay, and
suffer the Church in general, and his particular flock to be disquieted, and
hindered from the peaceable enjoyment of the Word.



Until the Son of man come.



Christ comes diversely, namely In carne, in the flesh, when he took our nature
upon him. This is past. Secondly, In gloria, in glory, when he comes unto
judgment, Romans 2.6. This is to come. Thirdly, In protectione, in preservation,
and defense: Behold, I am with you, unto the end of the world, Matthew. 28.20.
that is, by protection, care, and special assistance. This Coming is always,
and thus he is for ever present with his children. Fourthly, In donatione
Spiritus, he comes unto us by the donation of his Spirit; and this is either
extraordinary (as he came to the Apostles, giving singular and extraordinary
gifts unto them, Act. 2.) or ordinary: and thus he comes unto all the
faithful in their regeneration, when new and spiritual habits, principles,
and graces, are infused into them. Fifthly, In interno lumine, In internal
illumination, enlightening the heart, and opening the eyes; for he enlightens
every one that comes into the world, John 1.9. Now these two last are one, and
our only and true felicity. Whence we might observe,


That true happiness does consist in the presence of Christ in the heart:
Zacheus, then came salvation to his house, and consolation to his heart: when
Christ comes unto the heart of the faithful, then; and never until then,
comes joy unto their souls; then, and never until then, are they truly
happy. And therefore this we should desire first, that is, before and above all
other things, Psalm. 27.4. and 42.2.

Why are we made happy by the fruition of

First, because then, and never until then do Psalm. 4.6. and 80.3.7.19.

Secondly, because the coming of Christ unto Psalm 16.11. and Psalm 98. and
Matthew. 5.8.

VERSE. 24. The Disciple is not above his Master,
Christ by this title, Disciple, would teach us: Esaias 54.13. Ierem. 31.33. etc.
Proverb. 8.1. and 9.1.

How,

First, he teaches them by his Word, Matthew. Prove. 8.1. and 9.1.

Secondly, he teaches them by his Spirit, Psalm. John 2.27. And without this,
the other is ineffectuall: and therefore we must first labor to be taught by
the Word, and cleave close unto that, Esaias 2.3. it being the means of
regeneration (1 Pet. 1.24.25.) And then labor to be taught inwardly by the
Spirit. For without his gracious illumination we can know nothing aright. 1
Cor. 8.2. certainly humane knowledge must needs deceive us, and misleade us;
and therefore we must not be instructed by that Tutour, nor consult with flesh
and blood, concerning the things of our souls, ( Romans 8.6, 7, 8, and 1 Corinthians. 3.18.) but labor that we may be taught of God. The truth of this more
particularly appears thus, namely,

First, naturally we know not God aright, but have these gross, and false
conceits of him, viz. I. We think, that he sees not our sins, Psalm. 50.21.
But the Spirit of God teaches us that his eyes are over all the world, and run
too and fro through the whole earth: from which lesson proceeds these things.

First, a fearfulness to sin: for if God see us, how shall we then dare to
do evil?

Secondly, a watchfulness over our ways in secret; because God sees all
things, therefore we dare not privately do evil, or so much as conceive, or
imagine mischief in our hearts.

Thirdly, because God sees all things, therefore the Spirit works in us
humiliation, and godly sorrow for our evil thoughts, Yea

Fourthly, hence comes alacrity, and cheerfulness in the ways of God, and
every good work, because God sees them and writes them in his Book of
remembrance. Malach. 3. II. We think that God is like unto us, (as the Heathens
conceit of their Gods, as Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, and the rest) and that sin
is not so displeasing unto him as we say it is. But the blessed Spirit teaches
us, that he is of such tender, and pure eyes, that he cannot endure to behold
any thing that is evil. ( Habak. 1.13.) And hence the spiritual man is afraid
to commit the least sin. Matthew. 12 36. and 1 Thessal. 4.6. III. We think
that God may be deceived: but the Spirit admonishes us to take heed, that we
do not deceive our selves, for our God will not, nor cannot be mocked. Galath
6.7. When we remember that God fits in heaven, and there marks the words and
works that are done and spoken upon the earth, ( Psalm. 2.6.) it makes us the
more careful to purge the inside of the Cup as well as the outside, Math.
23.20. IV. We think, that God is all mercy, and no Justice; but the Spirit
teaches us that he is both, according to his own Proclamation of himself:
The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering and abundant in
goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, Exodus
34.6.7.
transgression, and sin. And this the Lord would have us take notice off,
(lest the sight of our sins should make us despair) And a God that will by
no means clear the guilty, but will visit the iniquity of the Fathers upon
the Children, and upon the Childrens Children, unto the third, and fourth
generation; and this the Lord spoke, least carnal security, and natural
stupidity should make us to presume.

Secondly, naturally, we are ignorant of Religion and the word of God, For I.
we think it to be a hard saying. Ioh. 6.60. But the Spirit of God does teach
us, that it is sweeter then honey, ( Psalm. 119.103) and more precious then
gold. Psalm 119.127. yea the very joy and rejoicing of our hearts. Ierem.
15.16. If we attentively read Psalm 119. we shall see what exceeding joy David
felt and found in the ways and works of Religion. II. We think Religion but
foolish curiosity: but the Spirit teaches us that without it there can be no
salvation. Hebr. 12.14.

Thirdly, we do not know our selves, Esa. 28.14
having made a Covenant with death, and being at an agreement with hell: yea,
ready to say that we are rich and abound in all things. Revel. 3.17. But the
Spirit teaches us, that these are but deceivable dreams arising from blind
pride: the truth being this, that we are poor, naked, blind, and miserable.

Verse 25. It is enough for the Disciple,
. If they have called the Master Beelzebub. Sect.


How was Christ called Beelzebub? that is, Devil.

One may be called Devil two manner of ways;

First, by nature; and thus all, and only the reprobate Angels, are called
devils, Or

Secondly, by participation, or by imitation of a diabolical corruption: And
in this sense the Jews falsely call Christ Devil, and Christ truly calls
Judas Devil, I have chosen you twelve, and one of you is a Devil Ioh. 6.70.
.

What does Beelzebub truly signify?

The text here reads (...), Beelzebul; but Syrus reads (...) Beelzebub: King.
1. where Abasia, being sick, sends to Baalzebub, the God of Ekron to know
whether he should recover or die. Tremellius interprets Baalzebub, Sminthium,
because Apollo was wont to be called Sminthius, from the Mice he killed, which
they of Mysia called (...). Pliny (lib. 29. natural histor. cap. 6.) calls
this God of Ekron Myjodem, (but more rightly he is called Myothen) that is, the
God of flies, or the driver away of flies: and Nazianzen (contra Iulianum)
witnesses, that this God Baalzebub was made in the fashion of a fly. And the
name is compounded of (...) Baal, that is, a Master, or a Prince, or a Lord;
and (...) zebub, that is, a fly. And therefore this was the name of an
execrable Idol of the Akanorites, and was called Baalzebub the God of flies,
because they believed that he destroyed, and expelled the deadly and
pestilentiall flies, which so grievously infested, and molested the inhabitants
of that Island: Or else (perhaps) he was so called, because when the Devil did
give any Oracles, or answer, concerning the health of any, he appeared unto
the Inchanters in the form of a great fly: Now by the name of this Idol the
Jews went about to disgrace the miracles of Christ, and consequently his
Doctrine, which was confirmed by Miracles, hoping hereby to overthrow it, and
to cast such an aspersion upon it, that none should believe it Otho. Gualt. p.
de vocibus exotic. page 102.
.

VERSE. 27. What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light:
. Preach ye on the house tops.



On the house tops, is taken from the form of buildings among the Jews,
mentioned Deuteronomy. 22.8. When thou buildest a new house, then thou shall make a
battlement for thy roof, lest any man fall from thence. So Judge. 16.27. and
Acts 10. The meaning therefore is, In tectis, id est, In publicis congressibus;
Preach upon the house tops, that is, in public assemblies. Here therefore our
Savior does express two things; namely, First, that they must conceal
nothing, but make known the whole truth of Christ, taught unto them Luke 12.2,
etc.
. Secondly, that these things must be published, and publicly preached. Whence
we may note, That the profession of Christ is not to be concealed, Romans 10.10.
Hebr. 4.14. and 10.23, etc. For First, the Spirit is a fire, and that a shining
fire, (Quis potest celare ignem) And therefore if the Spirit of God be in us,
it will send forth both heat and light, Mark 4.21. John 5.35. Secondly, the
heart directs the tongue; for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks; Mat. 12.34. Romans 10.10. and 2 Cor. 4.13. And therefore, if there be
grace in the heart, there will be gracious words in the mouth. Thirdly, faith
fears no dangers; for it apprehends Christ always present, Mat. 28.20. And
therefore, if there be faith in the heart, there will be profession in the
mouth, and practice in the life.

What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light: and what ye hear in
the ear, that preach ye on the house tops. Hence Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 11. being
about to recite the Sacramental word of the Eucharist, begins with this
Preface, I received from the Lord, that which I also delivered unto you.
Afterward, 1 Cor. 15.3. I delivered unto you, first of all, what I received;
which words were spoken when he was about to intimate, or rather perspicuously
to handle, and plainly to preach the word of the Resurrection. From whence
follows a facile and fair conclusion: As the word of the Resurrection thus
delivered by the Apostle, was not muttered and mumbled without sense, or after
the manner of a charm; so neither is the Sacramental word of the Eucharist.
Chamier. lib. 1. de Sacram. cap. 16. Arg. 4.

It is questioned between us and the Church of Rome, whether those things are
to be written, and taught in the Vulgar and Mother Tongue, which are contained
in the Scriptures, or not?

Now they holding the Negative, and we the Affirmative, we argue thus:
Whatsoever things are to be preached, and published in all tongues and
languages, and those which are commonly and generally known, may also be
written in the same tongues and languages. But whatsoever things are contained
in the sacred Scriptures, are to be preached unto all, in the tongues they best
know and understand. Therefore nothing withholds or lets, but that they may be
written in the same tongues also.


The Major is clear, because neither words nor letters are used for
themselves, but only for the things sake which are signified thereby: wherefore,
if the things ought to be known unto all, then certainly their signs should
not be unknown unto any.

The Minor is proved, both by Precepts and Practice. First, by Precepts, in
this verse, and chap. 24.14. and Mark 16.15. and Mat. 28.19. Secondly, by
Practice; for before any of the Apostles preached, there was given unto them
the gift of Tongues, that so every one that heard, might understand, Acts 2. If
any desire to see this Argument enlarged and prosecuted, let him look upon
Chamierus de Canonis usu. lib. 11. cap. 3. Tom. 1. page 391.

VERSE. 28, 29, 30, 31. And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able
to kill the soul; but rather fear him who is able to destroy both body and
soul in hell. Are not two Sparrows sold for a farthing? And one of them shall
not fall on the ground without your Father. But the very hairs of your head
are all numbered. Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many
Sparrows.
Illyricus (lib. de ratione Cognoscendi. s. literas. Tract. 1.) pitcheth upon
these verses, to teach young Ministers, how to raise Doctrines, and how many
sorts of Doctrines they may raise from a Text.

First, (...). I. It is necessary that we should publicly profess the known
truth so often as there is need. II. Confession of our faith Faith is to be
made, though we hazard thereby, the loss of our goods and lives. III. We ought
to contemn our lives, in regard of Christ and his Truth. IV. Eternal torments
are prepared, to be inflicted upon all those both in body and soul, who are
afraid to deny Christ and his Truth. V. He who would make a right confession of
his Faith, must with a full purpose of heart, yield himself to be guided and
directed by God. VI. The providence of God is not only general, but also
special, taking care of our least things, even the hairs of our heads.

Secondly, (...). I. They are deceived, that think it sufficient to assent in
heart to the truth of the true Religion, and to approve their consciences unto
God; but in the mean time, think it lawful, with or before men, to say or
unsay, to affirm and deny what they will in Religion, according to the
condition of time, and place, and persons; principally, when the danger of
death hangs over their heads, or attends upon the profession of Christ and
Religion. II. The Epicures err, who deny Divine Providence, thinking that it
does not suit with the Majesty of God, to regard humane and terrene things.
III. The Stoics, who think all things to be governed by Fate, are far from
Truth. IV. They are erroneous, who think, that besides those things which are
governed by the wise ordination of Divine Providence, there are others which
are ruled by chance and fortune. V. The Pelagians are out of the right way, who
yield more than is meet, or true, viribus humanis, to the power of Nature;
namely, That it is in Man's power and Free Will, to embrace Faith, to persevere
in the same, and boldly to profess it unto the end. VI. They do amiss, who
labor more for frail and external things, than for internal grace and
goodness.

Thirdly, (...) I. We must to the utmost of our power, endeavor, that we may
have the true fear of God before our eyes; because the true God is to be
feared before all men. II. We must learn such a contempt of humane things,
that we may always desire to leave them, and to go hence, that so we might be
united unto our Christ in Heaven. III. The consideration of the special
Providence of God, should make us remember that God always looks upon us, and
is present with us; and therefore we should implore his aid, and persuade our
selves that he will help us, and deliver us in a fitting and seasonable time.

Fourthly, (...). I. These words of our Saviors, do correct and tax the
negligence of those, who do not by fervent prayers, beseech God so to inflame
their hearts with a true and sincere love unto his sacred Majesty, that for his
Names sake they may not be afraid to lay down their lives. II. The stupidity of
those men, are here blamed, who do not see nor acknowledge all things to be
ordered by the Providence of God. III. Those are justly to be reproved, who
neglect to give thanks unto God, that he has and does vouchsafe to defend and
govern both us, and all our affairs by his special Providence. IV. They
deserve to be taxed, that abuse any of the good creatures of God, seeing that
he takes care even for them also, and his Providence is over them.

Fear not him that can only kill the body; but fear him that can cast body
and soul into hell.

Our Savior shows here, that man can go no further then the body, but God
can destroy both body and soul: but yet we read of one who bragged that he
killed both his enemies body and soul. The History is this. Henry, Stephen (in
his world of wonders, Chapter 18.) tells us of an Italian, who having
nourished malice and rancour in his mind a long time, yea, for the space of ten
years, yet dissembling friendship with his foe: at last being together,
unawares threw him down, setting his Dagger to his throat, swearing to kill
him, except he would deny, and renounce God, and all part and interest in
Christ; which he at length (to save his life) with much unwillingnesse did:
whereupon the wicked wretch having his desire, presently stabbed him with that
Dagger which was at his throat, and afterward bragged that he had taken the
bravest, and most exquisite revenge of his enemy, that ever man did, for he
had destroyed both his body and soul.

What things does the Scripture silence, as being

The Scripture speaks nothing distinctly,

First, it concerns us but little, to know whether Hell be in the Air or in
the concave of the earth, or of what longitude, latitude, or profundity it is.

Secondly, it concerns us much, I. To acknowledge that there is a Hell; and II.
To know that the torments thereof, are eternal, perpetual, and insufferable,
extending both to body, and soul, and III. to labor, endeavor, and pray,
that we may never come there.

In hell there is nothing heard, but yells, and cries;
In hell the fire nere slakes, nor worm ere dies:
But where this hell is placed [my MUSE] stop there;
Lord, show me what it is, but never where Pentelogia, dolor inferni.
.
What things does the Scripture express, as

First, it teaches us that there is a spiritual Revel. 21.8.

Secondly, the Scripture teaches us the fruits Luke. 13.28. and 16.23.

. 2. Are not two Sparrowes sold for a farthing?

In these words our Savior does teach us, Psalm 104.21. and 145.15. and 148.8.
and Hebr. 1.3.

God does not take care for Oxen. 1. Corinthians. therefore not for all things.







Thomas Thomasius says it is worth only (...) of a penny: Beza s. Luke. 12.6.
says it is of an English penny: Marlocrats s. Math. 10.29. says that it was
four pence in French money. The Rabbines call it Isor, and say that it
contains eight mites, ( Drusius in Praeter Luke 12.59.) And Godwyn in his
Jewish Antiquities page 324. says that Assarium valueth of ours in precise
speaking, q2. -- q. Whatsoever it was worth, certainly it was of less worth
then a penny in our English coin; and we know that a penny is but a thing of a
small value: according to that of Catullus, Omnes unius assis estimemus And yet
although two of these poor Birds be sold for a Farthing, and a quarter of a
Farthing, or thereabouts not one of them falls to the ground without the
providence of God. III. Our Savior does not only name a small bird, a
sparrow, of a small price but he also uses a diminutive phrase: for the word
here is (...), which is a diminitve (...); now this signifies Passer, a
Sparrow, that Passerculus a little Sparrow. And therefore hence it is clear and
evident, that the most contemptible, and least things, are not excluded from
the providence of God.



I. To govern all those things which he has created. And II. To direct them
to that end, which himself has ordained.



(Ratio, ordinandi praecedentia ad finem. Thom.) a wise ordering, and disposing
of things unto their end. And therefore Providence is the principal part of
Prudence. And therefore we must endeavor to see God in all things, and not
look to intently upon second causes: For so we shall bridle our anger and
revenge, against our brethren, and our murmuring against our God.





Thom. That God by a special providence did rule and govern all things above,
but nothing below. Job. 22.14. II. Some of them held a providence in
Spiritual, and eternal things, but not in corruptible.

Thirdly, the Maniches, who held ( Duo principia, or Duos Rectores,) two Lords,
Rulers, and

Fourthly, the Stoics who connect the second

What are Christians bound to believe, and

First, we must hold, that God has ordained

Secondly, we must hold, that God does accompany, Acts. 17.28.

Thirdly, we must hold that God (when it Dan. 3. Lions could neither kill, nor
eat, though nothing more usual. Dan. 6.

Fourthly, we must hold, that although the Thom. 22 q. 49. Art. 6.2. yet it is
also, I. In all contingent things. Thom. 1.22.2. and 4. and 103.5. And, II. In
all mutations, and changes of the Universe. Thom. 1. q. 22.2. And III. In
evils Sub ratione bone.

. 3. Your hairs are numbered.

Many things might be observed from these words, your hairs are numbered:
namely,

First, that hair is but an excrement, and the most contemptible part of man.

Secondly, that all our hairs are observed, and not one of them shall be lost.

Thirdly, Christ does not say, that the hairs of our eyelids are numbered, but
of your head where there is the greatest plenty, and the leastuse.

Fourthly, your hairs, (Non solum numer andi, sed and jam numerati) are not
only to be numbered hereafter, but are already numbered. But I omit these.

What is our Saviors scope and meaning in

To show that God takes care for all things which concern the elect, and
faithful. Romans 8.28. Psalm. 23.1. and 33.18. and 34. 15. Esa. 43.1. and
Deuter. 2.7. and 8.5. and 28, 2, 14. Levitie 26.4, 14. Besides the
consideration of these two particulars will further confirm this truth: to wit,

First, God has made the Angels ministering spirits for the good of of his
people, and children Psalm. 34.7. and Mat 18.^0 and Heb^. 1.14.
. And

Secondly, the Lord forbids us to care, (1 Pet. 5 7.) and commands us to walk
in faith. 2 Corinthians. 5.7. yea that we may the readilier obey, he promises to
give us all things. Math. 6.33. And to be more tender over us, then ever Mother
was over Child. Esa. 49.15. And therefore blessed are the righteous in all
things, for they shall lack nothing that is good. Psalm. 34.10.



Psalm. 37.22 Math 5.5.

Amos. 4.7. And II. He will free them from danger and evil. Acts. 27.24. And
III. He will give unto them issue, and posterity Psalm. 127. and 128.

Psalm. 37.23.



I. He will provide food for them: If they hunger he will give them bread, if
they thirst he will give them drink, Read Genes. 21.17. and and 28.20. and 1
King. 17.14. II. If they be naked he will provide garments for them Deuter.
8.3. III. If they be sick he will cure and heal them, Psalm 147.3. and 2
King. 5.1. and Esa. 38. IV. If they mourn, he will comfort them, Mat. 5.4.
Esaias 60.2.3. V. If they be in debt, he will releeve them, 2 King. 4.3.

VERSE. 32.33. Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I
confess also before my Father, which is in heaven: But whosoever shall deny me
before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven.


The Reward of Whosoever shall confess me before men.. 1. The Reward: I will
confess him before my Father in heaven.. 2.
Viz. Apostates, and deniers, wherein also are, The Person: Whosoever shall deny
me before men.. 3. The Reward: He shall be denied by me, before my Father.. 4.



Whosoever shall confess me before men.



First, (...), to confess, has many significations; namely,

I. Properly, it signifies to consent, or to say as another says (Simile
loqui) and that either, First, Idem affirmando, by affirming the thing
affirmed: (...) ( Act. 23.8.) But the Pharisees confessed, that there were both
Angels and Spirits, and a Resurrection. So, (...): The Fathers confessed also,
that they were Pilgrims, and Strangers in the earth, Heb. 11.13. Or, Secondly,
Idem negando, by denying the thing denied: (...), John confessed, and denied
not, that he was not the Christ. II. Hence the word is transferred unto the
confession of sins: (...), confessing their sins, Matthew. 3.6. and 1 John
1.9. Yea, III. Hence it is transferred to Promises: Herod, ((...)) promised to
give her whatsoever she should ask, Matthew. 14.7. So Luke 22.6. (...). And
Judas promised to betray him unto them. And IV. Hence the word is to a
particular profession of Religion applied, thus: Saint Paul answering, for
himself, says unto the Governor, (...). But this I confess unto thee; that
after the way which they call heresy, so worship I God. So, the Jews had
agreed; that if any man did confess ((...)) that Jesus was the Christ, he
should be put out of the Synagogue, John 9 22. V. It signifies to praise and
magnify the name of God: every tongue, ((...)) shall confess ((...)) to God,
Romans 14.11. and 15.9. where we may observe; that in this last sense, (...), is
put with a dative case; but in the other significations and acceptions, it is
either put with an Accusative, or with this Proposition (...): And in this
verse, and Luke 12:8. Now in the present Text, (...), does signify the
profession of Christ and Religion,

Secondly, (...). In me. Beza thinks this to

Thirdly, before men, shows that our profession

Fourthly, these words, (...), every one Phil. 2.11.

Fifthly, the meaning therefore of these words, whosoever shall confess, etc.
is, that Religion must be publicly professed; yea, so professed, that we may
be sure and certain to be rewarded and acknowledged by Christ. Hence then
three things offer themselves to be considered of, namely; I. That Religion is
outwardly and publicly to be professed. II. That outward profession of
religion alone, is not sufficient unto salvation. III. That that profession
which shall be rewarded by Christ; with eternal life, must be adorned with
purity and piety, both externa l, and internal.

Acts. 7.51. and 9.22.29, and 18.9.28. Romans 10.9.10. Heb. 10.23.25. Phil. 1.14.



Pet. 3.15.

Romans 10.10.

Mark 8.58. Luke 9.26. and 18.8. and 2 Timothy 2.12.

Philip. 1.12. and 2.15.16.

Phil. 1.20. whereas on the contrary, the denial of Christ is the greatest
dishonor we can do unto his name; as though Christ or Religion were things to
be ashamed of, Luke 9.26. whereas truth blusheth not, neither fears, nor
seeks corners.

John 14:6. And therefore Paul durst not do it, 2 Cor. 13.8.

John 1.14. Ingreditur carceres nobiscum. (Tertul.) If for the profession of
Christ and Religion, we be cast into prison, the Holy Ghost then will go with
us into the prison, as we see by experience, Act. 4.31.





Revelat. 21.8.) as follows by and by; because external profession is
distinguished from the action of the heart, and is added over and above. If
thou shall confess with thy mouth, the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine
heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved, Romans 10 9.





First, in the time of peace; namely, either I. Because they living in wicked
places, dare not profess Religion for fear of derision. Or II. When in wicked
company, they counterfeit themselves to be such; like the fish Polypus, taking
upon them any shape; or the Chamelion, any color, changing their garb^,
according to the circumstance of time and place. Or,

Secondly, in the time of affliction and persecution: when I. They dare not
publicly profess the truth. But II. Publicly dare deny their profession. The
herb Asolis is made green with heat drops, but shrinkes into the ground with
winter showers: So many flourish, and make a brave show of religion, in the
times of peace and prosperity; but when once the sharp winter of persecution
comes, then they whither, die, and forsake the truth.

Is the public profession of religion always,

First, every where, and always without any

Secondly, it is always, and every where required,

Thirdly, affirmatively, we are then enjoined

But it is dangerous for our selves, in some places

Danger in this case is to be despised, Act. 20.24.

Holy things must not be given to the dogs:

First, this command was given to the Apostles,

Secondly, but we are no where taught to deny Imo ingermain fidei confession^m,
Deus severe exigit, licet mundus non fert, Calvin. s. God requires, and exacts
at our hands an ingenuous and free confession of our faith, although the world
brook it not: Whence Saint Peter commands us to glorify God in our hearts,
and to be ready to give an account of our faith, unto every one that shall
demand a reason thereof, 1 Pet. 3.15. And therefore the righteous dare not
dissemble or double.

But Saint Paul says plainly, have thou faith, 14.22. Therefore the
profession of our faith to God, is sufficient, and to man is needless.



Paul gave for those times, when men were not certainly persuaded of the use
of Gods creatures; to wit, meats and drink, etc. But it belongs not unto us,
or our times.

John 4.24. Therefore external profession is not necessary at all.

Prove. 23.26. Because the outward worship of the body, may be without the
inward of the heart; but the inward of the heart cannot be without the outward
of the body: For if God have the soul and inward man, he will certainly have
the outward.



Cor. 12.3. and 1 John 4.2.

Bulling. s.

Act. 5.20. and 17.17.

Cor 9.13.



Ephesians. 1.6.12.



Acts 24.14.) for a palliating of religion does much hurt the weak brethren.
Hence observe these cautions, or rules, viz. I. We must courageously, and
resolutely oppose our selves against the kingdom of sin, and the abetters
thereof. II. Toward those which are weak, we must carry our selves more
gently, Jude, verse 22. III. In circumstances we must suffer as much as we
can, for the peace of the Church, as Paul did. IV. We must avoid, and beware of
all unprofitable controversies, or meddling with heresies, which are antiquated,
and long since l^ft. V. In the mean time we must not be wanting to the truth
of religion; but hold and maintain all the principal and fundamental points
thereof, Act. ^0.20.

Secondly, show forth the love of the Word: Phil. 2.16.

Thirdly, we must show forth an holy life, and Tim. 4.12. Titus 1.16. and 2.7.

What things hinder us from the profession of

There are two sorts, or kinds of hindrances, namely, First, there are some
impediments, viz. I. A fear of persecution, or derision: many fly from their
colors, because Religion is derided, scoffed, and persecuted: And therefore,
the remedy against this impediment, is Resolution; resolve that neither height,
nor breadth, nor affliction, nor persecution, nor death, shall separate us from
the profession of the truth. II. The love of the world, and the thorny cares
thereof, keeps many from Christ, and the profession of the truth, Mat. 13.22.
And therefore the remedy against this, is neither to love the world, nor the
things that are in the world, 1 John 2.15. III. The love of sin, and
iniquity, which is condemned by religion: wherefore we must eschew evil, and
do good, Psalm 34.14. Secondly, there are some impediments which hinder
others from profession; name, ly, I. The evil examples of Professors: 2 Samuel
2^.12.
The Grecians made a Horse, but the Trojans brake down the walls, and brought
it into the City, by which the City was destroyed. Balaam gives wicked
counsel, and the Israelites follow it, and so are ruined, and plagued. and the
enemies of the Church lay snares for her destruction; but it is the Professors
of Religion, that let destruction enter in; For seldom does a scourge, or
judgment come upon a Church, until there be a backsliding of the Professors
thereof. The sins of Professors are like dead Amasa, they hinder the march,
and put men to a stand, whether they were best to embrace that Religion, or no,
the Professors whereof do such and such things. The remedy therefore against
this impediment, is; for all Professors to be watchful over their lives, and
to labor to be upright toward all men, as well as holy toward God. II. The
indiscretion of Professors, hinders others from a good profession: whereas on
the contrary, God is glorified by the wise, and holy conversation of Professors
among the wicked, Titus 2.10. and 1 Pet. 2.12. If a religious person be
undiscreet, or imprudent in his carriage and conversation: Then, First, he
exposes himself to contempt, and opens the mouths of the wicked to exclaim
against him. Yea, Secondly, he exposes the Gospel to contempt, which he
professes, and consequently causes the name of God to be blasphemed, and
evil spoken of, Romans 2.24. And therefore, if we would not be bridles to keep
any back from religion, but spurs to spur them forward; let us in our lives,
conversations, actions, and dealings, be wise as Serpents, and innocent as
Doves. III. Dissension amongst Professors, either in opinion or practice, is a
great let and hinderance to the profession of the Gospel. And therefore, for
the removing of this block out of the way, let all Professors remember these
three things, viz. First, that these dissensions are kindled by Satan, and come
from his malice; For he knowing how strong the bond of Christian Love is, (
Ephesians. 4.3. Colos. 3.14.) labors by all means to sow some seeds of sedition,
or contention, that so this bond of perfection may be broken. Secondly, the
Professors of the Gospel must remember; that it is very reproachful, in regard
of those who are without, thus to dissent and jarre among themselves: yea, many
reject all religion, because we do not agree together in one. Thirdly, the
best Professors, and Practicioners should remember, that these differences and
disagreements of opinion in matters of religion, do kindle the hearts of
Professors, and make them often times to hate one another, to separate, and
forsake the society one of another; yea, sometimes to refuse to communicate, or
to serve God publicly one with another. Thus we read of the separation of
Paul and Barnabas, Act. 15.39. And of the too deep rooted hatred, which is
betwixt the Lutherans, and Zwinglians, or Calvinists; and of those bitter rents
which are amongst our selves, through the difference of opinion. And therefore
let us endeavor after unity and concord: and that, I. In opinion, that we may
all speak and hold the same things, 1 Cor. 1.10. Phil. 2.2. and 3.15.16. II.
At least in heart; and this Christ desires and prays for, John 17.11.21. and 2
Cor. 13.11. This I confess, will hardly be without the former, ( Phil. 1.27.)
for we see, that difference in opinion, does disioynt often times hearts once
loving; and that few are truly intimate, except those of the same opinion, and
sect. III. We must labor after union in society, according to the example of
the Faithful, of whom the Scripture witnesses ever and anon, that they were
gathered together, Act. 1.14. and 2.1, 44.4, 6. And then IV. There will be an
union of our prayers; For those who are one in opinion, one in heart, and one
in society, will undoubtedly pray one for another, Act. 4.24.




The hatred, and opposition of the world.

First, true and holy profession does make a man odious unto the world; as
appears I. From these places, John 15.19. and verse 21.22. of this Chapter,
where the world is said to hate Christ, and his Apostles, and all, that by a
holy profession follow Christ. II. From these following particulars; namely.

First, Religion naturally is odious to nature; and therefore also the
religious.

Secondly, Religion does condemn and reprove the world; and therefore the world
which cannot endure reproof, hates religion, and the professors thereof, by
whom she is reproved. The world (says Christ) hates me, because I testify of
it, that the works thereof are wicked, John 7.7.

Thirdly, the zealous Professors of Religion are culled out of the world, and
separated from it, and therefore they are hated by it. Because (says Christ to
his Apostles) Ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hates you, John 15.19. Let not then the Professors of the
truth, expect the love of the world, but arm themselves against the hatred
thereof, Mat. 16.24.

Secondly, Profession of Religion breeds and begets war with the world, or
Christian Profession does not give peace with the world, but rather a sword,
verse 21.22. of this Chapter. For I. The wicked worldlings require silence, and
forbid all checks or reproves: they would do evil, but they would not hear
of it. If John Baptists tongue reprove Herod, then Herod's tongue commands the
Baptists head to be hewn off, Mark 6.24. II. The world desires applause, and
praise, she would do evil, and yet desires to be commended, and extolled,
and flattered, though falsely. Yea, III. The world desires (besides these)
practice with them in their wickedness, Prove. 1. and Psalm 50. worldlings
would not only have the tongues of Professors tied, and their mouths stopped
from reproving of them; but rather their mouths open to commend them in their
wickedness; but also they desire, that Professors would not be so holy as they
are, but communicate with them in their sins, and wicked practices. Now these
things are not to be done, neither these requests to be granted: Because the
Spirit of God will not suffer, nor permit, that either:

First, the glory of God should be profaned, Act. 17.16. Or,

Secondly, that the Law of God should be violated and broken. Or,

Thirdly, that the truth should be suppressed or oppressed by a false religion,
Or

Fourthly, that the brethren or members of Christ should be injured: either by
error, or seducements, or oppression, or the like: And therefore in these
things the professors of Religion interposing themselves they must expect
affliction and persecution Mat. 16.24. and Hebr. 12.8.
.

Are all they hypocrites and false professors,

There will always be some of the brethren that dare not publicly profess
Christ: There were Seven Thousand in Israel, which had not served Baal, and
yet the Prophet could not see them. 1. King. 19.18. and so Romans 11.4. In the
Church there are some who are but Children, and newly borne. Hebr. 5.13. Some
who by nature are timorous, and fearful, and some who are sluggish and lazy.



Paul. Philip. 1.24. Yea II. When they see this, they must learn constantly,
and boldly to profess Christ, that so they may win and encourage them, by
their example, unto the same confidence and resolution. James 5.20. And then
they shall shine, as the Sun in the firmament. Daniel. 12.3.

Math. 16.23. And II. That they dishonor God by their fearefullnesse, and
faintness, And III. That hereby they distrust both the love and power of
Christ; as though he could neither free them from affliction, nor preserve
them from it, And IV. That by this their timorousness they provoke God to
anger, who can inflict as great yea, greater, and more heavy torments upon
them, then persecutors can. We read of one Wolsey, who being in prison at Ely,
in Queen Mary's time, amongst other of his friends, to whom he had distributed
some moneys, he sent 6 s. 8 d. to one Richard Denton a Smith, who lived at
Well in Cambridge-shire, with this message, that he marvailed that he tarried
so long behind him, seeing he was the first, that did deliver him the book of
Scripture into his hands, and told him, that it was the truth; and therefore
he desired him, that he would make have after him as fast as he could. Thomas
Hodilo (to whom the monye was given, and by whom the message was sent)
delivered both the money and message, and received this answer from Denton, I
confess it is true, but alas I cannot burn. Now mark, how he that could not
burn for the cause of Christ, was afterward burned against his will, when
Christ had given peace to his Church. For in the Year of our Lord 1564. On
Tuesday being the 18. of April, his house was set on fire, and while he went
in to save his goods, he lost his life, and he who durst not burn for his
God, did burn for and with his gold Fox Martyr. s. 1716 calce
. And therefore all professors should fear to faint in Christ's cause. V. Weak
Professors must remember, that it behooves them, to grow up from Children to
men of ripe years; and not to be always babes. Hebr. 6.1. Josh. 23. etc.
Hebr. 13.5. And thus much for the first observation.

Secondly, outward profession alone, is not sufficient unto salvation: or it is
not enough for a man publicly to profess Religion, or confess Christ: Satan
himself gives unto Christ outward worship. Mark. 5.6. and our Savior himself
tells us, That not every one that says unto him Lord, Lord, shall be saved.
Math. 7.21. Man chooses not an apple by his skin, nor God a good man by his
face.

The Wolf has as smooth a skin as the simple sheep, the sower Elder a
fairer bark, then the the sweet Juniper. Truth is naked, falsehood covered. An
empty vessel has a louder sound, then a full barrel. And therefore the Lord
will not do, as man does, look upon the outward appearance; but he looks
upon the heart (1 Samuel 16.7.) and requires not the outward worship without
the service of the heart, as is evident from his own mouth. For I spoke not
unto your Fathers, nor commanded them in the day that I brought them forth of
the Land of Egypt, concerning burnt offerings and sacrifices. But this thing
commanded I them saying, obey my voice, and I will be your God, and you shall
be my people etc. Ierem. 7.22.23. That is, God did not first of all, or
principally command sacrifices (for they were instituted for another end then
to please God) but he chiefly requires obedience: And elsewhere he does not
require profession. Esa. 1.11.12. that is, without practice. Proverb. 23.26.
Mark. 7.6. The Nightingall has a sweet voice, but a rank flesh: the Storkes
in India have a pleasant cry, but a bloody bill; and many have a form of
Godliness, who deny the power thereof, from which God will turn away his
loving countenance. 2. Tim. 3.5.

How does it appear that an outward confession

It appears evidently from these five particulars, namely, First because it is
the manner of the hypocrites to wash the outside of the cup and platter, and
not the inside, Matthew 23.25. And therefore the bare outward Profession, and
performance of Religion, and religious exercises, will not serve the turn.
Secondly, because the external profession of Christ and Religion, often
springs from an evil root: namely, I. Sometimes from the love of promotion
and preferment; thus many in the flourishing age of the Church, counterfeit
holiness for preferments sake. And II. Sometimes from a fear of punishment.
And III. Sometimes from the shame of men. And IV. Sometimes from the praise of
men, and estimation of the world. Math. 6.1.5.16. V. Sometimes from gain, and
filthy lucre. Matthew. 23.14. Thirdly, because God is a Spirit, and therefore
they that worship him must worship him in Spirit, and in truth. Ioh. 4.24. that
is, I. They must worship him with their hearts. And II. They must worship him
with their whole hearts. And III. They must worship him only, (and no other)
with their hearts. Wherefore the outward work alone is not sufficient.
Fourthly, because the heart is a great way from the mouth. Pacis quidem nomen
ubique est, res autem nusquam. Isidor. All men talk of peace; but few keep it,
Ecclesia nomine armamini, and contra coelesiam dimicatis Le^ epist. 83. ad
Palestinos.
. Many seem to arm themselves, with the name of the Church, who yet indeed
fight against the Church. Diabolus excogitavit novam fraudem, ut sub
ipsonominis Christiani titulo fallat in cautos Cypr. de simplicitate
Praelatari^^^.
. The Devil has bethought him of a new deceit, namely, under the name of a
Christian to delude the ignorant, and unwarie. And therefore seeing there are
so many who draw near unto God with their mouths, and not with the heart, (
Matthew 15.9.) ^ bare profession only will neither serve God, nor save us. Men
naturally would have the outside to be good, although the Lineing be but rotten
rags: and their cloth to have a fine dye, though a course thread: The Foul
may have fair feathers, and rank flesh: the Fish glistering scales without,
and yet rotten: The Amber-Stone will burn outwardly, and Freeze inwardly; and
the bark of the Myrtle Tree, which grows in the mountains in Armenia, it as
hot as Fire in the taste, and as cold as water in the operation. Thus the heart
lies a great way distant from the mouth, and therefore the mouth is not
always the interpreter of the heart, but often faints and counterfeits that
which the heart thinks not: Wherefore the outward confession of Christ, and
profession of religion will not save us. Fifthly, many relapse, and fall finally
from their profession; as appears plainly by these places. Matthew 13.20. John
6.66. Hebr. 10.25. Now only they who endure unto the end shall be saved. And
therefore outward profession will not save us.




Four, to wit Secondly, stupide, and blockish; who profess (ore tenus) with
their mouth, but without sense or life. Thirdly, unwilling: thus Julian the
Apostate in spite of his teeth, was forced to acknowledge the divine power of
Christ. Vicisti Galilee. and thus also does Satan. Math. 8.29. Fourthly, mixed;
thus the Samaritanes worshipped God and Idols. 2. King. 17.27. etc.




Silenus Pictures were without lambs and Doves, but within Wolves and Tygres:
so many inwardly are ravening Wolves, who outwardly seem innocent lambs.
Experience teaches us, that the finest Scabbard has not ever the bravest
blade; nor the goodliest Chest, the most rich treasure, neither is every bird
with white Feathers a simple Dove; nor every fair Lais, a faithful Lucrece.
And therefore let us neither measure our selves by our outward appearance, nor
trust in our external profession, but search our hearts, and our i^ward man.

Secondly, the notes and marks of outward professors are these, namely,

I. They think profession better then practice, and to seem, better then to
be good indeed. The Macedonians think the herb Beet, (which looks yellow
in the ground, but black in the hand) better seen, then touched: So many
think it better to look upon Religion, then to undertake it, and hold the
speculation thereof to be preferred before the practice. The Camelion draws
nothing into the body but air, and nourishes nothing in the body but Lungs:
so many hear and read only for Table talk, and outward show, but not for
true practice. And therefore let us examine our selves whether we think it
better to seem good, or to be good; and whether we take more pains to approve
our hearts unto God, or our outward man unto the world. II. Outward professors
are more given to their pleasure and belly, then to the service of their God.
Philip. 3.19. For many walk and yet are the enemies of the Cross of Christ;
whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is their
shame, who mind earthly things. These thus described by the Apostle, had been
professors, and it seems still were: and yet these four things are
predicated of them: namely,

First, that they are enemies of the Cross of Christ. And

Secondly, that their end is destruction. And

Thirdly, that their belly is their God. And

Fourthly, that they place their glory in their shame; that is, serve their
pleasures more then God. III. Outward professors are more highly conceited of
themselves, then inward are, and exalt themselves above others: Thus the
Papists call themselves Catholics, and all others Heretics, and some of the
Heathen called themselves Deists, and and all others Atheists: yea the Turk
will be the true Musulman, and all others must be Pagans. IV. Outward
Professors for the most part grow worse and worse: being professors in youth,
and profane in age. The leaves of Polyon are white in the morning, but blew
before night. Amesta a sweet flower at the riseing of the Sun, becomes a weed
at the setting. The Ravens in Arabia being young have a pleasant voice, but in
their age a horrible cry: So many begin in the Spirit, and end in the flesh;
at first seeming to be young Saints, but afterward appear to be old Devils.

V. Outward Professors are more ready to discern then to choose; more able to
perceive what is spoken, then to practice or remember what they hear; although
the life of profession consist in practice. Lynces had a quick sight to
discern, but a short memory to retain; and so have many external
Professors. But we must remember, that profession, knowledge, and judgment to
discern, are all nothing without Practice. And therefore if upon mature search
and enquiry we find that our outside is better then our inside; that we seem
to be that which we are not; that we serve our bellies and sacrifice unto
our selves, and our own pleasures, more then to our God; that we are proud and
selfe-conceited: that we grow the longer, the worse; and lastly that we are
more ready to hear then to mark and discern, more ready to discern then to
remember, more ready to remember then to practice: we may then truly conclude
that our profession is but in show, and our Religion in vain.

And thus much for the second Observation.





Four; namely, Ephesians. 4 19. And Secondly, those who profess Religion, and now
and then sin grievously; falling sometimes into drunkenness, sometimes into
adultery, sometimes into blasphemy, and the like. And Thirdly, those who
profess Christ, and have no egregious impiety in their lives, but their hearts
are polluted, and run after sin, Ier. 4.14. Fourthly, those who profess and
practice Religion, Luke 16.
as did Zachary and Elizabeth: And these last only must we strive to imitate,
laboring that we may be pure both in our profession and practice, both in
thought, word, and deed.


Romans 7.24. and 1 Ioh. 1.8. Psa. 14.3.

Phil. 3.12, 13. Indeed we have a copy set, to teach us unto what we must
strive, and after what endeavor; the purity of our Father is our examplar,
Mat. 5.48. and therefore we must sweat, ( Hebr. 12.4.) and labor as much as in
us lies, to come nearer and nearer to that similitude, every day learning
something, every day doing something, (Nulla dies sine linea) until the Lord
make us perfect, by bringing us to heaven.



These. 4.3.

Ephesians. 4.21.

Ephesians. 5.3. Alexander, Duke of Saxony, hearing two Christians to revile and
mis-call one another, forbade that they should any more be called Christians;
because this did not become those who had put on the name and badge of Christ,
but was rather a shame and disgrace to their profession: for as Aurelius once
said, Leve delictum in Philosopho graviter puniendum; a Philosopher ought to be
severely punished for a light offense, because he should be a guide and example
unto others: So it may truly be said of Christians, but principally of
professors, that a small sin in them is great, and deserves grievously to be
punished; because they ought to be pure and holy, both toward God, and toward
man, and in themselves.

Fourthly, because thus we gain others unto Saxony said once to his followers
and people, Vos Origenem audiendo convertimini, at ego ejus sanctimoniam
intuendo; You are persuaded to embrace Origens Religion, because of his
Doctrine; but I, because of his life and example: for a holy life in a
professor, is better, and more prevalent for this purpose, than a thousand
Sermons. And therefore Saint Peter exhorts the Jews, to have their conversation
honest among the Gentiles, that they may by their good works, which they shall
behold, glorify God in the day of their visitation, (1 Pet. 2.12.) that is,
when God shall be pleased to visit them in mercy, and to convert them, they
may bless God for that holy life, which they saw in the professors; which was
a means to convert them, and win them unto Religion.

Fifthly, because profession conjoined with evil If any man provide not for his
family, he is worse than an Infidel 1 Timoth. 5.8. where we must observe, that
the Apostle speaks not here of the Jews who were truly converted; for the Faith
and Religion of the Jews did not teach them to neglect their families: but the
meaning is, He that follows the wicked works of idleness, drunkenness,
gluttony, pride, and lasciviousness, which impoverish him, and makes him
unable to maintain his own charge and household; although he profess Christ,
and make a show of Religion, yet the truth is, he is but an Infidel.

Sixthly, because a pure life and sincere profession,

Seventhly, because the name of God is blasphemed Maillard reports, how at
Tours, in the Reign of King Lewis the eighth, the Jews reproved Christians,
for saying that Christ dyed for them, and yet they dishonored and blasphemed
his name, Romans 2.24.

Eighthly, because profession without practice, does not free us from the
servitude and bondage Ioh. 8.32. Romans 6.6. Wherefore, if we would approve our
selves to be free from Satan and sin, and to be made the freemen of Christ, we
must obey and fulfill his will, as well as profess his Name.

Tim. 6.18.) are more acceptable to God, than those who are only rich in
leaves, shadows, and outward shows; for these the Lord cares not for at all.

I will confess him before my Father which is in heaven.

Bellarmine argues for the proof hereof, thus; The Martyrdom of the Saints is
able to redeem great offenses; as Christ says, Whosoever confesses me before
men, him will I confess before my Father which is in heaven. But many of the
Martyrs had small offenses, at the time of their Martyrdom: And therefore
there remains abundance of satisfaction for others Bell. lib. 1. de
Indulgent. cap 2 Prop. 4.
.

Paul says, was Paul crucified for you? 1 Corin. 1.13. And Saint Ambrose says
well, Pendebat in c^uce filius, etc. While her Son hanged upon the Cross, Mary
offered her self to the Persecuters, Si forte sua morte publico muneri aliquid
adderetur, sed Christi passio adjutore non eguit: if so she by her death might
add any thing to the public benefit; but Christ's passion needed no helper.
Institut. virg. cap 5. Now if the sufferings of Mary could add nothing to
Christ's passion, much less the afflictions of others.

For the understanding of these words (I will confess him before my Father
which is in heaven) observe these three things; to wit,

First, to confess, signifies, to acknowledge, and to own and accept before
God.

Secondly, to the presence of God, is added, the presence of the Angels, Luke
12.8, 9. He that confesses me before men, him shall the Son of God confess
before the Angels of God.

Thirdly, the time when, is declared to be at Christ's second coming in glory,
both by Saint Mark, chap. 8.38. and Saint Luke, chap. 9.26.

Whence we learn, Sacerdos Dei evangelium tenens, and Christi praecepta
custodiens occidi potest, vinci non potest Cypr.
. He who holds and maintains the doctrine of the Gospel, and is obedient to
the precepts therein contained, may be killed, but cannot be overcome; because
Christ has promised that he will confess, and own him at his coming to
judgment; and quem Christus tum confitetur, invictus est. Cypr. Besides for
the proof hereof, we may read these places, Luke 22.28. Romans 8.16. and 1 Cor.
1.21. and 2 Timothy 4.8. and Revel. 2.9, 10, 11. Religion is the commandment or
work of God, life eternal is the reward, Hebr. 6.10. And therefore, it is
both Equal that this service should be crowned with a reward, ( Rom 1.17. and
2 Timothy 2.12.) and also Just, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7. Wherefore they that in sincerity
of heart, confess themselves to be the Lords servants, and in integrity and
singleness of spirit, labor to serve him, shall certainly be crowned with
blessedness at the last.

What is required of us, in regard of Religion,

First, we must neglect the care of our bodies, in Mat. 10.28. and 16.25. Acts
20.24. and 21.13. Rev. 12.11. We must not care for the world, ( James 4 4.) but
cast that care upon God, (1 Pet. 5.7.) And bend all our study and care, how to
glorify God, and help forward the profession of Religion.

Secondly, we must not fear infamy for Religion, Michols for our profession,
and service of God; with David confidently let us say, That we will yet be more
vile for the honor of Religion, 2 Samuel 6. Lucrece for fear of infamy, murdered
her self, but Susanna would not; neither must we do evil, that good may come
of it. But remember these two things; namely, I. That the providence of God
rules and governes all things, ( Acts 3.18. and 4.28.) A dog cannot bark at,
nor a wolf bite the righteous, without Gods permission: the wicked cannot open
his mouth to slander, backbite and revile the righteous, nor stretch out his
hand to hurt them, except God give him leave. And therefore we need not fear
reproach for Gods sake. II. All things at last shall be revealed, and the truth
of every thing appear, verse 26. of this chapter: and therefore, although we
should be calumniated for Religion, and detracted for the practice thereof; yet
we need never fear, but in the end, God will cause our innocence to break
forth as the Sun out of a cloud, as we see in Joseph and David.

Thirdly, we must constantly and resolutely stick to our Religion, and not be
shaken from that, by any wind or storm of affliction or persecution at all;
read Mich. 4.5. and Revel. 3.11. Two things the Lord (in holy Writ) inculcates
into our cares to this purpose, namely; I. Patience and exultation in
affliction: we must endure persecution, we must endure it patiently, yea we
must rejoice, when we suffer for our Gods or the Gospels sake, Romans 5.3. and
Iam. 1.3. Now where is patience or joy in suffering, when men avoid affliction
and persecution, by denying Christ, and their profession? II. Hope, and
expectation: if we suffer patiently and joyfully, then we may confidently hope
for, and expect the reward promised, even the crown of glory, Romans 8.24, 25.
and 15.5. and Col. 3 4. And therefore, when we are ready to forsake our
colors, and to deny our profession; let us examine which of these three
considerations it is, that moves us thereunto; namely, First, whether do we
think, that our profession and Religion is false? Or Secondly, that the
promises of God, contained in the Word; or the promise of Christ, contained in
this Text, is false? Or Thirdly, whether the reward promised, or promises made
in the Scripture, be not worth the seeking, or laboring, or suffering for? For
if our Religion be built upon the Scriptures, and regulated by the rule of
truth, (as it is) if all the promises of God, made in his Word, be Yea and Amen
in Jesus Christ, (as the word of God it self witnesses:) if all the sufferings
of this life be not worthy to be compared to that glory which shall be
revealed, (as is revealed to us from heaven, Romans 8.18. and 2 Cor. 4.17.) Then
we are left without excuse, and reserved for insupportable torments, if we
shall decline persecution and affliction, by denying of Christ and Religion.



Mat. 19.22. John 6.66.

Gal. 1.4.

James 1.14.

Luke 22.31. and 1 Pet. 5.8.



Deuteronomy. 4.6. Psalm. 111.10. Prove. 1 7. and 1 Corinthians 2.6, 7.

Solomon's Temple, there were two Pillars, (1 King. 7.21. and 2 Chronicles. 3.17.)
the one named Iachin (that is, God will establish) and the other Bohaz (that
is, Strength:) so there are two supporters which bear up the world; viz. I.
Religion, which sustaines and upholds the Church. And II. Justice, which
supports the Commonwealth. Whence the Jews rightly say, That for Ierusalems
sake (namely, the Church of God, and true Religion) the world stands.

Thirdly, because if we suffer for the profession Ioh. 9.35. yea he will own
us for his own at the dreadful day of judgment, as our Savior promises in
this verse.

By what means may we attain unto a constant,

First, the foot of this Ladder which reaches Acts 2.38. and 3.19. and Esa.
1.16.) for until we be free from sin, we are the servants thereof, ( Romans
16.6.) and therefore, so long all our boastings are in vain, 1 Pet. 2.23. And
therefore, if we desire to live with Christ, yea rather dye than depart from
Christ, let us labor to hate and eschew all sin whatsoever; for so long as we
love and follow sin, so long we cannot suffer for Christ.

What sins must we cease from?

First, from our own sins, not only from the sins of others.

Secondly, from all sins, not from some only.

Thirdly, principally from our principal sins, and not only from those we
care least for.

Fourthly, from our least sins as well as our greatest, 1 These. 5.23. Jude 20.

Secondly, the top of this Ladder which reaches Deuteronomy. 4.1. and 5.1. and Mat.
7.21, 26. Luke 11.28. And therefore obedience is necessary for the confirmation
of our Religion and Faith, and assurance of glory, Mat. 7.20.

Thirdly, Religion cannot be learnt without Mat. 11.2^. and 16.17. Ioh. 6.44.
And therefore this spiritual knowledge is a principal means to make us stout
and strong professors. Paul confesses, that he learnt Religion in the School
of heaven, Gal. 1.12, 16. And so must we; for I. It is a mystery, 1 Corinthians.
2.14. And II. It is revealed by the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. Esa. 55.13. For
as there are two impediments which hinders us from Religion; namely,

First, the veil that naturally hangs over our hearts, 2 Cor. 3.14. And,

Secondly, the blindness of mind, which is wrought in us by Satan, 2 Corinthians.
4.4.

So also there are two remedies, against these two impediments; namely,

I. To the Ministers is given illumination, and their lips preserve knowledge,
2 Corinthians. 4.6. And II. The veil is taken away from the eyes of the faithful,
and they thereby enabled to understand what is delivered, 2 Cor. 3.16. And
therefore if we desire to be instructed, and built up in the truth, we must
invocate, and supplicate God our Father, that he would be pleased for his
dear Sons sake.

First, to give light unto his Ministers, and to make them able to cut the Word
aright, and to teach, instruct, and lead his people, both by doctrine and
example.

Secondly, to give light unto our minds; that we may understand his word, and
will which is taught unto us, Ephesians. 1.17. And,

Thirdly, to give strength to our hands, and courage to our hearts, that we
may obey and perform his will, both in heart and life; both in prosperity, and
adversity, both in freedom and in affliction.







Pet. 3.16.

viz. I. By a diligent reading of the Word. And II. By a frequent, and
attentive hearing of the Word. And, III. By a sincere, and strict obeying of
the Word, read, and heard. And IV. By comparing place with place; and judging
of every place with humility, and not with wilfulness, or
selfe-conceitednesse: And V. By fervent prayer unto God, to enlighten our
understanding, and to anoint our eyes with that eye salve, that we may perceive
what we read, and hear.



First, by a mortification of the flesh, and a dying unto sin. And,

Secondly, by a newness of life, and a living unto God. And,

Thirdly, by a spiritual obedience.



Heidelberge, leaving a little Village, called the Holy Mount: Tilly from
thence battered the City: So Religion being once forsaken, we are easily
overcome, because without Religion, we are truly miserable. And therefore,
neither a Land, nor City, in general, nor any particular person should
forgo, or fall from the profession of Religion.

Secondly, forsake not truth for error, nor religion Philistines, who would
forgo the Arc for Dagon. Woe be to that people, or person, that shall thus
reward the Lord, to forsake the ever-living waters, and dig to themselves
Cist^rnes, that will hold no water.

Thirdly, do not stain the purity of Religion, Corinthians. 7.1.

Fourthly, direct we all our actions according Psalm 119:9.105. Here two
things are worth our observation; namely, I. The sacred Scriptures teach, and
instruct all sorts of men, how to walk and live: as for example, the Word
teaches Kings, Princes, and Judges; Psalm. 82. and Bishops, 1 Timothy 5. Yea, both
wise men and fools, old and young, Eccles. 11. and 12. The Word directs
Husbands, how to carry themselves unto their Wives, and Wives unto their
Husbands: Fathers unto their Children, and Children unto their Parents;
Servants unto their Masters, and Masters unto their Servants, Colos. 3. and 4.
Ephesians. 5. and 6. yea, in the Word both rich and poor are taught: And who not.
II. The Scripture descends to all the particular actions of our lives:
Forbidding:

First, all gross and enormious sins; as Drunkenness, Adultery, Oppression,
Usury, and the like, Romans 13.13. And,

Secondly, all small and petty things; as namely: I. The detaining of the poor
man's wages, Levit. 19. And II. Filthy and impure communication, Ephesians. 5.3. And
III. How we must bear our selves, in selling, Levit. 25.14. Prove. 20.14. And
IV. What we must do about Corne-selling, Ames 8. Prove. 11.26. And V. To avoid
Suretiship, Prove. 6.1. and 17.18. And VI. To leave gleanings for the poor,
Levit. 19.9. And VII. It teaches huswifery, Proverbes 31. Yea, VIII. It
teaches us how to eat, or what to do when we eat Corinth. 10 31. and 1 Timothy
4.4.
.

Now to what end is all this, but only to teach us, that all sorts of men, in
all the several actions of their lives, are to be regulated by the word of
God. And therefore Religion does not require, only the work of the Lords day,
(although many will not give God that) but it requires the labor of the whole
life; and that all our works should be directed with conscience, rightly
informed. And if we do thus; that is, prefer Religion before gain, and
Idols and sin, and square all the actions of our lives by the Word of God;
then we may certainly expect that reward of glory, which is here promised.

3. Whosoever denies me before men.

How manifold is denial; or how many kinds

Denial is manifold; to wit, there is Negatio: First, Di nitatis, a refusal
of dignity, or honor: Thus Moses denied to be Pharaohs son in law, or his
daughters son, Hebrews 11.24. Secondly, Sacerdotis; thus the Israelites
denied, and refused Moses; saying, who made thee a Ruler, and a Judge, Act.
7.35. Thirdly, Resurrectionis. Thus the Sadduces denied, that there was any
Resurrection, Luke 20.27. Fourthly, Mendacitatis, when men deny the truth; as
Sarah did, Genesis 18.15. Fifthly, Pompositatis, of pride; when men raised and
promoted unto honor, will not daigne to acknowledge, or take notice of their
poor friends, and kindred, Job 8.18. Sixthly, Timiditatis, of fearfulness;
thus Peter denied Christ, Mark 14.71. but of this by and by. Seventhly,
Parcitatis, vel Cupiditatis, of coveteousnesse; when men deny to relieve, or to
give alms unto the poor, Job 31.16. Eighthly, Egoitatis, and thus we are
commanded to deny our selves, Matthew. 16.24. Ninthly, Deitatis, or
Infidelitatis, when men through Infidelity deny God. Now this is twofold, viz,
I. When men deny God the Father; who is denied three manner of ways; namely,
either First, Directly, Cord and ore simul, when men deny God both with their
hearts and tongues; as the Atheists do, Psalm, 14.1. Or, Secondly, Indirectly,
Cord tantum, only in heart; that is, when men deny the providence of God, and
all his Attributes; that is, when men blasphemously affirm; either I. That God
is ignorant of humane things, and knows not what is done on the earth, Job
22.12. Psalm 10.11. and 64.6. Or II. That he cares not for the things of this
life; but Susque deque habet, although he sees humane things, and knows what
is done below, yet he cares not which way they go. Or III. That he cannot
resist the wicked world, Job 22.17. Psalm 10.4. and 12.5. 2 King. 18.32.
. Or IV. That he neither is able to punish the wicked, and wickedness of the
world, nor to reward the righteousness of the righteous, Job 21.14, 15. Psalm
10.3. Zeph. 1.13. Thirdly, God is denied in our works, Titus 1.16. They
profess that they know God, but in their works they deny him; that is,
although they know him, yet they do not worship and serve him. But of this
more amply by and by. II. When men deny God the Son: and this is that denial
which the Text speaks of; Whosoever shall deny me: elsewhere the phrase is,
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, Mark 8.30. Luke 9.26. where this addition is
put; And of my words; but the sense is one, and the same; for our Savior
speaks not here, de causa moveme, of the cause which moves men to deny Christ,
whether hatred, ignorance, fear, or shame, but de actu negandi, of the denial
it self, and this our Savior condemns, this he threatens, and this he
opposes to the confession, and profession of his name and word. Whence we
observe:


That to deny Christ is a great sin,

How is Christ denied?

Christ is denied many ways; or there is a manifold denial of Christ, namely,
either. First internal which is twofold, to wit, I. Direct, when in heart a
man utterly denies the truth of the Gospel. Or II. Indirect, when men do not
believe in Christ, but place their confidence in others, and other things, and
that both for temporal blessings and spiritual graces: Or when men deny the
Providence of God: Give me not poverty lest I deny thee. Prove. 30.9. Secondly,
External, which is twofold to wit, either I. Direct when a man denies Christ
with his mouth; and this is twofold, to wit, either. First, total, when men
deny that there is neither Lord or Christ; as the Atheists who impudently, and
blasphemously affirm, that there is no Deity, no Trinity Psalm. 14.1. Or
Secondly, partial, and this is twofold, namely, either I. When men deny that
Christ is not yet come in the flesh; as the Jews do. Or II When men deny that
Christ is the Messiah and true God as the Jews did. Act. 3.13. John. 9.22. and
As the Turks and Antichrist do. 1 John 2.22. Or II. Indirect, and this is
twofold namely either. First, when men deny Christ in opinion, and this is
twofold, namely, either. I. When men hold not the truth of the Gospel in all
things and in this sense, whosoever does think amiss either of God, or
Christ, or Religion, are said to deny them: As for example. First, the
Valentinians denied that Christ was incarnate, and made true man. Secondly, the
Arrians, denied his Deity, or that he was true God. Thirdly, the Epicures deny
the providence of God. Fourthly, the Sadu^^s deny the Resurrection. Luke 20.27.
Fifthly, Adam denied Gods truth and wisdom. Sixthly, the Pel^gians deny Christ
to be our sanctifier; contrary to 1 Cor. 1.30. Seventhly, the Socinians deny
Christ to be our Savior: for they who will not acknowledge him to be such a
Savior, as he is described to be in the word, deny him to be a Savior.
Eighthly, those deny Christ, who forsake, and fall away from the truth once
received, acknowledged, and professed; embraceing instead of the truth, lies,
and instruct of the word, humane Traditions, and superstitious vanities: Or II.
When men profess not the truth they know, and hold, they deny Christ; for he
is either denied by silence, or speech: Some speak false against their
conscience; denying that openly which they know to be true. Secondly, some dare
not openly profess that truth which they know for fear. Thirdly, some speak
of Christ contrary to knowledge, out of malice, as the Jews did: or out of
covetousness, as the Soldiers did. Matthew 28.13.15. They offend here against
the profession of Christ, and the truth, and Religion, who either. First,
blaspheme Christ, as Julian the Apostate, and the Pharisees, and Jews did, who
said he had ^ Devil: or as Pope Julius 2 did, when he said he would eat Bacon.
Al despetto del Dio, even in despite of God. Or Secondly, when men assent unto
errors; for as there is but one Christ, so there is but one truth; and
whatsoever is contrary to that is a lie: And therefore the servants of Christ,
are the servants of truth Math. 26.70. Romans 1.25. And they that deny the truth
and accept of errors, deny and forsake Christ. Thirdly, they also deny Christ,
who silence and conceal their profession; who smother the truth in their
hearts, not suffering the profession of Christ, or Religion, to appear unto
the world. Ioh. 9.20. and 12 42. etc. who either are not able, or at least are
unwilling to satisfy every man who demands or desires to know a reason of
their faith (1 Peter 3.15.) yea many think it now a days a high point of
wisdom, so to elude by ambiguous answers, all Questions concerning faith and
Religion, that no man can tell what Religion they love, like, or embrace: Thus
to cloak and cover Religion, does plainly unmaske and discover a denier of
Christ. I A Profession which is placed in good works, that is, when our works
may be known before our Religion And II. A Profession, which consists in an
open confession, (Quatenus fit ore) of all the principles and principal points
of true religion. Now the first profession is always necessary: But the second
is not necessary always: we must never show forth, or perform any works,
opposite or contrary to true Religion, or the Doctrine of the Scriptures: but
we are only to confess and profess the Articles of our faith, in a fit time,
and place, and upon some serious occasion. Secondly, Christ is indirectly
denied in Practice; and this is Five-fold, namely I. When Protestants deny
Christ, by a wicked life. 2 Timoth. 3.5. which place is expounded Titus 1.15.
etc. and 1 Timoth. 5.8. And therefore the warfare of Professors is to deny
ungodliness, and worldly lusts. Titus 2.12. For he that denies not these
denies Christ. II. When Professors talk much of Christ and Religion, but
show forth no religious works or performances: not being careful that way to
confess Christ. III. When men do not labor to conform themselves according
to the example of Christ. Philip. 2.5. IV. When his word which is taught unto
us is not obeyed. And V. When we neglect salvation, trampling under our feet
the blood of the Covenant, and sleighting the offers of Christ made unto us in
the word, and the tender of salvation by him. Read Hebr. 2.3. and 10.29: Acts.
3.14 and 13.46. And therefore let us take heed of all sorts of denials of
Christ, whether external or internal, whether direct, or indirect; because no
branch of it shall go unpunished, except it be repented of.


Why must we not deny Christ?

First, because if we deny him, we shall be denied Timoth. 2.12. and in this
verse.

Secondly, because if we deny the Son, we John. 2.23.

Thirdly, because it is a sign of Reprobation, Peter 2.1 Jude 4.

Fourthly, because not to deny, but to confess Pergamos. Revel. 2.13.

Fifthly, because if we do not deny him, then Revel. 3.8, 9.

What are the causes which move men to deny

First, hatred: and thus Julian the Apostate out

Secondly, Ignorance: for those who are Ignorant

Thirdly, shame or reproach makes many (with Nicodemus) afraid to confess
Christ; yea rather choose to deny him, then to undergo the taunts, and scoffs
of mocking Ismaels.

John. 18.25.27.

Demas, and Francis Spira, and diverse others. And therefore if we would not
deny Christ, then let us learn to love him, and his truth, and not to hate it:
let us labor for a true knowledge of Christ and his truth, and beware of
ignorance: let us not fear the disgrace and reproach of men, but by our
constant and courageous confession of Christ and Religion, procure the praise
and commendations of God: Let us not fear those who can but hurt the body (yea
not hurt that, nor a hair of our heads without the permission of God,) but
fear him who can cast body and soul into everlasting perdition: Let us not
deny Christ for any temporal thing, but contemn all as nothing worth, in
regard of Christ. Hormisda a great Noble man's Son and a man of great reputation
among the Persians was condemned by the King Sapor (when he understood that he
was a Christian, and denied to turn from his Religion) to keep his Elephants
naked. In process of time the King looking out, and seeing him all swarted,
Theodor. lib. 5. cap. 39.
and tanned in the sun, commanded him to have a shirt put on, and to be brought
before him; whom then the King asked if he would deny Christ. Hormisda hearing
this, tare off the shirt from his body and cast it from him saying; I will
never surely deny my Christ for a shirt. So we should never deny our Lord for
riches, or honors or the esteem of the world, but reckon all these as dung
and dross in regard of him Phil. 3.8.9.

Him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven.





viz.

First, there shall be a day of Judgment. Acts. 17.31. Romans 2.16.

Secondly, then Christ will return. Math. 24.30, and 25.31. and Acts. 1.11.
and 1 Thessal. 4.16.

Thirdly, then all shall be gathered together. Mat. 24.31. and 25.32. Romans
14.10. Revel. 20.12.

Fourthly, the sheep and goats shall then be separated asunder. Math. 25.32.
etc.

Fifthly, all men shall then be judged, 2. Corinthians. 5.10. Revel 20.12.13.

Sixthly, the godly shall then be received into glory. Mat. 25.34. and 1 Corinthians. 15.52. and 1 These. 4.17.

Seventhly, and lastly, the wicked shall then be cast into hell. Mat. 25.46.
And therefore in all our sins, and delays, and worldly delights ( Luke
16.25) let us meditate what the end of all will be, and what will become of us
at the last.

What must we meditate off, or remember, in regard of this last dreadful day?

We must remember continually these seven things, namely, First, that we are
all guilty of manifold Secondly, that none can deny, none can palliate, or
conceal their sins, the books shall be opened ( Revel. 20.12) the accusers
mouth will not be stopped, and our own consciences will be as a thousand
witnesses against us And Thirdly, that the judge of all the world cannot be
bribed. And Fourthly, that all helps and means, we can use to prevent this
judgment, or condemnation are vain, whether they be riches, or honor, or
craft, or friends, or the like. Fifthly, that Christ will deny us there, if here
we be wicked: this we should seriously consider of, and say with David, who^
have I in heaven but thee O Christ, ( Psalm. 73.25.) and will thou deny me?
This was it which went so close to the heart of Vsthazares one of king Sapores
Eunuchs, and made him so bitterly cry out: woe is me, with what hope, with
what face shall I behold my God, whom I have denied, when as this Simeon my
familiar acquaintance, thus passing by me so much disdaineth me, that he
refuses with one gentle word to salute me. If any desire to read the whole
story: let him look upon M. Fox his Book of Martyrs. fol. 97. 98. Sixthly,
that we can by no means delight our selves, or arm, or strengthen our minds
to suffer those pains which we shall be adjudged to undergo. For as the mind
of the righteous shall be confirmed and established for ever in ineffable
peace, and perfect joy Phil. 4.7. So the mind of the wicked shall be dejected,
and deprived for ever, of all comfort, peace, or light: and the darkness of
the heart shall be more full of heaviness and Lamentation then hell it self.
And Seventhy, that the last comfort which miserable men have, shall be taken
away, and denied unto those, who here denied Christ either with their mouth, or
hearts: When men are in excessive and extraordinary misery, their comfort is,
that death will put an end unto it: but there the miserable can neither kill
themselves nor dye for ever; but must remain alive for all eternity, although
the pangs of death be continually upon them. And all these miseries and many
more we must remember are prepared for those who deny Christ.


What denial does our Savior speak of here? I will deny him etc.

There is a double denial namely,

That those who are wanting to the profession of Christ, Math. 7. 23. and
25.12. Luke 19.27. and 2 Timothy 2.12.

VERSE. 34, 35, 36. Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not
to send peace, but a sword. For I am come to set a man at variance against his
father, and the daughter against the mother, and the daughter in law against
her mother in law. And a man's foes shall be they of his own household.
I came not to send peace, but a sword.

I came not to send peace (that is, an agreement and concord in evil, such an
evil peace as cannot stand with true Religion and a good conscience) but the
sword.

Sword?

Mich. 7.6. where he speaks of wicked men, who shall slay one another, as the
Moabites did, Judge. 7.22. And Ephraim and Manasses, Esa. 9.21. Or as Luke
19.27. But I do not conceive this to be the meaning of this place.

Sword, understand the Gospel, (Chrysostom. imperf.) Revel. 1.16. And that for
these reasons; to wit, I. Because it wounds, cuts, and penetrates unto the
hidden man of the heart, Luke 2.35. Hebr. 4.14. II. Because it overcomes sin
and Satan, Ephesians. 6.17. III. Because it provokes the enemies of God and
goodness unto anger, Exodus 5.21. IV. Because it destroys the enemies of the
truth, Rev. 2.16. and 19.15.

Sword, understand the division which shall be amongst men, by means of the
doctrine of the Gospel. Perkins.

Sword, are meant afflictions which the Apostles must suffer from wicked
hearers of the Word; and the dissensions which shall be amongst hearers
themselves, Luke 12.51. Now our Savior calls these a Sword, that thus he may
admonish us of a Christian warfare.

Job 1.7. Heb. 13.13.



be bruiseth their h^ele, Genesis 3.15. and he raises up tumults against them,
Acts 19.

Ioh. 14. And hence their life is but a warfare. Religion, and the Word of God,
I. Condemns sin, and the ways of the world. II. The gains which come by
oppression, craft, deceit, and the like. And III. The delights, honors, and
vanities of the world. And IV. The wisdom of the world it self, counting it
but foolishness. And hence the world holds war with all those who adhere to
the Word.

Romans 12.18.) and hide and conceal a multitude of sins, 1 Pet. 4.8. But when
the Word comes, and does I. Detect impiety, and the wickedness of the world:
And II. Commands the faithful to reprove the works of darkness, and to have
no fellowship with them, Ephesians. 5.11, 13. Then the godly show their dislike,
and worldlings hate them for that dislike. True zeal respects none but God and
his glory, and therefore when he is dishonored, the righteous cannot hold
their peace, neither are careful to please men, ( Gal. 1.12.) And therefore
the world holds war with them.

How manifold is our Christian and spiritual

Two fold; namely, First, Internal; Cor. 10.3, etc. Ephesians. 6.11. and 1 Pet.
2.11. but this we speak not of in this place. Secondly, External; when a man
suffers afflictions, and persecution for Christ: and this is here spoken of,
and also mentioned in these places, viz. 1 Corinthians. 15.31, etc. and 2 Cor.
11.23, etc. Philip. 1.29. and 1 Timothy 1.18. and 6.12. and 2 Timothy 2.3.


How may we know whether we be Soldiers, or not?

Examine seriously these four things; namely,

First, whether do thou oppose Satan, sin, the flesh, and thy self; that is,
withstandest all the devils temptations, and sins, provocations, and thy own
inbred corruptions, and daily insultings?

Secondly, whether do thou oppose the world, and honor, and riches, and
peace, and whatsoever else does war against thy soul?

Thirdly, whether do thou fight at thy own charges, or go a warfare at
the Lords? 1 Cor. 9.7. For the Lord does I. Prepare his Soldiers by
illumination, and knowledge, Hebr. 10.32. And then II. Arm them, with
Christian and spiritual weapons, Ephesians. 6.14. And III. Support, and strengthen
them in the day of battle, Psalm. 34.7. Luke 2.13.

Fourthly, have thou put off all love of the world, and wordly care? for no man
that goes on warfare, entangleth himself with the affairs of this world, 2 Timothy 2.4.

. 2. For I am come to set a man at variance with

What is the meaning of this verse?

First, some understand this of wicked men; as Ier. 9.4. Mich. 7.5, 6.

Whence we may observe, Esa. 57.21. Examples hereof we have in Senacherib, Esa.
57. Rehoboam, 2 King. 12. and Baasha, 1 King. 16. For it is just with God, that
I. Those who despise God their Father, should be despised by their children,
servants, and families. And II. That those who despise the Truth, should be
deceived by errors, 2 These. 2.11.









Tim. 3.5. Or







Mic. 7.7. as for example: I. If our friends or kindred, or those who are
nearest (in the bond of nature) unto us, be angry, or at strife with us; then
let us go unto God, and labor that he may be our friend, and we shall then be
happy; and have cause to rejoice in the midst of these jars and distastes. If
we be injured, and unjustly wronged by any who are near unto us, or whosoever,
and that we must suffer and endure those wrongs; then let us respect the
promises of God made unto such, and rejoice our selves in them.





Ioh. 14. and also promised; The God of peace, will give peace unto the
righteous, Esa. 57. Thirdly, the peace of the righteous with the wicked: and
this our Savior speaks of in this place. Here observe, that it is understood
two manner of ways; to wit, either I. Indicatively, only. Or else II.
Imperatively also.

First, this may be understood Indicatively only, showing what shall come of
preaching: and thus it seems to be understood by that which went before.
Whence we note,

That the preaching of the Gospel will beget jars and dissensions, Act. 17. and
in the Scribes and Pharisees, and Sadduces, and others, Acts 13.45. and 14.13,
19. and 18.6, 8. and 19.23. and 21.30. and 23.7. and Ioh. 6.52. and 7.40, etc.
and 9.16. and 10.19, etc.

Why does the preaching of the Gospel breed

First, because no man can serve two masters, Matthew. 6.24. The children of God,
and of the world, or Belial, cannot agree.

Secondly, because Religion, and the word Moses and Aaron (if God had not
preserved them) had paid dearly for bringing the Israelites from the
fleshpots of Egypt, Exo. 16.2. Saint Paul was in danger of death, for
dispossessing a Damsel, because she brought much money to her Master, so long
as she was possessed, Act. 16.18. Afterward, for speaking against Dlana;
Demetrius by an uprore, and insurrection, had likely to have slain him,
because Paul spoke against his profit, Act. 19.24. And thus, when Preachers
speak against men's lucre and darlings, they are hated by those who otherwise
love them.

Thirdly, because the word is a hard saying to John 6.60.) Or because men
cannot endure reproof: Lot was well liked by the Sodomites (for any thing we
know) until he reproved them: but then they threaten him, Genesis 19.9. So many,
when once the word reproves them, will endure it no longer; but spurn against
the reproves, and set themselves against the reprovers.

Fourthly, because naturally men cannot endure, Esaias 65.5. And hate those whom
the world thinks better then themselves; as we see in Cain, who hated his
brother Abell, because he was better in Gods esteem: and more beautiful in
his eye then himself was, Genesis 3.

Fifthly, the preaching of the word begets dissension Jacob was by his brother
Esau, Genesis 27.41. And therefore we may observe the perverseness of our nature,
and impiety of our dispositions in this particular, that those whom 1. Nature,
and 2. Civility, and 3. Custom, and 4. Acquaintance, has taught us to love:
yea, whom 5. we have loved indeed; we now hate only, because they are
religious.





First, wives are offended with their husbands, and husbands with their wives,
because they are religious, Job 2.9.

Secondly, Children are angry against Parents, because with the bridle of
religion they seek to restrain them, of their unbridled wills.

Thirdly, Parents are often angry with their Children, because they are young
Saints, and too religious; and Masters dislike servants, because they are too
pure, and religiously bent.

Fourth servants stomach their masters, because they observe such pious
practices in their houses; and will rather leave them, then submit themselves to
be taught, and instructed and catechized by them; yea, utterly refuse to be
examined at home, what they learnt at Church. And thus I might have gone
through all ranks, and qualities, and degrees whatsoever.

Secondly, this verse may be understood Imperatively also, as appears by that
which follows, To teach us:

Deuteronomy. 33.9. and Psalm 73.25. etc. David must leave his Country, and Rebecca
her kindred, if God call and command it. As justice is painted blind without
never an eye; so Religion makes men Vnoculos, to have but one eye; and
therefore they only behold, and love, Colos. 3.15.
and serve the Lord, contemning all other things, though never so strong; as
for example:

First, Propinquity, familiarity, and intimacy is a strong bond: and yet
Religion makes us forsake our most near, and dear, and familiar friends, if
they labor to seduce us, and lead us aside from God, or if they be hindrances
unto us in his service.

Secondly, Nature is a strong coard; yea, what nearer bond can there be, then
is that of the Child to the Father, and of the Wife to the Husband? and yet
children and wives must be neglected, in regard of Religion, and Christ.

Thirdly, the authority of Parents, is a strong tie, children being commanded
to obey them; and yet they must be disobeyed, rather then God, and forsaken for
Christ.

Malach. 4.6. How then does Religion occasion these dissensions?



Malachie does not speak of the persons of Fathers, but of Religion, and divine
worship; according to that of the Prophet; Seek the old ways: That is, John
Baptist by his preaching, shall reduce and bring back men to the former, and
true religion of the Patriarchs, which was taught them by God.

Thirdly, certainly Religion does sow the

VERSE. 37. He that loves Father or Mother, more then me, is not worthy of me;
and he that loves Son or Daughter, more then me, is not worthy of me.
. 1. He that loves Father or Mother more then me.

It is questioned between us, and the Papists, Whosoever loves Father or
Mother more then me, is not worthy of me. Therefore children may become Monks
without their Fathers leave. Bellarm. de Mon. Cap. 36.

First, in this place our Savior speaks of

Secondly, a man may leave his Parents, as

Thirdly, all go not to Christ, that come into

Does our Savior speak here only of Parents,

He does not prohibit these, A majore ad minus. For

First, all authority, and superiority (whether Kings, Magistrates, Judges, or
whatsoever) are included here under the name of Parents, or Father and Mother.
And,

Secondly, all love, and propinquity of brethren, friends, and the like, are
implied here in Children. So that the meaning is; that all men whatsoever, are
to be post-poned unto Christ, seeing that these who are most dear, both by
nature and the Law of God, are to be left, and forsaken, in regard of him.

Our Savior, by this expression of Father and Mother, would teach us,

That great honor is due unto Parents from Children. Read Levit. 19.3. Prove,
23.22. Malachie 1.6. Why must Parents be thus highly honored?

Ego mihi te genui.



Exodus 20 12. Honor thy Parents. And II. God has engraven his image in
Parents: A King in a Commonwealth, and a Father in a house, being the image
and substitute of God. Whence, First, sometimes God is called our Father, as
Malach. 1.6. and 2 Cor. 6.18. Ephesians. 4.6. And Secondly, sometimes Parents and
Magistrates are called gods, Exodus 23.28. Psalm. 5. III. God gives wisdom unto
children, as they increase in years; that thereby they may understand, what
honor, love, obedience, respect, and duty is due unto their Parents, Job
32.7. IV. God has ^ncouraged, and excited children to honor their Parents,
with a promise of blessings, ( Ephesians. 6.2, 3.) And therefore seeing God has
commanded it, and promised to bless it, and charged children to see him in
their Parents; yea, endued them with wisdom and understanding, to know what
belongs unto Parents, or what is their duty toward their Parents: It is then
great reason, that children should love and honor them.





Exodus 21.17. Levis. 20.9. Deuteronomy. 27.16. Proverbes 20.20.

Genesis 9.23. Yea, suppose that children be more learned, or wiser then Parents,
yet by no means they must despise them; and that for these reasons; namely, I.
Because they are their Parents: Men of rare and singular gifts, must not
despise those of inferior parts, whatsoever they are; much less then their
Parents. II. Because God has threatened to punish such children, as contemn
their Parents, Prove. 30.17. III. Because if they be more learned then their
Parents, they are the more obliged, and beholden unto them, that have taken
more care of their education, and bestowed more in the bringing of them up,
then their Parents bestowed upon them. If a Father shall educate his child
ignorantly, and that child bring up his son in learning and knowledge; and
for this education, the learned son shall deride, or despise his unlearned
Father; his ingratitude is great, and his fault inexcusable, both in the sight
of God and men. IV. Because if the son, have indeed more natural excellent
natural parts, then the Father, yet he must not despise him; they being given
him by God, who does distribute his gifts, not according to our merits, but
according to his mere mercy, and free will. And therefore it argues pride,
arrogancy, and unthankefulnesse toward God, to be so proud of our own
qualities, that in regard of our selves, we slight and contemn others.

Thirdly, those children are too blame, that Tim. 5.4.) For that which they
borrowed of them, when themselves were young, and unable to help themselves;
they should in equity repay back, when their Parents through age and
weakness are not able to work, or releeve themselves.

Fourthly, those children are faulty, who disobey Deuteronomie, 21.18. Yea:

Fifthly, those Parents are here too blame, who Ierem. 4.4. III. Some do so
admire their children, that they wholly neglect their religious education; Suum
cuique pulchrum, the Crow thinks his own young ones, as brave and fair
birds, as the best: and many Parents are so enamoured of their own children,
that they think none may be compared with them: whence:

First, their children become proud, and being proud, learn to contemn and
despise them: Or,

Secondly, their children think them foolish thus to dote upon them. Or,

Thirdly, their children being thus cockered, pampered, and doted upon, learn
to disdain and reproach their Parents. And thus through carelessness, and too
much indulgence, Parents bring a curse upon their children, and their children,
(in stead of a blessing) become a curse unto them: How great care then should
Parents have to educate, and bring up their children, in the fear an nurture
of the Lord.













He that loves son or daughter more then me, is not worthy of me.

Ephesians. 6.4.



Genesis 2. Yea, this is more truly said of children, then of wives; and
therefore Christ took our flesh upon him, or assumed flesh, not by becoming
the husband of a woman, but the son of a woman: Hence children are said to
issue out of their Fathers loins. Now if a man should love his wife, as
himself, because they are one in a conjugall bond: then also, (if not much
more) his children which are parts of himself in a natural bond; although in
other regards, a wife is to be loved more then children.

Phoenix springs up out of the ashes: And therefore Posterity was always
highly praised and desired, as Genesis 15.2. Abraham thought all things nothing,
so long as he was childlesse; so Genesis 30.1. Levit. 20.20. etc. Numb. 3.4. Deuteronomy.
25.5. Kuth. 4.5. and 1 Samuel 1.2. and 2 Samuel 14.7. Jeremy 18.21. Hosea 9.12.14.

Genes. 33.5. and 48.^. and,

Mat. 3.17.





Deuteronomy. 21, 15. etc.

What is the duty of Parents toward their

First, they must love them; for nature descends

Secondly, they must teach, and instruct them, Deuteronomy. 4.10. and 6.7. and 11.19.
and 32.46. Genes. 18.19.

Thirdly, they must correct, and reprove them, Prove. 23.17. and 1 Samuel 3.13.

Fourthly, they must pray for them, 1 Chronicles. Job 1.5.

Fifthly, they must provide some substance, estate Genesis 24.36. and 1 Timothy 5.8.

. 3. More then me?

Our Savior expressly here teaches; that neither Father nor Mother, son nor
daughter, must be loved above him.

What is love?

Love is a passion,

How many sorts, and kinds of love are there?

There are three sorts of love: namely, First, Eman^ns, or natural love: Prove.
6.8. This natural instinct, the Greek call (...). So man is carried to his
object by love: and because he must love something, what better object can he
choose to love then God? Secondly, Imperatus, or commanded love: Now this
commanded love, is that, whereby reason shows us some good thing to be loved,
and then our will commands us to love the same. If we had no more but reason
to show it to us, and the will to command us; yet this were enough, to move the
affections to love God. Thirdly, Elicitus, or love freely proceeding: now this
love, proceeding freely, is that, when the affections make choice of God
freely; when as the consideration of his goodness breeds admiration in us;
when the consideration of his bounty breeds love in us; and his sweetness
does so satisfy our whole desires, that we think nothing so worthy an object
to be beloved, as our God, who has all these excellent properties in him.


Why must we love God above all others?

Because he loved us first, John 3.16. John 4.10.) and therefore we are bound
to love him again, and that above all things. Here observe, that there are
three sorts of love: viz.

First, the love that seeks his own profit only; as when a subject loves his
Prince only for his goods: such was the love of Laban to Jacob: here the Prince
is not bound to love his subject again; neither was Jacob bound to love Laban
for this sort of love.

Secondly, the love that looks to lewdness and dishonestie, such was the love
which Potaphars wife carried to Joseph, Genesis 39.9. Now Joseph was not bound to
love Potaphars wife again in this sort of love.

Thirdly, there is a most pure and holy love; and in this love we are bound to
love back again God loved us before we loved him; yea, he loved us freely, and
for no by-respect; therefore we are bound to love him first, and above all
things. Weems. Image of God, part. 2. page 191.

VERSE. 38. And he that takes not up his Cross and follows after me is not
worthy of me.
And follows after me.

Mat. 8.22. and 4.20.22. and 9.9. and 19.27. Luke 18.43. Revelat. 14 4. John
10.4.27.









viz.

First some think that sanctity belongs not unto them, but only unto
Ministers; but these must know, that they who follow not Christ in the ways of
holiness, follow the Devil in the ways of wickedness.

Secondly, some say they have their labors, and employments, and callings to
follow; and therefore have neither leisure nor spare time to follow Christ* but
these must know, that to follow Christ is the principal, and most general
vocation of the soul, and woe be to him that puts, Christ into the Manger,
and post-pones the following of him unto wordly affairs.

Thirdly, some bind themselves Apprentices, and give themselves wholly up to
the service of Christ, both in prosperity, and adversity, both in persecution;
and peace: And these as the best of the three by much, are to be imitated.

But it may be objected, that this dedicating of men unto the service of God,

Religion does not teach this;

First, Religion teaches us to devote our selves wholly up to the service of
the Lord. And

Secondly, to follow our callings in the Lord; because he has so ordained, so
commanded.

. 2. He is not worthy of me.

None is worthy of God or Christ;

First, certainly no man in himself is worthy

Secondly, without doubt none can repute or Romans 11.

Thirdly, but the Lord is graciously pleased

That those who endeavor to give themselves verse 10. and Luke 21.36. Culos.
1.12. and 2 These. 1.5.

Why will Christ esteem such as these worthy?

First, because their persons are worthy, both

Secondly, the Lord is pleased to think such Ephesians. 4.1. and 3 John 6. Galath.
5.22. And therefore if we desire that our Lord should think us worthy of him,
let us walk worthily, bringing forth fruits worthy of amendment of life. Mat.
3.8. Acts. 26.20. Philip. 1.27. Colos. 1.10. and 1 Thessal. 2.12. For I. This
God commands. And II. Unto this the Spirit aid^ and assists us.

What is the scope of these words, He is not worthy

First, our Savior hereby would teach us, why Mat 7.23. and 22.8.

Secondly, our Savior hereby would teach us,

That it is a most unworthy thing to prefer Ierem. 2.13. Jonah 2.8. Esa.
1.4.28. and 1 Samuel 8.8. and 15.11.

How does it appear that it is an unworthy

First, because God has done such great John 3.16.

Secondly, because he is the living fountain Ierem. 2.13. James 1.17.

Thirdly, because Christ purchased us at so dear a rate; to wit, by his death
and suffering.

Philip. 3.8. And therefore to prefer such things, such a God, and Savior,
and Redeemer, is a most unworthy thing.





Psalm. 27.5.

Raebel who would not be comforted. Mat. 2.



VERSE. 40. He that you receives me; and he that receives me, receives him
that sent me.
Doway Disciples dispute from hence for the adoration of Saints, thus,

Basil says, Honor serverum redumdat in c^mm^^^em Dominum, the honor of the
servants redoundeth to the common Lord. page 8. The honoring of Gods servants,
as his Ministers, does redound to the Lord, as our blessed Savior here says,
He that receives you, receives me: But to give part of that honor which is
due unto God (as all Religious worship is) unto his servants, is a dishonouring
of the Lord himself; for he will not give his glory to another. Esa. 42.8.
Willet. Synops. fol. 428.

VERSE. 41. He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive
a Prophets reward: and he that receives a righteous man, in the name of a
righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward.
He that receives a Prophet.

Prophet?

Prophet has diverse acceptions in Scripture; namely,

First, sometimes it is taken for the books, and writings of the Prophets.
They have Moses, and the Prophets. Luke 16.29.

Secondly, sometimes for the whole word of God: No prophecy of Scripture is of
any private motion Peter 1.20.
.

Thirdly, sometimes those unto whom God vouchsafed familiarly to reveal
himself, are called Prophets. Thus Abraham was a Prophet, Genesis 20 7. and
Miriam a Prophetess Exodus 1^ 20.
.

Fourthly, ordinary interpreters of the word are called Prophets: as in this
verse, He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet.

Fifthly, and lastly, it is taken for those, who were enabled by divine
Revelation, to lay open hidden secrets, transcending all possibility of humane
search. Hence it is that Prophets in old time were called Seers (1 Samuel 9.9.)
and their Prophecy was termed a Vision. Esa. 1.1. because God extraordinarily
enlightened their minds with the knowledge of these secrets.

Our Savior here by receiving a Prophet, Hebr. 13.1.

Why must we be hospitable unto the

First, because they are our brethren, and fellow no man ever hated his own
flesh, but was ready to cherish and nourish it. Romans 12. and Cor. 1 12. Ephesians.
5.27.

Secondly, because they bring good, yea excelllent Corinth. 9.11. For if we
receive Prophets they will teach us: if we receive Righteous men, they will
lead and guide us by their example.

Thirdly, because in them we receive Christ Abraham did. Genes. 18.1. etc. and
many besides. Heb. 13.1.

. 2. In the name of a Prophet.

Our blessed Lord here shows how the affection is to be qualified: and that
we must not only truly love the Saints, but also for this cause because they
are Saints. Whence Note

That true love unto our brethren ought to be sincerely for religions sake:
John 2.9. etc. 3.10. etc. 4.20.) For this love should be in God, and Christ,
and for his sake.

Who are herein worthy blame and reproof?

First, hypocrites and dissemblers; who have Bernard says (Melin ore,
verbalactis: Fell in cord fraus in factis) Peace in their words, but war in
their thoughts: love toward the Saints in their tongues, but hatred in their
hearts; their words unto them being as sweet as honey and smooth as Oil, but
their deeds being deceitful, and as bitter as Gall. Prove. 23.7. James 2.13.
Our love unto the Saints must be sincere and cordial, not sinister and
counterfeit.

Secondly, those are here to blame, who love

I. Because they are their neighbors, and their good neighbors, from whom
they receive no evil, but upon every occasion, all neighbourly offices; Or II.
because they are of a kin, or allied unto them. Or III. Because they are of
meek, affable, and gentle natures, and loving dispositions. Or IV. Because they
love them, and theirs; therefore they repay love with love. V. Through vain
glory.

Thirdly, they are here faulty, who love the (Ali^d est serpare, ali^d propter
hoc Ager^) it is one thing for a man to hope that the Lord will bless him, for
his sincere love, unto his Children, and servants (because this God here has
promised:) It is another thing for a man to love, and receive the Saints for
the rewards sake promised, for this love is but self-love, (and such as God
rejects) not sincere love, and such as the Lord promises to reward^





viz.

I. Because they are Prophets, and thus we must love them for the words sake
which they bring, or at least which they profess.

II. Because they are Righteous, and thus we must love them, for that sanctity,
and Purity, and integrity, which we see in them.

III. Because they are Disciples: and thus we must love them for their
spiritual society; and bond of charity, as fellow travelers in a long journey
love one another, or as Countrymen love one another in a strange place, or
remote Country.

. 3. He shall receive a Prophets reward.

What is the sense and meaning of these words?

They may be understood two manner of ways, namely,

First, they shall receive that reward, righteous men are wont to receive from
the Prophets, that is, they shall be made Partakers of their labors. August.
s. Psalm. 102.

Whence we may learn,

I. From these places. Luke 10.6. Acts 8.6. and 10.25.33.44. and 13.7.12.42.
etc. and 16.14. etc. and 2 Corinthians. 7.15. Galath. 4.14, 15. II. Because the
affection opens the understanding: we easily believe what we earnestly love.
III. Because God crowns this affection toward his Ministers, with a
spiritual blessing.

Secondly, those that receive the Prophets, shall receive that reward which the
Lord hereafter will give unto the Prophets.

CHAPTER XI.
VERSE. 1. And it came to pass when Jesus had made an end of commanding his
twelve Disciples, he departed thence to teach, and preach in their Cities.
When he had made an end of commanding his Disciples.

Corinth. 9.16. The work of preaching neither has his beginning from us, (for
God commands it, and it is his service) neither ends in us; the end thereof
being to call and reduce Children unto their Fathers ( Malach. 4.6.) and we
but Gods laborers sent into his Vineyard, to gather in his vintage. Math. 9.38.





First, Quod, (...). That they must preach, as in this verse. And

Secondly, Quid, what they must preach? the words of life. Acts. 5.20.

Thirdly, Quibus, To whom they must preach? The Apostles must preach to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel. Mat. 10. and to all Nations. Mat. 28.20.
Pastors must preach unto that flock which is committed unto their charge.
Acts. 20.28.

Fourthly, Quando, When they must preach? In season, and out of season. 2. Tim.
4.2.

Fifthly, Quomodo, how they must preach? as becomes the Oracles of God. 1 Peter.
4.11. And therefore Preachers must be made all things to all men. (1 Corinthians. 9
19. etc.) if by any means they may win any: they must be meek,
long-suffering, and gentle. (2 Timoth. 2.24) and endure al things so long as
they may preach Christ. Philip. 1.15.19.

What is here required of people?

They must acknowledge the necessity of hearing: Preaching is a Relative word,
Bedaes boy made him do, Preach unto the Stones, which Christ never required of
us, but only enjoined us to preach, when we had some to Preach unto.

But it will be objected,

First, a command here is needless; if a Treasure David's taste, then the honey
or the honey comb) will desire it. Acts. 13.42. and receive it with joy.

Secondly, we have both Comminations and Proverb. 1.24. etc. All those are
greevously threatened, who will not hear, yea because they would not hear.
Mat. 10.15. Our Savior says, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom, and
Gomorrha at the day of judgment, then for that City, which will not leare the
word, when it is offered unto them. Mat. 22.7. Those who were invited to the
Marriage of the Lamb, are slain because they would not come. Besides these
Comminations denounced against all those who will not hear, we have a caution
given to all those who do, Luke 8.18. Take heed how ye hear.

In their Cities.

The Evangelist here by their Cities means the Cities where the Apostles had
first preached.



For if the word preached by them be not mixed with faith, which is imprinted
by Christ, it profits not. Hebr. 4.2. And therefore our Savior sends them
before his face ( Luke 101) that is he sent the Apostles before, intending
himself to follow after, because their preaching without his was but in vain:
Man only working upon the ear, but Christ upon the heart, and that by his
holy Spirit.



Cor. 4 6.) and waters that which we plant.







I. They who desire to be made partakers of Christ, must seek the word,
receive the Ministers thereof, and embrace the preaching of the Gospel. II.
They who hear and receive the word, must yet further expect, and desire, that
Christ by the internal operation of his Spirit, would work upon their hearts,
in, and with his word.

VERSE. 2, 3. Now when John had heard in the Prison the works of Christ, he
sent two of his Disciples, and said unto him, Art thou he that should come? or
do we look for another?
When John had heard in the Prison.

John the Baptist, and yet he is cast into Prison; To teach us,

That the greatest, and best, and dearest of the Children of God are subject to
affliction. Read Acts. 14.22. and 2. Timoth. 3.13. and Hebr. 12.8.

Why are the best, and most holy afflicted?

They are afflicted for a fourefold respect,

First, Respectu sui, in regard of themselves: there is in all (even the best)
a root of sin, and therefore our hearts must be plowed up by the Coulter,
and Plow-share of affliction, that so the root of sin may be cast out. Ierem.
4.4. Winter corrects and helps the overflowing, and abounding of humors; and
the fore-skinne is to be cut off. Deuter. 30.16.

Secondly, Respectu Dei, in regard of God; that thereby he may show himself to
be the Physician of his Children; yea, and that not only a wise, but also a
just Physician.

It may here be objected,

It is true,

I. The outward call of his word preached to the ear. And,

II. The inward motions of his Spirit, working upon the heart. And,

III. Afflictions, either corporal inflicted upon the body, or spiritual,
upon the soul, by reason of sin: for sometimes God wounds the body with
sorrow, and sometimes the soul for sin. And therefore this being one of the
ordinary means, whereby God weanes his Children from sin, he will not
sometimes withhold it from the best, and those who are best beloved by him.

Thirdly, Respectu impiorum, in regard of the wicked, that they may be justly
confounded, who enjoy peace, and yet will not obey. When the wicked see the
righteous, (who are careful to please God, and fearful to offend him) under
the rod and subject to some (sometimes sharp) affliction; and themselves
spared; they are left without excuse, and at the day of judgment shall not be
able to answer one word for a thousand; who would not obey that gracious God
that dealt so favorably with them, in sparing them, when he punished, and
corrected those who were much better.

Fourthly, Respectu, vitae futurae, in regard of the life to come: because the
Crown of thorns is the way to the crown of glory; and affliction to
felicity, Romans 8.17. and 2 Timothy 2.13. Hence we hear Abel to be persecuted of
Cain; Isaac of Ismael, Jacob of Esau, Joseph of his brethren, the Israelites
of Pharaoh, yea Christ of the Jews. And therefore reason there is we see that
the righteous should be afflicted, and justice in the afflicting of them.

How may we know whether we be righteous

Vae nobis, Woe be unto us; for our portion, will be the portion of Dives, and
that same dismal and direful ditty, will resound in our ears, which was
sounded: Thou in thy life receivedst thy pleasure; therefore now thou art
tormented, Luke 16. Such as these have their portion in this life, Psalm
17.14. there being nothing prepared for them in the life to come, but misery
and torment.



Termini convertibiles.



John Baptist) we suffer for Christ, or the truth, James 1.2, 10. that being
the crown of life, Ianus 1.12. We must labor to learn our Christ's Cross,
and be instructed by our afflictions; learning thereby: First, in general, to
be humbled under the mighty hand of God, (1 Pet. 5.6.) acknowledging his hand
in our afflictions.

Secondly, more particularly, we must learn by affliction, to be bridled from
sin, and our own will; to abstain from evil and our own ways. And,

Thirdly, we must labor under the Cross for a certain union, and conjunction
with Christ in the covenant of love and mercy.



John hear of, and how did he hear of them in prison?

Luke does plainly show, Chap. 7. For,

First, he raised a young man from death unto life, verse 12. etc. with the
admiration of all that heard of it, verse 17.

Secondly, John's Disciples bring him word of this unto the prison, verse 18.
whence he sends two of them back unto Christ, verse 19.

Thirdly, some think, these things are to be applied to the present time: As
if this our Evangelist would say; John hearing, that even now Christ wrought
many great miracles, laid hold of this fit, and seasonable time, to send unto
Christ, both for the confirming of his Disciples, and the people also, that
Jesus was the Christ: But of this afterward.

We may here observe, that Christ wrought many things, and great miracles,
before John was cast in prison; which the Baptist heard not of, being
distracted, or encumbred, with his own work of preaching and baptizing: but
now being in prison, and not suffered publicly to preach, he has leisure to
hear of the works of Christ: To teach us;

That the prison does administer time to hear Psalm. 119.67.71.
or affliction does afford opportunity unto spiritual duties: when men are (as
John now was) cast into prison, or deprived of their sight, or disinabled
through sickness or weakness to work; they have the more time, and leisure
to pray, and meditate, and examine themselves, and the like: As appears thus.

First, affliction takes away the quiet of the flesh, and presses us down,
and constraines us to complain, and makes us sensible of Gods hand, Psalm
30.6.7, 8. And therefore ministers unto us, occasion and opportunity of doing
good, and of humbling our selves before the Lord.

Secondly, affliction removes carnal impediments from us; as for example. I.
If we be deprived of riches, then we have the less molestations, and
distracting cares. II. If we be deprived of health, that we cannot labor;
then we have the better opportunity to read, hear, pray, and the like: It
had been well for Martha, if she had been sick; for then she would have
had leisure to have heard Christ; but being well, she was troubled about so
many things, that she had no time to hear. III. If we be deprived of
liberty, then with John, we have more leisure to hear of Christ.

How may we know, whether affliction be

First, if it drive us unto Christ, as unto our

Secondly, if leisure and opportunity being

We may observe hence again: John being in prison, was excluded, and shut out
of the presence of Christ: he could not now come unto him, but he could hear
from him; and although he were caged and hindered from coming abroad, yet not
from the hearing of the Gospel, for that penetrates the prison: When he was in
prison, be heard of the great works of Christ. To teach us:

That the Gospel penetrates into the most Act. 5.19. and 16.26.) the word
penetrates into the hearts of those, who deride and mock it, Act. 2.37. the
word comes to Ner^^s Palace, Philip. 1. And divides betwixt the marrow and the
bones, Hebr. 4.12. yea, it flies through the whole world, Romans 10. And is the
mighty power of God unto salvation, Romans 1.16. Psalm 45.4.

How may this History of John's incarcerating

If we consider this literal History Allegorically it is an exemplar of our
Conversion: For

First, by nature we are free from Christ, Romans 6.18. Then,

Secondly, we are imprisoned under the Law, and spirit of bondage, Romans 8.35.
being deprived of all true comfort. Then,

Thirdly, we hear of Christ by the hear, Job 42:5. In a dark speaking, 1 Corinthians. 13. Then

Fourthly, we receive a message of comfort, 2 Cor. 3.18. being assured by the
Spiris, that Christ is our Lord, and our God.

He sent two of his Disciples.

John sent unto Jesus?





John 1.40. I answer, that certainly, these two were not those two: The two
mentioned there, are Andrew and his companion, which could not be these two
sent from John to Christ, as appears evidently thun. I. These two, (at least
one of them) remained with Christ, and were his Disciple. And therefore; II.
They could not doubt of Christ, which followed him. And III. The great rumor
and report of Christ's miraculous works (which is judged to be the cause of the
sending these two Disciples unto Christ) was long, after Andrews departure
unto Christ, John 3.26.

John send these two Disciples unto Christ?



First for his own sake. II. For his Disciples sake. III. For Christ's sake.

First, John sent (when he was in prison) unto Christ, Sua c^i^sa; for his own
sake, or in regard of himself; and that either,

I. Because he was ignorant, whether he of whom he heard so great things were
the Messiah, and Christ, or not; for although he knew, that the Messiah was now
to come, (yea was already come) yet he did not know him by his face, neither
could particularly point at the person, until by the Spirit, he was taught
which was he, John 1.31.33. Thus Tertull. and Justin. answer. But to this I
answer, that John could not now be ignorant of Christ, because the Spirit had
showed him which was he, John 1.31.33. and 3.29. And he that was a Prophet,
yea the Prophet of Christ in the womb, could not be ignorant of him, after
he had published, and proclaimed himself unto the world. Or,

II. Because now being in persecution he was fearful: Nam Spiritus sanctus
posiquam auctus in Christo, a Iohanne disessit; (Tertul.) For the Spirit of God
had departed from John unto Christ; or at least, the more Christ increased in
Spirit, the more John decreased: according to his own words: He must
increase, but I must decrease, John 3.^0. To this I answer these things: to wit,

First, If we (even all the faithful) have received, and do daily receive of
his fullness, ( John 1.16.) then the Spirit is increased (being increased in
Christ) rather then diminished, or decreased: and therefore it follows not,
that because the Spirit was increased in Christ, therefore it was decreased in
John.

Secondly, the Spirit was given to David, and taken away from Saul; not ab
penuriam Spiritus, for any want or defect in the Spirit, (as though it could
not have inspired them both, and that sufficiently and abundantly) but because
Saul was rejected: Now I know the Reverend Father, and Father which I
reverence, will not say that John was so.

Thirdly, John was not incarcerated, or cast into prison, for the profession of
Christ, but through the hatred that Herodias bare unto him: And therefore there
was no need that he should fear persecution, for the confessing and
acknowledging of Christ.

Fourthly, if John had feared persecution for Christ's sake, then certainly he
would never so openly have sent his Disciples on this message unto Christ,
seeing it must needs be every way as dangerous, and full of peril, as to
confess him. Or:

III. Because he did doubt, whether Christ were he that should offer himself
to death, or whether he would send another. Many of the Ancients run this way,
says Maldonat. s. But is rejected, even of the Papists themselves. Or,

IV. Because being now in prison, pressed with affliction, grief, and sorrow,
he desires to nourish, and increase, and strengthen his faith, by more
testimonies then yet he had of Christ; And this of all the rest I conceive most
likely, to be most true. Whence we may learn.

That we must labor so to nourish our faith Cor. 10.15. Colos. 2.7 and 1 These.
4.10. and 2 These. 1.3.

Why must we be thus careful to nourish and

First, because so long as we are in this life, we In augmento, non statu, in a
growing age, not come unto our full growth: our perfection here being
respective, not absolute. Read for the proof hereof, 1 Cor. 13.9. Ephesians. 4.12.
and 3.19. and 2 Cor. 3.18.

Secondly, because this work (to increase in Matthew. 13. Phil. 2.12.

Thirdly, because the impediments of faith

Fourthly, because it is the nature of true Lord increase our faith, John 6.34.

Secondly, John Baptist sent (when he was in prison) his Disciples unto Christ,
Disciputorum causa, for their sakes, and that either:

I. To stay their murmuring: for they seem to tell John the great works,
which Christ did, with some disdain or indignation against Christ. He (say
they) whom thou baptizedst, now baptizeth himself, and all run after him,
John 3.26. Whence I might observe: That there will be emulations in the Church
of Christ, and that among the godly: but I pass this by. Or,

II. John sent them by Christ, that they might be instructed in Christ: He was
now shortly by death to depart from them, and to leave them; and therefore he
sends them unto Christ, that they might adhere unto, and follow him. To teach
us:

theirs, (that is, those who are under their care and charge) unto Christ:
Jacob blesses his before his death, Genesis 49. and Isaac, Genesis 27. Because they
knew, that they must give an account of those who were committed unto them.



Joshua: Let others do as seem good in their own eyes, but we and our
households will serve the Lord: Yet here two things may be distinguished and
observed; namely,

First, we must prepare; and instruct them; and this is always to be done, 2 Corinthians. 11.2. As Abraham taught his children, ( Genesis 18.) and family, the
fear of the Lord. And the sooner this be done, the better it is, Prove. 22.6.
Eccles. 12.1.

Secondly, to deliver some particular directions, and instructions to those,
who are under our care and charge; and this is to be done at, (or a little
before) our departure out of this life. Thus David did, both to Solomon his
son and to his people, 1 Cshron. 28. and 29. Chap. When a Father, or Master
of a family, can no longer remain with their children, or servants, it is the
Christian-like done, to administer holy, and religious counsel, and advice
unto them, and to take the best care for them, that possibly they can: For
herein we shall imitate our blessed Lord and Savior, who when he was to
depart, recommended his Mother to John, and his flock (the people) to Peter,
John 21.



Ely could not wash his hands of.

Deuteronomy. 6.7. yea, have more care of their souls, then of their bodies; more
care to teach them, then to feed them; and not like some, who fat up their
children, and teach their cattle, thus inverting the order, both of nature and
religion.

Thirdly, they are here to blame, who teach

What is the best meditation, or work we

Our best work is, John Baptist here does, to bring our children, and family
unto Christ.

Here observe, that certainly, our first care is to commit and commend our
own spirits into the Lords hands: as David did, Psalm. 3.15. But this work the
godly man does, long before his death: Age dum sanus, tum securus. August. Men
are wont, when they begin to think of death, to set their house in order, and
to take in hand these things: namely;

First, to cast up their estates, to prize all, and then to draw their estate
to a total sum. Then

Secondly, to appoint such and such legacies, to such and such persons. Then,

Thirdly, if their children be marriageable, to take care for the disposing of
them in marriage: Thus we all should do indeed, with a little change, viz.

I. Let us cast up our accounts, and render a reckoning unto our God, how many
talents we have gained; that is, how many children; or how many servants have
we brought in our life time unto our Lord Christ?

II. Let us dispose, and appoint our Legacies; give Christ unto thy family, and
give thy family unto Christ: Remember, that he promised to give unto thee
himself, and his Father, and his love; now therefore (before thou go away)
assign all these over unto thy children.

III. Let us marry our children (before we go) unto the Lord; oh it is an
excellent work, and earnestly to be taken in hand; for what is dearer unto a
man, then his children? what should a man care for more then his children?
wherein can a man better show his care for his children, then here, in marrying
them unto the King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords; yea, unto the Lord, and
King of heaven and earth? The Papists take care to get their daughters into
Nunneries, and their sons into Abbeys; but our care should be to get them
entered, and admitted into the Free-Schoole of Religion, before we die, and
then both we and they shall be happy. Hereunto three things are required of us;
to wit:

First, to pray daily unto the Lord for them, and that he would season and
sanctify their hearts with saving grace. And,

Secondly, to instruct, exhort, teach, and admonish them, so long as we are
with them: but principally, and most pithily, and vehemently, when we are to
depart from them; For the last words take a deep impression in the hearts of
those, who have any grace at all. And,

Thirdly, let us be lights and patterns unto them; both of piety, and purity
in life, and of courage, cheerfulness, patience, and constancy in death.

Thirdly, John being in prison, sends his Disciples unto Christ, Causa Christi,
and totius Ecclesiae, in regard of Christ, and his Catholic Church: And that
either:

I. That he might congratulate with Christ; as we are wont to say (by way of
rejoicing) to our friends, when they are returned, after a long absence, and
expectation of them; Venistine? What art thou come? Answer, I dare not
subscribe to this particular, and that,

First, because if this be the meaning of the Interrogation, then these words
(or shall we look for another?) are idly added. And,

Secondly, because Christ would not have returned an answer, if a question had
not been intended by John. And therefore the clear fountain of the word, is
not to be troubled with the clay of man's inventions; nor the fictions and
fancies of our brain, to be mixed with sacred truths. Or,

II. That he might give an occasion, to publish to the whole Congregation,
that Jesus was the Christ, and true Messiah. Whence learn;

Romans 10.18. and 15.17.20 For, for this end, was both the Gospel, and the
Forerunner sent, Esa. 40.





First, Christus doc^udus, Christ is to be taught, and this in the principles,
and grounds of religion, 1 Cor. 2.2. Phil. 3.8. John 17.3. Ministers must be
careful, to build up their people in saving knowledge, and sound doctrine.

Secondly, Christus imprimendus, Christ is to be imprinted in the heart, and
soul, Gal. 4.19. and 2.20. Ministers must labor to bring their people unto
Christ, and to bring Christ unto their souls, that he may dwell with them,
and live in them, and continue amongst them for ever and ever. For this is the
greatest, and best work of all, to have Christ live in us, and abide with us:
Aliud est Christum sequi, aliud tenere, aliud manducare, Bern. It is one thing
to seek Christ, or to follow him; (for a man may seek that he cannot find) it
is another, to lay hold of him (for a man may lay hold upon him, and yet not
bring him home to his house, as the Church did, Cantic.) it is another thing to
eat him, to enjoy him, to be made Partakers of him, to remain and abide with
him, and to have him living within us: And this is that which we must
principally labor for, Ephesians. 3.17. John 14.23. and 2 Cor. 6.18.

. 4. Or shall we look for another.

What was John's scope in this interrogation?

First, John himself did not doubt, whether this Messiah or not. But

Secondly, his Disciples doubted of it. And

Thirdly, the world much questioned the truth of it. And therefore his scope
here was.

I. To tax the blockishnesse, stupidity, and Pharisees. And

II. To confirm and fix the minds of his own Disciples. And

III. To declare and make known unto the whole world, that now they must no
longer expect or wait for the promised Messiah, but take notice of his coming,
and learn to know him by his mighty works, and embrace him, and his doctrine,
without which there can be no salvation. Acts 4.12.

VERSE. 5. The blind receive their sight,
. 1. The blind receive their sight.

Before I come to the particular handling of this verse, I will propound a
general Question or two.

Qua and qu^t in Christi responso animadvertenda.

Duo viz Responsi Christi Relatio generalis; ubi tria. Dixit illis non reji^it,
licet male affectos. Ite renunciate. ubi. 1. Non affirmat. II. Remittit amplius
docendos Quae auditis and videtis: ubi resert se ad opera sua.
Partesquarum altera respicit. Quaestionem; Seipsum: In qua probat se esse
Messiam; Tum ex Operibus miraculosis, utpote, Cacos, Clandos, Leprosos,
sanando, and mortuos excit ando: Verbis id est praedicatione Evangelij.

Quaerentes, Discipulos Iohannis, Beati qui non offensi per me, seu qui non
scandalizabuntur in me.


What was the end of Christ's Miracles, or Agit propter finem, propounds some
end unto himself in all the actions which he performs; and therefore much
more Christ.

First, the end of Christ Miracles was to demonstrate Messiah. Because (says
he) I do the works which no man by his own power can do; therefore believe
that I am the Son of God. John 15.24.

Secondly, another end of Christ's miracles was

Thirdly, another end was to signify Christ's



Iunius (Lib. 1. Paral. 29.) faith, this verse is to be taken historically, and
literally, and he gives these reasons for it, namely,

I. Because we must not flee unto Allegories, when the Text will admit, and
bear a true literal sense, and interpretation.

II. Because the Prophets are wont to insert and mingle histories with Types,
for the greater assurance and confidence.

III. Because the nature of the Types is to be otherwise spoken of, and
predicated, then squares or suites with their natures. And

IV. Because those passages of receiving the Gospel, and taking offense
thereat; are necessarily to be taken in a literal sense.

Calvin s. Non dubium, quin dicatur de spirituali a malis liberatione. Without
doubt our Savior speaks here of a spiritual deliverance, and freedom from
evil; and Tremellius (s. Esa. 35.5) confesses that there is an Hyperbole in
these words; Quia Christus agit tam in animis, quam corporibus: because Christ
is conversant both about soul, and body, and operative also in both.

Prophesies; namely,

I. Some merely Typical; as I will send Elias. Malach. 4.5. And they shall
serve David their King, whom I will raise up unto them. Ierem. 30.9. Now this
kind of Prophecies, Are either First above nature, as those who are spoken
either of God, Humanitus, after the manner of men: As when we are told of
hands, eyes arms, and feet. The creatures against their nature, as the
wilderness shall rejoice Esa 35. And the beam out of the Timber shall
testify against them. Habac. 2.11. Now these are above nature, and therefore
merely Typical.
Secondly, besides the dispensation of grace; As, my people shall sin no
more: For this grace is not given in this life, the best sinning in many
things, so long as they live.


II. Some Prophesies are merely historical, as Senacherib shall not come into
this City, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come before it with shield etc. 2
King 19.32. So, set thy house in order, for thou shall dye and not live. Esa.
38.1.2. And many the like.

III. Some Prophesies, and predictions are of a mixed nature, and these are
twofold; viz. either.

First, mixed secundum parts, when one part is Allegorical, another
Historical; as Mat. 24. where somethings are spoken of the destruction of
Jerusalem. some things of the general judgment Or else,

Secondly, secundum totum, when the same words may be taken in either sense:
As, I will establish the Kingdom of David my servant. Psalm 89.34. This may
either Historically be understood of David; or Typically of all pious, and
religious Kings. So the Lord says of Solomon, If he sin, I will chasten him
with the rods of men, but my loving mercy will I never take from him. Psalm
89.30.31. This may either literally, be understood of David, or figuratively of
all the Children of God. So Hebr. 13.5. I have said I will never fail thee nor
forsake thee: which is spoken Historically of Joshua Chap. 1.5. But the Apostle
understands it Typically of all the children of God. Now of this nature is this
present Scripture; for these things were Typically fulfilled in them, and
showed forth unto us for an example (1 Corinthians. 10.11.) As appears thus: John's
Disciples desire to know whether Christ be the true expected Messiah, or not;
Christ proves that he is, Because.

I. He cures and heales the bodies of men, both of blindness, lamenesse,
deafness, deadness, and Leprosy: yea all these both historically, and
Allegorically, And because

II. He enlightens the minds of men by the Gospel. Christ cured their corporal
maladies; for the blind received their sight etc. Here observe,

First, I confess, that these things have an Hystoricall, truth, that is that
Christ did truly and really cure corporal blindness. as John 9.29.

Secondly, that the Prophesies concerning Christ, do in part speak of the
same, as Esa. 35.5. It is foretold that the Messiah should open the eyes of the
blind, and the ears of the deaf, etc. yea otherwise our Saviors Argument
were nothing. They desire to know whether he be the Christ or not? He says he
is, and proves it thus. The Messiah shall heal the lame, blind, deaf, and
leprous, and shall raise the dead. Esa. 35.5.6. But I do, and have done all
this; Therefore I am the Messiah.

Thirdly, withal we must confess, that the Prophet Esaias in that place does
look higher then these, aiming at spiritual graces, as well as corporal
benefits, and cures. If the learned Reader doubt of this, let him Read Tremes.
s. Esa. 35.5.6. and Muscul. and Hyper. s.

Fourthly, therefore it is lawful for me to ascend, or to proceed from the
body unto the soul. In this place then we are admonished, that it is Christ who
does enlighten the eyes of the minds who purges us from the Leprosy of sin,
who frees us from death etc. Gualt. s.

Two things are very observable in this text namely,

I. What we are by nature; Deaf, blind, lame, Leprous and dead. And

II. That all these maladies are removed, and cured, and that only by Christ:
of these therefore in this order.

The blind receive their sight, here two things are considerable viz.

First, that by nature we are blind.

Secondly, that by Christ, we are illuminated and enabled to see.

Cor. 2.14. Ephesians. 4.18.



Antoninus, part 1. Titul. 3. Cap. 3.. 1. 2. 3. etc. where many rare things are
taught concerning spiritual fight.



First, the purity of the eye: For if the spirits of the eye be perverted
either by Melancholy, or anger, or the Iaundice, then all things will seem
yellow, or green, or the like. Thus Mala men's, Malus animus. If the mind be
corrupted then the man is corrupted, for Men's eujusque est quisque, the mind is
the man: if the eye therefore be dark, how great is that darkness, if the
understanding be perverted, so is also the judgment and affections. And
therefore let us labor for a pure, and sanctified mind free from the infection
and perturbation of sin.

Secondly, unto sight there is required the strength of the eye, that it may
perfectly apprehend the object: for a weak sight apprehends a thing
imperfectly; like the man who said, he saw men walking like trees. So when in
Religion we see In enigmate only, as in twilight or the dawning of the day,
(that is, see something but very darkly and obscurely) we must then labor
that our eyes may be perfectly opened, that thereby we may be able to perceive
things truly, and as they are in their own nature, as follows in the next
particle.

Thirdly, unto sight is required the liberty of common sense, that so we may
be able to judge of things that differ. And therefore we must not be like
children in understanding, as the Apostle says, When I was a Child, I spoke as
a Child, I thought as a Child, I understood as a Child; 1 Cor. 13.10. We must
not judge of Religion, or the service of God with a carnal eye, or the eye of
natural reason; but with an eye truly informed; that hereby we may be able
to judge of things truly, and aright. A melancholy man often thinks men to
be Bears; and a mad man, friends to be enemies, and hence oftentimes fleeeth
in the face of the Physician that desires to cure him. Thus in Religion we
often think the Lord hates us, because he will not give us that which we
desire, although it be as bad as Rats-bane for us, We cannot endure reproof
from the Ministers of God, neither that they should speak unto us, but desire
rather that they would willingly permit us to run headlong unto destruction.
And thus so long as common sense is captivated, we cannot judge of things as
they are: Wherefore let us labor that our understandings may be enlightened,
and our judgments truly informed.

Fourthly, unto fight there is required the light of the Sun, or Moon, or of a
candle, for three things are ordinarily required unto sight, to wit,

I. The Organ that sees, and takes up the Object.

II. The Object that is apprehended by the Organ. And

III. The Midst, by or through which the Organ does perceive, and receive the
Object. Although there be an Object which may be seen, and the Air also
enlightened, yet if a man want eyes, he cannot see that Object. Therefore unto
sight an Organ is necessary. If a man could see and the air were enlightened,
yet if the Object were not in fight, or if we could conceive no object to be
objected unto the eye, then the eye could apprehend nothing: Therefore unto
sight an Object is necessary.

If there were an Organ, and an Object, that is, if a man could see or have an
eye, yea that eye were open and awake, yet could he not see if either there
were no midst, or if the midst were dark. For

First, if there be no midst betwixt the Organ and the Object, then the Object
cannot be perceived by the Organ: for Sensibile positum supra sensorium, non
facit sensationem. Lay any thing upon the eye, and the eye cannot see (although
it be open) because there is no Midst to see through. Therefore unto sight it
is required, that there should be a Midst.

Secondly, although there be a midst, yet if it be dark, the Organ cannot take
up the Object. The Egyptians in that palpable darkness could see nothing, not
because there was no Object to be seen, or because their eyes were put out or
blinded; but because the Midst was obscured and darkened through which they
should see. And therefore unto sight it is required, that there should be a
Midst, and that the Midst should be clear and light.

Thirdly, although there be an Object, and an Organ, and a Midst, yea, and
that Midst be enlightened, yet there must be a true, and equal Intercapedo, or
distance of place: for suppose there was as even, and level and plain a piece
of ground, as could be imagined of a hundred miles in length, and at noone day
one man were set at the one end, and another at the other end thereof; yet
these two could not see one another, propter intercapedimum, by reason of the
long and unequal distance of place. And therefore unto fight it is required,
that the Organ should be rightly disposed, the Midst rightly composed, and the
Object rightly Proposed.

Thus we cannot truly see or perceive those things which are spiritual,
without the Midst be enlightened by the Sun, or some other light, that is,
without the light of the Spirit from above, natural wisdom not being able to
take up these things. The Philosopher threw away the Pentateuch as a frivolous
Pamphlet, not worthy to be received, or read. Yea from hence the Fathers say,
that Philosophi Haeresiarchae. The Philosophers were Arch-heretickes: As I
might instance and prove both by Caelius, Porphyrius, Iulianus, and diverse
others, but I pass them by, concluding this Question with the Apostles
assertion. Romans 8.6. etc. The carnal mind is enmity against God: for it is
not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. And therefore we must
labor that we may be enlightened by the Sun of righteousness, or we are no
better then blind men, who can see nothing.



Psalm. 143.10.



I. Purge the eye from all evil humors. And

II. Common sense from all diseases, and sicknesses, that is labor that thy
mind, and judgment, and affections, yea the whole inward man, may be purged
from all sin and truly sanctified.



Ephesians. 5.14. Luke 1 79. and 2.32.



It appears thus, Luke 12.38. John 12.35. and 3.19. Esa. 60.2. Luke 1.79.
Secondly, as the world, so we are dark: For I. Partly we are sleepie, and
drowsy, Ephesians. 5.14. And II. Partly we are blind. Ephesians. 4.18. and 5.8.
Thirdly, true light is only in Christ, and therefore all comes from him.
John, 1.5.9. and 8.12. Acts 26.18. Ephesians. 1.18.






First, internal, and passive, of the mind, And

Secondly, external, and active, of the life and conversation. Now this is
never called the Eye, but the former; and therefore I will treat only of that a
word or two.

The light of the mind is rightly resembled to an eye in many regards, viz.

First, the eye is the most Noble part of the body, and most profitable for the
body. Math. 6.22. So knowledge and the true illumination of the mind is most
profitable for the soul, and of great excellency and worth.

Secondly, there are two eyes, a right eye, and a left. Mat. 5.29. So the mind
being enlightened judges sinisterly of all evil ways, and looks upon the
wicked world with the left eye: but upon the ways of God, and all goodness,
with the right Eye, and with a dexterous opinion.

Thirdly, the best sight is, when both the eyes look upon one and the same
thing: for otherwise we are squint-eyed. Man looked thus when he was first
created, but has looked asquint ever since, or else looks with both the eyes
upon a wrong object. Man in his first creation looked with both his eyes
steadfastly upon God; and happy had man been if he had so continued; but by the
fall of Adam man was so corrupted in his sight, that now both his eyes are
commonly set upon evil, and he is but squint-eyed at the best. The nearer man
comes to his first estate, the better he is, now when the mind is truly
enlightened, then we begin to withdraw our eyes from vanity, and to lift them
up to the hills, where our hope, and help, and happiness is.

Fourthly, the left eye being shut, the right eye sees the more, and
contrarily; So the more earnestly we look with the right eye of the Mind and
understanding upon spiritual things, the more we see and discern of them, and
the less of carnal, and mundane things. On the other side if we look with
the left eye upon the world and wickedness, then it is but small insight we
shall have into spiritual things, but into corporal and carnal much.

Fifthly, it was disputed of old, whether the eye saw, intromittendo, or
retromittendo: so now adays it is disputed, whether man be saved by an active
or passive faith: But I will not dispute it, only let the Reader read and
mark, Ephesians, 2.8.

Sixthly, the eye is accurately, and most carefully defended, both by a
forehead, which hangs over it, and eyelids, which hang before it, Oculus,
dicitur ab occulendo. Varro, because it is covered, wrapped and veiled with
many folds, and fine coverings; yea, it stands in need of all, because it is so
tender a part, and so quickly endangered. Thus the mind and soul had need be
kept with watch and ward; because a little thing hurts, endangers, and ruins
it. The tongue that speaks proud words, destroys the soul. Polluted thoughts
destroy the soul, Jerem. 4.14. And the least evil thing shall not go for
naught, but shall endanger the poor soul; and therefore it had need carefully
to be looked unto.

Seventhly, the act of seeing comes from the spirits, which are in the eye; and
neither from that watery, or glass, or christaline humor that is therein, nor
yet from the nerves thereof; these being but only the conveyers, and
conduit-pipes of the spirits: So the knowledge, wisdom, and spiritual
understanding which we have, comes not from our selves, or from any natural
faculty, or power within us; but from the alone illumination of the blessed
Spirit.

Eighthly, the diseases of the eye, proceed not from the spirits, but from the
humors, or at least, from the absence of the spirits, In toto, vel vel tanto:
So the depravations, corruptions, and errors of the mind, proceed not from the
spirit of God, but from the natural imperfections of the mind, or at least
from the absence of the blessed Spirit from the soul.

Ninthly, the eye cannot behold the Sun; not because the Sun is contrary to
the eye, (for nothing is more delectable thereunto, or more desired;) but
because the Sun is too too excellent, and bright, for the eye to behold: And
therefore, seeing the eye cannot behold it in his full bigness and beauty, or
greatness and glory, it does therefore behold it in a cloud, or in the water,
or in the Rainbow; or through some cracks, or crannie, or clift, or hole of a
wall. So the souls chiefest happiness, is to see God, Mat. 5.8. But because
with Moses, we cannot see him in his glory, therefore we look upon his
Picture, and contemplate; and behold him in his creatures, in his works, in
his word, in his Christ, and in all his Attributes.



Examine seriously these things; viz. Psalm. 4.6. and 51.11. Ephesians. 3.19.
Secondly, whether have we a true, and watchful faith; or do we but sleep
and dream? that is, are we so assured of the presence, and good work of
Christ within us, that the remembrance, and assurance thereof, produces joy
and peace, Psalm. 4.8. Thirdly, whether is our conversation holy, and
unblameable, or not? are we zealous for the glory of God? are we filled with
the fullness of God? is there true life, and strength of grace in us, 1 John
1.^. Thus we must examine, whether we have light in our understanding? whether
we have light and brightness in our faith? and whether we are light and bright
in our lives, and conversations? Fourthly, whether do we hunger after that
glorious light, which is reserved in the heavens, or not? Phil. 1.23. and 3.20.
Revelat. 6.10. and 1 King. 19.4.




Esa. 55.6. and do not, either; I. Prefer other things before it. Or, II.
Procrastinate and delay, to enquire after it, Act. 22.16.





I. God enlightens the mind. 1 John 1.5. that is, God the Father, James 1.17.
God the Son, John 8.12. and God the Holy Ghost, Ephesians. 3.16.18. And therefore
we must desire God the Father, to enlighten our minds and understandings by
his holy Spirit, for his Christ's sake. Thus David did, Psalm 13.4. and thus
Paul would have us to do, Ephesians. 1.18.

II. The Ministers of the word, enlighten by the Gospel, 2 Cor. 4.4.6. and
Eccles. 3.5. And therefore we must be diligent in hearing the word, marking
best what does most concern our selves, and remembering that carefully, and
practicing it sincerely, and diligently.

III. I may add, that the godly do enlighten by their godly conversation: And
therefore profanely, perilously, and blasphemously is the holy for his
holiness, derided and scoffed, ( Psalm. 119.51.) this not being the way unto
illumination, but a means to keep us still blind, and dark. Wherefore they
who desire, that their minds may be enlightened, must 1. Pray unto God, to
anoint the eyes of their understanding, with the eye salve of his Spirit: Then
2. They must hear the word of God diligently, and desire that the Lord would
make it a means of illumination unto them: And 3. They must delight in the
society of the Saints, they must contemplate, and observe diligently their
sanctity, and integrity of life; and they must labor to imitate their virtues.

. 2. The Lame walk.

What is the meaning of these words?

First, Ambulare, to walk, is commonly understood Mar. 7.5. Luke 1.6. and Act.
14.16.

Secondly, Via, the way, signifies the practice of John, He walked in the way
of righteousness, Matthew. 21.32. And therefore most properly these words follow
the former, and the Lame, the Blind; because we must Walk, whilst we have
light, John 12.33. In these words, as in the former, we have two things to
consider of; namely: I. What we are by nature, and without Christ. II. What we
are by grace in Christ?

First, by nature we are lame; or so long as Psalm. 14.1 etc. Esa. 60.4. Romans
7.18.

How does this appear?

Because the impression of concupiscence within us, is:

First, universal, and general; that is, is seated and placed in all our
affections, and desires.

And:

Secondly, it is vehement, and strong, and of great power, Romans 7.5. and is
therefore called Lex membrorum, a law of the members, Romans 7.23. Yea;

Thirdly, it is so deeply rooted in us, that it cannot be removed by us: and
therefore by reason thereof we are made, and become truly miserable, Romans 7.24.

. The Lepers are cleansed.

By Leprosy is meant sin, because this is the pollution of the soul, as
that is of the body: And herein also we have two things to observe: viz. I.
That by nature we are defiled with the leprosy of sin. II. That by Christ
we are purged from the pollution of sin.

First, our natural estate is here worth observing: Genesis 6.5. and 8.21. and
Romans 5.12. and Ephesians. 2.1.3. Psalm. 39.5. and 116.11.

How does this appear?

First, it appears thus, Gehezi and Miriam, were Adams transgression, 1 Cor.
6.10. etc. Ephesians. 4. 17. etc. Tit. 3.3.

Job 14.4. and 15.14. and 25.4.) Psalm. 51.7. And therefore it is evident, that
all men are defiled.

The Body, is but a dead Organ, except only as it is quickened, and enlivened by
the soul. II. All our senses are both direct Traitors, letting in temptation
into the soul; and also the servants, and handmaids of lust and concupiscence.
III. The bruit part of man, is wholly set upon evil, and runs after, and
pursues nothing else: that is, both (...), the Irascible, and concupiscible
parts or faculties. IV. The Imagination does continually present some evil or
other unto the soul, Ephesians. 4.18. V. The will of man always (naturally)
assents to the worse part; Video meliora proboque: deteriora sequor: I see
what is best, but oh accursed;
I follow still what is the worst.


This was the bitter plaint of blessed Paul: The evil which I would not do, I
do daily, Romans 7.15. VI. Natural reason, and carnal wisdom, are enemies,
and opposite unto God, and averse from him, Romans 8.7. VII. (...), the mind it
self (which the Platonicks thought, did partake of the divine nature) stands
in need of reformation, and renovation, Ephesians. 4.23. Romans 12.2. And thus we
see by an Induction of parts, how the whole man of all mankind is corrupt.



I. Leprosy is an universal disease; it begins, and breeds first in the
humors, then breaks forth in the skin; and within a while overspreads the
whole man: Thus sin seizing first upon the soul; by and by, corrupted and
tainted, both soul and body. And therefore we should consider, how necessary
it is that we should be changed, and renewed, who are thus corrupted and
defiled. We are easily persuaded to confess, and acknowledge, that a change is
necessary, but very difficultly persuaded to go about the work, being (herein
especially) enemies to innovations: wherefore we should so much the more
earnestly, and industriously undertake the task; by how much the harder, and
contrary, to our natural affections it is.

II. Leprosy is hereditary (as was showed before: Chap. 8.) And so is sin,
derived from the father to the son.

III. Leprosy is an unclean disease: For

First, the humors in Lepers are intemperate: And,

Secondly, altogether corrupt, and poisonous: so that the humors in the Leper,
and in him, who is taken with the French (or Neapolitane) disease, are much
like. And,

Thirdly, it is an infectious disease; and therefore by the Leviticall Law,
Lepers were to live alone. Thus sin does pollute, and infect our selves, and
endangereth others: And therefore why should we presume thereof? Let us rather,
remember that I. Sin cast us out of Paradise. And, II. Brought death upon
Christ, who knew no sin in himself; neither deserved any death, or
punishment at all, for any offense of his own. And III. Hinders our prayers
from being heard; for God hears not sinners, John 9. And IV. Hinders the Lord
from saving us, because it is contrary to his Justice, to save sinners. Yea, V.
Is of that nature, that one sin is enough to destroy us: yea, the whole
world: as we see in the sin of Adam, Achan, Saul, David, Jonas, Hezekiah; yea
if Christ had but broken the least commandment, he could not have saved us.

IV. The Leprosy leaves its scarres, and marks, and relickes, behind it. So
sin leaves its remainders, and a pronenesse unto concupiscence behind it, and
a certain weakness, and inability in nature, to do the will and work of God.

V. Hence, the Leper (although he be cured of his Leprosy, and pronounced
clean) is prone to relapse, and fall into this disease again: So by reason of
the remainders and relickes of sin in us, we are prone to relapse, and fall
into sin, even after our regeneration. And therefore we must be watchful, and
circumspect over all our ways, standing always upon our Watchtower, and
laboring, and praying, that the Lord would sanctify us throughout, both in
body, soul, and spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. And thus we have heard, that we are by
nature polluted with the leprosy of sin. It remains now:

Secondly, to show that by Christ we are purged from sin: Or,

That those whom Christ receives, he cures

How may we know,

Examine seriously these five things, viz. First, Secondly, whether do we hate
all sorts and kinds of sin whatsoever, or not? whether great or small? whether
public or private? whether beloved or not beloved? Thirdly, whether have we
strength to walk in the ways of God? have we received health, and strength,
and new humors from the Lord; in so much, as now we can serve the Lord in
purity of heart? Fourthly, whether have we tender consciences, and awakened
consciences, or not, which will not endure the least touch of sin, but
carefully watch against all? Fifthly, whether does the Watchman of Israel,
which neither slumbers nor sleeps, preserve and keep us: that is, both watch
over us himself, and also excite us to be watchful over our selves.
Certainly, if we find these things in us, we may then be confidently assured,
that the Lepers are cleansed. And therefore enquire diligently, whether, 1. We
hate all sins in general? and 2. Strive more particularly against our own
sins? And 3. Are afraid to commit any, and watchful against all? And 4.
Perceive the holy Spirit, to prevent us from sin, and to help us forward in
the performance of what is good? And 5. Find new strength in our bones and
joints, to serve the Lord? For by these we may know, whether we be freed from
the pollution of sin, or not?


The deaf hear.

First, we must here consider the estate of nature. And then,

Secondly, the state of grace.

First, by nature we are deaf, until we be cured.



Deafenes is twofold: Body; of which I here speak not. Or, Mind, and it is an
incapacity of things; either, Natural: but we hear the clamours of nature,
which desire meat, drink, sleep, rest, health, pleasure, and the like. Or,
Moral; but we can learn worthy wisdom, and crafts, and the like. Or,
Scientialium, of things belonging to Arts, and sciences; but the natural man
can learn liberal arts, and sciences, and professions, yea, even the most
deep and profound arts. Or Spiritual: Now these things are understood: either.
I. In others; and here our ears are open enough to hear, and judge, and
proudly to censure others, Mat. 7.1. Romans 2.1. II. In our selves; and here we
are truly deaf: being not able to hear the Lord, or his word: And this
deafness I here speak of.



Ierem. 11.10. and 13.10.



First, naturally, we refuse to hear the threatenings of the word. 2 Chronicles.
36.16. Esa. 5.19. Ierem. 17.15.

Secondly, we stop our ears against the promises of the word Malach. 3.10.14.
and 2. Peter 3.4.

Thirdly, we are careless of the call of the word Prove. 1.24. etc.

Fourthly, we regard not the commands of the Esa. 30.9. etc. Ierem. 7.23. etc.
Ezech. 20.8. Audi^e to hear is ordinarily taken for obedire, to obey, in the
book of the Proverbes: ye would not hear: that is, ye would not obey.

Fifthly, we will not listen, to the Doctrines, and instructions Ierem. 32.33.
Now the meaning of the proposition I observed is this, Although the Lord call,
yet natural men will not hear: although he command, yet they will not obey;
although he teach, yet they will not learn; although he threaten, yet they
will not fear; although he promise yet they will not believe.

Do none at all all hear the word of God?

All men are deaf, but not al after the same manner, or in the same measure, or
malice:

First, some directly deny and refuse to hear the word, Ierem. 44.16. and
7.26. and 11.8. Zach. 7.11. etc. Mat. 23.37. This might be applied to those who
are refractory, who say, who is the Lord that we should obey him? (Exodus 5.2.)
and our tongues are ours, who shall control us? Psa. 12.4. But this belongs
not to the present institution properly, and therefore I omit it.

Secondly, some do not only refuse to hear the word but over and above
deride it. as 2 Chronicles. 30.10. and 36.16. and Acts 17.32. This may be applied.

I. To those who deride the Professors of the word Psalm 119.51. And

II. To those who scoff, at the preaching of the word. And

III. To those who taunt at Religion it self: As the story says of the
Thief, who bid spare him till the day of Judgment, and then he would take
all. But these being particular faults, and I having to treat of the general
disease and deafness, pass these over.

Thirdly, some (yea all natural men) are insensible of all true fear, and
understanding, having ears but hear not. Psalm 115.6. Ierem. 5.21. Ezech.
12.2. Mat. 13:13. etc.

Fourthly, the meaning therefore of the Proposition observed is this; The
natural man cannot so hear or receive the word (given for his salvation and
conversion) in his affection, internal sense, and conscience, that it works
in his heart conversion unto God.

How does this appear?

Thus,

I. In Goodness, for he loves not that which is good, although he do in part
understand it to be good: For every rule of Religion is hard. John. 6.60. And
wordly wisdom is enmity against God. Romans 8.7. yea hence naturally we love
not Christ (although of all others, and other things most worthy to be beloved)
Esa. 53.2. But will rather leave him, then embrace such hard lessons as he
teaches. John 6.65. Nature being altogether averse both from God and good.

II. In truth, for he cannot understand spiritual things.



Natural men understand many things: for they fear, and are enlightened, and
reformed, and have a taste of good things. Mark. 6.20. And therefore are neither
so blind nor deaf, as we would make them to be.

Cor 13.12.

viz.

I. General: and this grace can do much, both toward humiliation, from the
law, and illumination; for a man may be humbled with legal terrors; a man
may be so far enlightened, that he may pray with much show of understanding,
and fervor, and sense; yea have a taste of faith, and the good word of God;
and all from this general grace.

II. Particular, and effectual, unto conversion, and regeneration: Now those
who are deprived of this Grace, can do nothing as they ought to do nor hear
the word as they ought to hear. For

First, the end of Preaching is to teach men the knowledge of God; yea that
knowledge which is life eternal. John 17.3. And

Secondly, so to teach them the beauty, and sweetness, and goodness of God,
that they may love him, and long for him, and cry after him, before all other
things. Psalm 27.4. And

Thirdly, that through this love of God, we might be constrained to obey him,
and that both in heart, and life, 1 Corinthians. 6.20. But

Fourthly, nature is not capable of God, or spiritual things. 1 Corinthians 2.14.
Acts 16.14. Esa. 48.8. Here this phrase, or word Hearing is worth observing.
For thereunto three things are required, namely,

First, a voice, or the word preached. 1 Corinthians. 1.18.21. And

Secondly, the air, or breath that carries the voice to the Ear; and this is
the holy Spirit, which imprints the word in the heart with deep and indeleble
Characters. And

Thirdly, the Organ rightly disposed. Now so long as we are natural we have
neither of these.

Now as much as in us lies, we must labor to prevent, and remove all these
causes.

Audiunt; by Christ the deaf hear; or their spiritual hearing is restored
unto them; Or, Christ cures in his Children the deafness of the soul. Esa.
43.8. and 54.13. Ierem. 31.34.





I. Obstructions, or the stopping of the Ear: Now in the Stopping of the Ear,
There are three things to be considered, To Wit,

First, the efficient cause thereof; and this is the world, who labors to fill
our hearts, and take up our thoughts, and bewitch us with the delights thereof.
Now Christ cures this by showing how foolish, and vain, and transitory all the
things of the world are (Eccles.) yea that they are but snares, and wounds, and
most unconstant friends. 1. Timoth. 6.10. and Luke. 12.20.

Secondly, the sickely effect; for the Stopping of the Ear works a hardness
in the Ear; and as the humors in the Kidneyes and Bladder, do so harden that
they turn into a stone, and the stopping of the humors in the hands or feet
breed those Nodos podagricos, and Cheiragricos: So the humors of the Ear
being stopped breed such a hardness, that it begets both pain in the Ear,
and duls the hearing. Now Christ cures this, by taking away our hard and stony
hearts, and giving us hearts of flesh. Ezech. 11.19. Acts 2.38.

Thirdly, there is the infirmity it self, or deafness; this Christ cures, by
opening, and boring our Ears ( Job. 33.16. Esa. 50.5. etc. Acts 16.14. Esa.
55.10.) and enabling us to hear the word of God with joy and comfort.

II. The next impediment of the Ear which Christ takes away, is dryness, or
want of moisture in the Ear: This he cures by sending rain, and watring our
hearts with the deaw of Heaven, and with the grace of his holy Spirit. Read
Deuter. 32, 2 Esa. 30.20 etc. and 44.3. and 55.10.

Thirdly, the ringing, and tinckling in the Ear, hinders the heareing; this is
blind zeal, and is cured by Christ who enlightens our understandings, and
enformes our judgments, and suffers us no longer, through a false zeal (with
Saul) to persecute Christ, and his members, Acts. 9.4.
or in his members, but with Paul to suffer, yea to dye (If God require it) for
the glory of Christ, and the good of his body the Church.

IV. The weakness of the brain is a great impediment to the hearing: Now
this Christ cures by enabling us to hear the word of God profoundly, that is,
(as he did to Eze^hiel) enabling us to hear with our ears, and to receive in
our hearts all the words that the Lord speaks unto us: Ezec. 3.1^
and not like the seed in stony ground, who for want of depth of root, and
ground withered and died. Mat. 13.5.

V. Sleep and Lethargy hinders the hearing: this Christ cures by enabling us
to hear the word with delight, as Esaias commands us 58.13. And with joy, as
Jeremiah did. Thy words were found and I did eat them, and they were the very
joy and rejoicing of my heart. Ierem. 15.16.

Secondly, Christ does not only take away the impediments of hearing, but
repaires and restore the losses of the Ear which are principally

I. Christ gives life unto us. John 1.4. and 14.6. Dead men cannot hear; and
therefore he quickens us as follows in the next Section.

II. Christ gives his Spirit unto us ( Cantie. 4.16 Joel 2.28. etc. Esa. 44.3.)
whereby we are enabled to understand what we hear, and to practice in some
measure) what we understand,

. 5. The dead are raised up.

As in the former Section, so also in this, we

I. That by nature we are dead.

II. That by grace we are quickened.

First, by nature we are dead.





viz.

I. A death to sin, in the Dative case: now this is Mortification.

II. A death in sin, in the Ablative case. And this is the death here spoken
of.

(The dead are raised) is this, that all men by nature are spiritually dead in
sin; but the children of God are restored unto life by Christ: Now of these
in their order; and first of the first, the state of nature.





Romans 3.23. and 5.12. Colos. 2.13. Ephesians. 2.1.5. etc.

Romans 5.6.8. and 2 Cor. 5.14. but of this by and by in the state of grace.

Adam, Romans 5.15.17.18. and 1 Cor. 15.21.22. For:

I. The Image of God which was in us at first, is now lost, Genesis 2. But is
renewed by Christ, Ephesians. 4.24. At first the heart was converted unto God: And
the beams of love did inflame and kindle the hearts, to love the Lord above
all, Psalm. 63.1. But now we are averse from the Lord.

II. We are now guilty of death, 2 Cor. 3.7. And subject to the Law, which is
the Minister of death; and therefore we are called dead men, because by the
Law we are condemned, and adjudged unto death.

III. We are by nature subject to the wrath and anger of God: And his Justice
will not suffer us to go unpunished, Colos 3.6.

IV. Our nature is so polluted, that it produces nothing but sin, and
impurity, Colos. 2.13.

V. We are by nature the servants of sin, and Satan, Romans 6.20. and 2 Timothy
2.26. and 2 Pet. 2.14. And hence the body was called by the Ancients, Tartara,
Sepulebrum mortuorum, and Pistrinum animae Rhod. 287.
. And therefore these things considered, we may safely conclude; that all men
by nature are spiritually dead in sin.

Suscitantur, namly:

That Christ frees all those, who are his from the death of sin, John 5.24.
etc. Esa. 9.2. and 2 Timothy 1.10.



Ioh. 5.24. and 2 Thessalonians. 1.9 Revel. 2.11. and 21.8.



I. Of our fredome, and deliverance from our enemies, Romans 7.2. that is,

First from sin, and the kingdom thereof, Romans 6.2. Or,

Secondly, from the Law, and the curse thereof, Romans 7.4.

How, or by what means may we, or are we

First, by God, and Christ, Psalm 90.3. Romans 4.

Secondly, by the preaching of the Gospel, 1 Pet. 4.6.

Thirdly, by faith in Christ, John 5.24. etc.

Fourthly, by a spiritual death of sin, Romans

Fifthly, by charity, and love; we know that John 3.

VERSE. 7.8.9. And as they departed,
. What went you out for to see?

What use is there of an Interrogation? or

First, some ask a question, that they may be

Secondly, some ask questions, for this end;

Thirdly, some ask questions, to see, or try,

Fourthly, some propound Interrogatories, to John enquires; Art thou he that
shall come, or shall we look for another? not because he doubted himself,
but that his Disciples might be informed, instructed, and enlightened; and their
ignorance expelled by the words, and works of Christ.

Fifthly, sometimes Interrogations imply an Interrogatio affirmativa habet vim
negationis, et vice versa: If the Interrogation be affirmative, then the answer
is negative and contrarily, if the question be negative, th^^ the answer is
affirmative; as for example: What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof
ye are now ashamed? Here the Question is affirmative; and therefore the Answer
must be negative, None; or ye had no fruit in such things, Romans 6.19. So
again, shall I bide from Abraham, the thing which I will do? Here the
Question is affirmative; and therefore the Answer is negative, I will not. So,
if thou do well, shall thou not be rewarded? Here the Question is negative;
and therefore the Answer is affirmative, thou shall, Genesis 4.7.

Sixthly, sometimes Interrogations include, and imply, objurgations, and
reproves; as for example: What could have been done more to my Vineyard, that
I have not done in it? Esa. 5.4. So, do I desire the death of a sinner? do I
not rather desire that be should turn from his sins, and live? Ezekiel. 18.
and 33. So John 8.46. Act. 5.4. Mat. 23.37. In all which places the Question
does import a reprehension, and that with indignation, of an undeniable fault.

will a man rob God? Malach. 3.8. And, are ye still ignorant?

Peter love thou me? John 21.15. And, Shall I take the members of Christ, and
make them the members of an Harlot? 1 Cor. 6.15. And, are not the days of man,
like the days of an hireling? Job 7.1. And in this sense the Interrogation is
used in this place.

What went you out for to see?

Baptist, and to the preaching of the Forerunner; and therefore do not now
stagger, or withe^, or fail and decay: From whence may be observed.

let him, (therefore says the Apostle) that thinks he stands, take heed lest
he fall: yea, examples of such we have, Gal. 1.8. and Demas, 2 Timothy 4. and
Revelat. 2.5.





Stand (...) from me. I am more righteous then thou art, (Esa. 65.5.) is an
ordinary speech in the mouth of many Professors. The Holy Ghost admonishes us
not to be high minded, but rather to fear, because a high mind will quickly
make us fall. And therefore it is no marvel, if we be so prone to decline,
that are so prone to pride, which is the highway to perdition.



I. That we might try ourselves, and use the grace given unto us: And,

II. That we might be left without excuse, and justly condemned, if we
relapse and fall back. And therefore no wonder, if being left unto our selves,
we fall away.

A Reed shaken with the wind?



John Baptist, you went not to one, who was light and idle headed, or cock
brained, or as wavering as the Reed, who shakes to and fro with every blast.

Secondly, some hereby understand a man of a King. 14.15. Matt. 12.20. and
27.29.

Thirdly, some hereby understand some childish Videre, what went you out to see?

Whether was our Saviors scope in this Interrogation Baptist, or to tax the
people?

First, some think that this was spoken Baptists defense.

Secondly, some hold, that it was spoken by way of reproof to the people.

First, some are of opinion, that our blessed Lord spoke this in the defense of
his Forerunner; yea, in his praise, ver 9. And expound it thus, Went you out
to see a Reed shaken with the wind? that is, a light, mutable, and inconstant
man. The phrase seems to me to be borrowed from the Fable of the sturdy
Oak, which fell through the violence of the wind, but the Reed shaking, and
bending, and yielding unto the wind, fell not, neither was harmed by the wind:
Thus the zealous, and sincere Professors of the word, often suffer by the wind
of persecution, when the temporizing Reeds, and Time-servers, wind, bend, and
turn with the storm, and comply with the times, and so are not harmed
thereby: But John was none of these shaking Reeds.

From hence then we may note.

That inconstancy becomes no Christians at all, but is most of all unbeseeming
for Ministers; both Pastor and people must be constant, in the holding,
maintaining, professing, and practicing of the truth, otherwise they do
dishonor the truth, Gal 1.10. Act. 20.24. and 21.13. and 2 Corinthians. 1.17.

Why must all, principally Ministers, be thus

First, because our Lord, and God, and Master I the Lord change not, James 1.17.

Now we should labor to imitate him herein.

Secondly, the rule whereby we ought always Gal. 1.8.

Thirdly, to be a turne-coat is odious, and of

Whether is all confidence, and constancy in

No, for men may be constant,

How is the constancy, or confidence of Ministers

First, they must teach nothing but the word, which they receive from the Lord,
1 Corinthians. 15. Act. 20.28.







I. He will protect and defend them, so long as they are about his work,
worship and service. Yea,

II. That he will call them to give account of their stewardship; and if they
have been negligent, then their judgment shall be great. But

III. If they have been faithful in the Ministry, then great is their
reward in heaven.



As these words (went you out to see a Reed shaken with the wind?) are referred
to John and (according to the opinion of some) spoken in John's defense: So are
also these, went you out to see a man in soft raiment? or one who was
gorgeously attired as Courtiers use to be? No, John was no such man, for he
lived austerely: Here two things are observable, viz.

Luke 7.33.34.
First, Christ lived otherwise then John did, ^t and yet he praises John; to
teach us,



Secondly, that an austere life is commandable amongst Christians.

Why is an austere life so commendable, for the Saints?

First, because we have denied the world, being crucified unto it, and it unto
us. Romans 6.2. How can they that are dead in sin, live therein? and how can
they that are dead unto the world, delight therein?

Secondly, because a Court-like; fine, feminine, dainty, and soft life, becomes
not a Saint.

Thirdly, because how can we persuade others to mortification, if we our selves
be contrary?

(Went you out to see a Reed shaken with the wind?) by way of reproof unto the
people: and it seems to incline to both; as if Christ should say, John was no
Reed; that is,

I. A contemptible and despicable man, or one who was worthy to be slighted,
Matthew. 12.20. and 27.29. Yea, although he was but a mean man, in the eye and
estimation of the world; yet the Ministry of the word is not to be despised
for the poverty, or low estate of the Ministers; II. John was no spectacle, or
gazing stock, curiously to be looked upon, or to be hea^d: only out of a
curious and itching desire to hear new things; but out of a desire to learn,
and that thereby, both life and soul, might be reformed and renewed.

. Yea, I say unto you, and more then a Prophet.

Our Savior by his authority (Ego deco) does confirm their judgment, who did
so highly esteem the Prophet; and pronounces him to be greater then a
Prophet, and more honorable then those, who live in Kings Courts. Whence we
may learn:

That it is a greater praise, Deuteronomy. 34.10. and 2 King. 8.15.

Why is a Prophet so full of honor and esteem?

First, because he is the Interpreter, betwixt

Secondly, because they have power to beget Michah. 3.8. and 1 Corinthians. 5.
whence Kings have called them Fathers.

Thirdly, because they pray for us, and bless

Fourtly, because they are inspired from above, Michah. 3.8. and 2 Pet. 1, 20.
etc. which is most excellent of al.

What things are requisite in a true Prophet?

First, he ought to know hidden, and secret

I. Absolutely, things to come. Or,

II. Respectively, and thus he ought in respect of himself, to know things
which are remote, or done out of his presence; as Elias knew of the avarice of
Gehazi; or in respect of all, he ought to know the frame, and temper, and
disposition, and secret passages of the heart of man in general, although he
cannot know the secrets of any particular man's heart, without a special
revelation.

Secondly, he ought to understand, and to be

Thirdly, he ought to deliver no message unto John. 11.51.

Fourthly, he ought so to be taught, that he Pharaoh, Ba^^asar,
Nebucha^^^zzar saw visions, but they did not understand them; and therefore
were no Prophets.

Fifthly, a Prophet ought to be inspired with a

How was John Baptist more then a Prophet?

First, because he prophesied in the womb Luke 1.4^.

Secondly, because he was nearest unto Christ Mat. 3.2.

Thirdly, hence he spoke more plainly, and plenarily of Christ, then any (or
all) the rest: As He is amongst you, And I stand in need to be baptized of
thee; And behold the Lamb of God: And, He must increase and I must decrease and
the like.

John is greater then the Prophets, because he was foretold of by the
Prophets, and was partly the Object of the Prophets. Read Esa. 40. Malach. 4.

John was Terminus legis and Evangelij: As Jacobs hand held Esaus heel; so
John (as it were) with one hand held the Law, and with the other the Gospel;
and was the last Prophet, and the first Apostle; yea like the corner stone of
the Old and New Testament.

VERSE. 10. For this is he of whom it is written. Behold, I send my Messenger
before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.
Esa. 40.3. Mat. 3.3.



Four namely, Secondly, Mountains; these must be laid low: Now by these are
meant, either humane wisdom, or Rebellion, or trust and confidence in our own
Righteousness. Thirdly, Crooked ways: these are to be made strait: Now by
these are meant, either the ways of error, or self love, or the love of the
world. Fourthly, sharp ways; these are to be made smooth, and thereby are
signified the ways of sin. See this Question before. Chap. 3. 3.. 1. qu. 1.
3. where it is amply explained.




Four namely, Secondly, hatred against God, for naturally we love those things
which are enmity with him. James 4.4. and 1 John 2.15.16. Thirdly, uncleanness
and impurity, because our hearts are to be made Temples of the holy Ghost. 1
Cor. 6.16. Fourthly, impediments, and Remorae: as the employments of the world,
our own weakness and inability unto good works, and the like. Now if we
desire that Christ may come unto us, we must labor to be renewed in all
these.






First, gives his word unto his people: As he promised. Isa. 30 21. and did
Jonah 1. Then

Secondly, he mollifies and softens the heart, by a true sight of, and sense
for sin. Ierem 31.18. etc. Then

Thirdly, he reconciles such (as he has humbled) unto himself by infusing
his love into their hearts. 1 John 4.10. and Judge. 2.4.5.6. Then,

Fourthly, he extrudes out of the heart those that trouble it ( Mat. 9.25.)
That is he mortifies sin and crucifies the world, and subdueth the
affections, and lusts. Then

Fifthly, he increases zeal, and corroborates grace, and augmenteth Religion
and love thereunto, and to whatsoever is good. Colos. 1.23. and 2.6.7. And
therefore we must highly prize, and heartily profess and practice the word of
God as much as in us lies: And then pray unto God to make his word, a Sword,
and Hammer, to break our hard hearts, and to be reconciled unto us; yea to
expel our of our hearts, whatsoever may either hinder us from his service, or
spur us forward to that which is displeasing unto him; And lastly, that he
would be pleased to fill our hearts with the grace of his Holy Spirit, and to
increase us in all virtuous and Religious works. For if we labor thus to
prepare our hearts, we may be certainly assured that Christ will come unto
us at the last, and remain and abide with us for ever and ever. Revelat. 3.20.

VERSE. 11. Verily I say unto you, Verse. 11.
among them that are borne of women, there has not risen a greater then John
the Baptist. Notwithstanding he that is least in the Kingdom of Heaven, is
greater then he.
Among them that are borne of Women, there has not risen a greater then John
the baptist.

What manner of comparison does Christ make John, and the rest.

Our Savior does not mean that John was greater then all others; Non major,
sed illi non majores. Chrysostom. imperf. s. He did equal John with the rest,
and not prefer him above them: Others following those praises, which are
given unto John as for example.

First, John was called an Angel. Malach. 4. And so also were the Prophets.
Acts 7. and Heb. 2. yea Princes, and Magistrates are called Gods. Psalm 82.
which is a higher title.

Secondly, John preaches not of Christ's coming in the future, but in the
present Tense, he does not proclaim that Christ will come hereafter, but that
he is come already: Now this also do all the Apostles.

Thirdly, John digito demonstrat, points at Christ with the finger, and says
this is he, ((...)) So does also Andrew, and Philip. John 1. and the Samaritane
woman. John 4. and Martha John 11. And therefore I conclude this Question, thus

I. John was not greater then all others, but equal unto them.

Against this if it be objected, Moses was greater, because he was equal to
Christ Deuter. 18.15.

Moses was not equal unto Christ, but like unto him as is expressed in the
place objected; The Lord will raise up unto you a Prophet like unto me, not
equal unto me: But most plainly. Heb. 3.3. Christ was worthy of more glory
then Moses.

II. John is not here by our Savior compared with those that followed him, but
with those who went before him; not with the Apostles of Christ, or all
believers in general, but with the Prophets of the Lord, And therefore Pet.
Galatinus sights with his own shadow, and builds upon a false ground, and
sandy foundation, when he would prove from this place the Virgin Mary to be
without original sin. He argues thus.

Among them that are born of women (that is amongst those who are conceived in
original sin) there has not risen a greater then John the Baptist: but
Christ was greater then John; therefore it follows that he was free from
sin; and because the Virgin without doubt was greater then John, therefore it
follows also, that she was without sin. Pet. Galat. lib. 7. cap. 5. page
279.

John. But



John with Mary, or the believers of that time, but only with the Prophets of
the old Testament.

Baptist greater then the Prophets of the old Testament?

Malach. 4.

Malach. 3. and 4. Esa. 40.

Luke 1. as was said before.

John was greater then the Prophets in regard of his office; and this I
conceive our Savior here principally means: for

I. John prepares the way of Christ. verse 10. And

II. Does proclaim and show that Christ is already come, which none of the
Prophets did. And

III He was nearer unto Christ then any, for he was his forerunner; like that
Nobleman who walks next before the King in processions, or when he goes in
state: or like Lucifer the day star, who comes next before the Sun. And

IV. He pointed at Christ with the finger: Behold the Lamb of God.

V. He is almost equalled with Christ in honor. For

First, he was honored in the world, when Christ was unknown to the world.

Secondly, he prophesies that Christ shall increase, but himself decrease, as
came to pass by little and little.

Thirdly, his Disciples were offended, because more followed after, and flocked
unto Christ, then did unto him.

VI. As was showed before, he was the corner stone of the Law and the Gospel,
of the old Testament, and the new, the last of the Prophets, and the first of
the Apostles.

Why does our Savior make this comparison John and the Prophets? would he
hereby teach the Baptist to be ambitious or haughty?

Christ does not teach his servants to seek honor;

That Christ would have his Children to be received, Shake off the dust of
your feet and depart.

Why must the servants, and Ministers of Christ

First, because if the Doctor be despised, then John was cast into prison, the
people grew more cold then formerly they were. John 5 35.

Secondly, they must not be honored for any Cor. 4.7. Because in that regard
their feet are beautiful. Romans 10.17. and 15.29. And hence the honoring and
despising of them, reflects upon him who sent them, and enriched them with this
grace they bring. He that hears you, hears me; he that receives you,
receives me; and he that despises you, despises me.

What is here required of people in regard of

First, they must honor all good and faithful Cor. 4.1. and 1 Timoth. 5.16,
and 1 Thessal. 5.12.13.) Because such are called our fathers. 1 Cor. 4.14. etc.
Galath. 4.19. Deuteronomy. 5.16.

Secondly, they may prefer those whom God Romans 15.29 and 1 Thessal. 1.5.

Thirdly, they must obey them; this honor, Heb. 13.17.

VERSE. 12.
. 1. And from the days of John the Baptist

Two Terms are laid down in this Section; namely.

First, Terminus a que; vel Initium, and that, is from the days of John the
Baptist, now that is not controverted, but agreed upon by all.

Terminus ad quem, vel conclusio, and that is until now; Here it may be asked
whether this be terminated in that day when Christ spoke this or not, as if,
until now be as much as unto this day?



First, sometimes, Exceptive, excluding the time to come, or any time after the
present.

Secondly, sometimes, this phrase speaks only of the present time, neither
excluding nor including the future. Read for example hereof. 1 Corinthians. 8.7.
and 15.6. and 1 John 2.9.

Thirdly, sometimes this phrase (until now) includes even the future time: My
Father works hitherto, and I work. John 5.17. That is, not only unto the day
wherein this was pronounced, but so long as this world lasts. So also 1 Corinthians. 4.13. And thus this Phrase is here to be taken; as appears most
plainly, because it is expounded of the Preaching of the Gospel. The Law, and
the Prophets were until John: and since that time the Kingdom of God is
preached, and every man presses thereunto. Luke 16.16. The meaning therefore
of our Savior here is, the Gospel was preached by the Baptist, whereby so
great happiness is come unto the world. Whence we may note.



The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence.

Kingdom of Heaven?



Kingdom of Heaven, is often understood the Gospel, which publishes Christ
now already manifested; which is called the Mystery of salvation. 1 Timoth.
3.16. Or, which is all one, it is taken for grace and salvation published by
the Gospel. But violence is not so properly said to be offered to this Kingdom.

the Kingdom of Heaven, is here meant the true Church of Christ, which was
dispersed, far and wide through the whole earth, and into which all (that is,
all sorts) intrude themselves. Whence we may observe that the Church of
Christians is reputed and esteemed to be the Kingdom of Heaven. Matthew.
13.24:31.47. Romans 14.17. and 1 Corinthians. 4.20. Colos. 4.11.

the Kingdom of Heaven?

Romans 8.17. Ephesians. 2.19. Philip. 4.22.

viz.

I. To turn unto God, from whom naturally we are averse.

II. To adhere and clean unto the Lord, and to rely upon him.

III. To rejoice in him above al things. Phil. 4.4.

Thirdly, because the Kingdom, and King, and

What is meant here by suffering of violence?

These words may be expounded three manner of ways, namely.

First, Respectu personarum, At jam aperta janua Caeli. Ambros. But now the
gates of heaven are open. Our Savior seems to allude to those things which of
old were hidden, and prohibited: as the holy of holyes, whereunto none must
go, save only the High Priest, and that once a year: But now we (that is,
all the faithful) have boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of
Jesus etc. Hebr. 10.19. So the Mount must not be touched. Exodus 19. Heb.
12.20. But now the faithful are come unto Mount Sion etc. ( Heb. 12.22.23.) the
wall of separation, being broken down. Ephesians. 2. And the veil rent in
twain. 2. Cor. 3. Thus as all thrust at the Play Houses, and Theaters, and
places of public spectacles, desiring greedily (when the doors are open) to
see the sights, which are there to be presented; Or as when the gates are beat
open, or the walls of a besiedged City broken down, or a ship of the enemies
grappled withal, Josh 6.20
every man thrusts and strives to enter as fast as he can: Even so here the
kingdom of Heaven, suffers violence; that is, Christ having broken down the
wall of separation, and partition, and rent in twain the veil, and opened the
gate of heaven to all, whether bond or free, Jew or Gentile, Greek, or
Barbarian; hence of all sorts, from all places, many flock unto the Church of
Christ. Secondly, Respectu ordinis neglecti, in regard of the conditions which
now were abolished, and disanulled; namely, Circumcision, legal sacrifices,
and that hard and impossible condition, Fac and vives: fulfill the Law and
thou shall be saved by the Law; otherwise thou can not be saved. Now these
being worn out of date and antiquated, we men run unto God only by faith
in Christ, hoping thereby to be saved. Thirdly, Respectu interni roboris, in
regard of inward strength, and power: God giving under the Gospel ordinarily a
more ample spirit, or measure of his spirit: now of this by and by.
. 3. And the violent take it by force.

These words have the force of an exception; As if our Savior would say, the
kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, but yet not all obtain it, but only the
violent. Violenti rapiunt. Hence then observe.

That the kingdom of heaven cannot be obtained or gained, Luke 7.29.30.

What was required of the Jews in regard of the Messiah.

Romans 8.23.) as appears by the Proverb. Vt Iudaei Messiam, and also by John
1.19. etc. and 4 25.

Elias, the Messenger, and forerunner of the Messiah: and by and by seek out
Christ. As John 4.30.39. Luke 7.16.

Mat. 4.25. and 8.1. and 12.15. and 14.13. and 19.2. and 20.29. and Mark. 11.9.
and Luke 5.15. and 12 1. and 15.1.

Agrippa, who was almost persuaded to become a Christian, or like the young man
who departed from Christ sorrowful: but felling all, leaving all, denying
themselves, and taking up those crosses as Christ enjoined them, they should
follow him.



I. We must above all things long for, expect, and desire, that Christ would
come unto our hearts and souls.

II. We must believe his Messengers, and Ministers, who bring his word, and
declare his will unto us.

III. We must obey those directions which are taught us by his Messengers for
the obtaining of him: although the Rules prescribed be difficult and contrary
to corrupt nature.

IV. Having found out Christ, and obtained him, we must rejoice in him, yea so
rejoice that we would part with, and forsake al things rather then him.

V. We must then learn and labor to be truly zealous in his service, and for
his glory: because this zeal is the fire which mollifies and softens our
hearts, and makes them the more easily receive divine impressions. Now these
things being well weighed, and considered, we may safely conclude: That
heaven cannot be had without zealous desires, motions, and endeavors: because
violenti rapiunt, only the violent take it, and that by force.





Romans 8.15.16. and 1 John 5.10. Many desire this grace of a true and sure
faith, but they seek it fluggishly, and expect to obtain it easily. Cantic.
3.1. But we must be zealous in the search and enquity thereof, and then we may
hope that he whom we desire should come, will come, and not tarry. Heb. 10.38.

Thirdly, we must be zealous in our prayers:

I. The sense of our want, or misery, for he who conceives himself or his
estate to be miserable, will cry aloud unto God, with a sad heart and a
sorrowful countenance, as we see in the Publicane: whereas the proud Pharisee
only gives thanks, but prays for nothing. Luke 18.11 And therefore we must
labor to be sensible of our sins and wants.

II. A desire of the benefit offered; as Christ said to the woman, If thou knew
the gift or grace of God, then thou would ask water of me. John 4.10. And
therefore we must labor to know what spiritual gifts and graces are
excellent, and wherein we are indigent, and then hunger, long, and pray
earnestly for them; but because the gift and grace of prayer comes from above,
and without the assistance of the Spirit, we cannot pray as we ought; we must
therefore desire the Lord to give us the spirit of prayer, as also strength,
and power to offer up pleasing, and spiritual sacrifices unto him.

Fourthly, we must be zealous in obedience of Violoni rapium: The violent take
it by force.

VERSE. 13.14. For all the Prophets, V. 13.14
and the Law prophesied until John. And if ye will receive it, this is Elias
which was to come.
. 1. All the Prophets, and the Law prophesied until

What is the meaning of these words?

First, it is expounded, De scope Prophet^num, John is he, at whom all the
Prophets and this Law almed, and marked. Thus Calvin. Muscul. s.

Why did they level rather at John, then at John, and not rather, that they
all prophesied of himself?

Because he will not suddenly name himself; If I witness (says he) of my
self, my witness is nothing: And therefore our Savior does rather name John;
and by and by shows that he is Elias, the Forerunner of the Messiah. From
hence then we may learn,

That Christ is the whole scope of the old Testament, faith unto salvation; but
we have no other to believe in, or to hope for salvation from, but only
Christ, Act. 4.12.



whatsoever was written, was written for our learning. Romans 15.4. and 1 Cor.
10. And therefore we must so read, that we may learn something out of
whatsoever we read.

of Shilo, the seed of the woman, David my servant, a branch of Iesse, a woman
shall compass a man, Israel shall be freed from captivity, and the like; in
all these let us understand Christ.



De limite prophetarum, as if our Savior would say: All the Prophets
prophesied, or there were still Prophets, who prophesied until John arose, but
now they shall prophecy no more. Whence we may learn:

Baptist.

John; for Malachie was the last Prophet they had, after the Captivity. See the
Preface that is before Malachie in the great Bible.

Malachie, although they are not expressed in the Canon of sacred writ. Or,

Secondly, perhaps for the sins of the people,

But there were Prophets under the Gospel, as Agabus, who prophesied unto Paul,
Act. 21.10. There was a Prophet named Agabus. And therefore there were Prophets
after John.

This was miraculous, and not ordinary.

De gubernatione of the government of the Church: as if our Savior would say,
the Law and the Prophets, were the Governors of the Church, or people until
John, but no longer. Hence then observe.



Moses, and the Prophets, and are now not to be taught or ruled by them?



First, we must distinguish of the Law: for although the Ceremonial be
abrogated, yet the Moral remains, and abides for ever: yea, Galat. 5.6
although the Moral law be still in force, and never to be disannulled, yet it
is not said to rule and govern, because it neither saves nor damnes, but only
directs the children of faith, what fruits of faith to bear and bring forth.

Secondly, we must distinguish of the Prophets for their writings are not
abrogated (because they are moral:) But the Lord does not now govern his
Church by Prophets (as of old time) but by his Son, Hebr. 1.1.

Who are meant by Prophets?

First, Prophets signify those, who did foreshew

Secondly, by Prophets sometimes are meant

Thirdly, Prophets sometimes signify those, Romans 12. and 1 Cor. 14.

How are Christians freed from the Law?

First, they are freed from the yoke and service

Secondly, from the hard condition of the

Thirdly, not from the obedience of the Moral

. 2. This is Elias.

Why does John deny that he is Elias? John 1.21.

First, some held that Elias the Thisbite, was John was he: Now this John
denies, John. 1.21.

Secondly, some say that John was Elias in spirit, Elias his soul, had
animated John's body; but this opinion appears to be erroneous, by Matt. 14.2.
of which afterward.

Thirdly, Christ says, this is Elias, because John Elias did, Luke 1.17. and
Matthew. 17.11. Here observe, that there was in Elias, a double spirit, viz.

I. A spirit of revenge, 2 King. 1. This spirit Christ approves not of, neither
do we read that it was in the Baptist.

II. A spirit of zeal toward religion, 1 King. 18. This Christ commends, and
this was in John.

VERSE. 15. He that has ears to hear,
How many sorts of hearers are there,

First, some are manifest adversaries, and enemies unto the Preachers, and
preaching of the word of God; as was Herod, Herodias, and many of the Pharisees.

John.

John has a devil, because he came neither eating, nor drinking; and Christ
is a friend of Publicanes and sinners, verse 18, 19.

If ye will receive it, this is Elias, and he that has ears to hear, let
him hear.

John, who returned back again, because his doctrine contradicted their lusts,
and opposed their lewd lives: And as many, approved of his preaching, when he
reproved others, but were offended with him, when they were taxed themselves:
So many forsake the word, because it crosses their wills; and although they
allow Ministers to reprove others, yet they do not like that themselves should
be reproved.



John attributed more unto him, then unto Christ; yea, ascribed that unto John,
which was proper unto Christ. So, some ascribe more to the Isntrumental, then
to the Principal, or efficient cause; that is, often times more to the
Minister, then to Christ; yea, often sacrifice to themselves, and their own
labors and endeavors, more then unto Christ.

John and Christ, (as appears by the applause, never any man spoke, (...) this
man speaks) who would not obey the word preached. Now none of all these are
worthy our imitation, or commendation, but rather all of them deserve
exprobration.

VERSE. 18, 19. John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, he has a
devil. The Son of man came eating and drinking, and they say; Behold a man
gluttonous, and a wine bibber, a friend of Publicans
For John came neither eating nor drinking.

First, John Baptists diet, who came neither eating nor drinking; that is, he
ate wild honey, and the courfest things. Secondly, our Saviors diet, who
drank wine, but yet very moderately. Thirdly, the Epicures diet, who says,
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. Fourthly, the scrupulous
man's diet, who eats nothing but herbs, Romans 14.2. Now the difference betwixt
these is this; John the Baptists diet, and Christ's diet, are both virtues; but
the Epicures diet, and the Scrupulous man's are the two extreme: For the Epicure
takes God, to be an indulgent Father to him, in giving him the creatures to
eat of them at his pleasure. And the other takes God to be a niggard, who
grants not the liberal use of the creatures to his children.


. 2 And they say he has a Devil.

What was the cause that provoked them thus Baptist?

The provoking and incensing cause was twofold; namely,

First, because he preached the Law.

Secondly, because he was abstemious and temperate.

First, John preached the Law, and the threatenings thereof, he proclaimed them
to be a generation of Vipers, Matt. 3.7. He preaches that God can raise up
children unto Abraham of stones, Matthew. 3.9. yea, that now the axe is laid to
the root of the tree, verse 10. And therefore fruitless trees shall be cast
into the fire, verse 12. Now hence they were angry, and in their rage, said,
he had a devil: To teach us;

That the preaching of the Law is never acceptable to sinners, N^hem. 9.30.
Prove. 1.24. Act. 7.54. Esa. 30.14. Ierem. 44.5. and 25.4. and and 2 King.
17.13. etc. 2 Chronicles. 24.19. Ierem. 7.13.

How does this further appear?

Because the Law preaches four things,

First, the Law teaches, that our condition by nature, is evil, desperate,
and miserable; now this is opposite to the pride, and self-love, that is in
our natures, when Christ preached upon this head of the Law, the Pharisees cry,
Are we blind also? John 9.40. Because our proud natures will not brook this
doctrine.

Secondly, the Law teaches, that punishment hangs over our heads, and will
fall certainly at length upon us, except we repent. Now this is opposite to
presumption. When Jeremy preaches this point, the people reply: Thou lie,
Jeremy. 43.2. They will not believe that they shall be punished, although they
have grievously offended. So naturally we presume that no evil shall come unto
us, and make a covenant with death, ( Job 36.13. Esaias 28.14.) And therefore
cannot endure the menaces and comminations of the law.

Thirdly, the Law exhorts us to repent, (as Causa sine qua non) and tells us,
that without repentance we must needs be brought to destruction at the last.
Now this is opposite to the love of sin, which is inherent in our natures,
and habitual unto us. And therefore, this doctrine of repentance, is as harsh,
and unpleasant unto us, as is a prohibition of meat to him that is hungry, or
of drink, to him that is thirsty.

Fourthly, the Law persuades us to repent betimes, speedily, whiles it is said
to day, and to defer it no longer: Now this is opposite to that sluggish
idleness, that is in our bones, and which makes us from day to day, to cry,
yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little ^olding of the hands to sleep.
And therefore the preaching of the law is as distastful unto us, as it is to a
sleepy sluggish man, to be awakened, and pulled out of his bed.



Ephesians. 5.6. Now although this be an undoubted truth, and that experience does
daily prove it, yet we had rather not hear it.





Esa. 65.5. And therefore we must learn to deny our selves.



the wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23.



Secondly, the next provoking cause which made them say, that John had a
devil, was because he was abstemious and moderate, yea seemed more austeer and
rigide than themselves were: and therefore they envy him. Whence I might
observe two things: viz.

First, that an Hypocrite hates him that is more holy than himself, Esa. 65.5.

Secondly, that an austere life it odious and Pet. 4.4.

Why do carnal men so carp at an austere life?

First, because thereby Hypocrites and formallists

Secondly, by such a life wicked men are reproached: Ephesians 5.11.

Thirdly, such a life condemns the licentiousness Let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we shall die, Esa. 22.13. And therefore all Epicures, belly-gods and
intemperate persons, detest and abhor such a life.

We have seen the moving causes of the peoples censure given of John; namely,
because he preached the terrors of the Law, and because he lived a strict
life: we may now consider

What the effect of this censure was?

Rash Judgment: for they say, He has a Devil.

First, That rash judgment is seldom right Sam. 1.13. Mat. 7.1. Romans 14.10,
13 and 1 Cor. 4.5. Colos. 2.16.

Secondly, That there is nothing so good or Romans 1.30. and 2 Timothy 3.3. John
Baptist (Malice says) has a devil; although the holy Ghost say, That he was
sanctified in the womb: yea, Christ, the Lamb without spot (they say) is become
a friend, and familiar companion of sinners.

What is here required of all men?

First, wicked men, yea all men must hate, and Psalm. 15.3. and 73.15. Luke 3.14.

Secondly, the righteous must labor to cut

How must we so live, that we may escape calumnies

Saint Peter gives us three remarkable rules to be observed, for this end;
namely,

First, we must abstain from all sin whatsoever, Pet. 2.11. do no evil, and
then men can have no ground to build an evil report upon.

Secondly, shine before men in the works of holiness Pet, 2.12.

Thirdly, obey Magistrates and Superiors, in Pet. 2.14, 15.

. 3. Christ came both eating and drinking.

How, and wherein is Christ opposed to the

First, John's Disciples thought that they were Corrivals; but because (that I
know of) now none think so, therefore I slip it.

John was abstemious, and more reserved; but Christ was more familiar, that so
by all means he might win and gain some.





Romans 5.6, 7. he checked the proud, ( John 10.) and cheered the humble, Matthew
11.28.



Paul became all to all men, so the Lord has given us Ministers of all sorts,
that so we might be left without excuse: he has given us ancient and grave
Ministers; he has given us solid and learned Ministers; he has given us meek
and mild Ministers; yea he has given us Ministers of our nation, and not
strangers only, and the like. And thus he has given us Pastors according to
our several dispositions, yea some who can change themselves, or take unto
themselves any form (in indifferent things) for the winning of all sorts unto
Christ, 1 Cor. 9.20, 21, 22.

John preached the Law, and wrath, ( Mat. 3.7, 11.) unto repentance: Lugubria.
Gualt. s. But Christ preached, or proclaimed the sweet messages of the Gospel,
Mat. 3.28. Ioh. 7.37, etc.

viz. Threatenings and Promises, the Law and the Gospel; thus we see Samuel did,
1 Samuel 12. and Esa. 1.



Corin. 5. and 2 Corin. 2. And therefore the shameless must be shent and
shamed. III. Some sin openly and apparently, some secretly and covertly. And
therefore one strain, or way of preaching always, will not so well suit with
all dispositions.

Secondly, it is necessary, that both Law and Ephesians. 1.13.

Who are here to be blamed?

They who expect nothing, Rachel was fairer, but Leah more fruitful; so
Promises are more pleasing, but threatenings more profitable, in regard of our
corrupt nature. For I. In the beginning there are many Raemorae, and lets which
must violently be shaken off, and trampled under feet; which without the
Comminations of the Law, we shall hardly be induced to do. And II. In our
journey we shall be subject to sleep and drowsinesse, and therefore we must be
rouzed, and excited with Legal terrors. III. In our progress there will be
pull-backs, and relapses; sometimes in action, sometimes in affection; we being
like unto the Sea, who has both her Ebb and Tides. And therefore these things
considered, we must not always expect promises, and sweet blandishments from
the Word of God.

Fourthly, Christ and John differed not in the

That all the diverse gifts of the Ministry tend Ezekiel. 18. The Apostles gently
persuade and admonish ( Gal. 4.19.) that so Christ may be planted in our hearts.

What did the people, or Pharisees blame in John?

First, in general they blame all, they do; John^

That the natural man blames and dislikes every

Secondly, the people blame the Ministers of John, in whom they saw no evil at
all, save only their diligence and industry in preaching the word.

From whence we may learn, That Ministers Amos 7.12.

. 4. Wisdom in justified of her children.

For the propagation of Learning, Colleges and Schools, were in diverse places
erected for the Prophets: and their Scholars were termed Filij Prophetatum,
Children of the Prophets. 2 King 6.1 unto which phrase our Savior here
alludes, wisdom is justified of her Children.

VERSE. 20. Then began he to upbraid the Cities, wherein most of his mighty
works were done, because they repented not.
Tunc. Then began he to upbraid the Cities.

This voice Then, does denote the time to be the fame with the former, or that
this verse and those which follow were spoken at the same time with the verses
foregoing, and upon the occasion of them. As if the Evangelist would say, after
that Christ had spoken these things (from verse 16. etc.) in general, he
applies them particularly, Corinth 3.1. etc, and 5.1. and 6.10. and 10.6. etc.
and 1^.8. etc. Galath. 3.1.

Wherein most of his mighty works were done.





Joseph the Carpenters son, and that his Mothers name is Mary, and therefore
none of the Elders will believe on him. John 7.47. But now unto these cities he
showed his divine power; and therefore they were inexcusable.



done among them the works which none other man did, they had not had sin.
John 15.24. These Cities saw that he was stronger then the Devil. Luke 11.
and how he commanded with authority the unclean spirits, Mark 1.27. They saw
how the winds and Sea obeyed him. Matthew. 8.27. Luke 8.25. And how he loosed
Lazarus, from the fetters of death. John 11.44.

Matthew. 7.29. and 9.6. Now these Cities saw Christ's power both in his
miraculous works, and in his powerful preaching; and therefore a deeper woe
is denounced against them. Hence then observe.

John 3.19. If light come into the world, and be contemned by the world, the
condemnation of the world is greater. So Romans 2.4. If the riches of Gods mercy
be offered, and the offer thereof despised, the wrath of God then will be the
more swiftly, and sharply revealed.

Why shall those be more severely punished,

First, because the Revelation of the power of Praemoniti, praemuniti,
forewarned, forearmed; and therefore Sciens vivus vidensque peris: he perishes
willingly, wittingly, and deservedly, who sees the danger, and yet will run
into it, who sees the gate of heaven open, and will not enter therein, who
sees the way that leads unto life, and yet walks in those paths that lead
unto death.

Secondly, because such contemn great grace

I. Of sin. And

II. Of infidelity. And

III. Of the contempt of Christ, the Holy Ghost, and the word of God. And
therefore shall be the more greevously tormented.

How, or wherein is the power of Christ manifested,

First, in judicijs in his judgments. Ezech. 25.11 Exodus 7.5. Psalm. 105.5.
Esa. 26.9. Ierem. 5.3. The Lord sometimes corrects, afflicts, and punishes us,
that we, (seeing his power) might learn to amend, sometimes he makes his
power known upon others, that his own people might observe his judgments;
and powers forth his wrath and fury upon the disobedient, that we might
tremble and learn to obey; 1 Cor. 10
as the Dog is beaten before the young Lion, to make the Lion obedient, or the
Condisciples of the young Prince, to make him fear.

Secondly, in Benedictionibus, in blessings and Esa. 26.10. And great is the
judgment of those who despise these. Read Ezech. 16 Esa. 5.

Thirdly, in praedicatione verbi, his power is rather Romans 1 16. and 2.4. and 1
Thessal. 1.5. And therefore those who enjoy the preaching of the word, and
despise it heap up unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath.

Fourthly, the power of Christ is principally, Cor. 12.7. Hebr. 6.6. etc.) by
any general or particular grace. And therefore they who are enlightened by the
Spirit must take heed of relapsing: for as they have despised and slighted a
great grace, who do thus, so they do incur a great judgment and
condemnation eternally.

Because they repented not.

Our blessed Savior does not upbraid them, because they did not admire his
Miracles, or because they did not entertain or feast him; but because they
repented not; yea the other they did, but not this: they wondered at his
wonderful works, and many entertained him; but all was nothing without
repentance. Whence we may note,

Herod. Mark 6.20.) except we seriously repent and in sincerity obey, these
only being the blessed ones. Luke 11.28. John 13.17. Ierem. 4.4. Psalm. 34.14.
Matthew. 7.21. It is not enough for a man, to make a Profession of Religion but
he must indeed strive and study to eschew evil, and do good (which is the
nature of true Repentance) if he would be pleasing and acceptable unto God.



Authoritate, by a threefold authority, namely,

I. Of the Baptist, who preaches Repentance. Matthew. 3.3. And

II. Of Christ, who preaches repentance, Mat. 4.17. Luke. 24.47. And

III. Of the Apostles who preach the same doctrine. Acts 2.38. and 3.19. and
26.18.

Scopo by the Scope of Christ.

Now the scope of Christ in his coming was: I. To reduce men from their
errors; And II. To free them from their sins. Luke 1.75. and Titus 11.2.
etc. And therefore hence it appears, that without repentance all is nothing.

Luther says. Omnes damnari ob infidelitatem, that all are damned for
infidelity?

Certes, salvation is of faith, but repentance is the way unto faith, yea
(Causa size qua non) without repentance there can be no faith, for those who
never repented them of their sins, never had the least spark of saving faith.





First, desire to be redeemed, from Satan and death: Or

Secondly, who are in a miserable estate and condition. Now

I. Such are all men before repentance. Romans 3.23. and 5.12. And

II. All that do not truly repent.





Secondly, those who by a fained and counterfeit

Thirdly, those who repent key-coldly, and

Fourthly, those who seem both to others and Peter 2.22.

How must we repent?

There are two parts of Repentance, namely; Dediscere, Discere, damnare, amare.

First, Resipiscere, quasi re-sapere, to be wise again, or to condemn our
former wicked life and actions. Romans 12.2. And therefore unto true repentance
it is required, that we should seriously lament and bewail what is bypast,
and for the time to come, labor to be weaned from these things, to wit,

I. From all our former sins. 2 Peter 1.9. and 2.20. Galath. 5.24.

II. From the love of the word. Psalm 127.2. James 4.4.

III. From the contempt of the word; because it is a dangerous thing to despise
the word, and so long as we do so, we cannot truly repent: Read 2 Chronicles.
36.16. Proverb. 1.24. John 3.19. Acts 19.9. Ezech. 33.32.

IV. From despising of the blessed Spirit; that is, from greeving him. Ephesians.
4.28. or extinguishing his good motions. 1 Thessal. 5.19. And therefore that we
may avoid, and beware this the better, let us remember how many calls we have
neglected, and how many good motions we have smoothered.

V. From the neglect of salvation, we must remember, how formerly we preferred
pleasure and profit, yea, and all things before this, and learn both to repent,
deplore, and amend it.

Secondly, Converti, to be converted and turned unto God; or to direct an
averse heart unto him, and to labor, that hereafter our whole life may be
directed and guided unto a new mark. And in these two; [To repent of, and turn
from what is bypast, and amiss; and to amend our lives, and turn unto the
Lord our God; and whatsoever is good, for the time to come] does regeneration
consist. Now this second part of repentance does consist in these things;
namely.

I. In a desire and endeavor, to be ingrafted into Christ, the true and
living Olive; and this we are by faith, John 15.1. Romans 11.22. And

II. In an earnest endeavor to walk in faith, and to approve the truth
thereof, by our works of new obedience, and true sanctification, Gal. 2.19.
etc. and James 2.18 and 1 Timothy 6.18. And

III. In a true contempt of the world, 1 John 2.15. that is, although we may
make use thereof (as of an Inn for a night) yet we must neither serve it, nor
love it, nor delight in it, 1 Cor. 7.30. And,

IV. In a true denial of our own wills and ways, Matthew. 16.24. and an earnest
desire to know, what the good and perfect will of God is, Romans 12.2. Ephesians,
5.10. And,

V. In a serious labor to fructify, and increase daily in every good work:
Read Romans 12.1. and 2 Corinthians. 5.15. and 1 Timothy 6.18. And therefore we should
diligently examine our selves by these things, whether ever we truly repented
us of our sins, or not; seeing that without it, all our other labor in
religion is lost.



Deuteronomy. 30.6. And he converts and turns us, Ierem. 31.18.

VERSE. 21.22. Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida; for if the
mighty works which were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they
would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. But I say unto you, it
shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon at the day of judgment, then for
you.
If the mighty works which were d^ne in thee, had been done in Tire and Sidon

Tire?



David and Solomon, they were friends to the Israelites, as appears by 2 Samuel
5.11. and 1 King. 5.1.

Zach. 9.2.3.

Psalm 83.7. Ezech. 26.2.

Esaias 23, 1. etc. Ierem. 27.2. Ezech. 26. and 27. and 28. and 29.18. Amos 1.9.
Yea, they were captivated seventy years, and yet returned unto their
fornication, Esa. 23.16. their sins were diverse, viz.

I. They were the enemies of the Israelites, as was showed before.

II. They trusted to their wisdom and riches, Zachar. 9.2.3.

III. Being returned from their long captivity, they turn again to their
former fornication, Esa. 23.16.

IV. Tire thought her self, and boasted of her self, as a God, Ezech. 28.2.
and 27.1. etc. And yet if the mighty works which were done in Corazin, and
Bethsaida, had been done in her, she would have repented in sackcloth and
ashes. Whence we may observe:

Romans 1.16. that is, the preaching of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1.24. And therefore
nothing is impossible unto God, neither can any thing at all hinder him. Here
observe, that there are two things which hinder a Physician from curing; namely,

First, the time; many diseases being taken in time, are easily helped, but
being let alone a while, they become incurable. This cannot hinder the Lord,
for Nullum tempus occurrit Deo, he calls men to the gates of death, and then he
says; Come again ye sons of men; yea, at what time soever (whether at the
first, or third, or ninth, or eleventh hour) a sinner repents, he shall find
mercy, Ezech. 18. And therefore the length of time, or continuance in sin,
cannot let the Lord from healing.

Secondly, the kind of the disease and malady; some diseases are incureble unto
man; but nothing is impossible unto God; for he can pardon all our sins,
Ezech. 18.22. He can heal all our infirmities, Psalm. 103.3. yea, although our
souls were as red as blood, by reason of the pollution of sin, yet he can
make us as white as the driven snow, Esa. 1.16.18.

How were these of Corazin worse then they of Tire, or what is the end of this
comparison, which our Savior makes betwixt them?

First, it is usual with the Lord, to shame some sinners, by the example of
others, as Mat. 12.41.42. where our Savior reproacheth them with the
Ninivites, and the Queen of the South; and again, verse 19. taxes their
pride, by the example of Infants; and elsewhere reproves the rich, by
comparing them with the Widow, who cast in two mites into the treasury. But in
these examples, he compares them with those, who did well; but in the Text,
with those who did wickedly. Now it is no wonder, if these of Corazin and
Bethsaida, were worse then the good; but how were they worse then the Infidels,
and Gentiles?

Secondly, the Galileans were near to the men Tire, and the luxury, and
unbridled life of the Tyrians was known, unto the Galileans, and hated, and
condemned by them; and for this their wickedness were despised of them.
Therefore our Savior compares the Galileans, with the men of Tire, that they
may know, in how great danger they are, and how they are as bad, and worse as
they are, who in their esteem deserve to be hated, and contemned for their
wickedness, and ungodly lives.

Thirdly, but how were the Galileans worse Tire sinned ignorantly, but these of
obstinate malice. Whence note,

That the sins of Christians (after they have

Why are the sins of Christians, worse and

First, because Infidels have only the law of nature, Chrysostom compares the
Galileans with those of Tire, for these had only the law of nature to lead
them; but those besides, and above that had the Law of God, and the Gospel and
the Miracles of Christ; and therefore the Galileans sinned against the whole
blessed Trinity: For,

I Christ spoke, and preached unto them. And

II. The Holy Ghost, by some general notions did cooperate with the word. And,

III. God the Father did confirm the word preached by Christ, with signs and
miracles: And therefore great was their sin, in contemning this word, and in
shutting their eyes against this clear light.

Cor. 2.14) but in Christians, a vincible, because they are taught by the
Gospel, which is the means of knowledge.



First, we must take heed of contemning the Gospel, after once it has been
embraced and received: for it had been better for us never to have known the
ways of God, then after the knowledge thereof to relapse and fall away. 2
Peter 2.22. like the Galathians who began in the Spirit, Gal 3.3.

Secondly, we must take heed of sins of knowledge; whether

I. In general, after illumination, and a knowledge, that God is an enemy
unto, and a swift witness against all sins and sinners: for it is dangerous
for such a one to sin. Or

II. In particular, we must principally beware of those sins which we know;
The time, and sins of ignorance the Lord easily passes by. Acts 17. but
after a man is brought to the sight and knowledge of his sin, it is dangerous
then to continue any longer in it. Some follow drunkenness, and ignorantly
think it to be but only good fellowship, and not sin, or if sin then no
great one, neither much offensive to God. But woe be to him, who knows it to
be a great sin, and odious unto God, and therefore blusheth and trembles to
commit it, and yet notwithstanding proccedeth to act it: For such a one.

First, sins against the whole ever blessed Trinity as was said even now. And

Secondly, against his own knowledge. And

Thirdly, against his own tongue, wherewith. I. He has often asked pardon and
forgiveness at Gods hands: And

II. He has often promised to leave it, and to become temperate and sober. And

Fourthly, against his own conscience, whom God in some measure has
circumcised and awakened. And

Fifthly, against the holy Spirit of God, who has often admonished and checked
him: And therefore let all such consider, how near they come to incurable
apostasy.

They would have repented.

Our Savior commends those of Tire for good hearers; that is, if they had had
the word, they would have been more affected with it then the Galileans were.
To teach us,

That that only is good hearing which works Repentance; Matthew. 3.3. and 4.17.
and Acts 2.38. and 3.19.

Why is that hearing only good which works

First, because Repentance is the condition of Luke 3.3. and 24.47. and Acts
11.18.

Secondly; the scope of man is the glory of

Thirdly, Repentance is the scope of Preaching Acts 26.18. and 1 Thessal.
1.6.10.) And therefore good hearing works conversion.

But there are other scopes and ends of Preaching; the Scope thereof.

There are other scopes of preaching besides Repentance, but they are al
conjoined with this,

First, one end of Preaching is knowledge; Christ gave his word that men might
be brought from darkness to light. Acts 26.18. But knowledge is vain without
practice. John 13.17.

Secondly, another end of Preaching is that men might fear, and tremble at the
word of God: Esa. 66.2. because it is good to fear. Proverb. 28 14. But yet
this fear and trembling is only so far good, as it leads unto Repentance,
and no further.

Thirdly, another end of the word is that men might reverence it, and receive
it as the word of the Almighty God, and not of a weak man. Acts 10.33. But
reverence is to be perfected in obedience.

Fourthly, another end of Preaching is to work faith in the hearers. Romans
10.15. But Repentance is partly the inchoation and beginning of faith, and
partly the fruit thereof.

Fifthly, another end of Preaching is sanctity and new obedience. Ierem. 4.4.
Luke 1.75. Now this is no other thing then Repentance it self: And therefore
all the several ends and scopes of preaching are conjoined with this of
repentance, and end in it.

How manifold is Repentane? or how many

Repentance is threefold, namely.

First, fained, Secondly, Temporary, which lasts not long. Thirdly, true, and
unfeigned.


The parts of Repentance are these, viz. Secondly, the deprecation of pardon
for the sins committed. Thirdly the leaving and forsaking of all sins for
the time to come. Fourthly the circumcision of the heart. ( Deuteronomy. 30.16.) or a
tender conscience which cannot endure the least touch of sin. Fifthly, the
Baptism of the Holy Ghost. And Sixthly, the washing, and quickening of Christ.
1. Cor. 6.11. Galath. 1.20. And therefore we should examine our selves by
these, as by so many essential signs and infallible tokens of true
Repentance, for every one who is truly converted, is brought to a sight of his
sins, to a sense of his misery and danger through sin, to an earnest
desire, that his sins were blotted out, and pardoned, yea is baptized with
the Holy Ghost and with fire, and washed with the blood of Christ, and water,
and endued with such a soft heart and tender conscience, that he fears to
commit, yea hates all sins whatsoever.


They would have repented Iam pridem, long ago.

The meaning of our Savior here by long ago, is in the beginning of
preaching: as if he would say, If the word had been preached to Tire, and Sidon
they would have repented at the First;

In sackcloth and ashes.



The use of Ashes was twofold, namely, I. Natural, which was either. Ad
abstergendum. Plut. qu. conviv. Or Ad corroborandum. Alex. ab Alex. Or
II. Moral; and so signifies either baseness, or mortality. Job. 30.19. And
hence both Jews and Gentiles were wont to sprinkle themselves with ashes, and
to wallow in them Stuckins 144.
.
Secondly, Religious, and this was threefold, namely. I. Heathenish, for the
Gentiles used Ashes in their Religious performances; or in holy things, that is.
First, the honorable amongst them used Ashes in their sacrifices, Ad
lustrandum, Purgandum, and Deos placandum. Stuckins rit. gent. 144. Secondly,
they used to keep Ashes in Pots or Pitchers, which were either the ashes of
their Children, or kindred, or of Noblemen, who were burnt to Ashes after they
were dead, and thus reserved. Or II. Leviticall, and thus the Apostle says:
The ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the puryfying of
the flesh. Heb. 9.13. Or III. Spiritual, which is twofold, to wit, either.
First, hypocritical; as Esa. 58.5. and 2 King. 6.30. Or Secondly. sincere, as
Job. 42.6. Cilicium inventum ad corporis afflictionem, and mentis
humiliationem. Reg. Basilij. Cap. 69. Now this sincere spiritual use of
Repentance is twofold, namely, I. For the expression of sorrow and mourning.
And II. For the expression of repentance. But these two are one; for neither is
repentance visible without mourning, nor mourning profitable without
Repentance: and therefore true repentance must be outwardly expressed.



Observe hence, Jonah 3.5. etc. and 1 Samuel 7.6. and 2 Samuel 12.16. and Joel
1.13. and 2.12. etc.

Why must true repentance be outwardly expressed?

First, because the outward expressions and

Secondly, because it is a good example and

Thirdly, because the outward expressions of Hest. 4.1.3.16. and Daniel 9.3.

How many signs of sorrow were there, or

The signs or expressions of sorrow were six, viz. First, to humble the
heads; I. Velando, by covering of it: as 2 Samuel 15.30. Hest. 6.12. Or II.
Deijciendo, by hanging of it down; as Lament. 2.10. Or III. Radendo, by
shaving of it. Esa. 22.12. Ierem. 48.37. Ezeck. 7.18. and 27.31.
Secondly, Ashes; and this sign was threefold, to wit, I. Sometimes they
sprinkled themselves with Ashes, and sat on the ground. Nehem. 9.1. Lament.
2.10. Ezeck. 27.30. And II. Sometimes they sat in the Ashes. Lament. 2.10.
Luke 10.13. And III. Sometimes they wallowed themselves in the Ashes. Ezeck.
27.33. Ierem 6.26. and 25.34. And hence Ashes is sometimes taken for mourning
it self. Esa. 61.3.
Thirdly, to go barefoot: as 2 Samuel: 15.30. Fourthly, to change the
apparel; and this was also threefold; For I. Sometimes they would put on no
better attire then they ordinarily wore, which was a kind of expression of
sorrow, as we see Exodus 33.4. And. II. Sometimes they rent the garments, they
had on. Genesis 37.34. And III. Sometimes they put on sackecloth upon them, 1 Samuel
3.21. and 1 King 21.27. and 2 King 19.1 and Joel 1.13.
Fifthly, to draw water, and to pour it forth 1 Samuel 7.6. Sixthly, to wound
themselves; as Ierem. 48.37. and 1 King. 18.28. which practice is forbidden for
the dead. Levitic. 19.28. and 21 5. Deuter. 14.1.






I. Fasting as Nehem. 9.1. and 2 Chronic. 20.3. Psalm. 69.10. Joel 1.14. and
2.12. Jonah 3.5.7.

II. Tears, Job 16.16. Psalm 69.10 Joel 2.12. Jonah 3.8.



I. The outward work of fasting and Tears. And

II. The inward adjuncts; which are four, viz.

First, compunction and sorrow of heart. Psalm 102.9. and Joel 2.13.

Secondly, the hatred of sin.

Thirdly, conversion unto God. Ierem. 3.1.12 Zach. 1.3.

Fourthly confusion and shame of heart. Daniel 9.7.

III. The daily practice and use of all these. Psalm 102.9.

VERSE. 23, 24. And thou Capernaum which art exalted unto heaven, shall be
brought down to Hell; for if the mighty works which have been done in thee,
had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day. But I say unto
you, that it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom, in the day of
judgment, then for thee.
If the mighty works which have been done ^^ Capernaum, had been done in
Sodom.

Our Savior does not compare Carpernaum with Tire and S^^^n; who for the
present flourished, and (it may be) for the time to come, were to be called and
converted; but with Sodom, who for the hardness of heart, and maturity of
sin were cast into hell, there for ever to be tormented.

Capernaum to Sodom, and not to Sidon?

Tire and Sidon.) And therefore the Capernaites may know, and learn hereby,
how Christ does repute of them, who equals them, or rather makes them worse,
then these most wicked Sodomites.

Secondly, because these Sodomites were long Ab inferno nulla redemptio:) And
therefore if by chance these Capernaites should despise the last judgment, by
presuming of mercy; yet this (or the like) judgment they might fear, and know
that they should be made as miserable, or more miserable, then they, in as much
as they enjoyed greater mercies and means, and despised them. Now from these
two conjoyntly ( viz. that they were for the present most grievous sinners, and
were hereafter most grievously to be punished, for the contempt of the Gospel)
will arise this Observation; namely:

That the Contemners of the Gospel, Esaias 30.9.10.14. Ierem. 9.12, 13. Proverb.
1.24.28. and 28.9. Matthew. 21.43. and 2 These. 1.8. and 2. King. 17.19. etc. and
2 Chronicles. 36.15. etc.

How does it appear, that the contemners of

It appears by these particulars, viz. First from the Author of the word, and
Gospel, which is God and Christ, Deuteronomy. 18.19. Act. 3.23. Luke 10.16. and 1
These. 4.8. Secondly, from the excellency of the word in it self, and in regard
of its effects, Ier. 15.16. Ezech. 3.3. Revelat. 19.15. Thirdly, A signo,
because it argues a most hard heart, to contemn the word, which is of that
force, that it is called a sword; yea, fire, and a hammer. Read Esa. 49.2.
Ephesians. 6.17. Hebr. 4.13. Ierem 5.14. and 23.29. Now look upon all these
together, and see if he be not a great sinner, and worthy of great torments,
who dare despise the word of the great King; yea, such a word as is sweeter
then honey, and more precious then gold, and able to beget him, and nourish him
unto salvation; yea, to anatomize his heart, and to lay it open before his eyes.


Why must we not, or may w^ not contemn

First, because we shall give account thereof, Heb. 2.3. and 11.25.

Secondly, because it is so odious unto God, Luke 10.10. Act. 18.6.

Thirdly, because it is a sin, that the Lord has Ierem. 11.21. and 13.10.

Fourthly, because they are happy and blessed, Esa. 96.5.

Whence comes the destruction of Cities, and

From hence, Lo-ammi, until they reject him, and slight his word.

What are the fruits of the contempt of the

These four, viz. First, it blinds and hardens the heart, Job 36.12. Secondly,
it leads into errors, 2 Thessal. 2.10. Thirdly, it brings temporal judgment
upon a Nation, City, or particular person; yea; Fourthly, it casts the
contemner into everlasting fire. And therefore we had need be extraordinary
fearful to contemn the word.


It would have remained.

Esaias 3.10.11. and Psalm 37.



Esaias 65.2.





Niniveh was: Here observe.

First, it is not enough to hear the word, or to be present at the preaching
thereof. Nor,

Secondly, to suffer the word of exhortation, and reprehension patiently, Heb.
13 22. For this they of Chorazin did, for any thing we read to the contrary.
Nor,

Thirdly, to reverence the Preachers of the Word; for this Herod did, Mark
6.20. Nor,

Fourthly, to show some certain humiliation, by reason of the Comminations of
the Word; for this Ahab did, 1 King. 21. But we must seriously repent, and
turn unto the Lord, in new obedience, and true sanctification, as they did,
Act. 2.37. Yea,

Fifthly, neither is it sufficient, that this be done of a few, but of many,
when the Commonwealth lies at the stake; for although God spares often for a
few, Genesis 18.25. etc. Yet he will remember those who repent not in the day of
vengeance, Exodus 32.34. Numb. 14.21.

Sixthly, neither is the endeavor of the inferior, and vulgar sort sufficient,
without the conduct of the Nobles, Peers, and Princes of the Realm: and that,

I. In true humiliation of heart: And,

II. In an exemplary reverence and practice; for they are the Wethers and
Leaders of the flocks: now noble Captains never say, Ite, sed eamus, go ye
and fight, but come let us go. And therefore in the time of a public danger,
both Prince and people, noble and ignoble, high and low, Pastor and flock, must

First, assemble together to the house of God, to hear his word. And,

Secondly, the hearers must endure the Preacher to admonish and reprove;
neither contemning him, nor his message, but reverencing both; he one as the
message, and the other as the Messenger of the Lord of hoasts. Yea,

Thirdly, all must humble themselves, and tremble at the threatenings of God;
for the beasts must quake, if the Lion roar. And,

Fourthly, those who are called Gods, must labor by their command, and
humiliation, and godly practice, to move and excite others to unfeigned
repentance; as that Pattern of Princes, the Ki g of Niniveh did, Jonah 3.2,
3.4. For God has promised to be gracious to that nation, that thus seeks him.

VERSE. 25. 26. At that time,
. 1. Jesus answered.

Why does the Evangelist here say, Jesus answered, seeing no man asked him any
quest^^^?

First, Saint Matthew was an Hebrew, and this Calvin, Beza.

Secondly, it may be, that the Apostles said Beza. But,

Thirdly, I rather think that it arose from this

I. Christ sees and observes the success of his preaching, how that it is
received, and embraced, by men of an inferior rank.

II. He sees this to be the work of God, to reveal his word and will to
the^e.

III, He admires this decree of God, to blind the eyes of the wise, and to give
knowledge* (...) understanding unto the simple.

IV. Hence (as though God were present, and saying unto him, Ego feci, I have
done this) he breaks forth, as it were in answer hereunto: Father I thank
thee, etc.

. 2. I thank thee.

Gur Savior here by his joy and thankesgiving, would have us learn: Luke
12.49. Matthew. 22.7. Mark 3.5. and there we shall see how desirous Christ is,
that the Gospel should be propagated and received, and how angry he is when it
is contemned.

Why is Christ so desirous, that the Gospel

First, because it is his work, the Ministers being Cor. 5.19.) he making
them fishers of men, and able Ministers: And therefore he rejoices, when the
work of the Ministry goes well forward.

Secondly, he is the Head of the Church, and therefore rejoices in the
successful preaching of the word, because his body is edified thereby, Ephesians.
4.11.12.



Matthew. 5.16. and 1 Pet. 2.12.





First, that the word may be preached. Or,

Secondly, that it may be heard. But,

Thirdly, that the seed of the Word may be received. And,

Fourthly, that it may grow up, and increase, and become truly fruitful.



Jeremy wished, that his head were a fountain of tears (Ier. 9.1.) that he
might weep for that people: And Christ himself wept over Jerusalem, Mat.
23.37.





First, as he was the Minister of Circumcision. And,

Secondly, as he was Mediator of the new Covenant. Now as he was the Minister
of Circumcision, and sent to teach the Jews, no doubt it was a great grief to
him, when he saw them so hard hearted, that they would not believe. But
again, if we consider him as Mediator, looking up to Gods wisdom, and
decree, he gives God praise for passing by some, and choosing others; Paul
looking to his charge, wished that the Jews might be saved; but (when in a
second consideration) he looks up to Gods will, and sees that his preaching
was to make fat the hearts of that people, as was the preaching of Esaias, then
he rests in this, and rejoices that God is glorified. Although the Spheres
have their own particular motions, yet they all follow the motion of the first
mover: So, although Christ and Paul be sorry at first, for the hardness of the
Jews hearts, yet they must follow the motion of the first mover, God himself,
and rejoice when he is glorified.



Although men are by the Gospel called to the knowledge of the truth, yet only
the Elect do attain unto the same: and that because they are effectually
called by the Holy Ghost. When I say that all men are called, I mean by an
outward calling, which is especially by the public preaching of the Gospel;
for by this no man is excluded from the knowledge of the truth, but are rather,
both generally all, and severally each singular person, invited thereunto: But
by that inward calling, which is by the Holy Ghost, and therefore effectual, I
say that only the Elect are called, according to the Apostles golden chain,
Romans 8.29. Whom he has predestined, them (even them alone) he called (by an
effectual calling:) And this is that which our Savior here says, I thank
thee Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things from the
wise (that is, of this world) and revealed them to babes; that is, only the
Elect which are contemptible in the sight of the world. See to this purpose,
verse 11. and 13. of this Chapter, and John 12.38. and 17.6. and 1 Corinthians.
4.3. and 2 Timoth. 3 7. Only therefore the Elect come to the saving knowledge
of the truth; who for that cause are said to be of the truth, and to hear the
voi e of Christ; and only the Church is called the Pillar, and foundation of
the truth; for they only retain the truth, and of them only does the Church
consist, and so only must know the truth. Hill. lib. 3. page 237. of the true
knowledge of God.

. 3. Oh Father!

Why does our Savior turn his speech unto

First, because his speech is a thankesgiving,

Secondly Christ directs his speech unto his Arcana Dei judicia suspicit, ut in
eorum admirationem alios trahat. Calvin. s. Christ admires the secret
judgments of God, that he may draw others to the like admiration.

Thirdly, our Savior converts his speech unto

I. In regard of the Pharisees, and world, who despised them for their low
estate: And also,

II. In regard of themselves, who were discouraged by this contempt: For hereby
he would have them both to know, that this proceeded of, and from the Lord; as
follows in the next verse; Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.

Why does Christ call God Father?

That he may show how great reason he has to congratulate, or rejoice
together with God,

That none can truly rejoice in God, Romans 8.17. Gal. 4.7. and 1 John 1.3. and
1 Corinthians. 1.9. Hos. 1.10. Romans 5 2. and 1 Pet. 1.8. And examples hereof we
have, Romans 8.15. Gal. 4.6. and 1 John 3.1.

How does the truth, and evidence hereof appear?

It appears by these three particulars, viz. First, the promises are not given
by name to Peter, John, or Andrew: but only to those, who are received into the
fellowship of sons, and called the sons of promise, Romans 9.8. Galat. 4.28.
Secondly, God professes himself to be an enemy to the enemies of his
children; and therefore he is not the helper of all, but only of his, ( Psalm.
8.13. etc.) And consequently, none can rejoice in him, but those only who are
assured, that by a new Covenant they are made his. Thirdly, naturally we hate
the Lord, and his Law; the Commandments of God, being as bonds and chains
unto us, which restrain us from doing that which we greedily desire: And
therefore we desire to cast off this bond and yoke; and had rather the Lord
would suffer us to walk in our own ways, though the end thereof be death,
then constrain us to walk in the paths of this Commandments, which lead
unto life: Wherefore until by a new Covenant, we be united unto the Lord, we
cannot rejoice in him, or his service.




Pacem operando, by making peace, and appeasing jarres, and composing strife
betwixt man and man, brother and brother. Blessed are the Peacemakers, for
they shall be called the children of God, Mat. 5.9.

Benedicendo, by blessing those that curse us, etc. Love your enemies, bless
them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which
despitefully hate you, and persecute you: That you may be the children of your
Father, which is in heaven, Mat. 5.45.46.

Orando, by praying unto God, to give us that evidence and testimony of his
Spirit, that we may be enabled to call him Father, Rom 8.15.

Patiendo, by suffering and enduring patiently, whatsoever afflictions the Lord
lays upon us, Heb. 12.8.

Verbum audiendo, by hearing and obeying the word of God, John 17.13.



I. Credendo, in faith in Christ, John 1.12. Gal. 3.26. And,

II. Obediendo, in obedience unto God: for those who would approve themselves
to be the sons of God, must put off the works of darkness, and the old man,
and putting on the new man, walk as becomes the children of light, Ephesians. 5.8.
and 1 Thessalonians. 5.5. And therefore if we desire to be made the children of God, we
must,

I. Be Peacemakers, and Lovers.

II. We must love our enemies, and do good unto those, who do evil unto us.

III. We must pray daily unto God, to sealeou adoption in us, by the evidence
of his Spirit.

IV. We must patiently undergo whatsoever the Lord lays upon us.

V. We must love, reverence, and prize the preaching of his word.

VI. We must labor to apprehend, and apply Christ unto our selves, by a
lively faith. And,

VII. We must devote our selves wholly unto the service of God, in a sincere,
and sanctified obedience.

Why does Christ ascribe that unto God

First, negatively, not to deprive himself of (Chrysostom. s.) for he says
afterward, All power is given unto me of my Father. But,

Secondly, affirmatively, to show that his Father Chrysostom. s.

. 4. Because thou have hid these things.

What is meant here by hiding, or how does

First, God is said sometimes to blind the eyes, Exodus 4, 21. and 7.3. and
9.12. and 10.1. and 14.4. and Esa. 44.18. But

Secondly, this is not so to be understood, as

Thirdly, only by permitting us to harden our

Fourthly, by detaining of his grace from us, Revelat. 3.18.

From whence we may note, that the Lord Sam. 20.2. and 2 King. 4.27. Genesis
18.17. For they were evil before, yea altogether evil. Genes. 6.5. and 8.21.
And therefore must not blame the Lord for their obduration or destruction
(because he made them no worse then they were, but only made them no better
then they were, which he was not bound to do) but lay the fault only upon
themselves.

How can the Lord blind some, and not others,

God does not respect outward things, Eliah before David, nor Esau before
Jacob. But he looks upon inward things as piety, iniquity, pride, and the like:
and therefore the cause of Gods blinding some will appear by the examination of
the persons blinded. For who were blinded? the Wise. Who were these wise men
who were blinded? Pharisees; who

First, sat in Moses chair. Matthew. 23. and were Doctors of the Law, and yet,

Secondly, could not discern of Christ, but contemn and despise him. John
7.47. Luk 16.14. and laugh at him, yea persecute him. John. 8.37. and 3.32. And
slander him, calling him a Samaritane, and Beelzebub: And therefore because they
despise the salvation of the Lord sent unto them, and offered unto them in the
Messiah; God hides himself from them.

Esa. 6.10. John 12.40. Romans 11.18. This is but that lex Talionis, which God
has promised to observe. Proverb. 1.24. etc. Because First, I have called. And
Therefore Ye shall call. But I will not hear. But Laugh at your destruction.
Secondly, ye have not heard But Therefore Ye shall call. But I will not
hear. But Laugh at your destruction. Thirdly, despised, and derided my
message. Therefore Ye shall call. But I will not hear. But Laugh at your
destruction.


The Lord leaves none but those who first left him; he hardens none but those
who are already hardened; he despises none, but only despisers: as is plain
from 1 Samuel 2.30 Esa. 66.4.



Two manner of ways. viz. detinendo by keeping back, or taking away the word,
and by letting out the vineyard to other Husband men. Read Amos 8.12. Acts
13.46. and 19.9. Matthew. 21.41. The word is the fire which melts, the dew which
mollifies, and the hammer which breaks the hard heart: And therefore needs
must the heart grow hard, when the word is taken away. Secondly, Non
benedicendo; by not blessing the word: the word without the Spirit is but a
dead Letter; and therefore when the Lord does not speak to the heart, as well
as the word to the ear, no wonder if the heart remain hard and obdurates for
if the word preached be not mixed with faith (which is simply, and only
wrought by God) in the hearers, it is heard and Preached in vain. Heb. 4.2.
and 1 Cor. 3.7.








Rom^ns 1.24, 26, 28.



The word is despised by many, many ways viz. John 7.47. yea because this is
every where usual, our Savior therefore does comfort his servants with this;
that the contempt of them reflects upon himself, and those who despise them,
despise him, and as contemners of the Lord shall certainly perish. Luke 10.16.
Secondly, some deride, and scoff at the word. 2 Chronic. 30.10. and 36.16.
Acts 13.41. Thirdly, some hinder the Preaching of the word. Amos 2.12.
Fourthly, some have no spare time or leisure to hear the word. Luk 14.18.
Fifthly, some hear the word, as a pastime, or a jesting matter. Ezeck. 33.32.
And not (as they ought) as a means to work in them godly sorrow, Eccles. 7.4.
Sixthly, some will not be reproved: salt bites, and therefore they will not be
rubbed with salt reproofs. Amos 7.12. and 1 King 13.4 Seventhly, some hear the
word, but absolutely and desolutely, refuse to obey it. Ierem. 44.16 and 32.33.
Eighthly, some would obey the Gospel, but they procrastinate it, and put it off
from day to day, as Nehem. 9.29.30 and 2 King 17 14. Now all these are
contemners before God, and, as such, shall be punished by him.


What is the condition of those who are blinded

Miserable, and wretched;

First, the time will come when they shall give account unto God, for all the
time misspent, for all the means of grace misused, and for every sermon they
heard in vain.

Secondly, such are justly deprived of the knowledge of Christ, and made
strangers unto him. Ephesians. 4.18.

Thirdly, such are deprived of God the Father; for no man knows the Father,
but the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. verse 27.

Fourthly, such are cut off from all hope of salvation. John 3.17. yea

Fifthly, they heap up unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath, for
their contumely and contempt against the Spirit of God. Romans 2.5. And therefore
without doubt such are truly, and deplorably miserable.

What are the causes of this obduration, and

First, a self-conceit of selfe-wisedome and

Secondly, a love of sin. He who is captivated,

Thirdly, a Lethargy of insensibility; for he that is not sensible of his
sin, like the mad

What are the remedies against hardness of









From the wise and prudent,



Sapientia, wisdom consists in Sciendo in knowing, but Prudentia, prudence
consists in Vtendo, applicando, in using, and applying that which we know unto
the good either of our souls or bodies: And thus wisdom respects the
speculative part, and prudence the practica l

In modo acquirendi: because Wisdom is infused, but Prudence is acquired:
Wisdom is freely given by God, but Prudence is procured and obtained by
industry, pains, experience and observation.

Hae duae virtutes (veritatem prudenter quaerere, and sapienter invenire) ita
sibi implicatae sunt, and unitae, ut una sine altera esse non possit Prosp. de
vita contemp. Cap 29. and Cavis. 592.
. These two virtues (prudently to seek after truth, and wisely to find it out)
are so involved one in another, and so close knit one unto another, that the
one cannot be without the other.

How is Sapientia Wisdom, here held, accounted, Proverb. 14.16.) And blessed
is he that finds wisdom ( Proverb. 3.13) because she is better then rich
Jewels. Prove. 8.11 etc. Eccles. 2.13. and Job. 28 28. Proverb. 2.3. etc.





I. Divine: this is praised by Solomon, and St. James. 3.17. Flumen ex Eden in
parts quatuor divisum, significat quatuor virtutes: prudentia contemplationem
veritatis. August. de great. cont. Manich. 2.10. Est fons vitae, fons gratiae
spiritualis, fons virtutum caeterarum ad vitam aeternam. Ambros. de parad. Cap.
3. Wisdom is the fountain of life, of spiritual grace, yea of all virtues
necessary unto salvation: And therefore this wisdom our Savior does not
account as evil.

II. Humane and carnal; or the wisdom of the flesh, now this is condemned,
and does not commend us unto God.

But it may be objected, that humane wisdom, and prudence is commanded, and
commended: Be wise (says our Savior) as Serpents, Mat. 10.16. Yea, Solon,
Lycurgus, Thales, Socrates, and diverse others, are highly extolled for their
wisdom. Plutarch says of Fabius, and Marcellus, that they were gladius and
clypeus reipublicae: so may we say, that wisdom is both the sword, and
buckler of the Commonwealth. Besides, wise men have spoken many things of God,
and that well; as Hermes, the Sybils, Plato, Seneca, and diverse others: yea,
even humane wisdom was given by God unto Solomon, as a great blessing. And
therefore, how can it be evil?

There are diverse sorts of wisdom,

First, natural; and this sort of wisdom Solomon exceeded in.

Secondly, Philosophical; and this is double; namely, either

I. Moral, teaching virtues; and in this wisdom, Socrates, Plato, and
Aristotle were famous.

Or,

II. Political, which is twofold, viz. either,

First, that which consists in faining, counterfeiting, dissembling, and
supplanting. Or,

Secondly, sincere, which consists in governing, preserving, and the like.

Here then these two Positions, as undoubted truths, I lay down.

I. Crafty, and deceitful wisdom, is odious, and abominable unto God.

II. All humane wisdom is unable, and too too vveake, to acquire salvation.

From this second Proposition, I will dravv my first Observation: namely,

That no humane wisdom can bring us to Romans 1.22. and 8 6.7. and 1 Corinthians.
1.20. etc.

Why is all humane wisdom insufficient, to

First, because for the learning of Christ, there

Secondly, humane wisdom only understands, Corinth. 2.14.) for flesh and
blood cannot reveal spiritual things unto us, Matthew. 16, 17. But the
knowledge of God and Christ is true wisdom, John 17.3. And therefore carnal
wisdom cannot bring us to the knowledge of God, o Christ, or the Gospel. The
Philosophers understood something of the creation of the world, and of the
immortality of the soul, and of the dignity and excellency of the minds; but
they were wholly ignorant of the fall of Adam, and of the sacrifice of Christ,
and the like Theological truths: Wherefore unto the knowledge of Divinity
more then humane wisdom is requisite.

Thirdly, humane wisdom makes men proud, and puffes them up, 1 Timothy 3.6. But
those who Mat. 16.24. And therefore humane wisdom, is so far from bringing
us unto heaven, that it is a means to debar, and keep us from thence; as
follows by and by.



Thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent?

Et hic simpliciter accipitur pro tali statu, non pro vitio ponit, Calvin. s.
And by wise and prudent, are meant simply such, without any relation to the
maliciousness, or obliquity of humane wisdom. And therefore worldly wise men
should not flatter themselves; for all their knowledge and wit, is too weak to
bring them to heaven. Here observe two things, viz.

I. All wise men are not rejected: the Apostle says, Not many wise are called,
1 Cor. 1.26. by which he would mean, that the sentence is not general, which
our Savior here pronounces, that the knowledge of Christ is hid from the
wise: but (...), for the most part; or that it is not revealed to many wise
men. But yet,

II. All wise men are detained, and kept back from this knowledge, so long as
they trust in their wisdom: And therefore here our Savior principally
speaks unto the Pharisees, who trusted in their learning and knowledge.

Psalm 131.1.2.

that God has hid these things from the wise, would teach us,

That God hides the knowledge of the Gospel from those, who swell great with
humane wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.20. etc.
.

hide, or blind the eyes? is he the Author of sin and evil? Indeed many
phrases we have in Scriptures, that sounds this way, but can they truly, or
justly have place in God. He is said:

First, to give some over to a reprobate sense, Romans 1.28. And,

Secondly, it is said, that he hardens the heart, Romans 9.18. And,

Thirdly, that he prepares men for destruction, Romans 9.22. And,

Fourthly, that he lays a stumbling stone, and rock of off nce before some,
Romans 11.9. And,

Fifthly, it is said sometimes that he blinds, and gives the Spirit of slumber
unto men, Romans, 11.8.

God is said to do these things two manner of ways; namely, First, Passive,
Passively, by permitting them, and by not withstanding, gainsaying, that his
Spirit shall not always strive with man, Genesis 6.3. And therefore he endures,
or suffer the vessels of wrath, Romans 9.22. Secondly, Active, Actively; for God
is never merely passive, but a pure agent (Thom.) Now the Lord is active in
reprobates. Obdur ando, occaecando, by hardening their hearts, and blinding
their eyes; and this may be done one of these four ways: namely; either,
First, by working hardness in their hearts, or by making their hearts hard
immediately: and that either, I. By infusing malice, or a greater measure of
wickedness in the heart: Or, II. By compelling the party to the committing of
some wicked thing. These two God neither has done, nor will do, for be
tempts no man, James 1.14. neither is he the Author of evil. Or, Secondly, by
sending an evil spirit (as a judgment and scourge) unto an evil man, as the
Lord did unto Saul, 1 Samuel 16.14. Or, Thirdly, by permitting Satan to tempt,
1. King. 22.22. Offendicula patitur, non ponit: God suffers stumbling stones to
be laid in men's ways, but himself lays none. Or, Fourthly, by withdrawing,
or withholding his grace, and gracious aid, and assistance. As Romans 1.24. He
further hardens those who were obdurate before, as Exodus 3.19. He does not
send a Lethargy unto men, but he does not heal it, and therefore sin
prevails. Now this last is most proper and peculiar to our present purpose,
and institution.


How can carnal, or humane wisdom (which

First, we need not enquire and seek, what it Adam; and that is his own
glory ( Proverbes 16.4.) Now those whom the Lord denies to help or succor by
his grace, cannot rescue, or aid themselves at all, by any humane wisdom or
knowledge: And this humane wisdom may be said to hinder us from divine
knowledge, and eternal glory; because it cannot help, further, succor, or
enable us to attain thereunto. And this Calvin thinks to be the true meaning
of the point, and question in hand; that it hinders, because it conduces
nothing unto this spiritual knowledge. But it is something more.

Secondly, certainly natural wisdom it and salvation, or that knowledge of
God which is salvation, I^^n 17 3. Or we must acknowledge that there is
something in the wisdom of the flesh, which hinders from faith: For there are
two things in him that learnes; to wit,

I. A simplicity of believing: And this is necessary in him that would learn,
according to that of Aristotle, (...). He must believe what his Master
teaches; and with Pythagoras his Scholars, (...), our Master says so, must
be of great reckoning and weight with him. A Scholar can never learn well,
who calls the truth of that in question, which is taught, or rather, who will
not believe that which is taught. And herein humane wisdom hinders men from
faith; for it will believe no more in religion, then is plain and
demonstrative by reason: There is nothing true in divinity, which is either
false in reason, or contrary to reason: but yet there are many things in
Religion, which are above reasons reach, and therefore are to be believed by
faith, because they cannot be apprehended, or comprehended, much less
demonstrated by reason. Now (I say) the natural wise man will believe no more,
then he can take up by natural reason, although it be taught and confirmed,
(...), from the word of God. And thus humane wisdom hinders us from believing
all those saving truths, which the shallow shell of man's brain is not able to
contain, or comprehend.

II. In Scholars, who desire to be great and good Scholars, there is a
certain curiosity of disputing, and propounding doubts and queres; now this is
commendable in humane learning, but not in divine; although it be too frequent
with those, who are somewhat in humane learning and wisdom: And unto such
this is a great impediment, because worldly, or humane wise men despise the
simplicity of the Gospel: That great learned man; yea, the Philosopher
(Aristotle) rejected the Pentateuch, because Moses did only positively lay
down things, and not demonstrate them from the principles of Philosophy. Hence
then we may observe a third thing, viz.

Romans 8.6, 7. and 1 Cor. 1.26. and

Is all wisdom (as an impediment of faith, and an enemy to a new birth)
condemned?

No, for wisdom is manifold.

First, some say, that there is a five-fold wisdom; namely, Natural, Moral,
Political, Diabolical, and Spiritual.

Secondly, some say, that there is a double Wisdom; to wit,

I. Honest, and harmless, And,

II. Crafty, and fraudulent; which (as was said before) consists in
dissimulation, and couterfeiting. But this cannot be called Wisdom, being
neither Pharisaicall, nor Philosophical Wisdom.

Thirdly, Wisdom indeed is twofold, viz.

I. Spiritual, and divine which comes from God above. And

II. Carnal, and humane, or Natural; which consists partly in a natural
towardliness, and ripeness of wit, and partly in an artificial acquisition
by study, and knowledge.

How does this natural and spiritual wisdom

They differ in the very foundations;

First, natural wisdom is built upon reason, and judgment, and our own
understanding.

Secondly, spiritual wisdom is founded upon the will, and word of God. And
therefore,

I. Spiritual wisdom is commanded and commended. Deuter. 4.6. Acts 6.3. and
1 Corinthians. 2.6. and 12.18. and Ephesians. 1 8.17. And

II. Worldly wisdom is sometim^s permitted, and sometimes praised: Solomon
was wise naturally, and Joseph politickely, and both commendably, 1 King 2.6.
Here observe, that this natural or worldly wisdom is twofold, to wit,
lawful, and unlawful, and these two differ not, Re or Natura, indeed, or in
the very essenee and nature of them, but only Ratione in subjection unto the
will of God: And therefore, if

First, it be subject to the will of God, as a handmaid thereunto, it is good 2
Cor. 10.5.
. But

Secondly, if it will not be subject to the will and word of God, then it is
evil.

And therefore humane wisdom is a let unto faith, and a hinderer of
regeneration, because it is very difficultly subjected to the will and word of
the Lord, For

I. It is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. Romans 8.7. And

II. It contemnes, and despises Religion; and that either.

First, because it is but foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.18 21. and 2.14. Or

Secondly, because it is an abject thing, or a thing below him, and too base
for him to sto^pe unto, because he is wiser then the simple Gospel.

. 6. And revealed them.

We may observe here that our Savior does not say, thou have preached them,
thou have revealed them: as Galath. 1.12. and 2.2. To teach us that it is the
Lord, who reveals himself fully to his Children.

How does it appear, that the Lord himself

It appears plainly thus, viz. First, from the texts of Scripture. Cor. 2.10.
and 2 Corinthians. 4 6. Ephesians. 1.17. Secondly, because the knowledge of God is life
everlasting. John 17.3. And therefore we cannot acquire it of our selves, or
by our own strength. Thirdly, because the word preached penetrates only the
Ears, and it is the Holy Spirit, who works upon the heart ( Heb. 4.12) and
makes the word profitable. 1 Cor. 3.7. Fourthly, the word is equally and alike
preached both to the good and bad, both to the wicked and righteous: and the
difference is only within in the Spirit, because without that the word is but
a dead Letter. And therefore it is not man but God, who does reveal spiritual
and supernall wisdom, and knowledge unto us, yea Fifthly, the Spirit is
plainly called a Seeds-man or Sower. Math. 13. And therefore it is evident
that all grace and divine knowledge comes from the Lord.


Revelations are there?

viz. First, Delusive, or deceitful; and these come from Satan, 2 Corinthians.
11.13. and therefore we must not believe every Spirit, nor every Revelation,
but try them, 1 Ioh. 4.1. and 2 Thessal. 2.11. Secondly, miraculous, and
extraordinary Now these I. Were usual under the Law to the Prophets, and
Secrs. And II. For a while were retained, or continued to the Apostles, for the
planting of Churches: as we see, from 2 Cor. 12.4. etc. Ephesians. 3.3. But III.
Ordinarily, they are abolished, and out of date. Heb. 1.1. Thirdly, Ordinary;
and these belong unto the Children and sons of God; and may be called the
Revelation of the Gospel. Now this Ordinary revelation is the operation of the
holy Spirit in the heart, revealing unto the heart the certainty and assurance
of Christ, First offered in the Gospel.




First, the workman, which is the blessed Spirit, and promised Comforter John
14. and 1 Corinthians. 2.10. and Ephesians. 3.5. And Secondly, the means whereby he
works, which is the word. 1 Peter 1.5.13. And Thirdly, the Revelation it self,
and that is a particular work, whereby our hearts are confirmed in a full
assurance of faith. Romans 1 17. Ephesians. 3.13. Heb. 10.22. and 1 Peter 1.5.






First, we must adhere and cleave closely and diligently to the word of God, as
to our Schoolmasters remembering that it is a seed to beget us, and milk to
feed us, and a candle to enlighten us, and a sword to defend us, and joy to
cheer us, and a companion to associate us, and life eternal to crown, and
rejoice us.

Secondly, we must hope for and expect, the blessing of God in the hearing of
the word, according to his promise: that is, we prizing, valuing, and loving of
the word of God, and frequenting the Preaching and reading thereof, for this
end that we might be taught thereby; we may then rest confidently assured,
that the Lord will bless his word unto us, because he is faithful in his
promises, and the word is powerful in its operation. Heb. 4.12.

Thirdly, to this esteem of the word, and hope of the Spirit we must join
prayer; that is, beg at the hands of God this blessing, that he would come unto
our hearts by his Spirit, and teach us. Psalm. 143.10. And then we may
comfortably rest assured, that he who is most faithful in all his promises,
and whose ears are always open to the prayers of his Children, will in his
good time grant our requests, and with his Spirit fill our hearts with joy
unspeakeable, and glorious. Romans 5.1. and 14.17. and 1 Peter 1.8. Philip. 4.7.

. 7. Unto Babes.

How, or in what sense are they called Babes?

First, they are not Babes in understanding ( Romans

Secondly, in humility; and that either by an acknowledgement

Thirdly, in a dependence upon God their Father,

. 8. Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy

We see here how our blessed Savior (whose action is our instruction) neither
gives, nor seeks, for any further cause of Gods actions, then his own good
pleasure; that we might from him learn to rest therein; and in all the decrees
of the Lord, to make that our Non ultra, or Herculean Pillar, beyond which we
dare not, nor desire to go. For if it be demanded.

Why God does not bestow upon some those

We answer that the true and principal cause is the good pleasure of his
heavenly will. Pelagians are confuted, who do teach, that the will of God was
moved to elect some, and to reject others, because he foresaw the good works
of them, Hill. the know: of the true God. page 287.
and the bad works of these, flat against the Apostle, who says of Jacob and
Esau, that before they were borne, when as yet they had done neither good nor
evil, not of works etc. Romans 9.11. And to confirm this Proposition Christ
says that his Father hid the Gospel from the wise, and revealed it to Babes?
Why? because it was his good pleasure. Where we see, that his pleasure is the
cause that he did not reveal, as well as that he did. And therefore from
hence we may learn. That we must not enquire of God a reason of his actions,
but rest in his will. Romans 9.20. Thus did good old Eli 1 Samuel 2.18. and holy
Job 1.21, 22. And the blessed Apostles of Christ. Acts 2.23. and 3.18. and
4.28. and 13.27.



Romans 11.35. And therefore he says in the person of that Master of the
vineyard, who was not so liberal to one as to another, Can I not do with my
own as I will? Psalm 50. The Lord shows that all things are his, and
therefore none can give ought unto him: yea he has despoticall and absolute
rule and power over all creatures: For

I. They had all their beginning of and from him And

II. They all are ruled and governed by him. And

III. They all are ordained for him: according to that of the Apostle? For of
him, and through him, and to him are all things. Romans 11.36. And therefore who
shall dare to call the great Judge, and King of all the world, to the Bar, to
render a reason why he has done this or that?

Romans 11.33. etc. and 1 Corinthians. 2.16. Esa. 40.13. The judgments, ways, and
works of the Lord, are always just; but yet man is often forced to say with
Mary: How can these things be? Luke 1.34. and 18.27. And therefore in such a
case we must confess the blindness of our reason, and not dare to summon God
to give account unto us, of what he does.



Non ad discussionem operum Dei, sed ad honorandum Deum conditi sumus Muscul. s
. We were created for the worship and service of God, and not to discuss,
dispute of, or censure the actions of God. Non Iudices actionum, sed imperi^
subditi. Chrysostom. imp. s. We are the Lords vassalls, and not Judges of his
actions. Non ferenda mor^sit^^, non tribuentium Deo justitiae laudem, nisi
quoad sensus eorum pertingit; Great and intolerable is the insolency of those,
who will not acknowledge the Lords justice any further, then they can see
reason for it. Muscill. s. We see how our Savior does apply this reason (taken
from the will of God) to the hardening of some, and to the illumination of
others; As if he would say, it proceeds not from any impotency in God, that all
obeyed not the Gospel, but because it otherwise pleased the Lord Calvin. s.

Cantic. 1.3. He adds unto the Church daily such as he will have saved* Acts
2.47. namely, such as were ordained unto life. Acts 13.48. Romans 11.7. Non
precibus flexus, sed sp^^te sua com^^^^^ fecit. Chrysostom. super. He was not moved
to save us, for, or by our prayers, but of his own free will. Declarat non
aliunde quam ex Dei arbitrio pendere discrimen, quod sapientes caecutiant, and
idictae capiant. Calvin. s. Our Savior produces no other reason but only the
Lords will, why the wise are blinded, and the simple understand the Gospel.

How does this appear?

First, this divine Revelation, and spiritual knowledge Chrysostom. s. The
Gospel is not apprehended, or clearly taken up by any humane wit, but only by
the illumination of the blessed Spirit. Calvin. s. and hence the Apostle says.
The spiritual man (and he only) knows all things. 1 Corinthians. 2.14.15. And
again, God has given us his Spirit which searches all things, even the deep
Mysteries, and hidden things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10.12. And therefore if we
cannot understand spiritual things without the Spirit (as is most true because
no man knows the things of God, but the Spirit of God, and he unto whom the
Spirit will reveal them) And that no man can merit, deserve, or procure the
presence of the holy Ghost, by any thing he does, but that he is given freely
of God, to whom he will: Then predestination unto life and light, must needs
proceed from the free will, and good pleasure of the Lord.

Secondly, it further evidently appears that

I. All by nature are so blinded, and corrupted ( Psalm 14.1. etc. Romans 3.23.)
that none can now save themselves, or their own souls. And

II. Although it should be granted, that sufficient grace is given unto all
(which will be hard to prove) yet here there is no difference in the Object
neither: and therefore the difference will be either.

First, in the corroborating and strengthening of the minds of men, against the
temptations of the flesh, or world, or Devil. (And this without controversy
is the gift of God and a gift not given unto all neither) Or else

Secondly, in that further grace (whereby we cannot fall, finally or totally.
August de cor and great) which is given only to the Elect. And therefore this
grace and strength whereby we come unto salvation, must needs come from the
Lord, and that not of or for our merits, but only of his own free grace and
love.

Thirdly, it is clear, that election, and rejection,

I. The glory of God regulates his will. And

II. His will does dispose of his decrees, And

III. According to his decrees follow his actions: and therefore his actions
proceed from his (...) and good will: as our Savior plainly expresses in the
text: Thou have concealed these things from the wise and revealed them unto
Babes And why? Because it seemed good in thy sight: or because thou would.
So elsewhere the Lord says, I will do what I will. Esa. 46.10. And again,
the Lord works according to his own will. Daniel 4.32. Read further these
plain places. Roman 19.15.18.22. James 1.18. and Ephesians. 1.11.









Rom 11.33. etc. And therefore here I conceive that Aristophanes his Proverb is
worth observing; who says: (...) That it is better for a man to fit still,
then to rise and catch a fall; better not to enquire and search into the
profound and hidden Judgments, and secret decrees of God, then to search, but
never be able to find them out, especially when there is no need at all of
that investigation, or possibility to alter the least particle of any of Gods
immutable decrees, although we could find them out; but yet more especially,
when this kind of search is condemned, and forbidden, at least implicity, and
by necessary consequence. And therefore this is the first thing which is
required of us in regard of the judgments, decrees and actions of God, not to
demand a reason of them.

Jacob, and the destroying of Esau, and in the receiving of some, and rejecting
of others; although in the (...), we know not the reason, why the Lord does it.

VERSE. 27. All things are delivered unto me of my Father: and no man knows
the Son, but the Father, neither knows any man the Father, save the Son,
and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him.
It is questioned by some, whether God does

God does know himself,

There are two things from this verse objected against the Holy Ghost, which I
will briefly and severally answer, although in effect they be but one.

God knows the Son, the Holy Ghost (For no man knows the Son but the
Father:) Therefore the Holy Ghost is not God.

This place excludes no person of the blessed None, that is, no creature or
Idol god, knows the Son of God, but only the Father: And this opposition
is made to exclude creatures, not to exclude the Holy Ghost.

Although the Holy Spirit be God, yet is he not

This Objection is in a manner the same with the former; A figura dictionis,
because this Particle (...), does only exclude creatures, and not the blessed
Spirit, who perfectly knows God, 1 Cor. 2.10.

What knowledge does our Savior here speak None know the Father, or Son?

First, Calvin thinks that he speaks of that

Secondly, others suppose that he understands

Thirdly, our Savior himself is his own None know either the Father, or
Son, save only those to whom God reveals them. To teach us,

That none can know God without God, Exodus 33.20. and 1 Cor. 21. John 1.18. and
1 John 4.12 Except God please to reveal himself to men, they cannot know him;
as our Savior often objected to the Pharisees, ye know not the Father.

Why cannot men know God, except he please to reveal himself unto them?

Tim. 6.16.

Chrysostom. impers. s.





Romans 1.19.20.21.) and therefore a man may know God without Christ.



I. Theoricall, and Dogmaticall: and here perhaps they know something. And,

II. Experimental; and here natural men are ignorant, and know nothing,
because they have not seen God. Our Savior says, Blessed are they that see
God, Matthew. 5.8. because this sight begets an experimental knowledge of him:
And therefore natural men, who never had this sight, can never have this
knowledge.



I. Perfect and plenary: and that either,

First, absolutely, to know Quantus, Qualis est, how infinite he is, and
absolutely to comprehend, and perfectly to know whatsoever is in him. And thus
only God knows himself. Or,

Secondly, respectively, when a man knows God fully, according to the capacity
of the vessel. And thus all the Saints in heaven know God, Mat. 5.8. 1 Cor.
13.12.
.

II. Imperfect, and this is either,

First, clear, and bright, and is wrought by the preaching of the Gospel, and
the operation of the blessed Spirit, 2 Corinthians. 3.18. Or,

Secondly, cloudy and dark, and is begot, and bred in natural men, by the
relickes, and sparks of natural understanding. And this knowledge is all that
a natural man can have.

Caecus non judicat de coloribus. The blind cannot judge or discern of
colors, and yet many who are spiritually blind, will undertake to judge and
discern of God, although Christ never revealed him unto them.



Athenians, To an unknown God, Act. 17.14. For with what comfort or confidence
can we pray, to him whom we know not? Romans 10.14.

Verse. 28.
VERSE. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest.
Come.

Our Savior does not say, buy or procure this grace and consolation with
infinite sufferings and labors, but only Venite, Come, a most mean prize: To
teach us.

That the condition unto life, faith, Esa. 55.1. we must buy it, but without
money, or money-worth, Ephesians. 2.5.8. Titus, 3.5.

How does the truth of this appear?

Thus; namely, First, because we are saved by faith, Ephesians 2.5, 8. Tit. 3.5.
Secondly, because Christ hereby would magnify his grace, Ephesians. 1.6. Romans
4.16. Galath, 2.21. Thirdly, because Christ works in us, that which he
requires of us, Heb. 8.8. (from Ierem. 31.31.) and Heb. 10.16. Esa. 54.13. Romans
11.27. from Esa. 27.9. Fourthly, we must do nothing as a cause of our
salvation, Romans 11 6. and 10.6. Psalm. 81.10. etc.


. 2. Unto me.

Two things might hence be observed: to wit,

First, that there is no way or means to come unto salvation, but only Christ,
Act 4.12. But of this elsewhere.

Secondly, that the sum and top of our happiness,

How it the truth hereof apparent?

It appears most plainly by these three particulars; namely, First, because
he is able, Heb. 7.25. Qui vult and potest, pater omnipotens est: He that can
and will save us, is an Almighty, and all merciful God, Musculus upon these
words says; That there are tbree things in Christ, viz. (...). I. (...), He
who would help others, had need be Potent, able to help; and therefore Christ
who promises to help all that come unto him, had need be able (and is indeed
most able) to succor, releeve, and help, those who do come. II. (...), In
this thing, of helping others, there is not only required Potentia, ability to
help, but also Legitima potestas, that is, that he who helps has received
free power from God, to save whom he pleases: Now this also is in Christ, for
he says in the former verse, All things are delivered me of my Father; and
Chap. 28. 20. he more plainly says, All power is given unto me in heaven,
and in earth. III. (...): He that promises to help, save, and succor all
that come unto him, must not only be able to perform his promise, or have
free power granted unto him to do it; but he must have also a readiness, and
willingness of mind, to help all such, as he has promised to succor: Now
who can be more willing then Christ is? who does not only refresh, and give
rest to all, whosoever come unto him; but over and above does invite, and call
those who delay and procrastinate to come: saying, Come unto me. Secondly,
because he works good things in us; that is, I. He roots, grounds, and setles
us in the most holy faith, Colos. 2.6. etc. II. He reveals his will, his love,
himself, and his Father unto us; from whence we have full and complete joy.
Read John 17.3. Ephesians. 1.18. and 3.17. etc. and 1 John 1.1. etc. III. He guides
and directs our feet in the ways of God, and in the paths of grace, Gal.
2.20. etc.
. Thirdly, because of all other things, he is the best, and most profitable
for us, Luke 10.42. Philip 3.8.
.


All ye that labor, and are heavy laden.



Chrysostom. s.





Laborantes and onusti, laboring and heavy laden, are one and the same: for
(...), ye that labor, signifies not only to labor, but to be weary with
labor, and spiritually is to be understood of the labor of sin: (...), ye
that are heavy laden, signifies not only to carry a burden, but also to be
pressed, and depressed therewith: and Metaphorically is to be understood of a
thing troublesome, odious, and grievous. From hence then we may observe.

Peter. 5.6. James 4.10.



First, of the body, and such sleep sweetly, Eccles. 5.11. This is not here
spoken of. Secondly, of the Mind, and this is twofold: namely, when a man
labors. I. In affection; and that either, First, because he desires that
which he cannot obtain, or attain unto* Or, Secondly, because he fears that
which he cannot flee from, or avoid: Or, II. In sense, when a man grieves and
mournes under some burden, which is not pleasing, but painful, and odious
unto him. Now of this more by and by.


Why shall none be comforted by Christ, but

First, because until we be truly wearied of

Secondly, because Christ came not to call the Mat. 9.12. He was sent, (not to
comfort those, who stood in no need of comfort, but) to comfort those who
mourn, Luke 4.18.

Who are here to be reproved, and taxed?

First, those who rejoice in the world: Christ Luke 6.24.

Secondly, those who place their felicity only

Thirdly, those who deride the threatenings of Psalm 94.7. and 2 Pet. 3.4.

Fourthly, those who are not sensible of their

I. Those who do not think themselves to be sinners, as Esa. 65.5. but
proudly boast of themselves, Luke 18.11. and in comparison of themselves
contemn all others: yea, condemn others as sinners, but not themselves, 1
John 1.9. These are either hypocrites, and proud Pharisees, or moral, civil,
honest men. Or,

II. Those who through a blockish stupidity, and insensibility, perceive
nothing; neither examining at all, how miserable their estate and condition is,
nor what the end of them will be. Or,

III. Those who would not hear, or see their sins; and therefore hate the
word of God, (instead of being humbled) for reproving of their sins: Or,

IV. The Papists who instead of feeling the burden of their sins, brag of
their works and merits.

Fifthly, those are here faulty, who hypocritically

Sixthly, those who are not wearied with labor, Heb. 4.12. who would work the
Lords work, but not so as to tire or weary themselves; who are content to be
lazy servants and idle worke-men, but not painful laborers: Christ will not
comfort these, because God has cursed them, Ierem. 48.10. And therefore if we
desire consolation from him, we must labor, and that unto weariness.



There is a double labor; namely,



I. Innate, natural, and ordained: For,

First, all things are full of labor, Job 5.7. And,

Secondly, God has ordained, that man should labor, and get his bread with
the sweat of his brows, Genesis 3.16. And,

Thirdly, men can expect no blessing without labor, neither obtain any by
their own industry, except the Lord bless their labor. Now this labor and
pains was imposed upon, and enjoined man as a curse; and therefore these
Laborers are not simply happy, neither (as such) have any promise of comfort,
ease, or rest from Christ.

II. Acquired; and thus.

First, some labor, and take much pains in sin: And,

Secondly, some bestow much care and diligence, and labor in the acquiring of
riches, and the gathering of the thick clay of this world together. Now
neither are these Laborers happy, except they feel their labor, and grieve
for it, and labor* to ease their shoulders of the burden thereof.

Secondly, spiritual, in mind, and this is twofold; to wit, either,

I. Unjustly imposed; and that either,

First, by Doctors, which are either,

Or, Pharisaical, loving to lay heavy (and unnecessary) loads of Ceremonies,
upon men's shoulders, Matthew. 15.14. etc. Acts. 13.1^.
. Or. Papisticall, teaching men to labor, to obtain salvation by the merits
of works, and not by the grace of Christ, Romans 10.3. Philip. 3.9. Or,


Secondly, By the Tempter, Satan, who accuses men, and tempts them; and by
his accusations and temptations, troubles and molesteth them; as we see he
did with Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 12.8. Now these Laborers are blessed, if they
resist Satan's temptations, and wrestle manfully against them, James 4.7.

II. Religiously conceived; that is, when men are poor in spirit, Matt. 5.3.4.
and broken and contrite in heart, Psalm 51.17. And these are they, whom our
Savior principally speaks of, and to: And therefore if we desire to be made
partakers of the rest and comfort promised, we must strive thus to labor, and
groan under the heavy burden of our sins.



First, we must labor to know what our estate and condition is; and not
deceive our selves by false persuasions, or destroy our souls by

Secondly, we must labor to condemn our Cor. 11.29.

Here:

I. We must be careful not to extenuate our sins. And,

II. We must urge the certainty of destruction (unto our selves) for our
sins, except we repent us of them, 1 Cor. 6.9. Gal. 6.7. For if we would
but press our consciences, and cast our souls down unto hell, it would be a
means to make us rise the sooner to comfort, and spiritual consolation.

Thirdly, we must labor to be freed from the chains of sin: we must pray,
and cry incessantly, until the Lord hear, and answer us.

Fourthly, we must seek for Christ, and that

I. We must seek for Christ: For,

First, We are commanded to do it, Esa. 55.6. And in many places.

Secondly, the Lord promises, that those who seek him, shall find him,
Jeremy 32.41.

Thirdly, the Lord and Christ complain upon those, who will not seek him.
Read Ierem. 2.13. and 32, 33. Romans 10.21. And therefore, if we desire either
to please our God, or to bring comfort unto our own souls, we must seek
Christ.

II. We must seek him seriously, and earnestly; we must hunger and thirst
after him, Esaias 55.1. John 7.37. Because, if (with the Church) we seek him in
our beds, we cannot find him, Cantic. 5.

How many burdens are there, because Christ

First, there are temporal burdens: namely,

I. Want, which is either absolute, when men simply are poor, wanting many
necessary things, or respective, when men's desires are not satisfied, although
they have food and raiment sufficient. And,

II. An uncertainty of possessing, keeping, and enjoying what we have: Many
trouble themselves with this thought and care; that all they possess will be
like grass upon the house top, which quickly withers, fades, and dies: and
that it may be, their land, riches, friends, children, and all will be taken
away from them. And,

III. The burden of worldly cares, and of laboring and toyling for the world:
of which Gregory speaks (and that not amiss) That it is a rough yoke, and a
hard burden of servitude, to be under temporal things, to seek after earthly
things, to seek to hold these fading things, and to fear to lose, or leave
these transitory things.

Secondly, there are corporal burdens, namely of afflictions; and hence when
Judgments to burdens, as the burden of Edom, and Moab* etc.

St. James calls a burden, which neither we nor our forefathers were able to
bear. Acts 15.



I. For our separation from God, or the absence of God from us. Psalm. 42.4.
and 51.11.12. Or

II. For sin the cause of this separation. And that either.

First, for some sin already committed, this was David's burden. Psalm 51.
and 38.4. Or

Secondly, for the daily practice of sin: this is the burden of all the
faithful, who grieve daily for their daily transgressions, whereby their
Father is offended. Or

Thirdly, for the remainders of sin, or the strength of internal
concupiscence in the heart, this was St. Paul's burden. Romans 7.23.24. Or

Fourthly, for some strong temptation, which lies upon a man, and which he is
not able to remove: this likewise was the same Apostles burden. 2 Corinthians.
12.7, 8, 9.

Where he says, that there was given unto him a thorn in the flesh, the
Messenger of Satan to buffet him, for the which he besought the Lord thrice,
(that is often,) that it might depart from him. And yet he did not by his
prayer remove the burden, but only obtained the grace of God supporting him
under it, the Lord only assuring him, that his grace was sufficient for him. Or

Fifthly, for an impotency, and inability to resist the assaults of Satan: and
this is the burden of those, who are taken captive of the Devil at his will.
2 Timoth. 2.26, and who cannot cease to sin. 2 Peter 2.14. and this burden
lies upon the backs of many, and although it be a very heavy and greevous
burden in it self, yet they feel it not.





First, we must know our molestations, and causes of grief; and that either.

I. Temporal which we may see in one kind or another, in our selves or
others. Or

II. Spiritual, which are thus to be discerned, and known, viz.

First, from the Law, we may know what displeases and offends the Lord. And

Secondly, from our own consciences we may know, wherein we are guilty. Then

Secondly, we must humble our selves: And that

I. That we live in so wicked a world, wherein we are strangers from all true
happiness, Corinth. 5.1.8. And

II. That we are thus prone and subject to sin, and to transgress the Lords
will.

Some may here Object, this mourning,

It is not so, but rather contrary,

First, it is necessary, because we have sinned against an infinite God, and
for our transgressions, have deserved infinite torments, which we shall
certainly undergo, except we repent and turn from our sins; now sin has
taken such strong and deep root in our hearts, that it cannot without labor
(and that unto weariness) be expelled and overcome.

Secondly, it is safe and secure for a man thus to mourn, and humble himself;
because God has promised that he will not break a bruised reed. Esa. 42.3.
And Christ has invited such to come unto him, with a promise of mercy. Come
unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will refresh you.

What must we labor principally for?

In regard of our selves we must labor for salvation.

How must we seek for salvation?

First, we must deny our selves, and all merit of Luke. 18.13. Phil. 3.9. yea
that we are but unprofitable servants, in our best service, Luke 17.10. We
must not find any comfort in any thing we do, as it is ours, but seek rest
and consolation in some other.

Secondly, we must seek for this comfort Cornelius did Acts 10.2.

Thirdly, we must weary our selves in this labor

Must we not rest, and be quiet after we are

Indeed if once we were truly made partakers of Christ by faith, Ephesians. 4.22,
23, 24.

. 5. Ego I.

We may learn hence, Psalm. 50.16. Prove. 9.5 And therefore we are commanded
only to hear him. Deuter. 18. All power was given to him. ( Esa 9.6, 7. John
3.35. and 17.2. Colos 2.3. Ephesians. 1.21. etc.) yea he was ordained, given, and
sent for this end, viz. to comfort those who mourn in Sion. Esa. 61.1. etc.
And therefore all things are to be gathered together in Christ, Ephesians. 1.10.
There being salvation in no other but in him alone, Acts 4.12.



John 16.33

Psalm 69.7. Romans 8.37 Heb. 11.35. etc.

Acts 2.37, and 10.33. Crying out. Men and brethren what shall we do to be
saved? Certainly great joy does belong unto these, and does attend upon them.
Acts 8.8.39. and 13.48.



I. Their sins to be greevous. And

II. Gods anger to be great. But

III. See not the pardon of their sins, neither how to flee from sin or the
wrath to come. For

First, we sin boldly, yea with greediness. Ephesians. 4.19. Like Ahab who sold
himself to work wickedness. (1 King. 21.25.) And yet fear nothing. But

Secondly, at length sin appears: As evil juice, or moisture, or sickly
humors lurk long in the body, and are not perceived, until they come into
the ventricle; but then being once there, there is nothing but sickness, and
vomiting, and a desire, and a forcing or straining to eject it, and expel it
out of the body: like a Drunkard when he has overcharged his stomach, never
leaves until he have discharged it. Or as Thieves or Murderers, being once
apprehended, and convicted, are dejected, and mourn, and despair of mercy: So
sin when it appears in his true and lively colors to the conscience, works
in the sinner a horrible, and fearful expectation of wrath and punishment.
Heb. 10.27. As we see in Cain, Genes. 4.7. And that sinner Luke 7.38. etc. Then

Thirdly, if the conscience being thus fearfully amazed by reason of the sight
of sins committed, a man should teach the sinner a way how to escape wrath,
and to enjoy mercy, would he not then embrace it? If the Prince should promise
to a Thief, Murderer, or Traitor, yea swear unto him that he shall not
perish; would he not flee unto him, and cleave close unto him, least the
avengers of blood, or the justice and rigor of the Law, should attache and
apprehend him? Certes, those Cities of refuge were Types of Christ; who brings
this comfort unto all his, and all those who come unto him; that

I. There is no condemnation unto such, Romans 8.1. And

II. That not one of them shall be excluded or debarred out of heaven. For of
al those who were given unto him, not one was lost. And

III. That (Nullum tempus occurrit Deo) at what time soever they turn unto
him, and come unto him, let their burden be what it will, they shall find
ease, and peace. Ezech. 18.21. Acts 17.30. And hence David runs and
confesses his sin, Psalm 32.5. and Paul 1 Timoth. 1.13. And they find mercy
though their sins were great. It is a poor satisfaction for a Subject when
he has offended his Sovereign, to say Paenitet, I am sorry for it, and I
repent me of what I have done: And yet Christ requires no more but this in
truth: And therefore great joy awaits those who are truly sorrowful in soul,
and oppressed with the sight and sense of their sins. For Christ here
promises to give them rest and joy.

Fifthly, they in like manner may hence be comforted, Paul. 7.5, 15, 19, 23. For

I. We begin (ordinarily) to correct somethings in our outward life, although
but slowly, and that only in more gross sins; and yet we think it no
small matter we have done.

II. But when we increase in the knowledge of God: then we shall learn.

First, that God is most exactly pure, and perfect, and that not only by nature
(in himself,) but also in his will toward us. 1. Peter 1.15. He is
diametrally opposite to all sin, and hates all with a perfect hatred. In toto
genere. And

Secondly, that it behooves us to perfect our obedience in all things: not
suffering or admitting of any sin, but esteeming all as poison, Treason,
Rebellion, Murder, or the like things, which are of this nature, that one of
them once committed makes a man guilty of death. We must remember that one
small spoonful of poison will kill, and one chain captivate and enthrall; and
therefore be careful that no sin at all reign or remain within us. Romans
6.12. Yea Thirdly, then we shall know, that it is our duty to give our very
hearts up unto God. ( Proverb. 23.26.) and to conform them unto the purity,
and pure will of God, nor suffering a wicked thought to lodge or abide there.
Ierem. 4.14. but laboring to mortify all carnal and corrupt aff ctions. Hence

III. The further on we proceed and go in the way of sanctity, and the greater
the measure of our knowledge of God does increase; the more sensible we become
of the power and strength of sin, within us: which daily strives and wars
against us: Insomuch as,

First, we are not able to prevent or preserve our selves from the temptations
and assaults of sin Yea

Secondly, we are not able so to withstand temptations; and snares, but that
they daily overcome us, and lead us captive unto sin. Yea

Thirdly, we are often seduced, and led aside of our own lusts, and
concupiscence, which in us rebels against us. James 1.14. Galath. 5.17. Romans
7.23. Yea

Fourthly; hence we begin to fear that we are evil, and corrupt trees:
Matthew. 12.34. Because we can neither.

I. Cheerfully and freely, perform any thing that is good. Nor

II. Take heed of, or avoid spots, and blemishes, and stains, in the best
works we do. Nor

III. Suppress our own inherent lusts and concupiscence. Hence

Fifthly, at least we grieve and mourn, that we thus daily offend our good God
with David. Psalm. 120.5. and Paul. Romans 7.24.

And hence unfainedly, and frequently desire a new heart, Psalm 51.10. etc.
These may be comforted with the Lords promise unto Paul; My grace shall be
sufficient for thee, 2 Corinthians. 12.9. And with our Saviors here, who has
given his word, that he will ease and refresh them, and give comfort unto
them: yea, when they are thus sick, he will be a Physician unto them, Mat.
9.17. For either,

I. He will take away concupiscence and lust from them: the means whereunto,
are fasting, prayer, labor, and taming and bringing under the body, 1 Cor.
9.27. For by these, many temptations are overcome. Or,

II. He will give strength to resist them, and his Holy Spirit which shall
strive against them, Gal. 5.17. For conscience often does put a bridle upon
concupiscence; in so much as it cannot, when it would prevail against it. This
victory is most excellent; and undoubtedly the Saints never sin, Tota and
plena voluntate, without some struggling and reluctancie of Spirit, when they
are first informed, that the thing they are tempted unto, is sin. Or,

III. If our own lust or concupiscence should traitorously assault us; then at
least Christ will bridle, and restrain us from the act of sin; and will
either hinder it by cutting off the occasions, or by interposing some lets and
remoraes; as 1 Samuel 25.32. he hindered David (by Abigails coming) from killing
of Nabal. Or,

IV If we should fall into any sin, as the best of the Saints have done,
then he will pardon all our sins, and so take them away, that they shall
never separate betwixt him and us, 1. John 2.1, 2. And thus we see, who may
draw full buckets of comfort from Christ, this living and ever springing Well.

Refocillabo, I will give you rest.

The careful Physician, does desire and endeavor to heal, and recover his
sick patient; but he dare not assume, or arrogate thus much to himself, that
he will heal and cure him; but our Savior does, peremptorily affirming,
Refcillabo, I will give you rest.

John 7.37. and 3.16. and 13.28. All his promises are yea, and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.
And therefore seeing he has promised consolation, he will also perform it.
Wherefore let us labor above all things for Christ; for if we have him, we
have all, 1 Cor. 3.21. Here observe:

Christ promises unto the faithful these things, viz. First, confort against
Pressures, and oppressions of the world; and that either, I. By taking them
away, and delivering his children from them: Or, II. By facilitating of the
affliction; and making it either short or light. Or, III. By giving greater
things; that is, peace of conscience, a full assurance of faith, a cheerful
confidence, and perfect patience to undergo all oppressions and persecutions
whatsoever, Romans 8.37, 38. Or, IV. By crowning, and rewarding their sufferings
with eternal glory, 2 Cor 4.17.
Secondly, pardon of all their sins; both in regard of the evil of sin,
and punishment, 1 John 2.1. Thirdly, Balm of Gilead; he has promised to be
our Physician, to cure all our sins, and to preserve us in the state of
grace, and sanctification, until he bring us unto glory. Read Psalm
103.2.3. Romans 14.4. and 1 John 3.9. Fourthly, peace of conscience, and
spiritual joy, Romans 5.1, 2. and 14.17. Fifthly, Protection, and direction; he
will be a companion in our journey, and a Co-partner of our bonds: oh, who
would ot long, and desire such a Guide, and Convoy, as will not suffer a man to
err, but lead him into the truth nor to be heavy, and heartlesse, sad and
sorrowful in his journey, but will cheer up his spirits, and make him merry?
Oh who would not desire this Comforter; and Lord, who can afford unto us every
thing that is good, and preserve, and defend us from all evil?


Our blessed Savior by this promise of giving rest, unto all that come unto
him, would teach Matt. 7.7. Luke 6.24. He was sent to those who mourn, Esa.
61.2.3. And hence his mercy is glorified, that he freely gives to those who
seek, not to those who buy grace, or purchase Christ with a price, Esaias 55.1.2.

What does this Rest, or Refreshing import, or

The phrase is borrowed from the body, and transferred unto the soul, and does
respect a fourfold body, viz. First, Corpus aestuans, a hot, and burning
body; as appears by Psalm 66.12. Ierem, Act 3.19. Thus the soul inflamed
with the fire of lust or pride, is refreshed and cooled by Christ ( Romans
7.5.23.25. and 2 Corinthians. 12.9.) who does allay, and cause to freese this
scorching heat. Secondly, Corpus morbidum, a diseased body: a man sick of a
palsy, cannot walk or work, but only lies in bed: now it were a great
comfort and refreshing for him, to be enabled to rise, and to walk into the
fresh air. Thus when we are not able to walk in the ways of God, or to
work his work; when the good which we would do, we cannot, Romans 7.15.19.
Then God will give us power to run the race of his Commandments, and to work
his work; and to obey his will in some measure ( Esaias 58.13.) yea, them will
our Christ refresh us, by giving us that anointing which is holy, and by which
we may be able to do all things, 1 John 2.20. Thirdly, Corpus lassum, a weary
body; principally tired with the troubles and molestations of this life, Esa.
28.12. Whether it be, I. For those things which we love and enjoy. As Bucer s.
thinks. Or, II. For those things which wanting we seek for. Or, III. For the
labors which we undergo, and endure in our particular callings.
(They labor in the wind:) Therefore this shall not be crowned, or rewarded
with the promised Rest. Alexander, Eccles. 2.
Craesus, Xerxes, Caesar, and Solomon, were never quiet, so long as they sought
for content in temporal things: And therefore those that labor in the love of
them, or for them, are to be refreshed by abating, not by satisfying of that
love, and desire. Fourthly, Corpus sitiens, a thirsty body, or a body wanting
the peace of Christ: John 16.33. Colos. 3.15. Philip. 4.17. Now these Christ
will refresh, by giving unto them that peace of conscience, which passes all
understanding. Read John 7.37. and 2 Timothy 1.16. and joy unspeakeable and
glorious, 1 Peter 1.8. This is like that Iem, which to procure and purchase,
we should sell all we have, Matthew. 13.44, 46.






Ephesians. 4.19. The Apostle calls these (...), men who are past feeling.



Fourthly, those who being humbled, and Cain and Judas did. Now all these are
excluded from this promise of rest: and therefore all they who desire to be
made partakers thereof, must take heed, that they be neither proud Pharisees,
nor profane Epicures, nor blind worldlings, nor contemptuous despairers of
mercy, Chem. harm. page 742. cap. 56.
.

VERSE. 29.30. Take my yoke upon you,
. 1. Take my yoke upon you.

Christ calls all to come unto him, and promises

First, we must be subjects, and take our Saviors yoke upon us: The phrase is
borrowed from the wood of oxen, or which is worn by them, when they plow; and
it signifies rule and government, absolutely binding, governing, and
restraining: As if our Savior would say, think not with your selves, that you
are called unto liberty, or unto an Anarchy; but unto my obedience and service.
To teach us,

That it behooves all those who hope in Christ, Deuteronomy. 10.12. and 13.4. and
Ierem. 5.5. and 28.13. Lament. 3.27. and 1 Pet. 2.16.

Why must all, who hope for rest from Christ,

First, because we were redeemed by him, for Luke 1 74, 75. Titus 2.14. and 2 Corinthians. 5.15. and Heb. 9.14. and 1 Peter 2.24.

Secondly, because this is the scope of our profession, Thessal. 1.9. Rom
6.18.22. and 8.14. Hence comes obedience to be the fruit of faith, Heb. 11.7.
etc. because faith subjects the heart unto Christ, Gal. 2.20. and 2 Cor. 10.5.

Thirdly, because this is the end of all preaching, Romans 1.5. and 16.26. and 1
Pet. 4.6. and 2 Cor. 10.4. etc.

Fourthly, because this was the end of the promises are made in the word, and
all for this end that people might be more stirred up thereby unto obedience.
Exodus 23.23, 25. Deuter. 11.13. Levit. 26 Deuter. 28.





First, of Discipline, and correction; for the Lord chastens every son whom
he receives. Heb. 12.8.

Secondly, of Doctrine or obedience. Now true Religion does bind us to the
obedience of those things which are to be done, and which are to be believed.
For

I. It obliges the consciences of men, so that they dare not sin, or disobey
God: Hence the fear and service of God are sometimes conjoined together. Deuteronomy.
10.12. And therefore the phrase (of Serving) is evilly understood, for some
sort of worship or for voluntary obedience, according as we list, and when we
list: but we owe unto God the debt of obedience, and therefore there is a
necessity of service: we must not serve God, as one Neighbor helps another,
who will lend when they please, but will not acknowledge any debt: but we must
confess our selves to be the Lords Servants, and bound to do more then we
are able, and therefore when we have done all we must confess our selves to be
but unprofitable servants. Omne tulit punctum, he does understand his Masters
will a right, who has learnd to conjoyne these two together, Servire libere
and ex officio; to serve God with a free, ready, willing, and cheerful heart,
with a filial affection, and without any servile compulsion: and yet in thus
doing confess that it is his duty to do what he does.

II. It obliges the outward life, as well as the conscience: For we must not
live to our selves, but to Christ. 1 Peter. 4.2. Romans 14.7. etc. and 6.11, 13.
and 12.1.

Learn of me.

As we must be Subjects, (as was showed in the former Section) so we must be
Disciples, as comes now to be considered, wherein we must observe that,

First, Christ teaches unto us the necessity of learning; we must be taught.
And

Secondly, he shows that he is the only true Doctor and Teacher: opposing
himself,

I. To the Pharisees, who taught salvation by the Law, without Christ. And

II. Perhaps to the wisdom of the flesh, and humane reason. And

III. To the Doctrines of the flesh and world. But

IV. Most certain it it, is, that Christ here is opposed, to all other
Teachers, as weak and invalide in regard of him, who only is able to teach us
the truth truly. Matthew. 23.8.10.

Esa. 54.13. Ephesians. 4.21. John 6.68.





I. Strength of body. And

II. A towardliness, and readiness of mind. But

III. Learning it cannnot give; that being obtained only by study. And
therefore we being naturally borne ignorant, it is necessary that we should
be taught.

Secondly, because it is necessary that we should

I. Respectu Doctrinae, in regard of the Doctrine, which is the knowledge of
God. John 17.3. But this only Christ teaches, and knows Luke 10.22. John
1.18.

II. Respectu subjecti, in regard of the Subject, for we are not only to be
taught in our ears (for so man could teach us) but also, and principally in
our hearts, and so only the Lord of the Spirits teaches us. Ierem. 31.33. and
32.40. Luke 24.32.

III. Respectu Officij in regard of his Office; for Christ was ordained to
preach. Luke. 4.18. Deuter. 18.15. John 3.2.

IV. Respectu gratiae, communicatae and improssae, in regard of grace
communicated, and imprinted, for knowledge is a light. 2 Cor, 4.6. And Christ
and his Father are the light, and the givers of light; as appears by Luke
2.32. John 1.9. and 1 John 1.5. and James 1.17. and John 5.35.

And therefore seeing Christ is only able to teach us the true knowledge of
the true God, and alone able to teach the heart, yea ordained and appointed by
God his Father to preach unto us, and to communicate unto us spiritual light,
and knowledge, it is then necessary that we should be taught by him.

How many ways does Christ teach us?

First, he teaches us by the preaching of the Heb. 1.1. whence

I. It is called a light, to guide and direct our paths Psalm 119.105. And

II. We are directed, and sent thereunto. To the Law, to the Prophets. Esa.
8.20 And

III. We are commanded to seek the sense and meaning of the Law of the
Ministers; God himself endowing them with knowledge, and sending us then unto
them. Malach. 2.7. Yea

IV. It is hence called the mighty power of God unto salvation. 1 Cor. 1.18.21.
And therefore if we desire to know, whether we be taught by Christ or not; let
us seriously, and heartily examine, whether we be good hearers of the word or
not. viz.

First, are we reverend hearers; do we tremble in the hearing of the word,
because it is Gods and not man's? Esa. 65.2. or do we slight and despise it?

Secondly, are we industrious hearers: hearing daily, and treasuring up in our
hearts what we hear? Matthew. 13, 51.52. Or are we sluggish hearers, who hear,
but carry nothing away of all that we hear.

Thirdly, are we profitable hearers, not only remembering what we hear, but
practicing carefully what we remember? Luke 8.15. Or are we obdurate, and
perverse hearers, who will neither learn, nor practice what is taught?

Corinth 3.16. and without this our hearing is unprofitable Heb 4.2. And
therefore St. Paul prays for the Spirit of Revelation. Ephesians. 1.18. But this
we cannot hope to obtain, except we deny our own hearing, and the work of
the Minister, and expect spiritual light and knowledge only from the Lord, by
the operation of his blessed Spirit. Some hope to be taught by the word,
although in the hearing thereof they look no further at all, then either to
their own diligence in hearing, or ability, and capacity of understanding and
taking up what is delivered, or to the faithful, and powerful delivery of the
word by the Minister: now these cannot expect to be taught by Christ, because
both our hearing, and the Ministers preaching will be like water spilt upon
the ground without the operation of the Spirit of God: for except he give the
increase, Paul's preaching, and Apollos watering will be fruitless. That Noble
Soldier and godly Centurion certainly was convinced of this truth, when he
said and that unto Peter himself: We are all present here before God, to
hear all things that are commanded thee of God. (Acts 10.33.) whereby he
intimates that the word is Gods, the work is Gods, the message is Gods, the
direction is Gods, yea the blessing that comes by hearing is Gods also And
therefore if we desire to know, whether we be taught by Christ or not, let us
examine these three things. viz.

I. Do we desire with our hearts and Spirits (when we come to hear the word,)
that we may be taught by the holy Spirit of God? or do we trust to our own
hearing, or the Ministers preaching, not thinking at all upon the operation and
assistance of the Spirit?

II. Do we in our hearing lay aside all respect of the man who speaks unto
us, contemplating and beholding only the Lord in his word?

III. Whether are we sensible of internal light within in our hearts, Or are
we yet in darkness?



I. Afflictionibus, by his judgments, and afflictions, he teaches us to know
sin. Micah. 7.9. and to see the plague in our own hearts. 1 King 8.38 And
therefore if we desire to know whether we be taught by Christ or not; let us
examine whether our afflictions, or the afflictions of others, have reduced and
brought us home unto him, and that,

First, by the examination of our consciences. And

Secondly, by the hatred of our sin. And

Thirdly, by the operation of reconciliation with God. And

Fourthly, by the corroborating of our resolution to lead a new life. And

Fifthly, by an augmentation in sanctity, and uprightness.

II. Benedictionibus, by his mercies, and blessings; and thus he does excite
our love and thankfulness unto himself, and proves, whether we know how to use
these aright or not? And therefore let us examine.

First, whether do we use temporal blessings as servants, or as Masters, and
Lords? Many are slaves unto their riches, and possessed by their possessions.

Secondly, whether are we thankful unto God for his mercies, showing it by
our Liberality and good works? 1 Timoth. 6.18. Many care for nothing, but that
their estates may increase: but Sic crescere est macrescere, thus to increase
is indeed to decrease, and thus to grow fat in body or estate, is to grow lean
in soul, like the Israelites who had Quails and Manna, but leanness within;
their bodies were stalled and their souls starved. But if we desire to approve
our selves to be taught by Christ, we must labor ^aily to increase the fruits
of righteousness and Religion; like good Trees, who bring every year more
fruit then other.

Fourthly, Christ teaches us, by his example: Christi actio, nostra
instructio, an^ therefore if we be the Disciples of Christ we must labor to be
like our Master. Luke 6.40. yea to be like minded. Philip. 2.5. and to walk
even as he also walked, 1 John 2.6. And to learn of him, in this verse. Hence
two Questions spring up viz.

How many sorts, or kinds of imitation are

Imitation is fourefold to wit, either, First, (...), Natural; Secondly,
(...), Artificial, which does not so much imitate nature, as art, and cunning
workmanship; and of this kind are the endeavors, and imitations of wit and
learning in any Art. Thus many strive not to Imitate the life of Virgill, or
Cicero, or Livy, or to draw their pictures, but to imitate their Poetry,
eloquence, and style. Thirdly, Mixed of the other two, which is an imitation
partly Natural, and partly Artificial: when somethings are derived from
nature, some from Art, as the Painter often does. Fourthly, (...), which is an
imitation of virtue, and piety, as also of the profession and kind of life:
thus the Posterity of Jacob followed a Pastoral life as he did, and the
Rechabites followed their Fathers customs in abstaining from wine: And unto
this particle belongs the imitation of the Saints.






I. Every imitation should be undertaken in a possible thing; but it is
impossible to express the Miracles of Christ, or to perform such miraculous
works as he did; Therefore Miracles are nor to be imitated.

II. That which is unprofitable, and whose success is desperate is not to be
undertaken, but to imitate the Miracles of Christ is such (for what profit or
good can a man reap by undertaking a thing, which he knows he can never
accomplish, neither will ever be able to bring to pass) And therefore the
Miracles of Christ are not to be imitated.

III. that which is wicked should not be undertaken, But it is wicked thing to
imitate the Miracles of Christ: Therefore they are not to be imitated. Christ
by his Miracles, separated and differenced himself from all mortal men, as
the true Messiah promised to the Fathers; as was showed before Verse 4, 5.
where Christ shows to John's Disciples, that he is the true promised, and
expected Messiah, and proves it by his Miracles: because he did those great
works which were only proper unto the Messiah to do. And therefore it is a
great diminution of Christ's glory, for man to imitate that, which is only
proper for the Mesas to do by his own power. Indeed Christ gave power to his
Apostles, and some holy Martyrs, to work some Miracles: but yet this is but a
rotten foundation, to build an ordinary imitation of Christ's upon: For

First, that power was extraordinary; and therefore no rule for an ordinary
imitation.

Secondly, that power was given unto them by Christ, they had it not of
themselves: and therefore these Miracles are not to be imitated by those who
will confess, that no such extraordinary, and special power is given unto
them by God, or Christ.

Thirdly, we have presidents, and examples, that the Apostles and some of the
holy Martyrs wrought Miracles; but we have neither power to do so, nor precept
to strive to do so.

Fourthly, although we read of some Miracles, which were done by these, yet we
no where read that either Apostle or Martyr did undertake any such thing of
himself, or of his own free accord; that is, would work Miracles when they
pleased, and how they pleased, or of what sorts they pleased: For certainly in
the working of Miracles they were directed, moved, and stirred up by the holy
Spirit; and therefore their action is but a bad ground, or proof for those who
ordinarily will imitate these extraordinary Miracles.

Secondly, some of Christ's actions are agreeable (ad decorum:) And therefore it
is an error for any, to enjoyne poverty upon all; and grossly false, that all
men are equal in a Christian Commonwealth, as the Anabaptists hold.

Thirdly, some of Christ's actions were Moral,

I. Christ was a Lamb without spot, not tainted with any sin at all, either
in action or affection. Thus we should labor to cleanse our selves from all
pollutions, both of the flesh and spirit, 2 Corinthians. 7.1.

II. Christ devoted himself wholly up unto the service of his Father; yea,
offered up himself unto his Father for us: So we should labor to offer up
our selves, as a living and acceptable sacrifice unto God, Psalm 40.7.

III. Christ patiently endured the Cross, and under-went the shame, Heb. 12.2.
So we should patiently bear the Cross for Christ's sake, Mat. 16.24.

IV. Christ after he was dead rose again: So we should labor to rise to new
obedience.

V. Christ ascended into heaven after his Resurrection: So we should labor to
ascend in our hearts, and affections, setting them upon heavenly things, Colos.
3.1. Philip. 3.20.

VI. The life of Christ was generally holy, and replenished with all virtues, 1
John 3.3. And herein we should labor principally to imitate him. He was meek
(in this verse) so should we be. He was humble, Philip. 2.5. so should we be.
He was patient in adversity; he was beneficial, and helpefull unto others; he
was loving unto all; he was constant in the preaching, and profession of the
truth; he pardoned his enemies; he prayed for his Persecutors; he was
subject to his earthly parents, and obedient to his heavenly Father, even unto
death: In a word, there is no virtue, either Moral, or Theological, but we
have the example of it in him. And therefore, there is great reason, that we
should be careful to obey this his Precept, and learn of him.

. 3. For I am humble and meek.

Why does Christ propound his humility, and

First, for our example; because as was showed But I pass this by, entreating
the Reader only, to mark what was said before, Chap. 5. verse. 3. and 5.

viz.

I. In his life and conversation. And,

II. In his Doctrine, Ne deterreamur praeconio Majestatis, Gualt. s. Now that
Christ was a gentle and meek Doctor, appears thus. He was meek,

First, in his Doctrine which he taught. The Gospel which he preached, was a
Proclamation of free mercy; he exhorting men to come, and to buy, and that
without money, or moneyworth, Esaias 55.1. He desired, but that men would feel
themselves hungry, and thirsty, and then come unto him, and he proffered, and
promised, to feed and refresh them, John 7.37.

Secondly, he was meek in his manner of teaching; for he besought sinners to
be reconciled to their Father, and his Father, 2 Corinthians, 5.19.

Thirdly, he was meek in the using of his Disciples and Scholars; for he
laid down his life for them, and in his life had a great care of them.

Fourthly, he was meek in his Person; for he under-went all that was laid upon
him. Read Esaias 53.



The degrees of Humility are many, but the principal are these, viz: John.
Secondly, it is a great degree of Humility, for a man to be humble in his
words; It is a greater for him to be humble in his works; but the greatest of
all, is for a man to be humble in heart. Now in all these we imitate Christ,
and all these we learn of him: For he was humble in his words, Psalm. 22.6.
He was humble in his deeds, as appears by his washing of the Apostles feet,
John 13. He was humble in heart, as in this verse. Thirdly, it is a high degree
of humility, when we repute our selves to be as we are, or no better then we
are; but is a much more high degree, to repute our selves to be such, as we
should be, if the Lord should leave us unto our selves. Fourthly, it is a great
degree of Humility, for a man to be humbled for the evils and sins, which he
has committed; it is a greater for him to be humbled for the good works and
duties omitted: But the greatest degree of all, is for a man to be humbled for
the perturbations, distractions, coldness, and infirmities which attend upon
him, and molest him in the performance of good actions. Fifthly, it is a very
high degree of Humility, when a man is humbled for his defects, weaknesses, and
wants in spiritual things; it is a much higher degree, to be humbled for an
abundance of virtues, and a great measure of grace (as a tree who stoops the
lower, the fuller and better laden with fruit it is) But the highest degree of
Humility is, when a man humbles himself, according to the example of Christ,
John 13, 14, 15. that is, although eminent and great, both in place and virtue,
yet he thinks no office of love too base, or mean, to do for the least
Christian, though never so much inferior to him.


. 4. For my yoke is easy.

How many sorts of yokes are there?

First, there is Iugum Sathanae, and peccati: The Luke 11.22 and 2 Timoth. 2.26.

Secondly, there is Iugum hominis, the yoke of

I. Pharisaicall, which was contrary to the Gospel. And this Christ promises (
verse 28.) to take off from all those, who feeling themselves burdened
therewith, would come unto him: For there is an Antithesis between the yoke of
the Gospel, and the Pharisaicall yoke of Traditions.

II. Papisticall, which is contrary to Christian liberty, and consists in
Ceremonies, and Traditions; whereof there are three sorts; namely,

First, Mala illata, things which are simply evil, and yet brought into the
Church: as Invocation of Saints, and adoration of the Eucharisticall bread.

Secondly, Adiaphora corrupta, things which being indifferent in themselves,
are corrupted by them, and so corrupted imposed upon the Church; as Confession,
the use of the Cross, and Marriage, which must be believed to be a Sacrament.

Thirdly, Necessaria depravata, things which are necessary in themselves, but
polluted and corrupted by them; as the Sacraments, good Works, Prayer, and
Fasting.

Thirdly, there is Iugum Dei, the Lords yoke; viz.

I. Afflictionis, the yoke of affliction; now this God has promised to take
from the necks of his children ( Esaias 9.4. and 10.27. and 47.6.) And to put it
upon the necks of the wicked; that those who will not bear the yoke of
obedience and service, may bear the yoke of correction and punishment, Ierem.
28.13.

II. Legis, the yoke of the Law; and this is twofold; namely,

First, Ceremonial, this was to continue only until Christ came, and by his
death was abolished; for when (giving up the Ghost) he cried, Consummatum est,
It is finished, then was the Law of Ceremonies abrogated; And Act. 16. the
Apostles show, that we are free now from this yoke.

Secondly, Moral, which must continue for ever, Psalm 1.19. And herein are
two things, viz.

I. The matter of this yoke; namely, Obedience. And,

II. The manner of this yoke, namely, In the fear of the Lord; that is, we
must not only labor to do whatsoever the Law enjoynes, and eschew what it
prohibits, but we must do it with a filial, and religious reverence and
fear.

Iugum Christi, the yoke of Christ: and this the Text speaks of.



Crucis, legis, the yoke of Affliction, and Evangelicall obedience: For Christ
requires these two things of all, that belong unto him; namely,

I. That they should suffer all, that he lays upon them. And,

II. That they should do whatsoever he requires of them. And both these are
included, in Matthew 16.24. where our Savior commands us, To take up our Cross,
and follow him.



De jugo legis, of the yoke of the Law only.

De jugo Crucis, of the yoke of the Cross only.

verse 28.) to submit our necks to both these yokes; and in this verse (for our
comfort) our Savior pronounces them to be both light.

his yoke; for my yoke is easy?

his, for these causes; namely,

I. Because he did cooperate, and concur with the Father, in the giving of the
Law, Opera Trinitatis, ad extra sunt indivisa: And therefore without doubt,
Christ had a hand in the promulgation and pronouncing thereof; and so in that
regard may justly call it his yoke.

II. Because it was confirmed by him: he openly protested, that he came not to
destroy, or abrogate, but to ratify the Moral Law, Matt. 5.17. etc. He came
not to free Christians from the obedience hereof, but obliges them to
obedience thereunto: For his will is his Fathers will, and his Commandment,
his Fathers Commandment; and therefore in this regard it may be called his
yoke.

III. Because it was borne by him, and absolutely performed and kept by him:
Take my yoke upon you, etc. As if he would say, the yoke that I have borne my
self; for it is easy, I having perfectly kept, and obeyed it. Ano thus also
it may be called His.

IV. Because he took away the rigorous, and impossible conditions thereof: It
was said (before his coming) Fac hoc and vive, do this and live, and without
the full and perfect obedience thereof, ye shall not live; but Christ has
mitigated this rigorous Law, and now assured us, that for his sake God will
accept of the will for the deed. And therefore for this his mitigating, and
dispensing of the hard conditio s of the Law, it may be called his yoke.

V. Because he gives us power, (in some measure) to obey and observe it. For my
yoke is easy; as if he should say, the yoke of the Moral Law which was
imposed upon you by my Father, and confirmed by my self, is an easy yoke to
you, because I will enable you to bear it; and that which therein you cannot
do of your selves, I will do with you, and for you. It is my yoke, because I
bear the greatest weight of it; and therefore refuse not you to undertake it;
for what with that which I bear my self, and what with the strength I endue
you withal, your burden is but easy, and your yoke light: And thus also it
may be called Christ's yoke, because he bears one part himself (as follows
by and by) and gives us grace and strength sufficient to bear the other part,
with joy and comfort.

VI. It may justly be called Christ's yoke, because he rewards the obedience
thereof: As is most plainly laid down in the two former verses, where he
promises to refresh, and to give both spiritual and eternal rest, to all
those who submit their necks to this yoke; and labor constantly and
perseverantly, to perform absolute, perfect, and universal obedience to this
Law. And thus we see in what regards our Savior calls the yoke of the Law his
yoke, for these causes, viz.

Secondly, our Savior calls the yoke of the his yoke.

I. Because the crosses and afflictions which we suffer, are imposed upon us
by his will and permission; For without that no enemy, or calamity could touch
us.

II. Because we bear the Cross by his example; therefore it is called his
yoke.

III. Our Savior calls our crosses and afflictions, his yoke, that thereby a
difference may be observed, between the scourges of wicked men, and the
crosses of believers; for these are his yoke, but not those.

IV. The Cross is called Christ's yoke, because he has sanctified this yoke by
his own body, which on earth was subject to crosses, afflictions, and
persecutions for us.

V. Because our Savior does so moderate our afflictions, and crosses, by the
aid, assistance, and comfort of his holy Spirit, that they become light unto
us: therefore they are called his yoke.

How does our Savior say, that his yoke is easy and his burden light, seeing
that he says, Matthew. 7.14. That strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that
leads unto life: and therefore, verse 13. commands us to enter in at the strait
gate: And again, in the 12. verse of this Chapter, he says: That the
kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent only take it, who
strive to enter therein by force: And Mark 10.25. he says, that it is easier
for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter
into heaven?



Chrysostom. s. answers, that the way to heaven is hard Ignavis, only to idle,
and sloathfull men; and not to those who are industrious and painful: A
sluggard thinks a light burden heavy, but a laborious man makes nothing of a
hard task.

Matthew. 7.14. and 11.12, and appears evidently thus: Wedlock is a sweet bond,
where both husband and wife draw in one yoke: but yet a bond, it is a pleasant
burden, Conjugium a Iugo, it is no other then a yoke, and full of thorny cares,
and labors; although so delightful, and pleasing, that neither husband nor
wife would desire to be freed from that bondage. Thus howsoever the faithful
may (and doe^) think this yoke of Christ sweet and pleasant, (as follows by
and by) yet in it self it is full of labors; yea, and so full, that the
righteous are hardly saved. For,

I. The way that leads unto heaven is very obscure, and therefore hard to
find, and easy to loose, yea it is very slippery, and therefore except we be
careful, and heedfull of our steps, we may easily fall.

II. The burden that is laid upon our backs to bear, is heavy, and (which
adds to the weight thereof) we must bear it long, even so long as we live;
for otherwise we begin in the Spirit, and end in the flesh, and so come short
of our reward.

III. The works of Religion, and the duties required of us, both in regard of
God, and our brethren, and our selves, are very hard and heavy, as every one
will find that undertakes the task.

IV. Our Spirits are naturally both weak and dull, except they be awakened,
and quickened by a continual and renewed work of the holy Ghost, yea

V. Our enemies are both many and strong that labor to pull us out of this
yoke, and lead us aside from this way. And therefore these things considered,
we must needs confess, that the way of active and passive obedience which
leads unto heaven, and this yoke of Christ, is in it self, heavy, and hard.

Paul, to want and abound, and in every estate and condition to be contented.

Fifthly, one and the same thing may be easy and hard, light and heavy, to one
and the same man in regard of a diverse time; that is, the yoke Corinth. 15.19.)
But yet this double yoke seems sweet and easy to the spirit of the true
believer, and strong Christian, by reason of that gracious operation of the
good spirit of God, who does so form and fashion the regenerate unto the
obedience of the will of God, that when once they have had a taste and relish
of Christ, then nothing seems hard or difficult unto them, which is imposed by
him.

Sixthly, the commandments of God, and yoke

But against the Text it will be objected, By Iugum grave, a heavy, not a
light yoke.

First, the yoke of Christ does subject us to no

Secondly, those evils and calamities which Nature Mark 1.5.21.

Thirdly, the crosses of the servants of Christ Cor. 10.13. And therefore they
are not heavy.

But it will be objected again, If it be a Yoke, Burden, then how can it be
light? and if it be light, then how is it a Burden?

First, the speech is figurative, and the phrase

Secondly, our Savior by this phrase, does (Iugum and Suave) a yoke, and a
sweet yoke. Onus apposuit, and leve adjecit. Chrysostom. s. He no sooner tells us,
that it is a burden, but he adds withal, that it is but light. Men join Oxen
together with a yoke, and Camels with a bridle or halter, that they may be as
burdens. But we must note, that there are two sorts of men who impose these
burdens; to wit, I. Some put a yoke upon others, and oppress them under the
yoke: As the Spaniards do with the Indians, and as Pharaoh and Rehohoam did do.
Now Christ is no such imposer of a yoke. II. Some have a care of those who are
under, or in the yoke, that they may not be oppressed, but have rest and
comfort. And thus did God, Exodus 23.12. and Deuteronomy 5.14. and thus does
Christ, who promises to refresh them under the yoke, and ere long to give
rest, and freedom from the yoke, verse 28, 29. And therefore although it be a
yoke, yet it is neither heavy, nor hard.

Luke 14. (although riches be the good blessings of God:) yea to take up our
cross, and bear it patiently, (though never so great) yea to be humble and
meek (although our humility sharpen the pride and cruelty of others against
us.) And lastly, this yoke injoyns us to deny our selves, Matthew. 16.24. which
denial begets in us mourning and sorrow, and deprives us of all joy and
solace. Wherefore, how can this yoke possibly be said to be light, that has
these five sharp properties and conditions in it? viz. First, a hatred of all
sins whatsoever. Secondly, a renounceing of all temporal things whatsoever, if
they hinder us from Christ. Thirdly, Patience in all afflictions and crosses
whatsoever. Fourthly, humility and meekness, though we be therefore contemned
by others. Fifthly, self-denial, and an absolute devoting of our selves up to
the will of Christ.

viz.

First, it is light, in regard of our duty; because it is our duty to perform
the office of servants unto the Lord, and he requires no more of us. Servants
will say often (complaining of hard and cruel Masters) that it never grieves
nor troubles them, to do what becomes a servant to do, but their Masters impose
that upon them, which belongs not unto them to do, and that troubles them much.
Now in this regard, the yoke of the Law is light, because Christ therein
requires no more of us to do, than becomes us as we are children and servants.

Secondly, the yoke of the cross is light, in regard of our deserts; short and
light, momentary, and merciful are all our afflictions, in comparison of that
which we have deserved. Thirdly, light is the yoke, both of the Law and Cross,
in regard of that yoke which the Lord might have laid upon us. The Lord has
despoticall and lordly power over us, both in regard of our Creation and
Redemption; in which regards he might have imposed upon us, (if he had
pleased,) far heavier burdens, and more insupportable yokes, than he has
done. And therefore do but compare, what the Lord commands us to obey, and to
bear with that which he might have imposed, in respect of his absolute and
transcendent power over us; and then we shall conf^sse, that his yoke is easy.
John the Cardinal de Medicis, who afterward was Pope Leo, being restored unto
Florence, by the force and power of the Spaniards, having been before 18 years
in exile, invented this device: His Impresse was a Yoke, which Oxen use to
bear, and the Motto, Suave; signifying thereby, that he was not returned to
tyrannize over his Country, nor to revenge the injuries done him of his
enemies, and factious Citizens; but rather to show that his government should
be gentle with all clemency. And thus in regard of Christ's great power over
us, and gracious and mild governing of us, we may safely conclude, That his
yoke is easy, and that he rules us with a soft and an easy hand.

Fourthly, Christ's yoke is easy, both in regard of the Ceremonial and Moral
Law, imposed by God. I. In regard of the Ceremonial Law, and the multitude of
Ceremonies, and Legal Traditions contained therein, the yoke of Christ is
light and sweet. II. In regard of the Moral Law, Christ's yoke is easy: Here
observe a difference between the Law and Gospel; for although they be both
yokes, which Gods puts upon our necks to bear, yet they are thus differenced,
that Iugum Legis, the yoke of the Law is importable, or so heavy, that it
cannot be born, Acts 15.10. but Iugum Euangelii suave, the yoke of the Gospel
is sweet, facile, and light. The Law requires perfect obedience of man, and
that by his own proper strength, and threatens with a certain curse, him that
shall transgress the least of all the commandments. But the Gospel does
confer the holy Ghost upon the Elect, by whose power and gracious operation
they are enabled cheerfully to obey the Lord; and does also cover all their
defects and failings with the perfect obedience of Christ. And thus that, which
is impossible to flesh and blood, becomes easy to the regenerate, by the aid
of that good Spirit, by whom they were regenerated, as follows by and by.

Fifthly, the yoke of Christ is easy, in regard of the Doctrine thereof. For I.
The Doctrine of Faith does teach us to be saved by free grace, and that we need
not seek for many Mediators, or by the multitude of laborious Ceremonies to
come unto salvation, (as the Law did) but to seek unto one Mediator, and to
lay hold upon salvation, by him. And therefore in regard of this Doctrine,
Christ's yoke is easy. II. The Doctrine of Charity does teach only to love one
another: Now is not this easy? Certainly, love facilitates and makes all
things light: and therefore seeing Omnia vincit amor; That love overcomes with
ease, the greatest difficulties; Et nos cedamus amori; let us yield to this
Evangelical Doctrine of love, and then we shall think Christ's yoke to be but
easy. III. The Gospel teaches us, that Christ by himself, without either
help, or price, or merit from us, purchased our Redemption, John 1.12. and
8.36. Romans 8.2. and 1 John 5.3, 4. Now to be freed and delivered out of the
captivity of satan freely by another, without any ransom paying of our own, is
certainly a pleasing Doctrine; and therefore in regard thereof, Christ's yoke is
easy. IV. The Doctrine of obedience teaches nothing but that which Nature it
self teaches to be good; and therefore in this regard also, Christ's yoke is
easy. To lead a virtuous life, flying from all sin and wickedness, is a
thing that may easily be born by any man: for what grievous thing does he
impose upon the necks of our Minds, (says Gregory 4. Moral) who commands to
shun every desire that troubles, who admonishes to decline the laborious
journeys of this world, and to abstain from drunkenness, murder, theft, anger,
rebellion, and the like, which the light of Nature condemns as great vices?
Nay, what can be sweeter than this yoke, and lighter than this burden, (says
Hilary, Can. 2.) or more to be approved, than to abstain from wickedness, to
be willing to do good, to be unwilling with evil, to love all, to hate none,
to obtain things eternal, and not to be taken with these transient things? And
thus Christ's yoke is easy, in regard of the Doctrine thereof; which, although
it be grievous to Nature, yet it is agreeable to the light of Nature, and easy
in regard of Grace.

Sixthly, Christ's yoke is easy, in regard of the yoke of sin and satan: vita
vitiosa gravior. Chrysostom. s. A vicious life is more laborious and burdensome
than a virtuous. There is no burden heavier than the conscience of sin, and
none lighter than a good conscience: there is no punishment greater than the
punishment of sin, neither any reward greater than that which shall be
conferred upon those who bear Christ's yoke: A man can serve no worse Master
than Satan, nor better than Christ: and therefore how great is the folly, and
madness of those, who refuse to bear Christ's yoke, and in the mean time
willingly submit their necks to Satan's. Thus Chrysostom says that the yoke of
Christ is light, sweet, and easy, compared with the yoke of sin, which is born
by wicked men, (Chrysostom. s.) And he proves it thus: I. Because sin is a most
heavy burden; according to that of the Prophet David, Mine iniquities are
gone over my head; and as a heavy burden they are too heavy for me, Psalm
38.4. And Zachary, chap. 5. verse 7, 8. says, The burden of sin is like a
Talent of Lead, which presses a man down to the ground, and will not suffer
him to rise. II. Because Christ is a most sweet and gracious Lord: and
therefore David exhorts all, but to taste and see how good and gracious he is,
( Psalm. 34.8.) and then they will never refuse to submit their necks to his
yoke. III. Because the sweet pleasures of sin, and delights which carnal and
wicked men find in the service of satan, will all vanish away as a dream in
the night, Wisdom 5.6, 7, etc. But the sweetness of Christ's yoke endures for
ever; for the bearers thereof shall have peace of conscience, and internal joy
here on earth, and eternal felicity and happiness in the kingdom of heaven.
IV. Because the end of wicked workers is death and destruction, Romans 2.4. and
3.6. and 6.23.

Seventhly, the yoke of Christ is light, in regard of his example, for he has
born it himself: Ordinarily a man does not think his own burden so heavy, as
he would think another man's: that is, a man carries with more ease and
willingness, that which is his own, than that which is another: and to take a
great deal of pains for our selves, is not so troublesome or irksome unto us,
as to do the like for another. Now Christ bare the yoke and burden for us, and
that willingly, thinking it (out of his love to us) to be but light and easy,
and therefore we should not think it hard, to bear our own burden, or
unwillingly submit our necks to that yoke, which in duty we ought to carry.
Besides by Christ's bearing of this yoke, it is become more easy unto us: For
I. We see that it is a yoke which may be born, because our Christ has born it.
And II. It is made lighter unto us, by Christ's bearing thereof. The yoke that
cattle do bear, is very heavy when it is new and green, but when it is dry,
and somewhat worn, it is more soft to be suffered, and more light to be
carried: And therefore our blessed Savior would not incontinently after his
birth burden us with the yoke of his Law, but first did carry it some three
and thirty years himself, that it might become seasoned, and more light unto
us. For what has Christ commanded us to do, that he has not first done
himself? what yoke has he cast upon our backs, that he first has not born
upon his own shoulders? If he commanded us to fast, he fasted: if he commanded
us to pray, he prayed: if he commanded we should forgive, he pardoned: if he
commanded us to love, he loved: if he commanded us to dye, he died. And
therefore let us look upon Jesus, the Author and finisher of our Faith, and
think that we saw him with this yoke upon his own neck, and this burden upon
his own back, bearing and carrying them for our sakes and examples, that is,
bearing them himself, that so they might become easier unto us; and that seeing
he carried them, we may not refuse to bear them, but be encouraged to undergo
the^, because if the Master did carry them, then well may the servant; if he
did bear them for our sakes, then we may well bear the^ for our own. And thus
the yoke becomes easy unto us by Christ's bearing of it.

Eighthly, Christ's yoke is easy in regard of the short, small and momentary
time that it lies upon us. A Porter thinks a heavy burden light, if he be to
carry it but to the next door, or a little way off. No man thinks much of great
toil, and travel, if it be but of short continuance. And therefore in this
respect, Christ's burden is light: The yoke of the Cross is but momentary, (as
Paul himself says) our light afflictions, which are but for a moment, (2 Cor.
4.17.) where the second is an Exegesis of the first. Was Paul's afflictions
light? No, but very heavy, as appears most clearly by the 8, 9, and 10 verses
of that same Chapter. Then why does he call them light, if they be heavy?
Because Magna brevis, they were but short and momentary. The life of man is
like the Day of an hireling (says Job, 7.1.) And therefore who will think
either the yoke of the Law, or the burden of the Cross, to be heavy, seeing
they are to bear them but a day, yea (in regard of eternity) but a moment? Life
is short, and our labor is of the same length and Last; for when once the
night of death approaches, then all tears shall be wiped off from our faces,
then our yoke, and burden shall be taken off, and we shall be made happy and
blessed, by the enjoyment of eternal rest, Rev. 14.13.

Ninthly, the yoke of the Law is light and easy, in regard of the purity
thereof; for the Law of Christ is pure, and all his Commandments are holy and
just, and good. Moses Law did allow of Divorcements, and Usury: Phoraneus
granted to the Egyptians by a Law to be thieves. In Lycurgus his Laws,
manslaughter was not chastised. By the Law of Solon Solonius, Adultery was
dissimuled: Numa Pompilius held it lawful for a man to conquer, as much as he
could take, although he could pretend no other colorable title at all unto
it, then the purchase by dint of sword. The Lydians used no other Marriage then
this; that he who first could allure a maid unto folly, and entise her unto
fornication, should be her husband. The Baleares commanded, that the Bride
should not be given to the Bridegroom, before the next kinsman had used and
defloured her. These and such like Laws we may justly say, were hard, heavy,
and grievous; but the holy and sacred Law of Christ, is so right in the things
it does admit, and so pure and sincere in the things it does permit; that it
does neither suffer vice, nor consent to the vicious man. And therefore may be
called light in this regard.

Tenthly, Christ's yoke and burden is light and easy unto the faithful, in
regard of that love which they bear unto him; for love (we know) makes all
things light, the property thereof being to turn the rough into plain, the
cruel to gentle, the bitter to sweet, the unsavourie to pleasant, the angry to
quiet, the malicious to simple, the gross to advised, and also the heavy to
light. He that loves, neither can murmr at them, that anger him; neither
deny that they ask him; neither resist when they take from him; neither
answer, when they reprove him; neither revenge if they shame him; neither yet
will be gone, when they would send him away. What does he forget, that does
love with all his heart? what leaves he undone, that knows not but to love?
whereof does he complain, that always does love? In a word, the heart that
loves entirely without comparison, much more is that pleasure that he takes
in love, then the travel that he passes, or takes in serving, Guevara, page
48. Familiar Epistles.
.

Eleventhly, Christ's yoke is light and easy, in regard of the sweetness
thereof: for there is such a change wrought in the affections of the faithful,
after they are once brought unto Christ, that they think his word no longer to
be a har saying ( John 6.60.) but rather as honey unto their taste; delighting
more in the service of Christ, then ever they did in the service of sin, the
joy of the one being solid, the other light and vain.

Twelfthly, the yoke of Christ is easy, in regard of the help we have to
bear it; although without this assistance the yoke be heavy. If a Father
should command his child, to take up some great block, and carry it in; he
would answer that it is too heavy for him to bear; but if the Father take it
up, and bid him to support, and bear up the end thereof, then the child will
say, that it is light; because his Father carries the greatest weight by much.

Thus our blessed Savior does not compare his blessed Law to Timber, Stone, or
Iron; but only to the yoke, because all those things may be carried by one
alone: but to draw the yoke, of necessity there must be twain: To teach us,
that even at the present hour, when the good Christian shall put down his
head under the yoke to carry the same; forthwith on the other part, Christ puts
himself to help him. None calls Christ, whom he does not answer; none
commend themselves unto him, whom he does not succor; none does travel, or
labor for him, whom he does not help; For he who commands us to take up
this yoke, he himself does help us to bear it. With such a Guide as this, who
can lose his way? with such a Pilot as this, who fears drowning? with such a
Captain as this, who despaireth of victory? with such a Companion as this,
what journey can be tedious? with such a Copartner, and Fellow-helper as this,
what yoke can be heavy? If any should say, ah, but Christ is now in heaven,
and has left us to bear the yoke alone: I answer, we are not alone, for he
has given unto all those, who willingly submit their necks unto his yoke, a
blessed Comforter, even his ever-blessed Spirit, to be with them; who,

I. Strengthens, and enables them to bear the yoke of obedience, and in some
measure to perform acceptable service unto the Lord. And,

II. Corroborates, and strengthens them with patience, to bear the yoke of the
Cross, making a way for them to escape out of all afflictions, and laying none
upon them, which is above their strength to bear. And,

III. Affording unto them such a measure of peace, joy, and spiritual comfort,
in all their doings and sufferings, that nothing can deject or cast them down;
but in all these things they are more then Conquerors, through him that loves
them, Romans 8.37. etc.

Lastly, our Saviors yoke is easy, in regard of the reward, Duo sunt quae
faciunt opus facile: Primo affectus operantis. Secundo pretium rei
^dipiscendae. Jacob. de Val. Psalm. 118. That is, two things make a work easy:
to wit,

I. The affection and love, which the Workman has unto the work: as was
showed before.

II. The excellency, and worth of the thing, which we desire to obtain, or the
greatness of the reward which shall be conferred upon us for the work: If a
Porter shall be desired to carry a heavy burden; yea, and something far, yet
he refuses it not, neither is discouraged with the weight thereof: but rather
thinks it light and easy, if his reward therefore shall be extraordinary: Now
we know, that great is the reward which shall be given to all those, who
faithfully and cheerfully bear this burden (as is plain from 2 Corinthians. 4.17.
and Hebr. 11.26. and 12.2. and Luke 22.28. etc. and 2 Timothy 2.12. and Act. 5.41.
Romans 5.3. and 8.37.) yea, that there is no comparison between the work and
the reward: For what comparison, or proportion is there, between a corporal
work, and a spiritual reward, a temporal work, and an eternal reward, an
earthly work, and an heavenly reward, a momentany work, and a perpetual
reward, an imperfect work, and a perfect reward, a finite work, and infinite
reward, a corruptible work, and an incorruptible reward? And therefore in all
these regards, we may say with our Savior, in the Text, that his yoke is
easy, and his burden is Light.

Reasons of the Authors brevitie, in the following Chapters.
CHRISTIAN READER, I thought good to give thee notice, that when (at least,
(...)) I had finished the eleventh Chapter, I heard (which I profess I knew
not before) that both Calvin, Musculus, Marlorat, and Gualter, (which thou
may see, I made some use of) were in English, with diverse others (which I
never saw) upon this Gospel. And therefore this is one cause,

Again, my intent at first, was to imitate and follow Dr. Mayer, who has
observed some special Augustine says, this is a reason of writing, and
printing Books, and consequently of reading them: Vt sic bonae notiones, quasi
virgulis lunatis sigantur, ne ut aves avolent; that so good notions may be
held, as it were, with Lime-twigs, and not like birds fly away, as they often
do, when a man only hears them.

This was another cause of my printing these short Collections, and
Observations upon this Gospel;

CHAPTER XII.
VERSE. 5 Or have ye not read in the Law, how that on the Sabbath days, the
Priests in the Temple profane the Sabbath, and are blameless.


That the Priests, laboring in the Temple, did profane the Sabbath, and yet
were guiltless. How so; profane, and yet guiltless? Because those their
Temple works, (had it not been on such occasions) would have been a
profanation of the Sabbath. The sense of a Law, is the Law; now according to
the Letter of the Law, the killing of sacrifices, and other Temple-workes, were
to see too, a profanation of the Sabbath; but in the true meaning they did
sanctify, and not profane it. Right so: In case of necessity we profane
the Sabbath, except we profane it: For both necessity herein has no Law; and
besides it does add a new relation to the work we do; not a new Ens, but a
Modus entis. And there is not the greatest toil in the world, but in this
sense, it is a keeping of the Sabbath holy: For the Sabbath was made for man;
(that is) not only for the very being of man, but for his wel-being: and
therefore whatsoever by necessity, without fraud, or covin, is to be done on
that day for the comfort of man, that now is turned into a very Sabbath work:
If any desire to see this Question discussed thoroughly, I refer him to Mr.
Pembles obscure places explained, Chap. 18. page 375. I conclude that no
understanding Christian will (I think) make question, but that upon some
urgent occasions, and enforcing necessities, a man may work: as for example;
if a fire should break forth upon the Sabbath day in divine service, or Sermon
time, it were undoubtedly lawful to labor to quench it, although it could not
be done without pains, and also without taking us off, and from the religious
duties of the Sabbath. If those who live in a fenny country, should have a
Wall, or Bank break upon the Sabbath day, through which the water entering,
both Cattle and houses should be in imminent danger to be lost and laid waste,
without present and speedy help: In such a case, certainly a man may work;
yea, if they do not, they neither understand our Lords will, nor perform the
duties of the Sabbath.

VERSE. 7. But if ye had known, what this means, I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the guiltless.
Volo, I will.

I will?

Volo misericordiam ostendere (Hier. s.) I will show mercy. From whence I might
observe, that salvation proceeds from the mere mercy of God: But I pass this
by.

Volo ut misericordiam ostendati^ inter vos (and thus the most expound it) I
will have you to be merciful one toward another. Hence observe:

Matthew. 6.10. and 7.21. and 12.3. Romans 12.3. Ephesians. 5.10.15. and 1 Thessal. 4.3.

Volo misericordiam, I will have mercy.

James 1.27.

Volo justitiam, I will have justice?





I will have mercy.





Deus vult, God will have us merciful, and his will must rule us.

Matthew. 22.39. and 1 John.

Luke 6.36.

Mat. 18.22.

Fifthly, because otherwise, we neither can be Matthew. 5.7. and 7.2. and James
2.13.

3. And not sacrifice.

What is the meaning of these words?

First, some understand them Absolute, simply

Secondly, some understand these words respectively;

I. Comparative, comparatively, as if he would say, I desired mercy rather then
sacrifice, and knowledge rather then burnt offerings, Hos. 6.6.

Or,

II. Exceptive as if he would say, I care not for sacrifice without mercy,
Esa* 58.5. etc. These two last interpretations in g^^e^^ll, differ but little;
but particularly they may be thus distinguished: to wit,

First, in the sacrifices of the Jews, the former exposition seems to approve
of sacrifices, although mercy be better; as the work of Martha was good, but
Mary's was better, Luke 10.4. As if the Lord would say, I approve of your
sacrifices, but yet mercy is better then sacrifices: but this interpretation is
not now to be admitted, because Christ being come, all the sacrifices are
ceased.

Secondly, the latter exposition rejects all things where charity is wanting:
As if our Savior would say, in the commanding of sacrifices I would have
mercy, because this is the end, that is but the means. Hence then note.

That the outward worship of Religion,

What duties of Religion does the Scripture

First, without these, the sacrifices were not Esaias ^.11.15. and 66.3. Ierem.
6.20. and 7.22. Hos. 9.4. Amos 5.21. Mich. 6.6. etc. Psalm 50.8. and 51.16.
and 40.6.

Secondly, fasting without these is not pleasing Esaias 58.3. etc. Zach. 7.5.

Thirdly, all our prayers are ineffectuall without Prove. 15.8.29. and 28.9.

Why will not outward worship alone please

First, because God being a Spirit, he must be John 4.24.

Secondly, because a man may perform outward Sam. 15.22.) But none are
pleasing unto him, but those who labor sincerely to obey him.

Thirdly, because our sins do so pollute our best actions, that nothing is
pleasing unto God, Agg. 2.15. Proverb. 21.27.

Who are here to be blamed?

First, those who trust in the work wrought, or in the bare performance
thereof: for this may be done both without faith and love.



Abak. 2.4. Esa. 61.8. Many think to hide their oppressions, and wrongs done
under a pretense of Religion, like the Pharisees, who made longs prayers, that
they might the more unsuspectedly prey upon poor widows.

VERSE. 10, 11, 12. And behold, there was a man which had his hand withered; and
they asked him, saying, Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath days? that they
might a^use him. And he said unto them, What man shall there be among you, that
shall have one sheep; and if it fall into a pit on the Sabbath day, will he not
lay hold of it, and lift it out? How much then is a man better than a sheep?
wherefore, it is lawful to do well on the Sabbath days.
From these three verses, two or three general Questions may be considered of.



Saturns day, which is evil and unlucky to begin any work in. But this is a
heathenish superstition, to seem to worship those things for fear, which are
thought to hurt; as Tullius Hostilius, the third King of the Romans made the
Quartane Ague, and Fear and Palenesse, Goddesses. The Lord taught his people
otherwise, that they should not be afraid of the Stars of heaven, nor worship
those things which God had given for the service of men, Deuteronomy. 4.19.





I. This day was appointed and given, ad destructionem erroris; for the
destruction of errors, because the Lord did foresee, that diverse in the world
would make question of the beginning, and creation thereof; as they which say,
(2 Pet. 3.) Where is the promise of his coming? for convincing their error,
the Lord commanded this day to be kept as a monument of the Creation.

II. It was given to instruct us in the faith of our Redemption, to signify
that Christ's flesh should rest in the Grave, according to that, My flesh shall
rest in hope, Psalm. 16.

III. It was given to prefigure the truth of the Promise; both in our
spiritual rest from sin, ( Damasc. de orthodox. fid. lib. 4. cap. 24.) as also
in our everlasting rest in the Kingdom of God, Cyril in Joan. lib. 4. cap. 51.
Now in heaven we look for rest from three things, (according to Thomas) namely,
First, A laboribus hujus vitae, from the labors of this life. Secondly, A
tentationum concussione, from the trouble of temptation. Thirdly, A diaboli
servitute, from the service of the devil.

IV. It was ordained Ad inflammationem amoris, to inflame our love, that being
free from worldly labors, we might the better attend upon God.

V. It was given, Ad opera pietatis, for the works of piety: for otherwise some
would be so covetous, that they would never leave working for gain, (Thom. in
opuscul.)

VI. This day was ordained, that the bodies should be refreshed by this rest:
for some through their unsatiable greediness, could scarce have afforded any
rest unto themselves, especially unto them, who were at the command of others,
as children and servants; Simler. s. Exodus 20.

What things in the Sabbath were Ceremonial,

First, these things in the Jewish observation of Exodus 16.) yea it was not
lawful upon that day, to kindle a fire, Exodus 35.3. and that under pain of
death; for, he that gathered sticks, was stoned, Number. 15.4. The Sabbath was a
shadow of our spiritual rest in Christ, and of Christ's rest in the grave. In
all these respects, the Sabbath was Ceremonial, and binds not us now.

Secondly, these things also in the Sabbath are Accidentalis finis, the
accidental end of keeping the Sabbath, that so they might the better attend
upon the service of God. Calvin. II. The Sabbath was instituted specially for
the service of God; for the remembrance of his benefits; the setting forth of
his praise; and the meditating upon his works; as the Creation of the world,
the Redemption, and Resurrection of Christ; Simler. s. Exodus 20. III.
Conservatio Ecclesiastici Ministerii, the conservation of the Ecclesiastical
Ministry, was not the least, or last end of the Sabbath: that there should be
in the Church ordained, and so preserved, Pastors and Doctors, who should
divide the word of God aright, instruct the people, and exhort them to
Repentance. Bastingius. Vrsinus.

Thirdly, Thomas makes the Sabbath Ceremonial, Thom. 2.2. quaest. 122. Art 4
. But I rather with Vrsinus, take this spiritual Sabbath, which is begun in
this life, in ceasing from the works of sin, and perfited in the next, to
belong unto the Moral, and internal part of the Sabbath, than to the
External and Ceremonial. The two first indeed are Ceremonial in the Sabbath;
the other two are not properly Ceremonial, (seeing they are perpetual) but
rather Moral, Spiritual, and Mystical.

Esa. 58.14. teaching us, how to keep the Sabbath, in not doing our own works,
nor seeking our own will. Besides, it is Symbolicall, in being a pledge unto
us, of our everlasting rest in the Kingdom of God; according to that of the
Apostle, There remains therefore a rest to the people of God, Heb. 4.9.



Exodus 16.23.) or to kindle a fire, ( Exodus 35.3.) But in the other solemn
days, as in the first day of the Pasch, those works are excepted, which were
about their meat, Exo. 12.16. and they only are restrained from all servile
works, Lev. 23.7. And the reason hereof was, because the Sabbath was a special
figure and type of our spiritual rest in Christ: and figures are most exactly
to be kept, for the more lively shadowing forth of that which was figured. And
therefore we have now more liberty in keeping of the Lords day; wherein it is
lawful to provide for our food, and to do other necessary things, because the
figure and shadow is past, and the body is come Tostat. s. Exodus qu. 13.
.



I. Opera necessitatis, works of necessity, which could neither be conveniently
be deferred, nor yet prevented. Of this kind is the necessary defense against
the invasion of enemies; as 1 Mac. 2.40. So Joshua with his company, compassed
the walls of Jericho seven days together, of the which number, the Sabbath must
needs be one: It was also lawful for them to lead their Ox or Ass to the
water, ( Luke 13.15.) and if their Beasts were fallen into the pit, to help them
out, Luke 14.5. and in this place. And it was lawful to save their Cattle, or
their other substance, if any sudden casualty did endanger them: as if an house
were set on fire, to quench it; if their Corn were like to be lost in the
field, to preserve it; yea they might also in case of necessity, seek for their
food upon the Sabbath; as the Apostles plucked, and rubbed the ears of Corn on
the Sabbath, when they were hungry, and in so doing, are excused by our
Savior, verse 1, 2, 3, etc. of this Chapter.

II. Opera charitatis, the works of mercy and charity might (and still may) be
exercised upon the Sabbath day, as to visit the sick, to cure and heal the
diseased, or for the Physician to resort to his Patient. Thus we see our
Savior cures on this day, verse 13. of this Chapter, and Luke 13.11. and John
5.8.

III. Opera pietatis, religious works, or works tending to piety, were not
inhibited, but allowed to be performed upon this day; as the Priests did slay
the sacrifices, and offer them, and did other bodily works which belonged
thereunto: and therefore they are said to break the Sabbath, and not to be
guilty, verse 5. Not that indeed the Sabbath was broken by them, but this our
Savior spoke in respect of the vulgar opinion, that thought the Sabbath
violated, if any necessary work were done therein, Tostat. s. Exodus 20. qu.
14. Thus the Sexton may ring the bells to call the people to Church, and the
people may walk to their Parish Church, though somewhat far off; and the
Pastor, and Minister may go forth to preach; yea, study and meditate of his
Sermon, although this be laborious unto the body; because all these being
helps for the exercises of Religion, are warrantable and lawful.

IV. Opera voluntaria, works of pleasure and recreation: Now as for these we
have Permission to use them, as they shall be no lets, or impediments unto
spiritual exercises, as public prayers, the hearing of the word, the
meditating therein, and such like: otherwise they are not to be used. Willet.
Synops. fol. 498. Initio.

VERSE. 18. Behold my servant whom I have chosen, my beloved, in whom my soul
is well pleased: I will put my Spirit upon him, and he shall show judgment to
the Gentiles.
We have all the three Persons of the blessed Trinity lively expressed in this
verse; but I will speak but only of the third.

How is the Holy Ghost distinguished from

First, he is distinguished from them by his

Secondly, he is distinguished from them by verse, and John 14. God the Son
sends him, John 15. and 20.

Thirdly, the true propriety which distinguishes John 20.

What names are given to the Holy Spirit in

First, sometimes he is called only Spiritus, a Mat. 4. He was led into the
wilderness of the Spirit, and John 3. That which is borne of the Spirit, and
John 7. The Spirit was not yet given.

Secondly, sometimes some Epithets are added Spiritus Dei, Mat. 9. He saw the
Spirit of God descending. And verse 28. of this Chapter, If I by the Spirit of
God cast out devils, etc.

Spiritus Patris, the Spirit of the Father, Matthew. 10.20. and that,

I. To distinguish him from all created spirits. And,

II. To show that he proceeds, and is sent from the Father, or is of the same
substance with the Father.

Spiritus sanctus, the Holy Spirit; as Matthew. 1. That which is borne is of the
holy Spirit; and so verse 3.32. Whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost. Now
he has this name given unto him in a double regard, viz.

I. In regard of his substance, because that is most holy. And,

I. In regard of his substance, because that is most holy. And,

II. In regard of his office, becasue he is the Fountain of holiness,
bringing remission of sins, and working holy motions in the hearts of the
faithful.

John 14. and 16. And this name he has also from his office; because he
keeps the true Doctrine of the Lord, and leads the sincere Ministers of the
Church, and the faithful people unto all truth; yea, because he dwells in
those places and breasts, where heavenly truth reigns, and bears sway; but
absents himself from all that love lies, and errors.

Paracletus, the Comforter; because he sustaines the heart of the faithful in
affliction; by comfort, faith, patience, perseverance, and hope of eternal
glory, John 14. and 15. and 16.





First, the works of the Spirit respect the holy Prophets, whom he governed,
inspired, and taught, enflaming them with the knowledge, and light of the true
Messiah, and of things to come: Thus David in Spirit called Christ Lord, Mat.
22. And Zachary, and Elizabeth, and Simeon, are taught many things by the
Spirit, which they foretell of Christ, Luke 1. and 2.

Secondly, the operations of the Spirit respect Christ; for he helped the
conception and nativity of the Messiah; The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee,
etc. Luke. 1. and Matthew. 1. Before they came together, Mary was found to be
with child of the Holy Ghost: yea, the Spirit was given unto Christ by God out
of measure, John 1. and Luke 4. Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost, etc. and
Luke 10 He rejoiced in spirit; although this may be understood of the internal
motions.

Thirdly, the operations of the Spirit respect the Apostles and Evangelists:
he inspired them when they were to write the Scriptures, 2 Pet. 1.19. He led
them in the truth of their preaching, and brought those things into their
minds, which before Christ had taught them; He made them able Ministers,
enduing them with the gift of tongues, and the power of Miracles; and with all
graces befitting such a calling.

Fourthly, the works of the Spirit respect the Ministers and Ministry of the
word of God; for he makes them able Ministers, he calls them to the work of the
Ministry, yea he is the Governor of the Ministry, who does conserve,
deliver, and propagate the true Doctrine, and that by means, viz. the sincere
Doctors of the Church, whom he has promised to direct.

Fifthly, the operations of the Spirit respect the faithful elect children of
God: for

I. He regenerates them, John 3. Except a man be born of water, and of the holy
Ghost, etc.

II. He quickens the hearts of men, and does excite and inspire spiritual
motions therein.

III. He comforts and cheers sorrowful souls, and raises up those who are
dejected in spirit; from whence he is called the Comforter.

IV. He leads them the right way; They shall hear a voice behind them, saying,
This is the way, walk in it.

V. He excites and provokes the mind unto an ardent invocation of God,
teaching the faithful to pray in the Spirit.

VI. He gives to the faithful, an assurance of their Adoption, and
Glorification, Romans 8.15, 16 And therefore, if we desire to be made partakers
of these graces and blessings, let us labor for the Spirit by faithful,
fervent, and frequent prayers unto God.

VERSE. 20. A bruised Reed shall he not break,
What is meant here by Flax?

The word in the Original is (...),

First, sometimes it is taken generally for any thread.

Secondly, sometimes more strictly, for a linen thread.

Thirdly, sometimes for the string of a Harp.

Fourthly, sometimes for a Fishers line, which is made of thread.

Fifthly, sometimes for sails.

Sixthly, Syrus reads, and lucernam crepitantem non extinguet; he will not
quench the crackling lamp; because when a lamp is ready to dye, or go out, it
makes a creeking or crakling noise. And Tremellius for linum, flax, puts
lucernam, a lamp, whose match or wick is made of flax: and who smokes, and
makes a noise, as if it were ready to dye; and yet this Christ will not quench.
Hence then observe;

That there is a weak Faith, which yet is true; Psalm 103.2.

How does the truth of this appear?

It is evident from hence, simul and semel, perfect at the first, as Adam was,
but is like a man in the ordinary course of Nature, who is first an imperfect
birth, and then an infant, then a child, then a youth, then a man: or like a
grain of Mustard Seed, Mat. 13.31, 33. and 1 Pet. 2.2. for Faith grows and
increases unto perfection, as is clear from these places, Prove. 4.18. Ephesians.
4.13. and 2 Pet. 3.18. and 1 Corin. 1.7. and 2 Corin. 1.7. and 10.15. and 2
These. 1.3.



Mark 9.24.

These 5.3. must we not reprove them for their weakness of Faith? must we be
blind leaders of the blind, and not tell them of their faults?



First, some utterly reject all weak ones; and tax all weakness (in Faith) of
hypocrisy. Certainly these are either proud, or cruel men.

Secondly, some comfort, and establish those who are weak; saying, Be quiet,
thou have Faith and Grace enough, and thou art good enough, thou need no
more, neither must thou be too righteous, Eccles. 7. These are soft, but not
safe Cushions, these are fawning flatterers, and not faithful friends.

Thirdly, some comfort, and exhort; saying, Be of good cheer, he who has begun
a good work, will also finish it in you, Philip. 1.6. and therefore pray that
his Grace may abound in you, verse 9. yea do not sit still, but go forward, and
march on in the way of the Lord, Heb. 6.1. Now this is the safest and best
course: for three things are to be acknowledged; namely,

I. That the maturity of Faith does consist in the perfection thereof, Romans
8.38. and 2 Cor. 5.6. and 2 Timothy 1.12. and Heb. 10.22.

II. That doubting is not blameless; for a wavering, staggering, and doubting
Faith is every where taxed: as Ephesians. 4.14. James 1.6. Heb. 10.23.

III. That it is every man's duty, perpetually to increase, and to labor to
abound in Knowledge, Love, Faith, Spirit, and in all graces, and virtuous
qualities, 2 Pet. 3.18. Romans 15.13. and 1 Cor. 12.7. Colos. 2.7. And therefore
to conclude this Question, I say, that there are two things principally here
necessary: viz.

First, the truth of the fire, or of the life of Faith. And

Secondly, an increase unto victory: as in this verse, The smoking flax shall
be not quench, till he send forth judgment unto victory. Here we must observe,
That there is a great difference between life and power, between a faculty and
strength; and whosoever has Faith without strength, lacks one of these; either,

I. Truth: for an Ape seems to have Reason, by his imitating of Man; and the
Devil is Gods Ape, counterfeiting of a false Faith often for a true, as was in
those who were always learning, but never came unto perfection, 2 Timothy 3.7. S.
James says plainly, That every Faith is not true, there being a false Faith as
well as a true, James 2. And therefore, those who are long weak in their Faith,
perhaps want truth and life therein. Or

II. Age: Infants have true life, and yet no strength, Heb. 5.12. So a man may
be one of Christ's little ones, and tender babes, and yet be weak for a while:
but these may be of good comfort, for Infants in time become strong men, and
the weaklings of Christ by little and little will attain unto strength. Or

III. Health: vapors often disturb and hurt the brain, and this is very
dangerous: And therefore we must always so hope in the mercy of God and
Christ, that we endeavor still with all our might and strength, to increase in
age and health unto perfection.

What is here required of us?

To prove and examine the truth,

First, whether we be Infants or not? Now in Infants there are these two
properties, to wit,

I. They suck: and therefore examine whether we desire the sincere milk of the
Word, that we may grow up thereby? 1 Pet. 2.2.

II. They increase: for if they be always children, they are dwarfs, and
monsters in nature; wherefore we should try our selves by our selves, what we
were a month, a year, or seven years since, and what we are now; and see how
we have increased in light, and knowledge, and Faith, and zeal, and hatred of
sin, and strength in the service of God?

Secondly, whether are we sick or not? The properties of some sick men, are
these; namely,

I. They have no appetite, and therefore examine, what love we have to the Law
of God, what desire, and longing affection we have to the word, the food of our
souls?

II. They are disturbed in Mind, and their brain is obscured: let us try
therefore, whether we be not yet so blinded in our understandings, and so
polluted in our Minds, that we are scarce sensible of our sins, and we have no
desire to use the means appointed for the obtaining, and recovering of health.

III. They despise counsel, and will not follow the Physicians advice:
wherefore examine whether we submit our wills to the Lords will, or contemn his
word, and walk according to the imaginations of our own hearts lusts?

IV. They seldom rejoice, except it be only in jests, or ridiculous, or
childish things: so we should herein prove our selves, and see whether we
rejoice more in the world, or in our God; whether in vain pleasures, or solid
delights; whether in the ways of sin, or the works of righteousness?

Thirdly, whether have we a false Faith or a true? Certainly, if we neither
suck the sincere milk of the Word, nor grow up in grace, nor desire the means
whereby we may be edified and built up, we have neither true life, nor living
Faith.

VERSE. 22. Then was brought unto him, with a Devil; blind, and dumb, and be
healed him, insomuch that the blind and dumb both saw and spoke.
Then was brought unto him.



First, that this man comes not of himself unto Christ, neither has any
desire to come, that we read of, but as careless of himself is brought by
others, to teach us,

That we are naturally careless of our selves, and negligent in seeking unto
Christ: God loved us, before we loved him: Christ dyed for us, when we were
enemies unto him, and he called us unto him before we call upon, or desire
him.

Mat. 9.28. Where our Savior asks the blind men, if they believe in him,
before he opened their eyes: And therefore he does not always call or cure
us, before we desire or seek unto him.



John 3. as follows in the fourth answer.

viz.

I. That he might show the singular faith of the blind men, to those who stood
about him.

II. That he might teach both them and us, that faith is the means of
obtaining grace: and if any desire favor or mercy from him, they must believe.





Per se. Thus he healed the blind men. Matthew. 9.28. who prayed for themselves.

Per alios (by others) to be healed of him. And thus he cured the Genturions
servant, in whose behalf the Elders of the Jews were sent ( Luke 4.7. etc.)
by the Master.

pro alijs for others; whether they be brought unto him by others, as this
possessed man was; or whether mercy be begged in the behalf of others: as Luke
7.4.

Fourthly, sometimes he c^res, when he is not at all entreated, or any way
sought unto: and thus he restored unto life the Widows son. Luke 7.13.

Secondly, we see that this poor man, who is John. 1.41.45. Acts. 8.4.5. and
11.19. And besides remember,

First, that we can do nothing of our selves: but the whole work of our
conversion is Gods.

Secondly, those who bring us to God, are his Instruments: as we see in
Philip, Acts 8.29.

Thirdly, it is a duty imposed upon us by God to help one another, and to
labor to build up one another: according to our Saviors speech to Peter: when
thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren. And therefore it being Gods own
Ordinance that we should mutually strengthen and help one another, those may
hope for mercy who are brought to Christ, though by others.

Who are here blame worthy?

First, those who neglect to bring others unto James 5.20. And therefore how
far do they wander from true Christian charity, who regard their Brothers
pleasure, or substance, or life; yea his Ox, or his Ass, more then his soul.

Secondly, those are to blame, who will not be brought unto Christ, but despise
the counsel, advice, instructions, exhortations, and reproves which are
given, either

I. By the Ministers; as they did, Ierem. 51.9. Or

II. By the Magistrates; as they did 2 Chronicles. 30.10. Or

III. By friends and neighbors: as Luke 7.32. Certainly these will rise up in
judgment against such, as would not be won, or allured by them to come unto
Christ.

. 2. One possessed with a Devil.

Does Satan possess any, or is it only some

First, certainly Melancholy does many great

Secondly, certain it is that the Devil is always

Thirdly, but it is most certain that sometimes

I. Such wiil declare what is done at the present time, in most remote places.
And

II. Will overcome very strong men; yea, break many and strong coards. This
might largely be proved, but that in so plain a thing, it is needless to
light a Candle.









I. By perverting the senses and imagination. And,

II. By drawing the man so possessed wholly unto his service; for such being
not themselves, are wholly guided and led by Satan.



Obsid^ri nos, non Possideri. That men now adays may be both corporally, and
spiritually assaulted, but not corporally possessed.





I. There is no certain rule given, how far the power of Satan is
restrained under the Gospel.

II. But probably we may say, that some things do more agree to sometimes,
then to other: And therefore I suppose, that this corporal possession did
belong unto the former ages, and not unto this last age of the world. Here
observe three distinct times.

First, before Christ came, there were sathanicall Oracles, where the Devil
gave responses and answers to those who came unto him; and although sometimes
their answers were so ambiguous, that they might be interpreted either way; and
sometimes proved apparently false (as might be showed by diverse answers given
by the Delphicke Oracle) yet for the most part, they were true; and therefore
the Devil was honored as a God.

Secondly, in the coming of Christ, the Oracles ceased giving answers, and
became mute: (And yet in heathenish places, I mean amongst the Indians, there
are some yet) and then the Devil began to rage, and grow cruel against the
bodies of men; whence corporal possessions became frequent; and that,

I. Partly from the malice of Satan. And,

II. Partly for the glory of the Gospel, John 9.3.

Thirdly, after the Church was established, And now there being no need of
Miracles, the Devil seems to be bound, and restrained from the corporal
possessions, which cannot be cured by any natural means, but only
miraculously, or by means above nature.

Here (as in Chap. 11.) we may say, that undoubtedly in corporal evils,
spiritual are comprehended; and therefore this man teaches us, what every man
is by nature: namely,

That by nature we are al subject to the power and dominion of Satan: as
appears thus,

First, he is called the Prince of the world: Corinth. 4.4. And therefore,

Secondly, it is necessary, that either Christ free us, and cast out him, or we
can never be delivered, and set at liberty.

. 3. And the man was dumb.

It is worth observation, how the enmity of Satan is principally bent against
the tongue and speech; that being the most excellent member in the body. Read
Matthew. 9.32. Mark 9.25. and Luke 11.14.

What use serves the tongue for, that the Devil

First, in general the uses thereof are many;

I. With the tongue we glorify God, Iam. 3.

II. With the tongue we discourse with the Lord. As did Adam, Jacob, and Moses
often.

III. We express our minds unto others, by our tongues. Vox index animi.

IV. With our tongues we utter hidden and secret knowledge.

V. With the tongue we pacify and appease wrath, Proverb. 15.1. as Jacob did
with Esau.

VI. With our tongues we give both sweet comfort, and sound, and safe counsel
unto our brethren, which very difficultly would be expressed by signs, if we
were dumb.

VII. It is useful for a man's self; for therewith a man does complain of his
want and poverty; and therewith a man does implore help, and seek remedy; and
therewith a man does utter his injuries and wrongs, and desires redress. It is
an admirable thing to consider, how great variety there is in the tongue; for
with that, sometime we speak gravely, sometimes jestingly, sometimes
sharply, sometimes lovingly, sometimes harshly, sometimes sweetly, lingua a
ligando (Rhoding) because a man seems to have the mind of his brother (as it
were) in his hands, or rather in his tongue, to bind or lose as he pleases; for
sometimes with the tongue a man does incense and exasperate his brother, and
sometimes therewith pacify him, sometimes we persuade, and sometimes we
dissuade with the tongue; even as though it were in the power of the tongue, to
make our neighbor do what we desire.

Secondly, but the more principal, and particular

I. It distinguishes man from all other creatures. For,

First, the words of Angels are borrowed; they assuming strange bodies when
they spoke unto men, which by and by, they laid aside. But men speak with
their own tongues.

Secondly, the Sea Monsters which have the form of men, or women in part,
speak not, neither are heard to utter any language.

Thirdly, the notes of birds are not called words or speech, because they
understand not.

II. It teaches the Gospel and God, and Christ and the promises of the word;
preaching the power of God unto salvation, 1 Corinthians. 1.18.21. and the means
to beget faith in us; Romans 10.17. But there can be no preaching without a
tongue, or speech.

III. By Colloquies, conference, and discourse, both knowledge and grace is
increased.

IV. By the tongue we set forth the praises of the Lord, and therewith we give
him thanks for all his benefits.

In the malady of this man we may further briefly observe two things: namely,









Colossians 4.6.

Secondly, we may observe here the effect of Satan's malice, and envy;
namely, the letting and hindering of their speech. Whence we may observe;



First, God is glorified, by the prayers, praises, and pious speeches of the
tongue. And,

Secondly, we are helped thereby; the prayers, praises, and pious speeches of
the tongue, being means to increase our grace, to obtain blessings from God,
and to confirm us more and more in the service, worship, and work of God.

Thirdly, by the profession of the tongue, we give a good example and
encouragement to our brethren; by our prayers for them, we may withold
judgments from them, and draw down blessings upon them: by our seasoned and
sanctified discourses, we may establish them, and ground them more and more in
the most holy faith, and truth of Religion. And therefore Satan seeing how
profitable an instrument the tongue is, both in regard of Gods glory, and our
good, and our brethrens edification; does therefore labor to tie the tongue,

VERSE. 24. But when the Pharisees heard it, they said: This fellow does not
cast out devils, but by Beelzebub the Prince of the devils.
. 1. But when the Pharisees heard it.



Because hereby he was extolled, and preferred, both before them, and their
Ancestors.



That it is a most malicious practice, to traduce, or calumniate any, out of
suspicion:

Why may we not censure, and calumniate out of suspicion?

First, because it is contrary to religion, which teaches us to pass by that
which we see, and

Secondly, because if men might be censured and taxed upon suspicion, then none
could be free Zoilus, for a ground to build his calumnies upon.

How manifold is suspicion, and whether is all suspicion evil and unlawful,
or not?

First, there is a suspicion in evil things; when a man is suspected to have
done this or that.

Secondly, there is a suspicion in religious things; when a man is suspected to
be but an

Thirdly, there is a lawful use of suspicion; and that,

I. In civil things; for the finding out of offenses and offenders: Men are
often suspected, and upon suspicion attached, for doing such or such a thing:
And by the careful add prudent examining of them, truth is often brought to
light, and murders, and thefts often discovered.

II. In religious things, for the avoiding of danger. Christ we see would not
commit himself unto the Jews, John 2.24. And why? because he suspected them.
Thus certainly the Lamb may suspect the Wolf, and the Dove the Hawke; and
because they know their cruelty toward them, so suspect them, that they may
keep themselves out of their tallons, and hands.

. 2. He casts out devils, by the Prince of the devils.

Is Satan cast out by Satan, or how is he cast.

First, some say, that Satan may be cast out Ab esse ad posse valet
consequentia: The argument is good which is drawn from the entitie, or being
of a thing, to the possibility thereof: that is, such a thing has been,
therefore such a thing may be.

I. I answer, that there are many wicked ways to cast out Satan, as has
been showed before. Cap. 8.28.


II. I answer that Satan seems to be able to cast out Satan, two manner of
ways, viz.

First, volenter, willingly, that so he may deceive; he often departs
willingly, but as though he were driven out by force; that so he may deceive,
or be honored; Veritatein dicit ut fallat, (Thom. 1.64.2.5.) The Devil
sometimes speaks true, that he may deceive. The Devil seems to be subject to
Constellations, and to the aspect of the Moon; yea, to be driven away, and
cast out, by stones, herbs, verses, and the like; not that indeed he is
subject unto them; but,

I. Partly, that he might defame the creatures, by persuading us, that there is
a certain deity in them. And,

II. Partly, that he might establish that diabolical, and wicked art of
Magic, and Incantations. Vide Thom. 1.115.5.0. Vbi plura.

Secondly, Violenter, violently; the Schoolmen think, that the superior
devils can by force drive away the inferior, Thom. 3.43.2. ad 3. But if this
be so, then their kingdom is divided; and therefore I rather think, that when
one devil casts out another, it is done by a secret compact and liking betwixt
them; howsoever it seems otherwise to us: For our Savior seems directly to
deny the Schoole-mens assertion, when he says, How can Satan cast out Satan?
etc. Mark 3.23. etc.

Beelzebub, the Prince of the devils, as is most evident by these reasons, viz.

I. Because then a kingdom should be divided against it self; which is
absurd, Luke. 11.17.18.

II. Because their children cast him out (as they thought) otherwise then by
the help of Satan, Luke 11.19.
.

III. Because he being stronger then Satan, cast him out by the finger of
God, Luke 11.20.

IV. Because Satan scatters, but Christ gathers; and therefore Christ works
not his Miracles by the help of Satan, Luke 11.23.

V. Because Christ raises the dead unto life, which the Devil cannot do,
Nisi praestigio, Thom. 1.91.2.1. and 114.4.2.
.





VERSE. 27. And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your children
cast them out? Therefore they shall be your Judges.
verse, where our Savior says: If I through Beelzebub cast out devils, then
by whom do your children cast them out? In which words he ascribes this gift
unto the Jews.

children here understand the Apostles, who were Jews borne, and had received
from Christ this gift, and power to cast out devils. Now if this exposition be
true, yet it makes nothing for the Papists; because the Apostles had it
extraordinarily.

Secondly, but I rather with Calvin think, that

Now this practice is still common with the Papists; and was frequent among the
Jews: and we read of these Exorcists. Acts 19.13, 16. Now if any should
demand from whence they sprung? Josephus (Antiq. lib. 4. Ca. 2.) says, that
these Exorcists took their Original from Solomon, to whom God gave an art
against Devils for the benefit of men, by certain enchantments to assuage
sicknesses, and by conjurations to put Devils to flight, binding them from
returning again; And this Art Josephus says remained until his time. For he
saw one Eleazarus healing those who were possessed, in the presence of
Vespasian and his Sons and of diverse others: And the manner of it was this, he
put a ring to the Nostrils of the man possessed, having under the Seal thereof
a root showed by Solomon, and so he drew the Devil out by his nostrils, who
thereupon fell down. Then he conjured him, giving him Solomon's oath never to
return again, saying a charm over him made by Solomon. And that it might be
the more evident that the Devil went out of him, the Exorcist commanded him to
overthrow a Basin of water, which was set there as lie went out. Now this was
effected by mere conjuration: For what virtue can there be in any root, or
herb in the world, available to command and enforce Satan to depart out of a
man possessed?

Thirdly, the meaning of our Savior in this If I by the power of Beelzebub
etc. that is, you have amongst you sundry Magicians, and Exorcists, who pretend
and exercise the gift of casting out Devils, and you think they do it by
the power of God; why, then do you not carry the same opinion of me also? Or
those amongst you who cast out devils you condemn not, neither think that
they do it by any compact with the Devil, but rather hold them worthy of all
honor, because they are a means of so great a benefit unto you. And therefore
it is not the thing which I do, that ye cavil at, but it is my person,
against which ye are maliciously bent: wherefore the children of Israel shall
be your Judges, because in your approving of them, and upbraiding of me, your
malice against me does evidently appear.

VERSE. 29. Or else how can one enter into a strong man's house, and spoil his
goods, except he first bind the strong man, and then he will spoil his
house.
It is questioned by some, whether Christ's blood was given as a price of our
Redemption to the Devil, or to God? Now we say that Christ by his death, and
the power of his blood has delivered us from the power of darkness, and
hell. Colos. 1.13. which price was paid unto God to satisfy his justice, and
not given unto Satan: for God is the judge, Satan is the Iaylor, to whom the
judge did deliver us because of our sins. Luke 12.38. The debt wherein we
stood bound, was unto our Lord and Master, and he in Justice delivered us to
the Iaylor till we should pay all that was due. Matthew. 18.34. Now this debt
Christ paid, and that to God, not to the Devil: and the debt being once paid,
the Jailer has no longer charge nor power to keep us in prison. This our
Doctrine amongst other Arguments is proved from this verse thus: Our Savior
Christ is compared to a victorious man, that binds the strong man which is
the Devil, and enters by force into his house, and spoileth him of his goods,
that is, delivers them whom Satan held as his own proper goods, and
captives in prison. Christ entered then by force, not by a price; by assaulting
not by assenting; by war, not by wages: by fettering the strong man, not by
feeing him; by loosing our bands, not by giving any thing into Satan's hands.
Willet Synops. fol. 1136.

VERSE. 31.32. Wherefore I say unto you; all manner of sin and blasphemy shall
be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be
forgiven unto men. And whosoever speaks a word against the Son of man, it
shall be forgiven him: but whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall
not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come.
But the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven.





Sabellians, Eunomians, and Macedonians, Heretics, at first spoke wickedly of
the holy Spirit; and denied his Deity, but afterward repenting found mercy,
and obtained remission of sins.

Father lay not this sin to their charge, and yet these for whom he prays
had called him Devil, had said he had an unclean spirit, although they were
convinced of his Doctrine and divine works. I argue hence thus, Those who
commit unpardonable blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, are not to be prayed for:

But Christ prayed for those who spoke evil of him, and his Doctrine, and
works, against their consciences.

Therefore these had not committed that unpardonable sin; and consequently
might have obtained mercy, if they had but repented.

Fourthly, Augustine, (sermon. 11. de verbis Apost.) says, it is Impugnatio
finalis agnitae veritatis, a final opposing or resisting of a known truth,
Our Divines more largely and clearly define it thus: Blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost, is an universal apostasy, and total relapse, inseparably
conjoined with an hatred of the truth. Or thus, it is a denial and opposition
of a known truth concerning God, and his will, and works, of which truth the
conscience is convicted, and which denying and impugning thereof, is done of
set purpose and with deliberation. We have an example hereof in the Emperor
Julian, who was a learned, and an eloquent man, and a professor of the
Religion of Christ, but afterward fell away and turned Apostate (and hence is
called Julian the Apostate) and wrote a Book against the Religion of Christ
which was answered by Cyrill Afterward being in a battle against the Persians,
he was thrust into the bowels with a dart, no man then knew how; which dart he
pulled out with his own hands, and presently blood followed, which he took
in his hand (as it gushed forth) and flung up into the Air, saying Vicisti
Gallilae, vicisti: O Galilean, (meaning Christ) thou have now conquered me: and
so ended his days in blaspheming of Christ, whom he once professed Theod. lib.
3. hist. Ca. 25.
.

Why is this unpardonable blasphemy, called

First, not because the Holy Spirit may be offended,

Secondly, it is the sin against the Holy Ghost,

I. To enlighten the Minds with the light of the Gospel: and hence it is
called the Spirit of Revelation. Ephesians. 1.17.

II. To persuade the Mind to receive and embrace those truths which are
revealed by the Gospel; Heb. 6. for this is to receive the knowledge of the
truth.

III. To work in a man a certain persuasion of the goodness of those things,
which he believes and this is to taste the good word of God. And therefore the
sin against the Holy Ghost is a contumellous, and reproachful rejecting of
the Gospel, after that a man's mind (by the blessed Spirit) is supernaturally
persuaded of the truth, and goodness of this word, and will of God, laid down
in the Gospel.









Fourthly it is called unpardonable, because it is more difficultly pardoned,
then other sins are: For every sin is (...), a breach of Gods Law; and
therefore he can pardon (if he pleases) the greatest as well as the least. Nor,





I. Because such are punished by God, with such a final blindness of mind,
and hardness of heart, that they can never return, either to themselves, or
unto God, by true and unfeigned repentance: and therefore being excluded, and
debarred of repentance, they must necessarily be denied remission; because no
penitencie, no pardon. Hence Saint John forbids us to pray for such an one,
because it is impossible for such to be renewed by repentance, Heb 6.5.

II. Because such reject the only means of salvation; as the sick man, who
will not be cured: For as that disease is incurable, which does so take away,
or destroy the power of nature, that neither the retentive, nor concoctive
faculty can do their duties; So there is no cure for him, who rejects the
balm of Gilead, no water to wash away his sin, who tramples under his feet the
blood of the Covenant, and despises that all healing Jordan, Heb. 6.4. and
10.20. and Act. 4.12.
and cleare-purging, and white-washing Fountain; no sacrifices to take away
his transgressions, who crucifieth unto himself the Lord of glory; and
despises that inestimable sacrifice offered up by him; yea, there is no name
for him to be saved by, who blasphemes the name of the only Mediator, and
Redeemer, Jesus Christ our Lord.

III. Because God in his justice will not suffer, that his holy Spirit, which
is the Spirit of truth, should be taxed with lying and falsehood; which is the
direct sin of those, who commit this unpardonable offense.

IV. This sin is called irremissible, because it so casts them into the power
of Satan, that they can never return from that captivity and bondage: For as
the Saints, and faithful have the testimony of the Spirit, which assures them
that they belong unto God, not unto Satan: So these blasphemous Apostates have
a certain testimony of their own hearts and consciences, that the Devil
holds them, and will hold them unto the end: Now that testimony given unto the
Saints, may be called the seal of the Spirit; and this given unto these
blasphemers, the sign, or Character of Satan.

How many things concur to the making

First, three things concur to the making up

I. Abnegatio veritatis, a denial of the truth against knowledge and
conscience.

II. Apostasia universalis, an universal apostasy, and falling away from
Christ; and not some particular sin committed against the first, or second
table of the Law.

III. Rebellio, a rebellion, arising from the hatred of the truth, conjoined
with a tyrannical, sophistical, and hypocritical opposing thereof, both in
the doctrine, and profession thereof. Hence it appears,

Secondly, that in him who commits this sin

I. He must have a knowledge of that truth^ which he opposes: Hence every
sin (though never so great) committed of ignorance is excluded: yea, although
it arise from a certain malice against the Son of man himself, as did that
sin of Paul's, in persecuting his members: For blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost cannot be forgiven, but that great sin (arising from an ignorance of
the truth) committed against the Son of man, was pardoned, 1 Timothy 1.13.

II. It is necessary, that this knowledge of the truth do not only swim in
the brain, but so sink into the heart, that there be a full and deliberate
assent to the truth: And hence all sins are excluded, which are not committed
and acted, of set purpose, and out of deliberation, against the known and
acknowledged truth; For blasphemy shall never be forgiven, but sins suddenly
fallen into, may be pardoned; as we see by David's transgressions, Psalm 32.5.
etc. and 51.

III. It is requisite that this knowledge which is opposed, be not acquired by
study merely, or by strong and undeniable arguments or principles; but by a
supernatural persuasion of the Holy Spirit. Hence then all sins are excluded
which may be in a Gentile, or any man simply Atheistical; as the obduration of
Pharaoh, the presumption of Manasses, and the final impenitencie of the
wicked: For the sin against the Holy Ghost, presupposes the operation of the
Holy Ghost in the heart; and therefore cannot be pardoned: but there may be
obduration, presumption, gloriation in sin; yea, final impenitencie in
those, who never were made partakers of any such grace, or light, or knowledge,
or operation of the Spirit: and therefore if any such would but repent as
Manasses did, they should be pardoned as he was.

IV. It is necessary that this persuasion be not only of the truth of the
word, but of the goodness thereof also: when we persuade our selves, that the
Gospel is true; yea, that it is good in it self, and so good, that happy shall
we be, if we receive and obey it, but miserable if we reject and slight it.
Hence the sins of hypocrites, and all formal Professors, (who have only
some knowledge of the truth, and make only some outside show of Religion, but
are not affected with the goodness, and sweetness thereof) are excluded from
blasphemy, which never can be forgiven; for those may repent and find mercy;
but this blasphemer cannot.





Heb. 10.27. From blasphemy then by this particular are excluded, all
backsliding, and denying of Christ, and sins of presumption; which arise
either from infirmity, or passion: For Peter's denying of his Master may be
called properly Apostacy, but not properly blasphemy; because it proceeded
from weakness, not from malice.

Hebr. 10.26. whereby are excluded sins of malice, which spring from
ignorance, as Paul's did.

Paul calls voluntary, to sin willingly; And hereby are excluded sins
arising from carelessness, or presumption, or a persuasion of impunity, or from
a sleepie conscience, as the sins of Manasses did.

Heb. 10.23; for this is to reproach the blessed Spirit, and the grace of the
same.





First, of all other sins this harms nature most; because none casts men so
far from pardon, as this does, which utterly takes away repentance, the only
way unto salvation: As that is reckoned the greatest sickness, which does not
only deprive a man of health, but also debars, and shuts the door against all
means unto health.

Secondly, of all other sins, this is the most grievous, by reason of the
hurt it does; and of all other the most abominable, by reason of the defect of
excuse: For it takes away all excuse from men, and makes them inexcusable: They
cannot excuse themselves by ignorance, because their sin was against
knowledge; nor by infirmity, and weakness, because their consciences will
tell them, that they sinned out of obstinate, and wilful malice. And therefore
these mitigations, and extenuations of ignorance and weakness being taken from
them (which other great sinners may plead) their judgment certainly shall be
the more grievous, and insupportable.

Thirdly, of all other sins, this harms the will, and mind most; for it
makes a man unable to work the works of uprightness, and holiness. That
sickness is the most dangerous, which does so infect, and corrupt the taste,
that it makes the sick man refuse all good meat and medicine: yea, this sin
does not only disinable a man from doing good, but makes him decline from the
right rule, and disorder, and deprave himself more and more: for they sin
not only simply, out of malice, but out of malice, and that de industria.

What are the remedies against this sin, or rather,

First, let us watch against all sin; yea, against Ephesians. 4.27. Hebr. 3.11.
As those who fear the plague, fly far from the house infected therewith.

Secondly, let us highly prize the presence, and These. 2.10, 11.

Thirdly, let us learn to esteem and value

Fourthly, if (with Peter) we have fallen,

Fifthly, while our spirits are something soft,

. 2. Neither in this world, nor in the world to

Who are confuted by these words?

The Sadduces, (Orig. contra Cells.) Non agnoscunt se Seculum nisi praesens,
that is, they acknowledged not a time to come, when there shall be a
Resurrection: Although our Savior says here: Neither in this life, nor in the
life to come; whereby is intimated, both the immortality of the soul, and the
Resurrection of the body. Hence by the Jews these Sadduces were called Menaim,
or Probrosi, contentious, or calumnious: Gabia, the son of Pesisa, reasons
against the Sadduces thus, Talm. phesikra.
: Si quod non fuit, id fuit; Ergo, quod fuit erit. That is, if that which was
not, was: Therefore, that which was, shall be. He meant, if God created, and
made the world of nothing, may he not make our bodies of something again?

Bellarmine strongly presses this place for the proof of Purgatory, arguing
thus; Blasphemy against the Spirit shall not be forgiven, neither in this
world, nor in the world to come: Therefore some sins shall be forgiven in the
next world, by the prayers, and suffrages of the Church. But this remission is
neither obtained in heaven, nor in hell; Ergo, it is in Purgatory; and
therefore there is a Purgatory, Bell. de purgat. lib. 1. Cap. 1. loc. 1. ex
novo Testam.

Because this objection is abundantly answered by our men, I may be the shorter
in the answer of it: I refer the Reader to Amesius. Bell. enervat. tom. 2.
page 197. 198. and Chemnitius, exam. part. 3. page 135, 136. Arg. 7. and Hill.
of the knowledge of the true God, page 387. 388. and Pareus, s. And because
this place is urged by the Rhemists, upon Matthew. 12.. 6. I therefore refer
the Reader to venerable Fulke, and Cartwright upon the place; only entreating
him to observe, that this is no Categoricall Argument, but only an Enthymeme,
in which the Antecedent is Christ's (and therefore most true) but the Consequent
will appear to be most false.

(It shall shall neither be forgiven in this life, nor in the life to come)
belongs not at all to their Purgatory, where men satisfy Gods justice (as they
wickedly say) to the full; and wherein (for the time) men are extremely
tormented; the pains thereof being (as some of them say) equivalent to the
pains of hell, for the time. And therefore by this their Argument, instead of
raising the fabric of Purgatory, they have razed the foundation; as appears
thus: The scope of their Objection is to prove, that the sins of believers
are remitted in the world to come; now to remit, and to punish are opposites,
as Chrysostom, (Hom. de poen. and confess.) says, Nemo remittit, qui punire
vult; and therefore if the sins of the faithful be remitted, and pardoned in
the world to come (as they would prove from this place) then undoubtedly they
are not punished in the world to come. And thus instead of confirming, they
have confuted, instead of planting, they have plucked up Purgatory by the
roots; for to deny that souls are punished in Purgatory, is to deny Purgatory
it self.

Secondly, by this world, is meant a man's life

Thirdly, or by the world to come, may be Mark 10.30. They shall at this
present receive an hundredfold, and in the world to come, life everlasting.
Wherefore, Purgatory being imagined to be now present, it cannot be taken to
belong to the world to come. And so also, Ephesians. 1.21. and Heb. 6.5. the world
to come is taken for the world which shall be after this is ended, ( Willet
Synops. fol. 405.) yea the Papists, I think, are not able to produce one place
of Scripture, to prove, that by the world to come, is meant, the time betwixt
death and the day of judgment; but always either for the last day, or the
eternity which is after that day, Luke 20.35. And thus Augustine (de Civit.
Dei. lib. 21. cap. 24.) by the world to come, in this place, understands the
day of the Resurrection. And Damascene also ( de orthod. fid. lib. 2. cap. 1.)
says, Aeterna vita, and aeternum supplicium futurum seculum ostendunt. And
thus, This world, is taken for the distance of time, to the end of the world:
and, The world to come, for that eternity which shall begin after Christ's
second coming. And according hereunto, there shall be two times, in which,
sins are pronounced remitted; to wit, this world, by the preaching of the
Gospel to the repentant; and that to come, when Christ shall confess with his
own mouth, before Gods Angels, to whom they are remitted, and by which
remission they are made truly blessed; for that remission to come, shall be a
confirmation of this present: and those which are not remitted here, neither
shall there be so pronounced. Wherefore, from this speech of our Saviors, this
Argument is gathered from the Antithesis; If the sin against the holy Ghost, be
neither remitted in this world, nor in the world to come; then other sins are
remitted, both in this and the other; or at least, either in this or in the
other. But it is not remitted in the other, because it is not remitted in this,
as has been said: It follows therefore, that other sins are remitted, both
in this, and in the other. Now in this sense, this place does not only not
make for Purgatory, but also repugneth it. For these two remissions (in this
world, and the world to come) are conjoined, and one is not separated from the
other. Chrysostom expounding this place, together with this partition of time,
says thus; Amongst men,

I. Some shall be punished for their sins, both here and there; as the
Sodomites.

II. Some only in this life present; as the Corinthian fornicator.

III. Some only in the life to come; as the rich glutton.

IV. Some in neither, as the Prophets, and Apostles. And from this partition he
infers, that the meaning of our Savior is, That the sin against the holy Ghost
is so grievous and horrible, that they which commit it, shall feel the
judgment of Gods wrath, both here, and in the world to come; which happens not
to all, who commit other sins. Certainly, they which with a set purpose deny
the known truth, against their consciences, feel a hell of torments in their
consciences in this life, at some time or other, if not always; and in the
life to come, their pains shall be exquisite, and unspeakable, in the most
rigorous manner. And therefore, from this place nothing can be gathered for
their Plutonicall, rather than Platonicall Purgatory.

I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until I drink it with
you in my Fathers kingdom, Mat. 26.29. That therefore he did drink of other
things, because he did not drink of the vine. For it is a most foolish
absurdity, from two Negations to infer an Affirmation: as for example, Saint
Peter neither in this life, nor in the life to come, shall be made an Angel:
therefore some Saints in the life to come shall be made Angels. Now Bellarmine
would justify this Argument, by that example, where Christ says, My kingdom
is not of this world: And Pilate infers thereupon, Art thou a King then?
where an Affirmation is concluded out of the Negative. To this Doctor Willet
(Synops. f. 405.) answers, That the reason is not alike, except Bellarmine will
reason as Pilate did, Thy kingdom is not of this world, Therefore thou have a
kingdom. So, Blasphemy shall not be forgiven in the next world, Therefore there
shall be Blasphemy then. Thus he might have concluded truly (and thus he should
have concluded, if he would reason as Pilate does) for in hell there shall be
Blasphemy.

Origin imagined, that after some long and grievous torments, both the sins of
the devils and of wicked men should be remitted: And the Chiliasts thought,
that after a thousand years, from the day of judgment, all should be pardoned:
yea Augustine (lib. 6. contr^. Iul. cap. 5.) thought, that in the day of
judgment, some sins should be forgiven. And therefore Purgatory is not
necessarily concluded from the remission of sins after this life.

Bellarmines, it may be concluded, that mortal sins shall be remitted in the
world to come, because Christ only excepts the sin against the holy Ghost: but
this the Papists will not grant, and therefore why should we grant the other?

Seventhly, from a particular Negation (contrary Socrates, or Solomon is no
fool; therefore all men are wise: and he is a fool, and not wise, who admits
of such Arguments. Sadeel. adver. hum. satisf. object. page 247.

Eighthly, Bellarmine argues, A subcontrariis, and Subcontrarieties; from which
the force of the conclusion should follow. As for example,

I. Some sin is not remitted: Some sin is remitted.

II. Some sin is not remitted in this life:

Some sin is remitted in this life.

III. Some sin is neither remitted in this life, nor in the life to come.

Some sin is remitted both in this life, and in the life to come. Now these
are contraries, and concluded according to the Rules of Art. But the Papists
conclude thus; Some sin is neither remitted in this life, nor in the life to
come. Therefore some sin is not remitted in this life, but in the life to
come. Where the error is so plain, that a fresh man can tell, that it does
not conclude aright. For to a double negation should be opposed a double
affirmation; whereas they oppose only one. As if a man should argue or conclude
thus.

Some neither love God in this life, nor in the life to come. Therefore

Some shall love God in the life to come, which love him not in this life. This
follows not.

Our Savior rather argues thus, Some sins (namely, those committed against
the Holy Ghost) shall neither be forgiven in this life, nor in the life to
come. But some sins shall be forgiven both in this life and in the life to
come: that is all the sins of all the faithful; for they are pardoned here,
and they shall be pronounced and declared to be remitted at the day of
judgment. Scharpius de purg. p. 544.

Ninthly, Purgatory being an Article of their oblique kind of reasoning, but
from the direct, plain and express words of Holy writ, And therefore this
place is ill brought for the proof of Purgatory.

Tenthly, our Savior in this place speaks, De of the remission of sin: And
therefore Bellarmine is here guilty of the Sophisme called Ignoratio elenchi
applying it only to the punishments of sin, and that temporal. Christ says
that the sin or fault cannot be remitted in the world to come. John 3.18. And
the Romanists do not much oppose it. And therefore this place which speaks
only of the remission of the sin, is injuriously, produced for the proof of
the Remission of temporal punishment.

In the place alleged, John 3.18. Our Savior says, He that believes, is
not condemned, but he that believes not, is condemned already. Upon which
place the Rhemists give this note, that he that believes shall not be
condemned either at the hour of death, or day of judgment: from which place I
reason thus, Every man either dies in faith or without faith: If he die in
incredulity, he is condemned, and there is afterward no hope: if in faith, he
is freed from condemnation and entered into life, and so consequently delivered
from his sins: Therefore in this life only we obtain remission of sins,
because faith is only of this life, whereby our sins are remitted. Willet.
Synops. 405.

shall neither be forgiven in this life, nor in the life to come, is, shall
never be forgiven world without end, as is plain, from Luke 12.10. and Mark.
3.29. He that blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost has never forgiveness.
Marcus alijs verbis candem sententiam expressit. (August. de verb. Dom sermon.
11.) St. Mark expresses in other words the self same thing that S. Matthew
does: although this Evangelist uses more words for the greater Emphasis,
according to the usual and old custom of the Jews. Saint Matthew was an
Hebrew, and the Hebrews were not content to say, In seculum for ever, but in
Seculum and seculum, for ever and ever, that is, always. So here, neither in
this world, nor in the world to come; that is, never as St. Mark expounds it,
Mark. 3.29: yea according to the exposition of St. Matthew himself in this
place: for verse 31. he says. Blasphemy shall not be forgiven, that is, at
all: and then he adds in the verse following, neither in this world nor in
the world to come; so that not to be forgiven in this world, or the next, is
not to be forgiven at all. Bellarmine opposes that which we say, that Matthew
is to be expounded by S. Mark; but I omit his exceptions, entreating my
Reader, if he desire to see them both proposed and solved to look upon
Scharpius de purgat. page 544.

VERSE. 33. Either make the Tree good, and his fruit good: or else make the Tree
corrupt and his fruit corrupt: for the Tree is known by his fruit.
Rhemists object this place for the proof of free will thus: It is in a man's
own free will and election, to be a good Tree, or an evil, to bring forth
good fruit or bad: for our Savior here says: either make the Tree, and fruit
good or bad.



Secondly, this verse does not only not confirm

VERSE. 34, 35. O generation of Vipers, how can ye,
. 1. O generation of Vipers.

What resemblance was there between the Viper, and the Jews, or Pharisees, that
our Savior here calls them, A generation of Vipers?

Chrysostom (s. Mat. 3.) answers, Vipers, in regard of a threefold property,
which is common to them with Vipers; namely,

First, when the Viper has bit a man, Jews, having committed many great and
grievous sins, run unto Baptism, that thereby (after the manner of Vipers)
they may escape the danger of death.

Secondly, as the nature of the Viper, is to break the bowels of his dam, and
so to be brought forth: so the Jews, persecuting daily the Prophets, did thereby
kill their Mother, to wit, their Church and Synagogue.

Thirdly, as the Viper outwardly seems fair, and speckled, as though she were
painted, but inwardly is full of poison: So the Scribes and Pharisees did
without counterfeit, and feign a show of holiness, but did carry within the
poison of maliciousness, and the venom of wickedness.

. 2. How can ye that are evil, speak good things?

It is questioned betwixt us, and the Papists;

If any work, which proceeds from the mere Free Will of man be good, then it
will follow that a man may do some good thing of himself. But the latter is
false. Therefore also the former. The necessity and truth of this connection is
manifest; for all grant, that to be done by man, which is done by Free Will,
and so oppose Free Will to grace. And therefore it is necessary, that that
which does not proceed from grace, should proceed from Free Will; that is, from
man by the power of his will.

The Consequence is easily proved, from these two verses, Oh generation of
Vipers, how can ye speak good things, when ye your selves are evil? (that
is, as Lyranus interprets it) ye being filled with malice, and envy against
me, cannot speak any good of me:) The good man out of the good treasure of his
heart, brings forth good things; and the evil man out of the evil treasure
of his heart brings forth evil things; Anselm upon these words has this
Observation, or Exposition: Quomodo bonus homo non possit proferre mala, nec
malus bona; sic non possit Christus mala, nec diabolus bona opera facere: As
the good man cannot bring forth evil things, nor the evil man good things; So
Christ can do no bad works, nor the Devil any good. Read further for the
proof hereof, Mat. 7.16, 17, 18, 19. and Luke 6.43, 44. From whence plainly
this Argument may be drawn. No corrupt and evil tree can bring forth good
fruit. But every man by nature, is a corrupt, and evil tree (being the child
of wrath, and infected with sin) And therefore, no man by nature, or by the
only power of his Free Will, is able to bring forth good fruits.

A good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good things.



They are actions external or internal, conformable, and agreeable to the
will, and to the Law of God: But from this verse, they may be thus defined:
They are works which flow and proceed from a disposition of virtue: For the
good man, out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good things.



Three things are required, viz, verse 33. Secondly, a good matter, or object;
that is, something which is commanded by God: for otherwise, it will be but
will worship, as Matthew. 15.6. In vain do they worship me, teaching for
doctrines, the commandments of men. Thirdly, a good end; that is, the glory of
God, and those things which tend to his glory, 1 Corinthians. 10.31. And thus if we
desire to approve our selves to be good men by our good fruits; we must labor
that, I. Our wills may be rectified, and rightly disposed. And, II. That our
works may be moderated, according to the word of God, in regard of the matter
of them. And, III. That our end in all our good works may be, that God may be
glorified in us, and by us.


VERSE. 36. But I say unto you, that every idle word that men shall speak, they
shall give account thereof, in the day of Judgment.
Bunderius a Papist, from this place would prove Purgatory, thus. Men at the
day of Judgment, shall give an account for every idle word which they have
spoken. Now which is this day of Judgment? certainly, that day which comes
presently after death; according to that of the Apostle; It is appointed unto
all men once to die, and after death comes Judgment. Therefore, in that day
after death, men shall give an account of those things, which have been
culpable, and worthy of reprehension in them, and which must be expiated by
temporal punishments: now in what place can this be but only in Purgatory. His
meaning is this: As soon as ever men die, they shall give an account for their
venial, and less sins, which they have not satisfied, nor suffered for on
earth; and those shall be purged by the pains, and penance of Purgatory flames.

First, Sophister-like he concludes, that which

We must give an account for all our small sins

Secondly, we grant, that by and by, after death, there is a particular
judgment of God, wherein every one shall give an account of those things,
which he has done in the body.

Thirdly, by the day of Judgment, both Franciscus and Gorranus, and diverse
others understand the last day, and general Judgment; and some leave it
doubtful. Sa: Iudicij scilicet particularis in morte, vel universalis; that
is, by this Judgment, is either meant the particular Judgment presently after
death, or the general Judgment at the last day. Now we need not greatly care,
which of these say true; for if the last day be here understood, then Bunderius
his Argument (or Sophisme rather) is absurd; for there will be no Purgatory
after the day of Judgment: But if we lean unto those, who hold the place
doubtful, then it will prove but an uncertain Argument; and consequently not
an Argument of faith, nor to build an Article of faith upon, as Purgatory is to
them.

A question may hence be demanded,

Although it be true,

First, because our Savior here says, that we must give a straight account
of every idle word, in the general day of Judgment; and this is certain,
because every idle word is flatly against the Law of God; and yet these idle
words are those sins, which they call venial. And therefore this is a truth,
that all sins are mortal, that is, against the Law of God.

Secondly, because the Rhemists (Rhem. in 1. John 3.4.) confess in plain
terms, that every sin is a swarving from the Law of God. For doubtless,
that which swarveth from the Law, is truly said to be against the Law, but not
agreeable to the Law.

Thirdly, because the famous popish Friar, and Romish Bishop Josephus Angles
(in 4. sent. page 215.) teaches the same doctrine in his book, dedicated to
the Pope himself: His words are these; Omne peccatum veniale est al cujus
legis transgressio. Patet, quia omne veniale est contra rectam rationem, and
agere contra rectam rationem, est agere contra legem naturalem, praecipientem
non esse a regula rectae rationis deviandum. Every venial sin is the
transgression of some Law. This is clear, because every venial sin is
against right reason, and to do a thing against right reason, is to do it
against the Law of nature, which commands us, not to depart or swarve from
the rule of right reason. Thus every venial sin is against right reason, and
against the Law of nature, which is given to every one in his creation, or in
his birth and nativity. Of this same opinion is Durandus, (in 2. sent. did.
42. q. 6.) and many of the Schoolmen, Josephus Angles in 2. sent. page 275. and
Fisher the Bishop of Rochester, (Rossensis, Artic. 32. advers. Luth.) and
Bellarmine unawares confesses the same against himself. ( Bellar. com. 1. page
84.) If the Reader would see the several testimonies and words of the
fore-quoted Authors, and this Argument clearly handled, let him read Master
Bells Challenge, page 81, etc. unto 86.

Fourthly, Gerson (de vita spiritual. lect. 1. part. 3. in 1. corol.) has
these words; No offense of God is venial of its own nature, but only in
respect of Gods mercy, who will not de facto, impute every offense to death,
though he might do it most justly. And so I conclude, that mortal and venial
sins, as they be such, are not distinguished intrinsecally and essentially, but
only in respect of Gods grace, which assigns one sin to the pain or torture
of death, and not another. This Gerson (who thus writes) was a famous Popish
Bishop, and a man of high esteem in the Council of Constance; and if his words
be well marked, they are able to confound the Papists, and to confirm the point
delivered by us. For

I. He tells them plainly, that every sin is mortal of its own nature. And

II. That no sin is venial, save only in respect of Gods mercy. And

III. That God may (Iustissime) most justly condemn us for the least sin we do.
And

IV. That mortal and venial sins are the same intrinsecally, and essentially,
and differ but accidentally, that is to say, they differ in accident, but not
in nature; in quantity, but not in quality; in mercy, but not in deformity; in
the subject, but not in the object; in imputation, but not in enormity; save
only, that the one is a greater mortal sin, than is the other.

Fifthly, because the least offense that can be imagined, remaining eternally
in respect of the stain and guilt of it, though not in act, as do all sins
unremitted, must be punished eternally: for else there might some sinful
disorder, and (...) remain not ordered by divine justice. Now whersoever is
eternity of punishment, there is an everlasting expelling, and excluding from
eternal life and happiness: and consequently every offense that eternally
remains not remitted, excludes from eternal glory, and happiness, and is
rightly judged a mortal and deadly sin. Field of the Church, lib. 3. page 147.

Sixthly, all sins are mortal in them, who are strangers from the life of God,
because they have dominion and full command in them, or at least are joined
with such as have; and so leave no place for grace, which might cry unto God
for the remission of them. But the elect and chosen servants of God, called
according to purpose, do carefully endeavor, that no sin may have dominion
over them; and notwithstanding any degree of sin they run into, they recover
that grace by repentance, which can, and will procure pardon for all their
offenses.

VERSE. 37. For by thy words thou shall be justified,
What is Justification?

First, some say, Iustificare, to justify, signifies Iustum facere, to make
just, by a renovation or change of our nature: but this is false, for hereby
our Justification, and our Sanctification are confounded, and made one thing;
as though to justify, were the action of God, in regenerating and re-creating
us.

Secondly, to justify, is the work of God in Iustificare, to justify, does
signify Iustum pronunciare, that is, to pronounce righteous: and this is
manifest by these two reasons; namely,

I. Because in Scripture, Justification is opposed to condemnation; as in this
verse, By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be
condemned.

II. Because in Scripture, Justification is sometimes defined, to consist in
the remission of sins, sometimes in the forgiving of wickedness, sometimes in
the covering of sin, and not imputing of iniquity; and sometimes it is
described by the imputation of righteousness. All which do prove manifestly,
that Justification is the action of him, who is the Judge of mankind, in
absolving man from sin, and the punishment thereof.

Who is it that justifies man?

God alone, as appears by these two particulars;

First, the Lord is the only Judge of all: Heb. 12.23. And, Act. 17.31. it is
said, He has appointed a day, in which he will judge the world in
righteousness. Of which day also the Apostle speaks, Romans 2.5, 16. And the
reason hereof is given by the Apostle, Romans 14.7, 8. to wit, because he is our
only Lord, to whom we both live and dye, and to whom every one shall give
account of himself. Whereby it is clear, seeing God is the only Judge of the
world, that to justify, and to condemn, must only belong unto him.

Secondly, Justification consisting in the remission of sins, and the not
imputing of iniquity, it necessarily follows, that none save God only can
justify; because none, except the Lord, can forgive sin, as is clear, Mark
2.7. Luke 5.21. and Esa. 43.25. and 44.22. and Psalm 31.2. and 2 Corinthians. 5.19.

VERSE. 38, 39, 40. Then certain of the Scribes and of the Pharisees, answered,
saying, Master, we would see a sign from thee. But he answered, and said to
them, An evil, and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, and there shall
no sign be given to it, but the sign of the Prophet Jonas. For as Jonas was
three days and three nights in the Whales belly; so shall the son of man be
three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.
There shall no sign be given to it, but the sign of the Prophet Jonas.





Psalm. 103.13. yea he spared not his own, and only natural son, but gave him
to death for us, ( Romans 8.32.) that we might be freed from eternal destruction
by him.

Act. 4.12.

Chemn. harm. page 804. fine.

For as Jonas, so Christ, etc.

Jonas a Type of Christ?



I. As Jonas was sent out of Judea unto the Ninevites, who were Gentiles, to
preach repentance unto them, that thereby they might be delivered from a
dreadful judgment, which hung over their heads: And as hereby he was a
publisher and proclaimer of Gods universal grace, which is extended even to
the Gentiles, as well as to the Jews. So Christ ought to be a Preacher of the
Grace of God, and that not only unto the Jews, and Israelites, but also unto
the Gentiles; for he was sent to be a light unto the Gentiles, and the
salvation of the Lord to the uttermost parts of the earth, Isa. 49.6. Romans
3.39. Genesis 22.18.

II. As Jonas (when the sea raged, and the tempest grew impetuous) offered
himself to death, that the Mariners, and the rest in the ship, might be
preserved from shipwreck; so Christ (when the wrath of God waxed hot against us
for our sins) laid down his life for us, lest we should perish for ever, and
that by his death we might be saved, Mat. 20.28. John 11.50.

III. As Jonas voluntarily, and of his own accord offered himself unto death,
when the Mariners would gladly have preserved him: so did Christ lay down his
life of himself for us, when no man took it from him, John 10.18.

IV. As the tempestuous sea was calmed and quieted, when Jonas was cast
therein: so Christ by his death, pacified and appeased his Fathers wrath, tamed
the madness and rage of the world, and the Prince thereof, yea so took away the
horror, and fear, and sting of death, that unto the godly which believe in
him, it might no longer be (...), of all terrible things, the most terrible,
but rather as a peaceable and quiet sleep, or as a welcome and desired rest.

Secondly, Jonas was a Type of Christ, in regard

I. As Jonas perished not in the water, but was swallowed of a great Fish, who
carried him three days in his belly, but at length cast him safe upon the dry
shore: so Christ did not perpetually remain in the grave ( for it was
impossible that he should be holden by it, Acts 2.24.) but death and the devil
being overcome, he was restored, and raised up again unto life, Hos. 13.24.

II. As Jonas (being delivered from the belly of the Whale) preached Repentance
unto the Ninevites, and thereby brought salvation unto them: so Christ being
risen from the dead, by his Apostles did preach Repentance, not only to the
Jews, but to the Gentiles also, that thereby they might be brought, by grace,
unto glory.

III. As Jonas, who was cast by the Mariners into the sea, was a means to
convert and turn them unto the true God: so Christ by his death, converted many
unto his Father, ( Acts 2.41.) who were Authors of his death.

. 3. As Jonas was in the belly of the Whale.

What sort or kind of Fish was this which swallowed Jonas?

First, Rondeletus says, that it was a certain Basilius says, that it was a
Fish much like to some great hill inbignesse. And Augustine says, that in
Africa he saw a fish, whose mouth was like some great cave.

Secondly, Doctor Medcalf (the Hebrew Professor Cambridge) in his Lectures upon
Jonah, does affirm, That for certain, this fish which swallowed Jonas, was no
Whale: he proves it thus, because the Whale has Lungs, and breaths, and like
man has a windpipe; and therefore the passages through which the meat
passes, are so straight, that by no means she is able to devour a whole man.

Jonas was three days and three nights in the belly of the Whale; and the 70
render it, a Whale: and Josephus (Antiquit.) says, A cero devoratum esse
Ionam, Jonas was devoured of a Whale.

Jonah, and therefore created him without Lungs, or windpipe, and made all the
passages so wide, and vast, that it might devour a man whole.



Species, to the Genus. Because the Canaanites were principal Merchants, and
the Arabians most notable Thieves, and the Chaldeans excellent and singular
Astrologers: therefore the Jews called every Merchant, a Canaanite, and every
Thief, an Arabian, and every Astrologer, a Chaldean; thus attributing the name
of an ordinary Species, to the Genus thereof. And on the contrary, the 70 were
wont to give the name of the Genus, to a more known, or notable Species: and
thus sometimes instead of Nilus, or Euphrates, they would say a Flood. And thus
the Greeks calls every great Fish, (...), a Whale, and Homer calls Phocas, Sea
Calves, Whales: and Virg. Immania cete, great Whales, for great Fishes: and
hence Cetarius signifies a kind of Fish-monger, or seller, or taker of great
Seafish. And from this propriety of speech, our Savior calls this Fish a
Whale, because (dag gadol) was a great Fish.

So the Son of man shall be three days, and three nights, etc.





First, that diverse nations begun their day at diverse times; the Babylonians
and the Chaldeans reckoned their day from sunrising to sunrising. The
Astrologians counted the day from noon to noon; from the time that the sun was
at his height, until he returned thither again. The Romans, Egyptians, and the
Occidentals, reckoned their day from midnight to midnight. The Athenians and
the Hebrews accounted their day from sunset to sunset, from whence it came to
pass that the night was the beginning of the following day.

Secondly, it was very ordinary with the Hebrews, to put a part for the whole;
and therefore a part either of the day or night, was called in their manner, or
form of speaking, a Day, to wit, a natural day, consisting of four and twenty
hours.

Thirdly, when they did denote one day, although that which they called a day,
were but the least part of a day, yet they did usually pronounce or declare it
by parts, thus, The day and the night; from whence, by their propriety of
speech, a day and a night was ordinarily called a Day, and a Day by a
Synechdoche, was used for a part (yea sometimes the least part) of a day: And
hence the answer to the question is manifest, namely, When Christ was buried,
it was between the ninth and twelfth hour of Friday, which hours were part of
the first day, and by the forenamed Synechdoche, were called the first day and
night. Then from sunset upon Friday, unto sunset upon the Sabbath (or
Saturday) was the second day and night, which were both entire. Then from
sunset upon the Saturday, to the next dawning of the day, was part of the
third day, which part was called a day and a night, according to the vulgar
wont of the Jews: whose use and custom only, is the rule of expounding many
things of this nature in holy Scripture. And thus Christ is said to lie three
days and three nights in the heart of the earth; because he was crucified
between Evenings, at that time when the Paschall Lamb was killed: where the
Evening is reckoned for the first day, and the next four and twenty hours are
reckoned for the second day, and he arose upon the third morning, and that was
the third day, the morning being taken Syneedochice, for the whole day, and the
night following.

. 5. In the heart of the earth.

The meaning of the Text is, as Jonas was buried in the belly of the Fish, and
reputed dead for three days, and three nights: so Christ remained in the state
of the dead, three days and three nights.

VERSE. 41.42. The men of Niniveh shall rise in the judgment with this
generation, and shall condemn it, because they repented at the preaching of
Jonas; and behold, a greater then Jonas is here. The Queen of the South shall
rise up in the Judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: for she
came from the uttermost parts of the earth, to hear the wisdom of Solomon;
and behold, a greater then Solomon is here.
. 1. The men of Niniveh.

What dissemblance, (...), or disparity

First, the Ninivites were strangers from the

Secondly, the Ninivites had but one Preacher of the word; namely Jonas, and
yet they obeyed him; but although God had spoken unto the Jews by many
Prophets, and by John Baptist: yea, by his own, and only Son, ( Hebr. 1.2.)
yet they shamefully, and reproachfully rejected them all.

Jonah, the servant of the Lord, repented, believed, and changed their lives:
But the Jews had heard many Sermons from the Prophets in all ages; and at last
heard those Sermons repeated, and confirmed by Christ, the Lord and Master of
the Prophets: (And this is that which our Savior means in these words, but a
greater then Jonas is here:) And yet they would not repent, and amend their
lives.



Jonas without any sign, content with this, that he had come unto them, for
their disobedience toward God: But the Jews daily saw many signs; that is,
Miracles wrought by Christ, and yet persevered in their obstinacy, as though
he had done nothing worthy of faith, or for which they had reason to believe
in him.

Jonas; and yet when he came, they believed, and obeyed him: But all the
Prophets had foretold the Jews of Christ's coming, and they saw his works,
suit and agree with their predictions; and yet they would not believe him, nor
amend their lives

Jonas, although he threatened the miserable destruction, both of their City
and Kingdom: But the Jews would not endure, or hear, or obey Christ,
although he preached grace, and salvation unto them; yea, did not prescribe any
hard, or harsh rules of living unto them, but declared remission of sins to
every one who would repent, believe, and obey.

Jonas was not derided, and mocked by the Ninivites, although he fled when God
sent him unto them; But the Jews scoffed, and taunted Christ, who refused not
to undergo reproach, hatred, persecution, and death for them and their
salvation.

Shall rise up in the Judgment.





The Queen of the South etc.



Pet. 3.7.) yea, a person unaccustomed to travel, and yet she came to Solomon:
But the Jews were men, and the more worthy sex, and yet they are more slow,
and fluggish to hear, then she was.

Secondly, she being a Gentile, came to hear Abraham, according to the flesh.

Thirdly, she came along a tedious journey unto Solomon, although she her
self were a Queen: But the King of Kings himself comes unto the Jews, his
subjects; and yet they will not entertain, or receive him.

Fourthly, fame and report only moved her to Solomon, although oftentimes
nothing is more false then fame; according to the old saying: Tam ficti
pravique tenax, quam nuntia very,
Not only truth, but also lies,
Upon the wings of swift fame flies.


But the Jews saw, and heard many things, which many and great Princes had
desired to see ( Luke 10.24.) and yet they contemned both Christ, and them.

Fifthly, she was at great cost and charges, in Solomon: yea, brought gifts,
and presents unto him along with her: But the Jews would not embrace Christ,
or his doctrine, although he taught them freely, and by his word offered the
gift of salvation unto them, even out of mere grace, and would have sold them
wine and milk, without money, or money-worth, Esaias 55.1.

Sixthly, she came unto a mere man, and yet

Seventhly, Solomon only discoursed of plants Ephesians. 3.9.) upon the knowledge
whereof did depend eternal life, John 17.3. And yet they would not receive, or
accept him.

Eighthly, she thought Solomon's servants, and

VERSE. 43, 44, 45. When the unclean Spirit is gone out of a man, he walks
through dry places, seeking rest, and finding none. Then he says, I will
return into my house from whence I came out: And when he is come, he finds
it empty, swept, and garnished Then goes he, and takes with himself seven
other spirits, more wicked then himself, and they enter in, and dwell there:
And the last state of that man is worse then the first. Even so shall it be
also with this wicked generation.
By this Parable, our blessed Savior would show, that destruction did hang
over the heads of the Jews: And why? because they had received the Law of God;
and although they thereby seemed to be altogether delivered from the power of
the Devil, who held all other nations captives, yet they would not observe,
nor obey the Law: After this (to add to the measure of their iniquity, and to
make it full) they reject the Gospel, which was brought, and offered unto them
by the Son of God himself, and impugn the known truths, delivered by him,
and commit blasphemy against the Holy Spirit; as our Savior had before
intimated, verse 31, 32. Now what was this? no other thing then wholly to
renounce Christ, and to dedicate, and consecrate themselves wholly unto the
Devil; even as though a man should deck, and trim up a house, that his enemy
might willingly, and perpetually dwell there: For thus do they, who having
known the truth; and by the knowledge thereof, having been delivered from the
hands of the Devil, do afterward willingly, wittingly, and of set purpose
oppose it, and renounce it for ever; and adhere, and cleave to the lies, and
delusions of Satan. And this is the plain, and direct meaning of our Savior
in this place. Melancton, s. 1 Corinthians, 10. folio 45. understands this
place of those, who being tempted by a diabolical temptation, are overcome
thereby, and sin securely, without any fear of God, and consequently out of
contempt; which sin elsewhere he calls, a sin against conscience.

VERSE. 46, 47. While he yet talked to the people, behold, his Mother, and his
brethren stood without, desiring to speak with him. Then one said unto him,
Behold, thy Mother, and thy brethren stand without, desiring to speak with
thee.
There was a sect, who sprung up in Arabia, and were called Antidicomarianitae;
that is, the Adversaries of Mary, who to extenuate, and eclipse the glory of
the blessed Virgin, held, that after the birth of Christ, she was carnally
known by Joseph her husband. This heresy is refuted by Epiphanius, Contra
Antidicomarianitas, haeres. 78.
by diverse reasons, taken from this place, and some other probable grounds; as
namely,

First, because the Epithete of Virgin is given unto her; and therefore she is
a Virgin.

Secondly, because from the tradition of the Jews, it is showed, that she was
not given unto Joseph, for carnal copulation, but for the avoiding of the
imputation of being dishonest, which she would have incurred, if she had
brought forth Christ, before she had been given in marriage unto any.

Thirdly, because Joseph married not Mary for any carnal respects (he being
above, or about fourscore years old, when he took her unto him) but rather
that he might keep, and preserve her, she being of his own family.

Fourthly, because it would scarce stand with the sanctity, and piety of
Joseph, to use such a holy vessel, after the dispensation of so deep, and
divine a mystery.

Fifthly, because none can be named, that Joseph begot of her, neither read
we of any children he had by her, either before his fleeing into Egypt, or
after his return, twelve years at least, we read, that Joseph lived with
Mary; but after Christ was twelve years old, no mention is made of him at all;
neither do the Evangelists say any more: That his Father and brethren came
unto him; but (as in this verse) Behold, thy Mother, and thy brethren stand
without.

Sixthly, if Mary had had either husband, or children, then Christ (when he
was upon the Cross) would not have recommended her to John: Tradita est autem
Iohanni propter virginitatem.

Seventhly, Christ is called a Lion, (and says Epiphanius) in the same sense
we call Mary a Lioness: But the Lioness brings forth but one at a birth, and
has but one birth, all her life [Iteratus partus leaenae non contingit:] and
therefore was never carnally known by Joseph.

Eighthly, marriage was forbidden to Prophets, and Prophetesses: But the
Blessed Virgin was a Prophetess: Ergo, she was not carnally known of her
husband. That Mary was a Prophetess, is intimated by the Type, Esaias 8. A
Prophet shall go in unto a Prophetess; that is, Gabriel unto Mary. So Philip
had four daughters, which were Prophetesses, and Virgins.

VERSE. 48. But he answered, and said unto him,
Apelles did grant, that Christ had a true body, Mary, but from heaven; and
thinks to prove it from this verse, wherein our Savior says; Who is my
Mother, or who are my brethren? To this tradition ( lib. 1. de carne Christi.
Contra Apellem. Arg. 2.) answers, that the matter of this speech pronounced, is
to be considered: For none would have showed unto him, that his Mother stood
without, who were uncertain, whether he had a Mother, or not. Neither can it
be said, that this was done to tempt him; for the Scripture expresses no such
thing; and it does usually, when any such thing is done. The nativity of Christ
was never disputed, or questioned; and therefore this could not be said (Thy
Mother is without) to tempt him: Therefore it is more credible, that by this
enunciation they tempted his divinity, to see whether he could tell, who were
without, or not. Now Christ here taxes the incredulity of his brethren; Et
Matter quoque ejus demonstratur non aeque adhaes^sse illi, ut Martha, and Mariae
aliae. And therefore he denies his Parents, and his brethren, as he teaches
us to do ours for Gods sake, and work.

VERSE. 50. For whosoever shall do the will of my Father, which is in heaven,
the same is my brother, sister, and mother.
Whosoever shall do the will of my Father, which is in heaven.

Qui in coelo, which is in heaven?

Philip. 3, 20. And while we live on earth, seek heaven, and heavenly things,
Colos. 3.1, 2. For he that would be a Citizen of that heavenly Jerusalem,
which is above, must live like a heavenly Citizen here on earth.



Pet. 1.14.17.

Thessal. 4.4.8.) or we are made partakers of a heavenly calling. Read Heb.
3.1. And therefore we should answer our calling, by a heavenly life.

Pet 1.4. And therefore we should show it by a Saint-like life.

Hebr. 11.15. and 2 Cor. 5.2.9. Hebr. 12.18.22.

Jerusalem, Romans 8.17. Now our preparation consists in these things; to wit,

I. In a patient bearing of the Cross, and suffering of afflictions.

II. In a true denial of our selves, and our own wills and ways.

III. In a courageous combating against sin, Satan, and the world, and our
own corruptions, 1 Pet. 2.11.
.

IV. In a constant course, and practice of religion, and religious actions unto
the end.

. 2. He is my brother, sister, and Mother.

In these words our Savior shows that we must prefer our spiritual
kindred; whence it may be demanded.

Whether did Christ himself,

As man he loved them best, Who are my brethren, and my kinsmen? Those who do
the will of my Father, which is in heaven, the same is my Brother, and Sister,
and Mother; where we see he respected those most, who drew nearest to him in
the Lord

CHAPTER XIII.
VERSE. 3. etc. And he spoke many things unto them in Parables, saying; B hol^,
a sower went forth to sow: And when he sowed, some seeds fell by the ways
side; and some fell upon stony places; and some fell among thorns; and some
fell into good ground.
He spoke unto them in Parables.



Mat. 7.6. Give not holy things to dogs.



Carthus. s. page 116 6.

Some fell by the ways side, some in stony places, some among the thorns, and
some in good ground.

Our Savior in this Parable shows, that both formal, and faithful
Professors hear the word; and that both bring forth some fruits thereof.

Hence a question, or two may be moved, viz.



First, they may have a certain understanding

II. We must beware of the great subtilty of Satan, who (like aswift, and
ravenous bird) steals the word out of unprepared hearts, or as thieves use to
take away whatsoever they find loose; or carelessly laid up.

Secondly, hypocrites, and carnal hearers, Psalm. 4.7. whereas the joy of the
godly is solid and sound, and far above that which the worldly man has in gold
and silver, Psalm. 119.33, 34. And II. the wickeds delight arises from a wrong
end and motive; as to satisfy some humorous desire; to know something more
then other, etc. whereas the joy of the godly, is to know further, to the end
they may practice more.

Thirdly, hypocrites may have some care to keep that they have heard, and yet
the thorns

Exodus 9.29.

Act. 24.25.

Sa. 24.17.

Herod did, Mark 6, 20.

Balaam did, Numb. 23.10. And all these only for fear of judgment. Whereas
the godly confess their sins, and are stricken with remorse, and sorrow for
them; because thereby they have offended a living God, and gracious Father, 2
Cor. 7.10. yea, they endeavor not to do some things, but all, which they are
commanded, ( Psalm 119.6.) desiring the salvation of their souls for this
end, that thereby they may glorify God, Philip. 1.20.



Paul) to be the greatest of sinners, and the least of the Apostles.

Paul, who was alive without the Law. Now the entire hearer fears himself,
and doubts the deceit of his own heart.

(Omnium horarum homo) James 1.8. But the righteous is constant, or if by
chance he be drawn unwillingly from his right course, like the Adamant, he
never rests until he come unto the North.

Matthew. 23.15. but the righteous man takes his heart to task, and labors to
cleanse that, Ierem. 4.14. And therefore if we desire to know, whether we are
formal, or faithful hearers, let us examine,

I. Whether we see more faults in others, or in our selves.

II. Whether we are full, and abounding with all things, or whether we be
poor, naked, or miserable?

III. Whether we be constant, or unconstant in the practice of Religion?

IV. Whether we are careful only to keep the outward man unblameable, or the
inward also.

VERSE. 8. But other seed fell into good ground, and brought forth fruit, some
an hundred fold, and some sixty fold, and some thirty fold.
Carthusian (s. page 118.) says, that they are virgins, who bring forth an
hundred fold; widows, who bring forth sixty fold, and married people, who
bring forth thirty fold: But he confesses, that this is not generally true of
persons, but rather of the states of virginity, widdow-hood, and matrimony; and
therefore I will not meddle with his exposition; especially, because it is
altogether unwarranted by Scripture, and only the fruit of a humane brain:
yea, because if the Scripture do compare one estate with another, it is not in
regard of the estate simply, but of the times and seasons: But principally I
pass by the refutation of this exposition, because it is fully answered by
Masculus, s. fol. 363. b. initio, etc. And by Amesius, Bellarm. enerv. tom. 2.
page 161.

Whether shall all the Saints have a like measure,

All shall not have an equal measure, Matthew. 5.18, and this verse, and 25.4.

Secondly, the Scripture teaches us, that those who instruct others, shall
excel others in glory, Daniel 12.3. And therefore all shall not be glorious,
in one and the same measure.

Thirdly, it is said, that the Apostles shall have a singular degree of glory,
Matthew. 19.28. And therefore some shall excel others in glory.

Fourthly, in hell there are diverse degrees of punishment, Matthew 11.22.
according to the quality of sins: And therefore in heaven shall be diverse
degrees of glory, according to the degree, and measure of grace.

Fifthly, it is said, Revelat. 14.13. Blessed are the dead, which die in the
Lord; for they rest from their labors, and their works follow them. Now, why
do their works follow them? Because they shall be judged, and rewarded
(although not for their works, yet, according to their works, Roman. 2.2.6.
And therefore, as there are degrees of grace, and diverse measures of obedience,
so shall there be degrees of glory.

Sixthly, in the world to come we shall be like unto the Angels. Matthew. 22.30.
But there are degrees of Angels, as shall be else where showed: Therefore also
degrees of glory in the Saints.

Seventhly, St. Paul testifies his assurance of a peculiar Crown which he
knows is laid up for him in Heaven. 1 Thessal. 2.18. By which is employed that
one degree of glory does not abide all.

Eighthly, these and the like places teach and confirm this truth, that there
are degrees of glory in Heaven. Matthew. 20.27, and 1 Corinthians. 15.14. and 2 Corinthians. 9.6. etc.

Ninthly, these degrees of glory shall be given, not for our merits, or the
dignity of our persons, or the worthiness of our works; but of grace,
according to our duties, obedience and sufferings, which God will graciously
reward.

Tenthly, the glory of all the Saints in heaven shall be perfect in its degree
(for every vessel shall be filled to the brimme, although some contain more
then others) There shall be no lack of glory to any of the Saints, but the
glory of all shall be full according to their capacity: yea all shall be
perfectly contented with their portion and measure.

VERSE. 11. He answered and said unto them, Because it is given unto you, to
know the mysteries of the kingdom of Heaven, but to them it is not given.
To you it is given, but not unto them.



First, from these places. John 14.19. etc. Acts 10.41. Matthew. 10.5, Luke 2.10.
Matthew. 17.1. and 26, 37. Mark 13.3.

Secondly, from the diverse ends and scopes which Christ has in revealing of
himself. For

I. His most general scope is, that the world might be left without excuse;
and that God might be justified in all his judgments. Romans 3.4. And hence a
command is given to preach to all nations. Matthew. 28.19. yea to every creature,
Mark. 16.15. And this command is obeyed. Romans 10.18.

II. His more particular scope was, to call the elect unto grace, and
salvation. John 17.6. Acts 2.47. and 13.48. Ephesians. 1.18.

III. His most special scope was, to fit and prepare for some private and
particular work: Thus more especially he reveals himself to his Apostles, in
regard of that singular work which he calls them unto.

To know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven.

it is given to the Apostles to know the Mysteries of the kingdom of Heaven;
but to others it is not given. And therefore those sacred Mysteries which are
laid down in the Scriptures, are to be communicated to Bishops and Priests
only, and not to the common people.



Revel. 1.1. and unto those that fear him. Psalm 25.14. And therefore the
reading of the Scriptures is not to be denied unto them.

We see here, that the Mysteries of the Gospel are revealed by Christ, to
teach us,

That Christ is prepared to give the knowledge of God unto all his servants.
Matthew. 11.27. Esa. 11.9. Ierem. 31.34. and 2 Cor. 4.6. and Colos. 1.25.26.

Why does Christ teach the Mysteries of the

First, because otherwise they could not be saved.

I. None can be saved without this knowledge. Psalm 95.8. John 17.3. Hos. 4.6.
Ephesians. 4.18. And

II. None can learn this knowledge, except it be taught him by Christ. Matthew.
11.25.

Secondly, because it is his office to teach us. John

How are we to be taught the Mysteries of the

There is a double knowledge of God;

First Natural. Romans 1.19.20. Psalm 19.1. Acts. 14.17. Now this knowledge is
sufficient to condemn the contempt of God already known ( Ierem. 5.24.) but
it is Insufficient for the embraceing of salvation by Christ. The natural
knowledge of God will condemn men, because they would not obey, fear, serve,
and love him, although they knew him: but it is not able to save them.

Secondly, Supernatural, and this knowledge is twofold, namely,

I. Extraordinary, and miraculous, Thus Paul was taught the knowledge of God.
Galath. 1.12. And

II. Ordinary; and this knowledge Christ teaches or works by a double
means. viz.

First, External; and this is the word, and the preaching thereof. Romans 1.16.
and 1 Cor. 1.18.21 Acts 8.35. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Esa. 11.9. Colos. 1.27. And
therefore the word is preached, that thereby men may be converted and turned
unto God. Acts 14.15. and 17.23. and 26.18.

Secondly, internal; and this is the Spirit. Ierem. 31.34. Hebr. 8.10. Now
thus Christ plainly and manifestly teaches us, to wit, by his Spirit. 1 Corinthians. 1.31. Ephesians. 4.21. And hence we pray that he would give us his Spirit,
that thereby we may be instructed in the Mysteries of the Gospel, and the
knowledge of our God. Read Psalm 51.11. and 143.10. Ephesians. 1.17. Colos. 1.9.
And therefore to the Question propounded, How we must be taught the knowledge
of God, I answer,

I. Not by nature, this knowledge not being able to save us. Neither

II. Miraculously, as Paul was; Miracles are now ceased; and therefore
miraculous enthusiasmes, and Revelations are not to be expected. But

III. Ordinarily, by the instruments and means ordained by God himself for
this end, and purpose: Now these means, as was said, are.

First, the word of God; For now he teaches us thereby. 2 Corinthians. 46. And
therefore unto this knowledge, the hearing of the word is necessary.



Psalm 119 9.105) To worship God of our own heads, or by the dictates of
nature, is sometimes idolatrous and at the best, but will worship: But the word
teaches us how to obey God both in regard of the matter, and manner of our
obedience.

Sermo Dei est fidelibus, ut pisci hamus; capit quando capitur. August. s.
John. As the fish is taken with the hook, when she takes the hook; so the
faithful are taken by the word, when they hear and receive it.

Si Christus est virtus and sapientia Dei; qui nescit sacras Scripturas, nescit
Dei virtutem and sapientiam. Hier. s. Esa. If Christ be the power, and virtue
and wisdom, of God; then they that know not the Scripture and Gospel of
Christ, are ignorant of the virtue, power, and wisdom of God. 1 Corinthians. 1.24.

Secondly, God works this knowledge in the hearts of the faithful, by his
holy Spirit. For Spiritus monet, movet, docet; Monet memoriam, movet
voluntatem, docet rationem. Greg. M^r. That is the Spirit admonishes, and
moves, and teaches: he admonishes the memory, he moves the will, and he
teaches the reason.





First, in Doctoribus: in the speakers, and Preachers of his word. Matthew.
10.20. For

I. He makes men Ministers. Spiritus sanctus implet pastorem armentarium, and
facit Prophetam; implet Piscatorem, and facit Apostolum: implet persequntorem
and facit doctorem gentium: implet publicanum and facit Evangelistam. Gregor.
s. Ezech. The Holy Ghost can inspire Amos, and of an heardman make him a
Prophet; he can inspire Peter, and of a Fisher make him an Apostle: he can
inspire Paul, and of a Persecutor make him the Preacher of the Gentiles; yea he
can make Matthew of a Publicane an Evangelist: For it is he only that calls men
truly unto the work of the Ministry.

II. He makes them able to speak: The Book which God gave Ezechiel to eat,
was in the mouth of the Prophet as sweet as honey. Ezech 3.3. Dulcis in ore,
quia ipsi de omnipotente Deo, sciunt suaviter loqui. Greg. s. Ezech. hom. 7.
The Book was sweet in his mouth, because he knew, how to speak sweetly of God
Almighty. And thus as the Holy Spirit makes them Ministers, so he also makes
them able Ministers.

III. He directs them, and teaches them to speak unto their hearers those
things that are fit, pregnant, and profitable for them. Saepe Deus verbum
Doctori tribuit, pro gratia Auditoris: alias pro Auditoris culpa sermo
subtrahitur Doctori. Greg. Past. oftentimes the Lord out of his love and mercy
unto the people* enables the Ministers to speak profitable and seasonable words
unto them: And on the other side, the Lord sometimes for the sins of the
hearers, takes away the Ministers, or the word from them. Cum verbi auditores
esuriunt, pro eis reficiendis majora Doctoribus dona tribuuntur. Greg. Past.
When hearers hunger after the word, then the Lord (for the refreshing,
comforting, and satisfying of them) does give more Talents, and greater gifts
unto the Preachers: But when people grow cold in their hearing, or in their
desires to hear, or in their love unto the word; then God often lessens the
gifts of the Ministers, or else takes away his painful laborers, sending
Loiterers amongst them.

IV. He blesses their labors, and gives an increase to their endeavors, 1
Cor. 3.6. Pedes quatuor bestiarum (Evangelistarum, Ezekiel. 1.7.) ut scintillans
aes; aes candens est Praedicatio, and inde scintillae prodeunt, quia ardent
desyderio, and sonant verbo: and corda quae scintillae tetigerunt incendunt.
Greg. s. Ezech. hom. 3. The Ministers of the Word (according to the
Commandment of the Lord) preach to their flocks, and the Spirit of the Lord by
their preaching, does oftentimes inflame their hearts, and kindle their
affections, and fill their souls with sanctified desires, and turn them truly
unto himself. And thus we see, how the holy Ghost works, and teaches in the
Preachers of the Word; he both making them M nisters, and also able Ministers,
he both directing them what to speak, and also blessing what they speak.

Secondly, In Auditoribus, the holy Spirit teaches in the hearers as well as
speakers: for he makes their hearts often burn within them, when they hear, as
Luke 34.32. Otiosus est sermo Doctoris, nisi Spiritus sanctus adsit cordi
audientis. Greg. s. Evang. hom. 30. In vain does the Preacher speak unto the
ears of the Auditors, except the Spirit speak unto the heart, Nisi Spiritus
sanctus auditorum corda repleat, vox doctorum ad aures corporis incassum sonat:
nam formare vocem exterius possunt, sed interius imprimere non val^nt. Greg.
Mor. lib. 27. Now although preaching be unprofitable without the Spirit, yet
seldom does the holy Ghost fall upon any, or come unto any, but in the
preaching of the word: when Peter preached, then many were pricked in their
hearts, Acts 2.37. yea, then the holy Ghost fell upon many, Acts 10.44. And in
preaching, Lydia had her heart opened, Acts 16.14.

What is here required of Hearers?

First, they must pray, when they come unto

I. For themselves, that the Lord would be pleased so to assist them by his
Spirit, that they may learn Christ in the Ministry of the Word; yea, that he
would give his holy Spirit unto them, and fill them with the graces thereof:
this was David's prayer for himself, Psalm. 143.10. and Paul's for the Ephesians,
chap. 3. v. 18, 19. and for the Colossians, chap. 1. v. 9. Nulla in discrudo
mora est, ubi Spiritus sanctus Doctor adest. Beda. s. Luc. hom. 9. If the holy
Ghost be our Schoolmaster, then we shall not be Trewants, but good
proficients, and at Scholars. And therefore let us beg at Gods hands, the
Spirit of Revelation, Ephesians. 1.17, etc. that so we may go away from the Word
always bettered; Pray with Augustine (in one of his Epistles) Sanctum opus
semper inspira in me, ut cogitem, compelle ut faciam; suade ut diligam;
confirma me, ut te teneam; custodi me, ne te perdam. Sanctify thou, O Lord, so
my heart, that I may always think that which is good: strengthen thou so my
hands, that I may always do that which is good: persuade thou so my
affections, that I may above all things love thee the chiefest good: establish
thou me so in faith, that I may hold thee fast: and so keep me by thy Spirit,
that I may never lose thee.

II. Hearers must pray for the Preachers of the Word, that speech, and
utterance may be given unto them, Ephesians. 6.19. that the door of the Word may be
wide open unto them, Colos. 4.3. That they may be permitted and enabled to
speak the Word freely, 2 These. 3.1. yea that they may so speak, that their Word
may become blessed unto their Auditors, Romans 15.29, 30. And hence came that
religious custom still practiced by our Church, to have Prayers; and that both

First, before Sermons, that the blessed Spirit would be graciously assistant,
and present, both with speakers and hearers. And also

Secondly, after Sermons, that the same good Spirit would confirm what has
been spoken, and establish, and imprint it in the souls of the Hearers.

Rev. 2.7. Acts 10.33. Certainly here there is a most lamentable neglect,
ordinarily amongst Hearers, and little or no fruit can be expected of their
hearing, so long as that remains. Hearers are wont

I. To hear, for fashion sake only: and not for the feeding of their souls. Yea

II. To absent themselves, or keep themselves from the Word, for the least
cause, or upon the smallest occasion that may be. Yea

III. To hear with prejudice, or prejudicate opinions, or imprudent censures:
for some hearers deride, some tax and reprove the rudeness, or plainness of
the speaker: that he neither shows Eloquence nor Learning in his Sermons. When
this is amended, either by him, or by some other; that is, if we hear learned,
elaborate, and eloquent pieces, then we praise the eloquence, learning, wit,
and quickness of the speaker; in all things seeing, and judging man, and not
God: And so long as we look only upon man, in the preaching of the Word, so
long we cannot expect the assistance of the blessed Spirit i^ ^he Word: yea,
the more we look upon man, the less we look for the holy Ghost. And therefore
in the hearing of the Word, let us withdraw our ears, and eyes, and minds from
men, and look wholly up unto the Lord; remembering that they who preach, are his
Messengers, and that which they preach, is his message, and the word preached,
is made profitable only by him: that so we may desire assistance in hearing,
and expect a blessing upon our hearing, only from him, and return all glory,
honor, and praise unto him alone.

How may we know whether Christ have taught

First, certainly he that is uncertain of this,

Secondly, but because many dream that they Signs of the knowledge of God.
whereby this may be known; and principally such as serve for the convincing of
those, who falsely presume that they know God, when indeed they are ignorant of
the knowledge of him.

First, if our hearts be inflamed with a desire Ignoti nulla cupido, a man
cannot fervently desire what he knows not. Here observe that this desire is
twofold; namely,

I. Inchoate, and begun; and this is an earnest desire to know God, 1 John
5.20. For God is wont

First, to inflame and kindle the desire. And then

Secondly, to communicate light: we first cry, Draw me, O Lord, and then I will
run after thee, Cant. 1.3. And by and by the Lord in mercy reveals himself
unto us. Wherefore, we should here examine, whether this desire of the Lord be
in us, or not? do we make the knowledge and fruition of God, that one thing,
which we desire before all other things? Psalm. 27.4. do we long for him, as the
Heart does for water? Psalm. 42.1. or the thirsty earth for rain? Psalm. 63.1.
Certainly then we may be assured, that God has begun this heavenly knowledge
in us, and Christ is now about more fully and clearly to reveal unto us the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven.

II. There is a permanent, and continuing desire: which lasts until the desire
be accomplished, that is, when we do not hunger after the knowledge of God, or
desire to enjoy him, out of some sudden flash, but out of a solid, and serious
affection; and therefore cry earnestly for him, and seek diligently after him,
and continue therein until he has been pleased to come, and reveal himself
unto us. A loving wife desires always the presence, and society of her
husband, and could wish that he were always at home: so must we continually
desire to be present with the Lord, and never be at peace, so long as we are
absent from him: for this permanent, and continued desire of the Lord, is an
excellent sign of some true knowledge of him.

Ioh. 4.14. and 6.35. and Rev. 7.16. And therefore this earnest longing after
God cannot stand with these promises, nor become the faithful.

Esa. 47.9. Thren. 1.1. Or like one who is ready to pe^ish through thirst, as
Sampson was, Judge. 15.18. For unto the faithful shall be given grace, which
shall be as a living spring, Ioh. 4.14. yea as flowing streams, Ioh. 7.38. and
not like a dry well. But yet

Crescit amor nummi, quantum ipsa pecunia crescit.
Though Dives store of money have,
Yet naught but money he does crave.
For as his wealth does daily grow,
Even so his love does thereunto.


The more grace a Saint has, the more he desires, for nothing is so good for
him as that: The more full sight and knowledge a man has of God, the more
greedy he is of a little more. If God be pleased to talk with Moses, the
servant is then so delighted therewith, that he desires further to see his
face. If it be a thing so full of sweetness (thinks Moses) to hear of the
Lord, or to hear the Lord with the ear, then it must needs be a transcendent
felicity, to see him with the eye; and therefore, O Lord, let me see thy face.
They that once have been made partakers of the bread and water of life, cry, O
Lord, give us evermore of this bread, (Job. 6.34.) and this water, Ioh. 4. He
that is delighted with Music, desires it again and again; and he that is taken
with the pleasantness of wine, drinks often unto drunkenness. Certainly the
Apostle had an eye unto this, when he said, Be not drunken with wine, but be
filled with the Holy Ghost. Ephesians. 5.18. Intimating, that those who have once a
true taste of heavenly gifts, will desire a greater measure, and degree of them.
The Spouse is sometimes absent, and then the Church mournes. Cantic. 3.2 and
5.6. Not because she is uncertain whether she have a husband or not, or
because she doubts of his love; but because she is sick of love, Cantic. 5.8.
and therefore would perpetually enjoy his presence. And therefore let us
seriously prove and examine our selves by this desire of God, which is the
first sign and token of his knowledge.

Secondly, examine whether we can cry truly Abba Father, Galath. 4.6. For none
can be assured that God is their Father, without some measure of true knowledge.

Thirdly, try whether we unfainedly contemn Colos. 3.1, 2. Indeed this is not
an easy thing to do; for many say, they care not for the world, when indeed
all their care is for it, all their delight in it; Undoubtedly, he that does
indeed despise the world, and weane his affections from it, does thereby show
that he looks for another world, wherein dwells righteousness, and in which a
Crown of glory is reserved for him: and consequently has some true knowledge
of the ever living Lord, and of the Mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven.

Fourthly, we must prove, and see whether we Corinth. 10.5. and 1 Cor. 14.25.
Spiritus sanctus in columba and igne; quia igne zeli ardentes, and columbae
simplicitate mansuetos efficit. Greg. hom. The Holy Ghost descended in the
likeness of a Dove, and in fire: because he makes the faithful to burn with
the Fire of zeal, and to be meek, and dove-like innocent: For when once
Religion, and the knowledge of God enter into the soul, then all our
Peacocke-plumes fall, and we begin to humble our selves before the Lord, as
Holy Job did 42.6. yea the more our knowledge of God is, the more base, and
vile are we in our own eyes.

Fifthly, examine whether we labor and endeavor Corinth. 3.18. And that two
manner of ways, to wit.

I. In the practice of holiness: do we labor to keep his commandments? (1
John 2.3) do we labor to eschew whatsoever is evil, and to do whatsoever is
good? 1 John 3.6. and 1 Peter 2.9. and 2 Peter 1.3. yea do we labor to
increase in all heavenly hnowledge? Colos. 1.10.

II. In spiritual worship do we labor to worship and serve the Lord in
spirit? John 4.24. yea within to be filled with the fullness of God? Ephesians.
3.19. yea are we through a zeal to Gods glory moved to serve and obey him?
Then certainly we may be assured that Christ by his word and Spirit has begun
in part to reveal unto us the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven.

VERSE. 13, 14. Therefore speak I to them in Parables: because they seeing see
not: and hearin^ ^hey hear not, neither do they understand. And in the^ is
fulfilled the Prophecy of Esaias, which says, By hearing ye shall hear, but
not understand, and seeing, ye shall see, and not perceive.
Three things are ordinarily objected from these verses, which I will but
briefly touch; namely,









I. By a denial of light unto them. And,

II. By a forsaking, and leaving of them in their blindness. And,

III. By giving them over to the power of Satan, and their own desires.



Pareus, s. fol. 733.

VERSE. 19. When any one hears the word of the Kingdom, and understands it
not, then comes the wicked one, and catches away that, which was sown in
his heart; this is he which received seed by the high way side.
The wicked one, is called verse 4. The fowls of the air; when it may be
demanded, why the Devils are called the fowls of the air?





Charthus. s. page 117. a.

VERSE. 20, 21. But he that received the seed into stony places, the same is
he that hears the word, and anon with joy receives it: yet has he not root
in himself, but dureth for a while: For when tribulation, or persecution,
arises, because of the word, by and by he is offended.
Our Savior here intimates five properties in the stony ground; namely,

First, (...), he is a hearer of the Word of God.

Secondly, (...), he is a receiver of the Word which is heard.

Thirdly, (...), he receives it forthwith, as soon as he has heard it.

Fourthly, (...), he hears, and receives it with joy.

Fifthly, (...), yet for all this, he is but a server of the time; applying his
Religion and Conscience, to the present condition of things.

VERSE. 24.25. Another Parable put he forth unto them, saying, The Kingdom of
Heaven is likened unto a man, which sowed good seed in his field: But while men
slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the whe^t and went his way.
. 1. Which sowed good Seed.

What is meant by this Seed?

The word of God: verse 19. and Mark. 4.14. and Luke 8.11.

Against this answer, it will be objected, verse 38. The good seed are the
Children of the Kingdom.

By Seed, verse 38. is meant not the seed' sown (as in this verse) but the Corn
or stalk which springs up: So that in this verse by Seed is meant the root, and
in the 38 verse the fruit; for the Children of the Kingdom are begotten by the
Seed of the word.

In this Section we have two things to consider of, namely,

I. That the word of God is a Seed.

II. That the word is a good Seed.

First, the word of God is a Seed: and so called Seed; or we must so hear the
word, that we may fructify and grow up thereby. Luke 13.19.21. and 1 Peter
2.2. And the reason hereof is, because God gives his Talents; and word, and
Spirit, and all for this end that we may profit thereby. 2 Corinthians. 12.7.

How many things are observable in Seed?

Seed has these two properties, viz. First, to increase and fructify, one
grain Acts 2.41. and 4.4. Or by this increase may [and is properly meant,] the
diverse measure of obedience and degrees of grace in diverse hearers of the word
of God. Secondly, to be altered in form; Seed, it comes to have a new body,
wherein there is, I. Life, this is illumination and knowledge. II. A root from
whence the fruit springs; this is conscience or love toward God. III. An care,
filled full with good Corn: this is the life and conversation, which is
replenished with the good works of righteousness and holiness; now as one
Ear has often more Corn in it then another, so one Child of God brings
forth more Religious fruits frequently then another. IV. A stalk, and this is
constancy, and strength, and industry, in the work of the Lord.


Seed the word?



I. Because, we make conscience of the committing of the one, and the omitting
of the other,

II. Because we know that God is honored by the one, but dishonored by the
other.

III. Because we know that the Lord loves the one, and hates the other; and
therefore because we love him above all things, we desire to do that which is
pleasing and eschew that which is displeasing unto his Sacred Majesty.



Seed.

Seed, but a good Seed also; so and called (...) to teach us: That there is no
true, good, and profitable Seed, save only the word of God. Or the only
profitable Seed to beget us is the Gospel Iam. 1.18. and 1 Peter 1.23.

Seed?



I. Spiritual life; for we are begotten thereby. Iam. 1.18. and 1 Peter 1.23.

II. Food: for we are fed thereby. 1 Peter 1.2.

III. Light: For thereby we are directed in our spiritual walking. Psalm
119.105.

IV. Weapons and armor; for therewith do we defend our selves, and offend
our enemies, Ephesians. 6.17.

V. Comfort; for by the promises of the word, our hearts are cheered under
affliction. Romans 15.4.

VI. Life eternal; for that is the means to bring us thereunto. Acts 28.28.
Romans 1.16. and 1 Cor. 1.18.12.

Secondly, because all other things besides the Seeds: for they are either

I. Fruitful unto evil; and these Seeds are either,

First, intern^ll; as suggestions, imaginations, thoughts, affections, and the
like, Or

Secondly, external; as occasions unto evil, and the persuasions, and
temptations of others. Or

II. Unfruitful unto good; as vain Philosophy, and carnal wisdom: for
these rather lead men into error then truth. And therefore we must carefully
beware of a double Seed, namely.

First, unprofitable Seeds, for what has the chafe to do with the Wheat?
Ierem. 23.28. yea the word must be spoken as becomes the Oracles of God. 1.
Peter 4.11. Indeed, Natural Philosophy does explicate, and makes a thing more
lively unto us; Moral Philosophy does persuade us: Histories approve the truth
of the word: Examples move us; and the Fathers does show how they assent unto
us: Now if the word be the Queen, at whose beck all these are obedient, and
upon whom (as handmaids) they attend; we may then use them, and embrace them,
but we must never make Mistresses of them.

Secondly, we must take heed of evil Seeds: now these are either,

I. Internal, namely the love of sin, and our own wills: for from these
seeds comes no good fruit, but much evil, they being fruitful seeds of
impiety. Or,

II. External; namely,

First, the erroneous opinions of others; as in Usury.

Secondly, the custom of the world in that, and in lying.

Thirdly, the persuasions, and temptations of our companions and friends.

Fourthly, our own pleasure, riches, and honor. All these are evil seeds,
and therefore to be avoided; the word of God is a good seed; and therefore to
be embraced.

. 2. In the field.

What is meant by this field?

The field signifies the Church of Christ;

That the Church of Christ is generally dispersed

How does this clearly appear?

First, it is clear from the testimonies of Scripture, Matthew. 28, 29. Mark
16.15. Act. 10.34.

Secondly, it is manifest from the phrases attributed,

I. (...), Strangers and Pilgrims, Hebr. 11.13. and 1 Pet. 1.1. They are called,

II. (...), Scattered, or dispersed people, 1 Pet. 1.1. and James 1.1. yea, the
Church is called,

III. Catholic; for as,

First, the name Militant, does distinguish it from other universal Churches;
to wit,

I. From the Triumphant Church of the Saints in heaven.

II. From the Malignant Church of the wicked on earth. Even so,

Secondly, the name Catholic does distinguish the Church of Christ, both,

I. From the Judicial Church; that being but a Garden, this of ours being a
field: the Church of the Jews being but Particular, this of ours being
Universal, Read Romans 10.11. etc. Gal 3.27. and 1 Cor. 12.13.
. And also,

II. From particular National Churches; these being only members of the
Catholic Church, and are called Churches; (as Agellus dicitur Ager) every
little close, or enclosure may be called a field.



Orbis major urbe (as Augustine said) that is, The whole world is bigger and
larger, then the greatest City in the world: Faith is of things not seen,
Fides, quod non vides: And therefore in the Apostles Creed, we say; that we
believe, that there is a Catholic Church, because we cannot see it: Opus est
oculis Angelicis non carneis: he that would see the Universal Church, must
have the eyes of Angels, not of men. For Nec Deus videtur, nec Ecclesia,
neither can God be seen with bodily eyes, nor the Church of God, as Ruffinus
says.



Britannia to Virginia; and yet not depart from the Church of Christ; because
that is Catholic, and Universal: Coelum non animum mutat.



These. 2.11. And thus the Church of Rome has fallen from the pure Church of
Christ, forsaking the wholesome truth, and sound doctrine of the sacred
Scriptures, and taking heed unto fables.

The Husbandman sowes wheat in the field, that is not in the corners, or in
some parts only thereof, but in all the parts of the field: To teach us;

Col. 3.16. But of this we have to speak elsewher and therefore here I omit
it.

. 3. While men slept.

We see here in general, that Tares are sown presently after the word, and
good Seed: To

That the Gospel being once preached in any Wheat in the day, and then Tares in
the night, does teach us; that truth may challenge prioritie of error,
yielding principality unto truth, (says Tertullian) and posterioritie unto
lying. And so it must needs be, because as there must be, first iron, before
there can be rust, which cankereth the iron; so must there be a Virgin-truth,
before error, which is nothing else, but an adulteration thereof. So that
Primum, and Verum; that is, primarie antiquity, and truth are both inseparable
twins, begot and bred in the same instant; yet as the first seduction of
mankind, did shortly follow the integrity of his first creation; so sometimes
the difference between error and truth, in respect of time, has been no
more, then as wheat in the day, and tares in the same night. BP. Mort. Appeal.
page 511. lib. 4. Cap. 16. 4.

Now more particularly we see, that Tares

How many ways are men said to sleep?

To this Vincentius (sermon. hyem. dominica 4. post octa. Epipha. page 289. fine
and 291. media, etc.) answer,

That men are said to sleep three manner of ways; to wit,

First, Per ignorantium intellectualem; when men are so stupid, and dull, that
they cannot understand, and take up what is spoken, we say that they are
asleep.

Secondly, Per negligentiam spiritualem, when men are neglig^nt, remiss,
careless, or lukewarm in that which they do, we say they are asleep; that
is, when they go about spiritual duties, and the exercises of Religion
heedlesly, minding some other thing, more then that they are about.

Thirdly, Per abundantiam criminalem, when men sleep in their sins, and are
so overwhelmed with the deluge of their iniquities, that they are no more
sensible of their danger, or dangerous condition, then a man asleep upon the
Mast of a ship is. Now sleep in this place does signify, that they did not
perceive, when the Tares first began, or they were not aware of the first
sowing of them: Whence we learn,

That heresies creep secretly, obscurely, and Jonas his gourd, who grows up
suddenly, and at once to his height; but by degrees, and a change scarce
sensible.

Who are here to be blamed?

The Church of Rome, who commands us to show, when their heresies begun? what
year, what month, what day, or by what particular person? This is their
common brag, and over worn clamor, as we may see in Campian (rat. red.
Academicis.) and after him, the rule of faith. Kellison, and diverse more. To
whom we answer,

First, that we know not precisely the time of the first feeding of some
errors: only this we know, that the husbandmen, not regarding the Seed
(because it seemed little, and of no danger) neglected it as men asleep;
neither could it be discerned, until it did appear in a blade.

Secondly, the Apostle likewise has resembled corrupt, and erroneous speeches
unto a creeping Canker, 2 Timothy 2.17. which is a disease in man's body, gathering
upon a man, by little and little, from joint to joint, until it have corrupted
the vital parts, BP Mort. App. page 509.

Thirdly, there is a fourfold Sleep: namely,

I. Conniventiae, of connivence; when men wink at things, lest they should
disturb the peace of the Church. Sic Ecclesia tenet Origenem pium, licet
Scripta venenata (Hier) Thus the Church held Origin to be a good man, although
many of his writings were stained with gross errors; and Tertullian, and
Cyprian, to be holy, although they were Montanists; and Iustine, and Irenaeus,
to be worthy to be placed in the Beadroule of Saints, although they were
Chiliastes; and Augustine has the addition of Saint; although he seemed to
grant a Purgatory. Thus for the peace of the Church, winking at the faults of
such famous Fathers.

II. Negligentiae, of negligence, and thus through the remissness of
Governors errors have often crept into the Church.

III. Ignorantiae, of ignorance, when the Priests lips do not preserve
knowledge, Malach. 2.7.

IV. Avaritiae and superbiae, of pride and avarice, when men are so transported
with these, that they will neither see nor hear any thing which is opposite
unto these. And thus errors have crept into the Church, sometimes through the
affection of the people to the broachers of the errors; sometimes through the
negligence, sometimes through the ignorance, sometimes through the pride and
Avarice of the Prelates and Doctors of the Church.

Fourthly, I could name the beginning of some Popish heresies, and so stop the
mouths of those loud Cryers: And I will but only name one or two; namely,

I. The primacy of the Pope, was not confirmed, concluded, or proclaimed to the
world, before Phocas and Bonifaces time.

II. The worshipping of Images was condemned in the Nicene Council.

III. The Cup in the Lords Supper was never taken away from the people till the
Council of Constance. But because this is amply handled by Bishop Jewel, I
pass it by.



Satan can transform himself into an Angel of light: and therefore they
must watch di^igently over their flocks, and be careful for them. Galath.
4.19. And because the word is the good Seed, they must therefore preach in
season, and out of season. 2 Timothy 4.2. Heb. 13.17.

Secondly all must be wary, least corruptions

. 4. Sowed tares.

The enemy came and sowed (...), this should not be translated Tares or
Fitches, but evil Seed, for (...) is that which we call blasted Corn, or the
deaf Ears, which grow up with the good Corn, and cannot be discerned from
the good Corn until the harvest: and then it proves naught: for Fitches and
Tares may be presently discerned, and pulled up; the one signifies the
Hypocrites, and the other the Heretics. And where it is said, His enemy came
and sowed Tares, the parable must be understood thus, that the enemy corrupted
that Seed which seemed to be good Seed. Weeme se Exeroit Divine. lib. 1. page
139.

VERSE. 27, 28, 29, 30. So the Servants of the householder came, and said unto
him, Sir, did not thou sow good Seed in thy field? from whence then has it
Tares? He said unto them, an enemy has done this. The Servants said unto him,
Will thou then that we go and gather them up? But he said, nay: least while
ye gather up the Tares, yea root up also the Wheat with them. Let both grow
together until the Harvest, and in the time of Harvest I will say to the
reapers, Gather ye together first the Tares, and bind them in bundles to burn
them; but gather the Wheat into my Barn.
. 1. From whence then has it Tares?

Our Savior here shows the Servants care,

Wherein does this watchfullnesse consist?

First, in a daily watchful visiting of their fields

Secondly, their watchfullnesse consists in a rejoicing

Thirdly, the care of a Minister consists in a sorrow for the springing up of
Tares. These servants Tares amongst the Corn: Thus faithful Ministers when
they see errors, heresies, hypocrisy, and formality in Religion, to begin
to spring, and spread it self among their flocks; they must seek unto God,
and do all what lies in their power to redress it.





Hebr. 13.17.



These. 3.8.



Antecedent, because the field does not signify the Church, but the world,
verse 38.

Captio ab homonymia Ecclesiae: there is an ambiguity in this word Church,
which may signify either the outward visible, or inward spiritual, and
invisible Church.





The Papists, with one consent hold that the Church of Christ is a visible
society or company which can never fail: or that it is impossible that the
Church of Christ in the earth should so fail, that we could not see it: seeing
that it has promises that it shall be always unto the end so palpably
visible, that a man may point at it with the singer, and say. The Church of
Christ is there, or in such, or such a place. Now they prove it from this
place, wherein we see, that both Wheat and Tares are found in one and the same
field; and that they must both so remain until the time of the Harvest, that
is the consummation of the world; And therefore unto the worlds end this field
shall be visible.

Now the Protestants they grant

First, in the Church there shall be always both good and bad; that is,
wheresoever there is a visible Church or company of professors on earth; there
shall be some bad commixed with the good.

Secondly, some visible Churches or congregations may endure to the end of the
world; but not in the same outward beauty and splendour, but sometimes in the
wax, sometimes in the waine;

Thirdly, the purity of Religion, and the true Church shall always remain in
the foundation of salvation: but not in the whole outward glorious Ministry,
as the Papi^ts would have it.

Fourthly, this place does not at all prove, that the Church shall be always
visible so, as Bellarmin^ would have it, namely, that it shall be always
visible in a visible head, the Pope of Rome, always conspicuous in the
Prelates of the Church, and always endued with outward splendour and pomp: For
it will be hard for the Jesuit to pick these out of this Parable. Alsteed. de
nature. eccles. fol. 158.

. 2. But he said nay: lest while ye gather up the

Why does the householder forbid his servants Tares, and command them to suffer
them to increase?

First, lest in gathering up them, they should

Secondly, because he himself hereafter will Tares in his due time, and cast
them into the Fire, where we see that although wicked men escape man's hand, yet
they shall not escape Gods: or although God himself spare them for a time, yet
he will not spare them always, but punish them at the last.

Thirdly, because the Tares hinder not the

. 3. Suffer them to grow until the Harvest.

If the understanding Reader desire to see, how this Section is truly to be
understood; and how also it is abused by some, who labor from hence to
overthrow all political and Ecclesiastical Discipline, and how their
exceptions are fully answered: let him Read Pareus, s. fol 725. b. calce etc.
and Chemnit harm. page 863. 864. and Scultetus Idea Concionis, page 143. 144.
145. For the English Reader I refer him to Doctor Mayer s. f. 189, 190, 191.

VERSE 34. Verse. 34
All these things spoke Jesus unto the multitude in Parables, and without a
Parable spoke he not unto them.


Augustine (qu. Evang.) answers, that although some things were at sometimes
spoken plainly, yet at no time did he speak so plainly, but something therein
was parabolicall.

Chrysostom. qu. 3.

Some condemn too much knowledge, and prefer ignorance before it, setting up
Trophies thereunto: but this is not answerable to the precepts and practice of
Christ and his Apostles: for S. Paul makes the Gospel known unto the
Corinthians, 1 Corinthians. 15.1. It being a light not to be hid under a Bushel,
but to be held forth, and declared unto all: yea Christ, we see, taught
openly in the Temple, never secretly. John 18.20. And commands his Apostles to
go and preach unto all nations, Matthew. 28.19. And hence Paul says, that the
word of salvation is sent to all that fear God. Acts 13.26. Now against this
the Papist object this place, That Christ spoke unto the common sort, or people
in parables and without a Parable spoke he not unto them.

Augustine above, I might answer that in many things which he taught, although
something was difficult, yet there was something easy.

all these things spoke Jesus unto the multitude in Parables: and without a
Parable spoke he not unto them; that is, at that particular time: for at other
times we see, he teaches them plainly without Parables, as Luke 4. But
principally in his Sermon upon the mount. Matthew. 5, 6, 7.



Matthew. 10.17. And therefore Christ's preaching in Parables is no plea for the
excuse of ignorance.

VERSE. 35. I will utter things which have been kept secret from the foundation
of the world.
Concerning Secrets a question or two here may be made: namely,

What is meant by this word Secret in Scripture?

First, sometimes it signifies the Temple or Ezech. 7.22.

Secondly, sometimes it signifies a Tabernacle, Psalm 27.5. and 31.20. and 91.1.

Thirdly, sometimes it signifies Prophesies,

Fourthly, sometimes it signifies the divine will

Fifthly, sometimes it signifies the secret will,

Sixthly, sometimes it signifies humane counsels; or

Who reveals Secrets?

The Lord, Job. 11.6. Eccles. 10.20. Daniel 2.19.

To whom does the Lord reveal his Secrets?

First to his Prophets in particular. Amos

Secondly, to all his Servants (that is the righteous) Psalm 25.14. Prove. 3.32.
Esa. 45.3. Matthew. 13.11, John 15.15. Examples whereof we have in these places.
18.17. and 41.39. Numb. 12.8. Daniel 2.19. and 5.11.

What is required of us in regard of humane Secrets?

First, a man must not rashly communicate or Prove. 25 9.

Secondly, he unto whom a Secret is discovered, Proverb 11.13

Who reveal Secrets?

First, they are revealed by wicked men. Proverbs

Secondly, Secrets are discovered by fools. Eccle.

VERSE. 43. Then shall the righteous shine forth a^ the Sun, in the Kingdom
of their Father, who has Ears to hear, let him hear.
. 1. Then shall the righteous shine forth, as the

We affirmed before verse 8. that there were diverse degrees of glory in
heaven: now against this, this ver. is objected, thou the Righteous shall shine
in Heaven as the Sun;

This is a fallacy A dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter: because in
this place our Savior only teaches, that the glory of the faithful hereafter
shall be great; therefore simply there shall be no degrees of glory, follows
not.

. 2. He that has Ears to hear.

This seems to be a Synonimum, but it is not, for to hear signifies something
more then Ears, and the meaning is: He that has Ears prepared to hear, let
him hear. Whence observe,

Acts 16.14.



I^ appears clearly thus, namely, I. By disturbing and rowsing the carnal
peace of the heart: as Acts 2.37. For when men once feel themselves to be
sick, then they seek to the Physician. And II. By giving a taste of the
sweetness of the word. Ierem. 15.16. Secondly, because by nature we are deaf,
as was showed before. Chapt. 11.5. 4. of our selves we can understand, and take
up nothing, and therefore the Lord helps us; and that I. By opening the heart,
as he did the heart of Lydia. Acts 16.14. And II. By giving a clear
understanding, Colossians 3.16. And thus the Lord awakens our hearts by his
word; then makes us to feel some sweetness in the word; then opens our
hearts, and enables us to receive, and embrace the word; And lastly, teaches
us so to understand it, that we gain, and reap spiritual profit thereby,
and are edified and built up therewith more and more, both in faith, and
obedience: And therefore without him we cannot hear profitably.














viz.

I. That we may perfectly know the state, and condition wherein we are. And,

II. That we may learn by certain signs, whether grace live in us, and how
grace increases in us.

Whence comes it, that there are so many hearers, who are neither changed, nor
benefited, nor edified by the word?

Certainly, it proceeds from hence,

First, without meditation before we come unto the house of God, we can have
no true reverence; neither conceive of the word, as the word of God, and
injunctions, and counsel given unto us from him.

Secondly, without preparation, there can be no endeavor to profit, by that
which we hear, nor labor to digest it, and imprint it strongly in our
memories.

Thirdly, without prayer, there can be no hope of the cooperation of the Holy
Spirit, (without whose assistance we can do nothing) because we do not
awake, and stir him up, 2 Timothy 1.6. yea, we are unworthy of his aid, if we
will not beg it; for by a neglect of prayer, we seem to think that he is
not worth asking for. And,

Fourth. for such a contempt, and neglect, God is incensed; and in his just
anger, hardens such a hearer more and more; making the word a means to harden,
and not to soften him.

. 3. Let him hear,

Why does not our Savior say, Let him believe, or let him devote himself
wholly up unto the Lord; but only let him hear?

Because hearing is the means unto these,

That reverend, and religious hearing, Deuteronomy. 32.2. Prove. 1.5. Psalm. 34.11. and
45.10. Examples hereof we have in the Samaritanes, Act 8.8. and in the Eunuch,
Act. 8.38. And in Cornelius, and his friends, and family, Act. 10.34. and in
others, 1 Cor. 15.1.

How does it appear that grace comes by

It appears most evidently by these two Particulars; namely, First, the Gospel
is the means of grace. Romans 10.8. and 1. Pet. 1.25. and Romans 1.16. the Gospel
is called the power of God unto salvation; which is expounded of preaching, 1
Cor. 1.18.21. Secondly, it is evident from the end of the preaching of the
Gospel, which is to bring us from Satan unto God, and from darkness unto
light, Act. 26.18. and 1 Thessal. 1.10. Now this is done by these ways and
means, viz. I. By teaching us the danger wherein we are: for naturally we are
blind, and drowned in sleep; yea, drunk and senseless, Proverb. 23.34. etc.
presuming that all is well with us; but the Gospel teaches us, that by nature
we are miserable, Romans 7.23, 24. II. By showing the remedy; that is, by
preaching salvation by the blood of Christ. III. By giving the light of
understanding, and enabling us to see the truth, 2 Cor. 4.6. By nature we
think our selves to be wise, and men of understanding; but when grace comes,
then we see that we know nothing, as we ought to know. Capnio thought, the
first year that he came to Athens, that he knew something; the second year
he doubted of his knowledge; but the third, he openly confessed his
ignorance, and acknowledged himself to know nothing. And thus the more
knowledge we have, and the clearer our understandings are by grace, the more
sensible we are of our ignorance. As Simonides said to Hierom, concerning God.
IV. By bringing us unto Christ, 2 Cor. 11.3. and by forming Christ in us, Gal.
4.19. namely, by faith, Romans 10.15. And thus we see, that first by the hearing
of the word we are taught. And secondly, we are persuaded: And thirdly, our
miserable estate is discovered: And fourthly, the remedies are unfolded: And
fifthly, our understandings more enlightened: And sixthly, faith infused, and
Christ formed in our hearts, and we brought nearer and nearer unto him.


hearers are there?

Many sorts; namely,



Secondly, treacherous hearers; who hear that they may learn something,
whereby they may entrap him, whom they hear. And thus the Herodians heard
Christ.

Thirdly, scoffing and taunting hearers; and thus some heard Paul, Act. 17, 18,
32.

Fourthly, malevolent hearers; who pervert all things they hear, wresting them
to their own private senses; yea, are angry when the word reproves them, and
tax the Minister with malice, as though all his reprehensions proceeded from
spleen, or envy.

Fifthly, blind hearers, who understand no more then David's Idols, Who had
eyes, but saw not, ears, but heard not, etc. Psalm. 115.6. and 1 Corinthians,
2.14.

Sixthly, proud hear^rs; who are puffed up with their own wisdom, John 7.4.7.
like the Pharisees, who thought they knew so much, that Christ could teach
them no more then they knew.

Seventhly, sinful hearers; who are so hindered, and entangled by their
sins, that they cannot hear any thing, which crosses, or opposes their
sins.

Eighthly, sluggish hearers: who hear, but neither,

I. Remember what they hear, as Matthew. 13.52. and 1 Cor. 15.2. Nor,

II. Practice what they hear: but are inconstant in the duties of Religion,
James 1.5.7.



Quest. 3.

viz.

I. We must begin to hear betimes, in our youth, Eccles. 12.1. That is, let
us learn to love the preaching of the Word, in our young years.

II. We must hear it attentively when we do hear it. Constantine being
desired to sit down, when he stood to hear a Sermon; answered, Nesas verlum
Dei negligemer andire. It was no small wickedness, to hear the word of God
negligently, Eusebius. in vita Constant.

III. We must hear the Word humbly; that is, with fear and trembling, Esaias
66.2.5.

IV. We must hear the Word with a desire to learn thereby, as was shevved in
the former Section, Quest. 3.

V. We must hear seriously; that is, so as that we may gain by our
hearing. The house of God is like to a shop, full of precious drugs, or rich
merchandise; or like a costly, sumptuous, and well furnished Banquet: And
therefore we should never come thither, and go away again empty; but still
gain some spiritual grace, and profit: Non convenimus ut unus loquatur, alius
plausibus excipiat, and sic digrediamur: sed ut nos utilia-vos lucremini,
Chrysostom. s. Genes. hom. 1. We do not meet together in the house of God to
talk, or confer, or to applaud what is spoken; and so go away: but
Ministers must labor to preach profitable things, and people must labor to
hear profitably.

VI. We must hear prudently, and wisely; not imprinting all things (without
difference) in the memory which are delivered; but by separating the less
profitable things, from the more profitable, and retaining these the more
surely: Vt apes mel e floribus, sic doctrinas tibi aptas. Chrysostom. As Bees
gather honey out of flowers, so must we apply, and lay hold principally upon
those doctrines, and truths which are most fit for us; that so we may be
bettered thereby; that is, we must chiefly attend unto, and learn those
things, which do most avvaken the conscience, and shake off security, and
comfort the heart, and refresh the spirits, and direct the life. And,

VII: These things we must deeply imprint in our memories, Mat. 13.52 that
they may stand us instead in the time of need: As for example; sometimes we
hear instructions, how to behave our selves in the times of temptation,
tribulation, sickness, losses, crosses, and the like: Sometimes we hear
consolations for all these several estates and conditions: Now although we be
(when we hear these) neither tempted, nor tried, nor afflicted, nor weakened
with sickness, nor in any imminent danger of death; yet we should carefully
lay them up in our hearts and memories; that we may make use of them, when we
are in such case; for all these do attend those, who belong unto God, at one
time or other.

VIII. We must hear for this end, that we may obey; for to obey what we
hear from the Lord, is to follow the Lord.

Thirdly, after our hearing of the word of God, these things are required of
us: namely,

I. In the Church; and there three duties are enjoined, viz.

First, prayer; and this is not to be neglected; for as before Sermon we must
pray, both for the Minister, and our selves, that the Lord would assist both
him in speaking, and us in hearing, and so direct him by his Spirit, that he
may speak home to our souls, and consciences; So after Sermon, we must pray
for our selves, and all the faithful of the Congregation, that the Lord would
give a blessing to that which we have heard, that what we have heard, we may
remember, and what we remember, we may understand; and what we understand to
be good, we may practice, and be enabled to continue in the practice thereof
unto the end. And as we must thus pray unto God for our selves, so we must
also praise him, for enabling his servant the Minister, to deliver his message
unto us.

Thirdly, the blessing is not to be neglected, as many do, who go out of the
Church, before the blessing be given.

II. When we are gone from the Church, we must ruminate, and meditate of what
we have heard. It is not good, as soon as ever we go from the Word, to
busy, or employ our selves about something, or other; but to recollect what
we have heard, and to confer with our families about it, that so it may take
the deeper root in our hearts. Blessed are they that thus hear; that is, who,

First, reverence, honor, and esteem the Word. And,

Secondly, convene quickly, and come betimes to the Lords house, upon the Lords
day. And,

Thirdly, labor to hear unto profit, and edification. And,

Fourthly, pray for a blessing, from God upon that which they have heard. And,

Fifthly, do not neglect, but stay for the blessing of the Minister. And,

Sixthly, meditate, and ruminate after they are gone, of that which they have
heard.



act, nor power of justifying. B^. Davenant. Determine quest. 38. page 172.

VERSE. 52. Then said he unto them; Therefore every Scribe which is instructed
unto the Kingdom of heaven, is like unto a man, which is an householder,
Our Savior in these words (by a common consent of Interpreters) does express
both who are good Preachers, and also who are good hearers; and by an (...),
does imply, who are bad Preachers, and bad hearers: And therefore I will
propound a question, or two of either,

How must we make true use of that we read,

First, in a right understanding of them.

Secondly, in a right use of them.

How may we come to a right understanding,

By the use of these means; namely:

First, learn to fear God; for that is the way unto true saving knowledge,
Psalm 25.14. Prove. 9.10.

Secondly, labor for humbleness of mind, laying aside all conceit of thine
own wit, Psalm 119.130.

Thirdly, pray unto the Lord, that he would be pleased to instruct thee in his
word; as David, in the Psalm, 119. prays often.

Who are bad hearers of the word of God?

First, those who hear, but remember not what

Secondly, those who labor not to understand

Thirdly, those who use not the word which

Fourthly, those who are so highly conceited

Fifthly, those who in the studying, reading

Sixthly, and lastly, those who are fearelesse to

Who is a faithful, and good Preacher of the

First, the Minister of the Word must be learned; Paul requires in a Bishop,
that he be (...), one that is able to teach, 1 Timothy 3 2. Now if it should be
doubted, what learning is required in a Minister? Our Savior here shows, that
he must be Doctus ad regnum coelorum, instructed unto the kingdom of heaven;
that is, he must not preach for gaining of popular applause, or for the
satisfying of the curiosity of others, or for his own proper humane profit,
but he must preach for this end, that men may be taught the path of true piety
which leads unto life.

New, and Old.



Omnibus tenemini vestris praedicare:
Sed quid, quibus, qualiter, ubi, quando quare;
Debit i^ solicit praeconsiderare;
Ne quis in officio dicat vos errare.
VERSE. 55. Is not this the Carpenters Son? It not his Mother called Mary, and
his brethren James, and Ioses, and Simon, and Judas?
Christ's Countrymen speak here contemptuously of him, and his blessed Mother,
and the Evangelist from the Holy Ghost sets it down for their perpetual
disgrace. Whence it may be demanded, Mary to be adored and worshipped, by us or
not?

Epiphanius (Contra Collyridianos, haeres. 79. Maria non est adoranda: Although
all Nations shall call her blessed, yet none must worship her: his reasons are
these,

First, because he is more like a Devil then a man, that will edify a humane
or mortal creature, and set up Images thereof to be worshipped.

Secondly, because the mind commits spiritual fornication, while she departs
from the worship of the only true God, to adore those who by nature are no Gods.

Thirdly, because the B. Virgin worshipped Christ her self; and therefore
herein is to be imitated by us; but she her self is not propounded unto us to
be worshipped.

Fourthly, because Christ says to her, woman what have I to do with thee?
John 2. Where he calls her woman, that none might think her to be more.

Fifthly, because no Prophet has given any command to worship either any mere
man, or woman.

Sixthly, because John Baptist, and Elias, were Virgins, and Thecla was chaste;
and yet none of these were worshipped; and therefore neither ought Mary.

Seventhly, because if God will not suffer the Angels to be worshipped, then
neither Mary who was borne of humane seed.

Eighthly, because Christ did not take flesh of the Virgin Mary, that he might
make her a Goddess, or that we might offer up our prayers unto her; Because
this is due only unto God; and therefore Christ will not rob his Father of this
glory, to give it to his Mother.

CHAPTER XIV.
VERSE. 1. At that time Herod the Tetrach heard of the same of Jesus.
We Read of three Herod's, namely.

First, he who slew the Infants.

Secondly, he who slew John Baptist, and was made friends with Pilate; whom
Tyberius Caesar afterward banished to Lions in France: and this Herod was the
first Herod's Son.

Thirdly, he whom Tyberius Caesar made the former Herod's successor in the
Kingdom, after he was banished; and this Herod was the Brother to the former,
(as some say) or rather the Son of Aristobidus, who was the first Herod's
Son. Now the first of these Herod's was called Ascalonites; the second
Antipas, and the third Agrippa: And for the distinguishing of them by their
several bloody Acts one made this distich.

Ascalmita necat pueros, Antipa Iohanem:
Agrippa Iacobum, clauditque in carcere Petrum.
VERSE. 2. And said unto his Servants, This is John the Baptist, he is risen
from the dead, and therefore mighty works do show forth themselves in him.
This is John the Baptist.



This is John Baptist; that is, this Christ which teaches so powerfully, and
works such great Miracles, seems to me to be no other then John the Baptist.
Now this may be two manner of ways understood, namely,

First, thus, this is John Baptist, that is, in both of them, there is the like
piety, the like Doctrine, the like freedom and liberty in reproving of vices,
and their manner of life is not much unlike; and therefore in Christ John may
be lively seen. But

Secondly, it seems rather that Herod by these words was of Pythagoras his
opinion, who held the transmigration of the soul, or that the souls of the
dead did pass into new bodies. This Doctrine is ascribed to Pythagoras, but
Volaterranus shows that it had other authors before him, from whom Plato
learned it; as he chanced to Travel along with them. Now it is evident Plato
held this (...) from many places of his works. For ( Ad finem lib. 10. (...),
he tells us, That through the hatred of a woman the soul of Orpheus went into
a Swan, and the soul of Thamyrus went into a Nightingall, and the soul of Ajax
into a Lion, and the soul of Agamemnon into an Eagle; with diverse other
examples. So again (In fine Timai Dialogi) he tells us that the souls of
unjust men pass into women; and the soul of those who contemn Philosophy,
into Cattle; and the souls of men who are wholly given to the world and
worldly things, into Fishes. Many examples more he has in Phaedro, which I
omit.



Species, that, that is of which is produced according to the old principle.
Omne simile gignit suum simile. Every creature begets his like: And therefore
how can the soul of a man go out of a man, into the body of a Beast?

Species can be defined. No living creature (say they) can live without a
soul, nor no soul can animate any Body, but the soul of an Individuum, which
has a Species. And therefore seeing there are many monstrous births, unlike to
all the several Species, of living creatures in the world, this must needs be an
error, and as grossly false, forsaken and avoided.

Pythagoreans dare not avouch, because they know that

I. A body cannot come unto maturity and perfection without a soul; neither

II. That two souls can live in one body. Nor

III. Can they tell how that soul which first is in the body, does depart out
of it when the body is perfect; that so a strange soul may come in: because
when the soul departs from any body, the body dies.

Now if they say the second, that the soul passes into the body, when the
body is but small, and newly begun to be fashioned; then I would know, how the
soul which was even now most ample, in an ample and large body, can be
contracted in so small a room?

Fourthly, it were a most absurd thing to embrace Species: and that one and the
same soul can pass into many bodies of diverse species.

Fifthly, if the soul of a wise man, and great Tenet false and absurd is
utterly to be rejected.

Now against this it will be objected, Matthew. 11 14.) says of John Baptist,
This is Elias, the same soul which of old was in Elias, is now in John Baptist.

First, John being asked whether he were Elias

Secondly, the meaning of our Saviors wor^s ^^chary: He shall (says he)
convert many of the Ch^^^^^^ of Israel to the Lord their God, and he shall go
before (...) Messiah in the Spirit and power of Elias, that he m^^ turn the
hearts of the Fathers to the Children. Luke 1.16.17. Now it is one thing to
have the soul of Elias, and another, to come into the Spirit and power of
Elias. Yea it is worth observing that the Ang^ll does not only say, that he
shall come in the Spirit of Elias, lest some by Spirit had understood the soul,
but also in the Spirit and power. Pamphylus martyr ex Orig. lib. 7. in Evang.
Matthew.

Thirdly, our Savior in the place objected that John was the Elias which was
to come. And therefore there was one Elias who of old preached in Achabs time,
and another which was to come in the time of Christ, and which was foretold by
the Prophet Malachi.

Fourthly, how can the soul of Elias be imagined John Baptist, when the
Scripture witnesses that he laid not aside his soul at all, neither died, but
was translated both with his body and soul into heaven that so to succeeding
ages he might be in example or proof of the immortality of the soul, and of a
better, yea an Eternal life.

VERSE. 3.4. For Herod had laid hold on John and bound him, and put him in
prison, for Herodias sake, his brother Philips wife. For John said unto him, It
is not lawful for thee to have her.
Many great causes the Baptist had to reprove Herod, because many sins did
concur in this one fact of his, in taking his Brothers wife; namely,

First, Adultery, in lying with another man's wife.

Secondly, Injustice, in rejecting and casting off an innocent wife; for he was
married when he fell in love with his brother Philips wife, and then cast his
own off, and took the other unto him.

Thirdly, Rape, injustice, oppression, and tyranny, in snatching by force,
another man's wife from him.

Fourthly, an incestuous habitation with the wife of his brother, who was now
alive, and had had children by his wife Herodias. And therefore it was a most
unlawful marriage.

VERSE. 7. Whereupon he promised with an oath, to give her whatsoever she would
ask.
Oath?

Hebr. 6.16. and partly from the third Commandment, Thou shall not take the
name of the Lord thy God in vain.

Wherein observe these four things, to wit,

First, the end of an oath; and that is (...), for confirmation of the truth.

Secondly, the matter moving an oath; and this is (...), some difference, or
controversy; that is, when some doubts arise, which it is necessary for us to
clear.

Thirdly, the effect of an oath; and that is (...): the putting an end to all
strife. For an oath being interposed, puts an end to all controversies amongst
men.

Fourthly, the form of an oath; and that is a lawful calling God to witness
the truth of that which is affirmed, and a desire that he would punish it, if
it be false. And thus we see the principal causes of an oath.





Hebr. 6.16, etc. Exodus 22.8
To confirm the truth, and to put an end to all controversies, are things in
themselves both good and honest.

But the end of an oath, is to confirm the truth, and to put an end to all
controversies: Therefore in it self, it is a good, and honest thing.



That which God is the Author, and Institutor of, must needs be good and
lawful.

But he is the Author, and Institutor of an oath; as appears Deuteronomy. 6.13. Thou
shall fear the Lord and serve him, and shall swear by his name.

Therefore, there is an oath, which is good and lawful.

Thirdly, it is clear from the nature thereof:

That which is a part of Gods worship, is lawful and good.

But an oath is a part of Gods worship; for when men swear by God, they
acknowledge him to be the searcher of the heart, and the revenger of perjury,
and thereby worship God.

Therefore, there is an oath lawful and good.

Fourthly, it is evident, a signo: I argue thus;

But to swear by the true God, is a note of the true people of God, Esaias
65.15. Ier. 4.2.

Therefore, there is an oath, which is honest and good.

Fifthly, it appears plainly, Ab exemplis: The

That which has been used by God, by Christ, and by the Apostles, is lawful
and good. But an oath has been taken by God, Christ and the Apostles.

Therefore, there is an oath, which is lawful and good

The Minor is evident from these places. God the Father swears, Genes. 22.16.
God the Son often used the form of an oath, when he said, Amen, Amen; dico
vobis, verily, verily I say unto you; as thinks Aretius. exam. theolog. page
74. S. Paul swears, 2 Corinthians. 1.23. and 1 Corinthians. 15.31.

Wherein did Herod offend in swearing?

There are two things required in an oath, viz.

First, Vt rite fiat, that it be lawfully taken.

Secondly, Vt rite servetur, that it be lawfully observed, and kept. Now Herod
offended against both these. For,

I. He sinned against the first, because he took an oath, in a vain, and
foolish thing, without any necessity; when as he should have feared an oath;
yea, feared lest the Maiden should ask something, which was contrary to the
will of God.

II. He sinned against the second thing, required in an oath; for he was not
content to swear foolishly; but which was worse, he did wickedly perform,
and grant what was wickedly desired: namely, the head of the Baptist.

VERSE. 8. And she being before instructed of her Mother; said, Give me here
John Baptists head in a Charger.
What was there in this Damosel, worthy of our imitation?

First, as she believed the Kings oath, and promise, and upon the confidence
she had therein, framed her petition: So should we believe the promises, and
oaths of the Lord, and boldly ask, and confidently hope to receive what he
has promised, to give.

Secondly, as she did not petition the King of her own head, but first
advised with her Mother what to ask: So before we pray, we should consult, and
deliberate with the word of God, that we may ask only those things, which are
agreeable unto his will.

VERSE. 9.10. And the King was sorry; nevertheless, for the oaths sake, and
them which sat with him at meat, h^e commanded it to be given her: And he
sent, and beheaded John in the prison.
Herod originally accessory to the death of John Baptist, or not?

Hierome, and some others, think that Herod, and Herodias agreed together,
that he should make a Feast, and her Daughter should dance thereat; with which
he seeming to be extraordinarily pleased, should make this promise, to give
her whatsoever she should ask, and then she should ask John's head; at which
request (although in heart he rejoiced; yet) outwardly he should seem to be
sorry; that so those who were with him might excuse him, as being unwilling to
have done this bloody fact: Now the reasons which are given for the confirming
of this opinion, are these; to wit,

I. Because, except he had wished John's death, he would not have beheaded him
for his oaths sake; for in such oaths and promises, it is always understood,
that the thing be honest, and lawful which is desired: And therefore her
request not being such, he need not have granted it, if he would.

II. Because it is not probable, that he could be so strangely overtaken, and
delighted with a Dance, that in recompense thereof, he should make such a
large promise; as to give her whatsoever she should ask, verse 7.

III. Because, if he had not been consenting hereunto, he could easily have
corrected, the request of the Maid; and have directed her to ask some other
thing, which was more profitable for her, then was John's head.

IV. Because there was no need, to fear the offending of those, who sat at
meat with him, if he had not beheaded John: for we do not read of any
hatred they bare him, or desire, or delight, they had in his death.

V. Because the text says plainly, When he would have put him to death, he
feared the multitude; because they counted him as a Prophet, verse 5.

Augustine thinks that Herod did truly fear John, and willingly heard John,
and heartily grieved at the Maid request.

Carthusian. s. thinks that those words in the 5. verse of this Chapter, are
to be understood of an unwilling will; when Herod would have put him to death;
that is, with a will mixed with an unwillingnesse, and some reluctancie. And
indeed the letter of the History, both here, and in Mark 6. does seem to side
with Augustine, that the plot was not laid by Herod, but by Herodias, thus to
bring John to death.

UERS. 12. And his Disciples came, and took up the body, and buried it; and
then went, and told Jesus.
It is evident by many passages in the Gospel, John did envy Christ, and
emulate his glory; but now John being dead, they go unto Christ, and show him
what had happened; which argues, that their former emulation was abated at
least, if not altogether ^^nished. Whence it may be demanded.

What was the cause, that now they do envy Christ, as before?

First, because they saw, and perceived thy Christ and John, was led by one,
and the ^^me Spirit; and neither of them did envy, or labor to suppress the
glory one of another, but did rather labor, and study to exalt the honor, and
fame of each other.

Secondly, because John being in prison, had

VERSE. 13. When Jesus heard of it, Verse. 13.
he departed thence by ship, into a desert place apart; and when the people
had heard thereof, they followed him on foot, out of the Cities.
Whether did Jesus depart?

Saint Luke says, into a defart, Bethsaida, (Luke 9.10.) that is, the house of
hunting; because it was full of wild beasts; and was therefore so called, for
the much hunting, which was there used.

What was the cause of our Saviors departure

The cause was twofold; namely,

First, that he might escape danger: Herod had now beheaded John; and
therefore when Jesus heard of it, he departed, that he might not fall into
the Tyrants hands; the time of his suffering being not yet come. And this cause
is here expressed by Saint Matthew.

Secondly, that his Disciples might rest themselves; and this cause is plainly
laid down by Saint Mark. Chap. 6. verse 30, 31, 32.

VERSE. 14. Jesus went forth,
From verse 13. to 22. is showed our Saviors care for the multitude: whence it
may be asked,

What is the office of a good and faithful Minister

First, to reduce from error, those that go

Secondly, to cure the souls of those, who are

Thirdly, to feed those who are hungry, or hunger

What are the signs of false shepherds?

First, to seduce, and mislead their flocks into

Secondly, to slight and neglect those, who are sick. And,





Christ. For,

John 6.

Secondly, it is he who cures, and heals all, Psalm 36. and 103.3. and
107.20.

Thirdly, it is he that feeds all, Psalm 104. and 145. And therefore, those
who teach, and instruct in the truth, and reduce stray sheep into the way of
truth, and feed the hungry, and cure the sick souls, do it by virtue of that
power, which is derived unto them by Christ.

VERSE. 19. And he took the five loaves, and the two fishes; and looking up to
heaven, h^e blessed them.


John 6.) which he says, I can do nothing of my self, etc.



Verse 24.
VERSE. 24. But the ship was now in the midst of the sea, tossed with waves, for
the wind was contrary


Sea is meant the World; and by the Ship is meant the Church

Church meant by the Ship?

Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus.

Secondly, because as the ship never abides John 3.

Church, and a Ship?



First, there is Nauelerus, the Master and Pilot of the Ship; and this is
Christ, who is,

I. Potens, an able Pilot; and can defend the Church against all Pirates
whatsoever.

II. Bonus, a good Pilot; and does graciously gather up, or let loose the
sail, as he sees most fit (...) sometimes his Church sails with full sails,
and is in a prosperous, and peaceable estate; sometimes it is (as it were)
becalmed, and stands at a stay: yea, sometimes tossed to and fro with the
waves: But the good Pilots care is such; that although it seem for a while, to
make but a small progress; yet he does preserve it even then from danger.

III Sapiens, Christ is so a wise Pilot; and does so direct this Ship, his
Church, through quick sands, and rocks; that at length it arrives to the haven
of happiness, and eternal rest.

Secondly, there are in a Ship, Remiges, the Mariners; and these are the
Ministers of the Church, who help to manage this Ship, and to carry, or
transport it, from haven to haven; and from one Kingdom to another.

Thirdly, in a Ship there are Vela, sails; and Clavus, a Rudder; and this is
the word of God, whereby the Church is governed.

Fourthly, there is Ventus, wind: now this is twofold, namely:

I. A fair wind, which carries the Ship to his wished Port: and this is the
Holy Spirit, who agitates, and animates the sails of the word.

II. A cross, contrary, and tempestuous wind, which endangers the Ship: Now
the hurtful, and troublesome winds, are either,

I. Heretics, who deceive the simple, and cause them to make shipwreck of
faith; as did Ebi^n, Arius, Cerinthus, and diverse others of old, and many in
our ages. Or,

II. Tyrants, who persecute the Church, as did Maximinus, Decius, Diocletianus,
Iulianus; and many more besides. Or,

Secondly, Intra nos, within us; and this is the Devil; who raises sometimes
the wind of pride, promising honor (as he did unto Christ) sometimes the wind
of pleasure (as he did unto David) sometimes the wind of covetousness, as he
did unto Nabal: yea, sometimes he blows one blast, sometimes another,
according to the nature and disposition of him he tempts.

Fifthly; there are Conscensus, the steps, or ladder by which a man climbes up
to the Ship. This is Baptism, which is the ordinary admission, and entrance
into the Church. For as Noah numbered the creatures, which entered into the Arc,
by steps made for that purpose. So by Baptism, the faithful are publicly
admitted into a covenant with God.

Sixthly, there is Naulum, the fraught, or fare which is paid for passage over
the sea in a Ship; this is, the Covenant which we make with our Christ in
Baptism: he promises to carry us safe over the troublesome, and dangerous
sea of this world; and bring us to our wished haven; and we promise him, that
we will faithfully, without fraud, or coven pay our fraught. He promises to
bring us to our eternal country, and immortal kingdom; and we promise him,
to render due, and faithful obedience, throughout our whole passage, and space
of life.

Seventhly, there is Co^^eatus, provision of victuals, and diet; which the
Master of the Ship must provide for the Passengers: So Christ gives bread to
all the faithful in the Church, and invites those who are thirsty, to drink:
that is, he gives himself, who is the bread, which came down from heaven,
John 6. and his blood, which is drink indeed. And these he gives freely, Esaias
55.1.

Eighthly, there is Terminus ad quem, the haven unto which the Ship is bound;
and this is the Jerusalem, which is above, which all the faithful Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, and blessed Saints have desired, and longed for, when they
were on the sea of this world.

Verse 25 26.
VERSE. 25, 26. And in the fourth watch of the night, Jesus went unto them
walking on the sea. And when his Disciples saw him walking on the sea, they
were troubled, saying, it is a spirit; and they cried out for fear.
. 1. In the fourth watch of the night.



The first, they called Caput vigiliarum, the beginning of the Watches, Lament.
2.19.

The second was the middle Watch, Judge. 7.19. not so termed, because there were
only three Watches (as Drusius would have it, s. Judge. 7.19.) but because it
dured till midnight.

The third Watch began at midnight, and held till three of the clock in the
morning, Luke 12.38.
.

The fourth, and last Watch, was called the morning Watch, Exodus 14.24. And
began at three of the clock, and ended at six in the morning. And this is the
Watch here spoken of. Now these Watches were called also by other names,
according to that part of the night, which closed each Watch.

The first was termed (...) The Even.

The second was called, (...) Midnight.

The third was named, (...) Cock-crowing. And,

The fourth, (...): The Dawning. Ye know not when the Master of the house will
come, at Even, or a^ Midnight, or at Cock-crowing, or at the Downing, Mark 13,
35.
.

Walking on the sea.

Rome concerning the corporal presence of Christ; whether a true body can be
in a place, and yet not occupy a place? And Bellarm. lib. 3. de Euchar. Cap. 5.
proves it thus from this verse. It does no more agree to a corporal substance,
or true real body, to fill, and occupy a place, then it does to a heavy body
to descend, and sink downward; or to a lucide, and bright body to shine, or to
a colored body to be seen; or to a hot body, to warm, etc. But God can make,
that a heavy body shall not sink, etc. as is plain from this verse, where
Christ walks on the water, and sinkes not (and so also Luke 4.30. and 24.31.
and John 8.5^.) Therefore a body may be in a place, and yet not occupy, or
take up the place.

First, the proposition is false because all

Secondly, it is evident from Scripture, that

Thirdly, it is false which the Jesuit avoucheth Peter were no less
ponderous, when they walked upon the water then they were before: but only
when they so walked, they were sustained by a divine power; and therefore when
Peter's faith failed, he began to sink: whence it is clear that he was as
ponderous then as ever, but that he was upheld by an Almighty arm.

Fourthly although the bodies of Christ and Peter

Fifthly, that which Bellarmine says of the invisibilitie Luke 24.51. (...),
from them, is added, Scharp. curs. Theol. page 1474.

. 3. And they cried out for fear.

The Disciples seeing one in the form of a man walking toward them upon the
surface of the water, thought certainly that it had been some Specter; and
therefore were frighted with the sight, whence it may be demanded:

Why men naturally so much abhor and fear such sights and apparitions of
Spirits?

First, the reason hereof is because of that diversity Specter^ trouble men,
which would trouble them less if they were more acquainted with them, or
accustomed to such fights.

Secondly, spiritual creatures are more agile,

VERSE. 31. And immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand, and caught him, and
said unto him, O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt.
Concerning a small true faith diverse things have been spoken heretofore: I
will therefore here only propound a Question or two of faith in general.

Adam in his innocence.

viz.

First, the whole will of God revealed unto us in his word, containing all
Histories Commands, Doctrines, Threatenings, Promises, of what kind soever. And
this is called Legal faith.

Secondly, the particular promise of remission of Sins and everlasting life by
the death of Christ: and this is called Evangelicall faith. Now in this
distinction between Legal and Evangelicall faith, we must not conceive of two
distinct habits of faith; for it is but one gracious quality of the soul
disposing it to the belief of all divine truth, which for the substance of it
was the same in innocent Adam, with that which is in regenerate men. The
difference standing only in these three things, to wit,

First, in the degrees; Adams faith was perfect, because his understanding was
fully enlightened, and his affections absolutely conformable to all holiness.
We know but little, and by reason of our internal weakness, we believe but
weakly what we do know.

Secondly, in the Original; in Adam, faith was natural by Creation; in us it
is supernatural by the Holy Ghosts infusion.

Thirdly, in the particular Object; Adam believed God without reference to
Christ the Mediator; we believe chiefly the promise of grace in Christ, and
all other things with some Relation to him. And thus we see wherein our faith
differs from Adams.

fiducia trust, and assurance, of the essence of justifying faith,? because our
Savior here blames Peter's doubting.



First, from the Phrase of Scripture used in this business. Those phrases
(...), ( John 1.12. and Romans 10, 14) (...), ( Romans 4.5. Acts. 16.31) and
(...), ( Ephesians. 1.12) To believe in, or upon, or into God, Christ, the Holy
Ghost, are not used as the learned know by profane writers but only by
Ecclesiastical: implying that in divine matters (...), signifies besides the
naked acknowledgement of the Head, the confidence and affiance of the heart.

Secondly, it is clear, from that opposition, which is made between faith and
distrust or doubting; as in this verse; and James 1.6. and Romans 4.20.

Thirdly, from that excellent place. 2 Timoth. 1.12. where it is apparent that
to believe, is as much as to commit our selves to Christ's trust and keeping. I
know, (says the Apostle) in whom I have believed, or whom I have trusted; and
I am persuaded, that he is able to keep that thing wherewith I have entrusted
him, or delivered up to his keeping. What was that? his soul unto everlasting
salvation. Wherefore to believe the Promise, is with confidence and Trust to
rely upon it, resting our selves upon the performance of it.

Verse 33. Then they that were in the Ship,
How many ways are men,

Thomas (1 p. q. 33. ar. 3) says that The Son of God is five ways used in
Scripture, viz.

First, some are called the Sons of God, Propter similitudinem vestigij
tantum: and thus the unreasonable creatures are called the Sons of God, and
God is called their Father. Job. 38.28.

Secondly, some are called the Sons of God, Propter similitudinem Imaginis; and
thus the reasonable creatures are called the Sons of God: as Deuter. 32. Js
not he thy Father who has created and made thee.

Thirdly, some are called the Sons of God, Secundum similitudinem gratiae:
and these are called Adopted Sons.

Fourthly, some are called the Sons of God, Secundum similitudinem gloriae,
according to that of the Apostle. Romans 5. We rejoice in the hope of the glory
of the Sons of God.

Fifthly, some are called the Sons of God, Secundum perfectam rationem
nativitatis: and thus only Christ is the Son of God.

CHAPTER XV.
Verse 1. 2
VERSE. 1. 2. Then came to Jesus the Scribes, and Pharisees, which were of
Jerusalem, saying, Why do thy Disciples transgress the Tradition of the
Elders? for they wash not their hands when they Eat Bread.
Tradition?

This voice Tradition is equivocall,

First, sometimes it is taken for all Doctrine, whether written or not written,
2 Thessal. 2.15. Hold fast the Traditions which ye have been taught whether by
word or our Epistle.

Secondly, sometimes it is taken for that Doctrine which is delivered only Viva
Voce by word of mouth; as in this verse, Why do thy Disciples transgress the
Tradition of the Elders; which Traditions were never written, but delivered
with a living voice from one to another.

Thirdly, sometimes it is taken for the written word of God. As Acts 6.14. and
1 Corinthians. 15.3.

Fourthly, by the Papists this word Tradition is taken for that Doctrine which
is written, but not in the holy Scriptures.

Fifthly, the Fathers by this voice, did understand sometimes those Doctrines
which were contained in the Apostolical writings; and unwritten Traditions,
they called that which was not Totidem verbis, expressly commanded, or laid down
in the Scripture; but yet the thing it self was extant in the Scripture, and
might be proved from thence. And sometimes by Tradition they did understand,
not Doctrines, but Ecclesiastical order, and Rites. Scharp. de sacra Script.
page 125.

Verse 3.
Verse. 3. But he answered, and said unto them, Why do you also transgress the
Commandment of God, by your Tradition?
Bellarmine answers two things; namely,

Moses, but those which were newly and lately invented.



To his first answer, we answer two things; viz.

Moses; Christ bids them search the Scriptures, and not run unto Traditions.

Secondly, these which our Savior here speaks Elders Traditions, and they were
in great authority among the Jews: most like, because of some long continuance.

To his second Answer we answer likewise two things, to wit,

First, their Traditions were not openly and

Secondly, Christ in opposing the Scripture against

What may we safely hold concerning the

First, that besides the written word of God,

Secondly, the efficient cause of all true Traditions,

Thirdly, no Tradition of the Church, can constitute Romans 14.23. and 1. Corinthians. 14.26, 40.

Fourthly, although Ecclesiastical Traditions

How may the true Traditions of the Church

By these four notes and marks, to wit,

First, true Traditions are founded upon the word, and consentaneous unto the
word, and deduced, derived and taken from the word.

Secondly, true Traditions are profitable for the conserving and promoting both
of piety and external and internal worship.

Thirdly, true Traditions make for the order decorum, and edification of the
Church. And

Fourthly, are not greevous and intolerable, as the Traditions of the
Pharisees were, and the Papists are. Matthew. 23.4.

VERSE. 4, 5, 6. For God commanded, saying, Honor thy Father and Mother:
Honor thy Father and thy Mother.





Tantundem and aliquid amplius, a natural Relation to both, but a spiritual
Relation only to the virtuous and godly. We are commanded principally to love
our heavenly Father best, and caeteris paribus, to love those best next him,
that are nearest unto him in love, and most like unto him in purity.

In quantum est pater, as he is the Father, or the Mother, as she is the
Mother, be more to be honored and loved? then with the Schoolmen I answer,
that the Father is more to be loved and honored then the Mother: And the
reason hereof is this, because when we love our Father and Mother, Qua tales,
as they are our Father and Mother, then we love them as certain principles of
our natural beginning and being. Now the Father has the more excellent cause
of beginning then the Mother: because the Father is Principium per medum
Agentis, Matter autem magis per modum Patientis and materiae. And thus if we
look upon Father and Mother, Secundum rationem generationis, then we must
confess that the Father is the more Noble cause of the Child then the Mother
is. If the learned Reader would see this prosecuted, let him read Thomas 2.2.
q. 26. Art. 10. And Arist. ethe^. lib. 8. And Anton. part 4. tit. 6. Cap. 4..
8. And Aurtum opus page 60 b.

viz.

I. The Philosopher says, because the Mother is more certain that the Child
is hers, then the Father is that is his: he believes it is his Child, but she
is sure that it is hers.

II. Because hence the Mother loves the Child better then the Father does (
Arist. lib 9. ethic.)

III. Because the Mother has the greater part in the body of the Child, it
having the body and matter from her, and but only the quickening virtue from the
Father Arist. de gen animal. lib. 1.
.

IV. Because the Mother is more afflicted for the death of the child, than the
Father is, and does more lament the adversity thereof, than his Father does.
Solomon says, Prove. 10. A wise Son rejoices his Father, but a foolish Son is
a heaviness to his Mother. From whence some say, that Fathers in regard of
their natural constitution of body, which naturally is hot and dry, do more
rejoice when their children are promoted unto honor, than the Mothers do; but
Mothers, in regard of their natural constitution, which naturally is cold and
moist, do more mourn and lament for the losses and crosses of their children,
than the Father does. But I will neither trouble my self to prove this, nor
persuade my Reader to believe it, but leave it to the Philosophers and
Schoolmen to be decided and discussed.

V. Because the mothers part is more laborious, toilsome, and painful, than
the Fathers is: and that in these three regards; to wit,

First, Portando, it is painful to the Mother to breed her child, and to bear
it so many months in her womb.

Secondly, Pariendo, the pain is most extreme when she brings it forth into the
world.

Thirdly, Educando, her care, pains, and trouble is great, in the nourishing
nursing, and bringing of it up: And thus the Mothers part is painful, and
heavy, even from the very conception of the child. And therefore in these
regards she is more to be loved and honored than the Father is.

Whether are parents or children more to be

First, Ex part objecti, the Father is to be beloved sub ratione principii,
because they took their beginning and being from them, which has the show of a
more eminent good, and like unto God. And therefore in this regard, Parents are
more to be loved Thom. 2.2. qu. 26. art. 9.
.

Secondly, there is another degree of Ex part ipsius diligentis, in regard of
the party loving, and thus that is most to be loved, which is most near; and in
this respect children are more to be beloved than parents, as appears by a
fourfold reason given by Thom. 2.2. qu. 26. Art. 9. and Egidius Romanus. lib.
2. de regimine principum. part. 2. cap. 4. And both of them have these reasons
from Aristotle, lib. 8. Ethic.

I. Because parents love their children, as being parts of themselves, but
parents are no parts of their children: that is, a child is a part of the
father (because he issued out of his loins) but the father has no part from
the child; and therefore a man has a near relation to his child, than to his
father. And therefore that love wherewith a father loves his child, resembles
that love wherewith a man loves himself.

II. Because parents are more certain of their children, than of their parents:
a child cannot know its parents, but by hearsay, and some certain signs of
affection, education, and the like; but parents by and by have knowledge of
their children: And therefore by how much the more certain parents are of their
children, by so much the more strongly do they love them.

III. Because a man's child is nearer unto him than his father is: now love
imports a certain union, it being nothing else but a certain uniting and
conjoyning power of the person loving, with the party beloved. And therefore a
man's children being more near, and closer knit and united unto him, than his
parents are, are more beloved of and by him.

IV. Because men love their children longer than their parents; for a father
begins to love his child by and by by, as soon as he is born; but children
love their parents after a certain time: now by how much the longer love is, by
so much the stronger it is. Anton. part. 4. tit. 6. cap. 4.. 7, and Aureum
opus. page 61. a.b.

















Vmbertus in expositione regulae, ex Anton. part. 4. tit. 5. cap. 10.. 11.







Joseph her husband, and recommended her to John's care, when he himself was
corporally to depart from her. And therefore who dare disobey such a Precept?
who will not follow such a President?



I. Such shall have a long life, Exodus 20. Honor thy parents, that thy life
may be prolonged.

II. Such shall have loving, obedient, and tender children. Yea

III. They shall by blessed both with temporal, spiritual, and eternal
blessings, if together with their earthly parents, they love, honor, and obey
their father which is in heaven.

. 2. Whosoever shall say to his father or his mother,

What is the sense and meaning of these words?

For the understanding of this verse, Corban, that they would not help nor
relieve their parents, the Pharisees then taught, that the children were
discharged from that duty of providing, relieving, and taking care for them.
Hence their Talmud says, Talmud. Hierosol. tract. de votis. c. 10.
Every one ought to honor his father, and mother, except he have vowed the
contrary. And it is evident, that the Jews did often, by solemn vows and oaths
bind themselves, that they would never do good to such, or such a man, ( Philo
Iud. de special. leg. p. 595) Now this helps the exposition of this difficult
place. By the gift that is offered by me, thou may have profit: which words
being considered according to the form of the oath Corban, will be thus
rendered, By Corban, if thou receive any profit by me; to which words must be
annexed the execration implied (which was usual in the Jewish oaths, as
Genesis 14.22.) Then let God do thus, and much more to me. And so the sense
will be thus; By Corban thou shall receive no profit by me. This exposition is
as agreeable to the scope of the place, as it is to their form of swearing, and
plainly shows how the Pharisees, by their Traditions, transgressed the
Commandment of God. For God commanded, saying, Honor thy father and thy
mother. But the Scribes and Pharisees said, Whosoever shall say to father or
mother, seeking relief, By Corban, thou shall receive no profit from me, he was
discharged. Vide Drusium de tribus sect. lib. 2. cap. 17.

Cui bono? To what end did the Scribes and

For the understanding hereof, we must know, viz.

First, because God is the chief and principal Father, according to that of
Esaias, O Lord, thou art our Father. But we must here remember, that this is to
be understood, when parents do enjoin that which is contrary to God; that is,
if our earthly Father bid us do any thing which our heavenly Father forbids us
to do; then we must obey the Lord, because he is our chief and principal
Father: but in those things which God commands, we must say (or think we hear
the Lord say) That Obedience is better than Sacrifice. And therefore when the
Lord commands us to releeve our parents, we must do so, because therein we obey
our God; and not say, O but it is a better deed to spend that (which I should
expend upon my Father) in sacrifice and oblations unto God, for in so doing we
disobey him: yea we honor and please the Lord better in honoring and
releeving our indigent and aged parents, than in offering up any outward
sacrifices.

Secondly, the Priests confirmed this their Tenet by this reason, because it
would more profit and benefit their parents, to offer that unto God, which they
should give unto them, than if they should really receive it. The Pharisees
held, that if children should say to their poor parents, The gift which I have
promised, and will offer up unto God, will benefit you more, than if I should
give it unto you; that then they were not bound to feed them, or supply their
necessities Carthus. s. p. 130. b. medio.
. But we must not neglect an ordinary duty, in hope of a miraculous or
extraordinary success; we must not offer that up that in sacrifice, which
should feed our parents, in expectation that they shall be fed from heaven, or
miraculously be sustained without meat: for they stand in need of relief, but
not the Lord of oblations. And therefore those things which ought to be
administered to the necessity of poor parents, should not be offered up unto
God, who in this case would say, I require not your Sacrifices; that is, I
never commanded, that a man should take necessary food, and provision from his
parents, to give it unto me.

Concerning the adorning and beautifying of Churches (a question betwixt us and
the Papists) we affirm, That the Churches of Christians, and places of Prayer,
ought decently to be kept; yea and with convenient cost and seemly beauty to be
built and repaired, and Church vessels, with other necessary furniture, to be
of the best, not of the worst: but yet it follows not, that such immoderate
and excessive cost should be bestowed upon Idols, to garnish and beautify
Idolatry, and poor people in the mean time to want: And this we prove by this
Argument from this place.

I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, it being better to succor the living
Temples of God, which are the bodies of his poor children, than to bestow
superfluous cost upon dead Temples of stone. Willet, Symps. s. 485.

Thus have ye made the Commandment of God of none effect by your Traditions.





I. That they honored and observed their Traditions, more than the
Commandments of God. And

II. That many of their Traditions were directly contrary to the Commandments
of God.



Rome: For

First, the Commandments of that Church are much more honored and observed,
than the Commandments of God: for it is there taught that the Roman Church
authoriseth the Holy Scriptures; that is to say, that the ordinances of men
authorize the Commandments of God.

Secondly, in the Roman Church they teach things absolutely contrary to the
word of God: For,

I. God says, Exodus 20. Thou shall not make the likeness of things which are
in the heavens, or in the earth, thou shall not bow down before them, etc. But
in the Church of Rome, they paint the Trinity, and kneel before the Images of
Saints.

II. God says by his Apostle, 1 Timothy 3 2.4. That a Bishop should be a husband
of one wife only, and that his children should be subject to him in all
reverence. But the Roman Church wills, that a Bishop have neither wife nor
children.

III. God says by his Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. That it is better to speak five
words in the Church, in a tongue understood of the people, then ten thousand in
an unknown tongue: But the Papists are commanded to serve God in an unknown
tongue, and to pray in latin.

VERSE. 9. But in vain do they worship me,
We produce this place against the Monastical life now used in Popery; and
hence prove it to be but a humane invention.

There is neither Precept, nor President; either in Old, or New Testament, of
the Monastical life of the recent Monks.

But it is only proper unto the Lord, to institute, and ordain all religions,
and religious kind of lives by his word: Therefore that religion, or religious
kind of life, which has neither Precept, nor President in the word, is but
hypocritical, and humane. In vain (says our Savior) do they worship me,
teaching for doctrines, the commandments of men. Whence I frame this plain,
and direct Argument.

Those who worship God, by a kind of life, religion, and worship, which was
never commanded by God, worship him in vain; that is, worship him not at all,
or worship him hypocritically. But the Monks worship God by a kind of life,
and religious worship, which was never commanded by God.

Therefore, therein they worship him in vain, and not at all truly, but
altogether hypocritically.

Wherein did the Monks of old differ from the recent, and present Popish
Monks?

First, the ancient Monks lived solitarily, out

Secondly, the ancient Monks were not compelled their Abbeys be rich, and well
furnished, both with riches, revenues, and provision.







Alsted. fol. 344. 345.

VERSE. 10, 11. And he called the multitude, and said unto them; Hear, and
understand: Not that which goes into the mouth defiles the man: but that
which comes out of the mouth, that defiles the man.


viz.

First, he answers to the Scribes and Pharisees, that by their Traditions, they
have violated the Commandments of God, verse 3.

Secondly, he answers to the multitude in this verse; that it is not that which
goes into the mouth, which defiles the man, but that which comes out, etc.



Two things: to wit, Invitatio Turbae, Christ's inviting of the multitude;
wherein are two particulars, viz. I. Quos vocat, whom he calls: the
multitude. II. Ad quid vocat; why he does call them; namely, First, Vt
audiant; that they may hear. Secondly, Vt intelligant, that they may
understand. Secondly, Concio, his Sermon; wherein are these two parts: namely,
I. Pars negativa, the negative part, in these words; those things which go
into the mouth defile not the man. II. Pars affirmativa, the affirmative part;
in these words: those things which come out of the mouth, defile the man.


First, Quos vocat? whom does Christ here call? The multitude.

What may be observed from these words, Tum then he called the multitude?

First, From Tum, then, we might observe

I. That Christ does not teach them, until first he had confuted the
adversaries of the truth, And,

II. They being once confuted, then by and by he teaches, and instructs
them.

Secondly, from vocavit, he called; we might

I. That he does not answer, being asked by them; but he calls them, who
desired no such thing, that they might learn the truth; that is, the multitude
did not first come unto Christ, desiring to be informed by him, and then he
taught them; but without their suing unto him, he invites them to come, that
they might learn.

II. That he calls the multitude; that is, all, that so the truth may be
made manifest unto all, and his Apostles freed, and quit by all, from that
aspersion which was cast upon them, by the Scribes and Pharisees.

Thirdly, from Turbam, the multitude, we Matt. 11.25. and 1 Cor. 1.26.

Secondly, Ad quid vocat? why does Christ call the multitude? that they may
hear; where we see that something is required on their part; namely, to
hear, to teach us:

That if we desire to know, and understand Deuteronomy. 4.1. and 5.1. and 6.3. For,

First, preaching is the means to reconcile people unto God, and to bring them
by grace unto glory; as appears from 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. and 1 Cor. 1.18.21. Romans
11.6. And therefore this work is strictly required at the Ministers hands.

Secondly, on peoples behalf; hearing is the means to bring them unto
knowledge, grace, faith, and Christ, Romans 10.14.17. And therefore as Pastors
are commanded to preach, so are people to hear; and as the one does not
perform his Masters will, except he be diligent, and careful in preaching;
so neither the other, except he be attentive, and industrious in hearing.

Who are here blameworthy, and faulty?

First those who neglect hearing for every

Secondly, those who are weary with hearing,

Thirdly, those are here guilty, who forbid people to hear.

Our blessed Savior says, My sheep hear my voice, John 10. But the Popish
Priests, will neither preach the truth themselves unto their people, nor permit
those to come; who would hear us, ( Matthew. 23, 13.) but directly prohibit
them to come to our Church, and preaching. Here it is worth observing: That the
Popish Priests do not forbid their people to keep our holy days, or to
observe our Faires, or to come to our Plays, Pastimes, and Recreations; yea,
they do not forbid them to marry with us: What then? only they are forbidden
to be present with us in holy duties, and the exercises of Religion; namely,

I. They must not come to our Prayers.

II. They must not come to our Sermons.

III. They must not come to our Sacraments. And why not? Is it because we
herein are erroneous: No, that is not the reason; for they themselves say, that
our Common Prayers are drawn from their Missale; and they will confess, that
we often preach the truth; and yet they must neither associate us in these
prayers, nor this preaching. What is the cause then, that they may be
familiar, and associate themselves with us, and yet must not join with us in
holy duties? Certainly, the reason is, because the devil knows, that this
Sun of the Gospel burns, and that the preaching of the word works strongly,
both upon the affections, and judgment; and therefore he prohibits all his
servants to approach thereunto, and persuades them to avoid our prayers, and
fly our preaching.

Thirdly, Christ calls the multitude, Vt intelligant, that they may
understand, they must not hear for a form; but they must so hear, as that
they may know, and understand what they hear.



That we must prepare our understanding in the hearing of the word of God. Or,
when we hear, we must labor to understand what we hear, Colos. 1.9. and
2.2. Deuteronomy. 4 6. Ignorance is the cause, both of errors, and disobedience;
whence it is said, They rebelled, because they knew not my Laws, Psalm 95.
and ye err, not knowing the Scriptures.





First, because they praise Ignorance; saying, To know nothing, is to know all
things. Hosius, and Rhemist. s. 1 Corinthians. 14. And therefore no wonder if they
err.

Secondly, because they teach an implicit faith; that is, to believe
whatsoever the Church believes: yea, if they did not teach this, then none
would believe, nor obey their religion: who would believe them, if it were not
for this implicit faith? who would adore a piece of bread; or a stock, or
their foolish, and ridiculous relikes? who would pray to Thomas Becket? who
would fear Purgatory? who would buy their Indulgences at so dear a rate? if
it were not for this doctrine. They say, Ignorance is the mother of devotion,
or rather of rebellion, and superstition: And hence it is that the Turks
Alcoran forbids all disputations, concerning Religion; that so the errors
thereof, may not be known, and discerned. But,

Thirdly, the Papists in some kind, are worse then the Turks: for the Alcoran
does forbid disputations, concerning Religion; but it does not forbid any to
read it, or the laws contained therein: But the Papists forbid men to read
the Scriptures, and Law of God, although they confess, that they are the true
rules of right living, and the divine word of God. Doctor Sta^dish bad, take
away the damnable Bibles. Molanus faith, Salubriter arcentur a lectione
Scriptur arum: It is for their good (meaning the Laity) to be debarred, and
hindered from reading the Scripture in a known tongue: An Italian Bishop said
to Espencaeus, Nostri de^errentur a studio Scripturarum, ne fiant haeretici.
We forbid, and fright our people from reading the Scripture, lest thereby they
should become Heretics. Vide Reynold. page 41. Thus they. But the Apostles
contrarily exhort us, To let the word dwell plenteously in us, Col. 3.16.
because it is the best weapon against Satan ( Ephesians. 6.12.) yea, the fountain
of life, and the food of the soul: yea, the holy Fathers were of this mind
also. Cognitio non sufficienter, sed abundanter, Hier. s. Colos. 3.16. (...),
Chrysostom. s. Col. 3.16. Yea, the same Father exhorts men to prepare Bibles; at
least the New Testament, and to invite their neighbors also to read the
Scriptures, Chrysostom. hom. 9. s. Colos. And therefore, as Ex ungue konem; so by
this one particular we may see, how these children resemble these Fathers; and
how unlike they are to them; notwithstanding all their bold brags, and
audacious boasts.

What is here required of us?

First, in general we must so read, and hear, that we may understand what
we read and hear.

Secondly, more particularly these things are

I. We must listen unto all that from God is spoken unto us; we must
ruminate, and ponder all we hear, in our hearts: yea, we must apply it unto
our hearts, and measure our consciences by it.

II. We must lay up carefully what we hear, and never suffer it to slip out
of our memories.

III. We must labor daily for a more ample measure of knowledge; that our
understanding may be such, that we may have the body of divinity within us,
and be able to render a reason of our faith, to every one that shall demand it.

Fourthly, the negatiae part of our Saviors Sermon to the multitude, is this;
that those things which go into the mouth, defile not the man.

What things go into the mouth?

First, poisoned, and infected air.

Secondly, Pestiferous, and obnoxious meat.

Thirdly, many impure things, which do not here de Corpere, but de homine, not
of the body but of the Man, that is, the mind and Spirit; Wherefore we must
distinguish of pollution, which is either,

I. Corporal, and this is the pollution of the Body, Or

II. Spiritual; which is of the heart and conscience: and this is the
pollution of the Man.

[That which goes into the mouth, defiles not the man] is this, That meat is
nothing at all unto holiness. Hence then we may learn.

Corinth. 8.8. and 10.27. and Colos. 2.16.20. and 1 Timoth. 4 2. Where the
Apostle calls it a Doctrine of Devils to forbid some meats as unholy:
because as no meat can make us the holier, so none can make us more unholy; to
the pure all things being pure. Titus 1.15. And therefore we are exhorted to
labor that our hearts may be established with grace, and not with meats, which
profit nothing. Hebr. 13.9.



Tenet being so diametrally opposite to this Truth of Christ's. I will treat
something amply of their Fasts.





First the law or Precept; which is either.

I. General, to wit, as it was commanded and enjoined by God; both

First, in the Old Testament; as in diverse places of Leviticus, and Numbers,
and Ioell 1. and 2.

Secondly, in the New Testament, as Matthew. 11.18. and 17.19. and 1 Cor. 7.5.
and 9.27. and 2 Cor. 11.27. Acts 13.2.3 and 14.23. O

II. The Law of fasting is more particular: wherein these four circumstances
are included viz. Quantity, quality, Days, and hours, which Circumstances are
not determined either.

First, by the law of God which ordaines nothing herein. Praecepto Domini, non
invenio definitum (August. epist. 86. ad Cas^^lan.) Communis est sententia
Scholasticorum, non esse (Quadragesimam) juris divini Azorius instit. mor
1.7.12. Yea in all the Scripture we never find flesh forbidden upon Fasting
days.

Secondly, as the word of God is silent in these circumstances of Fasting, so
is also the Church of Christ: who has not by any divine and immutable Law,
given Rules for the direction of these Circumstances: for the better
understanding, and confirming hereof observe, that the Papists, show us two
sorts of Traditions; namely,

I. Those, which they have received from Christ's own mouth, and which the
Church cannot change, as the Sacraments. And

II. Those, which they (without any command from Christ) have enjoined, and
commanded of themselves and their own Heads: which kind of Traditions may be
disanulled, and abrogated either by a dispensacion from the Pope, or by, some
contrary custom of some place, or people. Melch. Canus. loc. theol 3.5.

Now he confesses himself, that the Injunctions and Laws of the Church,
concerning fasting is not of the first sort of Traditions, but of the second
(and so does also Bellarm. De bon. Oper. 2.2. Deinde.) And therefore by their
own confession they are not divine and immutable, but Subject to variation and
change.

Thirdly, certain it is, that these Circumstances of Quantity, quality, Days,
and Hours of fasting, were at first Free, and not enjoined by any Precept:
Augustine in the place above mentioned ( Epist. 86. and Casulan) says, That
he cannot find it determined by the Law of God, upon what days he should
fast, nor how many hours he must abstain from meat. Now to this Bellarmine
answers. That Augustine speaks De scriptis, non de non scriptis, of written
Traditions, not of unwritten: And this is true, for Augustine acknowledged no
such unwritten Traditions. Non est lex posita, sed quomodo unusquisque potest
vel vult. Prim^s. s. Romans 14. and Socrat. hist. 5.21.

Who are here worthy of blame?

First, those who think (Opus operatum) fasting Bellarmin himself will not
avouch: and yet there are many who thus think, yea, make more conscience of
eating flesh upon a fasting day, then of swearing, lying, or Adultery.

Secondly those are much to blame, who being Rome, and therefore we should not
halt between two opinions, but if the Lord be God, then follow him, and if
Baal be God, follow him: And if we would not be esteemed or judged Papists, let
us avoid all Popish Errors.

Thirdly, they are faulty also, who counsel

How? or how far are we obliged to the

First, in general we are obliged: that is, the

I. Unto prayer, 1 Cor. 7. but of this before, Matthew. 4.

II. Unto examination: and that both of our sins (that so we might be induced
the better unto Repentance,) and also of our estates and conditions: which
Examinations are profitable at all times, but principally before we come to
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: And therefore I wish that it were more
practiced then it is, to Fast the day before we come unto the Lords Table, that
thereby we might send up the more strong cries unto God, and be the more
strict and exact in the Examination of our selves.



I. Politic and civil: which is lawful and warrantable: and is used for a
fourfold end, viz.

First that the young creatures which are brought forth about such or such
times may be preserved.

Secondly, that flesh meat thereby may be the cheaper.



Fourthly, that the poor might be fed: that is releeved by that which we
spare from our selves.

II Religious, viz. l^st fasting should be wholly neglected: and therefore they
ordain and appoint some s^t and certain times. But

First, this Injunction does not command a difference of meats, but an
abstinence from meats; yea

Secondly, it does not only forbid the eating of meats, but enjoin the
performance of holy duties also.

Thirdly, I conclude therefore this Question with Civil, in these particulars;
viz.

I We ought to humble our souls continually.

II. A true Fast is internal.

III. An external F^st does not consist in a diff^rence, or ^istinction of
meats, but in an abstinence from meat.

IV. The end of Fasting is not to make us more holy thereby, but more prompt,
and ready, or better disposed unto holy dut^es.

V. There is ^o particular necessity of Fasting.

VI. The ordinary times appointe^ for Fasting, are ^ot to be u^ed out of any
superstitious obligation, but out of Christian liberty, lest others should be
offended Chem. p^rt. 4. pa. 154 a. and 155.
. Hence then observe three things; namely,

First, that the external or outward Fast is free.

Secondly, the end of the outward Fast, is not holiness: and therefore if
holiness, piety, and the worship of God be placed in the outward Fast, Cyril
reproves it from 1 Co. 10.27.

Thirdly, that the external Fast does not consist in a difference, and
distinction of meats; and this is the Question betwixt Us and Rome, of which by
and by.

Secondly, the next thing observable in a Fast, is the practice thereof. Now
here we must note that a Fast is either

I. Absolute; wherein two rules are to be laid down: n^mely,

First, upon an absolute Fast day, there must be taken but only one
refreshing. And

Secondly, that one refreshing must be at Supper time, and not at Dinner. Now
here the Papists do manifestly err: for

I. The truth of these two rules is proved from all Antiquity; but I spare the
pains, Bellarmine having fully proved it to my hands: and that

First, from the Scriptures, gathering from thence, that it was the custom of
those in the Old Testament to observe these two rules.

Secondly, from Tertullian, Athanasius, Basil, Epiphanius, Ambrose, Hierome,
Prudentius, Paulinus, Chrysostom, and Augustine. Yea

Thirdly, from Cass^^us, Benedictus, Gregorius, Bernardus, Aquinas, Bell. de
bonis operib. 2 2.. unam.

II. Yet he confesses that th^se two rules are not now observed by them, they
having upon their Fasting days, both a Dinner, and a little Supper: and this
their Church tollerates and permits, and not without cause: because of old they
did not eat usually until the sixth hour, that is, Noon; but they eat now
ordinarily at the third hour, that is, at nine of the clo k; and therefore
(which is enough) they fast three hours. Bellarm. de bon. oper. 2. 2.. sed
opus, and. addimus.

II. There is a Respective Fast; and that is, when the purpose of Fasting is of
so long continuance, that it is requisite that some refreshing be taken. And
here we allow of a difference of meats, but it differs from the Popish
distinction in three things; namely,

First, in the end: for

I. The general end of fasting, with them, is M^r^t; and because they place
holiness i^ meats, therefore in abstaining from some, as impure upon some
times, they think they do well, and for their well doing deserve som^thing at
Gods hands.

II. The end of Fasting and of forbearing some meats, when we fast, with us,
is to tame our concupiscence, and to subdue our carnal affections, ( August.
contra Faust. 30.5.) So Chrysostom speaking of the Ninevites, ( s. Mat 7)
says, Iram non solvebat I^junium, sed vitae mutatio, etc. It was not their
fasting that turned away the wrath of God from them, but it was their turning
away from their sins, and the amendment of their lives: Non dicimus ut
contemnamus, etc. yet we speak not this, that Fasting may be slighted, or
neglected, but rather that it may be honored; Honor enim jejunii est vitae
emendatio, for the honor of Fasting, is the amendment of life.

Secondly, we and the Papists in abstaining from some meats in the time of a
Fast, rather than other differ in the Adjuncts: for the confirming hereof, we
lay down the positions given by the ancients in this particular; namely,

I. Those who Fast, must eat but once upon that day, and that must be either at
the ninth hour, or at the twelfth, not at the sixth.

II. Those who Fast, must not eat much, nor unto satiety, at that one
refreshing which they take upon the day they Fast. Neither

III. Must they upon that day eat delicate, and sumptuous, or costly meat. Nor

IV. Must they celebrate their Fast with joy and delight, as at other times;
because it is a day of humiliation: That is, in our Fasts we must abstain from
joy, mirth, and natural delights. Nor,

V. Must we follow the labors of our vocations, that day which we fast; but
set it apart for meditation, supplication, examination of our conscience, and
other holy duties.

VI. That day whereon we fast, must be a day of refreshing unto the poor, and
a day of bounty and liberality. Illud jejunium Deus approbat, cum quod tibi
subtrahis, alteri largiaris: ut unde tua caro affligitur, inde proximi egentis
reparetur. Greg. past. God approves of this Fast, when that which a man
with-drawes, and withholds from himself, he bestows upon another; and from
whence his body is afflicted, thence the body of his poor brother is refreshed.

VII. We must in our fasting, to the abstinence from meat, conjoyne internal,
and spiritual works, as examination, and prayer; and the like. Now the
Papists adhere most to the difference of meats, which is the very meanest part
of a true Fast.

Thirdly, we and the Papists differ in the very difference, and distinction of
meats; and that

I. In regard of the Quantity. For,

First, the Ancients did much, and very strictly observe this, eating that day
whereon they fasted, but very little. Vide Isidor. de sum. bon. 2.43.

Secondly, this the Papists reject, and slight in their Fasts, abstaining, a
quali non quanto; but of this we spoke before, Matthew. 4. Read also Chem. p.
4. page 117. 6. and Bellarm. de bon. op. 2. 4.. Quare.

Socrati, hist. 5. 21. and Aug. de mor. eccles. 2. 13. and Sozomen. 1. 11.
II. In regard of the Quality; here observe, that the Fathers have distinguished
of Fasts, but not of flesh: That is,

First, that always flesh was not forbidden; for Elias, and the Baptist ate
flesh: yea, of old, some upon fasting days ate birds; and some after the ninth
hour, ate of all sorts of meats, I. Now here the Papists object many things;
namely,









That it is good not to eat flesh, Romans 14.21. and therefore commands us not to
eat flesh, 1 Cor. 10.28. And for his own part says, he will eat non^ 1
Cor. 8.13.

Paul says in the last place, that he will eat no flesh, as long as he
lives, but the Papists will not say thus.

Secondly, by flesh may be understood fish: There is one manner of flesh of
fishes, 1 Cor. 15. Now they will not abstain from fish.

Thirdly, by the Apostles own rule, the weak Romans 14.2. and 1 Cor. 8.8. Now
they will not (for shame) say that all Papists are weak.

Fourthly, the Apostle only forbids the eating

Fifthly, these things were of old objected by Augustine, viz

I. That nothing is unlawful of it self, but that a man may eat flesh, or
abstain from it lawfully.

II. That the places objected, respect no more then the scandal, and offense
of our brethren; and therefore where no such offense is taken, no such
diff^rence of meat should be made.

III. That we abstain from flesh when we fast, for three reasons, viz

First, to refrai^e, and bridle, Aug. de mor. Manich. 2.14.
and subdue our gluttonous appetite.

Secondly, because we would not offend our brethren.

Thirdly, lest those who are weak, should communicate with Idols.

III. Daniel, and John Baptist, who made a distinction of meats in their
practis^.

They did not only abstain from flesh, Daniel abst^ined also from all
delightful, and pleasant bread.

IV. Flesh,

First, if the Papists did only prohibit (when

Secondly, why do they not forbid wine, Vinum ^ecesse cum piscibus, wine is
necessarily to be drunk, when we eat fish, said Hallensis, Chem. part. 4. p.
11. b.

Thirdly, they eat those things when they fast, which do more kindle lust,
and are mo e delectable to the carnal, and natural appetite, as curious, and
dainty fish; and conserves, and preserves, an^ junkets, and all manner of
banqueting stuffes, and Anchoves, and Caveare, and Iringus: And thus we see,
that by the Fathers and Ancients, flesh was not forbidden always, when they
fasted.

Secondly, only flesh was not forbidden, when they fasted: but the Fathers
equally abstained from all things, which might hinder their humiliation: And
we may see a double pla ne difference between them, and the Papists.

I. Wine was of old forborne; yea, forbidden when they fasted. Abstines a vino,
non ab injuria. Basil. Abstines a vino, sed mulsa bibis, vinum specie
imitantia, suavitate vincentia. August. de mor. eccles. 2.13. I need not
enlarge this, because the Papists acknowledge it; to wit, both Bellarmine, and
Azerius the Jesuit, part. 1. 7. 10. But yet now they use it. ( Vide Chem. p 4.
page 117. 6. and Bellar. de bon. op. 2.5.. ad illum.) And therefore it cannot
be denied, but that herein the Papists differ from the Fathers.

II. The Fathers, and Ancients in their Fasts, abstained from all dainties; but
of this we spoke before, Matthew. ^. Now the Papists have both dainty,
sumptuous, and gluttonous Fasts; for they have (except flesh) whatsoever
delicates can be got (and therefore no wonder, if the Child said, Mother when
shall we fast again:) As though flesh would defile them, but nothing else;
whereas our Savior says here expressly, not that which enters into the mouth
defiles the man; from whence for a conclusion I draw this Argument.

If a man sin by eating, he is polluted also by eating; and if a man be not
polluted by eating, then neither does he sin by eating.

But a man is not polluted by eating; for that which goes into the mouth,
defiles not the man: Therefore a man does not sin by eating; and
consequently, they sin, that put holiness in meats, and prohibit flesh as
unholy.

VERSE. 13. But he answered, and said: Every plant, which my heavenly Father
has not planted, shall be rooted out.
John Fortune Martyr alleged this place of Scripture against Popish
Ceremonies: All things, (says our Savior) which my heavenly Father has not
planted, shall be plucked up by the roots; But Popish Ceremonies are things not
planted by God. Therefore they shall be rooted up.



Paul thought not so, when he called them weak, and beggarly; and said, that
they were bewitched, who sought to be in bondage unto them. Fox, fol. 1918.
col. 2.

heavenly Father?







viz.

Rules of a holy, and heavenly life.
First, let us frequently meditate, and ruminate upon this; what if the Lord
should call us hence by death, before we be regenerate? what Act. 4.12. And
therefore we should be careful to examine our selves, whether we be in
Christ, or not (2 Cor. 13.5.) because no other thing will avail us unto
salvation.

Secondly, let the glory of God be our maine Cor. 10.31. And let us be careful
of this, so long as we live.

Thirdly, let us be careful of the salvation of Philip. 2.12. and 2 Peter 1.10.

Fourthly, let us labor to mortify, kill, and Romans 6.2. and 1 Peter 2.11.
That is; both

I. All our vicious lusts, and affections; as anger, concupiscence, pride,
drunkenness, prophannesse and the like. And also,

II. All our vain lusts, and affections, as riches, honor, pleasure, and all
vain joy and delight.

Fifthly, let us spend our lives in spiritual

I. In the works of the Lords day; that is

First, in a Reverend, and careful hearing of the word, upon the Lords day.

Secondly, in a repetition of those things with our families which we hear.

Thirdly in a private examination of our selves, and our own consciences, by
that which we have heard.

Fourthly, in a faithful and fervent praying unto God both privately with our
families, and secretly with our selves, and publicly with the congregation.

Fifthly, in singing of Psalms of praise, and thanksgiving unto God. Now these
duties are required of us upon the Lords day.

II. We must study how we may so direct and lead our lives, that God may be
pleased with us. Psalm 119.9. And

III. We must sometimes fast, for the better confirming, and establishing of us
in these, and all other good duties.

Sixthly, let us watch in these; lest either negligence,

Seventhly, let us remember continually, what

VERSE. 14. Let them alone: Verse 14.
they be blind leaders of the blind. And if the blind leads the blind, both
shall fall into the Ditch.
In this verse our Savior shows the misery of blind Teachers, and of those
also who are led by blind Teachers.

First, our Savior here speaks of the Scribes and Pharisees who were offended
with him, verse 12. And says of them in this verse. That they be blind leaders
of the blind. And if the blind lead the blind both shall fall into the ditch.
In foveam peccati and inferni: Into the ditch of sin and Hell: says Hugo
Cardinalis on the place. Cum Pastor per abrupta graditur, necesse est ut grex
in praecipitium ducatur. When the S^epherd goes by craggie clifts, the flock
must needs fall Headlong, and break their necks; says Gregory. Duces,
praeceptores fovea, infernus. The guids are the Teachers, and the ditch is
hell, says Faber Stapulensis on this place.

Romans 1.28. Corinth. 12.2. Ephesians. 4.14. and 2 Thessal 2.11. and 2 Timoth.
3.13.



How can I (said the Eunuch) understand without a Teacher? Acts 8.

Peter 2.2. And hence the Lord threatens to make drunk their guids, if they
will not obey, Ierem. 51.57. and to send them seeing Seers if they will but
repent, and obey, Ierem. 3.13.14.









I. Is without a head or guide, or King. Or

II. Which has blind, and ignorant Magistrates and Governors.



I. Has blind guids, and ignorant Teachers. Or which has wicked Teachers;
that is, without the light of a pure life, though not without the light of
sound Doctrine and knowledge. Here observe three things. viz.

First, that ordinarily, a Teacher, who is sound in judgment, and profound in
knowledge, does more harm by a wicked example, then good by all his preaching:
because we live now more by examples then precepts. And therefore in regard of
this scandal, and stumbling stone which wicked Teachers put before the face
and feet of their flocks. I say they are miserable who have such wicked guids,
although they be sound, and seeing Pastors (in regard of their knowledge)

Secondly, I conceive those people are equally and alike miserable, who have no
guide at all, and those who have blind and ignorant Teachers; that are not able
to lead the flock of Christ in the ways of God, their own lips not preserving
knowledge, Malach. 2.7.

Thirdly, it is better for a people to have a Pastor who is endued with the
light of knowledge (though not with the light of a pure and immaculate life)
then one who is ignorant and unable to teach, although his life be not so
scandalous, as the life of the other.

VERSE. 17. Do not ye yet understand,
The Scriptures every where ref^ll the error Not that (says he) which goes
into the mouth, defiles the man, but that which comes out of the mouth
defiles the man. Now the Pharisees being offended with this speech, our
Savior confirms it by the very condition and corruptible nature of all meat,
in this verse Do not ye (says he) yet understand, that whatsoever enters
into the mouth, goes into the belly, and is cast out into the draught. As if
he would say, it is a foolish thing to seek holiness, or righteousness, in
such Terrene, corruptible and frail things, as are meat and drink: or to think
a man to be contaminated and defiled by the moderate use of any sort of meat or
drink: For all these things are neither good nor evil in themselves, but are
made evil by the mind or abuse, of him that misuseth or uses them not aright.

We produce this place as against the Popish

If the body of Christ were carnally eaten, then it should go into the belly,
and from the^ ^e into the Draught: but this is absurd; therefore also the
other. If the Reader desire to see how this Argument is canvased to and fro;
and how it is answered by Bellarmine, and his answers answered, let him Read
Chamier tom. 4. de euchar lib. 11. Cap. 16. fol. 686. 687. I only add a word
or two.

First, Bellarmine hereto answers, that Christ

First, to this we answer, that the truth of this which enters into the mouth,
that goes into the belly and is cast out into the Draught.

Secondly, we answer, that Bellarmine himself in his answer does grant, that
all those things which nourish the body, go into the belly, and are cast out
into the draught. Now we assume, but that which is received with the corporal
mouth in the Eucharist, does nourish the body: And therefore by his own
confession, that which we eat with the mouth of the body goes into the belly
and is cast out into the draught. Our Assumption is proved by that Analogy
which this Sacrament has with our Spiritual nourishment; yea from the
Schoolmen themselves, who maintain, that those things (which they call Species
Sacrament^las) which remain in the Sacrament after Consecration, Reficere
nutrire and virtutem vini, tanta quantitate posse sumi, ut hominem naturaliter
inebriaret. Alex. Al. ^. 4. q. 10. m 7. a. 2. Bonavent. and alij in 4. d. 12.

Bellarmine answers, that after the Resurrection Christ did verily eat, and yet
that was not cast into the Draught which he did eat.





Bellarmine answers that Christ speaks here of mortal and corruptible meat,
not of immortal and incorruptible, such as his body is. Bellarm. de euchar
lib. 1. Cap. 14. resp. ad Arg. 2.

Whatsoever enters in at the mouth; and therefore nothing that goes that way
can be excepted.

Peter shows: you are borne a new not of mortal Seed but immortal; even the
word of God. 1 Peter 1.23. Then it follows verse 24. All flesh is grass etc.
but the word of the Lord endures for ever. Flesh which is grass and
corruptible is not capable of the immortal Seed of the word, no more is it of
the immortal food of Christ's body, for they may as well say, that mortal food
may go into the soul, as immortal into the belly.



Verse. 19. For out of the heart proceeds evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
etc.




First, evil; as Genes. 6.5. and 8.21. and Esa. 597. Psalm 94 11. Romans 1.21.
and 1 Corinthians. 3.20 Now in these evil thoughts we may observe these things,
viz.

I. That both they and good thoughts are known unto God. Deuter 31.21. and 1 Samuel 16.7. and 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Job. 42.2. Psalm. 7.9. and 94.11. and 139.2. and
Ierem. 11.20. and 17.10. and 20.12. Ezech. 11.5. Esa. 29.15. Matthew 9.4. and
12.25. Luke 5.22. and 6.8. and 9.47. and 11.17. and 1 Corinthians. 3.20. and Hebr.
4.12. And

II. That evil thoughts are odious unto God, and condemned by him. Proverb.
6.18. and 12.5. and 15.26. and 24.9. Esa. 32.7. and 65.2. And

III. That evil thoughts pollute and defile. Ierem. 4.14. Matthew. 15.19. Iam.
2.4. Psalm. 56.5. And

IV. That evil thoughts, and the wicked devices of the heart shall be
frustrated, and disappointed. Job. 5.12. Psalm 5.10. and 33.10. and 76.10.
Prove. 12.2. and 19.21. and 15.22. Ezech. 20.32. and 38.10. And

V. That evil thoughts by wicked men are sometimes magnified, and obeyed.
Ierem. 18.12. And.

VI. That evil thoughts are sins, Proverb. 24 9. Acts 8 22. And

VII. That evil thoughts shall be punished, Proverb 12.2. Eccles. 10 20. Esa.
66.18. Ierem. 4.4. 18. and 6.19. Mich. 7.13. Acts 8.22. And

VIII. That evil thoughts are therefore to be washed of, Ierem. 4.14. and
left, Esa. 55.7 and Iere. 23.22 and 25.5. Esa. 1.16.

Secondly, there are good thoughts; wherein we may observe these three things;
namely,

I. That good thoughts are praised, and commended by God, Prove. 12.5. and 21.5.
And

II. That good thoughts are directed by God. Prove. 16.3. And.

III. That good Thoughts come from God. 2 Corinthians. 3.5.

VERSE. 22.23.24.25.26.27.28. And behold a woman of Canaan came out of the same
coasts and cried unto him, saying, Have mercy on me O Lord, thou Son of
David, my Daughter is greevously vexed with a Devil. But he answered her not a
word. And his Disciples came, and besought him saying, Send her away, for she
cries after us. But h^e answered and said, I am not sent but unto the lost
Sheep of the house of Israel. Then came she and worshipped him saying, Lord,
help me. But he answered, and said, It is not meet to take the Childrens
bread, and to cast it to Dogs. And she said truth Lord, yet the Dogs eat of
the crummes, which fall from their Masters Table. Then Jesus answered, and said
unto her, O Woman, great is thy faith: be it unto thee, even as thou will. And
her Daughter was made whole from that very hour.
. 1. And cried unto him; Have mercy on me O Lord: my Daughter is greevously
vexed of a Devil.

In this Canaanitish woman, who came unto Christ in the behalf of her
Daughter, we may observe these things, namely,

First, she cries unto him: Now crying is a sign of sorrow, and grief.

Secondly, she cries, Miserere mei. Have mercy on me: she does not say, Have
mercy on my daughter, but on me: as if she would say, it is I which am
tormented, and depressed with this evil.

Thirdly, she cry^th, Lord help me, verse 25. She does not say, Lord help my
Daughter; but me, thereby showing the true nature of true love, which is to
make our brothers misery ours.

Fourthly, that she may gain good will the better of Christ, she calls him
Lord.

Fifthly, she insinuates her tribulation, and misery, when she says, My
Daughter is sore vexed of a Devil.







I was not sent, but to the lost sheep, of the house of Israel.





John 10. Or those who desire to approve themselves, to belong unto God, must
labor to be like sheep?





John 1. Yea, He was as a Sheep before the Shearer, Esaias 53.









Joseph, who learned among the Egyptians to swear by the life of Pharaoh. And
therefore, because we are prone to be stained by those amongst whom we
converse, we must be so much the more careful of our selves, and watchful
over our ways.

Fifthly, sheep easily follow the Wether, their

Sixthly, sheep hear the voice of the Shepherd, John 10. So we should be
ready to hear Christ, speaking unto us in his word, and follow him, in obeying
those things which in his word he teaches unto us.

Seventhly, sheep are simple, and not crafty: John 1.41.

Eighthly, sheep are innocent; that is, they

Ninthly, the Lambs which were offered up in Cor. 7.1.

To what sheep was Christ sent?

To lost sheep. Ovibus perditis. Here observe, perdition, or loss.

First, Eternal. And thus Judas is called, The son of perdition; because he
perished everlastingly.

Secondly, Temporal; and thus Christ gathers those which were lost.

We see here then, that Christ was sent to lost sheep; that is, to such as
confess themselves to be miserable, sick, and wanderers, from the ways of
God: Whence we learn,

That we ought to acknowledge our selves to

First, the Physician was sent to none, but to the sick: Christ was sent only
To lost sheep

Secondly, there is no need of a Physician, except a man want health.

Thirdly, there is no seeking unto the Physician, nor hope in him, except men
be sensible of their sicknesses, and sores. And therefore, I. Mad men. And Are
incurable: Wherefore we must first labor to be sensible of our sins,
sicknesses, and miseries; and then hasten unto Christ. II. Dead members Are
incurable: Wherefore we must first labor to be sensible of our sins,
sicknesses, and miseries; and then hasten unto Christ.


To what lost sheep was Christ sent?

To the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

That the Church of God is a House; God separates

What is here required of us?

First, we must hunger, and thirst, desire and Psalm 27.4. and 84.4.

Cor. 6.19.20. II. In a great house, there are diverse offices, and officers,
but yet but one Law: so in the Church of Christ, there are diverse degrees, and
men of all callings; but yet but one truth, (which all must hold) and one Law,
which all must be regulated by. III. Fellow Servants a^e separated from others,
but united amongst themselves: So the children of God are separated from the
world, but united together amongst themselves, in and with their Head Christ,
Ephesians. 4.4. and 5.25, 29. etc. Titus 2.14. IV. Fellow servants must mutually
help one another: so we must bear one another burdens, and perform all
offices of love unto each other.

Tim. 2.19. That is, we must labor to be pure, and undefiled, and bring forth
much pure, and holy fruit.



It is not good to take the childrens bread, and give it to dogs.

In these words our Savior teaches this point of doctrine unto us:

Matthew. 7.6. and 2 Timoth. 2.2. and Matthew. 10.11.



Matthew. 7.6. [ Give not holy things to dogs, nor cast your pearls before
swine, lest trampling them under their feet, Mat. 7, 6.
they turn again, and rent you] we may gather these five reasons; namely,

I. Because they are holy things.

II. Because they are Pearls.

III. Because they are your pearls; that is, the Jewels which are proper unto
the faithful.

IV. Because he that does it, will but lose his labor; for dogs and swine will
trample pearls under their feet. And,

V. Because it is perilous, and full of danger to him that does it; for they
will turn upon you, and rent you.

Ab indignis.
who are unworthy of them, or wicked; because, I. They being impure, and
polluted, contaminate, and defile all things: for a pure thing became impure
(under the Law) by the very touch of a man polluted. II. Because it cannot be
expected, or hoped, but that the holiest things being given to those, who are
wicked, will be abused by them, and unworthily handled.

Thirdly, holy things must not indifferently, Ab alijs.
Some hunger after them, but others despise them: and therefore some choice
should be made in the distributing of them. Yea, II. It would make others to
slight, and despise holy things, if they saw them given to dogs, and hogs, and
all sorts of wicked men.

Fourthly, Ministers are dispensers, distributers, A nobis.
(1 Cor. 4.1.) ordained by the Lord to give meat in due season to his servants,
( Matthew. 24.45.) And therefore they must not take the childrens bread, and give
it to dogs, or the servants money, and give it to loyterers, or rebels.

What holy things are not indefinitely, and

First, the word; for we see that the Lord Act. 16. Against this it will be
objected,

Christ commands his Apostles to preach upon the house tops ( Matthew. 10.27.

First, we distinguish here, betwixt the preaching

I. Exhortatorie, by way of exhortation; and thus mercy is to be preached,
Conditionaliter, upon condition, that men will do as they are exhorted. And
thus Mercy, I. Is, and may be preached in the beginning to all indifferently.
But II. After grace is once offered in the word, and despised, it is not then
to be preached to the contemners, as follows more plainly in the last
distinction, Act. 13.51. and 18.6. and 19 9. Ier. 51.9.
.

II. Mercy is preached Consolatorie, by way of consolation; and thus it is
preached Absolute, positively, to the obedient, and believers.

Secondly, we distinguish betwixt All, and

Thirdly, we distinguish between those, who Act 18.6. and 19.9. and 13.51.
and 2 Timothy 4.14. And II. Those who are doubtful: for they which for the
present are enemies, may be in Gods election of grace, Romans 11.6. Esaias 11.6.
Ephesians 2.12.13. and 2 Timothy 2.25. Now although the word be to be taken away from
the former, yet not from these.

Secondly, the profession of the word is not persons. It is not necessary, that
men should accuse themselves; and consequently, not required to lay our selves
open to those, who persecute the truth, either by fire, sword, or derision.
Here I lay down these particulars, viz. I. That if we be called thereunto, we
must confess Christ, and his truth, and that even unto death: for we must
rather dye, then deny either our God, or religion.

II. We must not so hide, or conceal our selves in the times, and places of
danger, that we seem unto others, either to deny, or to be ashamed to confess
Christ, or his truth; as Nicodemus at first did, John 3. For our lives must be
as pure, and our love unto religion as sincere, and our hatred to all manner of
supersticion, and iniquity as great, in the times and places of persecution,
as of peace.

III. This only is lawful for us, to remove our selves from the company, and
society of those who are wicked in themselves, or maliciously, and
despightfully bent against us.

Titus 3.10. Here observe,

I. That charity believes all things, and hopes all things, (1 Cor. 13.) and
therefore often (through hope) admonishes those, who are no better then dogs,
and swine.

II. That charity (at the least) makes a Christian do for the wicked; as
Samuel did for Saul; that is, although he came not at him (1 Samuel 15.35.) yet
he ceased not to pray, and mourn for him, 1 Samuel 16.1. So the children of
God, sometimes forbear to reprove those who are wicked, and remove themselves
from their society, and acquaintance, but never cease to pray, and mourn in
secret for them.

III. Observe how miserable, men make themselves by the contempt, and
disobedience of the word of God: for the Lord will not suffer such to be
reproved; and without reproof, they must needs run on headlong unto
destruction.

Matthew. 26.26.

Musculus observes a great abuse in conferring of holy orders; sometimes upon
ignorant men, and sometimes upon wicked. But I enlarge not this.

Then Jesus answered, and said unto her.

We see here this poor woman to stand in need of mercy, to desire mercy, to
cry for mercy: yea, to follow Christ, the fountain of mercy, and yet seems a
great while to be slighted by Christ, and neglected, but at length he hears
her: To teach us.

Joseph was afflicted, hated of his brethren, and sold, falsely accused, and
laid in prison, as though God had forgotten him David all his life time (in a
manner) was under one affliction, or other; and Israel was forty years in the
desert. Thus the Lord seems often not to regard his children, nor to take
notice of their wants.

When does the Lord seem not to regard his servants?

First, when they pray; for the children of Psalm 22.2, 3. And that either,

I. In temporal affliction; for sometimes the godly are oppressed, and the
ungodly insult over them; yea, although in their misery they call upon the
Lord, yet he holds his peace, Psalm 69.17. Or,

II. When they pray for spiritual grace, or strength, 2 Cor. 12.8.

Why does the Lord so often refuse to answer the prayers of his children?

First, because they ask a stone instead of bread; and pray for those things,
which may be hurtful unto them.

Secondly, because some sin, or corruption hinders the Lord, from performing
that which he has promised.

Thirdly, because our wants, and afflictions may make more for Gods glory, and
the confusion of Satan; and thus Job was afflicted a while.

Fourthly, because God has appointed times for the conferring of all his
graces, and favors. And therefore if we beg any thing at Gods hands, and
receive it not, then let us think, that either, I. God sees it not to be
commodious, and profitable for us. Or, II. That our sins hinder good things
from us. Or, III. That our present estate makes more for Gods glory, then
another condition of life would do. Or, IV. That the Lords appointed time, is
not yet come. And therefore in this case we must be subject, and patient, and
awaite the Lords leisure, with perseverance in prayer.

Secondly, the Lord often seems not to regard Psalm 104.229. Cantic. 3.1. and
2 Corinthians. 3.18.

Why does God seem herein, not to regard

First, because they are not as yet purged from

Secondly, because they are not as yet truly Zebedee were. Or,

Thirdly, because they are not as yet weaned

Fourthly, because they seek not Christ fervently, Cantic 3.1. Or,

Fifthly, perhaps because they have omitted, Cantic 5.2. etc. Or at least:

Sixthly, because the Lord would have them, and difficulty acquired is the most
charily kept, and more highly prized. And therefore if any have begun to set
their faces toward Sion, and to seek the Lord and after some long search have
not found him, Let them then confess that the reason is either,

I. Because some sin yet gets the upper hand over them. Or

II. Because they are yet proud, and selfe-conceited. Or

III. Because they are not yet weaned from the world. Or

IV. Because they seek not Christ fervently and industriously. Or

V. Because they have not been so careful as they ought to nourish, and obey
the motions of of the Spirit, and to lay hold upon the offers of mercy, and to
use those means which God has prescribed in his word. Or else

VI. Because God would inure them to labor at the first, that so by exercise
they may grow the stronger. Wherefore if we desire to find Christ, and to bring
him home to our souls, let us labor to remove these impediments, and learn,

First, to subdue, and bring under all our corruptions, and take heed, that we
be not subdued, or brought under by any. And

Secondly, to be humble, and poor in Spirit, and low in our own eyes. And

Thirdly, to use the world as though we used it not, and not to love it, or set
our hearts upon it. And

Fourthly, to seek Christ with all our hearts, and with all our souls. And

Fifthly, To be careful to attend to the motions of the Spirit, and the calls
of the word. And.

Sixthly, to be constant, and courageous in the use of all Holy means, until
the Lord have fully revealed himself unto us: for although he come not within
a little time, yet he will certainly come at the last. And therefore

I. Be not discouraged, neither faint.

II. Pray unto him to reveal himself, and to be found by us, Psalm. 31.16. and
80.3, 7, 19. and 119.135.

III. Do not delay; or slack this search of Christ. And

IIII. Labor to remove all impediments out of our way: and then he that shall
come, will come and not tarry.

O Woman, great is thy Faith.

Many profitable Quaeres will here be made, namely,



Mark says, that she heard of Christ, and so (according to St. Paul, Romans
10.14) her faith came by her Hearing.



James 2.





Secondly, this woman by her coming unto (Lord be merciful unto me, and help
me,) that she was as sensible of her daughters miseries, as if they had been
her own, and besought Christ as earnestly in her behalf, as she could have
done for her self, observing herein the Apostles lesson, Weep with those that
weep, Romans 12.15.

Thirdly, this Woman prays unto Christ,

I. We do not read that she cried after the Apostles, but only unto Christ.
And

II. The Apostles as yet were living: and we deny not, but the living may pray
for the living: though neither for the dead, nor unto them.

III. The Apostles (though not sought unto) sue unto Christ (as it seems) to
help her, because Christ answers, I am not sent but to the lost sheep of
Israel, verse 24. but yet they prevail not; and herein the Popish invocation of
Saints is like unto this.

But Pareus s. page 755 thinks that the Apostles did not entreat Christ in her
behalf, but disdained her, and desired that Christ would stint her loud
clamor, and cause her to depart, because with her cries she troubled them.
Dimitte eam vel abige, Drive her away Lord, because she troubles us. And
therefore let us not with Papists forsake Christ, and flee unto the Saints; but
with this faithful Female, let us

First, pray our selves unto our God and his Christ. And

Secondly, let us continue praying (as she did) until we be heard. And

Thirdly, let not our baseness or unworthiness hinder either us from praying,
or our faith in praying, but let it be rather an Argument unto us, that we
shall be heard: because the Lord never sends such empty away, as are truly
sensible of their unworthiness.

Fourthly, another good work observable

Fifthly, in this woman we see a singular humility, It is not good to take the
Childrens bread, and to cast it to Dogs: And what says this woman unto it?

I. She does not deny that the Jews are the Children of God; although she
might justly have objected, and taxed their great incredulity, and ungratitude,
Neither

II. Does she deny that she is a Dog, but confesses it, yea confirms it, for
these words Etiam Domine, yea Lord, do import a confirmation of what he had
said. Although she might justly have compared her fidelity and confidence, with
the infidelity, and diffidence of the Jews: and from thence have concluded;
That she was more like a Child then they, and they more like Dogs then she.
But she silenceth this, acknowledging that she is every way as vile and
unworthy, as Christ says she is. From whence we may note by the way, that true
humility has in it these two properties: to wit,

First, not to contemn or condemn others, as worse: therefore this woman will
not meddle at all (by way of reproof, or fault-finding) with the Jews.

Secondly, to acknowledge our own vileness and unworthiness, although both
our faith, love and hope be great, and consequently our worthiness great in
the Estimation of God: Therefore although Christ knows this woman's faith to be
great, yet she her self confesses her self to be but a Dog. And thus a
singular humility did show it self in her.



I. She calls him Lord; and thereby acknowledges him to be God.

II. She calls him the Son of David; and thereby acknowledges him to be
man: she says; O Lord the Son of David be merciful unto me; in which words,
she attributes unto Christ, that he is the promised Messiah, that is, the
Savior of the world, and the Anointed of the Lord. And thus we see how this
Woman approved her faith unto Christ, and how by her example we ought to
approve our faith unto God, namely

First, we must come unto Christ in love, loving him above all things.

Secondly, we must love our Neighbors as our selves.

Thirdly, we must pray only unto Christ for the supply of all our wants, and
relief of all our necessities and distresses.

Fourthly, we must be patient in all injuries, and wrongs whatsoever.

Fifthly, we must be humble; that is, neither contemn others, nor be highly
conceited of ourselves; but acknowledge our own vileness, and esteem of others
better then our selves. And

Sixthly, we must show our faith, by a full and free confession and Profession
of Christ. For all these were in this woman, of whom our Savior says, O woman
great is thy faith.







First, Knowledge, now herein the faith of this woman is great: for although
she lived amongst the blind Gentiles, who were ignorant of the true God; yet
she had an exquisite knowledge concerning Christ, that he is the Lord, and the
true God: that he is the Son of David, and true man; and that he is merciful,
bountiful, and omnipotent, able to drive away the Devil, and to subdue his
power. And all these she knew, as exquisitely as if she had been brought up
amongst the people of God, all her days: And therefore her knowledge was great.
Secondly, Assent; now herein also, this woman's faith was great; for she lived
among Idolaters, some worshipping Hercules, some Beelzebub, and some others,
some other God or Goddess: yea, she lived amongst those, who being in the
like misery and misfortune, that she now was, would repair to Inchanters, and
Exorcismes, or the worship of Idols. Now all these being rejected, and
slighted, she assents unto none, but only unto those Prophesies, and Prophets
that teach, that Jesus of Nazareth is the great Prophet of the Lord, who is
able to expel, and repel Satan, and all evils. And therefore her assent was
great. Thirdly, trust and confidence; now herein likewise her faith was great;
for unto this Throne of grace (Christ) she comes with that boldness; that
neither by Christ's silence, nor a hard answer given to his Disciples, nor that
reproachful name of dog, given to her self, she can be kept from him, or
caused to surcease her suite, until she have obtained mercy, according to her
desire, Heb. 4.16. And therefore her confidence was great. Fourthly,
application: now in this also her faith was as great, as in the other three:
for she does not desire Christ to go home with her to her house, and to lay
his hands upon her Daughter; but firmly believes, that if he do but speak
the word, or assent to her request, that then her Daughter shall certainly be
freed from the molestation of Satan: yea, she believes that one crum of his
grace, is of that virtue, and efficacy, that thereby both she and her child
should be relieved, and comforted. And therefore her faith was great in
Application, Chem. harm. page 1181. cap. 80.



When is faith great?

To this Dormisecurus, sermon. 18. answers; Tunc charitati admixta, perseverans
and firma: Faith is then great, when it is conjoined with works, mingled with
love, and firm, and constant. For,

First, faith which is without works, is an idle and dead faith, James 2.

Secondly, faith, which is not accompanied with love and charity, is a
fruitless, and unprofitable faith, 1 Cor. 13.

Thirdly, faith which is not constant, and perseverant, but temporary only, is
not a great faith, neither is it available unto salvation. And therefore unto a
truly great faith, it is required, that it have with it, both works and
charity; and be constant, and perseverant even unto death.

How, or how many ways is faith in any one called great?

Four several ways: namely, First, when a man understands, and believes
profound things, concerning God; or when he apprehends much more of the nature,
and essence of God, then humane nature can teach him: And thus the Centurions
faith was great, Matthew. 8.9. Secondly, when a man can esteem all temporal
things to be transitory, and contemn them, in regard of those things which he
hopes for, by faith in Christ: And thus the faith of Moses was great, Heb.
11.26. Thirdly, when in adversity, affliction, and misery, a man can fully
trust in God, without either fainting, or doubting: And thus Jobs faith was
great, when he said, Though the Lord kill me, yet will I put my trust in him,
Job 13, 15. Fourthly, when a man does not desist from doing his duty, although
the Lord answer him not at first. And thus this woman's faith was great, who
notwithstanding the great, and diverse repulses she had (as follows in the next
question) continued to follow Christ, and to pray unto him, until her request
was granted, Anton. part 4. tit. 2. Cap. 3.. 7.
.




Have mercy on me, oh Lord, thou Son of David, my Daughter is miserably vexed
with a Devil; but he answered her not one word. It appears that she called
still, because his Disciples said, send her away, for she cries after us*
then he answers, That he was not sent, but to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel: yet notwithstanding this, she came, and worshipped him, saying, Lord
help me: He answers. It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and cast
it to whelper: She replied upon him, Truth Lord, but the whelps eat of the
crumbs, that fall from their Masters table. Then Jesus said unto her, O woman
great is thy faith. She fastened upon Christ with her prayers, as did the woman
of Shunem upon Elisha with her hands: She caught him by the feet, and said
unto him: As the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, I will not leave thee.



I. Some think that Christ hid himself some time from her, and that sh e
could not hear, nor learn where he was; and when she did hear, and come,
he was removed from thence before she came. And yet she gave not over the
Quest, until at last she had found him out, Scultet. Idea, conc p. 186.

II. Having found out Christ, she cries unto him, but is not answered by him:
He hears her cries, he sees her sorrow; but he will not vouchsafe to speak
unto her; yet she cease not crying; Christ seems to slight her, as though
she were some excommunicate person, and not worthy his answering, but she
leaves him not; yea, rather cries so much the more earnestly after him. Now
this trial was, Tentatio silentij, Christ proves, whether her faith could
speak for her, when her Savior would not speak unto her. Now the reasons
which moved our Savior not to answer, were weighty and profitable: namely,

First, that by his silence and delay, he might both prove, and exercise her
faith, and by the exercise thereof, make it the more illustrious.

Secondly, that hereby the confidence, and constancy of the woman might be
made the more apparent, to those who were with Christ.

Thirdly, that hereby the ingratitude of the Jews might the better be seen;
who having that grace offered in plenty (which she desires with tears, but
one crum of) did slight and despise it.

Fourthly, Christ would not answer her at first, nor grant her request, at the
second asking, that thereby he might teach us, that he is not so inexorable;
but that patience, perseverance, and constancy in prayer will overcome, and
prevail with him. This trial of hers was great, for having found out the
Physician which she sought for, she hoped then that all was well with her,
and her Daughter the better half cured: Dimidium facti, qui been caepit,
habet; but her expectation is crossed, for he will not answer her one word.
The word of the Father would not speak to her: the wisdom of the Father
would not answer her; the heavenly Physician would not help her: And yet all
this does not amaze her, or cause her to stint her clamor; but she follows,
and fastens still upon him by prayer, and at last overcomes.

Fifthly, Christ is silent, that she may not be silent; he will not answer,
that she may pray the more powerfully; he holds his peace, that she may cry
the louder after him.

Sixthly, some think Christ answered her not, that by his silence others might
pray with her, and for her: and thus the Apostles seem to do, Scult. Idea
con. p. 187.
for Christ not answering her; the Disciples come unto him, and entreat him to
send her away: that is, (as I conceive) that he would grant her request, that
so she might be gone; for otherwise, I cannot see what our Savior answer unto
them, points at; I am not sent, but to the lost sheep of Israel. Pareus, and
some others deny, that the Apostles besought Christ in her behalf, and say,
that they speak (as it were) with indignation against her: Master use thy
authority, and cause her to pack hence, and suffer her not thus to molest, and
disturb us by her clamours: But then Christ's answer unto them is, Nihil ad
Rhombum, having no dependence at all upon their speech: But if we understand
them, to intercede, and mediate unto Christ for her, then his answer is most
pertinent, and pregnant: For she cries for mercy, and help: but Christ
answers not; the Apostles then help her, beseeching Christ to cure her
Daughter, that so she may depart in peace: Now to this request of theirs Christ
answers, I am not sent, but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel: as if
he would say, This woman is no Jew, no Israelite, but a Gentile, and
Cana^nite; and therefore what have I to do, or why should I cure her, seeing I
am sent to the Jews only: Thus I say, it seems to me, that the Disciples
prayed unto Christ in her behalf, although I do not think (as the Papists
say) that she entreated them to do so; for we have no one word in all the
History to confirm that, but diverse to confute it, as was showed before.

III. Her next discouragement is, that she is none of Christ's sheep; she was
greatly, and grievously tried, when Christ would not speak; but she is much
sorer tried by his speech: And this trial is, Tentatio negationis; for when
he speaks, it is small for her comfort, being (to her seeming) a direct
denying, and disclaiming of her; as though he were not sent to help, and show
mercy to such as she was: yet notwithstanding this great discouragement, she
fainted not, but thus imboldens her self: Thou say, oh Lord, that I am none
of thy sheep; and if I be none of thy fold, then am I one of the devils
flock: Truth Lord, I have been one of Satan's Goats, but now I desire to be
made, and to become one of thy sheep; and in token hereof I adore thee, as the
Shepherd of my soul; and therefore good Lord help me; for a Shepherd will be
ready and willing, to help a weak, infirm, and stray sheep.

IV. Another great discouragement was this; she prostrating her self before
Christ, and praying unto him, he objects unto her her vileness, and
unworthiness, calling her (as it were in reproach) Dog; and this trial was,
Tentatio repulsae; as though she deserved like a Dog to be beaten out of his
presence, and driven away from his face, and not like a sheep to be cured,
helped, and regarded. But yet she holds out, answering thus unto Christ: O Lord
thou say I am a Dog; truth Lord, so I am, but I desire to be thy Dog; and
Masters do not drive their Dogs out of door; but although they will not suffer
them to feed at their tables upon full dishes, yet they suffer them to feed
under the table upon those bones, and scraps, and crumbs that fall; and this
Lord is all that I desire that I may but gather up a crum under thy table.

V. Christ would discourage her by her unworthiness to be fed with the
childrens bread: and she confesses, that she does not deserve it: yea, not
desire it, one crum of his divine grace being enough for her. Now Christ
hearing of this, answers, Oh woman great is thy faith.

Be it unto thee, even as thou will.

In these words is laid down the efficacy of faith, by which she obtaines
what she would have; for after these bitter brunts, and harsh repulses, she
obtained both a cure for her daughters infirmity, and a commendation of her
own faith. She wrought a miracle by the force of her prayers, making both the
deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak; she cried to the ears, and tongue of
her Redeemer, Ephata, Be ye opened, hear, and answer my petition, and
fulfill my request: whereupon our Savior answers, Oh woman great is thy faith,
be it unto thee even as thou will.

VERSE. 29. And Jesus departed from thence,
Concerning this word Mountain, a question or two may be made.

How manifold is the signification of this Mountain?

Twofold, for it either betokens, and signifies.

First, things, which are either, I. Literal, and thus Mountain is often
taken for Mount Sion, Psalm 2.6. and 48.2. and 74.2. and 78.68. and 125.1. and
133.3. Or II. Mystical: and thus this word Mountain does First, sometimes
signify the Church of God, or Kingdom of grace; as Esaias 25.6, 7. And
Secondly, sometimes signifies salvation, and the Kingdom of glory. And,
Thirdly, sometimes signifies safety, and protection, as Genesis 19.17.30* Ezekiel.
7.16. Esaias 22.5. and Ierem. 16.16. Or, Secondly, persons; which are either, I.
Divine: and thus Mountain does sometimes signify God, Psalm 121.1. Or, II.
Humanc: and thus Mountain does signify First, sometimes oppressors, as Psalm
76.5. And, Secondly, sometimes Persecuters, as Ier. 13.16. and 51.25. And
Thirdly, sometimes those who are barren, and destitute of good fruits, as Esaias
7.25. and 30.17. and 42.15. and Ierem. 4.24, 26. And, Fourthly, sometimes proud
men, as Job 9.5. and 28.9. Psalm. 144.5. Esaias 2.12.14. and 40.4. And, Fifthly,
sometimes great, and mighty men, as Judge. 5.5. and 2 Samuel 22.8. Psam. 18.7. and
46.2, 3. and 72.3. and 80.10. and 87.1. and 148 9. Esaias 41.15. and 64.1. etc.
Habac. 3.6. And, Sixthly, sometimes those who are obstinate, and obdurate,
Ezech. 6.2. etc.
How many sorts of Mountains are there?

First, there is the Mountain of the Lord: as Exodus 3.1. and 4 27. and 18.5.
and 19.3. and 24.13. Numb. 10.33. and 1 King. 19 9. Psalm 15.1. and 24.3. and
36.7. and 43.3. and 48.1. and Ier. 17.3. and 31.21. And this Mountain is called

I. Sometimes the holy Mount; as Psalm 2.6. and 3.5. and 15.1. Ezech. 20.40.
And,

II. Sometimes the Mountain of the Lords house, Esaias 2.2. Ierem. 26.18.

Secondly, there is the Mount of blessing, or Deuteronomy. 11.29. and 27.12,

Thirdly, there is the Mount of security, or the secure Mount, Psalm 30.7.

Deuteronomy. 11.29. and 27.13.

Ier. 50 6.

Josh. 3.16.

Job 14.18.

Job 28.9 Psalm 97 5. Esaias 34.3. and 64.1.3.

Psalm 83 14. and Ierem. 51.25.

Psalm 104.32. and 144.5.

Psalm 114.4.6.

Psalm 98.8.

Psalm 148.9. Esaias 44.23. and 49.13. Ierem. 31.12.

Esaias 5.25. Ierem. 4.24.



Genesis 22.2. Exodus 3.12. But this practice was afterward prohibited, and
reproved, 1 King. 14.23. and 2 Chronicles 33.15. Esaias 57.7. and 65.7. Ierem.
3.6. and 17.2. Ezech. 6.13. and 18 6, 11, 15.

Secondly, sometimes they did preach upon the Mat. 5.1.

Thirdly, sometimes they did pray upon the Matthew 14.23. and many places
besides.

Fourthly, they hewed stones out of the Mountains Chron. 2.2, 18.

Fifthly, they worshipped upon the Mountains. Psalm 99.9.

Sixthly, they rested themselves upon the Mountains;

What promise did the Lord make to the

First, the Lord promises that the Mountains Esa. 30.25. Ierem. 31.12. And

Secondly, that they shall become fruitful Esa. Ierem. 31.5. Ezech. 17.23. And

Thirdly, that all rough Mountains shall be Esa. 49.11. And

Fourthly, that on the Mountain the Genes. 22.14. Exodus 19.3. Psalm 122.1.

CHAPTER XVI.
VERSE. 4. A wicked and Adulterous generation seeks after a sign, and there
shall no sign be given unto it, but the sign of the Prophet Jonas.
A wicked generation seeks after a sign.

WE see here how our Savior calls the Scribes, and Pharisees, and Jews, an
adulterous, and wicked generation, because not content with the word of God,
they seek a sign: whence we may learn,

That we must not desire Miracles from God, that we may believe, Matthew. 12.38.
etc. and Luke 1.18. where Zachary is blamed for this and John 6.30. and Luke 16



Judge. 6.17.36. and 13.8 and 2 King 19.28. and 20.9. But now the light of the
Gospel is such, that he that runs may read it, as the Prophet Abakkuk says.

If it be Objected, that signs, Acts 2. and 4.

I answer, they rather confirm Christ, Paul,) to infidels, and unbeleevers, but
not to the Church of Christ. Hodie cessat in ecclesia, Chrysostom. s. Col. 3.
Miracles cease now in the Church, and Gregory gives the reason of it, because,
Plantae rigantur, non nisi initio. Plants are only watered when they are first
set.

Secondly, Miracles cannot make us believe;

I. By their own nature. Or

II. By any necessity: for they do not work upon our understandings, but upon
our affections, begeting there an admiration. Matthew. 9.8. But

III. Only by the will and disposition of God Who

First, granted Miracles for confirmation of his word: Or, for the Trial of
men. But

Secondly, now denies them. God sometimes suffers wicked men to work
Miracles: as appears by Matthew. 7.22. and 24.24. Revel. 13.13, 14. and 16.14.
and Exodus 7.12, 22. and 8.7. and 1 Samuel 28.12. yea he permits wicked men to
work Miracles, that they may deceive others thereby: as Deuter. 13. Ierem.
23.32. Revel. 19.20. and 2 These. 2.9. etc. And therefore we must not ask
Miracles, or seek signs at Gods hands; lest in his anger he permit them, and
permit us to be seduced by them.



Matthew. 27.42. Luke 16.31.

Canus.



I. That they go about to confirm, and prove their Religion, by miracles:
contrary to Deuter. 13.1. And

That they contend, that Miracles are to remain in all the ages of the Church,
whereas they are proper only to her nonage.



Matthew. 24.24. where Our Savior says, that false Prophets shall show great
signs, and wonders,) but Miracles are only wrought in a true Church by
faithful Teachers.

This distinction is ridiculous, because both signs, and wonders (as well as
Miracles) are ascribed to Christ. Acts 2.22. and Hebr. 2.4.

2 Thessalonians. 2.9. etc.
by false Teachers, but true Miracles are only wrought in the true Church, by
true Teachers.

I. By this distinction (if we may believe their own Canus) their Church is a
false Church, and themselves false Teachers; for he fears that most of their
Miracles are forged: yea,

II. Wicked men, and false Prophets sometimes have wrought true Miracles, as
was showed before, and is plain from Deuteronomy. 13.1. And

III. The falsehood of Miracles cannot always be convinced, or discovered by us.



I. The Devil did usually deceive, and delude men of old, by prodigies, and
Oracles, but Christ being once incarnate, all the Oracles ceased And

II. That in Popish blindness, many delusions returned; specters, spirits,
ghosts, and strange sights being usual amongst them: but the light of
reformation arising, they vanished, no such things (in a manner) being now
heard of amongst us.



I. Let them be impossible in nature: for there are many wonderful things
which are natural, and because natural, are therefore no Miracles; Exodus
8.18. John 15.24. and John 3.2. Here observe, that it is one thing to be
impossible to man, whose power is only natural; and another to be impossible
to Satan, whose nature is spiritual: And here we must be principally
careful, that those things which are impossible unto man, be not wrought by
Satan; for many are here deceived.

II. Let Miracles be true, and not false, as the Popish Miracles are. And

III. Let them be wrought amongst Heathens, not Christians; for Miracles belong
not unto believers, but unto infidels, 1 Cor. 14.22.

. 2. There shall no sign be given them, but the

Our blessed Savior, by bringing in Jonas here simply, would thereby teach us,
to consider of the whole History of that Prophet; and so to accommodate, and
apply it both to the Jews, and to our selves; that we may understand, wherein
Jonas was unto the Jews a sign.

First, as Jonas was cast into the sea by the Mariners, to whom he betrusted
himself; and was delivered by them (as they thought) to death: So Christ
coming unto the Jews, unto whom he was promised, and who were his peculiar
people; was by them cast out of the holy City, and condemned, and put to death.

Secondly, as Jonas willingly offered himself unto death, for the preservation
of the ship, and those therein: So Christ willingly laid down his life for the
salvation of his Church, and the faithful thereing

Thirdly, as Jonas by being cast into the sea allayed, and calmed the tempest:
So Christ by his death assuaged, and appeased the anger of his Father; and gave
peace of conscience unto his brethren.

Fourthly, as Jonas being (after three days burial) cast by the Whale upon
the shore, preached to the Ninivites the doctrine of repentance, and brought
salvation to those, who repented truly at his preaching: So Christ, after
three days rising from the grave, preached repentance, both to the Jews and
Gentiles, saving all of both sorts, that truly repented.

Fifthly, as Niniveh was not destroyed within forty days, after Jonas
preaching, but some forty years after; as may be gathered from the Prophet
Nahum: So Jerusalem within, or about some forty years after Christ's preaching
was destroyed, and taken by Titus; and thus Jonas was unto the Jews a sign.

VERSE. 6. Then Jesus said unto them: Take heed,
Our Savior in these words does plainly lay down this lesson unto us; Matthew.
23.13. etc. Luke 11.43. etc and Mark 8.15. And therefore let us examine their
Religion a little exactly, that so we may judge the better of the true
Religion, and acknowledge, and avoid the false. I will sum up all h^re in
this one Question.



Law, and that either,

I. Against the whole Law, by obscuring of it; which they did.

First, by their many diverse expositions: for Epiphanius tells us, that they
had a fourfold interpretation of Scripture; to wit, of Moisis, of Rabbi
Aciba, (or according to some of Baraciba, the son of Aciba) of Adda, or
Judah, or Annanus, and of the son of Assamonaeus, Senens. lib. 8.625.. 7.
This may be applied

I. To the Origenists, who allegorize all truths.

II. To the Anabaptists, who expound all Scripture, according to their
particular, and several rev^lations.

Secondly, the Pharisees obscured the Law, by taking away from the people the
key of knowledge, Luke 11.52. Thus the Papists praise ignorance, and take away
the Scripture, the key of knowledge, from the people, and stand in the
justification of it, as we might show from Doctor Standish, Hosius,
Bellarmine, and diverse others of them, wherein they are contrary to
Chrysostom, Origin: yea, holy Paul himself, Colos 3.16.

II. The Pharisees by their Religion sinned against the Parts of the Law; that
is, both

First, against the Ceremonial Law, which they preferred too much, by the
observation of their Traditions; as the washing of hands, pots, vessels, and
the like, wherein they were more strict, then in the observation of the Moral
Law, Mark 7.3. etc. Now they had two sorts of Traditions: to wit,

I. Divine, which they understood literally, and preferred before those things,
which were more weighty: Now these were their Lotions, Phylacteries, borders of
their garments, and the like, which Christ speaks of, Mat. 23. And for which
he reproves them; because they were more strict in the observation of them,
then in the great works of the Law. We must here observe, that they did not
sin in the bare use of these, because they were enjoined by God. For

First, the Lord commands them to make, (Zizith) Fimbrias, fringes in the
borders of their garments, Numb. 15.38. Deuteronomy. 22.12. And it is wonderful to
consider, what virtue they put in these, and how much they ascribed unto them;
for they thought that these being put on, were able to defend them from (Iezer
hara) their Malus genius, or corrupt concupiscence, Paulus Phagius. s. Numb.
15.38. Item. Simler and Gelasius. This may be applied to the Papists, who
ascribe full as much, if not more, to the sign of the Cross, as these
Pharisees did to their Fringes. For at first it was used for the testifying of
our faith in Christ crucified, but afterward for the driving away of devils,
and for the saving, and blessing of them from all evil, or danger, and the
like.

Secondly, they had their (Tephyllim) Phylacteria; and these were not
inventions of their own, but commanded by God, Exodus 13.9.16. Now they had a
double Phylacterie; one to wear upon their forehead, and another for their
left arm; both which were made of parchment, and were worn every day. In
these Phylacteries were writ four sentences, or lessons, which they called
(Parschioth) namely,

I. Deuteronomy. 6, 4. Heart oh Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord: And thou shall
love him, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy might.

II. Exodus 13.1, 2. The Lord said unto Moses, sanctify unto me all the first
borne.

III. Exodus 13.11, 12. When the Lord shall bring thee into the land of Canaan,
thou shall then set apart unto him, all that opens the matrix.

IV. Deuteronomy. 11.13. If thou will hearken unto my Law, and love me with all thy
heart; then I will give thee the former, and latter roine.

II. The Pharisees had humone Traditions, (...) Hier. Epist. 151. Multas
constitutiones a majoribus per manus traditas, quae non inter leges Mosis,
Joseph. Antiq. 113.18.
Besides the Laws of Moses, they had diverse traditions delivered unto them,
from the Elders. And these were the traditions which our Savior speaks of
Matthew. 15.9. I could name many of these traditions, but that some of them would
offend chastity: yet if any would see them, let him read Hierome, Epist. 151.
I will only name one or two, concerning their Tephillim: God commanded them to
wear them, but their Elders commanded, that the lessons, or sentences, which
were writ in them, should be writ in four equal lines, one no longer then
another; and therefore some of the vers^^ were clipped, and not set down as
they were in the Text. Again, when they had on their Tephillim, then they must
not come near any grave, or sepulcher; that is, not within four cubits of it,
and this was not commanded by God, but enjoined by their Elders. Now they
offended doubly in these traditions. For

First, they placed a great deal of hope, confidence, and religion in the
observation of these traditions: Si quis Tephillim quotidie utatur, et non
negligat, perinde sit, ae si quis servet omnia praecepta Dei. If any wear his
Phylacteries daily, and observe the Traditions, and Injunctions of the Elders,
in the wearing thereof, he has done in effect as much, as if he had observed,
and kept all the commandments of God, Vide Sylloge vocum exotic ubi Plura,
page 153. etc. ad 160. s. Mat. 23.5.
.

Secondly, they sinned in these traditions, because they preferred them before
the precepts of God, Matthew. 15.9. Now the Papists are like the Pharisees, and
like unto them offend in both these; as was sufficiently showed in the former
Chapter, and might be showed by that beastly Tenet of theirs: that whoredom
is rather to be tolerated, then marriage, in those that have entered into holy
(or rather ungodly) orders: but I forbear it. Thus we have seen, how in some
things the Pharisees sinned against the Ceremonial Law. Secondly, the
Pharisees sinned against the Moral Law, and that many ways: to wit,

I. Cortici inhaerendo, by looking only to the letter of the Law, Mat. 5.20,
21. and purging only the outward man, Matthew. 23.25. So there are many, who
abstain from great, gross, criminal, and enormious offenses, who never
regard sanctification at all.

Minima praeferendo; by preferring the lesser things, as appears thus,

First, because they were curious, and strict in the lesser things, as Matthew.
23.23.

Secondly, because they were injurious in the greater things, as Matthew. 23.4.
This may be applied to gross Hypocrites, who are sharp Censurers of others,
and yet no better themselves: many there are who have a show of profession, but
in the m^ane time, are covetous, proud, angry, cruel, injurious to others, and
given to revenge themselves.

III. Externis incumbendo, by insisting, and resting only in the outward work,
doing that which was commanded only to be seen of men, and to be praised by
them, Matt. 6.3. and 23.5. Now this may be applied to two sorts of men, viz.

First, unto Hypocrites, who desire to be seen, and applauded for that which
they do. Here it may be demanded;





I. That God may be glorified thereby. And

II. That our brethren may be edified, and converted thereby. And

III. That our own faith may be confirmed thereby.



I. Because sin and Satan have many servants. And

II. Because they are bold, impudent, and brazen-faced, in showing themselves
to be the servants of sin and Satan: and therefore it is a horrible shame,
for us to be ashamed by our works, to show our selves the servants of the
Lord. Yea,

III. Because it is a great fault not to shine before men, and to hold forth
the Lamp of a pure life; yea, to show forth a life replenished with all manner
of good works: For

First, if a man dare not profess Christ, or show forth Religion in his life;
it is a sign that he wants faith. And

Secondly, if a man be careless in showing forth the light of Religion, in
his life and conversation; it is a sign that he wants both zeal and love.
And therefore it is necessary that we should shine in good works before men:
But



First, in so doing a man deprives himself of good works.



First, they are proud boasters of themselves,

Secondly, they regard the outward man, but

Thirdly, they seek themselves, and their own Mat. 23.14.

And therefore let us examine our selves in these.

Secondly, this practice of the Pharisees in relying wholly upon the outward
work, may be applied to those, who place their confidence in the work
wrought, as the Papists do, thinking that they have discharged their duty
toward God, and merited a reward from God, if they have but performed those
works materially, which God requires. Indeed good works are to be done, and
that both for Gods service, and our ^xercise; but yet formally, as well as
materially, and with a right mind, as well as with the body.

IV. Finem legis nesciendo, the Pharisees sinned against the Moral Law, by
their ignorance of the end thereof: which is threefold; to wit,

First, to condemn, and convince us of sin; accusing both our evil actions,
and internal corruption.

Secondly, to lead us unto Christ; or rather, to show that it is not able to
save us; and therefore if we would be saved, we must go unto Christ.

Thirdly, to be unto us a rule of obedience, for the framing of our lives: And
therefore the libertines of our days, who would overthrow the Law, are justly
reproved. And thus we have seen, how the Pharisees sinned against the Law, both
Ceremonial, and Moral.

Secondly, the Pharisees sinned against the Gospel, and that in a double
regard, viz.

I. Because they taught Liberum Arbitrium, that there was in man a freedom of
will unto good, as well as unto evil: as both August. de haeres. and Epiphanius
write of them.

II. Because they denied righteousness by faith, Romans 10.3. which Paul only
cleaves unto, Philip. 3.9. From whence we may learn, what true righteousness
is: to wit,

First, to labor, and endeavor with all our might, and strength, and power,
to do whatsoever the Lord, in the law requires of us. And then

Secondly, to put no confidence in any thing we do, or can do; but place our
trust as wholly in Christ, as though we had done nothing at all.

VERSE. 14. And they said,
The Pharisees held diverse, and sundry erroneous opinions; amongst which some
errors they had concerning the resurrection of the dead; which although they
acknowledged, and maintained against the Sadduces; yet concerning it they thus
taught, Joseph de bell^. lib. 2. cap. 12.
: That the souls of evil men deceased, presently departed into everlasting
punishment; but the souls of good men, they said) passed by a kind of
Pythagorean (...), into other good men's bodies. And hence it is thought Serar.
Trihaeres. lib. 2. cap. 3. and Drus in Praeter.
; that the different opinions concerning our Savior did arise: Some here
saying that he was John Baptist, others Elias, others Ieremias; as if Christ
his body had been animated by the soul of John, Elias, or Ieremias.

VERSE. 16. And Simon Peter answered, and said, thou art Christ, the son of
the living God.
It is questioned, and controverted between us, and the Church of Rome, what
the object of justifying faith is, and they say, that it is not a particular
assurance, or application of the promises of God unto our selves, in and
through Christ (as we hold) but only in general to believe, that whatsoever
is contained in the word of God, is true ( Bellarm. lib. 1. de Justify. Cap.
4.)

Now because we deny this, they undertake to prove it from this verse; arguing
thus:

Peter confessed; when he said to our Savior; Thou art Christ, the Son of
the living God, was the same faith that justifies.

But this faith was a confession only of the divinity of Christ, and no
special application of his merits.

Therefore faith is no such thing, Bellarm. lib. 1. de Justify. Cap. 8.

Peter here confesses: For they affirm, that faith is an universal belief
of the Articles of Christ's death, and Resurrection, etc. But at this time,
though Peter confessed thus of the Son of God, yet he neither

I. Believed that Christ should die; for therefore was he called Satan, ver.
23. of this Chapter, because he went about to persuade Christ not to die. Nor

II. Did Peter believe at this time Christ's Resurrection for the Apostles in
general (for ought we read to the contrary) doubted of it, even when Christ
was risen again: And therefore how could this be the justifying faith, in
respect of Peter, that confessed it?

Peter confessed, though it were not the whole justifying faith, yet it was a
principal part thereof: for in faith there are two things; namely

I. The matter and substance thereof, which is the belief of the Articles of
faith. And

II. The form, which is the particular use, and application thereof, to every
man severally: To confess therefore that Christ is the Son of God: [which
does comprehend both the natures of his Godhead, and humanity; and the offices
of Christ, whereunto he was anointed, his Kingdom, Prophecy, and Priesthood]
belongs to justifying faith, as the matter, and substance thereof.

Amesius (Bell. enerv. tom. 4. page 98.) answers: That Peter, with the rest of
the Apostles, had before this confession a certain assurance, and confidence
of special mercy by Christ, the true promised Messiah: and that the
determination of this assurance was explicated, and expressed by this
confession of the Divinity of Christ.

Fourthly, Dr. Willet (Synops. f. 974.) answers, Peter in this place, that it
may declare a right justifying faith; that is, so to confess Christ to be the
Son of God, and to be the anointed Messiah, to take away the sins of the
world; that he which so confesses, believes it with comfort; and that Christ
is so, even to him. Therefore Saint Paul says; That no man can say, that Jesus
is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, 1 Corinthians. 12.3. And our Savior says to
Peter, after he had made this confession: That flesh and blood had not
revealed it unto him, but his Father in heaven. Wherefore it is certain, that
he uttered more, then a general belief of this Article, which may be in
devils; except Bellarmine will say, that the devils also made the same
confession by the Holy Ghost, and by revelation from God.

VERSE. 17. And Jesus answered, Verse 17.
and said unto him, Blessed art thou Simon Bar. Iona: for flesh and blood has
not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven.
. 1. Blessed art thou.

What is meant by Blessedness?

First, the word is unknown to none, every Aristotle placed Blessedness in a
perfect life; and the Stoics in virtue, and Plato in Idaeis. Aristotle calls
Blessedness, (...), from (...) God, or Fortune.

Secondly, Blessedness is that state (which in rerum natura, and it is rightly
called Summum banum, the chiefest good.

Thirdly, true Blessedness is twofold: to wit,

I. Present, and this is a holy life; for only such are truly blessed here,
Mat. 5, 6, 7, 1. Luke 11.28.

II. Future, or to come: and this Blessedness is life eternal; that being the
reward of the faithful, and the time of retribution, Matthew. 13.43. Revelat.
7.17.

. Flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee.

The meaning of these words is: That there is no natural illumination of the
truth, the very thoughts of the natural man's heart being evil. Genesis 6.5.
and 1 Corinthians. 2.14. and 15.50. But I pass this, by having treated of it
before, Chapans 11.5.

. 3. But my Father which in heaven.

Two things are here observable: namely,

1 The Person. II. The Action.



my Father which is in heaven.

John 14.16.

John 14.16.

my Father which is in heaven?

Romans 8.15, 16.

my Father which is in heaven?



First, an earthly Father, from whom they have their nature; and by whom they
are begotten. And

Secondly, an heavenly Father, from whom they have grace, and by whom they are
begotten anew, of water, and the Holy Ghost, John 3.5. And therefore we must
labor, to have our conversation in heaven, Philip. 3.20. because we are the
children of an heavenly Father.



not flesh and blood, but my Father has revealed these things unto thee.
Wherein our Savior teaches two things unto us; namely,

First, that the Gospel is a mystery, which is hid from all natural men, and
revealed only to the faithful, Luke 10.21.

Vetus revelatum, the old Testament revealed, and discovered: and therefore how
is the Gospel a secret mystery?

John) shined in darkness, but the darkness comprehended it not, Ioh. 1.5.
And therefore the fault is not in the Gospel, but in us.

Secondly, our Savior shows here, that it is the Lord alone, that discovers,
and reveals the mysteries of the Gospel unto us, John 14.26.

VERSE. 18, 19. And I say also unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this
Rock will I build my Church: and the gates of hell shall not prevail against
it. And I will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; and
whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven? whatsoever thou
shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven.
. 1. Thou art Peter.

What does our Savior here mean by these words?

Our Savior (says Augustine, sermon. 13. Matthew) in this place alludes to Simons
surname: Christ the Head is Petra (a Rock) therefore the body, the Church, is
Petrus. For the principal name is Petra; and therefore Petrus is derived from
Petra, and not Petra from Petrus; even as the name Christianus comes from
Christus, and not Christus from Christianus. More plainly, thy name says
Christ is Simon, but henceforth it shall be Peter; that is, one that depends
upon Petra, the Rock. I promised John 1, 42. that thou should be called
Cephas, a Stone; but now I alter it into Peter, because thy name shall be
derived of me. For I am Petra, and thou Peter, I am Christ, and thou a
Christian: I a Rock, and thou rockie, or builded upon the Rock: Thou art
Peter, because thou beleevest in Petra: that is, in me the Rock, upon the
which I will build my Congregation, whom I will have to be called Peter's,
deriving their name from me the Rock, as thine is derived: because whosoever
shall believe in me, as thou do, shall be called by the same name thou art:
and who so confesses me as thou do, shall be called Peter of me Petra: that
is, a Christian of my name Christ. Thus Origin (in hunc locum) says, If we
affirm and confess, that Christ is the Son of the immortal God, as Peter
did, then are we Peter's, and shall obtain the same felicity that he has
obtained, because our confession, and his is all one: If we confess Christ to
be the Son of God, the Father revealing it unto us, it shall then be said to
each one of us, Thou art Peter: And thus our Savior calls him Peter, and
promises to build his Church upon that Rock, which he had confessed, and
which he knew, when he said, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God: that
is, I will build my Church upon my self, not upon thee, because I am the
Rock, and thou only derived from it, or one depending upon it, Sylloge. voc.
exotic. p. 126.
.

. 2. Upon this Rock.

Who is the Head,

Not Peter, or the Pope, but Christ: Ephesians 1, 21, 23. Colossians 1, 16, 18.
And is therefore by this title of the head of the Church lifted up by Saint
Paul, above all Angels, Principalities, and powers: Wherefore although the Pope
were the successor of Peter and Paul, yet should he not therefore be the
head of the Church, which agrees to none in heaven, or under heaven, that is
merely a creature, but is proper, and peculiar to our Lord Christ.

Against this the Popish Writers generally object Peter: Thou art Peter, and
upon this Rock will I build my Church: therefore he was Ruler over the
Apostles, and the Foundation, and the head of the whole Church, and the
universal Bishop of the earth: And therefore the Pope of Rome his successor,
is the head of the Church, and the Bishop, and chief Ruler over all the
particular Churches in the world. Peter they say is the foundation of the
Church, of him it depends, in him it rests, and he is the head thereof: and
as God dwells in Christ: so does Peter in the Pope: Bellarmine frames the
Argument thus.

If Peter be the Rock upon which Christ built his Church, then Peter is the
Monarch and head of the Church (and consequently the Pope his successor)
because that which in a building is the foundation, in a body is the head.

But the former is true from this verse.

Therefore also the latter.

Thou art Peter and upon this Rock will I build my Church, for by Rock (in this
place) the Papists understand not Christ (as do the Protestants) but Saint.
Peter, and with that confidence and insultation, that they challenge all
Protestants to answer it, or contradict it if they can. Let all the Lutheranes
come (say they) and join issue with us; the authority of this place is
invincibly for us, yielding unto us the Triumph ( Roffensis advers. Luth. Art.
25. and Bellarm de Romans pon. li. 1. Cap. 10. Staplet. doctr. princip. Cap. 3
etc. 5. and alij: vide Dr. Mort. appeal. Li. 1. Ca. 2.. 30 p. 36. fine).

Scharp de Capeti eccles. milit. page 100 and 116, and Peter not at Rome, page
28. etc. Cham. tom. 2 fol. 376. Willets Synops. 152 etc. and Bishop Davenant
Determine. page 220 and Pareus s. In all which he shall see the present Objection
so fully answered, that no Papist (as yet that I know of) has undertaken to
confute their Answers. I will add an Answer or two, because this Objection is
daily and hourly whispered, as a truth undeniable.

Peter, yet not only Peter but the rest of the Apostles also; For the Question
being asked of all; But whom say ye that I am? Peter to avoid confusion gave
answer, in the name of all the rest of the Apostles, upon whom (in respect of
their Ministry) the Church is as well builded, as upon Peter, Revelat. 21.14.
As appears thus.

I. All being asked the Question, it must necessarily follow, that either Peter
gave answer for all and as the mouth of the rest; or else that Christ asked his
Apostles a question but received no answer from them; which cannot be affirmed,
without charging Disobedience upon the Apostles, (who would not Answer when
their Master spoke unto them) and Negligence upon Christ, who seeking to
strengthen all the Apostles in the faith toward himself, should have given
them no strength at al; neither by experience of the work of God within
themselves, nor by the glorious promises which he annexed to this confession,
unless he had in Peter's Answer, received the answer of the rest, and in
speaking to him, had spoken to the rest.

II. It appears otherwhere by Peter's own confession, that the rest knew, that
Christ was the Son of the living God as well as he himself ( John 6.69) And
therefore what should hinder them from making confession of it as well as did
Peter? and in regard thereof to be as much respected of their Master as he?

Fourthly, although by the Rock, here be meant Peter, yet it will not follow
that Peter is the Head of the Church: for those Fathers who interpreted Peter
to be this Rock did render other reasons, why he was called a Rock then this,
because he was constituted and made the Head of the Church. Nazianzen says,
Petrus petra vocatur etc. Peter is therefore called a Rock, because the Church
is built upon his faith, or has his faith for her foundation. And Theophylact,
Quia primus eam confessionem edidit, super qua Ecclesia fundanda erat: Peter
was therefore called a Rock, because he first made that public confession of
Christ, upon which the Church was built; yea Erasmus has observed in the
sentence of S. Cyprian, that although Christ had called Peter the Rock, yet it
was not to make Peter the Imperial top, but the representative Type of the
Church: that as he answered in the name of all, so every one professing the
same, might be a Petrus in his kind ( Erasm. annot. in Matthew. 16.) Accordingly,
Cardinal Cusanus from S. Hierome answers, that although the word Rock
should betoken Saint Peter to be the foundation-stone, yet so likewise were the
other Apostles called the stones of the Church. Card. Cusan. de Concord.
eccles. lib. 2 Cap. 13.

Fifthly, although Peter were both the foundation, Peter was Bishop of Rome,
yet it cannot be proved by Scripture, but rather the contrary: For if he had
been at Rome when Paul was there, amongst many others he would not have
forgotten to mention him, having diverse occasions thereof: especially he would
not have wrapped him in the common charge, that all had forsaken him, 2 Timoth.
4.16. yea again, Peter's proper charge being amongst the Jews, who were never
frequent, or many at Rome, (Galath, 2.7.) and after the few that were there
were banished from thence ( Acts 18.2.) what likelihood was there, that he
would most reside there where they had least to do, except they will say that
Peter loved his ease and pleasure as the Popes of Rome do? And therefore they
might have had more color to have made S. Paul Bishop of Rome, (who was there,
and writ an Epistle thither, and was the Apostle of the Gentiles, then St.
Peter, seeing he never writ any Epistles to Rome, never set foot in Rome, that
they can prove, nor ever was properly the Apostle of the Gentiles, but of the
Jews, which the Romans were not. Again, if it should be granted that Peter was
at Rome, yet there is no colorable probation, that he was Bishop there, the
Bishopric being a place far inferior to the Apostleship, whereunto he is
called. 1 Corinthians. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11. yea though Peter were the Bishop of
Rome, yet it will not follow that the Bishop of Rome is his successor: For

I. It should have been but a personal right belonging unto him only; For the
driving of this wedge more home, and close unto them, let us observe how
Bellarmine (lib. 3. de pont. romans Cap. 2.. Secundus locus) goes about to
prove, That Antichrist is but one singular man, from the Greek article ^, as
where Antichrist 2. These. 2. is called The man of sin, and the child of
perdition, signifying (says he) one certain and individual person; and then
(as though this observation derived from the Greek article, were a point of
learning, and of singular moment) he in a manner insulteth against Protestants
for their ignorance herein (Et sane mirum est nullum Adversariorum qui tamen
jactant linguarum peritiam, hoc animadvertisse) never considering that by what
Argument; they would free their Popes in their personal succession from the
Title of Antichrist, by the same they mainly overthrow that wkich they think to
be the very bulwark of all Popery, even this succession from St. Peter, as
thus. In this verse our Savior says. Thou art Peter, and (...), that is, Upon
this (the) rock, will I build my Church. And thus by their own Argument, if
Peter were Bishop of Rome, and was meant by the Rock, yet it is not to be
extended further then his own person. If the Reader would see into how great a
strait the Papists are brought by this Argument, let him read our venerable
and Reverend Prelate Bishop Mortons Appeal, lib. 2. Cap 5.. 4. page 146, 147.

II. If Peter were the Bishop, and it belonged to his successors to be so,
then Antioch, where he is said to have sat, before he is supposed to have
sitten at Rome, might challenge it as well, and as warantably as they. Neither
can his death (which they suppose to have been at Rome) give that privilege to
Rome above Antioch, or any other place, more then the death of Christ
privileged Jerusalem, which by the just judgment of God, for the same cause
was made an heap of stones.

III. If Peter were the Bishop of Rome, and the Head of the Church, and that
this did belong to his successors at Rome; yet it belongs to his successors
in Doctrine, and not to his successors in place only; considering that if the
Church were builded upon Peter, it was in respect of the Doctrine he taught,
and not of his person. Now there have been some Popes Heretics, some
Magicians, and some in their words no better then Atheists, (as is proved by
our Bishop Jewel, and Bishop Morton in many places of his Appeal) and
therefore these were no successors to St. Peter, in his doctrine, and
consequently not his successors at all.

Peter, but himself which Peter confessed. Now because this is the very life,
marrow, and sinews of this objection, we will prove it plainly, and that

I. By some of our Holy Martyrs: as for example.

First, John Husse says, That Christ in saying upon this Rock etc. did not
purpose to build the Church upon Peter, but upon himself who is the true rock:
for as much as Jesus Christ is the only head and foundation of every Church,
and not Peter Fox, page 610. resp. ad artic. 9.

Secondly, Sir John Bortwike Knight, condemned for the truth in Scotland, anno
1540. thus declares his mind. As Abraham took his name of the multitude,
which should come of his seed, so Peter was named of the Rock; but Abraham was
not the multitude it self, no more was Peter the Rock; for the Church should
be stayed upon a weak foundation, if Peter were the ground thereof, who being
amazed, and overcome with the words of a little wench, did so constantly deny
Christ, Fox 1260.

II. By some of the Fathers, who have expounded this place, not of Peter's
person, but of his faith, built upon the true Rock, Jesus Christ: Fides est
Ecclesiae fundamentum, Ambrose de incarnat. Cap. 5. Petra est quisquis, etc.
Every Disciple of Christ that drinks of the spiritual Rock, is a Peter, and
a Rock: Origin, Tract. 1. in Matthew. So Augustine by the Rock here understands
Christ. s. Super hanc Petram, etc. Upon this Rock Peter which thou confessest,
and upon this Rock which thou acknowledgest, when thou said, Thou art Christ,
the Son of the immortal God: upon this Rock will I build my congregation;
that is, upon my self the Son of the ever living God; upon me will I build
it, and not upon thee. Again, Aug. s. John 21. says; the Church cannot fall,
because it is founded upon the Rock, of the which Rock, or Petra, Peter has
his name.

III. This may be confirmed by this reason, because Nomen and Denominatum, the
name, and the thing denominated, cannot both be spoken of one, and the same
thing: For a stone, and stony, is not both one: faith, and a faithful man, are
diverse things, as are also Grammar, and a Grammarian. Petra is the name, from
whence Petrus is derived, or denominated: and therefore the Papists grossly
expound this place, even as though a man should thus say, Aristotle is a
Logician, and Logic is the instrument of sciences: therefore Aristotle is the
instrument of sciences: for Petrus differs from Petra, as Dialecticus from
Dialectica; namely, because both are (...). This reason is drawn from
Augustine (Tract. 124. in John) and Basil sermon. de poenit. and Ambrose, sermon.
84.

IV. This may further be confirmed from Scripture: as

First, from this very Text, where we see the Evangelist does thus express
the mind, and meaning of Christ, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I
build my Church; in which words we see Peter clearly distinguished from the
Rock, both in gender and person; which were absurd, if both the members were
to be understood of one Peter: for if so, then the words should have bin thus;
Thou art Peter, and upon thee Peter will I build my Church: Now we not being
able to teach the Holy Ghost to speak, must take the Scripture as spoken, and
meant by him.

Secondly, that Christ founded not his Church upon Peter, but upon the Rock of
his confession, does further appear by the Text, what was his confession? That
Jesus Christ was the Son of God. Then this faith of Peter's is the foundation
of the Church, which foundation Paul affirms to be Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11.

Thirdly, this may further be confirmed from these words, (...), my Church,
thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church: which words
signify the whole edifice, which consists of diverse parts, and is called the
Church; whereof there are principally these two parts, namely, the Militant
Church, and the Triumphant. Now there is nothing in all Christ's words, which
may be restrained unto one part only; namely, to the Militant, excluding the
Triumphant. Now it is granted on all hands, as most certain, that these two
parts have but one foundation. And therefore if Peter be understood by that
Rock, upon which Christ promises to build his Church, then it will follow,
that Peter is the foundation, and head of the Triumphant Church, as well as
Militant; and consequently the Pope; which is so false, that I persuade my
self, every ingenuous Papist would blush to affirm it, Cham. de Pontif. lib.
11. cap. 2. fol. 377
.

Fourthly, this may yet further be confirmed from this verse, because Christ
said not to Simon, Thou shall be Peter; but, thou art Peter; and there fore if
both these enunciations be one in signification, Thou art Peter, and, Thou art
a Rock: then it is necessary, that now when Christ spoke this, Peter should
have been a Rock immovable: but this is false, because presently after he
fell foully, and d^nied his Master shamefully; whereby he showed, that he was
not as yet so confirmed, and rooted in Christ, that he could adhere unto him,
without any staggering: which yet notwithstanding he did afterward, when he
had received the Holy Spirit. And therefore the Rock did not betoken Peter,
because now he was no Rock.

Fifthly, the Apostle Paul says positively, 1 Cor. 3. Another foundation can
no man lay, besides that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ: we may add
hereunto the testimony of Gregory, Greg lib. 28. mor. cap. 6.
Cum in sacro eloquio non fundamenta, s^d singulari numero fundamentum dicitur,
nullus alius nisi ipse Dominus designatur: Whenever in the holy Scriptures
we read of a foundation in the singular number, we must understand it of
Christ. For if (as the Apostle affirms) besides Christ, there can be no other
foundation of the Church; then without doubt, it cannot be proved by any
argument, that Peter is the Rock, upon which the Church is built. For that
upon which the Church is built, Eccles. 2.20.
is the Churches foundation, which is Christ, and not Peter: For Peter himself
was built upon Christ, and so also were the rest of the Apostles: yea, the
whole Church of God. Indeed Peter may be called a foundation; Revelat. 21.14.
because by preaching the Gospel, he founded the Church: and in this sense, the
other Apostles are called foundations. But grant that Peter is that Rock,
which does so sustain the whole Church, that the gates of hell cannot prevail
against it (which none dare affirm that are in their right wits) yet what is
this to that Monarchy of Popish, and Romish Bishops, which all their adherents
labor so much for? It is one thing to sustain a house, and another to govern
it by a Monarchical command, and rule. Neither can the Popes by this their
external Monarchical government either defend any one member of the Church,
against the gates of hell, or themselves, who are swallowed up of death. And
therefore we may pity the Church of Rome, whose Rock (even according to
their own confession) may sink down into hell, and be overcome by it. For
themselves acknowledge, that the Pope (who is the head, and foundation of the
Church) may be damned eternally.

Sixthly, and lastly, it appears evidently, that the Rock in this place does
signify Christ, and not Peter, by the testimony of the Popish Writers
themselves.

First, venerable Bede says, Metaphorice Petre dictum est (super hanc Petram)
id est, salvatorem, quem confessus est, aedificatur Ecclesia, etc. Bid in
Matthew. 16. Christ says Metaphorically to Peter, upon this Rock; that is, upon
the Savior of the world, whom thou have confessed, will I build my Church.

Secondly, to sum them up together (as our Reverend Prelate does) Bishop
Mort. page 276.
: Their learned Expositor Lyra; their honest Preacher Ferus, and Cardinal
Hugo, by Rock expound Christ; yea, their common Gloss upon the Papal
Decrees, fixes a Credo, that is, a belief upon it: and their Cardinal
Cusamus is confident in the matter, and ventureth against their
Notwithstanding, to affirm that by the Rock, is meant Christ.

Thirdly, some of the Jesuits themselves, have neither feared, nor blushed to
affirm it; Pererius (Comment. in Dan. 2. in ea verba; lapis abscissus) says,
that Christ is that Rock (noting the place of Matthew. 16.) upon the which the
Church is built; And Salmeron (Comment. in Ephesians. disp. 16.) shows; that
Christ is the foundation. And thus much may suffice, I hope (unto any
indifferent Reader) in answer to their first objection.

The Papists produce these words, Thou art Peter, to prove, that the Pope
cannot err; they reason thus: In this place Peter is called the Rock, and
foundation of the Church; and withal every one of his successors is the Rock,
and foundation thereof: Now the name of a Rock does denote constancy, and
solidity, and an immovable stability: And therefore if the Pope err in faith,
as he is Pope, he cannot be called the Rock of the Church. Further, seeing
the building; that is, the Church it self cannot fall, then neither can the
Pope, the foundation thereof; for a house and building has its stability, and
firmness from the foundation, upon which it is built.

First, this whole Argument is taken from a Peter, nor his successors, but
Christ, as was abundantly showed but even now.

Secondly, yea, if we should admit that Peter Hilary de Trinit. 6. seems to
understand it.

Thirdly, yea, if the Church were built upon Peter's Person (which we must not
grant) yet it would not follow, that it is now built upon the Pope because
neither had Peter any successor in his Apostolical office, neither if he had
could his personal privileges be derived to his successors: For in the same
sense that Peter is called the foundation of the Church, are the other Apostles
called foundations also, but their personal privileges, were not devolved to
the Bishops their successors: and therefore neither Peter's.



First if we consider their persons, then without doubt, we may safely say,
that the gates of Hell have prevailed against them, many of them having been
Magicians, Atheists, yea Devils incarnate, and monsters in nature.

Secondly, if we look upon, and consider the public profession of the
Orthodoxe faith, then it is certain that many of them have erred, and fallen
from the true faith, many of them being Heretics: as might be instanced in
Liberius, Vigilius, Honorius, and diverse others.

Bellarmine here yet further presses these words thus ( de verbo Dei. lib. 3.
Cap. 5) Peter here is literally called the Rock, the foundation of the Church,
and the chief Rector of his Church, and so consequently, are al his
successors: from hence a double Argument is framed by him.

Peter be a Rock then he shall not be broken, he shall not be carried about
with every wind of Doctrine; that is, he shall not err in faith, at lest
Quatenus petra, that is, as he is the chief Bishop.

First, these words upon this Rock will I build my are not literally spoken of
Peter, as is abundantly proved before.

Peter, yet we deny that they belong also unto the Pope, his successor (as
they term him) as is also showed before.

Peter be a Rock then he shall not be broken, that is, not err in faith; that
is as he is the chief Bishop. Thus he goes about not only to distinguish his
person, but also to separate him from his office, which is ridiculous; because
an office is no other thing, but a quality happening or acceding unto a person,
and the office cannot but be affected either by the virtues or vices of the
person; as if a man be learned, and a Bishop, then he is a learned Bishop; if
unlearned, then he is an ignorant Bishop; So although Marriage respect properly
the person, yet if he who is married be a Bishop, we say he is a married
Bishop, and therefore it is a foolish thing to distinguish the person from his
office, seeing the office is a quality, and an accident, which cannot subsist
without the person, which is the substance: Thus also if a man be an Heretic
and a Bishop, we truly aver him to be an Heretical Bishop: and that man
cannot be a Catholic Bishop, which is not a Catholic man. A Sword is nothing
of it self, but only Iron so framed and fashioned, and yet all the faults that
be in that iron so formed, are called the faults of the Sword it self. So when
a Bishop is nothing at all by himself, but only a man chosen unto that place,
and calling; without doubt the faults of the man, will be also the faults of
the Bishop. We conclude therefore, if in this place there be not promised an
infallibily of person, then neither an infallibility of office: That is, if
Peter and Alexander, the 6. and Gregory 7. be not exempted from erring as they
are men (then neither as they are Bishops, and Popes; now Bellarmine himself
dare not affirm the first ( viz. that Peter, or the Popes cannot err, as they
are men,) therefore the latter cannot be denied, namely, that they may err as
they are Bishops, chief Bishops, and Popes.

Se^ondly, his next Argument drawn from his

We distinguish here of a Foundation: foundation properly so called, and a
Ministerial foundation, now concerning the first foundation we admit the
consequence, and confess with Bellarmine, that the Foundation cannot fail, but
the house must fall; but the house may fall and yet the foundation continue. But
neither Peter nor an^ successor of Peter's is the Church properly so called, as
St. Paul witnesses. 1 Cor 3.11. Now concerning the Ministerial Foundation, we
deny the Consequence; because as that Roman Pantheon, or Temple, does not
therefore fall, because he is dead by whom it is built; so it hinders not, but
the Church may continue in the right faith, although he should apostatize,
that planted that faith in the Church, as we see plainly in Peter: when he
staggered in withdrawing himself from the Gentiles by reason of the Jews (
Galath. 2.) the Church did not therefore stagger, he being not the proper
foundation thereof. Cham. tom. 1. page 57.

. 3. Ego I will build.

The Papists affirm,

First, Christ said, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock Ego, I will build my
Church, in this verse.

Secondly, Christ said, Ego I have prayed for thee Peter, that thy faith should
not fail. Luke 22.32.

Thirdly, Christ said to Peter, Feed my sheep. John 21.16. Therefore Peter and
Peter's successors the Popes, have their primacie from Christ. Bellarm. de
Pontif. romans lib. 2. Cap 17.

To these places, Tunstall and Stockesly two Popish Bishops (yet in this point
holding the truth) did pithily make answer in their Epistle sent to Cardinal
Poole.

First, to the first, they affirm out of the ancient Rock was meant the faith
which was then first confessed by the mouth of Peter, and not Peter's person,
and consequently not the Popes. And they confirmed this further from, St. Paul,
who says that only Christ is the foundation of the Church and neither Peter
nor any creature besides. 1 Cor. 3.

Peter, which he knew in his godly prescience, giving an inckling unto him,
that after his fall he should be converted, and strengthen his brethren: Now
if this were meant of Peter's successors also, then they must first fail in
faith, and after confirm their brethren.

Peter to feed: for he himself testifies the contrary, exhorting all Pastors
to feed the flock of Christ, which was given them in charge by Christ. And he
encourages them herunto by this, Because (if you do so, then) when the chief
Shepherd shall appear ye shall receive an incorruptible Crown of glory, (1
Peter 5.) where he calls not himself the chief Shepherd, but only Christ. It
is evident therefore (say they) that your three Scriptures meant nothing less
then such a Primacie over all. Fox. f. 1067.

Aedificabo, I will build.

Peter was Head of the Church, and Prince of the Apostles; and consequently
that the Romish Bishops are so also. And Bellarm. lib. 1. de Pontif. Cap. 11.
argues thus. The Text says aedificabo, I will build my Church: but if Christ
be here taken for the Rock, his Church was built already, for many believed in
him. But Peter was not made the Head of the Church till afterward, a ter his
Resurrection, and therefore he says in the Future Tense aedificabo I will
build.

Peter, both which are absurd.

I will build, and his Church was begun to be built already that therefore
another kind of building must be excogitated, no more then, because Christ gave
his Spirit to his Apostles, ( Mat. 10.1. John 20.22) and yet bids them to
stay at Jerusalem, till they should receive the Holy Ghost ( Acts 1.7.) that
therefore they should look for another Holy Ghost, as though they had not
received the Holy Ghost before. But as the sending of the Holy Ghost is meant,
for the increase and more plentiful measure thereof, so is the building of the
Church here taken for the increase of the building Willet Synops. f. 152.
.

Augustine, Super hanc Petram quam confessus es, aedificabo Ecclesiam. (Tract.
ult. in Johan.) Upon this Rock which thou have confessed will I build my
Church. So that in this place is meant not Peter to be the Rock: but either
Christ whom he confessed, or his faith whereby he confessed him which is all
one in effect. For it matters not much whether we say, the Church is builded
upon Christ, or faith is the foundation of the Church, faith being an
apprehension of Christ. But of the person of Peter it can no more be
understood, then of the rest of the Apostles, who in regard of their Holy
Apostolic Doctrine upon which the Church is built, are called the foundation
of the Church. Ephesians. 2.20.

But the Papists Object again; and against this Peter, and upon Peter's faith:
but faith (they say) has here a double consideration: for it may be either
absolutely considered, or with relation to Peter's person: But faith generally
and absolutely respected is not the foundation of the Church, but as it was in
Peter, Bellar. de Pontif. lib. 1 Cap. 11.

First, Peter's faith which was in Peter, and confessed Peter's personal faith
cannot be this foundation; for then when Peter died, his faith being a
particular accident to his person, going away with him, the Church should have
wanted a foundation.

Secondly, in Peter these two things are respected, Peter besides faith, was
flesh and blood, but that could not be the foundation: therefore Peter's faith
only was the foundation, and his person had therein no part at all.

Thirdly, their own Decrees say, Quod Petrus 2. cause. 24. qu 1 Cap. 6) Peter
when he had received the Keys signified the whole Church; now if in Peter the
whole Church be considered, then Peter's particular person is not included; and
so consequently, by their own rule, their own distinction is overthrown.

. 5. My Church.

Many Questions will hence arise, which I do but only name, having amply to
treat of them in another place.

Whether shall the true Church of Christ be always

No,

Whether shall the Church be always visible in

No:

First, because many rare, famous, and sometimes flourishing Churches, have
failed; as all the Oriental Churches have done, which are named, Revel. 2. and
3. And

Secondly, because the Covenant which is made between God, and al particular
National Churches, is conditional: and therefore God will be their God, no
longer then they walk as becomes his people.

Whether shall the Visible Church of Christ be

Humanum est errare, as might be proved by some Prelates of all ages, in all
places: that is, in all Churches there have been some of the Prelates, and
Rulers, who have been subject unto, and tainted with some errors.

(Ad intra) And that not only,

I. In regard of some which shall profess the truth somewhere? but also,

II. In regard of some Ministers, which shall preach and administer the
Sacraments?



Field, confesses, that somewhere or other, in all times there shall be some
Pastors, who shall openly, and publicly, faithfully preach the word of God,
and rightly administer the Holy Sacraments.





Zachary, Anna, Simeon: and Mary were the true Church, and not the Scribes, and
Pharisees; as Bellarmine himself confesses. Tom. 1. 1272. B.

ad intra, without a visible ad extra?

Melchisedech, Job, Cornelius, the Centurion, and the Eunuch: as is confessed
by Bellarmine himself, de Eccles. milit. li. 3. Cap. 16. Sect. Ad Tertium. Yea
at the time of Christ's death when the Apostles failed, and shrunk away for
fear, the profession of the faith and truth remained in the Blessed Virgin
only. August Epist. 48.











The Church which is in thy house salute.



By what marks or signs may this Church of Christ be known?

The marks of the true Church are these, viz.

First, the word of God, as it is revealed, Matthew. 7.24. and 10.7. and 13.23.
and 17.5. and 28.20. Mark 13.10. and 16.15. Luke 24.47. Now by these and the
lik^ places it is evident, that the pure word of God (not adulterated with the
traditions, and inventions of men) is a notable mark of the Church of Christ.
Secondly, a true and lawful use of the Sacraments, and Keys, according to the
institution of Christ, Matthew. 28.19. Baptize them in the name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, Luke 22. Do this in remembrance of me, John 20. Whose
sins ye remit, they are remitted etc. Thirdly, confession of the truth,
constancy, and perseverance in the profession thereof, and purity of life and
conversation, Matthew. 5.16. and 10.32. So Peter in the ^ame of the other
Apostles, having conf^ssed Christ, to be the Son of the living God; he (in this
verse) presently adds, Upon this Rock will I build my Church. Fourthly,
obedience to the Ministry, in those things which Christ has taught, and
ordained, as Luke 10. He that hears not you, hears not me, etc. John 8. He
that is of God, hears Gods word. And Matthew. 10.14, 15.
. 6. And the gates of hell shall not prevail against

What is here meant by the gates of hell?

First, for answer hereunto we must observe; in place: For;

I. The greater Consistory sat only at Jerusalem, within the Court of the
Temple, in a certain house called (Lischath hagazith) The paved Chamber,
because of the cu^ious cut stones, wherewith it was paved: by the Greeks it was
called (...), The pavement: as John 19.13. Pilate sat down in the judgment
seat, in a place called the pavement.

II. The lesser Consistory sat in the gates of the Cities. Now because the
gates of the City, are the strength thereof, and in their gates their Judges
sat; therefore it is said here, The gates of hell shall not prevail against
it; that is, neither the strength, nor policy of Satan. Jewish Antiq. Godwyn,
page 234.

Secondly, our Savior says, That the gates of against this faith, this Rock;
and those who confess Christ with as good a faith as Peter did; and the
Metaphor is taken from the gates, wherein the Jews and Gentiles exercised
their judgments, as appears by Moses, Genesis 22.17. and Job 32.21. And because
wicked Judges did there give false sentences, as absolving the offenders, and
condemning the innocents: therefore false judgment, and tyrannical Judges,
and injurious Magistrates, are called hell gates; that is, the gates of death,
or the judgment seats of death. Wherefore (...), the gates of hell may be
translated, the gates of death, or the gates of the grave. The gates of Hades
(says Christ) shall not prevail against, or overcome the Church, nor utterly
destroy the faithful; neither at length have the victory; for they may kill
the bodies, but they cannot hurt, or touch the souls. Now these gates are
false Judges, malicious Magistrates, and cruel Tyrants, which sitting in
judgment condemn the innocents, and justify the Malefactors; and
consequently may injure, and wrong the bodies of the righteous, but not their
souls at all. Peter not at Rome, page 33.

Origin, and Ambros. s.

It is questioned between us, and Rome; whether the Church of Rome may err,
or not: and we affirm, that it may, (that is, any particular Church, or
visible Congregation) and confirm it thus.



But there is no such thing promised to any Church.

Therefore no Church is exempt from error.

If this place be objected (as it is by the Papists) That Christ has
promised, that the gates of hell shall not prevail against his Church. We
answer,

First, Christ speaks not here of any particular,

And I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven.

Mason de Min. Ang. l. ^. cap 3.
The Papists, to prove the absolute, and boundless power of the Pope, allege
this place; To thee will I give the keys of heaven. Mark (say they) Christ
did not promise unto Saint Peter, Clavem one key, but Claves, two keys; to wit,

First, Scientiae, the keys of knowledge: and with this key, he does open the
door of the Scripture, absolving all mysteries, and resolving all
controversies.

Secondly, Potestatis, the Key of power, and with this Key he does open the
Church door; and that either,

I. By ordination, admitting Pastors into it. Or,

II. By jurisdiction; commanding, injoyning, or correcting the inferiors in
it, or expelling the disobedient from it; having power over them all, in all
cases in their Courts, by Excommunication, Absolution, Dispensation, and
Injunction; as also in their Consciences, to remit, and retain sins.

Genesis, Multa asserit, sed pauca probat; they affirm many things, but
confirm nothing; persuading themselves, that we must, or ought to take their
assertions, for undeniable truths, without proof; wherein they much deceive
themselves: For until they prove what they have said, we will deny both the
Antecedent, that Christ gave such unlimited, and unbounded power unto Peter;
and also the Consequent, that therefore he has given such power unto the Pope.

Carerius, and Bozius say: That the Pope has Peter (says he) when he
received of Christ, the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, he also received the
temporal, and civil sword, and a right of erecting, and destroying Kingdoms;
as far forth as he might think it behovefull for the good of souls: and to
this end ought the Pope to use the civil sword, both against Kings, and others.

This objection is answered by our Reverend Bishop Morton (whom they got not
about to answer) thus: Victoria) is signified a spiritual authority, different
from the civil jurisdiction, as is proved by the use, which is remitting, and
retaining of sins; which no way can belong to civil authority: ( Victoria,
Relect. 1. Sect. 2. Tertio probatur.) Neither can any one Doctor of but
reasonable antiquity be produced; who by these understand a civil power.
Bishop Morton against the modest answ. part. 3. Cap. 6. Object. 1. page 15.

The Papists are so confident of the Popes infallibility Origin upon this
place. Christ says, Unto thee will I give the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven:
and upon these words Origin (hom. 6. in Mat.) says; Unto the other Apostles
were given the Keys but of one heaven, but unto Peter of many.

To this Maldonate answers, that the distinction of heaven, and heavens, is but
a nice subtilty, Maldon. Jesuit. Comment. in Matthew. 16.19. Colossians 379.

From this place further, the Popish Writers Peter to be the Prince of the
Apostles, and the Monarch of the Church; and consequently, that the same
honor, power, and privileges belong unto the Pope: They argue thus: Christ
says unto Peter; Unto thee will I give the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven:
and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, etc.
Therefore Peter had especial jurisdiction given him, more then any of the
rest, Bellarm. lib. 1. de Romans pontif. Cap. 12. The question here betwixt us,
and them is,

Whether Peter be the universal Monarch of the whole Church, in the place,
and stead of Christ, ordained and appointed by Christ himself, and the Pope
his successor? This they affirm, and we deny; and Bellarmine tells us,
Horum verborum planus, and obvius est sensus, etc. That the sense and meaning
of these words [Thou art Peter, etc. And unto thee will I give the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, etc.] is plain and easy: for under two Metaphors we may
understand the Primacie, and government of the whole Church, to be promised by
Christ unto Peter. Now to prove this, the Papists generally from hence frame
this Argument.

Whosoever received from Christ the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven, is the
universal Bishop, and sole Monarch of the Church.

But Saint Peter only received these Keys; as is manifest from this verse.

Therefore he is the universal Bishop, and sole Monarch of the Church: And
consequently, the Popes of Rome his successors.

Bellarmine will not affirm, nor is able to produce any literal place, which
will warrant his interpretation, and exposition of this: And therefore the
sense of this cannot be so plain, and obvious, as he would persuade us, it is.

Peter, as is evident; because after this, once and again they strove which
should be the first, greatest, and chief amongst them.

Bellarmine does: and therefore the sense, and meaning of these words, is not
so plain.

Bellarmine does: for they generally teach, that this power which our Savior
here speaks of, is Sacerdotall; given first by Christ to his Apostles, and
then by them given unto other Ministers, Lombard. lib. 4. did. 18. and Alex.
Ales. part. 4. q. 20.

Peter, to have been given to all the Apostles besides: But they say, hereby
is signified the height of government, the power of making Laws, of calling
Councels, and confirming them, of ordaining Bishops, and Pastors; and finally
to dispense the goods of the Church spiritual, and temporal. Now all this is
added without ground, neither had either Peter, or any of the Apostles this
ample authority, no, nor the Bishop of Rome, for diverse hundred years after
Christ: yea, we absolutely deny, that in these words, a Monarchical power is
contained; and we prove it from the definition of the Keys, which are nothing
else, but the power of binding, and loosing, as is here expressed by Christ:
and this power does consist in remitting, and retaining of sins. Vide August.
Tract. 50. in John. Theophylact. and Anselm. s. Matthew. 16.

Sixthly, we deny, that this promise of the Peter: for there is no more
promised unto him, than unto all the rest of the Apostles, Mat. 18.18. they
likewise having authority given to bind, and loose ( John 20.23.) and all
Ministers in them: For Saint Peter did now sustain, and represent the person
of the Church; and therefore the Keys were promised to the other Apostles, as
well as unto him.

Seventhly, as Peter confesses in the name of all Peter a Proctor for others)
but together with the rest.

It is controverted between us, and the Papists: Bellarmine says, that it
belongs unto the Pope, and the College of Cardinals. ( Bellarm. lib. 3. de
Script. Cap. 3.) and he urges this verse for the proving of it: Christ says
to Peter; To thee will I give the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven: therefore
the Pope has authority to expound Scripture, and is the chiefest Judge of
Scriptures. They argue Syllogistically thus.

He to whom the Keys, and power of binding, and loosing are given, is the
chiefest Judge, and Interpreter of Scripture in the Church: Because by the
Keys, not only power of loosing men from their sins is understood, but also
from all other bonds, and impediments; which except they be taken away, none
can enter into the Kingdom of heaven, seeing the promise is general, not
saying: Whomsoever ye shall loose, but whatsoever ye shall loose: that we
might understand him to be able, to dissolve all knots, to dispense with Laws,
to remit, or mitigate the punishment of sin, to determine controversies, and
to explicate, and expound difficult places, and deep mysteries.

But to Peter, and his Successors were the Keys given.

Therefore the Popes are the chiefest Judges, and Interpreters of Scripture in
the Church.

First, here is nothing spoken of the College Bellarmine (in this place quoted)
dares not refer the matter to the Pope alone, to expound Scripture, but
joyneth the College of Cardinals with him: now either are the Cardinals, as
well as the Pope, Peter's successors, (and then not the Pope only) or else the
Pope and Cardinals make up but one body (and then neither is the Pope alone
Peter's successor) or else as Peter represented the Pope, so the other Apostles
did represent the Cardinals (and this I know they will not affirm for fear of
some conclusions which would trouble them) or else, that the Cardi^als are none
of Peter's successors, nor once spoken of, or meant in this place, and then it
is absurdly brought for the proof of their position. For if the Pope without
the Cardinals, cannot expound Scriptures, and this place speaks only of the
Pope, and not at all of the Cardinals; then it must necessarily follow, that it
is improperly, and ridiculously brought for the proof of the Popes power in the
judgment of Scripture.

Peter, or of the chief ordinary Pastor.

Keys, is meant, either

I. The preaching of the Word, or commission to preach the Gospel, and not
only to expound doubts, as Doctor Willet thinks, Syn. fol. 44. and Whitak. de
script. p. 317. Claves hic non significant, ut vult Iesuita, etc. The Keys do
not here signify (as Bellarmine would have it) the authority of interpreting
of Scriptures, and of opening those things which are difficult, and obscure in
the Scriptures: but they signify the authority of preaching the Gospel: for
when the Gospel is preached, then to those who believe, is opened the kingdom
of heaven; and to those who will not believe, it is shut. Or

II. By the Keys, is meant the pardon and remission of sins, as Amesius thinks,
Bellarm, enervat. tom 1. page 52. And he grounds this upon Matthew. 28.18, 19.
and John 20.21, 22. Or

III. By the Keys is meant the whole Ministry, which consists in the preaching
of the Gospel, and the administration of the Sacraments, and Discipline, by
which the kingdom of heaven is opened to those who believe, and shut against
unbeleevers.

Peter only, Matthew 18.18, 19. Caeteri Apostoli cum Petro par consortium
honoris and potestatis acceperunt. The rest of the Apostles were received
together with Peter, into the same fellowship of dignity, authority, or power.
Council. Aquisgranens. cap. 9. ex Isidor. It was not said of Peter exclusively,
Dabo tibi soli, I will give to thee only the keys of the kingdom of heaven:
but inclusively of the other Apostles also, to whom with Peter, this power was
common. For in this place, Christ did not give the keys, but only promised
that he would give them hereafter; and afterward when he did give them, he
spoke to all the Apostles equally and alike, and not to Peter only, as is
clear from Mat. 28.18, 19. John 20.21, 22, 23. And therefore, if the Pope have
authority to interpret the Scriptures, because the keys were given to Peter;
then so also have other Bishops and Ministers, who were the successors of the
other Apostles, because to the other Apostles, as well as unto Peter were the
keys given.

Augustine (Tract. 124. in Johan.) says, Petrum significasse universalem
Ecclesiam; That Peter signified the Catholic Church, when the keys of the
kingdom of heaven were given unto him: And therefore this power of the keys was
not given to the Pope only, but to the whole Church.

Sixthly, the Pope is no more Peter's successor, Peter's steps: yea, they are
not able to prove (although they are easily able to affirm it without proof)
that the Popes are Peter's successors, both in seat, and faith, both in place
and Bishopric: for it were impious and most impudent to say, that they are
Peter's successors in doctrine and faith; as though Peter taught or believed
that which is taught and believed at this day in Rome. And it were a work which
would well beseem Peter's successor, to prove his Religion from Peter's
Epistles, which they never yet went about to do.

Seventhly, the gift of interpreting the Scripture, Rome, or the Roman Bishops,
or to the Pope, and College of Cardinals; but God gives it to whom he will, yea
to those who are neither Popes, nor Cardinals. When one brought Moses word,
that Eldad and Medad did prophecy; and Joshua out of love unto Moses, would
have had them forbidden; meek and holy Moses answers, Would God that all the
Lords people were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them,
Number. 11.29. Where we see, that Moses prays, and from his heart wishes, that the
Spirit of Prophecy and Interpretation were given to all the Lords people. So,
Amos 7. I am no Prophet, nor the son of a Prophet; and yet he prophecieth. And
2 Pet. 1.19. The Apostle says, That Prophecy is not of any private
Interpretation; but it is the work of that Spirit, whereby also the Prophets
spoke: and this he gives to whom he will, 1 Cor. 12. And therefore this Spirit,
and power, and privilege, of interpreting of Scripture, according to the
proportion of faith, is not given only to the Pope, and his Cardinals.

Eighthly, if by these words [whatsoever thou be meant, the interpretation of
Scripture, than by these [whatsoever thou bindest] must necessarily be
understood, the obscuring of Scripture, and so this must belong to Peter and
his successors, as well as that: and indeed, those who would be called Peter's
successors, choose this part to themselves Ames. Bell. enerv. p. 52. t. 1.
.

Ninthly, Bellarmine in the proof of his Major

I. Because he says, that under the names of the Keys, the supreme power of
judging is given to Peter and his successors: whereas indeed, there is given
only the Ministry of loosing and remitting of sins, and of explicating the
doctrines, opinions, and controversies of Religion. Scharp. de sacra Script.
106.

II. He offends, because he says, that to Peter and his successors, was given
power not only to pardon sins, but to loose all bonds: for Christ speaks here
of pronouncing remission and pardon to the penitent, but not to all, hand over
head, to whom the Pope pleases; but of dissolving and untying other bonds, our
Savior speaks not.

III. He sins in saying, That those to whom the Keys were given, have power to
dispense with those Laws which were enacted, and ratified by God himself, and
with those punishments which were inflicted by God himself: That which God
commands a man to do, he may omit by a dispensation from the Pope, and that
without sin: that which God charge men not to do, may faultlesly be done, if
the Pope give leave: those punishments which God inflicts upon offenders, may
be taken off by the Pope. And thus we see, that the Pope is not only by them
exalted above all that are called Gods (that is, all Magistrates and Rulers)
but even above the Lord of heaven and earth: for he can take men out of Gods
hands, he can free them from his hands, yea he can deliver them from his
commanding, and condemning power.

IV. The Cardinal offends by his frivolous distinction of Whomsoever, and
Whatsoever: because our Savior in this place speaks only of loosing of sins,
and of binding men for their sins, as is evident from Mat. 18.18, 19. and John
20.23.

Peter had a Ministerial power of binding and loosing, but not of binding or
loosing, What he would, or Whom he would, or As he would (as the Pope
arrogantly claims in his unbounded power) because he must only teach those
things which are commanded him, and dispense those things which were committed
unto him aright, that is, according to the direction, and prescript rule of God
Mat. 18.20. Act. 2.4. Gal. 1.8
.

Peter, we must understand, either

I. The Pope only; and thus we deny that the Keys were given to Peter and his
successors; because the Pope does neither exercise the doctrine nor the works
of Peter. Or else

II. All Bishops together: and if thus, then we must either understand it

First, of all and every Bishop that has been in the Church since Peter's time:
and in this sense we deny also, that the keys were given to Peter and his
successors: for it is true which Ambrose says ( lib. 1. de poenit. cap. 6.)
Non habet Petri haereditatem, qui fidem Petri non habet. He is not the heir of
Peter's place, who is not heir of Peter's faith. Or

Secondly, we understand it only of those Bishops and Ministers who follow
Peter's Doctrine: And in this sense we grant, that the Keys were given to Peter
and his successors.

Peter in his extraordinary office, had no successor at all, much less the
Pope; and if he had, then so had also the other Apostles, who had the same
power: and consequently, there is not one only supreme and chief Judge of all
Controversies in the earth, but many, namely, all the successors of all the
Apostles, as well as the successor of Peter.



viz.

First, in respect of the Commandment, Mat. 18.17.

Secondly, in respect of the purity of the Sacraments: because they are holy
mysteries, therefore God will have the power of the Keys to be executed, that
all impure persons may be kept back from his holy Table, read 1 Cor. 5.5. and
11.28. Numb. 11.31. Deuteron. 17 12. Matthew 5.24.

Thirdly, in respect of Gods glory: for God is reproached and despighted, if
without difference the wicked and blasphemers go, in the number of his children.

Fourthly, in respect of the safety of the Church, which shall be punished if
she wittingly, and willingly profane Christ's Sacraments.

Fifthly, in regard of the safety of sin^ers, that they being often admonished,
may return unto repentance.

Sixthly, in respect of others, lest they should be corrupted, 1 Cor. 5.6.

Seventhly, in regard of those who are without; lest they which are not yet
members of the Church, be deterred, or kept back from submitting themselves
unto the Church, by the evil example of some within it; and therefore the
power of the Keys is to be executed upon offenders, that the mouths of those
without may be stopped, seeing that the Church does not wink or favor but
punish such offenders.

Eighthly in respect of sinners; that from them punishment may be averted:
because the wicked approaching unto the Lords Table oat their own condemnation.
Wherefore that this may not come to pass, the Church is bound to provide, that
such approach not thither.

. 9. Whatsoever thou bindest on earth shall be

How does it appear that by this committing

First, these Keys are called the Keys of the Peter and his successors wordly
power and pomp.

Secondly, our Savior in this his commission Peter or the Pope.

Thirdly, the power of the Keys does consist in the remitting and retaining of
sins; as John 20.22.23. Whose sins ye remit they are remitted; etc. And
therefore no Primacy or external power is here meant.



John 20. being about to give them the charge of Preaching, and the power of
binding and loosing, does first breath upon them, saying therewith, Receive ye
the Holy Ghost; and therefore no external and personal Primacie can be here
meant.

Matthew. 28.) All power is given to me etc.) Therefore by the Keys Christ did
not promise any such power to Peter or his Successors.

Pope nor Peter, nor unto any Apostle or Minister, absolute power to
excommunicate, and bind over to Satan, or to remit and pardon whomsoever they
will: but they must only bind impenitent and obstinate persons, and loose only
penitent and obedient, or otherwise they shall be punished for abusing their
office and power, and transgressing their charge. If the studious Reader would
see this enlarged by many more Arguments, let him read Aret. probl. de
Clavibus fol. 25. b. and 26. a.



Paul. 1 Corinthians. 5.12: Or, if one particular Church (to wit, the Church of
Rome or France,) should excommunicate, or assume power to cast another Church
(as of England) out of the Communion of the Catholic Church for some error
(as they conceive) which it holds. Indeed one Church may counsel and advise
another, but not exercise this judiciary power over any Church (though in some
things faulty) which is not under her jurisdiction.

John 9, 22. So the Papists punish those who are amongst themselves for
Heretics, and bring them into their bloody Inquisition, if they be found to
read and study the Scriptures, and begin to acknowledge the truth of the Gospel.

Thirdly, this judicary power is abused by the Davenant de Iudice controv. page
90.

Some Papists Object this place to prove that thou loosest in Earth shall be
loosed in Heaven.

Therefore the Pope has power to dispense with all kind of vows and Oaths.

First, this text is not understood of every kind John 20.23.

Secondly, absolute power is not given of binding or loosing, but according to
Gods will; as Lyra expounds it, Supposito debito usu clavis, etc. The right use
of the Key being supposed, God approves it in Heaven; Now it is not Gods will
that lawful Oaths should be violated, but faithfully kept; Psalm 15.4. He that
swears and changes not shall dwell in Gods house.

Thirdly, this power of binding and loosing is Mat. 18.18. And so Hierome
confesses as he is cited by the ordinary gloss. And therefore if this
exposition were true, then every Priest might dissolve, reverse, and dispense
with Oaths.

Fourthly, whatsoever is said to St. Peter is not Peter, both in doctrine and
place, in the probation of both which he fails.

The Papists further produce this place to warrant Peter, to whom Christ said,
whatsoever you loose in earth shall be loosed in Heaven. They argue thus,

That which was given to Peter, was given also to the Pope;

But from this place it appears, that unto Peter was given a full power of
loosing sinners both from the fault and punishment.

Therefore this power is also given to the Pope Cajetan opuse. tract. 8.

Chamier. de Indulgentijs. lib. 24. Cap. 15. Arg. 1. fol. 1098.

Peter then unto the rest of the Apostles: as St. Hierome well notes. Cuncti
claves regni caelorum accipiunt, and ex aequo super eos Ecclesiae fortitudo
solidatur: All the Apostles receive the keys of the Kingdom, and the strength
of the Church equally is founded upon them al. Hier. lib. 1. advers. Iovinian.



VERSE. 20. Then charged he his Disciples, that they should tell no man that he
was Jesus the Christ.
(...) does not simply signify Iussit he commanded, or prohibuit, he forbad
them, but graviter interdixit, he strictly charged, or seriously prohibited
them to tell that he was Jesus the Christ.

Messia^ not be known now when he is come? yea did he not often discover
himself to be the Christ, unto the Jews? John. 5. and 9. and 10. yea had he not
commanded his Disciples to declare and preach him unto all people, and that
publicly? Mar. 10.27. Why then does he now forbid them to preach the Gospel:
for to teach that he is Jesus the Christ, which is here forbidden, is no other
then to preach the Gospel, which is elsewhere commanded?

Cameron s. page 43 calce.

Luk 22.35. Cameron s.



Fourthly: this prohibition and charge which Chap. 17.9. where he forbids them
to divulge his Transfiguration, but withal adds this limitation, Until the
Son of man be risen from the dead.

Why would not Christ have his Disciples to Messiah, till after his
resurrection?

First, (as was said before) in regard of them,

Secondly, in regard of the Jews, because he Messiah, yet they would not
believe it, but deride them for it. For they would not believe it, when he was
risen again.

Thirdly, Pareus (in hunc locum. fol. 764) thinks If they had known the Lord of
glory, they would not have crucified him. 1 Cor. 2.8.

VERSE. 22. Then Peter took him,
Much was alleged for Peter's Primacie and Supremacy, from verse 18, 19. now
from this verse we may gather a Reason for the contrary.

What reason was there why Christ should give the supremacy to Peter above, or
over the rest? Peter seems to deserve the least of all the Twelve, for the
Scripture reckons up his faults to be more in number, and heavier in weight,
then any of the rest. To pass by diverse common infirmities, there are four
grout faults, which Peter fell into much amplified by the Fathers.

First, he dehorted our Savior from his passion in this verse, Master, favor
thy self, and was therefore called Satan an adversary to the death of Christ,
and so to the Redemption of man.

Secondly, in promising rashly not to deny Christ, yea unto death, whereas
Christ had foretold him of his fall before.

Thirdly, he denied his Master, and that thrice, yea, with an Oath, at the
Instance of a Maiden, and in a very short while, before the Cock crew twi^.

Fourthly, the last assault noted in Peter was that, for the which he is
reproved of Paul. Galath: 2.14. If the Reader would see this Argument
prosecuted, and enlarged, let him read Doctor Willeis symps. fol. 157. 158.

Verse. 24.
VERSE. 24. Then said Jesus unto his Disciples: If any man will come after me,
let him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me.
Whosoever would be my Disciple.

Quicunque, whosoever, is as much, as Si quis: If any will be my Disciple, to
teach us:

That there is but one way for all men to come unto Christ; or whosoever would
come unto Christ, must come by one, and the sameway; for one man must not come
by one way, and another by another, Mark 8.34. Acts 10.35. and 13.26.



Act. 10.34. Colos 3.11. Galath 3.28. Ephesians. 6.8.

Cor. 12.13.



Let him deny himself.





Galath. 5.17. Phil. 2.13.

James 1.14. and 1 Pet. 2.11. Josh. 7.21.

John 1.12, 13.





Gregory (Hom. 32. in Evang.) answers: We are one thing, being fallen through
sin, and another thing by nature, or by our first creation: and then do we
deny our selves, when as we shun, and desire to be freed from that estate,
and condition wherein now we are, and to be made partakers of that estate of
grace, wherein first we were. That is; we deny our selves, when we desire and
endeavor to put off the old man, which is pleasing to corrupt nature; and
labor to put on the new, which is contrary thereunto.

Gregory (Hom. 10. in Ezech.) says, he denies himself, who is changed to
better, beginning to be that, which he was not; and ceasing to be that, which
he was.

Gregory (lib. Mor. 23.) says, he denies himself, who treading pride under
foot, shows himself to be estranged from himself.

viz.

I. Negatio meriti, a denial of our merits; or an humble confession, and
acknowledgement, that no good thing belongs unto us by desert, or merit. This
denial belongs unto faith; and is necessary, but is not here spoken of; and
therefore I will omit it.

II. Negatio placiti, a denying of our selves in those things, which are
pleasing to our natures; not seeking those things, which are delightful unto
us: And this denial belongs unto service, and is that which is here spoken of:
Whence we learn.

That we cannot serve both Christ and our Matthew. 6.24. Hence then we learn,
that true self-denial includes four things; namely,

First, Obedience, and this included three things; to wit:

I. A denial of our selves, and our own wills; because our will and nature,
will lead us aside from the obedience of Christ.

II. A denial of the world, and of men, though great and potent; for God must
be our Lord and King. Now this is not to be understood Anabaptistically, as
though we denied obedience to Magistrates, and those who are over us; but only
if there be an opposition between their will, and Gods. We must confess our
selves only to be the Lords servants, and not obey any in those things, which
are contrary to his will.

III. An absolute, universal, and constant obedience of God: we must so deny
our selves, and submit our selves unto Gods service, that we must labor to
obey him in all things, whatsoever he commands, and continue in that obedience,
all the days of our lives. For this Denial includes this Obedience.

Secondly, true self-denial includes Honor, we must not arrogate any thing
unto our selves; but we must ascribe all glory, and honor unto the Lord
only: yea, as servants honor, and reverence our Lord, Malach. 1.6.

Thirdly, true self-denial includes Obligation, for we must serve the Lord,
Libere non libere: for the understanding hereof observe, that there are three
sorts of men: to wit,

I. Some who serve the Lord, but it is by compulsion, and constraint: for if
they were left unto themselves, they would not do any thing, which he
commands at all.

II. Some there are, who serve the Lord, and that without coaction, but yet
they think not themselves bound so to do. They do many things which God
requires, but in the manner of a free will offering.

III. Some there are, who labor to obey God in all things that he commands,
and that willingly, and cheerfully; but yet they confess, that they do no
more, then is their duty to do: yea, (in their best performances) come far
short of what they ought to do. Now this is the nature of true selfe-denial,
and acceptable service.

Fourthly, this service, and self-denial includes Dependence upon God: for
those who deny themselves, and give themselves wholly up to the service of the
Lord, must, and will depend upon him, for whatsoever they stand in need of,
Luke 12.30. Matthew. 6.

Let him take up his Cross.



These: namely, Secondly, when he afflicts his mind by compassion toward his
neighbor. Now because abstinence is subject to the infection of vain glory,
and compassion to the infection of false piety. Christ subjoyneth: Let him take
up his Cross, and follow me, Greg. hom. 32. in Evang. Thirdly, when he does
patiently bear, whatsoever affliction, adversity, and evil is laid upon him
for Christ's sake. But of this in the next Question.


Ferat crucem, and tollat crucem: Let him bear his Cross, and take up his
Cross?

The differ, and that thus; to wit,

Far crucem, to bear the Cross, is simply to bear it, or to suffer any
adversity, although against the mind and will: Many have burdens imposed upon
them, which they must bear, and which they cannot shake off; and therefore
bear them; but they wish that their shoulders were eased of them. Now this is,
To bear the Cross.

Secondly, Tollere crucem, To take up the Cross, is to bear willingly, and
cheerfully, and contentedly, whatsoever the Lord lays upon us, or is imposed,
or inflicted upon us for the Lords sake. Read for the proof hereof these
places: Rejoice when ye suffer for my names sake, Matthew. 5. And the Apostles
went away rejoicing, that they were thought worthy to suffer for the Lords
sake, Act. 5. Ye were imitaters of the Lord, and of us, receiving the word
with much tribulation, and joy in the Holy Ghost, 1 Thessalonians. 1. They endured the
loss of their goods with joy, Heb. 10. and diverse the like places.

And follow me.

That Christ is to be followed, and how he is to be followed, we have showed
before, ( Chap. 4.19. and 8.22. and 9.9. One question therefore only I here
add, namely;



Philip. 2.) so must we be ready, and willing, even to die for Christ, if the
Lord shall call us thereunto, or require it at our hands.

Pet. 2.) so we must take heed, that we suffer not as Malefactors, but for
well doing, after the example of Christ.

Thirdly, as Christ did not curse, nor reproach Peter 2) so although we be
punished, as evil doers, for righteousness sake; yet we must not revile, nor
curse our Persecutors, nor avenge our selves of them.

Fourthly, as Christ prayed for his persecutors, (Father lay not this sin
unto their charge.) So must we do, Mat. 5.

Fifthly, as Christ laid down his life for us, so John 3.

VERSE. 26. What is a man profited, Verse. 26.
if he shall gain the whole world, and loose his own soul; Or what shall a
man give in exchange for his soul?
Our Savior does not here put a Lamb betwixt two Wolves, nor a Medium betwixt
two extremes, nor a man betwixt two evils, but the soul betwixt two Orbs,
earth, and heaven, this world, and the world to come: And in his judgment
fearful is the judgment, and miserable the condition of that poor soul, who
so labors for the earth, that it loses heaven: For what will it profit a man
to gain the whole world, and loose his soul? As if he would say, heaven is
the object, and center of the soul; heaven is that which the soul should
seek before all earthly things: for nothing can make the soul happy, if it be
deprived of heaven; nothing can be given unto the soul, in exchange of heaven;
no place of pleasure can the soul find to rest her self upon, if she be shut
out of heaven: And therefore nothing should be more desired, or endeavored for
(in regard of our selves) then a portion, and inheritance in the Kingdom of
heaven. Or we may learn hence:

That the chiefest endeavor of a Christian should be, to make sure for his
soul a mansion, Matthew 6.33. Luke 10.20. and 2 Corinthians 5.2. Heb. 11.10.16. and
Heb. 13, 14.

Why must our chiefest desire, and endeavor

First, because as the soul is better then the body,

Secondly, because not earth, but heaven is the

Thirdly, because only heaven is solidely





Esaias 25.8. Revelat. 21.4.

Matthew. 15.21. John 16.22, 24.

Kingdom, and that in a threefold regard; namely,

I. For the glory thereof; which is threefold; to wit,

First, of the body, Dan. 12.3. Matthew. 13.43. and 17.2. and 1 Cor. 15.42. And

Secondly, of the mind; because there our knowledge shall be perfect, 1 Corinthians
13. And,

Thirdly, of the state; for glory, and honor, and peace shall all they have,
who gain admission into the Kingdom of heaven, Romans 2.10.

II. Heaven is called a Kingdom, Propter co-regnum in regard of that
co-heireship, and joint Kingdom, which we shall have with Christ, our Head,
Revel. 21.2.

III. Heaven is called a Kingdom, Propter dominium mentis, in regard of the
freedom, the soul and mind shall there have, who shall be perfectly delivered
from all base, and vile lusts; yea, all her enemies.



I. With all the godly, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. And,

II. With Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the Patriarchs, Matthew. 8.11. Luke
13.28. And,

III. With all blessed Martyrs. And

IV. With the Angels, and Archangels, Luke 20.36. And

V. With Christ our eldest brother, John 17.24. and 1 Thessalonians 4.17. Yea,

VI. With God our Father, 1 John 1 3.

Ephesians. 5.27. Revelat. 3, 4.18. and 6.11. and 7.9. and 19.8.

Matthew. 22.30. Luke 20.36. Matthew. 17.2. and 2 Corinthians. 3.18. and Philip. 3.21.
and 1 John 3.2.

Cor. 15.26.54. Hebr. 2.14. Revel. 21.4.

Eighthly, there and then Satan also shall be Revel. 12.9. and 20.10.

Ninthly, there we shall see God, which is the Matthew. 5.8. that is, not only

I. The glory of Christ, John 17.24. But also,

II. The Majesty of the Father. Moses could not see Gods face, Exodus 34. But
in heaven we shall see him with open face, 2 Cor. 3.18. and know him as we are
known, 1 Cor. 13.12. And therefore these things considered, we may safely
conclude, that Heaven is worth our first, and best, and utmost endeavors.

What must we particularly, and principally

First, we must long fo it, and hunger after it before all other things;
Philip. 1.23. and 2 Corinthians. 5.2.4. etc. Gratissimi servi est, non haerere
praesentibus, sed ad patrem semper urgeri, in futura semper gestire. Chrysostom.
s.

Secondly, we must labor to feel, and to be sensible

Fourthly, we must meditate daily of the joy, honor, and glory which the Lord
has prepared for the faithful in the kingdom of heaven: for this will make us
labor to be of the number of the faithful.

Fifthly, we must hunger after the possession of Paul, to be dissolved, Philip.
1.23. And crying, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Revel. 22.20.

From whence comes this desire of death?

First, from a good Conscience: for otherwise a Adam, because he knows that he
is angry with him: but when the Conscience is purged, and washed with pure
water, ( Heb. 10.22.) then it desires to approach into Gods presence, though it
be by the gate of death.

Secondly, this desire of death comes from a John 2.15.) For if the heart be
glued unto the world, or the affections set upon the world, then we shall
rather cry, Oh Death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee! than desire the
approaching thereof. But if the world be crucified unto us, and we unto the
world, then it will rather rejoice us, than grieve us to be delivered from it.

Thirdly, this desire of death comes from a hope of the participation and
enjoyment of heaven, and God, and Christ: for where this hope is not, this
desire cannot be.

VERSE. 27. For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his
Angels; and then he shall reward every man according to his works.
For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father.

The Jews object, that Christ is not the Messiah, and they argue thus: The
Messiah ought to be a Prophet, but your Christ was no Prophet, neither is
called by you a Prophet (say they unto us) And therefore your Christ was not
the Messiah.

Luke 24. He was a Prophet, and mighty in work and speech; John 4. Sir, I see
that thou art a Prophet.



Luke 18.31, 32, 33. and in this verse also he prophesies of himself, saying,
The Son of man shall come in the glory of the Father, etc.

Secondly, he prophesied of his Disciples, Mat. 10.16, 17, 18.

Thirdly, he prophesied of the Jews, Luke 19.41, Pet. Galatin. lib. 8. page 323.

. 2 And thou be shall reward every man.

The Papists object these words,

The Apostle, Romans 11.35. Who has given first unto God, and it shall be
restored unto him again.

How can these places then be reconciled?

First, God properly is debtor unto none, having

Secondly, God therefore is said to reward Cameron s. Myrothee. Evang. page 44,
45.

CHAPTER XVII.
Verse. 1.
VERSE. 1. And after six days, Jesus takes Peter, James, and John his
Brother, and brings them up into a high Mountain apart.
After six days.

Matthew here, and S. Mark Chap. 9.2. saying this was after six days, but S.
Luke 9.28. says it was after Eight days?

Aretius. s.

St. Luke reckons the day upon which Christ made this promise, and the day also
wherein the promise was performed: but St. Matthew, and St. Mark reckon only the
intermediate days between the making of the promise, and the performance
thereof: for there were three sorts of reckoning among the Jews; namely.

I. Excluso uno termino, and incluso altero, when one of the Terms was
included, and another excluded. The Jews were commanded to circumcise their
Children the Eight day, now if the Child had lived seven days, and a part of
the eighth, he was to be circumcised, as if he had lived complete eight days.
Now none of the Evangelists do thus account or reckon this History.

II. Excluso utroque termino; when both the terms are excluded: and thus St.
Matthew, and Saint Mark says, This was after six days, excluding both the
day of the promise, and also of the performance.

III. Incluso utroque termino, when both the terms are included; and thus S.
Luke says, that it was Eight days after. And thus the Evangelists are easily
reconciled.

Verse. 2. And was transfigured before them,
Why is Christ's Transfiguration upon the Mount adjoined next to the foregoing
History.

First, Christ had promised that some of them,

Secondly; our Savior had foretold them of life verse 24 25. of the former
Chapter: Now because a taste of that glory; which they shall be made partakers
of, which suffer willingly for Christ, is an excellent means to confirm, and
strengthen them against death, and crosses: therefore six days after this
sermon, of the crosses of the faithful in this world, he went up into an high
Mountain, with three of his Apostles, where he was transfigured, and they
made eyewitnesses of his glory.



Matthew. 17.2. Therefore he is able to exhibit his body, under the forms of
bread and wine.





VERSE. 3. And behold, there appeared unto them Moses, and Elias, talking with
him.
Moses and Elias appear unto Christ, and his Apostles, and talk with them:
Therefore souls after they are departed, may return on earth again, and
appear unto men.



Moses and Elias appeared not to all the Apostles, but only to three, neither
(that we read of) did they speak to those three, or persuade them to do any
thing for their honor (as to build Churches in their name) or teach any new
Doctrine unto them, which is the common practice of the Popish spirits that
appear.

Thirdly, Moses, Elias were not sent to the Apostles (as popish spirits are
sent to men) but unto Christ himself only.

Against this it is objected; If it be thus, then it was needless for the
three Apostles to have been there: Christ might have gone up to Mount Tabor
alone: but Christ does nothing in vain; there was some use therefore certainly
of their presence.

It was very necessary,

Why do these two above all the rest appear unto Christ?

First, that by Moses, who was truly dead, and Elias, who was not dead, it
might be showed, that Christ is Lord, and Judge, both of the dead, and living.

Secondly, Moses and Elias appear unto Christ, Moses was the giver of the old
Law, and Christ of the new; and Elias was a Type of John Baptist, the
forerunner of Christ.

Thirdly, these two appear for the signifying Moses was of a meek, and gentle
spirit, and Elias of a fiery, when God was dishonored: so Christ is meek, and
gentle, and infinite in mercy, to all penitent, and believing sinners, and
souls; but infinite in justice, and fiery indignation against all those, who
are impenitent, and disobedient.

Fourthly, for the eminency of the dignity, Moses, and Elias.

Fifthly, these two appear, to show, that

VERSE. 4. Then answered Peter and said unto Jesus,
. 1. Lord, it is good for us to be here.

St. Bernard applies this briefly to Religion, or the true spiritual Spouse,
and Church of Christ: It is good to be here; that is, in Religion, and the true
Church: it is good; yea, very good to be a member of this little house, and to
be truly religious, and that in many regards, viz.

First, because those who live in the Church, and are of the Church, live more
pure, and holy lives, then those do, which are without.

Secondly, because those who are of the Church, and are truly religious, sin
much seldomer, then do they, who are either without the pale of the Church, or
are irreligious in their lives; for these sell themselves to work wickedness,
and that frequently; but those only sometimes, through infirmity, and frailty:
Now there are three reasons, why the religious sin seldomer then the other:
namely,

I. Because he carefully avoids all evil occasions, or occasions of evil;
but those who are not of the Church, run into them.

II. Because he carefully avoids all evil customs, and labors to resist
them; but the other makes custom a law, and is led thereby.

III. Because he carefully shuns the company, society, and conversation of
wicked men, but the other rusheth thereinto.

Thirdly, it is good for a man to be religious, and a member of Christ's
Church, because such rise from sin more quickly; they sometimes fall (as was
said before) but they lie not long, but speedily renew themselves by
repentance: but those who are not of Christ's fold, and flock lie, and continue
in sin; yea, wallow in the puddle of iniquity, not hastening at all to come
out of the jaws of Satan.

Fourthly, it is good for a man to be in, and of Christ's Church; because then
he will walk more warily, and circumspectly. Religion is a School of
wisdom, wherein he learnes the wisdom of God, and how to direct his steps,
in the ways of God, Ephesians. 5.15. Now this wisdom whereby we may be enabled
to walk warily, is acquired by these means, and ways; namely

I. It comes from God, and is procured by faithful, and fervent prayer, James
1.5. If any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, etc.

II. It is learnt by the reading, hearing, meditating, and studying of the holy
Scriptures, Psalm. 119 9.105. And

III. By the godly exhortation, admonition, advice, and counsel of good men.
And

IV. By experience, which is the Mistress of things: Paul would have us not to
be ignorant of Satan's devices, but learn his craft, and policy; and mark
what occasions of evil he does offer unto us, what impediments he casts in
the way, to hinder us from that which is good; and how he watches his time,
and opportunity to tempt us unto that which is evil: that the experience of
these may make us avoid them the better.

Fifthly, it is good for a man to be truly religious, because such have peace,
quiet, and spiritual security, Matthew. 11.29.30. Those who belong not unto Gods
Church, have care, disturbance, fear, and trouble: yea safety no where; for
the wicked flee, when no man pursues them: but unto the righteous, there is
peace, and a sure resting place.

Sixthly, it is good for a man to be of Gods flock, and one of his fold,
because such have internal joy, comfort, and consolation: yea, can rejoice in
the midst of affliction. Now this spiritual rejoicing springs from these three
roots: to wit

I. From humility in the understanding. And

II. From purity in the affections. And

III. From sincerity and truth in the performance of the good will of God. For
he that is humble, and lowly in his own eyes, and base and vile in his own
conceit, and pure in his heart and affections, and sincere in his life, and
without hypocrisy in his obedience: cannot but have a great deal of joy, and
rejoicing within.

Seventhly, it is good for a man to be a member of Christ's Church; and a
servant in this house, because then he shall always dwell in Christ's presence,
and be in his sight. Peter says here: Master it is good for us to remain where
we are; and why? because Christ was there, and because he was ravished with his
glory. So those who are of his little flock shall always enjoy his presence,
and see his face.

Eighthly, it is good for a man to be a religious member of the Church, because
then he shall enjoy the society of the Saints: Peter showed the delight he had
in the company of Moses, and Elias, by his desire to make Tabernacles for them;
and great is the comfort that the Children of God find in the society one of
another; but the joy they shall have in the fellowship of the Saints in Heaven
passes knowledge, and exceeds expression.

Ninthly, it is good for a man to be a member of the spiritual Church, because
then he will not regard, nor inordinately love the world: Peter forgets the
world, and all the pleasures and delights thereof; saying Master It is good for
us to be here: and those whose hearts are ravished, and enflamed with the love
of God, and who are assured of a portion in the Kingdom of Heaven, do lightly
regard the things of this world.

Tenthly, it is good for a man to be in the fold of the true Church, because
then he will die the more confidently and cheerfully; whereas on the contrary
the remembrance of death is bitter to of those who are without the wall of the
Church.

Lastly, it is very good for a man to be in the Church Militant, because great
shall his reward and glory be in the Church Triumphant: but of this we spoke
before, Chap. 16 26. And thus we see that it is good for us to be here, viz. in
Religion, and the true Church.

. 2. Let us make three Tabernacles.

The Papists say, that the Pope cannot err, Peter may err, yea did err, then
the Pope (which they say is his successor) cannot be exempted from erring, but
is subject to err.

But Peter erred; therefore the Pope may.

That Peter erred, St. Hierome proves from this place, and that

First, because he was contented and sufficiently satisfied in the
contemplation of Christ's humanity: whereas blessedness is essentially placed
in the contemplation of his Divinity, which St. Peter then saw not.

Secondly, because he sought and desired a mansion on earth, whereas he should
have desired a heavenly mansion; according to that of the Apostle, we have here
no abiding City, but we seek one which is to come.

Thirdly, Peter erred because he was unmindfull of the rest of the Apostles,
whereas he should have wished them the enjoyment of the society of their
Savior, as well as himself: but contrarily he says, Master it is good to be
here, although there be but a fourth part of thy Disciples with thee.

3. One for thee, one for Moses, and one for Elias





First, Adam in his estate of integrity knew Eve as soon as he saw her; Genes.
2.23. Therefore in heaven much more shall the Saints know one another, because
their knowledge is there more perfect (in degrees) then Adams was in Paradise.

Secondly, because Peter here having but a taste of the glorious estate, and
condition of the Saints in Heaven, knows Moses and Elias: and therefore those
who are perfectly glorified shall much more know one another.

Thirdly, the Saints in Heaven shall mutually love one another, with a true,
and perfect love: and therefore also shall know one another. A man may love
things which he never saw, but scarcely things which he never knew.

Fourthly, those who are in Hell, are endued with such a knowledge, that they
can know this or that man: Dives being in Hell, sees, (that is knows) Lazarus
in Abraham's bosom: and this knowledge is given them for an augmentation of
their torment. And therefore much more the elect and blessed Spirits know one
another, because that adds unto their happiness, and helps to make it
complete.

Fifthly, the near Relation the Saints have one unto another helps to convince
this truth: For what are they? They are al Children of one father; all Servants
of one Master; all members of one body: and therefore undoubtedly they shall
all know one another.

Sixthly, but yet no carnal thoughts, or imaginations must be had, either
concerning the knowledge, or the love of the Saints in Heaven: as though a man
should know his wife, or Children, or friends better then others, or love them
better then others: for this conceit savours of the flesh, and flesh and blood
cannot inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, all things there being spiritual: for
as there shall be a new Heaven, and a new earth; so also there shall be new
men, and new affections, and new loves which shall be perfect, and without any
dregs.

Verse. 5. While he yet spoke, behold a bright Cloud overshadowed them: and
behold a voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son in whom I
am well pleased: hear him.
. 1. And behold a voice came from Heaven:

It is not unworthy our Observation, to mark, That God revealed himself to his
servants, four manner of ways, to wit,

Now of these three we have to treat of elsewhere. First, by the gift of
Prophecy. Secondly, by ordinary inspiration of the Holy Spirit. Thirdly, by
Vrim, and Thummim, light and perfection.


Fourthly, by Bath-col, per filiam vocis by a little small voice, or an echo,
whereby he answered his servants: Job calls this vox in silentio, Job. 4.16. a
silent voice, And thus God revealed himself, to these three Apostles in this
place: for There came a voice from Heaven. Syrus, filia vocis, The Daughter of
a speech.

. 2. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well

What necessity was there now of this voice unto these,

First, it was requisite and necessary, that these Peter. 1.17, 18.

Secondly, it is requisite that these Apostles

I. This is my beloved Son: and this was for the strengthening of their faith,

II. Hear him: and this was for the corroborating of their obedience.

VERSE. 9. And as they came down from the mountain,
Why did Christ forbid the publication of his Transfiguration until his
Resurrection.

First, to teach us, to hide our own excellency, hold them forth, through pride
or for the applause of men, but rather (as it were) conceal them, that none may
judge us to be proud of any thing in us, or highly conceited of our selves.



Verse. 10, 11, 12, 13. And his Disciples, asked him saying.
We must here observe: That the Jews expect Elias Tishbites, to be the
forerunner of Christ: and they have a Proverb when they cannot resolve any
hard question to their Scholars; Tishbi solve^ nodos, and quaestiones,
(Talmud.) When Elias Tishbites shall come, he will resolve all doubts, and
questions: But this will be, as we say, Ad Graecas calendas.

For Elias is come already, and they have done to him what they please.

Elias is not yet come; and amongst many, Christopher Castrus the Jesuit, on
Malach. 4.8. concludes it, because it was the voice of the Jews, and the
expectation of the Scribes and Pharisees who said that Elias should come before
Christ's glorious appearing.

Messiah, to be glorious in all worldly Pomp; and therefore it follows not:
They expected the coming of Elias; Therefore he must come.

Elias truly shall first come, and restore al things, but though these words
were spoken after John the Baptist was beheaded, yet Christ means not that
Elias shall come corporally: but in answering his Disciples he propounds the
objection of the Jews, which they before alleged more briefly, and speaks
according to their opinion: Elias indeed shall come; and then in the verse
following he says unto his Disciples thus in effect, by way of correction,
whatsoever the Scribes say or affirm concerning Elias his bodily coming; is
not literally to be understood; but I say unto you, that Elias is come already.
And what he says to his Disciples here, he says to the people. Matthew. 11.14.
If ye will receive it, this is Elias which was for to come. He fore-knew that
some would not believe him; and therefore he said if ye will receive it, this is
Elias: this John (who then did live) is Elias not which shall come (for this is
the exposition of the Jews) but this John is that Elias, which was to come, and
now is come; and the prophecy fulfilled Doctor Kellet Miscel. lib. 3. Cap. 1.
page 177.

Verse. 17. Then Jesus answered, and said:
. 1. O faithless generation.

What faith was this which Christ desired in his Disciples,

First, hereunto we answer, that faith in general,

Secondly, the word of God does either, Declare, Show, or Promise; and hence
arises a distinction of faith, for we either believe God when he shows any
thing unto us, or when he promises any thing unto us.

I. We believe those things which God declares and shows unto us, whether
bypast or to come, as, that the world was created, and that there shall be a
day of judgment.

Secondly we believe those things which God promises, and this God requires of
him to whom the promise is made, that he believe that the thing promised shall
be made good unto him.

Thirdly, the divine promises of God made in

I. Special; and these are such as are made to some certain persons, Or

II. General, which are made unto all.

First, sometimes God makes some special promises to some particular persons;
as he promised to his Apostles, that they should be able to cast out Devils, if
they would but believe.

Secondly, sometimes God makes some general promises unto all, and thus he
promises life eternal unto all men if they will but believe. John. 5.9 unto
16.

Fourthly, that faith which is exhibited to a

Fifthly, these things premised we answer thus to the Question: The Question
was, in what credulity our Savior upbraids, and taxes both in his D^isciples,
and the Jews; or why he twits and reproacheth them both for want of faith? And
the Answer is because neither the one nor the other believed his word.

I. Christ had given power to his Apostles to cast out Devils, but they believe
not this word of their Masters, because if they had believed it, they should
then have cast out all unclean Spirits.

II. Christ had openly professed to the Jews, that he was the promised Messiah,
and the Son of God, and therefore had power to cast out Devils, and to work
Miracles, and to give health and salvation to all those who would believe in
him, but they doubted of this, and would not credit it; and therefore both
Disciples and Jews, are here justly taxed, and called a faithless generation.

2. And perverse generation.

Our Savior by this exprobration of his Disciples, and the Jews, would teach
us what all men are until they be truly converted, and turned unto God:
namely, faithless, and perverse: From whence two Questions will arise.





1. First, an evil man, Luke 6. The evil man out of the evil treasure of his
heart. etc.

2. Secondly, flesh John 3. That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh. etc.

3. Thirdly, flesh and blood: Matthew. 16. Flesh and blood has not revealed this
unto thee etc.

4. Fourthly, the world: John 1. The world knew him not.

5. Fifthly, terrene, and earthly: John 3. He which is of the earth is
earthly, and speaks of the earth.

6. Sixthly, the Children of this world. Luke 16. The Children of this world
are wiser. etc.

7. Seventhly, a wicked, and adulterous generation, Matthew. 12.

8. Eighthly, a faithless and perverse generation: in this place.

9. Ninthly, a generation of vipers, Matthew 12. and 3.

10. Tenthly, corrupt and rotten Trees, Matthew. 7.18.19.

11. Eleventhly, the Children of that evil one, the Devil: Matthew. 13. and
John 8.

12. Twelfthly, stony, and thorny fields, Mat. 13.

13. Thirteenthly, lost sheep, Matthew. 15. Luke 15. and a lost groate, Luke 15.

14. Again, Prodigal Children, Luke 15.

15. Again evil servants. Matthew 18. and unprofitable servants, Matthew. 25.

16. Again, Unjust Stewards, Luke 16.

17. Again, foolish Virgins, Matthew. 25. and foolish men, Matthew 7.

18. Again, Idle Servants, Matthew. 20.

19. Again, Men that fit in darkness, and in the shadow of death. Matthew. 4.
Luke 1.

20. Again, Plants not planted of the Father, Mat. 15.

21. Again; they are called Workers of Iniquity, Matthew. 7. And

22. Lastly, dead men; let the dead bury their dead, Matthew. 9. And thus by
these names we may learn what we are by nature; that so loathing our selves,
and detesting our present condition, we may flee unto Christ for freedom from
it.

What are the properties of natural, and unregenerate

First, they want original righteousness, having Adams fall.

Secondly, instead of that original righteousness, which was in them at
first, they have unrighteousness, and original corruption, or sin in all
their parts, working that which is contrary to the will, and word of God, both
in the internal motions of their mind, and will, and in their external
members, Matthew. 7. and 12. and John 8.

Thirdly, they are the slaves of Satan, Mat. 12 John 8. and 12. and 14.

Fourthly, they are guilty, both of the wrath John 3. Luke 13. and 16. and John
8.

VERSE. 18, 19, 20, 21. And Jesus rebuked the Devil, and he departed out of
him;
I have spoken something already, for the satisfaction of the vulgar Reader,
concerning the weapons against Satan, and the power which some wicked men may
have over him, and the means, and ways, both wicked, and warrantable, by
which he is, or may be cast out, and dispossessed [ Chap. 4.4. 1. qu. 1, 2. and
Chap. 7.22.. 3. qu. 1, 2, 3. and Chap. 8.16. qu. 1, 2. and verse 28.. 1, 2. and
Chap. 12.22.. 2.]

Our Savior here, saying; If ye have faith, ye may move this question.

Whether the Apostles, or any other did ever remove Mountains?

First, certainly the Apostles would have removed

Secondly, others far inferior to the Apostles in faith, and holiness, have
removed Mountains (as follows by and by) and therefore no doubt, but they
could have done so also, if need had required.





Eusebius (Eccles hist. lib. 7. cap. 25.) relates; that one Gregory, a Bishop
of Neocesarea; [when there was need to build a Church in a certain place, being
too narrow, by reason of a great River on the one side, and a mighty high Rock
on the other] by continuing there al night in fasting, and prayer, prevailed
with the Lord so, that in the morning the Rock was removed so far off, that
there was space enough left to build, according to their desire. And Faber
says, that he read in the History of the Tartars, of a certain holy man, who
when the Tartarians mocked the Christians with this; That their Master promised
them, that if they had faith, they should remove Mountains; as if this were
most absurdly spoken, obtained by prayer the removal of a certain Mountain
there, thus stopping their mouths.





I. An historical faith, whereby all things are believed to be so, as they are
propounded in the Scripture; and this faith is common, both to the wicked, and
righteous, James 2.

II. A justifying faith, whereby a man believes the promises of God, and
apprehends the mercy and grace of God in Christ, applying it unto himself: and
this faith is peculiar to the righteous, and not communicable unto the wicked.

III. A miraculous faith, whereby a man firmly believes, that nothing is
impossible unto God (no not to remove Mountains) and withal his mind is
driven, and moved, by some motions, and blasts of the spirit, to effect some
great, and wonderful thing; and this faith is neither peculiar to the
righeous, nor to the wicked, but common to both. For the understanding whereof,
observe.

First, this miraculous faith is peculiar (I conceive) to Christians; that is,
to the outward visible Church, and cannot be in one, who is not of the Church.

Secondly, this miraculous faith, is not common to all Christians, or unto
every particular member of the Church; whether wicked, or righteous, but is
peculiar unto some only.

Thirdly, as this faith is not common to all the wicked in the Church, so
neither to all the righteous: and herein it differs from justifying faith; for
this is given to all the righteous, but not that.

Fourthly, as this faith of Miracles belongs not unto all Christians, so
neither unto all times, or ages of the Church; but is proper unto some persons
only in the Church, and unto some ages of the Church, 1 Cor. 12.9.

Fifthly, this miraculous faith can save none; because it is given to the
wicked, as well as to the righteous; and because it does not change the heart,
and affections; and because it may be without love. And this is that faith,
which our Savior in this place speaks of.

Our Savior in saying here, that unclean spirits are not cast out, but by
fasting, and prayer, may move these two questions, which follow.

How may men be delivered out of the snares

By two ways are unclean spirits cast out: namely,

First, by the extraordinary gift,

Secondly, by the ordinary means of fasting, and prayer, which our Savior
prescribes in this place. By which means we doubt not, but even in these
days, when it pleases God, Satan is chased from the possession of Christ's
members. We have an example hereof in Luther, who by these means, was a means
to free a young man from the Devils power. The History is this: A young man
(as is credibly reported) having bound himself by obligation to the Devil,
and sealed the bond, and subscribed it with his blood to give him his soul; so
he would satisfy his desire, and wish, with money, grew in short time to
great wealth: Now the matter being disclosed with much ado to Luther, he
calls the Congregation together, and joyneth in prayer for this young man;
and as they prayed, the obligation was cast in at the window. For p. 864.

What are the benefits of fasting, that our Savior

The benefits of fasting are great;

First, he that fasteth much, has not such need of worldly things, and so is
more free from covetousness, and more inclined to mercy. And

Secondly, he is made more light, and watchful in prayer, and not sluggish,
and drowzie; and so in prayer becomes most powerful against the Devil.

Thirdly, he that fasteth, and prays, has two wings, whereby he flees
more swiftly, then the very wind.

VERSE. 24, 25, 26, 27. And when they were come to Capernaum, Verse. 24.25, 26, 27
they that received tribute money came to Peter; and said, Does not your Master
pay tribute: He says, yes. And when he was come into the house, Jesus
prevented him, saying, what think then Simon? Of whom do the Kings of the
earth take custom, or tribute, of their own children, or of strangers? Beter
says unto him, of strangers. Jesus says unto him then are the children free.
Notwithstanding, lest we should offend them, go thou to the sea; and cast an
hook, and take up the fish that first comes up; and when there have opened
his mouth, thou shall find a piece of many: that take, and give un^o them for
me, and thee.
2. They that received tribute money.

The word in the original is (...), Didrachmum, we English it Tribute money:
The Syriak reads Duo zuzim; now that coin which was termed Zuz by the
Hebrews, was answerable to the Roman Denair, whence it appears that it
valued of ours, j s. 3. d. fifteen pence.

Moses says, Ex^d. 30.13. The half shekel shall be an offering to the Lord:
how then came it to pass, that this half shekel was paid to the Roman
Emperors?

Matthew. 22.19. were not all one: for this was imposed as tribute, by way of
conquest, upon the Jews, according to their substance; the other they used to
pay by the poll to the Temple; which the Romans also usurped to themselves, and
diverted it from the original use. Viller. Annot. Matthew. 22.19. But of this
more afterward, Chap. 22.19.

Josephus says, that Vespasian enjoined the Jews, yearly to bring binas
drachmas, two drams into the Capitol. And Iunius thinks, that there were
two kind of the coin, called Denarius, the one of the Sanctuary, which was
double to the common, and equivalent to the didrachma, or half sicle; and by
this the Priests accounted, and the Publicans, and Tollgatherers by the other.
But Denarius being a latin name, and part of the tribute, which they paid to
the Romans, and consequently, a civil, and profane payment; it is not like
that it was reckoned after the account of the Sanctuary.

Denarius the same, with the Didrachma, the half sicle, mentioned in this
place; for the Denarius, and Roman penny, is almost the same with the Grecians
Dram, the eighth part of an ounce, and the fourth part of a sicle, and the
tenth part of the French Crown; that is, three shillings six pence French:
Budeus; and about six pence half penny sterling, or thereabouts: it was as much
as an old Groat, when eight Groats made an ounce.

Willet upon Exodus 30.13. qu. 20.) that both in this place, and also Chap.
22.19. mention is made of tribute, or poll-money, as the Syrian Interpreter
calls it Argentum Capitationis, head or pol-mony Mark 12.14. But Beza says,
that in his ancient Greek Copy, in stead of (...), tribute, he found (...),
head money, in that place of Saint Mark.

2. Came unto Peter.

These words are urged by Canisius, Peter, because the Receivers of custom
come unto him.

First, among the twelve Apostles, Peter (we

I. Of authority: now by the privilege of authority, I mean a pre-eminence, in
regard of estimation, whereby he was had in reverence above the rest of the
twelve Apostles; for Cephas, with James and John, are called Pillars, and
seemed to be great, Gal 2.6.9.

II. He had the prerogative, and pre-eminence of Primacie, because he was the
first named, as the foreman of the Quest, Matthew. 10.2.

III. He had the privilege of principality among the twelve, because in
regard of the measure of grace, he excelled the rest; for when Christ asked
his Disciples, whom they said he was; Peter as being of greatest ability, and
zeal, answered for them all, Matthew. 16.16. I use this clause, among the twelve,
because Paul excelled Peter, every way in learning, zeal, and understanding, as
far as Peter excelled the rest.

Secondly, but we deny, that Peter was the Chap. 10.2.. 2. and also have much
further to clear it afterward.

. 3. Of whom do the Kings of the earth take

How came it to pass, that this half shekel, Didrachma (which at first was
ordained to be paid, as an offering to the Lord, Exodus 30.13.) was paid by
Christ, and others for tribute, unto the Roman Emperors?

It so pleased God, that this portion which was first set apart, for the use of
the Temple,

First, because Dei jugum excusserant, they had cast off the Lords yoke, the
Lord departed from his right, and delivered them over unto hand Lords, Calvin.
And

Secondly, because they gave but with a grudgeing mind to the Temple, they are
now turned over unto others; for so it falls out often, that Quod Deo
denegamus and hostis heripiat, what we deny unto God, the enemy takes away.
Gelas. in Exodus And

Thirdly, because by the coming of Christ, the external worship prescribed by
Moses, was to be abolished, God would have this pension taken away from the
Temple, whereby it was maintained. Simler. s Exodus 30.13. And

Fourthly, although our Savior did pay this tribute, yet did he not thereby
approve the unjust exactions, and impositions of the Romans; but gives (for,
or in, the doing of it this reason) lest we should offend, that is, Ne
suspici^^em illis demus, etc. lest we should give them occasion of suspicion,
as though we should be sedicious, or disturb the Kingdom, Muscul. s.
Christ therefore by his example teaches the people, not to move any tumult,
or sedition, about their tribute, as they had before time. but willingly submit
themselves to that yoke, which for their sins was laid upon them.

4. Then are the children free.

Sampsons Foxes, the Anabaptists, and the Papists, whose heads are diametrally
opposite, but in their tails they carry firebrarnds, for the destruction of
Protestants, and the truth which they profess.



Christ speaks this of himself, who by his birth was Heir to the Crown, and
Kingdom of the Jews; and therefore by right was to pay none; neither did, but
for avoiding of offense only (as Mr. Perkins thinks, although some others
think otherwise, as follows in the next question:) wherefore this place
serves not at all, for freeing of others from obedience to the civil
Magistrate, or any Christian Governors.

Peter, What think thou, Simon? of whom do the Kings of the Nations receive
tribute, of their own, or of strangers? Simon answered, of strangers: the Lord
said, then are the children free. But Clergymen are the children of the
kingdom, therefore they ought to be free. Thus reasons Marsilius de Padua,
and the Rhemists, Mat. 17. sect. 8. Bellarmine reasons thus; The children of
Kings, with their families, are exempted from paying of Tribute, Mat. 17.26.
but the Clergy properly belongs unto the family of Christ; and therefore they
are exempt from tribute.

Rhemist. Ann^t. Romans 13.. 5. and Bellarm. de Cl^ricis, cap. 28.) and yet they
go about (against themselves, and their own assertion) to prove this Tenet from
Scripture.

Marsilius his Argument, Bellarmine himself gives a double answer, viz.

I. That by this reason, all Christians, as well as Clerks, should be exempted
from tribute; because they are all the sons of God, being born a new in
Baptism.

II. Christ speaks only of himself; that as Kings children are freed from
tribute, so much more he (who is the son and heir appar^nt of the King of
kings) should be exempted from all temporal tribute.

Willet, Symps. page 166. But Dr Amesius (Bell. enerv. tom. 2. p 147.) affirms
(and that with reason) that Christ himself, as he was subject to the Law, was
bound to pay this Tribute, and Custome-mony: and therefore (as Cajetan well
observes) if he had not done it, he had given an active, not a passive offense.
Ne scandalizemus, dicit, non ne scandalizentur, v. 27. He does not say, We will
pay, lest they should be offended; but lest we should offend: as though (in
regard of his subjection to the Law, whereunto he was made subject for us) he
had offended if he had not paid: although true it is, that as he was considered
as the Son of God, he was not bound unto any such payments, being superior
unto all Kings, and the greatest earthly Monarchs but only his substitutes or
deputies. Now howsoever we consider Christ, whether simply, as God, (and so
subordinate unto none) or as man (and so made subject to the Law:) yet this
act, or these words of his, will exempt none from paying of Tribute to Princes;
for that which Christ did as God, is no president for mortal men to imitate
(neither are the Papists so impudent as to avouch it:) and as man we see he
paid Tribute, and was so to do: and therefore until the Popish Clergy be Gods,
and not men, they cannot be exempted from these Customs and Tributes by our
Saviors words.

Fourthly, learned Cameron answers here, that the nihil ad rhombum, nothing at
all to the purpose: because the Tribute which is here required of Christ, and
paid by him, was not that which belonged unto the Magistrate, but (which by
the prescript of the Ceremonial Law) was to be paid for the use of the
Sanctuary. And therefore, this is no ground for non-payment of Tribute to
Princes. His grounds and Arguments are solid, and convincing, but I set them
not down, because they are something large. See Cameron, Myrothee Evang. in
Mat. 17 24 page 54, 55, 56.

Fifthly, Sed dato, non concesso; but suppose we

I. Although Christ were free from the payment of these Taxations, and Toll,
and Tributes to the Magistrate; yet it follows not hence, that this privilege
belongs unto the Ministers of the Church, by right.

II. Although the Apostles of Christ were free from the payment of Tribute to
Princes, so long as their Master lived with them; yet it does not follow hence,
that this privilege belongs to the Apostles successors. If the Reader would see
both these demonstrated, and the Argument prosecuted, let him read the
forenamed Author. Cameron, page 57, 58.

Bellarmine has put a sword into our hands for the conquest of himself: and by
the same reason that he confutes Marsilius, is himself confuted. By Marsilius
Argument, all the faithful (says Bellarmine) are exempted from paying of
Tribute to the Magistrate: And why? Because they are all Gods sons. By
Bellarmines Argument (say I) all the faithful are exempted from paying of
Tribute to Christian Princes, or others: And why? Because they are all Gods
servants, and of his family, as well as the Clergy are. We of the Ministry are
called Clerks, or Clergymen, that is, Gods portion, or inheritance: now are
not faithful people so also? God, we know, is no respecter of persons, ( Acts
10.34.) and therefore he respects a faithful sheep as much a faithful
shepherd, Caeteris paribus. But Bellarmine says, that Ministers properly
belong unto the family of Christ. Are faithful people then retainers, or
hangers on? are they not as properly of Gods family, as Ministers are? yea,
does not the Apostle totidem verbis, call them, and say of them, that they are
of the household of Faith, Gal. 6.10. and of the household of God, (Ephesians. 2.19.)
and fellow Citizens with the Saints.

children are free.





First, spiritual: and thus all Christians are made free; because by Christ
they are freed from the yoke of sin, and bondage of satan: according to that of
our Savior, If the Son have made you free, then are you free indeed.

Secondly, corporal: and thus the faithful are not freed from tribute, but
bound to pay it, according to that of our Savior, Give to Caesar, those things
which are Caesar's; and of the Apostle. Give tribute to whom tribute is due, and
custom to whom custom longs. And this is the answer of that ingenious, Papist
Carthusian upon this place, who says indefinitly, Fideles tenentur ad tributa,
the faithful are obliged to pay tribute unto Magistrates, neither excluding
Clergy nor Laity; Carthus. s. page 147. a. initio.

. 6. Thou shall find a piece of money.

The word here is (...), Stater; which we English a piece of money at large, but
it contained precisely two Didrachma. For the tribute money to be paid for each
person, was Didrachmum, as is evident from verse 24. (And they that received
Didrachma, came unto Peter, etc.) And this Stater was paid for two, namely, for
Christ, and Peter, verse 27. and the value of it was about 2 s. 6 d. half a
crown. For we must observe, that every person was taxed at two Drams, or
Roman pence, which two pence made the Didrachma; that is, the double Groat, or
half Sicle, which every one was set at: and two of those double Groats made but
one Stater, which is usually translated, a piece of twenty pence; but it was a
full Sicle, which was half an ounce, and consequently a third part more, namely
(as was said) thirty pence; which Peter here paid for his Master, and himself.

. 7. That take, and give for me and thee.

We, against the Church of Rome, affirm, Romans 13. where every soul is commanded
to be subject to the higher powers; and there, verse 5. paying of Tribute is
made a part of subjection: the Argument therefore thus follows, Clergymen
are subject to Princes, therefore they ought to pay tribute.

CHAPTER XVIII.
VERSE. 1. At the same time came the Disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who is the
greatest in the kingdom of Heaven?
the kingdom of Heaven?







Fourthly, because the certain seat of the Subjects

Fifthly, this kingdom of Christ is called Heavenly,

VERSE. 3. Verily, I say unto you, Verse. 3.
Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into
the kingdom of Heaven.
Except ye become like little children.

In what sense does Christ take Children in this place, Child taken in
Scripture?

First, we are called Children sometimes, when we are humble, lowly, and poor
of spirit, as in this verse.

Children sometimes, when we are without vice, and malice, as 1 Corinthians
14.20.

Children, as considered under the Law, Gal. 4.1. and 1 Cor. 13.11. When I was
a Child, that is, When I was under the Law.

Children sometimes, because we are yet weak in grace, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2.

Children, because like Children, we have always need to be fed with the word
as with milk, 1 Pet. 2.2.

VERSE. 7. Woe unto the world, because of offenses, for it must needs be that
offenses come; but woe to that man, by whom the offense comes.
It is principally necessary that these words should be lively laid open,
before the eyes, and deeply imprinted in the heart of all Christians in these
days, amongst whom nothing is more frequent, than giving and taking of
offense: and therefore I will treat of them particularly, and something more
largely than ordinary.

Woe unto the world, because of offenses.

Scandals?

Woe unto the world, by reason of offenses.

Who should be greatest in the kingdom of God? verse 1. Whereupon our Savior
does

I. Show them, by the humility of Children, what their duty is, verse 2, 3, 4,
5. Then

II. He teaches them, what it is, and how dangerous it is to offend one of
these, verse 6. And

III. Then, and thereupon handles the general Doctrine of Scandals, and
Offenses.

Scandals?



First, into the Church, and congregation of the Righteous. And

Secondly, into the Synagogue, and assembly of the wicked. And these are called
the World, ordinarily and usually, because they are many. From whence we may
learn,

Scandals and Offenses: or, the world, and many in the world shall sorrow, and
smart for the offenses they give, Hos 4.3.



Pet. 5.8.) and an enemy unto mankind: desiring the destruction and death of
all, as God desires their salvation and life, 2 Peter 3. And therefore he
prevails with, and against many.

Secondly, it appears also by his instruments, who are many: but principally
these two viz.

I. Persons; or men: that is either

First, perverse, and obstinate, who hate all goodness and scandalize all good
men. Or

Secondly, diabolical men, who like Satan Iuvat socios habuisse doloris, it
would be an ease unto them, to have copartners in their misery. Or

Thirdly, beastly and Swinish men, who for the satisfying of their lust, and
unsatiable covetousness, care not what scandals, and offenses they give. Or

Fourthly, ignorant men, who thinking evil good, and good evil, do thereby
frequently give offense to those, whose judgments are rightly informed.

II. Things are sometimes the Devils instrument to work Scandals, as well as
persons viz.

First, the sweetness, delight and pleasure, which is in that which is evil:
And

Secondly, the difficulty of that which is good. The Devil lends men a glass
wherein they see how easy sin is, and how hard the service of God is; how full
of pleasure sin is, how painful the service of God is, how delightful and
pleasing to flesh and blood the ways of wickedness are, and how tedious and
irksome to our corrupt nature, the ways of grace are; and the sight of these
makes us more prone unto evil, and puts us back from that which is good, and
consequently makes us scandalous, and offensive to Christ's little ones.

Thirdly, it is further evident that there are

. 2. For it must needs be, or, it is necessary. Sect


Why does our Savior here say, That it is necessary that offenses should come?

There is a double reason,

First, in regard of the end, and thus Saint Paul says; it is necessary that
heresies must come; that the good may be known, 1 Cor. 11.

Secondly, offenses are necessary in regard of the corruptions of the world;
for the world it so corrupt and wicked that it is Impossible, Acts. 28 22. and
1 Corinthians. 4.9 and 2 Pet, 2 3.

Why will the Gospel be always Subject to

First, because men by nature are suspicious, and ends, or the like; for which
they scandalize them: as though it were indeed as they sinisterly imagine.

John 6.60. and 1 Corinthians. 1.16.21.

Acts 2.13. and 4.1. and 5, 17, 40. and 6.11. and 1 Cor. 16.9.



Luke 2.34. and 12.51. And the Primitive Church was reported to have sacrificed
children, to have been Nicolaitans, with other wicked scandals, slanders.



I. By a constant resolution, that no detractions, derisions, slanders nor
reproaches, shall cause us to turn our feet out of the ways of God. And

II. By circumspection, and watchfulness, Ephesians. 5.15.

Thirdly, we must take heed, that we be not offended with any thing that
happens, or falls out, but avoid the Ordinary causes of offenses, which are
these, to wit,

I. Some are offended with Religion, because the persons of the Religious are
despised. Read Matthew. 13.57. etc. Mark. 6.3. John 7.41, 47.

II. Some are offended with Religion, because the life of the Religious is
somewhat popular, and not so strict, as they would have it. Thus some stumbled
at Christ when they said: Why do the Disciples of John, and of the Pharisees
fast, but thy Disciples fast not? Matthew. 9.11. John 8.48.

III. Some are offended with Religion, because the Religious are still subject
to the cross, and under the rod; Matthew. 26.31. and 1 Corinthians 15.19.

IV. Some are offended even with the Doctrine of the Gospel, Acts. 28.22. and 1 Corinthians. 1.23. And that either,

First, because the Gospel is preached: Acts. 4.2. and 13.45. etc. Or

Secondly, because Christ publishes, and proclaims himself to be the Son of
God. John 5.18. Or

Luke 24. And hence the Christians were made a mocking-stock of, by the Jews,
because they believed in a crucified God, John 6.52.60. Or

Fourthly, because Christ abrogated the Law of Moses, Acts. Or

Fifthly, because he gives salvation freely unto us, without any merit or work
of ours Matthew. 9.3. Philip. 3.9. Or

Sixthly, some are offended, because Religion is too severe: and will not allow
them sometimes to follow and fulfill the desires of their own hearts: Or

Seventhly, some are offended with Christ; because he is to liberal, and free,
in reprehending of them, Matthew 15.12. John 8.33, 45. Or

Eighthly, some are offended with the Gospel by reason of the many
dissensions, and diversities of opinion amongst Christians: and this is the
frequent Objection, and cavil of the Turks and Heretics. Now these and all
other causes of offense we should cautelously avoid, and let nothing make us
stumble at Christ, or at Religion.

. 3. Vt Scandala, that offenses should come.

The meaning of these words, Woe be unto the world, by reason of offenses, is,
woe be unto the world because many scandals shall arise therein, and there
shall be many offenses, in the plural number. Scandala; to teach us,

That many offenses are to be expected in the world.

What is an Offense, or Scandal?

First, in general the word is derived from the Suidas.

Secondly, or the word Scandal, comes from Hebrew word, or the Syriacke. For
Syrus says that Machshula a Scandal, comes from Cesal Impingo, to beat,
knock, or dash against it, Now the Hebrews say, that Michshol a Scandal, comes
from the root Casal which signifies to offend: And therefore to scandalize and
offend, does signify a giving occasion unto others to stumble, and fall, and
hurt themselves.

Thirdly, more particularly, this word Scandal,

I. Sometimes for evil, loss, and an impediment: and thus it is frequently
taken in the old Testament.

II. Sometimes it is taken for an offense against the conscience of our
Brother, who is zealous for Gods glory. Thus the Athenians were an offense unto
Paul, whose heart burned, and whose Spirit was troubled in him, when he saw
their Idolatry, Acts 17.16.

III. Sometimes it is taken for a tentation, whereby our Brother is drawn unto
sin. Now these two latter properly are Scandals, and offenses, but not the
rst. The meaning, therefore of the point is this, That so long as we live in
the world, we shall hear, and see many things, which will offend us, if we be
zealous for Gods glory, yea many things, whereby God is dishonored, and
Religion scandalized: yea we must expect temptations, and provocations from
others unto evil, that so we may arm our selves against them and labor to
prevent them.





First, Scandalum datum: an offense which is given: and this Offense is either,

I. In the will of the Agent: and that whether it respect. First, a man's self
that is, either

I. His gain, pleasure, or satisfaction: now this is understood of those who
tempt others unto adultery, or drunkenness, or murder, or lying, or theft, or
perjury etc. Or

II. His pride; not caring who is offended: Sic volo, Thus I will do, let
others think what they will, I care not: Now these are blameworthy, not so
much because they look upon their brethren in envy, as because they do not
respect them in love: for we should bear that love unto our Brethren, that we
should not offend them at al, if it lay in our power: for if we willingly
offend these little ones, when we are left free, we are inexcuseable, and
subject to the woe denounced in the Text. Or

Secondly, these voluntary offenses respect our brethren; when men do those
things which are offensive to the Children of God, and that out of envy, and
for this end, that they may be offended. Number. 31.16.

Certainly none can be free from misery that thus gives offense, our Savior
here denouncing a woe against such. And thus we see how this offense given is
voluntary, or, in the will of the agent. Or

II. There is an Offense given, which consists in the nature of the action: and
thus,

First, some things are offensive to a man's self. Matthew. 5.30. If thy hand
offend thee etc. but this is improperly, or at least, less properly called an
Offense.

Secondly, some things are offensive to our brethren: and thus all public
sins are, 2 Samuel 12 14. Thus much may suffice for the understanding of
Scandulum datum, the Offense given.

Secondly, there is Scandalum acceptum, an offense which is taken, but not
given: and herein we have two things to observe: namely,

I. The description thereof viz, An offense taken, is when our brethren are
offended with that which we do, without any fault in us at all: that is, when
there is in us neither a will or desire to offend them, nor any direct
depravity in our actions, wherewith they are offended.

II. We have to consider the Destribution of this offense taken, viz. it
consists, either

First, in an indifferent, or adiaphorall action; which is twofold; to wit,
either

I. An action which is indifferent, and remains such; that is, when the thing
is indifferent, of it self, and in its own nature; and a man is neither
compelled to do it or not to do it: either by Any Public Command. Or Any
private Necessity.
Now here offenses must by all means be avoided, and shunned by those, who
desire to avoid this woe denounced in the Text. Read Mat. 17.27. Romans 14.15.
and 1 Cor. 8.9.13. and 10.29. etc. Or,

II. There are actions which are indifferent in their own nature, but are
changed either by the command of the Magistrate, or by some great, or
inevitable necessity; and if a man be offended with these actions, it is
Scandalum acceptum, an offense taken, because the Agent, or doer thereof, does
it not voluntarily, but by a command from authority; and also because the
action, or thing done, is not simply, or positively evil; but in its own
nature indifferent; that is, a thing which may be done, or left undone, without
sin. Or,

Secondly, this Offense taken consists in a pious, and religious action; as
when men are offended with Christ, and Religion, and the Gospel, as was showed
before,. 2. Now these offenses we must not at all regard, nor shun, and avoid;
but if men will be offended with that which is good, and godly, let them be
offended, Matthew. 16.23. And thus we see the truth of the Observation, that many
offenses are to be expected in the world, by those who are faithful in the
service of the Lord.

. 4. But woe be to that man, by whom the offense

Our Savior here denounces a woe against those who offend, or are stumbling
stones unto the children of God; Woe be unto them; that is, they shall perish
for ever. Hence then we may observe.

That offenses, Matthew 5.29.

Wherein, or how do they offend, who lay stumbling blocks before men?

First, such offend, because they give occasion Tim 3.5. Woe be to such, who by
their hypocrisy, and color of Religion, give offense unto others.

Secondly, such offend and sin, in laying of

I. A cause of evil, by precipitating, and casting headlong, that which is
good. Or,

II. It is a confirmation of evil, by hardening men in sin, and hindering them
from conversion; for those who cause others to offend, are causes unto them
both of doing that which is evil, and of leaving undone that which is good.
And therefore we must take heed of giving offense, or a Scandalis datis, for
by that means we are guilty of our brethrens sin, and smart, and their blood
shall be required at our hands.



Judas, nor the Jews did any thing, but what was before determined; and yet
they are blamed, and that justly; for the doing of it; because they did it
willingly, and out of envy unto him.

Scandalum acceptum, non datum, an offense taken, but not given.



First, voluntary; as

I. When Laws are made directly against Religion. And

II. When men exhort, persuade, and tempt unto sin. Now these are the worst
scandals. Or

Secondly, there are occasional offenses; and these are therefore condemned,
because they are causes of evil; and if he be threatened, and shall be
punish^d, who is seduced; then much more he who is the S^ducer. Now we must
farther observe; that these occasional Scandals are either,

I. In doctrine; as when men teach that which is Popish, Idolatrous, and
supersticious; now woe be unto such ^lind, and wicked Leaders of the blind: for
both themselves, and those who are seduced, and mislead by them, shall perish,
and fall into the Ditch. Or

II. In Practice, and that either

First, by exhortation; and that either,

I. Docendo, by teaching others to lie, steal, and the like; as parents often
do their children, and Masters their servants, for their advantage, and filthy
lucres sake. Or

II. Alliciendo, by alluring others unto theft, adultery, drunkenness, and the
like. Or,

III. Terrendo, by terrifying, and affrighting others, with scofs, taunts,
derisions, and the like: by which some are kept back from the profession of
Religion. Or

Secondly, by Example; and thus great men are great scandals; for an evil
life, or example in a Superior does much harm, and occasions much evil in,
and amongst inferiors. Or

Thirdly, men give occasion of offense by their words; to wit, by their
scurrilous speeches, and songs, and oaths, and the like; wherewith pure, and
chaste cares are offended.

Cor. 10.32.

First, the Apostle speaks not there of the rites,

Secondly, Saint Paul forbids the eating of Cor. 10.28, 29.

Thirdly, in these things, these four rules are

I. The first respects Christian liberty: for all Cor 6.12. and 10.23.

II. The second respects Christian charity, Cor. 8.13. and 10.32. Romans 14, 15.
And I conceive, that it is the scope of the Apostles doctrine, 1 Cor. 8. and
Romans 14. But we must note here, what scandal the Apostle speaks of, whether

First, such an one as does offend the mind of our brother. Or,

Secondly, such an one as labors to draw our brother to the participation of
sin: that is, the Apostle did not so much forbid them the doing of that which
might off nd the mind of their brother; as the persuading of them to
communicate, and partake with them in those things, which they held unlawful.
And this is the scandal, which I rather think the Apostle speaks of in those
places.

III. The third Rule respects Christian obedience Scandalum acceptum, non
datum, an offense taken, but not given.

IV. The fourth Rule respects divine obedience:

First, that it is lawful for us to do those things which are indifferent in
their own nature.

Secondly, but if our brethren be offended with the doing of them; and there is
no necessity of the doing of them, nor command for the doing of them, then we
must forbear the doing of them.

Thirdly, but if the Magistrate shall command us to do them, then we must do
them, although our brother be offended by them.

Fourthly, but if the Magistrate shall command us to do that which is forbidden
by God, then we must not do it, though the Magistrate should be offended with
us for our disobedience, and refusal. Now there is no question of the truth of
all these Rules, save only of the third; and therefore we will show, that the
command of the Magistrate is more to be regarded, then the offending of our
brother; that is, if we cannot avoid it, but that either we must disobey the
Magistrate, or offend our brother, we must rather offend our brother, then
disobey the Magistrate: and this we prove thus.

I. Because the Magistrate is more to be esteemed; and therefore we must rather
offend our brethren, then them. We do not inquire here, whether offenses be to
be given, or not? for it cannot be avoided, but that one must be offended: and
therefore the question is, whether must rather be offended, our weak brother,
or the Magistrate? and we conceive our brother.

II. To offend the Magistrate by disobeying his command, is Scandalum datum, an
offense given; to offend our brother by doing that which the Magistrate
commands, is Scandalum acceptum, an offense taken. Now as I confess, our
brethren are to be regarded, and not to be offended, it there were no command,
or necessity enforcing thereunto: so I imagine that we must rather choose to
fall into an offense taken by the weak brethren, then into an offense given to
the Magistrate: because the one is our sin; the other is not ours.

III. There will always be some weak ones in the Church, which will stumble at
these adiaphorall things: and therefore if these should be respected more then
the Magistrate: the Magistrate should never be obeyed in these things at all:
That is, if a man should omit the Ceremonies (although the Magistrate enjoyne,
and command them) until all the people be informed, concerning the
lawfulness, and indifferency of them; he should then never use them at all;
because there will be still in the Church, some who will stumble at them.

IV. When we do those things which give offense, we do them not, for this end,
that others may be offended, but that we may not offend. Romans 14.20. We desire
not to disobey the Magistrate, nor that others should be offended with our
obedience of him.

V. Thus to offend our brethren: namely, by doing that which the Magistrate
enjoins, is not the Offense, which Saint Paul speaks of: namely, to lay a
stumbling stone before them, that they may fall, Romans 44 13. and so destroy our
brother, for whom Christ died, verse 15.20. For the Apostle speaks of eating
meat offered unto Idols; and he says, that some eat it as a thing offered
unto an Idol, and their conscience being weak, is defiled, 1 Cor. 8 7. And if
they see those who are strong, eat such things in the Idols Temple, their
conscience is confirmed, and enboldned to eat those things, which are offered
unto Idols, verse 10. And so their consciences are wounded, and killed, verse
11, 12. wherefore we must deny our selves, rather then thus cause the weak to
stumble, and fall, verse 13. And thus we see the large difference that is
between our Ceremonies enjoined by the lawful Magistrate, and voluntary eating
of meat offered unto Idols, which the Apostle speaks of in the place objected.

VI. Those things which of themselves, and in their own nature are indifferent,
being once commanded, are not indifferent, by virtue of the fifth Commandment,
which enjoyneth obedience to Magistrates in lawful things.

Who give offense to their brethren, and by Woe here denounced?

First, those who do hurt unto their neighbors, Matthew. 13.41, 42.

Secondly, those who offend the consciences of Mat. 18.6.

Thirdly; they are guilty of this woe, who Romans 2.24. and 1 Peter 3.2.

Why must we be so careful not to give offense?

First, because those who are offensive unto the Cor. 10.32. And

Secondly, because such shall be punished, Mat:

Thirdly, because offenses and scandals are

I. We were ^reated for Gods glory. Those who offend do I. Dishonor God. And
II. We were created for our brethrens edification. Those who offend do II.
Infect their brethren. And III. We were created for the salvation of our own
souls. Now contrarily, Those who offend do III. Ruin, and destroy their own
souls.
For the better understanding of this, we must yet observe, that there is a
double scandal, or offense: namely,

First, in unlawful things, as Romans 2.24. and 1 Cor. 5.12. and 2 Cor. 11.29.
Now woe unto him by whom such offenses come.

Secondly, in lawful things, as Romans 14.13. and 1 Cor 8.13. Now concerning
these, we lay down this Rule: That as Religion regulates Christian charity, so
love should regulate Christian liberty, 1 John 10.20. We expound and explain
the Rule thus, viz.

I. This must be understood of indifferent things, not of Religious: for we
must not for our love unto our brother omit, or neglect any religious duty, or
work: but we may, and ought to forbear indifferent things, if our brother be
offended by them.

II. This must be understood of indifferent things, so long as they remain
indifferent, and free: and not of those things which are commanded by lawful
authority, our love unto our brethren must not make us to disobey the
Magistrate: but if no such command be, then we must not offend them: but for
bear those things which are offensive.

III. This must be understood of infirm, and weak brethren, and not of those
who are refractory, obstinate, and perverse. Those who are weak, and desire to
be informed, we must be careful not to offend, as much as in us lies: those
who are obstinate, and self-willed, we need not be so careful to please.



Woe be unto that man, by whom the offense comes. Neither can it be denied,
but that in so doing he gives offense, at least to the weak: because an
offense is nothing else, then something said, or done, Minus rectum, which
gives unto another, an occasion of stumbling and falling. Now this deed (of
going to Mass) does give occasion to the weak to suspect, that Mass is not a
wicked, and idolatrous action; and so consequently makes a way for him to
incline, and fall unto Popery, and Superstition. And therefore they sin who do
so, Bishop Davenant qu. 7. determ. page 40.


VERSE. 8, 9. Wherefore if thy hand, or thy foot offend thee, cut them off, and
cast them from thee: it is better for thee to enter into life, halt or ma^^ed,
rather th^n having two hands, or two feet, to be cast into everlasting fire.
And if thine eye offend thee pluck it out, and cast it from thee: it is better
for thee to enter into life with one eye, rather then having two eyes, to be
cast into hell fire.
Something has been said of these words before, Chap. 5 29.30. And therefore
I will only add a word or two, to what has been spoken.

If thy hand, or foot, or eye offend thee.

Si s^^nd^l^^^, if it shall offend thee; (...), as was said before comes a
(...), Claudi^s; as if our Savior would say, faciet clandicart. Whence we may
note.

Romans 11.11, 12. and 14.4. and 1 Cor. 10.12. and 2 Cor. 11.3. The truth hereof
further appears thus: we are commanded,

First, to stand fast in faith and obedience, Romans 11.20. and 1 Cor. 16.13.
Galath. 5.1. Ephesians. 6.13. and 2 Thessal. 1.15. and 1 Pet. 5.12. and Colos.
4.12. and 1 Thessal. 3.8. And

Secondly, to walk in the ways of God, Colos. 1.10. And

Thirdly, to run the race of his commandments, Romans 9.16. and 1 Cor. 9.24.
Galath. 5.7. Now to fall is opposed to all these; namely, to standing, walking,
and running. For sin makes men fall, either

I. From obedience; and that either

Finally, as Heb. 6.6. or Dangerously, as Hebr. 12.15. Or

II. From faith, Galath. 5.4. and 1 Timothy 6.21.

What is here required of us?

First, we must take heed of Apostasy, that Heb. 6.6. and 1. John 5.16.) if
it be,

I. After illumination.

II. If it be a total relapse.

III. If it be conjoined with presumption against the holy Spirit ( Hebr.
10.26.) there remains then no more sacrifice for sin.

Secondly, we must take heed of the cosen

I. They spoke against Christ, and his Word, Matthew. 12.25. and Mark 3.22. He
casts (say they) out Devils by the help of Beelzebub, etc.

II. They contemned the means of grace: the Word and Sacraments.

III. They abused the gifts, and graces of the Spirit: namely, illumination,
and compunction.

IV. They spoke often against their own consciences. And therefore we must
take heed of these sins, which lead unto a total relapse: we must not speak
against Christ, or religion: we must not despise the means of grace; that is,
either neglect, or abuse the Word, or Sacraments; we must walk according to
our light, and knowledge, and be obedient to all the good motions of the
Spirit, and we must principally beware of sins against conscience, because
they lead unto Apostas^^, and Atheism: Yea,

Thirdly, we must take heed of all sin

I. From the course of our obedience, and service of God, unto the service, and
obedience of Satan. And

II. From the liberty of the sons God, into the snares and captivity of sin and
satan, 1 Timothy 2.25.

III. We must take heed that we decline not from the grace of God: for so long
as we live holily, God will protect us, but if we tempt him we may justly fear
that he will leave us.

IV. We must beware, lest we fall from the comfort of the holy Spirit, Ephesians.
4.29. we must, not grieve the holy Spirit.

V. We must take heed, lest we fall into the irefull hands of God, Heb. 30.31.
for then we shall either be punished with temporal, or eternal torments.

. 2. Cut it off, pluck it out, and cast it from thee.

Is the body to be dismembered?

No; N^^ mutilar^lum corpus, sed fraenandus usus



Potes cogere manum ut pec^et, manus te cogere non potest. Hilar. s. Thou may
constrain thy hand, and force it to sin, but thy hand cannot compel thee unto
evil.

Otiosum damnum corporis, relicta voluntate concupiscentiae. Hilar. It is to no
purpose to cut off an hand, and pluck an eye out of the body, so long as lust
and concupiscence remain in the soul.

Quia crimen non carnis, sed voluntatis; non oculus sed per oculum animus
intuetur. Chrysostom. s. Because the fault (when a man sins) is in the will, not
in the flesh; and it is not the eye that lustfully looks upon beauty, but the
mind by the eye. And therefore unwarrantable was the practice of Leo the
first, who cut off his hand, because by the kiss of a Matron he was inflamed,
and kindled unto lust. Sabel. 5.6.

For it is better for a man to enter into Heaven, having but one hand, foot or
eye, etc.





It is better to enter into life (not to remain or abide in life) having but
one hand, etc. And Mark 9.43, 45, 47. it is called the kingdom of Heaven, and
in both places is diametrally opposed to Hell.





Than having two, to be cast into hell fire.

Tim. 2.19. Mat. 7.23. Rev. 2.5. yea it is an excellent sign of a Saint, and
sanctified man, to be totally separated from sin, and the occasions thereof.

viz. separate themselves from sin, and the occasions thereof.



First, by a sincere purpose of heart, Acts 11.33. Romans 7.17, 20. And

Secondly, by an increase of grace; for thereby we shall be taught, and enabled

I. To sin more seldom every day than other. And

II. To check, and reclaim our selves sooner from sin, than formerly. And

III. To lament, bewail, and be more sorry for our sins, and more condemn our
selves for our iniquities, than heretofore. And

IV. To love sin less, but hate it more, then hitherto we have done. And

V. To love good things, and godly duties better every day then other.

Why is this place so expressly thrice repeated, Mat. 5.29, 30. and 18.8, 9. and
Mark 9.43, 45, 47?

First, it is repeated for the certainty of the Doctrine; Mat. 5.18. and 24.35.
Psalm. 19.17. and 1 Cor. 6.9. Gal. 6.7. Psalm. 11.6. Romans 2.8, 12.

How further does it appear, that sinners shall

First, because Tophet was prepared for such, Esa. 30.33. Prove. 16.4. Romans
9.22, 23.

Secondly, it appears evidently, that the wicked These. 1.6, 7. And therefore
sinners must not delude themselves, and think that they may sin and live; for
they must either leave their sins, or lose life everlasting; they must either
turn from their iniquities, or submit themselves to hell fire and everlasting
death.

Must all adulterers, and drunkards, and sweaters,

Certainly all such shall, except they repent;

Secondly, this place is thrice expressly repeated

That the repetition, and recapitulation of Pet. 1.12. and 3.1. And that

I. Because many often are not present, when things are first taught and
delivered. And therefore a short recapitulation of those things can neither be
displeasing to those who have heard them, nor unprofitable unto those who heard
them not.

II. Because many often are present, which attend not: and therefore a brief
repetition will sharpen and quicken their attention. We must sow and water, if
we desire that our labors may be profitable.

III. It is evident, that repetition of what has been formerly preached, is
very profitable, because it is very hard for us 1 To understand divine Truths.
And 2 To believe all saving Truths. And 3 To love all holy duties, and things
which are taught unto us. And 4 To remember those things which are delivered,
and taught. And 5 Seriously to mark and observe them. Now it is necessary that
all these should be done, and therefore a brief rehearsal of what was formerly
more amply delivered, must needs be profitable unto all who desire to be
understanding and good hearers.

IV. A short repetition is yet further profitable in a threefold regard: namely

First, in regard of our selves: for the hearing of that twice which nearly
concerns us, does imprint it deeper, and fix it the surer in our hearts.

Secondly, in regard of our judgment and understanding; for those things which
we understand not at all, or not right, or not sufficiently, at the first
hearing we shall understand the better, by a second recapitulation. And



Thirdly, this place is thrice expressly repeated for our meditation; to teach
us, That the punishments







viz.

I. How suddenly we may be called by death unto judgment. And

II. How severely we shall be judged. Index nec pecunia nec penitentia etc.
August de Symbol. No bribe can be fastened upon that Judge, no tears will
prevail with him. Tum Potentissimi Reges-Aristotelis Argumenta-non proderunt.
Hier. Epist. ad Heliodorum. At the day of judgment the most potent Princes
shall find no more favor then the poorest persons, yea then neither Tullies
Rhetoric, nor Aristotle's Logic* will a whit avail them.

III. Meditate how inevitable Hell is, and how impossible it is for a wicked
man to avoid the eternal punishment thereof. It is impossible for men by any
art, or power, or policy, to shun death; and as impossible to escape
judgment after death, and alike inevitable is punishment after judgment, unto
all that are wicked dying without Repentance; for Christ has preached, and the
Holy Ghost thrice repeated, That those who will not cut off, and pluck out, and
cast from them their sins, shall together with their sins be cast into Hell
Fire.

VERSE. 10. Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones: For I say
unto you, that in heaven their Angels do always behold the face of my Father
which is in Heaven.
Their Angels,

The Rhemists urge these words to prove the (H^er. s.) And the thing is so
plain that Calvin dare not deny it, and yet he will needs doubt of it, Lib. 1.
Institut. cap. 14.. 7.

First, Calvin doubts not of the Protection of

Secondly, this the Scripture does avouch, that Calvin in the place cited.

Thirdly, Hierome, does not mean, that every Ephesus; Thyatyra, Philadelphia,
and the rest: Where if the word Angel were to he understood of heavenly
spirits, yet it is one Angel, for the Church of a whole City, and not for
every person one.

Fourthly, Chrysostom affirms that by Angels Cartwright and Doctor Mayers.

The Papists urge this place amongst others; Zachar. 1.12. Revelat. 8.3. Daniel
10.13. Psalm 91.11. Matthew. 18.10.) the Angels intercede for the living, and
have care of them in particular. And therefore much more ought the Spirits, an^
souls of men so to do: and consequently we may call upon them.

First, in some of the places quoted, the Holy

Secondly, the Argument is sick of a Non sequitur: Psalm. 91.11. and Heb. 1.14.
But we read of no such charge, or power given to the deceased Saints.

Thirdly, in Revelat. 8. John declares a vision, Daniel. 10.13.

Fourthly, in this place here is nothing at all of Scharp. de eccles. triumph.
38.

. 2. They behold the face of my Father.

What is meant here by the face of God, or

First, sometimes the face of God is taken for his presence in general: as
Genes. 4.16. Judge. 6.22 Job. 1.12 and 2: 7. Psalm 89.14. and 96.13. Zachar.
2.13.

Genes. 3^.30. Exodus 33.11. Numb. 12.8. and 14.14.15. Deuteronomy. 5, 4. and 34.10.

Job 1.11 and 2.5. and 13.20. Psalm. 10.11. and 51.9. and 139 7, Eccles.
8.8.12.13. Esa. 26.17, and 65, 3. Ierem. 4.1. and 16.17. Hos. 7.2. Jonah 1.3.10.

Samuel 2.18. and 13.12. and 21.6. and 2 King. 13.4. and 2 Chronicles. 34.27. Psalm
95.2. and 119.58. Ierem. 26.10. Hag. 1.12. Zach. 7.2. and 8.21. etc.

Psalm 16.11. and 1 Cor. 13.12. and Revelat. 22.4. And

Psalm. 104.29. And

Exodus 33.14. Esa. 63.9. And

Exodus 33.18. Judge. 5.5. Nehem. 1.5, 6. Psalm. 68.8. and 97.5. and 114.7. Esa.
63.1, 2. Joel 2.6.10. And

Numb 10.35. Ierem. 3.12. and 4.26. and Psalm. 21.10. and 1. Peter 3.12. And

Nehem. 4.5. and Ierem. 18.3.



Exodus 33.20* 23.) by mortal eye.

Proverb 17.15:

Psalm 89.14.

Answer 3. of the former Question.



Daniel 9.13.

Numb. 6.6.25. and 1 Chronicles. 6.11, and 2 Chronicles. 7.14. Psalm. 24.6. and 27.8. and
31.16. and 42.2. and 51.11. and Psalm 63.1 and 67.1. and 80.3.7.19] For thus
did David Psalm 27.9. and Epbraim, Hosea 5.15. and Israel 2 Chronicles. 15.12.

Psalm. 96.9. Ier. 5.22.) as Job did. 23.15.



Chron. 30 9. Job. 33.26. Psalm 22.24. Ierem. 15.19. Ezech. 39.29. Except it be
for a while, either for their sins, or trial; as Esa. 59.2. Job 13.14. Psalm
13.1 and 30.7 and 31, 22. and 88.14. Esa. 8.17. and 54.8. and 64.7.

Secondly, Gods face is the joy, and rejoicing Psalm 4.6, 7. and 16.11.

What is predicated of Gods Face, in regard of

First, to the wicked it is a fatal face. Psalm. Lament. 4.16. Ezech. 38, 20
and 2 These. 1.9.

Secondly, to the wicked it is a terrible Face, Genes. 3.8. Esa. 19.1. Revelat.
6.16.

Thirdly from the wicked God will hide his Deuter. 31.17, 18. and 32.20. Ierem.
18.17. and 33.5. Ezech. 39.23, 24. Mich. 3, 4.

Fourthly, the wicked shall be cast out from Chron. 7.20. Ierem. 7.15. and 23,
39) as was Israel 2 King 17.20, 23. and Judah 2. King 23.27 and 24.20. and
Ierem. 15.1 and 52.3.

Fifthly, Gods face is set against the wicked, Levitic. 7.10. and 20.3, 5, 6.
and 26.17. Ierem. 21.10. and 44.11. Ezech. 14.8.

. 3. Of my Father which is in Heaven.

The Ubiquitaries object this place for the proof of the Ubiquitie of Christ's
humanity. Their Angels (says Christ) always behold the face of God in
heaven: therefore when they are sent into the earth as ministering Spirits, they
are then present substantially both in Heaven and earth [because it is said,
They always see the face of God in Heaven,] and therefore much more the humane
nature of Christ, which is Hypostatically united (...), to the substantial
word, or deity) may be, and is present at once both in earth and Heaven.

First, it is no mighty miracle, or wonder,

Secondly, this phrase, to see the face of God, does to see the Face of the
Father, because they are always, and eternally happy, continually enjoying the
familiar presence of God: they being his servants and Ministers, pressed
continually to perform his will.

Thirldly, all the Ancient Divines, and Orthodoxe Angeli sunt in loco
circumscriptive, non repletive vide Thalmannum. assert. ver doct fol. 114. 6.
Arg. 28.

VERSE. 15, 16, 17. Moreover if thy Brother shall trespass against thee, go
and tell him his fault between thee, and him alone; if he shall hear thee, thou
have gained thy Brother. But if he will not bear thee, then take with thee one
or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word may be
establis^ed, And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church, but
if he neglect to hear the Church, let him he unto thee as an Heathen man, and a
Publicane.
These verses occasioning controversies both amongst our selves, and betwixt us
and the Papists, it will not be amiss to propound a general Queon or two.



Verse 5, 6, 7 etc. Then comes he to injuries offered, and shows how men must
carry themselves toward such as do offer them wrong, in these three verses
etc. And that this is the order, appears both by the Text, and matter. For

First, he admonishes his to take heed of offending others. And

Secondly, he declares how they are to carry themselves toward such as do
trespass against them.



Zacheus, yea and our Evangelist who sat at the receipt of custom: for which
they were to the Jews very hateful, but therein servants to the Romans, and
so freed from the power and authority of the Jews, with whom (as with the very
Heathen, and Gentiles amongst them) what Jew soever would have to do for any
wrong which they offered, that Jew must call these Publicanes before Roman
authority and convent them there, and not bring them into any Jewish Court;
from which they were exempt by their Service to the Roman state: which liberty
was also granted to any other Privileged Jew which would make an appeal to the
Roman Governor, as St. Paul did: to whom the Jews might have recourse if they
would recover their rights, or redress wrongs offered them.





What is the sense and meaning of these three Verses?

The meaning of these words is; Bishop Bilson of the perpetual government of
Christ's Church.
that is, bring him before the Roman power, and sue him at Caesar's bar, as if
he were a Publican, or Heathen. So that this place is meant of private, and
personal suits, and quarrels between man and man, Jew and Jew, as the state
stood then, of which our Savior did speak.

. If thy brother sin against thee.

The Papists affirm, that no General Council is of sufficient authority,
without the allowance of the Pope: and that he is in such sort above all
Councels, that he cannot, though he would submit himself to their sentence.
Bellarm. de Council. lib. 2. Cap. 11. and 14. Now against this, an Argument or
two may be framed from this place.

The Scripture here says; He that refuses to Therefore if the Pope shall
refuse the sentence of the Church assembled in general Councels, he is no
better by the voice of Christ, then an Heathen,

Our Savior says here: If thy brother offend, or But the Pope is our brother,
he being a Christian, and one who prays, or ought to pray, Our Father, etc.
And therefore the Pope may be called to the judgment of the Church; and
consequently be judged, censured, and punished by the Church. Now the Church
does nothing, but by her Prelates: and therefore the Pope may be judged by a
Council consisting of Prelates. This Argument was first framed by Gers^^,
Doctor Parisiensis.

First, hereunto Bellarmine answers: Although Gerson said; That the Pope ought
to acknowledge himself to be subject unto the Church: yet we answer, that the
Pope fulfilleth this Precept; when he reproves a man in private, next by
witness, and after shall himself proceed unto public censure. Bellarm. lib.
2. de Council. Cap. 19.. Sed iterum.

Reply.
Hereunto as credible a person as the Cardinal is, answers, Christ said not unto
Peter, Tell thy self, but tell the Church, which is a Congregation in a
Council, Greg. Papa apud Aenaem Sylvium, lib. 1. comment. de gest. Council.
Basil.

Bellarmine answers again: By this word Church, is either understood a Bishop,
as Chrysostom would have it, or a company of the faithful with their head.
Wherefore in every Bishopric, all offenders are to be carried unto the
Church, and Bishop of that place: but if that Bishop sin, then he is to be
carried to a higher Church: namely, to the Arch Bishop, or Patriarch under whom
he is: if an Arch Bishop, or Patriarch offend, they are to be carried yet to a
higher Church: to wit, to the Church of Rome, or a General Council, over whom
the Pope is: but if the Pope offend, he is to be reserved to the judgment of
God; for there is no Church unto which he can be carried, or before which
accused, seeing that without him, no Church can be found which has an head.

Chrysostom say, Dic Episcopo, tell the Bishop, but Dic Ecclesiae, id est,
praesultibus, ac praesidentibus; tell the Church: that is, the Prelates, and
Presidents thereof; and so also Theophylact, (...) And therefore by the Church
is always meant some body of men, and never a particular person.

Peter himself to the Church, as to a superior Tribunal, or judgment: yea,
to a particular Church. Now if every, or any particular Church, have greater
authority in judgments, then either Peter, or any of the Apostles: yea, or any
particular person; then much more the Universal Church, which is represented
in a General Council.

Bellarmine is idle, viz. That when these things were spoken to Peter, he was
but a private man, and not as yet the Universal Bishop, and head of the
Church: and therefore he did justly then acknowledge himself to be inferior
unto the Church: For Peter was now an Apostle, but an Universal Bishop he was
never: And we leave it unto them to prove. Although I could say that these
words were spoken after those, Matthew. 16.18. Thou art Peter, etc. when
themselves: yea, Bellarmine himself says, that he was constituted Head, and
Universal Monarch of the whole Church: and therefore it relisheth not well to
say, that now he is but a private man.

If thy brother sin against thee, whosoever he is; except Bellarmine will say,
that the Pope is no Brother; that is, no member of the Church, nor no child of
God.

Fifthly, the Pope may sin against another, as

Sixthly, in the Council of Basil, the case was Hierome, and Augustine; and
the two ancient Popes, viz. that it is necessary that the Pope should be
subject unto a Council; for if the Church be a Mother, then must the Pope
acknowledge himself to be her son, otherwise how shall he have God for his
Father? And this our Savior showed, when he said unto Peter (Tell the Church)
which authority if the Pope shall contemn, he ought to be accounted as an
Ethnic, and Publican. Vide Aenaeam Sylvium de gest. Council. Basil. lib. 1.
fol. 5.. Multis: yea, Cardinal Cusanus does further prosecute this argument,
from another sentence of Saint Augustines, wherein he requires the judgment
of a Council, in determining of a case, after that the Pope had delivered his
sentence. Card. Cusan. Concord. Cathol. lib. 2. Cap. 17. page 737. If the
Reader would see this Pillar of Popery (That the Pope is not subject to a
National, or General Council) razed, and pulled down, and that by their own
side; let him read Bishop Mort appeal* lib. 4. Cap. 2.. 8. p. 451. 452.

We affirmed before in the conclusion of the fourth General Question, that
these verses speak of private, and personal suits, and quarrels between man
and man: Now how this is clearly confirmed, and the contrary Objections made by
the Separatists fully confuted: If the Reader would know, and see, let him
rea^e Mr. Bernard against the Separatists, page 220. 221.

. 2. Take with thee one or two.

Why must witnesses here be called?

First,

Secondly, that he may be left without excuse, if he offend again. And

Thirdly, that they may see, and know, that he which has suffered the wrong,
has done what Carthus. s.

. 3. Tell the Church.

The Separatists object here against us, and what we have said: That in these
words, Tell the Church; the word Church cannot be taken for the Jewish
Synedrion, or the Assembly of Authority among the Jews; which was then as
well civil, as Ecclesiastical.

First, the word Church in holy Scripture, is not always so strictly taken, as
men do now use it, but is used for the assembly of good, or bad Christians, or
Infidels, met together to consult, and determine of causes, whether civil, or
Ecclesiastical, Psalm 26.5. Where the Septuagint do translate the word
Assembly, by the word, (...), Church: So Prove. 5.4. and Acts 19.32.39.40 in
which three verses the word translated Assembly, is (...), the same which is
here translated Church.

Secondly, Beza himself by the word Church, understands it as spoken here of
the Jews; that is, the Elders assembled, who exercised ju^gement in those
days; which assembly of Judges, as here they be called the Church, so in the
old Testament they were called the Congregation, which is all one, Number. 35.12,
24, 25. Josh. 20.6 9. And therefore our Exposition is warrantable by the word,
and this objection is also of no moment against it.

If he refuse to hear the Church.

If he refuse to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen-man, and
Publican: Therefore the Church is absolutely to be obeyed in all things, Bell.
lib. 1. de Council. cap. 18.

If thy brother trespass against thee, etc. verse 15. where Christ says no
more then this; That Christians ought to obey the sentence of the Church, in
censuring of sin; and not that they ought to receive new Articles of faith, if
imposed by the Church, though contrary to Scripture.

verse 20. For otherwise by the Jesuits collection, Christ and his Apostles
should have been as Publicans, because they obeyed not the Scribes and
Pharisees, amongst whom the Church was at that time.

If he will not hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen man, and
Publican; but unless her judgment were infallible, it were hard: yea,
unequal, to hold them for heathen men, and Publicans, which would not obey her
Decrees. And therefore the Church (that is, the Pastors of the Church; Bellarm.
de verbo Dei, lib. 3. Cap. 5.) cannot err, but is to be heard in all things.

Romans 13.1. and yet they may command things unlawful, and in such a case they
must not be obeyed, Act. 4.19. It was a Law to the Jews; that in matters of
weight they should repair to the Priests, and do according to that which he
should judge, without declining from it ( Deuteronomy. 17.8.) and yet the Papists will
not say; that Vriah, and Annas, and Caiphas, were of infallible judgment.

Secondly, the meaning of this place is: That

Thirdly, the things properly which Christ John 9.34.) and the East, and West
Churches censured one another, about the keeping of Easter, Niceph. lib. 12.
Cap 33. If the Reader would see this further cleared, and fully proved from
some of their own side, let him read Mr. White, his way to the true Church,
page 78. and Epise Daven. de Judice, p. 100.

Fourthly, if the Church may err in her censures

Fifthly, the judgment of the Church, whether

Sixthly, this place speaks of a particular

Tarmerus (in colloquio Ratisbonensi sess. 13.) produced this Argument, to
prove: That the deciding, determining, and judging of all controversies of
Religion, belongs only unto the Church; that is, to the chief Pastors, and
Bishops only of the Church. He argues thus. If all controversies be to be
decided by the Church, and referred unto the Church; then it will follow that
the Church is the Judge of all controversies.

But the Antecedent is true, that all controversies are to be decided by the
Church, and are referred unto the Church.

Therefore also the Consequent; That the Church is the Judge of all
controversies. Now he proves the Antecedent from these words: Tell the Church,
and if he will not hear the Church, etc. Therefore the Bishops, and chief
Pastors must expound the doubts in Scripture. Bellarm. lib. 3. de Script. Cap.
3 argu^s thus.

Our Savior speaks here of private injuries; but the place is to be understood
also of public injuries, such as Schism, and Heresy are: Now by this word
Church is not meant the whole body of the faithful, but only the Pastors* and
Bishops: and therefore Heretics, and Schismatics are not to be referred, or
turned over to the Congregation of the faithful, to judge, and censure, but to
the Prelates of the Church; because as a man hears, and speaks by his head, so
the Church does by her Prelates; and consequently from the judgment of the
Pastors there is no appeal, their sentence, and determination being the last,
and utmost judgment.

Hunnius (in eodem Colloquio Ratisbonensi) did rightly distinguish this word
Judge; for there is a double Judge: namely,

I. A Judge, who has absolute authority of judging: now if the Argument
understand Judge in this sense, we deny the Consequent; for although it be
certain, that all controversies which arise amongst Christians, may be
referred unto the Church, that they may have her judgment: yet it is most
false, that the Church is a Judge, which is absolute from all Law, and may
pronounce after her own will; and so in effect be the chief, and principal
Judge; that is, the very Rule of Religion, and controversies.

II. There is a Judge, whose power is limited, and restrained unto the Law: and
if the Argument speak of this Judge, we have nothing to say against it: for
we deny not, but that some; yea, all controversies may be referred unto the
Church, to be examined, and judged.



Thirdly, we must give care to the Church, but

I. We must be sure, that it be the Church of God, as our Savior himself
expounds it, ver. 20. Where two or three are gathered together in my name,
etc. So that every Congregation is not the Church; but that which is assembled
in the name, and authority of Christ. And therefore it is necessary, that we
know that Church, which we hear to be the Church of Christ, and that by the
Scriptures, for otherwise we cannot know the true Church, but by the word, and
except it be the true Church, we ought not to hear it at all.

II. We must not hear the Church (although it be a true Church) contrary to
the Scriptures, but only so long as she teaches the doctrine of Christ; for
otherwise an Angel from heaven is not to be heard, Gal. 1.8. If the Pastors,
Prelates, and Presidents of the Church shall prescribe those things, which are
approved, or prescribed by Christ, we must hear them, otherwise not: for there
have been many Bishops and Councels, which have refuted ^iver Heretics, and yet
have erred themselves in many other things. Wherefore the Church is not simply
to be heard in whatsoever she says, or teaches, or to be believed, and
obeyed, in all her decrees, opinions, tenants, and commands, but only then when
she speaks, and teaches the truth of Christ: For we are not to believe, or
credit the Church, but for Christ, and his words sake. I find this answer given
by Dr. Willet. Synops. 46. initio. Whitak. de sacra Script page 31.7.

Fourthly, if the judgment of the Pastors and

Fifthly, our Savior speaks not here of the viz. of Constantinople, Jerusalem,
Smyrna, Rome, and the rest; not unto all together, but every one severally: Now
the Papists themselves do not contend, that every particular Church is the rule
of all controversies. Now that the place is to be understood of brotherly
admonition, and reproof, appears thus: namely,

I. Because the speech is of private offenses between brethren; as is plain
from verse 15. If thy brother shall sin against thee. But private, offenses,
injuries, and jars, are not to be referred, either to a National, or General
Council, but unto the Ecclesiastical society, or jurisdiction of every place,
by whom the reasons on both sides may be weighed, and known, and judgment
accordingly pronounced.

II. Because this is the first degree of public or Ecclesiastical judgment;
for the former degrees here named by our Savior, verse 15, 16. are private; to
wit, when the wronged Brother does privately alone admonish him that did the
wrong, or before some few Witnesses. But it was scarsly ever heard of, or at
least done, that either private offenses, or even public, and those which
belong unto the Church, should presently at the very first be referred unto the
Church universal, scattered through the whole world.

III. Because our Savior speaks here of Excommunication, as some are of
opinion; let him be as a Heathen, etc. But Excommunication, and every kind of
Ecclesiastical censure does belong also to every particular Church ( Council.
Nicen. can. 5.) And therefore in this place by Church, are to be unde^stood the
Jurisdictions of particular Churches, and not such a Judge as is absolute,
free, and ex^mpt from all Law, having his own will only for a rule. I conclude
this Objection with a double Argument.

If every Church [which who so hears not, be be the absolute Judge of all
Controversies: then it will follow, that every particular Church is the
absolute Judge of all Controversies: but the consequent is absur^ly false,
therefore also the antecedent. Cham. t. 1. p. 26.

Peter, Dic Ecclesiae, etc. Tell it to the Church, and if he will not hear the
Church, etc. Therefore Peter and his successors are not the supreme Judges:
for here he is referred to the Church. Willet, Synops. page 1304.

Let him be unto thee as an Heathen man, and a Publican.

Heathen man, and Publican?

Sect. 1. as also, in the general questions before that Section. I do
therefore here but only add this, That to esteem one as an Heathen man, or
Publican, is not to hate him, but not familiarly to use him, or not to be
familiar with him who despises the voice of the Church.





Paul, 2 These. 3.6, 14. We command you to withdraw your selves from those who
walk disorderly; and have no company with those who are disobedient to our
word; (...), That he may be ashamed: where the word is most significant, for it
denotes such a perturbation of the mind, that he who is affected therewith,
seeks up and down where he may hide himself for shame. For as nothing animates
a sinner more, than to see Christians, yea the Professors of Religion to love
him, and delight in his company: so nothing humbles a sinner sooner, than to
see that all good men withdraw themselves from his society and friendship. Now
this Christian subduction, or alienation is not like the subduction of the
Anabaptists, which is conjoined with hatred and execration: but our withdrawing
of our selves from the contemners of the Church, is an Argument of our love
unto them: yea, we must not simply or totally withdraw our selves, for the
Apostle exhorts us to admonish and counsel those whom we must not be familiar
withal: and how can we admonish them, except we go unto them, and labor to
reduce them into the right way?

Paul exhorts the Corinthians to excommunicate the incestuous person, and to
give him over to the Devil, lest he should infect others; for a little leaven
sowers the whole lump, 1 Cor. 5.7.

Cameron de Eccles.
are thought to be like those who are tolerated, 1 Timothy 6.1.

How many sorts of sinners does our Savior

Vincentius (Sermon. hyemal. page 540.) observes, viz.

First, there are some simple, and corrigible sinners, who when they have
offended, and are reproved, thank the reprover, and are sorry and satisfactory
for the offense. Now of these our Savior says, If thy brother sin against
thee, tell him his fault between him and thee: admonish him secretly, because
he will quickly be convinced of the wrong done, and make thee satisfaction.

Secondly, there are some who are proud and presumptuous sinners, who presume
too much of themselves, and stand too much upon their own justification. Now of
these our Savior speaks, when he says, Take one or two with thee, that by
their words and persuasions they may be the sooner convinced of their offenses
and errors.

Thirdly, there are obdurate, obstinate and perverse sinners, who are led by
the spirit of contradiction and obstinacy, and will be counseled, advised,
and persuaded by none. Now these must be referred to the Church; that by her
power and authority, they may be convicted and humbled.

Fourthly, there are others more profane, malicious, and incorrigible
sinnners, who neither regard the admonition of their Brother, whom they have
offended, nor of their Brethren who in love advise them, nor of the Church; but
disobey all, despise and slight all. Now these our Savior says, must be held
as Heathen men and Publicans.

Verse. 18. Verily I say unto you, Verse. 18.
that whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: and
whatsoever you shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven.
Because much was spoken of these words before, chap. 16, 19. I therefore here
add only a word or two.

What is meant by binding and loosing?

For answer hereunto, we must observe that these words, ligare and solvere, to
bind and loose, were usual in the Church of the Jews, and therefore the
signification of them was well known and understood, when Christ was corporally
in the earth; for in the Judaicall Church, ligare, to bind, did signify
Interdicere, Prohibere, to interdict and prohibit; and Solvere, to loose,
signified Iubere, permittere, to command and permit; and therefore in their
language (...) is Prohibere, and (...) is Permittere. And thus they have a
saying, Davidem and Ezechielem nihil ligasse quod nen esset ligatum in lege.
Wherefore to bind, is to pronounce something to be profane; and on the
contrary to loose is to pronounce something to be lawful: this therefore is our
Saviors meaning, Whatsoever the Church shall declare to be unjust, the cause
being truly and thoroughly known, those things G^d will decla e to be unjust,
and on the contrary th^se things which the Church shall declare to be just,
those God also will declare just Cameron de Eccles. Argum.
.

This place is produced by our men against the Papists, who affirm the keys to
be promised, only unto Peter: They argue thus.

If the Keys were by Christ promised unto Peter only, then they were given by
him also only unto Peter, for he performs what he promises.

But the Keys were given to all the Apostles, and not only to Peter, as appears
by this verse. Therefore they were not promised only unto Peter. If the studious
Reader would see this Argument canvased to and fro, let him read Amesius Bell,
enerv. tom. 1. page, 162. ad 167. And because it is so largely handled there, I
will but briefly prosecute it, and frame the Argument thus.

To preach the Gospel, and to have jurisdiction of government, do both belong
unto the power of the Keys.

But the Keys were equally to all committed: therefore they had all equal power
both to preach and to govern. That they all had the power of the Keys equally
granted unto them, appears from this verse, wherein the Keys are given to all
the Apostles.

Yea Bellarmine himself confesses that James was Bishop, and ordinary Pastor
at Jerusalem, and therefore (with Anselm and Aquinas) says, that he is named
first by S. Paul, Galath. 2. Bellarm. lib. 1 de Pontif. Romans Cap 19. Therefore
at Jerusalem Peter was to give primacie to the ordinary Pastor there.

Rome was the chief City, and therefore Peter being Bishop of Rome, was to
have the preeminence.

Reply.
But hereunto we reply, that Jerusalem was rather to be preferred in respect of
place; for that City was chosen by the Lord himself, to be the chief City of
his Church: but Rome through the tyranny and usurpation of the Romans over
other Countries was advanced to that dignity, and not by the election and
choice of God.

If the Reader would see how this verse is urged by the Separatists for their
Church Discipline, let him read Mr. Bernard against Ainsworth, where the
Objection is fairly propounded and fully answered. Page 222, 223, 224.

VERSE. 20. For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I
in the midst of them.
Where two or three are gathered together,



Vincentius (sermon. hyem page 544.) thus commenteth upon them.

First,

Secondly when the Pastors, Prelates, and Presidents of the Church are convened
together in a Convocation or Synod* for the good of the Church of Christ; they
are then gathered together in the name of Christ, who (according to his
promise) will be in the midst of them.

Thirdly, when the faithful meet together in the house of God, for the
celebration of the worship and service of God; they are then gathered together
in the name of Christ, who according to his promise will be in the midst of
them. Here Vincentius plays with the words, and pleases himself with his own
conceits, thus

When the congregation is met together in the Temple, there are but Two, that
is, Clergy, and Laity, or men or Women; or Three, that is, the people on the
Ministers right hand, and those on his left hand, and himself which is in the
midst of the Pulpit Or there are but two, that is, the Preacher, and the
People: or Three, namely, the Laymen, and the Ecclesiastical men, and the
Preacher.

Fourthly, we add, that when two or three are privately met together in a
family, for Prayer, or other holy exercises; they then are gathered together in
the name of Christ; who (according to his promise) will be in the midst of
them: for he regards not so much the multitude of supplicants as the sincerity
of the heart, and therefore when a little family joins together about the
worship and service of God, then Christ will be present with them, and also
assistant and gracious unto them.

. 2. Shall be gathered together in my name,

It is controverted between us and the Church of Rome,

Counsels ought to be congregated in the name of Christ, that is, by him that
has authority from Christ so to congregate them ( Nam in nomine idem est* quod
ex authoritate, for in the name of Christ, is the same; with by the authority
of Christ) but Christ did not commit his Church to Tyberius, but to Peter and
his successors; when he said, Peter feed thou my Lambs. Bellarm. lib. 1. de
Council. Cap. 12.

First, the exposition of the Jesuit, is gross

I. If to assemble in the name of Christ be to assemble by the authority of the
Pope, then it will follow that none are assembled in the name of Christ, and
that Christ will be present with no assemblies or congregations, but only
those who send up to Rome for a license, that they may assemble, and come
together; then which what more absurd?

II. If it be one and the same thing to convene together in the name of Christ,
and by the authority of the Pope, then it will follow, that the four first
general Councels ( viz the Nicene, Constantinopolitane, Ephesine, and
Chalcedone Councels) which were so singularly approved of, were not called or
congregated in the name of Christ, because they were appointed not by the Pope
but by the Emperors: and yet Socrates (lib. 1. Cap. 6.) dare say that they were
gathered together in the name of Christ. Cardinal Cusanus goes farther,
affirming boldly, that the authority of a Council does not depend upon the
Pope, ( Quia tunc non fuissent octo prima Concilia omnia firma quoniam per
Imperatores congregabantur, Card. Cusan Concord. Cathol. lib 2. Cap. 25.)
because so we should thus disanull the authority of the Eight first general
Councels, which were appointed by Emperors; etc.

Peter, and his successors; For we read, that the Church was committed to
Kings. Esa. 44.25. And David did distribute the Ministeries, and other Kings
have had care of the Church. But we no where read that the Church was
committed to the Pope; and therefore it follows not neither, the Church was
committed to Peter therefore it belongs to the Pope only to call Councels.

viz. to be assembled in unanimitie, and concord, and the power and Spirit of
Christ: as both Chrysostom (hom. 4. in Matthew) and Arias Montanus (in hunc
locum) expound the place.

In the name of Christ, does not always signify authority but sometimes
faith, and the profession of Christ, as Infants are baptized. In the name of
Christ: yea sometimes in the name, signifies for Christ's sake, as Ephesians. 5.20
Matthew. 19.29. John. 14.14. But here it signifies in the power and virtue of
Christ. Scharp. de Council. page 392.

[When two or three are gathered together in my name etc.] the promise of our
Savior is general, respecting as well the congregations and Assemblies of the
faithful in prayer, as in Councels. Now shall not Christian men any day pray
in the name of Christ unto God, before they have the Popes real command, or
assent?



I will be in the midst of them.

Bellarmine answers two things, viz.

First, to be gathered together in the name of

To be gathered together to preach the word of Christ truly, to hear it
reverently, Reply.
and to receive it sincerely, is to be gathered together in the name of Christ,
and does not agree with Heresies, and Schisms which destroy the Church.

Secondly, Bellarmine answers, That this place shows not where the Church
is, but where Christ is.

Christ walks amongst the Seven Candlesticks, Reply.
which are the seven Churches, Revel. 1.20. and 2.1. He is to be found only in
his Church; and therefore where Christ is known to be present, there is
necessarily the Church.

The Papists object this place to prove that a Council cannot err, Bellarmine)
Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of
them, and therefore they obtain whatsoever they desire of God, viz. wisdom,
and light which may suffice for the understanding of those things which are
necessary for them. And as Christ is present in private, and particular
assemblies, to help and assist them in private and particular things; so he is
present in a general Council, that he may help them in great and public
things; and consequently, they do judge of all such things infallibly. Bellarm.
de Council. lib. 2. Cap. 2.

First, this place directly respects every particular

Secondly, in these two or three, to whom Pope of Rome; and yet the Papists say
that not only the opinion of two or three, but even the judgment of the whole
world wants this infallibility, until the confirmation of the Pope of Rome
come thereunto: and therefore from this promised presence of Christ, this
infallibility of judging is not rightly collected.

Thirdly, Gregory de Valentia (analys. fide lib. 8. cap. 7.) answers, That this
place is not to be applied to an infallible certainty of any opinion, wherein
many agree: but unto the efficacy of the consent of many, for the obtaining of
that which is unanimously desired. Bishop Davenant, de Iudice controv. page, 97
and 114. ubi ex hoc loco contra hanc infallibilitatem disputat.

How is Christ present with those who are assembled

The Schoolmen say,

First, the humane nature of Christ is present, (...), with the Son of God, and
the Substantial word Personaliter, personally the humanity being united unto
the Deity, (...), inconfuse, (...), inconvertibiliter, (...), indivulse,
(...), inseparabiliter, and therefore the humanity can never be separated from
the Deity.

Secondly, the humane nature of Christ as it is present (...), in the Godhead,
is present with the blessed Saints and Angels in heaven, Gloriose, gloriously,
who without ceasing behold his glory which was given unto him by his Father.
John. 17.24.

Thirdly the humane nature of Christ or his manhood, is present (...), with his
Church Gratiose, graciously: governing it and blessing the Ministry thereof,
regenerating men by Baptism, feeding his Children in his Holy Supper with his
body and blood, hearing the prayers of the faithful, curbing their enemies,
and at length freeing them from all evil. And this is the presence here
promised.

Fourthly, the humane nature which Christ assumed unto his divine, is present
with all creatures Vniversaliter, universally; creating them, conserving them,
directing them unto a determinate end, containing them within the bounds
appointed and set by God, and the like.

Is there not a Pleonasmus or redundance here, (...), I will be there in the
midst of them?

It seems that there is, but yet indeed there is nothing less: for this
Phrase, To be in the midst, in the Hebrew phrase has a double signification
namely,

First, to be present with some: as is plain from these places, Genes. 23.6.
Ezech. 1.1. Esa. 52.11. which is repeated by S. Paul. 2 Corin. 6.17. Separamini
de medio eorum, Be ye separated from the midst of them, that is segregate your
selves from them. Now suppose this phrase To be in the midst, had no other
signification but this, then there was indeed a Pleonasmus here, and yet such a
one as is ordinary and very Emphaticall; thus the Grecians say, (...), and the
Latins, Etiam atque Etiam, Again and again: and therefore being the more
Emphaticall, it is not superfluous. But we need not thus answer the question;
because there is another signification of these words viz.

Secondly, this phrase, To be in the Midst, as it signifies to be present with
some: so also to be president amongst some: or to be chief in an assembly:
Thus it is said, God stands in the congregation of the Gods, and judges In
medio Deorum, in the midst (or amongst) the Gods, For in Judicial assemblies
the place of a President is in the midst, that he may both hear all, and be
heard by all. Thus Christ is both present with, and President amongst the
faithful assembled together in his name.

VERSE. 23, 24. etc. unto the end of the Chapter. Therefore is the Kingdom of
Heaven likened unto a certain King, which would take account of his servants;
and when he had begun to reckon, ^ne was brought unto him which ought him ten
Thousand Talents, etc.


First, the King here spoken of, is God, who is the Lord of all the world.

Secondly, the servants here mentioned are we

Thirdly, the Talents which the Lord betrusted

Fourthly, the debts which we owe are our sins

Fifthly, the calling of the servants by name

Sixthly, the payment of the debt, is either the

Are we able to pay the debt we owe unto

No,

How may we obtain remission of our sins at

First, we must do as this servant did to his

I. We must humble our selves before God, as this servant, Who fell down and
worshipped.

II. We must pray unto God for pardon, and remission, as he did; Lord have
pity, or patience.

III. We must promise the payment of our debts, as he did, I will pay thee
all: that is, we must promise that our debts shall be paid and satisfied for by
Christ, and we must vow new obedience unto God. And then

IV. We may be sure that the King our Master will pardon and pity us, and
forgive us our debt.

Secondly, we must do as this Servant did not

What debts must we forgive our Brethren.

By the name of debts are understood all the offenses, wrongs, injuries,

Whether are money debts to be forgiven, or

Neither:

Why must we forgive those who wrong injure,

First, because herein, and hereby we imitate the example of our Father, who is
full of mercy and pity. Read Luke 6.36. Ephesians. 4.32. Colossians 3.13.



I. What do our brethren owe us; a hundred pence: observe here the Roman penny
is the eighth part of an ounce, which after five shillings the ounce, is 7-d.
ob. So that the whole sum is but iij.l. ij.s. vj.d.

II. What do we owe our God? Ten thousand talents: now here also observe:
That a talent is 750. ounces of silver, which after five shillings the ounce,
is 187. d. x.s. And the whole sum is 1875000. One thousand thousand, eight
hundred seventy five thousand pounds. And therefore seeing our Father so freely
forgives us so great a sum, we should not stick to forgive our brother so small
a debt.



James 5.9. He who will not pity his fellow servants, nor have patience with
them, shall (with this wicked servant) be eternally punished. For as

I. The King being angry, calls this evil servant: And,

II. Reproves his cruelty: And

III. Casts him into perpetual prison. So cruel persons in the general
judgment, shall

First, be cited, and summoned to appear, by an angry Judge. And

Secondly, shall be reproved, and reproached for their cruelty. And

Thirdly, shall be subjected, and bound over to perpetual pains, and
unspeakable torments.





First, the Lord pardons cito, quickly; David had no sooner said, Peccavi, I
have sinned, but he hears (Dominus abstulit peccatum tuum) tidings that the
Lord had put away his sin, we see that the Lord is so prone to pardon, that
the Prophet Jonas is displeased with his readiness, and pronesse thereunto. I
hus should we be slow to anger, but ready to remit, and most easy to be
reconciled.

Secondly, God forgives Totum, the whole debt; he does not pardon by halfes,
but remits all our sins, Psalm 103.2, 3. Thus we should not forgive our
brother only seven times, but as often as he offends us, and that wholly and
fully, as though they never had wronged us at all.

Thirdly, our Father gives more then is desired: his servant here entreats him
to have a little patience, and he presently does not only forbear his debt, but
does forgive the debt. Adam and Eve are not only pardoned, but have over and
above a promise made of a Savior: And the Prodigal Child does only beg, that
he may be received as a servant, and he is accepted as a son. Thus we should
put on the bowels of mercy, and tender compassion, and be ready not only to
forgive our brethren, but also to give unto them; not only to do them no hurt,
but also to do them what good we can.

Fourthly, God does all these things, Ex animo, cordially, and verily; for our
offenses being once pardoned, he remembers them no more, but casts them into
the bottom of the sea, Mich. 7. Thus we must not revenge our selves indeed, nor
complain, or murmr in word, nor by our carriage or countenance show, that
either we will avenge our selves, or would if we could, or harbor any malice,
and grudge in our hearts, but forgive from our hearts. For if we labor in
these things thus, to imitate our heavenly Father, then we have a promise,
that all our sins shall be pardoned by him.

Against this which has been said, flesh and blood objects many things: and
because many therefore I will briefly resolve them.

My brother, or neighbor reiterates his offenses

Consider with thy self,

But my easiness and readiness to pardon him,

Do thou what is thy duty to do,

But this pronenesse to pardon those who offend

Saint Paul hereunto answers; that glory, honor, Romans 2. Yea, those who honor
God, shall be honored in heaven by God, though despised on earth by men.

But David cursed his enemies, for their mischief done against him, and prayed
for their destruction: and therefore why may not I?

David prayed, against the Counsels of his enemies, and that God would
infatuate them, and frustrate them; as that of Achitophel: and thus may we
desire wish, and pray for the peace, and prosperity of the Church, and children
of God, and that the Lord would infatuate all the plots of the wicked intended
against them. Or

David prayed for some temporal calamity to be inflicted upon the bodies of
his wicked enemies, that thereby their souls might be saved: and thus we may
desire the Lord to show his power, and justice upon obstinate sinners, that
thereby they may learn to fear, and tremble before him, and turn unto him, and
so by a corporal punishment be freed from an eternal. Or

David prayed for the final destruction of his enemies; and that two manner of
ways: namely, either

I. For the destruction of all his enemies in general, whosoever or
wheresoever they were. Or

II. For the destruction of some more particularly, whom by divine inspiration
he knew to be the enemies of God, and his Church. Now these are not to be
imitated by us, we having in the Gospel both a Precept, and President, to the
contrary.

First, we are commanded to bless those who curse us, and to pray for those
who persecute us, Mat. 5.

Secondly, Christ did not revile, when he was reviled, 1 Pet. 2. nor curse
those who crucified him, but contrarily prayed for them.



Joseph, although he was a man, yet he forgave his brethren, who had sold him
to be a slave unto heathens. David was a man, and yet he forgave Saul his
enemy, who pursued his life. Stephen was but a man, and yet he forgave, and
prayed God to forgive those who stoned him.



ex animo, for a spark is true fire, and a drop is true water.

verse 27. and afterward for the debt casts him into perpetual prison, there
to endure eternal torments?

First, we must here observe: That this is a Parable,

Secondly, Christ had taught his Apostles, and verse 21.22. And then presently
adds this Parable, for the confirming, and declaring of his purpose. Now our
Saviors scope herein is to show; that it is necessary, that they should
forgive their brethren, who desire to be forgiven by their Father.

In this Parable,

I. Our Savior propounds the example of a King, who forgave a great debt unto
one o^ his servants: and hereby would teach us: that we have a Master, and
Lord in heaven, who is gentle, easy to be entreated, and ready to forgive sin;
but so, that when we are not able to pay our debts, or to satisfy for our
sins, we beg mercy at his hands, and pray unto him for pity, and pardon. The
King here releaseth not his servant, nor remitteth his debt, until he humbles
himself before him, and confesses his present inability to pay, and prays
for mercy: Thus although the Lord be naturally slow to conceive a wrath, and
ready to forgive; yet we cannot hope to be forgiven, except we confess our
sins, and humble our selves before our God, and crave mercy at his hands;
because upon these conditions, the Lord offers mercy unto us.

II. Christ in this Parable propounds unto us the example of a servant, who
would not pardon his fellow servant: and lays down the words of the King, his
Master unto him, should not thou also have had compassion on thy
fellow servants, even as I had pity on thee, verse 33. And hereby our Savior
would teach us, that God requires of us, that we should pardon our brethren,
who have injured us, when they ask forgiveness of us, and remit the debts of
those, who are not able to pay.

III. In this Parable our Savior declares the words, and deeds of the King,
unto this evil servant; his Lord was wroth with him, and delivered him to the
Tormentors, etc. verse 34.

IV. The Parable being expounded, Christ forthwith does explicate, what his
scope is in this Parable, saying; So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also
unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their
trespasses.

Zanch. miscel. de remis. peccat. page 288. Initio.

CHAP. XIX.
VERSE. 3, 4, 5, 6. The Pharisees came unto Christ tempting him, and saying unto
him, is it lawful for a man to put away his Wife for every cause? And he
answered and said unto them, Have ye not read, that he which made them at the
beginning, made them male and female? And said, For this cause shall a man
leave Father and Mother, and shall cleave to his wife: and they twain shall
be one flesh. Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore
God has joined together, let not man put asunder.
THe Pharisees demanded of Christ, whether it were lawful for a man to put
away his Wife for every cause?]

Whether for every cause a man may put away his wife, or not?



First, from the authority of the Institutor of Marriage, which was God, verse.
6. Whom God has joined together, let no man put asunder.

Secondly, from the Antiquity of the institution of marriage, which was from
the beginning, Verse. 4. At the beginning God made them male and female, and
joined them in marriage together.

Thirdly, from the manner of the conjunction and union, which is betwixt a man
and his wife: verse. 5. Twain shall be one flesh.

Fourthly, from the excellency of the conjugall bond and tie, verse. 5. A man
shall leave Father and Mother, and shall cleave to his wife.

And they twain shall be one Flesh.]







I. Lawful, and improperly so called; and this is, when men have had more
wives then one, but not at once, but successively, one after the death, or
lawful divorce of another.

II. Unlawful, and this is twofold; to wit, either.

First, direct Digamie, when men have two wives at one time. And

Secondly, indirect Digamie; and this is when a man having put away one wife
unjustly marries another: and of this sort of Digamie, the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 5.9. She must be the wife of one husband. A wife might not by the law of
God (if she had not violated her faith to her husband, nor stained the
marriage bed) be divorced from her husband; but it was permitted amongst the
Jews. Now such a woman as was unjustly divorced from her husband, and married
to another, was the wife of two husbands: that is,

I. She was the wife of the first husband still, Iure divino, by the law of
God. And

II. She was the wife of the second husband only Iure humano, by humane Law.

What manner of union is betwixt man and

This union and conjunction of the husband and the wife, viz.

First, for the procreation of Children, and issues sake; Now although properly
the Father be Genitor the begetter, yet he cannot beget a child alone: And
hence it is, that the offspring which is brought forth must acknowledge both
Father and Mother, but not as two, but as one Parent. Vnus enim ab uno est.

Secondly, man stood in need of a helper for the education of children: Now it
is impossible (ordinarily) for a man to have any, who will be more tender, and
careful over his children then his wife, she being Mother unto them.

Thirdly, man stands in need of a helper, and assistant, that may communicate,
and partake with him, both of weal and woe, both of prosperity and adversity:
For our joy is increased when we have others who rejoice with us, esteeming
our joy their rejoicing, and our good their glee, and our sorrow is decreased
when we have copartners, who mourn and weep with us, bearing a part of our
burden, as though our grief were theirs. Now ordinarily there is not a greater
fellow-feeling of one* another affairs, or occurrences, between any, then
there is betwixt the husband and wife.

Fourthly, this union of the husband and the Wife, is seen in the communion of
all things, all things being common betwixt them. If the studious Reader would
see these two last particulars amplified and enlarged, let him read Cameron.
Myrothec. Page 96.97.

. 3. Those whom God has joined together, let no man put a sunder.

Whom God has joined, let no man separate; therefore after divorce they still
remain man and wife before God, and may not marry to others.

Perkins.

It is controverted betwixt us, and the Church of Rome, whether there are more
causes of divorce then Fornication only; and they hold the affirmative, and we
the negative. Separation from bed and board may be admitted, say they, for
diverse causes. Council. Trid. sess. 24. can. 8. Bellarm. lib. 1 de Matrim. c.
14. Now against this their opinion we urge this Argument drawn from this place:

What God has joined together, man must not separate; But the Papists in
devising so many separations (as they do) from bed and board, do put asunder
those whom God has coupled: for where the duties of marriage are broken off,
there marriage it self is also dissolved: if the man and wife be no longer
bound to render the carnal debt one to another, and other services of love,
the bond of marriage it self is loosed between them: and consequently they
are divided whom God has coupled. This is Chemnitius his Argument, and is
opposed by Bellarmine, and amply answered by Dr. Willet. synops. 777. 778. To
which place I refer the Reader.

It is controverted also between us and the Church of Rome: Whether the Pope
can dispense with those who are married: and both the practice of the Pope, and
the opinion of the Popish writers show, that by his dispensation he can
dissolve lawful and perfect Matrimony. Now against this we produce this place,
That which God has joined, man must not separate, or put asunder. Hereunto we
may add. Luke 16.18. and 1 Cor. 7.10. In which places both Christ and St. Paul
say, That man and wife joined by Christ, must abide during life together, or
live unmarried, and not be severed by the Popes dispensation.

Bellarmine (Lib. 2. de Monach. Cap. 28.) and diverse others say, That those who
are married may be separated, if the one party be desirous to enter into holy
Orders, though the other be not agreed, if their marriage be not consummate by
carnal copulation, but was only publicly ratified and confirmed by the rites
of the Church, and the consent of both parties: More plainly their opinion is
this, The Pope by his dispensation may dissolve a marriage in these two cases,
to wit:

First, if either the man desire to become a Monk, or the woman a Nun. And

Secondly, if the marriage have been only publicly ratified, but not
consummate by carnal knowledge: and the reason to prove this, which is given
both by Bellarmine and others is, That CHRIST speaks here only de matrimonio
consummate, and that Matrimonium r^tur^ with which the Pope dispenses, is not
de jure divine, Hereunto we reply.

First, CHRIST speaks here absolutely, and

Secondly, Matrimony with Papists is a divine Melchior Canus, who says
Spiritus sanctus, et Sacramenti gratia per coitum non datur Canus de locis Lib.
8. Cap. 5. Page 246. The holy Ghost, and the grace of Sacrament is not given by
copulation.

Thirdly, it is absurd to say, that marriage begins

Fourthly, it follows hereupon that there Adam and Eve, for their matrimony
was in the state of innocence, and before all carnal knowledge.

Fifthly, it follows hereupon, that the marriage between Joseph and Mary,
was not perfect matrimony: for there doubtless wanted carnal copulation: and
yet the Angel of God feared not to call her Joseph's wife.

Sixthly, both the Pope has dispensed with marriages, or, by his dispensation
dissolved them, even after copulation, and also many popish Doctors deny, that
he may give dispensation for the dissolving of those marriages which are
ratified and performed according to the rites of the Church, with the consent
of both parties, although not consummate by carnal copulation. If the learned
Reader would see this to the life prosecuted and proved, I refer him to B.
Davenant. De Iudice controv. pa. 138. 139. and Mr. Bells bold challenge, page
36. 37. 38. 39. 40.

VERSE. 7.8.9, They say unto him,
. 1. They say unto him.

The Pharisees here demand of Christ, Moses commanded that which was unlawful?
Hereunto our Savior answers these things, namely,

First, Moses gave a commandment concerning a bill of Divorcement.

Secondly, he grants that Moses did permit them to put away their wives, but he
denies that Moses gave any such commandment.

Thirdly, he gives the reason, why Moses did permit that, which in it self was
unlawful; viz. because of the hardness of their hearts, and for the avoiding of
a greater inconvenience, namely, murder, as was showed before. Chap. 5.31.

Fourthly, he shows the true, and only cause, or the only true cause of
divorce, namely adultery: Whosoever puts away his wife, except i^ be for
fornication, etc.

Why did Moses command to give a writing of divorce, and to put her away?

What is the difference between Repudium (a putting away of a wife) and
Divorsium a Divorce? Modestius says, they differ thus. Repudium; a putting
away, has place, and belongs, unto those who are contracted (thus after Joseph
and Mary were contracted, he thinking her to be with child, was minded
Repudiare; to put her away.) Math. 1.19.) but Divortium a Divorce, is a
separation of man and wife, after that matrimony is consummated, both by
public legal rites, and carnal knowledge. Reupdium (Inquit) est inter
contractos, at Divortium inter maritum et uxorem, Post matrimonium consumatum.

But from the beginning it was not so.

Bishop Cowper in his seven days conference, observes hence, That if
controversies of Religion were decided, as our Savior decided the question
concerning Divorcement, the quarrel between us, and the Church of Rome, were
soon ended: For being demanded, whether men might put away their wives, as
Moses permitted them? He answers, no: because from the beginning it was not so:
caving this to us as a Maxim in Religion, and a most sure rule whereby to try
truth from falsehood. What has not been from the beginning, let it be
rejected as a novelty. Now how many novelties there are in the Church of Rome,
which cannot be proved to have been from the beginning, is proved by B. Cowper.
page 7. 8. 9. etc. And diverse of our own learned See Bp. Mortons Appeal. lib.
4. cap. 16.. 3. page 150.
men.

But the Papists will not acknowledge yt any of their opinions or practices are
novell, except we can produce the year when they were borne, the place wherein
they were first brought forth, and the author by who they were first begotten.
Now the manner of the resolution of this question, does overthrow this idle
evasion of theirs; as appears thus:

When the Pharisees tempted CHRIST in the question of divorce, asking; Whether
it is lawful for a man upon every occasion to put away his wife? He answers,
from the beginning it was not so: reproving the common error of the Jews by
testimony of Antiquity, from the word of God, Genesis 2.24. Where we may observe
that the question propounded by the Pharisees were two, viz.

First, whether is it lawful?

Secondly, if it be not lawful, Why then did Moses suffer it? To this second
Christ answers.

Moses suffered it for the hardness of your hearts. But to the first he
answers: It was not so (that is, not thought lawful) from the beginning.

Here the Romanists would have taught the Pharisees to reply upon Christ, thus;
If you convince us of error, you must show us, When this arose in the Church
of God, who first taught it, and what person resisted it; or else this
contrary custom must be maintained as divine, and from the beginning. But the
wisdom of Christ seems to condemn this reason of folly, when passing over
the original of this custom, he is contented with the revealed will of God in
ye beginning of truth: In the beginning it was not so: plainly teaching us,
that we are not bound for the confutation of error, to a positive
demonstration of the beginning thereof, but that it is sufficient to deliver a
negative, showing a time when it was not.

But the Papists plead Antiquity for many of their opinions, which we hold
erroneous; to which evasion also our Savior has taught us here, how to
answer: For he by reforming the corrupt doctrine of divorce (which was
ancienter then Moses) by a more ancient constitution, even of that which was
from the beginning, did teach us wisely to distinguish of Antiquity, that one
is primitive, and hereditary, the other adoptive, of an after invention: There
is Ancient, and most ancient, and this must we flee unto, because Antiquissimum
verissimum, That which is most ancient, is most true. Tertul.

What may we safely hold concerning Polygamie, or the having of diverse Wives
alive at once, Jews, and seems here to be reproved by our Savior?

First, we hold that it was never lawful, being From the beginning it was not
so: for ( verse 4) At the beginning God made them male, and female; one male,
and one female: and they two shall be one flesh; where we see that not three or
four, but only two are made in one: therefore Polygamie is a breach and
transgression of the first Jnstitution. Mal. 2.15.

2. In the Patriarks we deny not, but that before ye necessity of those times,
it was by use and custom tolerated, though not by any dispensatio^ authorized.

Thirdly, among the Gentiles, where there was

Fourthly, after Moses law was written, and the Willet. Synops. fol. 775.

. 4. Except it be for Fornication.]

In these words our Savior does plainly show, that Marriage is not forbidden
after a lawful divorce; For if he which puts away his wife but not for
fornication, causes her to commit adultery; then he which puts away his
wife for fornication, causes her not to commit adultery. And if he which puts
away his wife, unless for fornication, and marries another, commits Adulte^y:
then he which puts away his wife for Fornication, and marries another, does not
commit adultery. This argument is largely handled, and discussed, both by Dr.
Willet. Synop. page 776. 777. and also by Chamierus, de repudiis. lib. 18. cap.
16. tom. 3. fol. 693.

The Papists hold that a man may put away his wife, if he be to enter into
Orders: Against which we produce this Argument from this place.

Our Savior gives this perpetual Rule, that no man should dismiss his wife
but for Fornication: But Orders is no fornication (although frequently those in
Orders be fornicators) therefore not for entering into Orders, is* she to be
dismissed. So verse 6. No man must put a sunder that which God has coupled:
but they which are but Contracted, are coupled before GOD; therefore no humane
ordinance (such as is the single life annexed to Orders) can separate them.

VERSE. 10.11.12. His Disciples say unto him, If the case of the man be so with
his wife,
His Disciples say unto him.]





First, opposes the necessity of marriage, which is such, that but few are
exempted from it.

Secondly, he shows to whom this is given, to be free from Marriage; viz.
either to those that by some defect of nature are debilitated from generation;
or to those who willingly or unwillingly are made Eunuchs; or to those who by
Witchcraft, charms, and enchantments are weakened and disinabled from
performing the act of procreation; or to those, who neither by nature nor force
are gelded, but of their own accord abstain, being endued with the gift of
Continency: of which more by and by.

It is not good to marry.]

Paul, 1 Cor. 7.1. (It is good for a man not to touch a woman) stand or accord
with that saying of the Lords. It is not good for man to be alone; that is, To
be without a wife.





Paul also speaks of a personal good, or commodity, which is joined with a
single life; because the single did more easily undergo persecution, then the
married. Verse. 26.

All men cannot receive this saying.]

The Papists usually blame us, because sometimes we refuse to subscribe to the
opinion of some one or other Father, and ancient writer, yet themselves can
reject them by the gross: As for example. Maldonate the Jesuit ( Comment. in
Math. 19.) Says, That almost all that comment upon this place of Scripture do
note, that all men are not capable of the state of single life, because they
have not the gift of continency. Now observe these things, viz.

First, that the Fathers by their exposition of this place, did imply a
necessity in some to marry namely, for those to whom the gift of continency
was not given.

Secondly, that the Jesuit himself confesses, That almost all the Fathers
do expound his place to signify, that it is not in all men's power to live
unmarried, because of the want of the gift of continency.

Thirdly, amongst these, Almost all, he reckons up Origin (Tract. in Math. 7.)
Gregory Nazianzen (Orat. in haec verba) And Ambrose (in exhort. ad Virgil.) Who
expounds the place as we have said.

Fourthly, yet hereunto he vouchsafes only this answer, I cannot agree
hereunto, nor be brought to follow this interpretation, but think rather that
CHRIST by saying (All men receive not this saying) meant that all men did not
understand it. Such is the partial practice of our Adversaries in condemning
Protestants of impudency, for refusing the testimonies, although but of a few;
and yet will Maldonate have it held a point of learning and wisdom in
themselves, to reject (as often as they list) Almost all.

Against the vow of single life imposed by the Church of Rome upon all the
Clergy,

Continency is a hard thing, and is not given to all, (All men receive not
this saying) And therefore it ought not indifferently, and without any
difference, to be imposed upon the Clergy.

First, Bellarmine hereunto answers, That they

But there is nothing seen in their Mass Priests, nor in those who enter into
Orders,

Secondly, he answers, that the Clergy may have

But they have no more power to contain if they will, Paul had to perfect what
he would. Romans 7.15. Yea suppose that he might contain that would, yet who
(in these things) could be certain, that always his will should be to
abstain. Quibus datum est, non qui voluerint, dicitur: quoniam non est
volentis, neque currentis, sed miserentis Dei, a quo datur donum virginitatis
servanda. Non dicit, qui vult, sed qui potest capere, quia et si velles, and
non sentis te tantae constantiae, ut possis, non es de numero eorum qui possunt
capere. Cajetane in hunc locum.

Against this they object, Christ has made a That whatsoever any asks of God
in his name, they shall receive it. John 14.14. and 15.16. And St. James says,
If any lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, who gives abundantly. James. 15.

First St. James says, If any lack wisdom (not

Secondly, it is palpably absurd, to understand example. If this exposition of
Christ's words ( John 14.14. and 15.16.) be true, then it will follow, that all
the Cardinals, Bishops, and Priests in the world shall be Popes at one and the
same time, upon this supposition, that they all prayed to God for Christ's sake,
to make them Popes when the Popedom is vacant: and so (according to their
opinion, that the Pope is the head of the Church) the Church would be made a
true monster indeed. But this they will say is absurd; and therefore let them
say no less of their general, and indefinite exposition of Christ's words.

Evangelist elsewhere expounds the place, adding this limitation, if we ask
any thing according to his will he hears us. 1. John, 5.14. And therefore not
whatsoever in general.



I. Some gifts are general promised to all the faithful. And.

II. Some are singular, and peculiar; now this St. Paul says, God distributeth
not indifferently to all the faithful, but as he pleases, to one thus, and
another so. 1. Corinthians. 12.11. Now the gift of continency is not one of the
first sort, but of this second: and therefore all cannot receive it, though
they pray for it.

When the Apostles had said, It is not good to marry; our Savior replies. All
men cannot receive this saying, save they to whom it is given. For there are
some Eunuchs, which were so borne from their Mothers womb; and some so made
by men, and some who make themselves such for the Kingdom of Heavens sake. He
that is able to receive it, let him receive it.

From these words Bellarmine collects three things ( de Monach. lib. 2. Cap.
9.) namely,

First, that in this place no precept is given concerning continency or the
conservation of Virginity, because in this Chapter marriages are proved and
approved. Yet

Secondly, in this place there is given Consilium a Counsel concerning
continency, and the preservation and conservation of virginity; because when
the Disciples had said, It is not good to marry; the Lord does not say, yea but
it is good and expedient: but he that is able to receive it, let him receive
it. And

Thirdly, from hence he gathers, that this continency does not only afford
unto us, and bring along with it a corporal utility, but it has also a reward
in Heaven; because our Savior here says, Some have made themselves Eunuchs
for the Kingdom of Heavens sake.



Virginity is a good work, which is not commanded but commended, and yet there
is made unto it a promise of the Kingdom of Heaven: therefore there are works
of supererogations, which shall be rewarded.



Secondly, we say, that in this place diverse

Thirdly, we deny, that Christ in this place

Fourthly, Christ does not so call them ad

Fifthly, these words, He that is able to receive is not a Counsel which
commends the single life unto all men, as a work of perfection: but a rule
showing to whom belongs the single life, which is an instrument, whereby those
who have it may come nearer unto perfection, they having more freedom and
liberty to serve the Lord, then those who are encumbred with the care which
attends upon those who are married.

Sixthly, to that which Bellarmine affirmed, Counsel in that sense, that
Papists defend and maintain Counsels.

. 4. And some have made themselves Eunuchs.]

It is a dangerous thing (in the interpretation of Scriptures) when the words
are properly to be taken, for to take them figuratively; or contrarily, when
the words are figuratively to be taken, to take them properly. When Origin
taught at Alexandria he gelded himself, because our Savior here said: Some
have gelded themselves for the Kingdom of God, taking these words literally,
which are figurative; whereas he propounded almost all the rest of the
Scriptures figuratively. Now this fact of his Demetrius the Bishop of
Alexandria at first did approve of and commend, but afterward, when he heard
the fame of Origin to increase, and the world to sound his praise, did reprove,
and condemn it.

Some have made themselves Eunuchs?

Ennuches (as Origin thought) but that there are some, who being assured that
they have the gift of continency, upon that gift do endeavor to maintain
there present estate, that so they may the better serve God, and advance his
Kingdom, both in themselves and others.

Eunuchs.

Eunuchs are meant those who have no need of marriage, and therefore are fit
to lead and live a single life.

Eunuchs are there?

Eunuchs from their Mother: who are so cold of constitution that they are
unfit for generation.

Eunuchs by men; who either for some sin, or for some disease of the body,
have been gelded: or else so dealt withal by force, for the keeping of
Queens, Virgins, or Concubines, which was usual amongst the Gentiles, and is
yet in use amongst the Turks.

Eunuchs, who have made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heavens sake.
That is, there are some who being endued by God with the gift of continency,
do devote themselves wholly up to the Service of the Lord, and withdraw
themselves from all carnal and mundane delights, which may distract them from
the Lords work.

It is controverted between us and the Papists, whether it is lawful and
meritorious to vow the vow of continency or not? And for the proof of the
affirmative, they produce this Argument drawn from this place.

Eunuche does denote a vow; and therefore those who make themselves Eunuchs
for the Kingdom of Heavens sake, are those who have vowed the vow of
continency: The Antecedent Bellarmine proves thus; He is not an Eunuche who
only does contain, but he who cannot not contain: Now these Eunuchs are not
compelled to contain for some defect of nature (because they are distinguished
from such) nor are constrained by any common Law, because there is no Law which
forbids marriage absolutely; and therefore by Eunuchs are meant those who have
vowed the vow of continency. Bellarm. Lib. de M^^^ch. Ca. 22.

Bellarmines probation prove it; for whosoever contains himself, so long as
he contains himself, Ex d^^ by virtue of the gift of continency, is an
Eunuche.

Secondly, we deny the Consequent; because Corinth. 7.9. Yea, the Apostles
here did not demand concerning a vow of continency: and therefore this place
speaks nothing of vowing; for undoubtedly CHRIST answers unto the things
demanded.

Thirdly, many did contain and abstain from Corinth. 7.20.

Why may not all the Clergy, or others, vow

First, because except the gift of continency

Secondly, because no young men or women

Thirdly, because single life being (as they Counsel not a Precept, becomes by
the vowing of it) a Command not a Counsel: and thus they command that which
neither GOD nor CHRIST commands.

How does it appear that Ministers may

The German Priests and Bishops being forbidden marriage, some 700 years
after Christ, Pope Boniface, Hildebrand, and some others, maintained Priests
marriages against them, by the word of God; and some of their arguments were
these.

First, because God in the old Testament allowed wedlock to the Priests. And

Secondly, because no where in the new Testament is it prohibited, either by
GOD, or CHRIST. And

Thirdly, because St. Paul says expressly; That concerning Virginity he had
no command from God. And

Fourthly, because St. Paul would have Bishops and Deacons to be the husbands
of one wife. And

Fifthly, because both Christ and Paul affirm, That all men cannot receive
this Counsel of continency, but only they to whom it is given.

. 5. For the Kingdom of Heavens sake.]

The Rhemists object this place to prove, Christ says, Some have made
themselves chaste for the Kingdom of Heaven.

First, this is meant only of those who have Verse 11.

Secondly, as for meriting of heaven, it ^^^^^neth Romans 6.23.

VERSE. 13, 14, 15. Then were there brought unto him little Children, that he
should put his hands on them, and pray, and the Disciples rebuked them. But
Jesus said, suffer little Children, and forbid them not to come unto me; for of
such is the Kingdom of heaven. And he laid his hands on them, and departed
thence.
And the Disciples rebuked them.]

Christ rebuke and blame those who brought Children to their Master?

It was not out of envy to the children' or the bringers of them, but out of
zeal for the honor and quiet of their Master.

First, they imagined that Christ should be inaugurated into an earthly Throne
and Kingdom, and therefore it did not suite with the Majesty of a King, to
trouble himself with women (which seem to have been the bringers of the
babes) and young children. And

Secondly, they rebuked those who brought the Children, in love to their
Master, that he might not be over-wearied: they saw him to be so troubled,
molested, and pressed upon, that often times he could not get leave, or have
leisure to eat; and therefore (they thought) that he would be tired outright,
if he were troubled with children too, as well as men. And

Thirdly, hitherto the sick had come unto Christ, and the Disciples
commiserating their sickness, and desiring their health, suffered them to come
unto Christ; but these children were well, and wanted nothing; and therefore
what need was there to offer, or bring them unto Christ? Thus they rebuked
them, because they thought it a needless work. Yea

Fourthly, they thought that Christ could do nothing with or unto these
children: And therefore they blame the bringers of them. The Apostles see the
children to be young, and as yet neither capable of reason, nor able to hear
their Masters words with profit, nor to judge of his miracles; and therefore
what should their Master do with them? Now all these conceits our Savior
implicitly taxes, in saying, Suffer little Children to come unto me, and
forbid

Suffer little children to come unto me.]

The Papists say, that men and women at any age (if they be come to years of
discretion) may take upon them the vow of Monkerie: and because we deny this;
therefore Bellarmine produces this place for the proof of it. Christ says,
Suffer little Children to come unto me: Ergo, young men and maids may become
Monks,

First, the text speaks of little children, such as were not yet come to
years of discretion; now the Papists themselves say, that they must be of
years of discretion, who undertake this vow or profession of Monkerie. And
therefore this place is corruptly applied to the question

Secondly, from this place they might as well conclude, that none can come unto
Christ, but through a Monks cowle; because our Savior says, Suffer such to
come unto me.

Thirdly, the text says, Of such is the Kingdom of heaven; and therefore by
this reason of Bellarmin's, the gates of heaven should only be open to Monks
and Friars, which is the right heresy of the Pelagians, and Manichees, that
promised the Kingdom of God to none, but those who cast away their riches.

. 2. For of such is the Kingdom of heaven.

Whether or no by Baptism can and ought the Kingdom of Heaven be applied, and
sealed to Infants, seeing by the word, and the other Sacrament it cannot be,
and consequently whether are they to be baptized?

The affirmative (namely, that heaven may be applied and confirmed unto Infants
by baptism) is proved by diverse arguments taken from Scripture; by which also
it appears, that they ought to be baptized.

First, Christ here says, Of such is the Kingdom of heaven: now none can
enter into heaven except he be regenerate, John, 3.5. and baptism is called
the laver of regeneration. Titus. 3.5. And therefore it is necessary that
Infants should be baptized, that they might be borne again of water, and the
Spirit, and consequently enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Secondly, it is not the will of God, that Infants perish. Math. 18. And
therefore he would have them saved. Now God, does not save them without means,
but by the laver of regeneration. Tit. 3.5. And therefore Infants are to be
baptized.

Thirdly, if those who are guilty of sins, would not perish in their sins,
nor for them, it is necessary that their sins should be pardoned, which
remission is conferred by the means appointed by God for this end; now Peter.
Acts. 2.38. exhorts them to be baptized for the remission of their sins. And
therefore if we desire that Infants may not perish, we must admit them to
baptism for the remission of their sins.

Fourthly, Christ would and commanded Infants to be offered and brought unto
him. Math. 18. Now we cannot corporally and visibly put infants into the arms
of Christ, but we do it by baptism; for as many as are baptized into Christ
(says St. Paul) have put on Christ, Romans 6. Galath. 3. And as many as are
baptized into CHRIST, are baptized into his death, and are buried with him by
Baptism. Now because there is no question of this, that Infants are to be
brought unto Christ (he having commanded it) but that the controversy between
us and the An^baptists is concerning the manner, how they ought to be brought
unto him, We therefore follow the conduct of the Scriptures, which teaches ^s
that Infants are to be offered up, and brought unto Christ and are to put on
Christ by baptism, and consequently, that it is both the will and commandment
of Christ, that Infants should be bapti^ed, and by baptism be brought ^^th
him, because of such as are brought unto him is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Fifthly, Christ would bless Infants, Mark 10. that is, communicate his merits
unto them for their salvation, for this is the true blessing, Genes. 22.
Galath. 3. Ephesians. 1. Now Baptism is the means or instrument, whereby the
benefits of Christ are communicated to Infants: for by baptism Christ
cleanses and sanctifies. Ephesians. 5. Yea saves, 1. Peter 3.21. And therefore
Infants are to be baptized, that so the blessing of Christ (that is the
participation of his merits) may be communicated unto them.

Sixthly, when Christ says: Suffer Infants to come unto me, he would have
Infants to be made his members, that is members of the Church whose head he is:
for they who come unto Christ are the true members of the Church, John 6. and
are baptized into one body, 1. Corinthians. 12. And therefore Infants are to be
baptized, that they may be made members of the Church whereof Christ is the
head.

Seventhly, those for whom CHRIST died, that they might be glorified, he
sanctifies, and washes with the laver of water in the word. Ephesians. 5. But
Christ died for Infants, of whom is the Kingdom of Heaven: therefore he
sanctifies Infants, and washes them with the laver of water in the word.

Eighthly, Infants in the old Testament were circumcised, therefore in the new
they ought to be baptized, for Baptism is come in the place of Circumcision.
Colos. 2. And there is the same covenant of peace and grace in both.

Ninthly, Christ gave an universal command unto his Apostles of baptizing all,
who were to be saved. Math. 28. Mark 16. But in that number are many Infants;
and therefore the Precept of baptizing is to be extended even unto them.

Tenthly, Acts 16. and 1. Corinthians. 1. We read of whole Families and
house-holds which were baptized by the Apostles; and therefore by their
practice it appears that Infants are to be baptized, because in all
probability there were some Children belonging to those Families.

Lastly, the Prophet Esaias prophesying of the time of the new Testament, Chap.
49.22. does not say that only men of ripe years shall be members of the
Church, but he says, I will lift my hand unto the Gentiles, and set up my
standard to the people: and they shall bring thy Sons in their arms: and thy
Daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders. Acts 2. when St. Peter verse
38. had exhorted them to be baptized for the remission of their sins, he
adds, verse 39. For unto you is the promise made, and to your children.

Balthazar one of the first Anabaptists objects. Christ confe^^d a blessing
upon those Infants which were brought unto him, not by baptism, but by the
laying out of his hands upon them* and therefore we ought not ^o baptize
Infants, but only to lay our ^^nds on them, not doubting but thereby the
blessing of Christ will be conferred upon them.

First, whether we should embrace rather the

Secondly, whether we should rather do that Anabaptists, to their own
unwarrantable and wicked practice, and as not worthy to be learnt, reject it.

Thirdly, all the actions of Christ are not to

VERSE. 16.17.18.19.20.21.22. And behold, one came and said unto him, good
master, what good thing shall I do that I may have eternal life? And he said
unto him, why call thou me good, there is none good but one even God? but
if thou will enter into life keep the Commandments. He said to him, which,
and Jesus said, these, Thou shall not kill: Thou shall not commit adultery:
Thou shall not steal: Thou shall not bear false witness. Honor thy Father
and mother: and thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. The young man said
unto him, I have observed all these things from my youth: what lack I yet?
Jesus said unto him, if thou will be perfect, go sell that thou have, and give
it to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come and follow
me.

And when the young man heard that saying, he went away sorrowful: for he had
great possessions.


. 1. Why call thou me good, there is but

Some object this place to prove that Christ is not God, arguing thus.

He that denies himself to be good, denies himself to be in nature and
essence a God:

But Christ here denies himself to be good: Why call thou me good? etc.

Therefore Christ denies himself to be in nature and essence a God.

First, that Christ is good evidently appears

I. From his own mouth, Many good worker (says he) have I done amongst you;
therefore for which of my good worke^ do ye stone me? Now men cannot g^^^er
grapes of (...)* and therefore he (...) brings forth true good fruits, must
needs be a good Tree.



Secondly, it is false that CHRIST denies himself to be good; for he only
asks a question.

Why do thou call me good; Therefore he denies himself to be good, follows
not: For

I. We must consider unto whom, and wherefore Christ uttered these words, to
wit, they were spoken unto a Pharisee, for the repressing, and beating down of
his pride: He thought himself to be very good, but when he hears, Christ
seems to dislike the phrase, and not to take the title unto himself, he may
then learn to think lowlier of himself? for although the Pharisee were good
in his own conceit, yet I cannot conceive that he thought himself to be
either so good, or better then Christ; and therefore seeing the Master refuses
to be called good, the proud Pharisee cannot for shame but pluck down his
peacocke-plumes.

II. CHRIST does not simply deny himself to be good, but he denies it
according to that opinion which the young man had of him, who thought him to be
but a merere man: Now in this sense indeed Christ says, that no mere man is
absolutely good.

Ambrose (lib. 1. de fide. cap. 2.) says well, Non dicit Christus, nemo bonus,
nisi Pater, sed nisi Deus, Deus autem est nomen commune et naturae. Christ
says not, none is good but the Father, but none is good save only God; now
God, is a common name to all the three persons of the blessed Trinity.

There is none good but God only, that is, after that sort which God is good,
to wit, by his essence and nature, and therefore truly, and by himself good.
And this speech of our Saviors was not spoken without cause: For look what
good is in the creatures, the same is from the Creator, 1. Corin. 3.8. and
James 1.17. Now though the goodness that is in the creatures be from God, yet
is it imperfect: whether it be.

I. Natural, as to be, to live, to have sense, etc. Or

II. Gotten by art and pains, as the liberal sciences, virtues, etc. Or

III. Supernatural, as the knowledge of God, faith, regeneration, etc. But at
for God he has them most perfectly, and is good: Who as he is JEHOVAH of
himself, so is he good of himself. Man although he have all things good,
perfectly in respect of other creatures, yet imperfectly in respect of God: to
whose goodness, wisdom, and power, the like in creatures cannot be equal.

There is none good but God, does neither deny himself to be good, nor to be
God; but it was his mind hereby to reprehend, in that party with whom he spoke,
and in all others, two things: namely.

I. That when as we see in our selves, or others any good, we consider not
that it is from God, but admire the same as if it were of our selves: whereas
we should ascribe all glory and honor unto God, who is the Author of
whatsoever is good.

II. CHRIST by this his answer would reprehend this in us, viz. That we
consider not the corruption of our nature, namely that all men are naturally
evil, and that God only and wholly is good, there being in him no evil at
all. Wherefore Christ by this speech of his, would bring all men

First, to the knowledge of God, that he alone is good indeed, from whom all
good things come. And

Secondly, to the knowledge of our selves, that we by nature are evil and
perverse. Thus we must not think, that Christ denied himself to be good: as
though he did exempt himself from being this one alone good God; but only in
that sense that the Pharisee called him good: who considered not, that
whatsoever was good in the man Christ, the same was from God, and consequently
from his Deity.

. 2. If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments.]

The Papists lay down their opinion concerning the merits of works, in this
manner and form; God gives as well everlasting life and glory to men, for and
according to their works, as he gives damnation for the contrary works. And
men by their works proceeding of grace, do deserve or merit Heaven. Rhemist.
Romans 2.. 2. and 1. Cor. 3. S. 2. Now for the proof of the merit of our works,
they produce this text, Jf thou will enter into life, keep the Commanments;
and 1. Timothy 48. Godliness has the promise both of this life, and the next.
And whosoever shall forsake any thing for my sake, shall receive an hundred
fold in this life, and in the life to come, life everlasting. And James 1. He
shall receive the crown of life, which God has promised to those that love
him. Now hence they reason, life eternal is promised to good works; and
therefore as he that promises is indebted by promise; so he that works and
fulfilleth the condition meriteth. Or thus, if the promise of eternal life be
conditional, then it is necessary that those who would be saved should fulfill
the condition: But Christ has here said, If thou will enter into life, keep
the Commandments: and therefore unto salvation is required the condition of
the fulfilling of the Law. And therefore our fulfilling of the Law is
necessary, yea the proper and true cause of our salvation. Or thus (for
Bellarmine de Iustific. lib. 4. cap. 7. urges the point in controversy all
these ways) life eternal is promised to works, and a promise made with a
condition of labor, does not only make the thing promised a debt, but also
that he which fulfils the work may be said to merit the thing promised, and
may demand it as his wages, which of right belong unto him. The Argument seems
thus to be framed.

Whosoever shall fulfill the works, to which the promise of life eternal is
made, he merits Heaven Ex condigno, and may challenge it as due debt.

But the faithful fulfill those works, whereunto life eternal is promised.

Therefore they merit heaven Ex condigno and may claim it, as their right by
work.

promise, and merit, or work, cannot stand together: now promise (not merit,
or work) is the object of Faith, according to that of the Apostles, It is by
Faith that the promise might be sure ( Romans 4.16.) And that which is of Faith,
is not of debt or man's merit; as the Apostle shows, Romans 4.3. And Ambrose;
veniam tanquam ex fiae speremus, non tanquam ex debito. Let us hope for pardon
as of Faith, not of debt ( Lib. 2. de paenit. cap. 8.) And therefore if
Salvation be by promise it is not of merit but of faith.





Bellarmine affirms.

ex condigno, because there is no proportion between our imperfect and
momentary works, and our eternal and glorious reward. Again, a promise may
be added to the condition of a work, which of right ought to be performed;
that is, a King or Master may promise a Subject or Servant some reward, if they
will but do what they ought to do; As for example, A Master may promise to
his bond-slave that if he will be but a good, faithful, and profitable Servant
unto him for a year or two, he will then set him at liberty: Now though the
Servant should do what is desired, yet he could not claim his freedom, ex
condigno, because all servants ought to be good, and faithful unto their
Masters. And thus our Savior says of us, Luke 17.10.

Sixthly, the Minor proposition is false Forgive us our trespasses: and
therefore they cannot ex condigno, by their works merit heaven.

Seventhly, to the place objected we answer two things; namely.

I. That none of the places produced or

II. The places cited only prove that there is a promise made to those who
work, but not that the works are condign, that is, either not due by some
other right, or perfect, that is, such as are supposed in the condition. And
therefore they neither establish the Major proposition.

. 3. Keep the Commandments.]

Our Savior sending this young man to the





I. The Doctrine of the Gospel is revealed from above, and otherwise is
unknown to the wise and prudent men of the world. Matthew. 11. I thank thee oh
Father, that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed
them to babes. And John. 1. The Son of God shall teach you. And Math. 13. To
you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven. Thus the
Gospel is not naturally known unto men.

II. The Law in some manner is known to reason; for although it was proclaimed
in Sinai and published by GOD, yet before that it was known, and written in
the hearts of men in their first condition, and remained (though much obscured)
afterward: as St. Paul shows Romans 1. And that those who have no more then the
light of nature, have the Law in some sort writ in their hearts.

Lex data, the Law was given by Moses, Veritas facta, but grace and truth were
made by Christ, John 1. Where an Emphasis is to be observed in these words,
Dare et Facere, To give and to make. For

I. Moses gave the Law, that is, Moses in the Law did show and demonstrate unto
men, as with his finger, or in a glass, what righteousness the Lord requires
of men as his due, namely, the perfect fulfilling of the Law prescribed, or
entire obedience, which is absolute in all the parts and Articles of it. But
Moses cannot show a doer of the Law, nor can find one that pays the debt of
absolute and perfect obedience amongst all corrupt mankind: But

II. The Gospel shows and holds out unto us a Doer of the Law, namely Christ,
who by doing the Law, has merited grace for us at the hands of his heavenly
Father. For for mankind or in the room of mankind he performed the Law
perfectly, and absolutely, as he says himself, I came not to destroy the Law
but to fulfill it. Math. 5.



I. The promises of the Law are conditional and particular, promising life
only to those, who perfectly satisfy it according to the will of God;
according to this speech of Christ's unto the young man, If thou will enter into
life, keep the Commandments; and Luke 10. Do this and live. And thus the
promises of the Law are made only to those who perfectly fulfill it. But

II. The Gospel has free and universal promises, namely, that God for
CHRIST'S sake will freely forgive the sins of all those who believe, John
3.16. and 1. Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the World:
and of his fullness we have all received grace for grace, John 1.16. Thus the
Law has promise of life, upon the condition of doing and fulfilling the Law;
but the Gospel has a free promise of salvation, upon the condition of
believing, or laying hold upon the promises by the hand of Faith.

Fourthly, the Law and the Gospel are distinguished

I. The Law does not bring nor show grace unto men, but it makes known unto
them their sins, and the wrath of God, which they have incensed by their
sins, and that condemnation which they are guilty of for their sins; and
thus it works in men terrors. But

II. The Gospel does show and bestow grace by CHRIST, and the benefits that
we reap by him: It lets us see, how we are justified before God by Christ,
and how for his sake God is reconciled unto us, promising peace and joy unto us
in Soul here, and glory and felicity in Heaven hereafter: and thus it works
comfort, and sweet consolation.

What is the office and use of the Law, that our keep the Commandments?

First, the Law of God does admonish all Adams breaking of the Law has not
abolished this rule of righteoosnesse, which was given unto man at first to
walk by, but it is immovable, and does still express and show that
Righteousness and obedience, which men owe unto God as unto their Creator. And
this Law the Lord would have to be made known unto all men, that every one
might understand his obligation thereunto.

Secondly, the Law does lead us to the acknowledgement Matthew. 18. The Law
accuses, John 5. There is one which accuses you even Moses; it kills men, and
leaves men deprived of all comfort; it affects with shame and blushing. Our
Savior being about to leave the Earth, Luke 24. gives charge to his Apostles
to preach Repentance; and therefore the office and use of the Law is to urge
and persuade unto contrition, and sorrow for sin, and the breach of the Law.
Yea without the true knowledge of the Law, either Epicurisme or Pharisaisme
does reign amongst men.

Thirdly, the office and use of the Law is to John being asked by diverse of his
Hearers what they must do? Answers, they must be just, charitable, and
faithful, and bring forth fruits worthy of repentance. Luke 3.8, 11, 12. etc.
Which works were prescribed unto them in the law, and from it. And all those
precepts which Christ ever and anon gives concerning good works are agreeable
unto the Law: and therefore our lives must be framed according to the rule of
the Law, and the direction thereof.







Math. 5.48. and 1 Peter 1.13. etc. And

Math. ^.16. Philip. 2.15. And

John 14.15. And

Peter 1.10. And

Vsus Promptos facit, Use makes men perfect and prone, both

I. Unto a holy labor in that which is good: And also

II. Unto a godly warring and fighting against sin and whatsoever is evil.
And



Philip. 2.15. and 2. Peter 1.12. And therefore great reason there is, that we
should labor to obey it.

Jesus says unto him, These, etc.]







Satan, and our own corrupt nature overreached. And

Fourthly, because our true obedience to the Galath. 5.6. and 1. John 4.20.

Fifthly, our Savior to this young man recites All these have I kept from my
youth up. And therefore for the suppressing of this presumption, and rectifying
of this vulgar error, our Savior by the rehearsal of these precepts would
teach them, that they observe and keep none of them, as they ought to do.

. 5. Honor thy Father, and thy Mother.]

What is the honor that Children owe unto

To this the Hebrews answer; Honor the Lord with thy substance; and Honor
thy Father and Mother: thou art to honor God with thy substance, if thou have
any substance; but thou art to honor thy Parents, whether thou have any
substance or not; for if thou have not, thou art bound to beg for thy
Parents: So says, R. Solomon in his Gloss upon Levit. 10.3.

Whether ought we to love our Parents or

First, we are to love our Parents more th^n

Secondly, we are to succor our Parents in (Filium subvenire parenti proprio,
honestius est quam sibi ipsi, Aristot.) It is a more honest thing to help the
Parent, then a man's self. Yea there is a greater conjunction betwixt the
Father and the Son in Esse absolut^, then betwixt us, and our Children: and
therefore in case of extreme necessity, a man is more bound to help his
Father, then his Child.

Thirdly, when there is not such a case of extreme Corinth. 12.14. The
children lay not up for the Parents, but the Parents for the Children: And the
reason is, because the Father is joined with the Son, as the cause with the
effect: Sed causa infl^it in effect^m, the cause works in the effect, and so
should the Parent communicate (...) his child.

And thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.





Objective that is, in respect of the blessedness that is desired, because
they are nearer joined to us in God.
A Center, out of which issues many lines; the further they are extended from
the Center, they are the further disunited among themselves; and the nearer
they draw to the Center, they are the nearer united; as appears by the figure
in the margent. So those who are nearest to God, should be nearest to us, and
we should wish to them the greatest measure of happiness.

Appretiative, and in our estimation; And thus Christ loved John better then
the rest of his Disciples, John 13.23. because he was both his cosen German,
and had more grace in him; but he wished not a greater measure of glory to him
then to Paul, Objective, Matthew. 12.50. For the understanding hereof, let us
observe here a threefold consideration of Christ, viz.

I. He is considered as God, And thus He loved not John better then the rest.
II. He is considered as God and man, or as Mediator. And thus He loved not John
neither better then the rest; for as Mediator he loved them all alike. III. He
is considered as Man And thus He loved John better then the rest.
Timoth. 5.4. If a Widow have Children, let them learn to requite their
Parents: in the Syriacke it is, Rependere faenus parentibus. Let them pay usury
or interest to their Parents. A man divides his goods into three parts: that
is,

I. So much he spends upon himself, his wife, and servants. And

II. So much he gives to the poor, and pious uses. And

III. So much he lends to his Children looking for interest back again.

All these have I kept from my youth up.]

This young man being a Pharisee, gives us occasion to move this question;



The Pharisees were a sect so called, because they separated themselves from
others by a Hypocritical kind of service, and outward show. And Drusius (in
Elench. trihaer.) makes mention of seven sorts of them, but there are only
four usually made mention of, viz.

First, the Pharisee of praise, that did all that he might be seen of men; and
of this CHRIST speaks, Matthew. 6.21.

Secondly, the Pharisee who says, What is it, that I have not done? as if he
should say. I have done that which the Law, commands and more. Such a Pharisee
was this young man, who boasted to CHRIST, that he had kept all the precepts of
the second Table even from his youth up. Such are the new Pharisees who say,
they have works of supererogation: And as the old Pharisees had their
Auctarium Legis, Additions to the Law; so have the Papists good works to spare
to others.

Thirdly, the Pharisee of blood ( Epiphan. advers. haeres. Lib. 1.) who knocked
his head against the wall, So that the blood came: they carried Thorns in
their clothes, and spread thorns in their beds, that they might sleep the
less, and attend their prayers the more. Such are the new Pharisees, the
Penitentaries, who whip themselves until the blood come down.

Fourthly, the Pharisee of fear (Drusiu^. in Elench. trihaeres.) who abstained
from doing of evil only, Formidine paenae, for fear of punishment.

. 8. If thou will be perfect, sell that thou

The Papists by these words hope to establish and strengthen two maine pillars
of Popery: of which severally and apart.

First, Go and sell all thou have, if thou will be perfect: which is a
Counsel of perfection, not a precept given to all Christians: Now that this is
not a Precept, but a Counsel, appears by the context, or very consequence of
the words: For to the young man demanding, What he should do to be saved,
CHRIST answers, if thou will enter into life keep the Commandments: where our
Savior teaches, that the observation of the Law is sufficient unto salvation,
and forthwith subjoynes. But if thou will be perfect [that is, if thou be not
content with life eternal, but aspirest unto an excellent degree in life
eternal, by doing works above those which are prescribed in the Law] Go and
sell all thou haest. Bellarm. de Monach. Lib. 2. Cap. 9.

First, this young man was bewitched with viz. He thought that the observation
of the Law of God was so obvious and easy, that it might be fulfilled with an
ordinary and mean labor: He thought also (as do the Papists) that there were
some voluntary and free works, of a greater perfection then were the works
commanded in the Law. And therefore seeing the Pharisees, Sadduces, and
Essenes, had their peculiar works, in which they placed their perfection; this
young man desires that Christ would show him, what works he preferres as most
perfect, that he might follow after them, All the Commandments (says he) have
I kept from my Childhood: What lack I yet? As if he would say, The precepts of
Gods Law I have fulfilled from my youth with an easy labor: and therefore I
entreat thee to prescribe unto me some more perfect works, that I may
exercise my strength and power in them. Now Christ that he may convince him of
his error, propounds unto him a peculiar precept of trial, by which it will
appear, that he neither loves God with all his heart, nor his neighbor as
himself: and consequently, that he had not (as he dreamed) as yet fulfilled
all the Commandments of God.

Bellarmine erres here in saying, That in these words of Christ's, If thou will
be perfect, go and sell all, etc. Is given as a common Counsel of perfection,
or of supererogation; for there is given a peculiar precept of probation,
exploration, and healing or reducing this young man who was self-econceited of
his own strength, and performances.

Precept, and not a Counsel: Go says Christ, sell all thou have, which words
bear the form of a Command: and again Mark. 10.17. Christ says, This thou
want, but we are commanded to supply those things which are defective in
us. Philip. 3.13. Yea these words, If thou will be perfect, are in the effect
the same with these, If thou will enter into life; now if we would be saved
our Savior sends us to the Law, Keep the Commandments. And therefore this is
not a Counsel but a Precept.

To love the Lord with all their hearts, and to be content when the Lord
requires for Christ's s^ke, to leave all we have. Calv. inst. 4. Ca. 13.. 13.

Fifthly, some Precepts are

Observatoria; given for observation and practice; and thus the Precepts of the
Law, were given, that they might be obeyed and done. And

II. Some are Probatoria; for trial; and these Precepts are either

First, for the approving of our sincerity: and thus Abraham was commanded to
offer up his Son Isaac.

Secondly, for the reproving, and detecting of our Hyprocrisie: And thus this
young man was commanded to sell all, etc.

Christ loved him. Mark. 10.21. I answer



First, an Artificial Hypocrisy; and this I conceive he had not. And

Secondly, a Natural Hypocrisy: and this he was tainted withal; for the
discovering whereof unto him, our Savior gives him this Command.

II. There is a threefold love of Christ; to

First, general, toward all his Creatures; and thus he loved this young man,
but not thus only. And

Secondly, particular, toward every good thing: whether proceeding from a
renewing grace (which this young man had not) or from a common and general
grace; or from a restraining grace which preserves from sin and evil. And
this the young man had, and for this CHRIST loves him. And

Thirdly, there is a proper love, toward those who are Regenerate and borne
anew: and thus he loved not this young man.

Sixthly, Bellarmine erres here in saying. All these have I kept:

Seventhly, gross and palpable is the error If I shall distribute all my
goods for food for the poor, and have not love, it profits me nothing. 1. Corinthians. 13.3. By which it evidently appears, that this work which Bellarmine
extols above all the Commandments of the Moral Law, is nothing, further then
it is subordinate to the precept which enjoynes love unto our Brother. Yea it
is evident also, that this work may be done by those, who are void of true
Christian love, and consequently, which are guilty of the breach of the whole
Law which is fulfilled by Love, and consists in Love. And therefore to sell
all, and give it unto the poor, is not a work of perfection, or
supererogation, which transcends the Law of God.

If the Reader would see how Bellarmine excepts against diverse things which
has been said, and how all his instances are full answered; let him read B.
Davenant. de justit. actuali. Cap. 44. Page 510, 511. and Dr. Willet. synops.
Page 322.

This place is further urged for proof of the If thou will be perfect, go and
sell all thou have, and give it to the poor, and come and follow me. Now this
is properly to follow Christ, to lack propriety, and live in common: and thus
the Apostles followed Christ. Rhemist.

First, for the full answer to this Objection, I Mortons appeal, Lib. 5. Cap.
4.. 3. And because it is there answered, not only learnedly, but clearly, and
plainly also. I will therefore but add a word or two.

Secondly, these words are a special precept of



Luke 9.59, And therefore this precept being given not generally to all, but
particularly to him alone, we must not make a general rule of a special
commandment or example.

Gulielmus de S. Amore, as he is cited by Aquinas (Thom. opusc. 19.) Thus
expounds this precept, Go and sell all, etc. Ibi mandatam nobis esse
paupertatem habitualem, etc. Our Savior here requires a habitual, not an
actual poverty; that is, he commands us not to distribute, and give actually
all away, that we possess; but only requires an habitual poverty; that is,
when the confession of the name of God, and the glory of CHRIST so requires.
Tum omnia deserere parati simus, Then we should be ready to leave all etc.

Peter had a house; John had to provide for the Virgin Mary, whom CHRIST
commended unto him: and Matthew made a Feast of his own goods.

VERSE. 24, 25, 26. And again I say unto you, It is easier for a Camel to go
through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of
God. When his Disciples heard it they were extremely amazed, saying, Who then
can be saved? But Jesus beheld them, and said unto them, with men this is
impossible, but with God all things are possible
It is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle.]



Jerusalem called the Needles eye, which was so low and little, that when
Camels came that way, both their load must be taken off, and themselves must
stoop, before they could pass through. So if rich men would enter into Heaven,
they must forsake and part with their riches, (as this young man was commanded
to do) and humble themselves, and then they shall be saved. But I conceive
this to be but a conceit, and therefore leave it.

Beza. s. and Sylloge vocum Exotic. in Matthew. 3.4. page 11. et in hunc locum,
Page 145. do tell us, that in stead of (...) a Camel some read (...), a
Cable: and then thus expounds the words, A man cannot possible put a Cable as
it is through a Needles eye, but if he untwist it, he may by thread and thread,
put it through. So rich men cannot possibly come unto Heaven so long as they
keep their riches, but if they will distribute, and impart them unto good
uses, then they may be saved. But we mislike both the reading, and the
exposition: For

I. We must not corrupt, and pervert the text when we cannot understand it,
this being a cutting, and not a loosing of the knot.

II. It is false (by Scripture) that a rich man cannot keep his riches, and
come unto heaven; or be saved, except he give away all he possesses: for
Abraham, Joseph, Job, and diverse others were rich, who did not part with all
they had, and yet were saved no doubt.

Thirdly, these words are a proverbiall speech; Talmud had a Proverb (Antonius
Nibris. de proverbiis Talmudi^is.) Are ye of Pambeditha, who can cause an
Elephant to go through a Needles eye? These of Pambeditha were great braggers,
who said they could do strange things; hence came that Proverb amongst them,
and Christ uses it. It is easier to cause a Camel to go through a needles
eye, then to do thus or thus, or for such, or such a thing to be.

Fourthly, the meaning is plain and simple. Sell all, and give it away, and
follow him, and then he shall enter into life: Now this being heard he departs,
because he had great possessions. Whereupon our Savior says, That it is
merely as impossible for such a rich man to be saved [That is, which trusts
in his riches, and loves them, and will disobey God rather then distribute
them unto good uses, yea leave Christ, rather then leave them] as it is for a
Camel to go through the eye of a needle.

. 2. But with God all things are possible.]

The Papists for the proof of the corporal, Eucharist, produce this place;
The Lord says, that it is possible for a Camel to go through the eye of a
needle; and therefore it is not impossible for CHRIST to be in the Sacrament
under the forms of bread and wine. Again Christ says, That to God nothing is
impossible; and therefore he can make a true body to be in diverse places at
once. The body of Christ may be where is pleases him, and yet shall not need
any natural place, or occupy any room: He is able to bring a Camel through
the eye of a needle (as he says here) and therefore he can as well, and is no
doubt present under the shapes of bread and wine in the Sacrament. Rhemist. in
Matthew. 26.. 11. et Bellarm. Lib. 3. de sacram. Cap. 6.

First, it is the Cardinal, not Christ that says

Secondly, for full answer unto this objection, Amesius Bellar^^ enero. Tom. 3.
Page 145 and to Mr. Hill. In his knowledge of the true God, Page 174, 175.

Thirdly, the power of God is two fold, to wit,

I. Absolute: now Gods absolute Power is that by which he can do more, then
either he does or will. Matthew. 3.9. Philip. 3.21. Matthew. 26.53. Ephesians. 3.20.
Now by this power it may be said, That God could have made more worlds, and
have hindered the fall, and the like. And of this absolute Power our Savior
speaks in this place.

II. There is an actual Power of God; which is that by which he causes all
things to be, which he freely wills. Psalm. 135.6. Or that power by which God
does those things which he wills freely: And this is called by the School
men, Potentia ordinaria, Gods ordinary power: Now theologically it is not
lawful to argue, but only from this Power of God, which is always conjoined
with his will. And therefore in the Objection there is Captio ab homonymia
Potentiae.



I. Such things as are contrary to the nature of God: as to destroy himself,
and not to beget his Son from all eternity.

II. Such things whose action argues an impotencie in the doer; and may be
done by the creature, but not by the Creator; as to sin, to lie, to be mad,
to deny his word. Tit. 1.2. and* 2. Timoth. 2.1, 3. Now these things are
contrary to the nature of God; and therefore we say, that such things are not
of their own nature impossible, but in respect of God, who is Omnipotent, and
infinitely pure and perfect. And

III. Such things as imply a contradiction; for God cannot make a truth false;
or that which is, when it is, not to be: as for the world to be created and not
created, Gods children elected, and not elected: these are contradictory one to
the other, and so impossible. Now such things as are of this quality we say
cannot be done by God, who cannot make two contradictory propositions true; for
how can he that created the World, make now that it should not be created? Now
in these things it were better to say, That they cannot be done, then to say,
GOD cannot do them: for thereby we signify that the defect is in the thing,
which cannot be done, and not in the power of God. Now for a body to be at once
in diverse and sundry places is impossible by the two latter sorts of impossible
things; because it is contrary to the nature of a true body, and includes
contradictions, as is proved clearly afterward. Chap. 26.26.

Luke, 1.37. or with the Lord of the Angels in this verse, Though with men
many things be impossible, yet with God all things are possible: for there is
nothing that can be either spoken of, or imagined, which as not subject unto
his power. For the better understanding and confirming hereof, observe that
there are three causes only, why some effect cannot be accomplished by some
agent, none of which have place in God. The causes are these.

I. The first is, because there is no similitude betwixt the effect, and the
agent, as there must needs be: but what is there that has not some resemblance
with God? If thou have a being, it is like to God in being, who is a most
perfect being: and therefore every thing that either is, or may be, is subject
to his power.

II. The next cause, why an agent cannot produce an effect, may be, because the
effect is more excellent then that the agent can accomplish it: therefore
corporal substances cannot beget spiritual, nor inferior superior. But
there is nothing more excellent then God, who is excellency it self.

III. The agent may want matter to work upon, and can neither provide it of
himself, nor procure it from others. But this can never hinder God, who has
no need of matter, for if it please him to use it, he can create it of nothing.
And therefore it is as clear as the light, that all such things as in nature
are, and are not contrary to the nature of God, are subject to his power.

Sixthly, unto the place we answer, that

Seventhly, the Consequence of the argument A posse ad esse non valet
consequentia. Such a thing may be; therefore such a thing shall be; or, God
can do such a thing, therefore he will do such a thing, follows not:
neither is the question between us and the Papists concerning the power of
God, what he can do, but concerning his will, what he does, or will do.

Eighthly, it is not proved out of this place,

Ninthly, the thing aimed at in the Objection shall remain, and abide in
heaven, until the time of the restitution of all things, Acts 3.21. And
therefore it is impossible that now his body should be on earth, ordinarily,
and in diverse places at once, as they teach. But the impossibility, and
absurdity of transubstantiation is sufficiently illustrated afterward, Chap.
26.26.

If the Reader would see, how some things which we have said are excepted
against by Bellarmine, let him read Willets synops. page 609. and Scharp. de
sacra Caena. Page 1463.

VERSE. 28.29. And Jesus said unto them, verily I say unto you, that ye which
have followed me in the Regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in the
Throne of his glory, ye shall also sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve
Tribes of Israel. And every one that has forsaken Houses, or Brethren, or
Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands for my names
sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life.
Ye which have followed me in the Regeneration.]

Concerning this head of Regeneration, many necessary questions may be
propounded; and because they are necessary, I will not balke them, and because
many, I will not enlarge them all.





First, Regeneration is the work of God, not the work of man; and hence they
which are regenerated are called his workmanship, Ephesians. 2.10. And the work
is appropriated unto him, as the Author of it, John 13. and 3.6. and Ezech.
36.26.

Secondly, Regeneration is wrought by the means and ministry of the word;
Psalm. 19.7. John 15.3. and 1. Peter 1.23. and 2. Peter 1.5. And therefore if
we would be regenerated, we must attend carefully to the word, as follows by
and by.

Thirdly, in Regeneration the Lord infuseth his Spirit into the whole man, and
works a true and holy change in all the parts of the soul, Wisdom. 12.11.
and 1. Timoth. 1.7.

Fourthly, God works. Regeneration in the heart of his Saints, both for his
and their glory: where we may observe, that as there was a double aim and end
in the Worker of Regeneration, so there should be in those in whom it is
wrought.

First, the Person working the work of Regeneration, aimed therein

I. At his own glory, Proverb. 16.4. And

II. At the good, glory, and eternal felicity of those whom he Regenerates:
Therefore

Secondly, the persons in whom the work of Regeneration is wrought, should aim

I. Principally, and above all, to glorify their God, in their lives and
conversations, who has done so great things for their souls, 1. Corinthians.
10.31. And

II. Next thereunto they must be chiefly careful to work out the work of
their salvation with fear and trembling, Philip. 2.12. because nothing does so
nearely concern them, next unto Gods glory, as the salvation of their souls.

By what steps or degrees does the work of

First, the Spirit of God, and the Spirit of contrition

I. The Spirit of God does show us three things; namely,

First, our guilt; that is, how we have transgressed and violated the whole
Law of God; and therefore if God should call us unto judgment, or enter into
judgment with us, we must needs accuse our selves, and confess that we are
guilty of the transgression, and breach of the Law. And

Secondly, our danger wherein we are by reason of our sins; the wages of
sin being death, Romans 6.23. and the reward of the violation of the Law,
eternal condemnation. And

Thirdly, the pollution and filthiness of sin, how that it is out of measure
sinful, and a thing most loathsome both in it self, and unto the pure eyes of
our heavenly Father.

II. The Spirit of God does negatively not teach unto us these two things: viz,
either

First, to hate God, because he is the punisher, and avenger of sin, or
because he will not suffer us to sin without punishment: for this the
malignant Spirit teaches to men, who have given themselves over unto sin. Or

Secondly, to hate righteousness, and true holiness, because they are
contrary unto our sins, lusts, and vile affections, and because for the
violation of the rules of righteousness and holiness we are punished and
plagued. For this, Satan, and our own corruption teaches unto us, and not
the good, and blessed, and holy Spirit of God.

III. The Spirit of God affirmatively teaches these three things unto us:
namely.

First, to hate the punishment of sin: the Spirit teaches us, that it is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of God, because he is a consuming fire:
and that those who continue to transgress an infinite Law, and to offend an
infinite Lawgiver, shall be infinitely punished with torments intolerable,
though always tolerated and borne: and therefore we are taught by the Spirit
to hate these punishments, which are the reward of sin. And

Secondly, to hate sin it self, which is the cause of this punishment, and
that with a perfect hatred; yea not only in regard of the punishment of sin,
but in regard of sin it self, it being in its own nature a thing worthy to
be detested, and abhorred. Yea

Thirdly, the Spirit teaches us to hate our selves, for our folly and
madness, that have loved, and delighted in those things, which are both
infinitely evil and ougly in themselves, and shall be so severely, and
unspeakably punished without repentance. And this is the first degree and
step unto Regeneration.



I. The desire of the Regenerate is serious and solid, they conceive sin to
be an infinite evil, and a thing so odious unto God, that it separates him
from man Ierem. 5.25. And therefore so long as they are not certain that their
sins are remitted, they are uncertain of the presence of God in them, or of
his love unto them, or of their reconciliation unto him; yea until they are
sure that their sins are done away, they cannot have any true peace of
conscience, or spiritual rejoicing. Now as they earnestly, and unfainedly
desire to be certain of all these: viz, of the presence and love of God, and
reconciliation unto him, and peace with him, and with themselves, and of the
joy and consolation of the Spirit in themselves: So they incessantly and
heartily desire the assurance of the pardon of their sins, without which
assurance they cannot be assured of the other.

II. The desire of the unregenerate is a confused, and fleeting desire; he
wishes often that his sins were pardoned, but the desire thereof does not
constantly possess his heart: he may desire remission remissely, slightly,
and casually, but not seriously, and solidly, or upon those grounds whereby it
is desired by the Regenerate man.

III. The Regenerate man desires rather to be purged from the evil of sin,
then freed from the evil of punishment; When the child of God groans, both
under the burden of sin, and of punishment, and is sensible of both the
Evils; then he desires to be freed first from the guilt and filth of sin, as
the greater evil; and prays unto God more heartily to wash him, and purge
him, and cleanse him from his pollution, then to ease him of his pain.

IIII. The unregenerate man is more sensible of the evil of punishment, then
of sin, and more desirous to be freed from that, then this. Thus this earnest
and unfeigned desire of the assurance of the pardon and remission of sin is
the second degree of Regeneration.

Thirdly, the next step and degree of Regeneration,

I. Whether pray we daily unto God, to pardon our sins and to regenerate us?
And with David cry unto the Lord, to create clean hearts, and renew right
Spirits within us? Psalm. 51.11. And

II. Whether can we commit our selves unto the Lord, and expect with willing
obedience the revelation of his will? can we when we pray, say unto the Lord,
I flee unto thee O Lord, do unto me as shall seem good in thy eyes? And

III. Whether do we obtain our requests at Gods hand or not? we should
mark the return, and fruit of our prayers, and see whether (with the King of
Niniveh, and the prodigal Child) our prayers be heard, and our suites granted.
For if we can fervently pray, and faithfully commit and commend our selves
unto the good will, and pleasure of God, and obtain our suites at his hands,
we may be comfortably persuaded that we are regenerated, because God hears not
sinners, John 9.31.

Fourthly, the last degree and highest step of

Who are Regenerated?

Only those who are endued with the knowledge of God, and the faith of Christ.

What is Regenerated, in those who are regenerated?

The whole man; that is, to be renewed in the spirit of our minds, Ephesians. 4.23.
Romans 12.2.

Who Regenerates?

CHRIST as God by his Spirit: Ye are taught by Christ, Ephesians. 4.21. and ye
are created anew according to God, verse. 24.

Unto whose examplar, or according to whose

According to the exemplar, John 3.3.

Wherein does Regeneration consist?

In the putting off the old man, Ephesians. 4.22.

What are the parts of this new man which is

True righteousness, and holiness, Ephesians. 4.24.

Where and when is Regeneration to be





Luke 1.74, 75. And

John 3. These eight last Questions I have only briefly named, because if the
Reader would see them all enlarged, let him read Zanch in Ephesians. Cap. 4. Page
327. 328. 329. 330. 331.



John 3.5. And therefore we must not resist the holy Ghost, nor greeve him,
nor quench his motions, but weight carefully for his coming, and attend
diligently unto his calls, and cry mightily unto the Lord, to give his holy
Spirit unto us.

Ephesians. 4.21. James 1.18. And therefore two things are here required of us, if
we desire to be regenerate; namely,

I. We must attend constantly to the preaching of the word, because the mouth
of the Minister is the conduite pipe by which the seed of the word, and the
life of grace is derived unto us.

II. We must hide the word in our hearts: it is a seed, now if the seed be hid
in the earth it will spring up; it is a medicine, and if it be taken down it
will heal; it is a pure Fountain, and therefore if we delight our selves
therein, it will purge: the word is a quickening word, and is full of life, and
therefore if we be careful to listen to the counsel and direction of the
word, and to embrace it, and walk according thereunto, it will be a means to
animate and enliven us.





I. The first difference shows it self in the very faculty resisting: For

First, the natural, moral, and unregenerate man does not resist sin with
the Will but with the Conscience; for the Will consents unto sin and would
sin, but the Conscience reclaimes him, and withholds him from sinning, and
makes him, that though he would willingly, yet he dares not: the Dog desires
the meat which he sees hang, or lie by him, and would gladly eat it, but
forbeares for fear, because the whip hangs by, and he knows he shall be
beaten if he do. Thus the Will of the wicked man runs after sin, but the
terror and fear of punishment makes the Conscience withstand. But

Secondly, the Regenerate man resists sin with the Will, as well as with the
Conscience; as he would not be punished, so he would not sin, and he
forbeares tasting of the forbidden fruit, because it is hurtful unto him, and
because he loves it not. Malum quod volo, Romans 7.19. Paul conceived sin to
be an evil, and therefore with his will resisted it, and those who are
Regenerate as soon as they know a thing to be sin, so soon they hate it,
because it is sin, and not for fear of punishment. This difference between
the good and bad man's abstinence from sin is so clear, that Horace by the
light of nature could see it, and thus lively express it: Oderunt peccare
maliformidine paenae,
Oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore.


And therefore if we desire to know, whether we be Regenerated or not, we
must not so much enquire whether we hate sin or not, Or, whether we resist
it or not: As wherefore, whether for the fear of punishment, or for the love
of God, and hatred of sin as sin, though no punishment were allotted
thereunto by God at all.

II. The next difference between the striving and struggling of the Regenerate
and Unregenerate man against sin, shows it self, in the object of the
Contention and strife. For,

First, the natural and moral man, for the most part at least, if not
always, strives and wars only against gross and enormious sins, and such
as are obvious and odious unto men; but for lesser sins, which the world
makes lesser matter of, or which are unseene and unknown unto men, they care
not to withstand or resist at all. Wicked thoughts, evil words, jeasting which
is not convenient, and the like, they never regard: by which they show plainly,
that they fear more to offend and displease man then God. But

Secondly, the Regenerate man wrastles and wars against all sins
whatsoever, whether great or small, whether external, or internal, whether of
omission or commission: yea he not only strives against those evil things,
which are conspicuous to the eye of the World, but also greeves for, and
strives against, his faint endeavors and drowsiness in the performance of
good works, yea against all evil works, Lascivious looks, and corrupt
thoughts. And therefore if we desire to know whether we be Regenerated or
not; let us examine whether we bear an equal hatred unto all sins alike,
whether we are equally watchful against all sins alike, and whether we
equally war against all alike, because they are sin, and seen, and taken
notice of by God, and displeasing unto him.

III. The next difference between the striving of the Regenerate and
Unregenerate man against sin, shows it self in the consideration of those
things which move unto this strife, or in the thing striving. The Apostle Paul
says, The Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit lusts against the
flesh, Galath. 5.17. Whence observe two things, viz.

First, in the Regenerate man, the Spirit lusts against the Flesh: that is,
Spiritual respects, and considerations makes him forbear to offend. He is
tempted unto sin and wrastles against it with manfull wrastlings, because he
fears to offend his God, yea because he loves his God, and (Res est solliciti
plena timoris amor) perfect love is full of fear: yea for him to put forth his
hand unto wickedness, were to crucify unto himself again the Lord of Glory,
and put him to an open shame; and therefore he resists sin even unto blood.
In a word, the love of CHRIST constraines him to strive against sin: And thus
in him the Spirit lusts against the flesh.

Secondly, in the Unregenerate man, the flesh lusts against the flesh: that is,
Natural, carnal, and mundane respects and considerations, cause him to
abstain from Sin, and to strive against it. He is tempted often to
Drunkenness, revenge, Fornication, deceiving by false weights and measures,
and the like, and he resists and withstands these temptations; and why? For
fear of the Judgments of GOD, or the displeasing of some men; or, the
staining of his reputation, estimation, and credit, and the like carnal
respects; and thus in him the Flesh lusts against the flesh.

IV. The last difference between the striving of the Regenerate and the
Unregenerate man, shows it self in the means by which they resist: For

First, the troubled Conscience only of the Unregenerate man resists; and for
the most part, by little and little the Conscience grows senseless and hard,
and then he sins without feeling, Ephesians. 4.19. But

Secondly, the Regenerate resists Sin by the word, and grace of God; and as
his knowledge in the word increases, and the grace of God is increased in him,
even so his strength, and hatred against sin increases. And therefore if we
would know whether we be Regenerated or not, we must examine whether we war
against sin with Spiritual or Carnal weapons, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. And thus much
for the first answer, and the first effect of Regeneration.

John 3. and that by Faith, Act. 15.9.

Here observe in the Regenerate four things: to wit,

I. He conceits of Sin, and looks upon whatsoever is evil, as a thing not
belonging, but as a stranger unto him; he knows sin is not his work, and
therefore he imployes not himself therein, but as an enemy hates it, and
fights against it. But

II. He looks upon that which is good, as his own proper work, which he is
bound to obey, and to perform; and therefore (according to St. Paul's advice,
Philip. 4.8.) he labors after whatsoever is holy, just, pure, and of good
report; because the Lords work is his employment, and the Lords ways are his
path, and as the Lord by the effectual vocation of his Spirit has called him
unto holiness, so he labors to walk in the ways of holiness, and to work
the work of the Lord. Hence

III. When he is not able to do that good which he would and should (as a
Sick man sometimes is not able to digest his meat) then is he sensible of his
weakness, and sorrowful for it, and apprehensive of the want of grace in his
Soul, as the body is for want of meat: crying out, and complaining of his
impotencie and inability with St. Paul, Romans 7.15.19.24. And

IV. When he finds, that he is not able to do what he would, then he strives
to do what he can, and that to the uttermost. As it is with an industrious
man, who being wounded in his legs, and forced through lamenesse to keep
house, strives to be doing something, and employes himself in one good and
profitable work or other, until he be able to go about his affairs, and to
follow his own proper and particular calling. So the Regenerate man, if he be
not able to walk in the ways of God, and to work his work as he desires,
through infirmity and weakness, then he labors to employ himself as he can,
and to do what good works he is able, with an earnest desire of more strength
and a faithful promise, and full purpose, to run swiftly the race that is
set before him, when the Lord shall give his anckle bones strength, and to
work cheerfully the work of the Lord, when he shall be pleased to strengthen
his hands. And therefore if we desire to know, whether we be Regenerated or
not, let us examine our purposes and promises, our desires and endeavors of a
new life, and holy conversation; for they which are borne again, will avoid
all evil, impure, and scandalous actions, and labor to abound in every good
work, and grieve when they are not able to do what they desire, and rejoice
when the Lord increases their strength, and makes them thereby able in some
good measure to obey his will.

Thirdly, the next effect of Regeneration is a viz.

I. As an Infant knows not that it lives, neither is sensible of life: So
those who are Infants in grace, and newly regenerated and converted, are not
sensible (for a while) of the Spiritual life of Grace: but when they come to a
greater maturity of grace, they easily perceive it, and know it.

II. As a melancholy man may think himself to be sick, yea dead, when in the
mean time the actions of life, and motion convince him to be alive: So the
Regenerate in the hour of temptation does often think himself to be dead in
Sin, and deprived of all Spiritual life, when in the mean time his fear to
offend God, his sorrow for his sins, his warring against sin, and his
unblameable conversation, shows and proves that he is a living Soul, and
alive in the Lord.

III. As a man by some deep wound, or extreme blow, or the decaying of the
Spirits, may faint or swound, and become insensible of life: So may the
Regenerate man after the committing of some great and grievous Sin; as we
see in David, Psalm. 22. and 32. and 42. But as those are brought unto
themselves (who faint) with rubbing, and other the like means; so these by the
wounds and checks of Conscience, and by an earnest endeavor in the exercises
of Religion, may by little and little return unto themselves, and their former
assurance of Grace and Regeneration.

IV. If the Regenerate man be not an Infant, nor under the burden of
temptation, neither has committed any great or grievous Sin, then he may
know his estate and condition, and that he is alive unto the Lord (1 John 2.13.
and 3.14.) because the actions of life prove him to live, and his life is no
longer hid from himself. An Jmage or Picture may in outward show be like to a
living man in all things, although it have no life in it at all; but this
concludes not, that therefore a living man c^nnot tell certainly whether he
lives or not. A man asleep may dream that he wakes, and works, or eats, and
walks, when he does none of them; but it will not follow from hence, that
therefore he which is awake, cannot be sure that he is awake, or certainly
know what he does. Thus an hypocrite may dream that he is a righteous man,
when there is no such thing; but the Regenerate man knows that he is such, and
is not deceived. And therefore we must examine ourselves, whether the Spirit of
God witness unto our spirits that we are the Children of God, and created in
CHRIST JESUS.

John 15.2. Colos. 2.19.) all the members drawing unto themselves a fitting
augmentation. Here observe, that there is a double increase, namely.

I. In quantity; as a man increases in strength and stature until the age of
25. And

II. In quality; as a man after 25 increases in wisdom, solidity,
experience, and the like.

So the regenerate labors

First, to increase in the quantity, and number of graces, and virtues: Philip.
4.8. and. 2. Peter. 1.5, 6, 7. And then

Secondly, in the measure, degree, and extent of them. For the Child of God
must labor and endeavor daily, to bring the habits of grace unto act, and
when there is in a manner no grace or virtue, which he has not in some measure
attained unto, and showed forth in his life, he must then strive unto a greater
measure and degree of them. This is clearly pointed out by St. Peter, who

I. Exhorts the Children of God; to add to their faith virtue; and to virtue
knowledge; and to knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to
patience godliness; and to godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly
kindness charity. 2. Peter. 1.5.6.7. And then

II. Exhorts them to abound in all these, verse 8. But as men both before they
be five and twenty years old, and after, have agues, fevers, falls,
sicknesses, which hinder (for a while) their growth and increase both in
quantity, and quality: so have also the Regenerate children of God. And
therefore they must be so much the more watchful over their ways and
industrious in the use of all good means. And therefore we must examine
whether we be always children, or whether we grow up daily in grace.

What is here required of all men?

To prove, and examine themselves,

First, it is dangerous, and most full of peril, to neglect the enquiry of our
Regeneration, and take it up only upon trust. Jf a thief should go singing
to the gallows, hoping verily that the King would send him a pardon, and then
find none, but be cut off suddenly, contrary to his expectation, his death must
needs be so much the more horrible: So if men cry peace unto themselves when
they are not as yet regenerated; and persuade themselves that their condition
is happy, when the contrary is most true; they will be so much the more
confounded, when they find their hope and expectation so miserably frustrated.

Secondly, at the best, those who neglect seriously to examine themselves
whether they be regenerated or not, must needs be full of anguish, sorrow, and
mourning. If a man were lead unto execution, and were ignorant of any pardon
granted unto him from the King, he must needs go mournfully to his death,
although a pardon did there attend him, because he was not certain of it. So
if those who belong to the covenant of grace be negligent in the examination of
their evidence, their comfort must needs be small, true faith, and lively hope
being the parents of solid joy.

What is required of those who are Regenerated?

First, it is required of them, that they be careful viz.

I. Contagion, and infection: those who eat, and converse, and dwell with
sick men, oftentimes are taken with the same disease and sickness whereby
they are debilitated and weakened: So he who walks with a wicked man is made
worse, and his course and progress in Religion in tanto is hindered. Hence
Solomon says, walk not with an angry man, least thou learn his ways: which
may be applied to all Sinners, and a Caveat to the Righteous* to beware of all
society which is wicked, Acts 2.42. We are commanded to save our selves from
the generation of the wicked because we may easily be seduced by them, as
Adam was by Eve. David says, Depart from me ye wicked, because I will keep
the Commandments of the Lord: as if he would say, the Society of wicked men
will hinder me from the service of the Lord. So Paul exhorts us to depart from
every brother which walks inordinately; because a little Leaven leaveneth the
whole lump.

II. Poison, for that contaminates and corrupts both the meat, and all the
nutritive faculties; now this poison is Sin, which contaminates and pollutes
the whole man, and hinders the increase and progress of Grace.

III. The excess of meat which distempers, and disorders the whole body, hurts
and hinders the nourishment thereof: this is, the excess of worldly delights,
which though otherwise lawful, yet immoderately used, becomes a bait, and
snare to entrap the soul.

IV. Hunger, and the want of good food hinders the nourishment of the body; for
oftentimes the less the stomach eats, the worse it is. So if we starve our
souls, and deprive them of their fitting food, no wonder if we do not grow
and increase in truth. And therefore, if we desire to nourish and cherish our
spiritual life, which is infused in us in our Regeneration, we must warily
shun all wicked society, we must carefully avoid all sin and iniquity, we
must moderate our delights in all wordly things, and we must feed our souls
with spiritual exercises.

Nascitur indigne per quem non nascitur alter that is, Unworthily that man does
live:
Which to another does not life give.


And therefore all the Children of God must watch all occasions of doing good
unto others, in their general calling, as Christians, whether by instruction,
or reprehension, or admonition, or consolation; but chiefly every man must be
careful in his particular calling, to bring those unto CHRIST, whom God has
put under his

. 2. Ye shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel.

Some object this place to prove that CHRIST is not the judge of the world
arguiug thus,, It is said here, that the Apostles shall judge the twelve Tribes
of Israel; and 1. Corinthians. 6.2. The Saints shall judge the World, Therefore
Christ is not the only Judge of the world.



How shall the Apostles judge the twelve Tribes of Israel, seeing that CHRIST
himself says. John 5.22. The Father has given all judgment to the Son?

First, at the last day of judgment there shall be

I. Some shall judge in power; now this power is either

First, absolute, and independent: and thus God the Father shall judge the
world. Genes. 18.25. Shall not the Judge of all the world, do that which is
just? Or,

Secondly, delegate and derived: and thus Christ as man shall judge the world.
John. 5.22.

II. Some shall judge Assessorie, as Judges laterall, or assistants: and thus
the Apostles shall judge the world, as it is said in this verse.

III. Some shall judge by approbation, that is, they shall sit with the Judge
in judgment to approve the sentence of the Judge: and thus all the Saints, and
faithful shall judge the world. 1. Cor. 6 2.


Secondly, the Apostles shall judge the twelve Tribes of Israel three manner of
ways; to wit.

I. By their doctrine, and preaching of the Gospel: because according unto
that the sentence shall be pronounced at the last day. Romans 2.15. That is,
those at the day of judgment shall be acquitted, that have believed and obeyed
the Gospel: and on the other side they shall be condemned, that would not
believe, and obey it.

II. The Apostles shall judge the Jews, by their testimony, which shall so
convince them, that they shall not be able to pretend ignorance of that
doctrine according to which they shall be judged. As CHRIST says. Matthew.
24.14. That the Gospel shall be preached in the whole world, for a testimony
against them: So the conscience of the Jews will convince them and bring unto
their remembrance, when they see the Apostles, what they both did and said
amongst them, for their edification and salvation, and which obstinately and
perversely they contemned and despised.

III. The Apostles shall judge the Tribes of Israel, by their example: for if
the Jews should pretend, that the doctrine of the Gospel was too abstruse and
sublime for them, and that they were neither able to perceive it, nor receive
it; then the Apostles will be set before them, as exemplars of the contrary,
who being rude, and illiterate men, did notwithstanding understand the doctrine
of the Gospel, and were thereby regenerated, and made the children of God.
Chem. harm. page 1827.. ult.

. 3. And shall inherit everlasting life.]

Who are enemies unto eternal life? or, erroneous

First, the Atheists who deny it. Post mortem in any think that it is with man
as with beasts, when they are dead, they are gone, and they are neither
sensible of pain, nor of pleasure after this life. But this is directly
contrary to the text.





I. Some hold that the joys of heaven, and eternity it self, were only to
continue for the space of 1000 years, and then to cease. Danaeus. 29. Prateol.
347. b^et. 128.

II. Some held that the Saints should wallow (in the life to come) in all
carnal delights, and fleshly pleasures: and this is reported to be the opinion
of the Mahumetanes, but Mr. Bedwell shows the contrary.

III. Some hold a double time; namely,

First, that the righteous should have joy, and the wicked sorrow, and pain
for the space of one thousand years. And

Secondly, that after that time, the world should be renewed, and the devils,
and damned spirits freed, from their torments. This was Origens opinion, and it
was condemned, and judged erroneous, by the 5. Counsel of Constantinople.
Prateol. 378.. 9.

IV. Some express, and explicate this opinion by a (...) or transmigration of
the soul: thus not knowing how to agree amongst themselves.



Bellarmine objects, life eternal is promised to good works, in this verse;
but a promise made with a condition of work, makes that he which fulfils the
work, does deserve the thing promised, and may of right require it as his due,
and deserved reward.

Durande. (in. 2. d. 27. q.) answers singularly two things for us: viz.

I. Promissio divina in Scripturis sanctis, non sonat aliquam obligationem, sed
insinuat meram dispositionem liberalitatis divinae.

II. Quod redditur ex promissione praecedent e non redditur ex merito operis de
condigno, sed s^lum, vel principaliter ex promisso.





First, Primaria, the prime and principal Cause; and that is. God, namely

I. God the Father, who gives it from himself, and from whom all good things
come. John. 3.16. and.5.21. and. James. 1.17.

II. God the Son, who gives it from the Father, yea gives it as the Father.
John. 5.21. and.10.28. Romans 8.10.

III. God the holy Ghost, who gives it from the Father, and the Son, for the
Spirit is life. John. ^.5. Romans 8.10.

And therefore if we desire to be assured of eternal life, let us be careful
to please God the Father, and obey the God Son, and seek after God the holy
Ghost.

Secondly, Impulsiva, the impulsive and moving cause, and, this is the only
mercy of God: And therefore we must not arrogate any thing to our own works,
but laud the mercy, and free grace of God. Ephesians. 1.6.

Thirdly, Medians causa, the isntrumental Cause, or Means, whereby we are
made partakers of this life. Now the means are these.

I. The Spirit of Regeneration, who works the beginning of this spiritual
life. Romans 8.

II. The word of Reconciliation. 2. Cor. 5.20. and salvation. Acts. 18.28.
John. 6.68. Romans 1.16.

III. The Sacraments, because they seal unto us the grace of God, and confirm
our faith.

IV. Hence ye Minister of the word and Sacraments is said to save, and to beget
in Christ, as the Apostle says, 1. Corinthians. 4.15. and. 2. Cor. 5.21. And
therefore if we desire to walk in that way which leads unto him, let us pray
unto God to give us his holy Spirit, let us attend carefully to the preaching,
and reading of the holy word, and approach reverently, and preparedly (when we
are invited) to the holy Sacrament of the Lords holy Supper.

Who shall be made partakers of this life eternal?

First, only the Elect, and faithful. John. 17.9. Acts. 2.47. Romans 11.7.

If it be here demanded, whether the wicked

I answer, they shall, but not unto eternal joy, Daniel. 12.2. Matthew. 25.46.
and 2. These. 1.8.9.

Shall not wicked men rise (at the great day of

They shall rise unto eternal death,

I. It is like death herein; as there is no exemption from death, so there is
no redemption from hell. And

II. In death there are two things; namely

First, Mortis inchoatio the inchoation of death, or the doleful, and strong
pangs of death, now this wicked men have; for the bitter pains of eternal
death are always upon them, and they (with St. Paul in another sense) may
justly say, that they dye daily.

Secondly, Mortis consummatio, in death there is the period, perfecting, and
consummation thereof: Now this wicked men never have, for they are always a
dying, but they never dye.

Secondly all the Elect shall be made partakers

It may here be demanded, whether the joy of

First, in heaven there shall be Par gaudium,

Secondly, in heaven there shall be Impar gradus, different degrees of Glory,
Daniel, 12.3.

When shall the Elect and faithful be made



I. Some said it would be 6000 years after the Creation: of this opinion were
Justinius, Iraenaeus, Hieronymus, Augustinus, Lactantius, Hilarious, Rabbi Elias,
and some heathens.

II. Some said it would be 6500 years after the Creation: and of this opinion
were Cyrillus, Chrysostomus, Hyppolitus, Germanus Constantinopolitanus. Vide
Senens. bibl. Sanct. lib. 5.. 190. page 399.

viz.

I. Tempus Inchoationis. There is the time when they are first interested into
this life; and that is, when they are Regenerated, John 5.24. and 17.3. and 1
Ioh. 3.2. Thus this fruition of life Eternal is begun in this life. Read Romans
5.2. Colos. 3.3. Gal. 2.20.

II. Tempus Possessionis. There is the time, when they enjoy this life in Soul
only, and this is presently after death. When

First, the body rests from labor. Revelat. 14.13. And

Secondly, the soul has a certain perfection.



Nazarens thought (Danaeus) and therefore the soul should never be restored to
the body, or to life, as the Saducees dreamt.

Arabians.

Thirdly, some held that the soul died not, but Senens.. 345. Page. 569. 570.

Fourthly, some held, that the soul enjoyed the Pet Mart. 3. 14. 16. Page. 684.

Fifthly, some hold that the Elect and faithful,

Here some object: God only is immortal, Timoth. 6.16. and therefore the
soul is mortal.

First, God only is Eternal, we only sempiternall: Aparte, ante, and to
everlasting, aparte post: but man had a beginning, although he shall have no
end, because both soul and body shall be conjoined together again at the last
day, and shall endure for ever.

Secondly, God only is the fountain of Immortality,

Thirdly that the soul is immortal and dies

The Scripture says, the soul goes to God, Eccles. 12.7. Revelat. 7.15.
and.14.4. And Stephen commends his soul to God. Acts. 7.59. And CHRIST says,
That man cannot kill the soul. Matthew. 10.28. And. John. 6.40. Christ promises
to the faithful, that they shall be raised up, and made partakers of life
everlasting.

III. Tempus perfectionis, there is the time when the Elect shall absolutely
and perfectly enjoye this life eternal, and that is, in the Resurrection; when
the body and soul shall be united and conjoined together for ever inseparably.

What is this life eternal?

Increate: as is the life of God. Or Create, and is either Natural; as is the
life of the body; or, the life which we lead in the body. Or Spiritual; which
is Inchoate and imperfect in this life. Or Comsummate, and perfect in the life
to come.




John, 17.21. Revel. 21.3.

I. With the humanity of CHRIST. And II. With his Deity. And III. With the
Father, and the holy Ghost John. 17.22.


Romans 8.21. but it is for pleasure and delight, not for necessity or want.

What manner of life shall this everlasting

First, it may be illustrated, and described by the

I. A reward: great is your reward in heaven. And

II. An inheritance Romans 8.17. and. 1. Pet. 1.4. And

III. A crown of glory. 2. Timoth. 4.4, 8. Revelat. 2.10, 11. And

IV. A Kingdom. Matthew. 6.33. Luke. 12.32.

Secondly, it may be illustrated and described

I. By the feast, and banquet of King Ahasverus, joy and melody, and dainties
in all abundance: But yet it fell far short of that felicity which is
reserved in heaven for the righteous.

II. By this world: here observe two things; viz.

First, there are many rare things in the world, which we think to be worth
seeing, and looking upon, worth seeking after, and worth enjoying, and keeping.
Now if there be such excellent things in this world, what is there in the world
to come?

Secondly, there are many and great delights and comforts in this world: Now
Sitalia in carcere, qualia in patria? August. soliloq. cap. 21. If there be
such joys in prison what is there in the heavenly palace, and happy presence
of God?

III. By three places, viz. The womb, the world, and heaven; and that in three
regards; to wit,

First, Respectu Locorum, in regard of the places themselves; here three things
are observable, viz.

I. As the world is more ample, and spacious then the womb; So is heaven more
spacious and large then the world.

II. As the womb is dark, and the world light, in comparison thereof; so the
world is dark in comparison of heaven. A child sees nothing in the womb, but
being come into the world it sees much, yet in comparison of what is sees in
heaven, it sees nothing in the world, as men know more in the world, then in
the womb, so they shall know much more in heaven, then they do on earth.

III. Jn the womb Methusalem continued nine months, in the world 969 years,
but in heaven for ever and ever. As our life ordinarily is longer in the world,
then in the womb, so by much it is longer in the world to come then in this
world.

Secondly, Respectu nostri, in regard of us; here mark two things; namely,

I. As our delight is greater in the world, then in the womb; so it is greater
in heaven then in the world.

II. As our understanding is greater when we are in the world, then when we
are in the womb; so it is greater in heaven then in the world.

Thirdly, Respectu roboris corporalis, in regard of the strength of the body;
as the body ordinarily is stronger in the world, then it is in the womb; so it
is more agile, strong, and quick, in heaven then in the world.

Honor, by the honor thereof, Luke 22.30. and 12.37. 1. Corinthians. 6.3. and Romans
2.10. And

Sociis, by the companions, we shall there have. Daniel 7.10.



Facilius quid non sit (August, de utilit. paenit.) It is more easy to tell
what is not in heaven, then what is: for it passes all humane understanding,
Revelat. 2.17. and 1. Corinthians. 2.9. Acquiri potest, aestimari non potest.
(August. de civ. Dei, 22.) Heaven may be acquired, but it can never be valued
to its worth. Revelations 21.4.



I. We shall be happy in heaven in our bodies* For there

First, we shall be freed from all molestations, and evils of the body; namely,

I. From all afflictions, and dangers: because there shall be security.

II. From all diseases, weaknesses, and old age: because there shall be
complete health and strength.

III. From all hunger and thirst; because we shall then have spiritual bodies,
1. Corinthians. 15.

IV. From death and corruption; because there shall be eternity.

Secondly, in heaven our bodies shall be nimble and quick, as Mr. Perkins
gathers from their sudden ascent into heaven: But this is something curious.

Thirdly, in heaven our bodies shall be beautiful, and fair. Daniel 12.3
Matthew. 13.43. and 17.5. and Mark 12.25.

II. Jn heaven we shall be happy in our souls: For there

First, we shall enjoy a threefold freedom; namely,

I. From sin, and the power thereof: as Ezech. 37.23. And

II. From ignorance and imperfection. And

III. From all weak affections, as anger, fear sorrow, and the like.

Secondly, in heaven we shall have a perfection of gifts. 1. Corinthians. 13.10. And

Thirdly, there we shall have a sight of God, which is our chiefest good (
August. de trinit. cap. 13.) This is that knowledge which John 17.3. speaks
of, and 1. Corinthians. 13.12. and Matthew. 5.6. Hebr. 12.14.

Shall we have a corporal sight of God in heaven, Job seems to affirm, Chap.
19.27. where he says, I know that my Redeemer lives, and that I shall see him
at the last, even with these eyes.

First, that place is spoken of Christ, the Redeemer

Secondly, God has neither flesh nor bones,

Thirdly, this sight of God has in it these four

I. A knowledge of God, and of his decrees: which we shall see as in a glass.

II. The love of God, and of the Elect: and this love is proportionable to the
former knowledge.

III. Joy for the salvation of the Church, and the enjoyment of Gods presence.

IV. Thankesgiving unto God, and loud Hallelujah's, Revelat. 19.1, 3, 4, 6.

What may we learn from the excellency and

First, we may learn to contemn, and despise

Secondly, in miseries, afflictions, and distresses, we may learn hence
comfort, because they are but transitory, and momentany, but the joys of
heaven are eternal.

Philip. 1.23. and 1 John, 3.2.

Matthew. 6.33. As evidently appears thus.

I. If we long for, and lust after wordly things, in Heaven there are greater
and better.

II. If we hunger after spiritual things, in heaven there are perfecter.

III. Jf the reading, and remembrance of the former questions (concerning the
joy and glory of Heaven) delight us, in heaven we shall find them to be true,
yea far exceeding our expression, and expectation.

IV. Jf we desire greater things then has been mentioned, in heaven we shall
have greater then the greatest; and this is a praiseworthy ambition, to
slight the honors of the earth, and to aspire in our affections and
endeavors unto heaven, and the glory thereof. And therefore let us labor to
be regenerated, that we may be glorified.

CHAP. XX.
VERSE. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. For the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a certain
householder, which went out at the dawning of the day to hire Laborers into his
Vineyard. And he agreed with the Laborers for a penny a day, and sent them
into his Vineyard. And he went out about the third hour and saw others
standing idle in the Market place, And said unto them, Go ye also into my
Vineyard, and whatsoever is right, I will give you: and they went their way.
Again he went out about the fixth and ninth hour, and did likewise. And he
went out about the 11th hour, and found others standing idle, and said unto
them, Why stand ye here all the day idle? They said unto him, Because no man
has hired us. He said unto them, Go ye also into my Vineyard, and whatsoever
is right, that shall ye receive.
For the Kingdom of heaven is like unto a Householder.]



Hierome expounds it of those who are called unto grace, at diverse ages; that
is,

First, those who were called in the morning, and sent into the Vineyard, are
those who in their childhood are brought to the obedience of God: whether they
were sanctified in the womb (as was Jeremiah and John) or, whether they begun
to serve the Lord, as soon as they were capable of the use of reason, as did
Samuel.

Secondly, those who were called at the third hour, are those who are
converted unto God, in their youth and adolescencie.

Thirdly, those who were called at the sixth hour, are those who are converted
unto God, in their strength and perfect age.

Fourthly, those who were called at the ninth hour, are those who are
converted unto God, in their declining, and old age.

Fifthl^, those who were called at the eleventh hour, are those who either are
converted unto GOD in their decrepite old age, or at the last hour and period
of their life, as the Thief upon the Cross

Which went out to hire Laborers into his Viney^rd.]



Ierem. 48.10. and therefore are not to be imitated, but rather to be taken
heed of.

Secondly, there are in the Vineyard of the

I. Hypocrites, and Dissemblers, who draw near unto God with their lips, but
are far from him with their hearts, Mark 7.6. Who have a form of
godliness, but deny the power thereof both in their hearts and lives, 2.
Timoth. 3.5. And therefore cause the word of God, and religion to be evil
spoken of. Romans 2. Or,

II. Tyrants, and persecutors, who (like the wild Boar of the Forest) labor
with tooth and nail to destroy, and lay wast the Vineyard. Or

III. Heretics, Schismatiques, and perverse persons, who by their errors and
false opinions, make rents, and breaches in the Church.

Thirdly, there are painful, and faithful Laborers in the viney^ard of the
Church, who endure much pains, take much care, and use the utmost of their
power, that they may be profitable Laborers, and fruitful vines in the Lords
vineyard. And these only are they whom the Lord rewards with an immortal
inheritance.

Fourthly, Cyprian (ex Anton. part. 1. titul. 5. Cap. 2.. 8.) says, that there
are twelve abuses in this vineyard, whereby it is endangered, and harmed: to
wit,

I. A wise man without good works.

II. An old man without religion.

III. A young man without obedience.

IV. A rich man without liberality, and alms deeds.

V. A woman without shame and chastity.

VI. A Master without wisdom.

VII. A Christian which is contentious.

VIII. A pooreman which is proud.

IX. A King which is wicked.

X. A Priest which is negligent.

XI. The common people without discipline.

XII. A people without Law. If the Reader would see all these enlarged, let him
r^^d Antoninus in the place above cited. These Master Warner.

A penny a day.]

That which Caesar exacted of the Jews, was this Denarius or penny (for
Denarius, Didrachma, and Numisma, were all one) and this penny was the ordinary
hire of a workman for a day (as appears by this place) and the daily wages of a
Souldior, as Tacitus says.

We may observe hence, that with the Jews, the day was divided into four
quarters.

The first quarter began at six of the clock in the morning, and hell dtill
nine: and this is here called, the third hour, verse 3.

The second quarter ended at twelve of the clock; and is here called the sixth
hour, verse 5.

The third quarter ended at three in the afternoon; and is called the ninth
hour, verse. 5.

The fourth quarter ended at six of the night, and is called the eleventh
hour, verse 6.

Where note, that the three first quarters, had their names from that hour of
the day, which closed the quarter [for they began the count of their lesser
hours, from six a clock in the morning, and our 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, was their 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.] only the last
was called the eleventh hour by our Savior Christ; whereas among the common
people it either was called, or should have been called by proportion with the
rest, the twelfth hour to intimate unto us, that though God in his mercy
accept laborers into his vineyard eleven hours of the day, yet he seldom
calls any at the 12th. for that is rather an hour to discharge servants,

. 4. Some also at the sixth hour, etc.]

Observe here, that an hour is a certain part of a day; and is either simple
or compound.

First, a simple ho. is either natural or temporary.

I. A natural hour is the four and twentieth part of a natural day.

II. A temporary hour is the twelfth part of an artificial day; are there not
(says Christ, John 11) twelve hours of the day wherein men work? and so here
mention is made of the morning, and 3. 9th. and 11. hours.

Secondly, a compound hour, is a quar. or fourth part of an artificial day;
as was showed in the former Section, where we declared what the first, second,
third, and fourth quar. of the day was, and when they both begun and ended. Now
that which has been said concerning the division of the day and hour, will
serve to reconcile the Evangelists, who seem to differ about the suffering of
Christ: For St. Mark 15.25. says: And it was the third hour when they
crucified him, St. John 19.14. says, it was the preparation of the Passover,
and about the sixth hour they delivered him to be crucified, St. Luke 23.44.
says, It was about the sixth hour, and there was darkness over all the Land.
Now the sum is this, that Christ was crucified at the 3. and 6. hour; the 3.
hour being ended

. 5. He says unto them, go ye also into my Vineyard.

We see here that the Laborers stand all idle until they be called, to teach
us, that the beginning of all grace, and goodness is from Gods call, and not
from our selves. Whence it may be demanded.

Why does God then blame any for disobedience and wickedness? Why does he not
call them,

There is a double call, namely,

First, a general call, by the word Proverb. 1.24. and 8.1.3. etc. and 9.3.
etc. Now every Christian is thus called; and therefore the fault is in
themselves, because they willingly slight and despise this call.

Secondly there is a particular call, and that is when men are inwardly moved
by the Spirit.

Now J persuade my self, that there are none which live under the general
call of the word, but they have also the particular call of the Spirit, which
moves them unto repentance and obedience. Now this particular call is
threefold, viz.

I. Unto the external society of Christ: and thus the Apostles were called to
follow Christ, Matthew 4.19, etc. and 9. And

II. Unto internal grace; and this is twofold; namely,

First, general, from which a man may fall, Mat. 20.16. and 22.14. Galath.
5.13. And

Secondly, real and effectual; Romans 8.28. etc. Cantic. 2.10. and 5.2, 4. And
therefore it is not sufficient for us.

I. To be called generally by the word of God: Or

II. To be called generally by the Spirit of God, for the stony ground heard
with joy. But we must learn and labor,

First, to be changed, and to be made new creatures, 2. Corinthians. 5.17. Gal.
6.15. And

Secondly, to be humbled, by a lowly confession and acknowledgement, yielding
our selves to be the Liege Servants of God, 1. Corinthians. 16.20. And

Thirdly, to deny our selves, Mat. 16.24. And

Fourthly, to labor to bring every rebellious thought in obedience unto the
Spirit, 2. Corinthians. 10.4. And

III. There is a particular call, unto particular callings and functions; and
thus Bezaleel and Aholiab were called; thus Saul and David were called; and
thus Ministers are called to the work of the Ministry.

VERSE. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. And when even was come, with my own?
Is thy eye evil because I am good? So the last shall be first, and the first
last: for many are called but few chosen.
So when Even was come, etc.]

Bellarmine (lib. 1. de Sanctorum beatitudine, cap. 1.) produces this place to
prove that the souls of the Saints do not enjoy the beatificall vision, and
sight of God, until the Resurrection: and he argues thus;



Chrysostom (in hunc locum) admonishes us, not to strain every particular of
a Parable, but only to consider the scope of Christ in the propounding
thereof. Now the scope of our Savior seems to me to be threefold: namely,

I. That all the elect shall be endued with life eternal, at what hour soever
they be called. And

II. To show that the Fathers and Saints in the new Testament labor a shorter
time, then did they in the old: that is, the elect obtain Heaven sooner, and
in fewer years now under the Gospel, then they did under the Law. And

III. To teach us, that not always they who are first called, come first to
Heaven; for often they who are later called, come sooner to their journeyes end.



Give them their hire.]

Bellarmine (de poenit. Lib. 4. Cap. 8.) produces this place for the proof
hereof, arguing thus.

Jf good works may merit or deserve eternal life, then much more may they
avert and turn away temporal punishments.

But the first is true from this place, where the Kingdom of God is called
wages, or reward; and 2. Timoth. 4.8. it is called the crown of Justice, which
God the just Judge shall give: where the Apostles intimates, That it is a reward
justly given to men's deserts.

Therefore good works may much more redeem temporal punishments.



First, St. Paul having first said, The wages of sin is death, adds
further, but the gift of God is eternal life, Romans 6.23. Where he calls it a
gift, and not wages.

Secondly, it is called in this parable, a reward or wages; but not in respect
of the workemans labor, but of Gods covenant and promise. For

I. Jf it were by desert, then he that labored twelve hours had deserved
more, then he that wrought but one. As St. Ambrose says ( de vocat. Gentium.
Lib. 1. Cap. 3.) Hora undecima intromissos in vineam, etc. They which were sent
into the Vineyard at the eleventh hour, the divine indulgence made equal to
the Laborers of he whole day, not paying the wages of their labor, but
pouring out the riches of his goodness, etc. that they which endured much
labor, and received no more then the last, should understand, Se demum gratiae
non operis accepissae mercedem. That they received a gift of grace, not a
reward of the work.

II. The Lord says verse 15. It is not lawful for me to do as I will with my
own? But if they had deserved it, it had been their own.

III. St. Paul directly affirms, that wages is not counted of favor, but of
debt ( Romans 44.) And therefore let the Papists consider, whether they dare say,
That to obtain Heaven is not of Gods favor.

Thirdly, to the testimony of St. Paul we answer two things; to wit,

I. It is a crown of justice, but not of ours, but of the justice of Faith in
Christ: as the Apostle says, verse 7. J have kept the Faith. And

II. It is Gods Justice to give it in regard of his promise, not of our desert,
as Augustine says, Ex misericordia promissam, sed jam ex justitia solvendam;
it was promised of mercy, but is now in justice to be paid. Sermon. 2. de verb.
Apostoli.

The Papists object this place, to prove that call them, and give them their
hire, or wages, or reward; now the name wages, and reward does imply and
include a merit, and desert.

Because the matter of this Objection is answered before in the foregoing
objection,

First, (...), of debt. And

Secondly, (...), of grace; and this distinction is derived from Romans 4.4.
Where the Apostle says, Totidem verbis, To him that works is the reward not
reckoned (...), of grace but of debt. Where we learn, that there is a reward
of grace, and there is a reward of debt; and the reward which is of debt is not
attributed to the works of grace. The Papists say, that there is no reward but
of debt, and therefore if our works shall be rewarded they are meritorious;
But on the contrary we see that St. Paul supposes that there is (...), a
reward of grace, not of debt. Now if i^ be demanded,

How it appears that there is (...),

It is evident from the Hebrew word (gneqeb) which signifies a Reward; Heel,
or back part of the foot; because Merces the Reward, is the end of the work,
and the fruit of the work (which is also the end of the work) And so (...)
signifies both a Reward which is of debt, and more over the fruit of the work,
which is (...) of grace.

. 3. And every man received a penny.]

From this Parable we prove against the Papists, that our works merit not: and
our Argument is this. Jf the reward be given of merit, then for an inequality
of merit, should be given unequal rewards: but unequal rewards are not given;
therefore the reward is not given of merit. The assumption is plain, and
manifest by this Parable, for the works of those who labored the whole day,
and those who wrought but some hours of the day, yea one hour only were
unequal, and yet their reward was equal; for every man received a penny. The
proposition is manifest from the very Doctrine of the Papists. Jf the Reader
would see this Argument prosecuted, let him read Chamierus de operum merito,
Lib. 14. Cap. 18.. 1. etc.

Now that the reward is not given of merit, but of grace, appears thus.

First, those who murmr against the Master, say, That they which were hired
last did not deserve their reward; and therefore it was given freely.

Secondly, the Master says, I will give unto this last, even as unto thee:
Volo huic dare, id est, volo huic donare (ut interpretatur Augustinus Sermon. 59.
de verbis Domini) I will give unto this last, that is, I will bestow upon this
last: now Donare to bestow is not ex meritis dare to give of debt, or for
desert.

Thirdly, the Master says, Is thy eye evil, because I am good? therefore life
eternal is given of goodness, and not of merit. Thus it is evident, that
glory was given to those who were last hired of grace, not of desert.



Similitudo non tenet in omnibus. Christ intends not here to set forth the
equality of Celestial glory, and what shall be the estate of the godly after
this life: but the very drift of the Parable is to show, that they which are
called first, have not cause to brag or insult over others, which as yet are
uncalled, considering that they may be made equal, or preferred before them.
Perkins.



Felton upon Colos. 1.

They murmured against the good man of the house.]





First, against the attributes of God: that is, either,

I. Against his justice; as Ierem. 6.10. Ezech. 18.25.29. Or

II. Against his equality; as Genes. 4.5. and in this verse, Matthew. 20.11. Or

III. Against his truth, Esa. 63.17. Or

IV. Against his goodness. Deuter. 1.27. Or

V. Against his mercy, Esa. 58.3. Or

VI. Against his providence under the name of Fortune. Flesh and blood often
says, we suffer, and God sees it not, or else he cares not for us: Yea, is
there knowledge, and providence in the most high? Or

Secondly, we murmur against the word of God John 6.60. Or

Thirdly, against Religion; because it is either too strict and rigide, or else
because it is false and heretical, Acts 28.22.

Did not those Laborers who were called in

CHRIST answers no:

First, the proposition is this, Friend I do thee no wrong, verse 13.

Secondly, he confirms this, refelling the recrimination of those, who murmr
against him by these five reasons: namely,

I. Because by covenant he ought them no more then a penny, verse 13. where he
seems to argue thus: He is unjust who gives to unequal Laborers an equal
reward against his covenant and bargain: But J have not done it against my
bargain (for J agreed with you all for a penny a day) And therefore I am not
unjust, neither have I done thee any wrong.

II. Because thou have that which thine is, verse 14. Take that thine is, ^iz.
of the Steward: where he argues thus. Jnjury is not done to him who has as
much wages as he agreed for: but thou have as much as thou did agree for;
therefore take that thine is, for thou art not wronged.

III. Because J will give to this last freely as much as I give thee by
covenant, verse 14. where he argues thus, He which gives unto all as much as he
covenanted for, and gives unto some more then they deserve, is bountiful to
some, but unjust to none: But this is all I have done; and therefore I do thee
no wrong.

IV. Because I have absolute right and power over that which is my own, verse
15. and therefore whatsoever L do therewith is done without any injury to thee
at all.

V. CHRIST confirms his proposition by retorting the Ar^ument upon him that
murmures. Thine eye ^^vill because I am good, verse. 15. Thou enviest ^y bounty
and liberality, and thereby art injurious both to me, and them, unto whom it is
extended.

. 5. We have borne the heat of the day.]



An Hebrew day is either natural or artificial.

First, a Natural day is the space of 24 hours, containing also both the
morning and the evening, which are the bonds of every day. Now the Evening is
of two sorts: viz,

I. From the ninth hour to the setting of the Sun.

II. From the setting of the Sun to the shutting in of the night, Levit.
23.5. In the first Month, and the fourteenth day of the Month, between the
two Evenings shall be the Passover of the Lord.

Secondly, an Artificial day, is the space of time from the rising of the
Sun to the setting; and therefore is longer in Summer, and shorter in Winter.
Now the Laborers were hired to work an Artificial, and not a Natural day.

Take that which thine is, and go thy ways.]

As all Scriptures, so this was written for our instruction and admonition; for
some we see here to be rejected of God, but not through any default of his, but
of themselves; that we thereby might learn to beware, least otherwise we fall
into the same fault. For when God calls men unto salvation and life eternal,
they are not then all of one and the same mind.





First, some may but will not hear the word, and call of God; like the Adder
who stops her cares. Read for the proof hereof, Psalm. 85. and 95.8. Romans
10.16. Matthew. 23.37. Now such as these God will never admit unto his glory, and
glorious Kingdom.

Secondly, some embrace the Gospel, for temporal respects: The Lord blessed
Obed-edom and all his house, so long as the Arc was with him, and a blessing
does attend upon those who favor, promote, and embrace the Gospel; and
therefore many accept of the word, that they may be blessed in outward things,
and reject and slight it, when affluence and abundance does not accompany it.
Now unto these the Lord will never give Heaven.

Thirdly, there are many idle persons in the Lords Vineyard who will neither
labor themselves, nor suffer others to work, for an idle man is an impediment
to others, and a disturber of others. Some deride others for their devotion,
and despise all duties and exercises of Religion in themselves; Some will
neither read nor pray privately themselves, nor allow of it in others; but by
scoffs and taunts labor to hinder and deter them.

Fourthly, in the Church there are many proud murmurers, who think more highly
of themselves, then of any other, and persuade themselves, that their deserts
exceed the merit and worth of all other, Esa. 2.12. Now these (with the
murmurer in the text) God will reject, with an abi, Take that which thine is,
and go thy ways.

. 7. Is it not lawful for me to do with my

Some object these words for to prove a lawless liberty to deal with their
own things as they lift: because the Lord says, May I not do with my own as
I will?

First, that which God does is very good; and Paul charge the rich to be rich
in good works, 1. Timoth. 6.18. But it is not lawful to abuse that which we
have, neither do we learn that of our Heavenly Father.

Secondly, this is Gods speech, and his peculiar May I not do with my own,
etc. Whence we learn that the Lord has absolute power over, and right unto
all things, but what we have is but lent unto us. A Lord may do what he will
with his own goods, but a Steward may not do what he will with his Lords: Now
God is the Lord of all things, and therefore may give and distribute them as he
pleases, and to whom he will; but we are but Servants, and Stewards, and
therefore we must use that which we possess, according to the will and pleasure
of our Lord.

. 8. Many are called.]

Our Savior in these words would teach us, Prove. 1.24. etc. and Matthew. 22.14.
Luke 14.8 John 3.19.

Is not the call of God certain? John 13.1. Romans 11.29.

First, there is a certain effectual calling, Romans 8.28.30. and 1. Thessal.
5.24. And

Secondly, there is an ineffectuall calling, Matthew. 13.20. Hebr. 6.4. and
16.26. And this is the calling which is here spoken off.

How is the call hindered?

First, by an error in Judgment: When men Esa. 28.14.) and cry peace peace
unto themselves (1. Thessal. 5.) because they persuade themselves that they are
good enough, ( Luke 18.11.) then they neglect the day of their visitation, and
observe not their call.

Secondly, the call is hindered, by the love of Felix trembles, but yet the
love of Covetousness makes Paul's words of no efficacy with him. Act. 24.26.
When men are drowned in the pleasures of Sin, then they contemn that call of
the Lords, which would reduce and revoke them from sin.

Agrippa was almost persuaded to become a Christian, Acts 26.28. but not all
together. Vult et non vult piger; the sluggard being called and awakened,
answers and to rise, but deferres and procrastinates it, crying, Yet a little
sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep. And
therefore if we desire this effectual vocation: let us,

I. Learn to deny our selves, and to renounce all selfe-confidence, and high
conceits of our own deserts and goodness. And

II. Let us learn to hate all Sin, and that with a perfect hatred. And

III. To cast off all sluggishnesse, and avoid all idle endeavors, and
Soule-killing delays, and with speed, alacrity, and diligence, undertake the
labor of the Lord, and the work of our salvation unto which we are called.

many are called, and but few, are chosen: Now this stands not with the
providence of an all-wise Creator.





I. Hereby he would show, that those who are chosen, are chosen of mere grace,
and not for any merit, or worthiness of their own. And

II. Hereby he would stir up us to give grea-thankes unto him, for so great a
benefit, in choosing us so few, out of so great a multitude of men, unto
eternal life.

And few are chosen.]





First, God has mercy of whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens:
and therefore all are not elected.

Secondly, our Savior here says, Many are called, but few are elected.

Thirdly, few enter into the strait gate Mat. 7.13, 14. But all that are
elected unto life, enter therein. 2. Timoth. 2.19. And therefore all are not
elected, Romans 8.30.

Fourthly, the Apostle says plainly: The election obtained mercy, and the rest
were hardened.

Fifthly, the goats shall go into everlasting fire, which was prepared for
them from the beginning. Matthew. 25. And therefore all were not at the beginning
elected.

Sixthly, universal election is overthrown by these Scriptures. John. 13.18.
and. 15.19. 1. Corinthians. 1.26. and. 2. Timoth. 2.20. John. 17.9. Romans 8.29.

Se^venthly, Election is out of a heap, or mass, or multitude, to segregate,
or choose some things, or some persons: and therefore all are not elected.
Deuter. 7.7. John. 15.19. and. 1. Corinthians. 4.7.

Some demand again, why there are but few

First, who art thou O man that reasonest against Romans 9.23. and. 11.34.

Secondly, we deny that God should have

VERSE. 18. Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be
betrayed unto the chief Priests, and unto the Scribes, and they shall condemn
him to death.
Why was it necessary that CHRIST should be Condemned, and suffer, and dye?

First, because it so pleased God.

Secondly, because so he wrought and purchased

Thirdly, because God so loved the World, John, 3.6.

VERSE. 22, 23. But JESUS answered and said, Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye
able to drink of the Cup that I shall drink of, and to be Baptized with the
baptism that I am baptized with? They say unto him, We are able. And he
says unto them, ye shall drink indeed of my Cup, and be baptized with the
Baptism that I am baptized with; but to sit on my right hand, and on my left,
is not mine to give, but it shall be given to them, for whom it is prepared of
my Father.]
. 1. Ye know not what ye aske]

Wherein did the Sons of Zebedee err in their requests, that our Savior here
blames them? Their petition and request was faulty, and inordinate in three
regards; to wit,



Secondly, because they desired, and dreamt of a carnal Propinquity, and
nearenesse unto CHRIST. And

Thirdly, because out of a certain Presumption and pride they seem to have
made this request: desiring the chiefest place and glory, yea that they might
be preferred before all the other Apostles. Carthus.. page 164. b.

But to sit on my right hand, and on my left is not mine to give.]

Arrians objected this place against the Deity and power of CHRIST, thus; The
Mother of Zebedees children, desiring that one of her Sons might sit at
Christ's right hand, and the other at the left, in the Kingdom of him: he
answers, To sit on my right hand and on my left, is not mine to give, but it
shall be given to them for whom it is prepared of my Father.

Therefore CHRIST is not omnipotent, or of absolute power, and consequently is
not God.

Zebedees Children desired these things out of a humane affection,
acknowledging CHRIST only to be a man, and his Kingdom some Kingdom of this
world: Now our Savior answers in her sense, that as he is man, it is not his
to give: so before, when the young man called him good, he answered there is
none good but one, that is God.: because the young man did only attribute unto
him a humane goodness.



It is not mine to give, he speaks not of the power of giving, that he might
take it from himself, or deny it to be in himself, for a little before he
had promised his Apostles that they should sit (at the day of Judgment) upon
twelve Thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. And therefore he does
not speak of Power, or what he could do, but only shows that it did not
become him, neither was convenient to give them that which they desired; for
rewards are to be given to those who work, and crowns to those who contend
for the victory. Yea, because the Sons of Zebedee (either out of their own
ambition, or their Mothers) did peculiarly beg that for themselves, which was
promised to all the Faithful: therefore CHRIST the just Judge could nor, or
might not give that which was unjustly demanded: And lastly, it did not become
Christ to sooth up them in their ambition, seeing he did (when occasion offered
it self) dehort others from ambition. Sincler. de filio Dei, lib. 2. page 109.
b.

This place serves to confute the popish, Bellarmine (de Sanct. lib. 1. cap.
10.) says, That of Saints some are canonized, that is, publicly allowed to be
Saints; and some are not canonized, or received into the Calendar: and the
difference between them is this; Canonized Saints who are either generally by
the Pope so canonized, for the whole Church, or more specially by a Bishop for
his Province, or Diocese, may be publicly prayed unto, Temples built in their
names, their Holy days yearly remembered, and their Relics preserved in
Churches to be adored: but none of these things may publicly be exhibited to
not Canonized Saints, unless privately only.

First, neither Canonized nor Uncanonized

Secondly, it is grossly absurd to say, That it Ezech. 8.10.

Thirdly, if they be Saints, why are they not

Fourthly, who gave them such power to canonize To sit at his right hand, or
his left, is not his to give: How then dare the Pope, or any Prelate presume to
do that, which CHRIST assumeth not, as he is man?

. 3. But it shall be given unto them, for

We showed before, verse 16.. 9. qu. 1. Now this verse serves for another
Argument to confirm the negative, which we there (according to Scripture, and
from Scripture) maintained to be the truth. Our Savior here says, The
Kingdom of God shall be given unto them, for whom it is prepared of my
Father: whence it is clear, that the Kingdom of God is not prepared for all,
but for some. St. Paul also shows, That there are vessels of wrath prepared
to destruction, and vessels of mercy prepared unto glory: all therefore are not
vessels of mercy, neither are all prepared to glory. If the Reader would see
how this Argument is answered by Snecanus, and Huberus, and how their answers
may be answered, let him read Dr. Willets Synops. page 896. 897.

VERSE. 25.26. But JESUS called them unto him, and said; Ye know that the
Princes of the Gentiles, exercise dominion over them, and they that are great,
exercise authority upon them But it shall not be so among you: but whosoever
will be great among you, let him be your Minister.
The Lords of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them.]

St. Bernard applied these very words to Pope Eugenius in this manner: It is
plain (says he) That here dominion is forbidden the Apostles; how then dare
you take upon you rule and Apostleship, or in your Apostleship rule and
dominion, for if you will have both alike you shall loose both; otherwise you
must not think your self exempted from the number of them, of who^ the Lord
complains thus: They have reigned but not of me; they have been, but I have
not known them.

But it shall not be so among you.]

The Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over others etc. but it shall
not be so among you.

Bellarmine answers, that our Savior does not here prohibit rule and dominion,
but a tyrannical and violent domination, and Lordship, as appears by the word
here used (...).

Zebedee desired: but they did not desire power or license to rule tyrannically
over the rest, but only Primacie and dominion.

Luke. 22.25. where in the same sense (...) is used without the proposition.
Amesius. Bell. enerv. tom. 1. Page. 280.

Peter. 1. Peter. 5.2, 3. exhorts them to feed the flock of God, etc. neither
as being Lords over Gods heritage. Therefore all imparity in the Ministry, is
contrary to the rule of the word.





Ephesus and Creet, and some other places, primary pastors, unto whom was given
the power of jurisdiction, not only over the laics, but even also over the
inferior Ministers of the same Churches: And therefore neither Christ nor
Peter would destroy the difference of degrees among Ecclesiastical persons;
but granting a pastoral priority, and paternall superiority to the Apostles,
and their successors the Bishops, does only forbid them to use a Regal or
Lordlike power, either over CHRIST'S Ministers, or Gods people, who are under
their rule and government. Bp. Daven. Determ. qu. 42. page. 193.

VERSE. 28. Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.
. 1. Even as the Son of man came not to be

CHRIST having before dissuaded his Apostles from ambition, and the desire of
ruling, and domineering over others, does now further enforce it by his own
example, and humility.

Wherein did the humility of Christ's ministry show it self?

First, in the assuming, and taking upon him Corinth. 8.9. Philip. 2.7.

Secondly, in his life, and ministry, he not

Thirdly, his humility showed it self, in his

. 2. And to give his life for a ransom.]

What is the meaning of these words?

That he gave himself to be a sacrifice for our guilt; per modum Redemptionis,
by paying our ransom, but also per modum Satisfactionis: for he who undergoes
death for one that is guilty thereof, and by his death frees him from
punishment, does redeem him Per modum satisfactionis. and thus CHRIST has
redeemed his children Per modum Redemptionis (because he has freed them from
the captivity of Satan) and also Per modum satisfactionis, because he has
delivered them from that punishment, which they were subject unto, Lubertus
contra Socinum. If the Reader would see, how this verse is urged for imputed
righteousness, and how it is excepted against by Bellarmine, and his exception
answered, let him read, Bp. Davenant de justitia habit. Cap. 28. Page 364.

Our Savior in this place speaking directly, and clearly of the Redemption of
his children from sin, Satan, the curse of the Law, and the wrath of the
Lord; it will not be amiss to answer briefly a question or two, concerning
Redemption.

How manifold is Redemption.

Twofold viz. First, of the Soul from sin. Secondly, of the body from death,
John 1.29. Revelat. 20.5, 6. To this purpose Bernard says, Qui enim resurgit
in anima, resurget in corpore ad vitam: He that arises in soul from sin,
shall arise in body unto Salvation.


Wherein does our Redemption consist?



First, by suffering the punishment due to sin, which is the curse of God. And

Secondly, by the perfect keeping of the Law, without which there can be no
deliverance from sin, and Satan, Galath. 3.10, 12. And therefore we cannot
redeem, or free our selves from condemnation. Hebr. 9.22. and. 12.14. And
consequently the opinion of popish merit is quite overthrown.



John. 3.16. Acts. 4.12. Romans 5.8. and. 1. John. 5.12.



Matthew. 11.12. Luke. 2.10. Romans 1.16.





Alia atque alia ratione, not after one and the same, but after a diverse
manner. For

I. God redeemes us, but is by Christ. But

II. Christ redeemes us, by himself.





Socinus answers, that five things are necessarily required unto a true,
proper, and real Redemption, and if that one of these five conditions be
wanting, it is no Redemption properly. His necessary conditions are these viz.

First, there must be some who are redeemed.

Secondly, there must be some, who does redeem.

Thirdly, there must be some from whom, or from whose power, the captives are
redeemed.

Fourthly, there must be some price paid. And

Fifthly, this price must be paid to him who keeps the Captives in captivity.
These things, says Socinus, are necessarily required in a proper and real
Redemption, and we gainesay it not because all these are found in our
Redemption by CHRIST. For

I. It is man who is redeemed: and to this purpose St. Paul says, He has
redeemed US. Gal. 3.13. Titus. 2.14.

II. It is Christ who redeemes us: as is laid down in the same places of St.
Paul.

III. It is principally the Lord, from whose curse and malediction man is
redeemed; and less principally he is delivered from Satan, an evil
conversation, iniquity, death, and malediction, as it is taken for the
punishment of sin. Read for this purpose. Romans 11.32. and.1.24. Galath. 3.22.
Revel. 14.10. and. 20.2.14.15. where it is said. Death, and hell, and whosoever
was not found written in the book of life, were cast into the lake of fire. By
whom were they cast? by God: therefore God, not the devil holds men in
captivity; For he properly keeps captive, who has power to inflict the
punishment of death and condemnation upon him who is in captivity: Now this
power only the Lord has.

IV. Christ himself who was slain and offered for us, is the price of our
Redemption. Matthew. 20.28. and. 1 Timothy 2.6.

V. And lastly, this price must be paid unto God (not unto Satan) whose
debtors we are, and whom we have offended. Hebr. 9.14. and. 10.9. For the price
and debt is to be paid to him that lays in Prison, and not to the Jailer that
detaines and keeps in prison. Lubertus contr. Soc.

VERSE 30, 31. And behold two blind men sitting by the way side, when they heard
that JESUS passed by, cried out saying, Have mercy on us Oh Lord thou Son of
David. And the multitude rebuked them, because they should hold their peace:
but they cried so much the more, saying. Have mercy on us Oh Lord thou Son of
David.
. 1. And behold two blind men sitting by the

Whether is this an Historical, or an Allegorical

Although undoubtedly it be a real truth,

What is observable in the Allegory?

First, the state of man after the fall; For by

I. We are (like these men) blind in our understandings, Caeti.
and blockishly ignorant in Spiritual things.

II. We (like these) are beggars, in grace, Iuxta vias.
being herein miserably poor, deprived of all grace, virtue, and goodness,
and strangers from the favor of God.

III. We (like these) sit, doing nothing, Sedetes.
being dead in works: for so long as we are natural we are dead in sin, and
so long as we are dead in sin, we are as unable to work spiritual works
well, as a man corporally dead is to work corporal or natural works.

I. CHRIST passes by. II. We hear the noise. III. We ask what the matter is.
Mark. 10. IV. We then cry, and beg, and sue for mercy. V. We have many
impediments, which hinder us from being heard for a time. VI. Yet if we
continue crying; Christ will First, call us: And then Secondly, take pity of
us. And Thirdly, help us. But I pass by these.





First, if a man should walk in a way, and before him should be a deep pit,
and on one side of him a rich treasure, and he see neither, but neglects the
treasure, and falls into the pit: who would say, but this man were certainly
blind? Thus we walk in the way of the world, seeing neither the heavenly
treasure that is reserved for the righteous, nor the infernal torment which is
prepared for the wicked, but neglect the one, and engulfe our selves into the
other; and therefore it is evident that we are blind. Secondly, who will say
that he sees, who is not able to discern between light and darkness,
between gold and burning coals? Thus the natural man cannot understand
spiritual things. 1. Corinthians. 2.4. but chooses the burning coals of this
world, yea even of hell, neglecting the celestial gold of life eternal.
Natural men prefer the darkness of fables and humane traditions, before
the light of the word; yea death before life, and hell before heaven: and
therefore who will deny, but that they are blind? Thirdly, the blind man knows
not whether he goes, ignorant which way to turn, yea often running against a
wall. Thus by nature being ignorant of the word and will of God, we know not
whether we go, we know not how to serve God aright, ^or when we do well. And
therefore who will deny, but that great is our blindness? Fourthly, the blind
often stumble, and easily fall: so as long as we remain in our natural
blindness, and ignorance, we frequently fall into one sin or other, not
being able to cease from sin. 2. Peter. 2.14. And therefore our deeds of
darkness, and works of the flesh do show, that we are as blind in souls,
as these men in the text were in their bodies.






First, let us acknowledge and confess unto our God, our spiritual
blindness, and how ignorant we are in divine and celestial things.

Secondly, let us seek for, and enquire after the Physician of our souls, who
is able to open our blind eyes. If it be demanded, Who this is? Moses, the
Patriarks, Prophets, Evangelists, Apostles, Confessors, and Martyrs, answer
with one mouth, that it is JESUS the Son of David, who is the light of the
world, and which enlightneth every one that comes into the world. John. 1.9.
Isa. 35.5. and.61.1.

Thirdly, we must ingenuously confess this Physician; as these did, Jesus thou
Son of David: we must not be ashamed to confess and acknowledge him before
men, who is able to deliver us, both from the wrath of God, and the rage of
men, and this our extraordinary natural blindness. Acts 26.18.

Fourthly, with blind Bartimeus we must cast away our cloakes, and reject and
shake off whatsoever may hinder us from coming unto Christ. Hebr. 12.1. we
must take up our crosses, and deny our selves, and follow CHRIST; and we must
lay down our pleasures, and profits, if they keep us from Christ. But of this
something has been said before, Chapt, 5. and 7. and therefore J enlarge it
no further.

When, or about what time did this History

It was after Christ's departure from Jericho, verse 29. and Mark 10.46.

St. Luke 18.35. says it was, when he came Jericho: and therefore how may the
Evangelists be reconciled?

First, the omitting of some circumstances overthrowes

Secondly, it is very likely, that these blind Jericho, and although he heard
them, yet he would not answer them (for the trial of their perseverance)
until his return from thence: and thus thinks Calvin. And thus before Chap.
9.28. Two blind men cry after him in the way, but he answers them not until
he come into the house.

St. Matthew says here; there were two blind Mark and Luke there was but one;
and therefore how can they be reconciled in this particular?

First, it may be at the first, there was but one,

Secondly, it may be there were two, yea certainly Bartimens is named, either
because he was better known, or more famous, or more clamorous, running faster
and crying louder after CHRIST, then the other did.

Thirdly, Omne majus continet in se minus; Matthew says there was two, St.
Mark and St. Luke say, there was one (not that there was but one only) now
where there are two there is one.

Fourthly, the holy Scriptures are not strict in the observing of numbers, but
are wont to neglect them: and thus our Evangelist, Chapt. 8.28. says. There
were two possessed with Devils, and St. Mark. 5.1. and. St. Luke. 8.26. say,
There was one.



Mark and St. Luke answer, to beg of those who came by, Mark. 10.46. Luke.
13.35.

Deuteronomy. 15.7. and that order was taken for the providing for them, Deuter.
24.12. etc.









When they heard that Jesus passed by, cried out.]



viz.

First, they hear a great noise, or tumult, or course of people. And

Secondly, because they know not what it means, they ask; where we see that
hearing, and enquiring are the causes of their sight: To teach us,

Luke. 3.11. Acts. 2.37. and. 8.34. and. 10.33. and. 13.15.42. and. 16.30. and.
17.11. Romans 10.14.



viz.

I. The malice of Satan, in the Popish Priests, or the sathanicall malice of
the Popish Priests, against the Laity: for they neither prohibit them to
drink, nor live, nor marry with Protestants, but only to pray, and hear, and
ask them questions concerning Religion, and these they are charged strictly to
avoid which I conceive they have learnt from Sergius in his Alcoran, who
prohibited the Turks to dispute of Religion with any but of their own sect.

II. We may observe the misery of those mislead, and miserable seduced Papists,
who obey, and follow this prohibition of their Priests, thinking that they do
God good service, when they abstain from the hearing of his holy word.

Secondly, they are faulty here among us, who

Why did the blind men cry unto Christ?

First, perhaps because CHRIST as man could

Secondly, because he was hindered by some

That we must pray fervently. Here observe

First, CHRIST'S knew of their blindness before, but yet he would be sued, and
sought unto Yea

Secondly, although they pray unto him, yet he does not at first incline unto
them, until they cry. Yea

Thirdly, he does not lend an ear to their clamours by and by, but (in all
probability) deferres to grant their requests till after he returned from
Jericho, as Chap. 9.28. And what is the reason of all this? Because he would
have us importunate. Hence then learn

That God is delighted with importunate Matthew. 7.7. Romans 12.16. and. 1.
Thessal. 5.17. and James. 1.6.

Who are here blameworthy?

First, those who neglect public prayers with

Secondly, those who neglect private prayers at

Thirdly, those who pray perfunctorily, and

Why do these blind men cry, or Wherefore?

They cry for a temporal blessing,

That prayer is the remedy for the removal

First, Supernatural; whether they be

I. Corporal, as witchcraft, enchantment, and the like. Or

II. Spiritual, as temptations, check of conscience, trouble of mind, and the
like. Now prayer only is the remedy against both these. Or

Secondly. Natural; here neither prayer alone is to be used without ordinary,
and lawful means, (that being presumption) nor is the means to be used
without prayer (that being carnality) but we must use the means, and then pray
unto God for a blessing.

Who are here to be taxed as faulty, and blameworthy?











Thou Son of David.]

We see here how the blind men acknowledge CHRIST to be the promised Messiah,
who was promised under a double name, namely,

First, sometimes under the name of David, as Ierem. 30.9. Ezechiel 34.23. Hos.
3.5.

Secondly, sometimes under the name of the Son of David: as Esa. 9.6. and
16.5. Ierem. 23.5. And 23.15. Matthew 22.4^. John 7.42. Matthew. 12.23. and 2^.9.
and 15.22.

Have mercy upon us.]

Not my will but thy will be fulfilled: for we must prescribe nothing unto God,
who is infinite in mercy, love, wisdom, and knowledge, but subunt our wills to
the will of God.



And the multitude rebuked them.]



They did not rebuke them for begging of men, but for praying unto Christ,
whence we learn: That impediments in good things are always ready at hand.
Matthew. 13.27.





I. Tentando ad^^ala, by tempting us unto that which is evil; namely,
pleasure, honor, gain, ease, the love of the world, and the li^^.

II. Terrend^^ poni^, by afrighting ^e from that which is good, by injuries,
derisions, persecutions, and the like.

Secondly, the flesh: now this apprehends the tentations, provocations, and
allurements of the

Thirdly, the Devil, who hinders us, by casting

What may we learn from this multiplicity of

From thence we may learn four things, namely First, where there are no lets,
Secondly, where there are many impediments and lets, it is a sign that the
work which is so withstood is good and godly, righteous, and religious. And
therefore the children of God should not be disheartened with the multitude of
Remorses in the service of the Lord, but rather encouraged and comforted
thereby, because those impediments approve the work to be good. Thirdly, to
expect lets, and hindrances in the performance of good works, that we may the
better learn to prevent and avoid them. Fourthly, to resist them manfully,
because otherwise we shall never do any good work well. And therefore two
things are here required of us; to wit, I. Resolution; certainly many perish
for want of this; and therefore we must resolve with our selves, that nothing
shall hinder us from the service of our God, and he performance of the good
duties which we ow^ unto him whether public or private. II. Watchfulness; for
it (...) two cannot well be severed; we cannot be watchful indeed without
Resolution, and our resolution is idle, without watchfulness Read Luk* ^^ 42.
and 1. Peter. ^.8. If a man know that he has an enemy, who observes and marks
both his words and deeds, he will be the more careful and watchful both over
himself, and life and actions and words that so he may have no advantage over
him. Thus should we do, because we have an enemy* that sleeps not, but
watches daily for our destruction.



. 6. Because they should hold their peace.]

In these words (...) have two things observable, namely,

First, the end of the reproof. And

Secondly, the causes of the reproof.

First, we have in these words the end of the reproof, and this is expressed;
They rebuked them for crying after Christ, that so they might hold their peace
and abstain from praying unto our Savior. To teach us,

That Satan chiefly desires to hinder our prayers: Thus he made the Apostles
drowsy, when they should have prayed with their Master, Matthew. 27.







been esse and well performance of them.

Annah from praying, or, to have distracted her in praying, to hear the high
Priest say she was drunk: and no less was it unto Daniel, to know that death
did awaite him, if he prayed unto his GOD within so many days.



I. By the Seminaries of mischief, the Jesuits, who persuade Papists not to
pray with us either publicly or privately, if they can possibly avoid it. Or

II. By our own sectaries at home, the Enthusiastes and others, who dissuade
men from praying until the Spirit move them, which often as but once in a
week, or fortnight, and sometimes longer.



I. Sometimes our bodies through drowsinesse, and sleepiness, will not permit
us to pray.

II. Sometimes our minds are upon other matters, and we neither mark nor
observe what requests we power forth unto GOD.

III. Sometimes we mark what we say, but yet the sacrifice of our prayer is
not offered up with fervor, and the fire of zeal. And

IV. Sometimes we are affected with wearisomenesse and tediousness in our
prayers. And therefore we had need strive manfully against all these
impediments, that we be not by them hindered from praying and well praying.

Secondly, we have now to consider the causes, why the multitude would have had
these blind men to have held their peace: namely,

First, because they thought it was a shame for CHRIST to entertain any
discourse with beggars; but CHRIST himself thought not so. Or

Secondly, because they thought that they had cried after Christ for an alms,
and so to ease and free him thereof, they bid them hold their peace: but he
gives unto them what they desire. Or

Thirdly, because Christ held his peace, when the blind men cried after him,
therefore ^^e multitude thinking that CHRIST took their clamours in all pa^^,
bi^d^^ them hold their peace: but CHRIST is silent only for the ^ryall of
their says and perseverance. Or

Fourthly, because by their cries they disturbed CHRIST in his preaching to the
people: and therefore the multitude bid them hold their peace: but CHRIST
preferres mercy before sacrifice. Or

Fifthly, because the Scribes and Pharisees could not endure to hear them call
Christ the Son of David, (that is, the Messiah) therefore they charge them to
hold their peace.

. 7. But they cried so much the more.]

Jn this History observe these three things; namely,

First, the blind men cry unto Christ, but he seems not to hear them at all.

Secondly, they persevere, and continue crying, but yet they gain nothing
thereby.

Thirdly, afterward (as though they had done some evil thing) they are
reproved and blamed by the multitude, for their prayers. Yet notwithstanding
all this they do not desist, but are so much the more fervent in their
prayers, as is here plainly expressed, and they cried so much the more.

How many things are herein employed?

Two, namely.

First, their perseverance; they give not over, but continue praying. To teach
us,

That we must be perseverant in prayer, and Romans 12.12. and 1. These. 5.17. Luke
18.1. etc. Matthew. 7.7. and 26.42, 44.

Why must we continue thus in prayer?

First, because God by withholding from us

Secondly, because if we persevere in prayer, we

I. We can obtain nothing without perseverance. And

II. If we persevere in prayer, we shall obtain what we desire. Hitherto
(says Christ) ye have asked nothing in my name, but ye have obtained it, John
14. and 1. John 4.16.

Thirdly, we must continue in prayer, because James commands all to pray, when
they are afflicted. James 5.12. Yea

Fourthly, we must continue in prayer, because

I. It is the service of God. And

II. The solace of the soul. And

III. The remedy against evil.

Secondly, the next thing implied in these words (And they cried so much the
more) is the fervor and zeal of the blind men. Whence we learn,

That we ought to pray fervently, as well as Romans 12.12. H^^ observe these
things, namely,

I. We stand in need of many things, but we can expect nothing without prayer,
James 4.2. Jf we would have, we must ask, Matthew. 7.7. For prayer is the cause
and condition, without which we cannot, and by which we may obtain any thing
at Gods hand; and therefore it is necessary that we should pray.

II. We are hindered from good things by Satan, who is expelled and driven away
by prayer alone: and therefore great reason there is that we should pray.

III. It is the remedy against temptation; as appears by our Saviors
admonition, Pray, lest ye enter into temptation. And therefore if we would be
preserved from sin, we must pray.

IV. Prayer is a part of Gods worship, and service; now he is to be worshipped
in spirit and truth, and served with all the heart, and with all the soul: And
therefore we must offer up unto him spiritual, hearty, and fervent Prayers.

CHAP. XXI.
VERSE. 5. Tell ye the Daughter of Sion, Behold thy King comes unto thee,
meek, and sitting upon an Ass, and a Colt, the Foale of an Ass.
Our Savior here by calling himself a King, ministers occasion unto us to
consider a little of his Kingdom, and the nature thereof; because King and
Kingdom are Relata.



Psalm. 2.6. Daniel 2.44. Luke 1.36.



viz.

I. Jn respect of all ages, Matthew. 22.43, 44, 45. For it has been from the
beginning, and shall be unto the end of the World.

II. Jn respect of all sorts of men which belong unto this Kingdom: for there
are some of all nations, and vocations which belong thereunto, Daniel 7.14.
Revelat. 17.4.

III. Jn respect also of all creatures, inasmuch as they belong unto the good
of Gods chosen, and promote or help forward their salvation, Ephesians. 1.21, 22.

Romans 14.17. Yea

Revelat. 1.18.

Daniel 2.44. and 7.14.

Esa 9.6. Ephesians. 2.16. Hebr. 7.2. And hence this Kingdom is called in
Scripture, sometimes the Kingdom of God, sometimes the Kingdom of peace and
glory, sometimes the Kingdom of light and glory, and sometimes the Kingdom of
heaven, and the world to come, Hebr. 2.5.



Ecce, Behold: Tell ye the Daughter of Sion; Behold thy King comes unto thee
meek, etc. It must needs breed and beget admiration in us, if we do but
consider these things; viz.

I. Who comes? The King of glory, and the glory and splendour of the Father.

II. Unto whom does he come? Unto those who drink iniquity like water, Job.
15. And therefore Christ's coming unto us, is no other, then

First, the coming of light to darkness. And

Secondly, the coming of righteousness, to unrighteousness. And

Thirdly, the coming of life to death. And therefore how can we but admire it?
Elizabeth wondered whence it was, that the Mother of her LORD should come and
visit her; and we have much more cause to admire, why the Lord himself will
come to visit us.

Secondly, the Subjects of this King or Kingdom, Thy King comes unto thee.
Every Christian should labor to make of this Tibi a Mihi; that so they might
say, My LORD CHRIST has come Mihi, to me, for this will afford true and solid
joy.

Wherein must we rejoice?

First, in prayer, because whatsoever we beg in King we shall obtain.

Secondly, in anxiety and sorrow for our sins, That this King came into the
World for the salvation of Sinners.

Thirdly, in tentation, because we have a King Satan in us.

Fourthly, in persecution, poverty, sickness, and

Here it may be objected, oh but he deferres long; for J have been in misery,
and prayed unto him,

First, be not dismayed, For he that shall come will come, and will not tarry,
if he see deliverance





Here J am poor, there shall J be rich.

Here J am sick, there J shall be sound.

Here, J am contemned, there J shall be honored.

Here, J am crowned with Thorns, there J shall be crowned with glory: for the
remembrance of these and the like, will expel all sense of humane sorrow.

Hose. 14.13.) and because it brings us to the presence of this King, and the
possession of this Kingdom.

Hosanna to the highest, as if they would say, Grant oh eternal God, that this
thy King may be acknowledged, and worshipped by all men. And to this purpose
we are taught to pray, Thy Kingdom come.

King, must help forward this Kingdom themselves, as much as in them is. Thus
some of the multitude here spread their garments in the way, and those (as is
probable) which had no garments to spare, cut down branches, and strewed them
in the way: And thus according to our ability we must do good, and thereby
labor to advance and enlarge this Kingdom.

VERSE. 8, 9. And a very great multitude spread their garments in the way,
The Papists upon Palme-Sunday, Quiristers; and all this they would warrant by
this practice of the multitude in the text. Rhemist. annot. Matthew. 31.. 1.

First, we say that their processions are horrible

Secondly, that which CHRIST'S Disciples, and Prophesied of Zach. 9.9. And the
Childrens crying out in the Temple, Psalm. 8.2. And the cutting down of Palm
branches was a Ceremony belonging to the Feast of Tabernacles, truly
accomplished by our deliverance in CHRIST. But the Papists have turned the holy
mystery of CHRIST'S riding to Jerusalem, to a May Game, and Pageant-play.

To whom were the multitude opposite, or contrary

To the Scribes and Pharisees: First, Blessed is he that comes in the name of
the Lord. Secondly, Blessed is the King of Israel, and blessed is the Kingdom
of our Father David, which comes in the name of the Lord. Thirdly, these desire
the prosperity and flourishing estate of this King. Fourthly, these rejoice,
and sing praises unto God, for sending of this King.
But the Pharisees cry First, Cursed is he who comes in the name of
Beelzebub. Secondly, we have no King but Caesar, and he that favors any other
is not Caesar's friend; and therefore this man shall not reign over us.
Thirdly, these desire that this King were destroyed, and all his glory laid in
the dust. Fourthly, these disdain the honor, and esteem of this King, and
are sorry for it.




Plutarch making mention of this Festivity, says, That these Boothes were made
principally of Ivy boughs ( Plut. Sympos. 4. Problem. 5.) But the Scripture
reckons up four distinct kinds, Levit. 23.40. which are thought to be.

I. The Citrine Tree.

II. The Palm Tree.

III. The Myrtle Tree.

IV. The Willow of the Brook.

P Fag. in Lev. 23.
The Rabbines teach, that every man brought every morning his burden of the
boughs of these four Trees, otherwise he fasted that day. And this burden
they termed Hosanna (Elias Thisbit) Now in allusion hereunto, the people here
cutting down branches from the trees; and strewing them in the way, when our
Savior did ride into Jerusalem, cried, saying Hosanna to the Son of David.

VERSE. 16. Jesus says unto them,
The Papists produce this place to prove that prayers which are not understood
of the party praying are acceptable unto God: and they reason thus, young
childrens prayers proceeding from the instinct of Gods Spirit, be acceptable:
and so the voices of the like, or of other simple folk now in the Church,
though themselves understand not particularly what they say, be marvailous
grateful to CHRIST. Rhem. annot. Math. 21.. 4.



Hosanna in the highest, spoke in the Syrian tongues, which they understood,
and also knew, that they saluted our Savior CHRIST, as their Messiah, whose
coming they were taught according to the Scripture to look for; although they
understood not distinctly all mysteries of Christ's office, which none of his
Apostles did thoroughly know, at this time.



Psalmist names infants, and sucklings, that can neither speak, nor
understand.

Fulke.

VERSE. 19. And when he saw a Figtree in the way, he came to it, and found
nothing thereon, but leaves only, and said unto it, Let no fruit grow on thee
hence forward for ever. And presently the fig tree withered away.
We say that although the Jewish Church be now but like a withered tree, yet
it shall flourish again hereafter.

Never fruit grow upon thee henceforth; And therefore it seems that this tree,
and that Church shall never flourish again.



VERSE. 22. And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in Prayer,
. 1. And all things whatsoever ye shall ask

Our Savior in these words does plainly point out this Observation unto us,

That true and Lawful prayer never wants his effect.

How does the truth hereof appear?

Most evidently from these particulars, to wit, First, from these places of
Scripture. Psalm. 22.24. and 50.15. John. 16.24. James. 5.16. and Ierem. 29.13.
Amos. 5.4, 6. Secondly, from the truth of God, who is faithful in all his
Promises. 1. These. 5.24. Hebr. 6.10. Thirdly, from the ordinance of God, it
being the means appointed by GOD, for the obtaining of what we want. John.
14.13. and 16:24. and in this verse. Fourthly, from the mercy of God, who is
always ready to supply our wants, and only waits until we pray. James.
4.2. Fifthly, from the force and efficacy of prayer; whereof we spoke before,
Chap. 6. Sixthly, from an absurdity which otherwise would follow; for if we
have no certainty of the hearing of our prayers, then we can have no confidence
at all. For I. We have none in heaven or earth, to trust unto but only unto
God. Psalm. 73.25. II. We cannot see him, for none has seen him at any time.
III. Our only way unto him is by prayer: and therefore of all men we are the
most miserable, if we be unsure of his Love to help us, or that he will
hear us, and grant our requests. But the contrary (that is, the assurance of
the faithful to be heard) is evident from these places. 2. Chronic. 14.7. and
15.2, 15. Psalm. 118.5. and. 120.1. Esa. 38.5.



Whence comes it, that the prayers of many are

Jf we be not heard, we must know, God is near unto all those who call upon
him faithfully, Psalm. 145.18. But more particularly if our prayers be not
heard, the reason thereof is one of these, either.

First, because we are wicked and unbelievers: for the prayers of such are
abominable unto him, but the prayers of the Righteous are his delight. Prove.
15.29. Psalm. 145.19. Or

Secondly, because our requests are not lawful; that is, when either

I. We desire those things which are not good; as when we pray for revenge. Or

II. When we desire those things, which stand not with Gods glory, neither
suite with our good. Or

III. When we desire those things which are not necessary, but superfluous;
serving for the satisfying of our lusts, Psalm. 50.15. and 120.1. and 116.3, 4.
and 18.6. Or

Thirdly, because we are not aright prepared to pray; that i^, when either

I. We pray without any meditation and examination at all, not considering and
pondering either how we must pray, or for what. Or

II. When we pray with our sins upon us, and in us: as the people did, Josh.
7. and. 1. Tim. 28. Or

III. When we are not fit to receive such a grace as we pray for: as for
example, we pray for a sight and assurance of the blessed Spirit in our hearts,
but we must not expect the assurance and apprehension thereof, until we have
seriously undertaken to work out the work of our salvation, yea until
renovation, holy affections, zeal, and the like graces be wrought in our
hearts. Or

Fourthly, because our prayers are not faithful: Here observe, that unto a
faithful prayer these things are necessarily required; namely

I. Self-denial, and all selfe-confidence; praying only in the name of
Christ. John. 14, 13. And

II. A sure confidence and affiance in God, that if we ask those things which
are agreeable unto his will, he will hear us. Mark. 11.24. Hebr. 10.22. And

III. The aid and assistance of the holy Spirit; for if we pray in the holy
Ghost, our prayers shall be heard. Jude. 20. Or

Fifthly, because we beg things peremptorily, and not with a subordination to
the will of God. Or

Sixthly, because we do not persevere in our prayers, but quickly grow weary.
And therefore if we desire that our prayers may be always efficacious, and
fruitful; let us labor.

I. That our persons may be holy and pure. And

II. That our requests may be lawful; that is, Let us desire

First, always those things which are good in themselves. And

Secondly, only those things which may stand with Gods glory, and our good. And

Thirdly, only necessary things. And

III. That we may be rightly prepared before we pray: that is, we must

First, meditate of our wants, and the nature of him to whom we pray. And

Secondly, we must remove from us the Love, guilt, and pollution of sin by
repentance. And

Thirdly, labor that we may be made vessels of honor, that so we may be
capable to receive those graces which we crave. And

IV. We must labor, that our prayers be faithful; that is, not offered up
with any hope to be heard for any merit, or worthiness that is in us; but
powered forth unto God, by the assistance of the Spirit, and with a sure
confidence to be heard through the merits and mercies of Christ our Lord. And

V. We must always conclude our requests with a willing submission unto Gods
will. And

VI. We must continue asking till we have received, and persevere in prayer,
until we have obtained what we want.

. 2. Believing.]

Our Savior here by showing, that Prayer is to

What is the proper act of a true, lively,

The proper and principal act of justifying faith, is a particular
apprehension,

First, because ( Iustificatio peccatoris pertinet ad bonitatem and
misericordiam Dei etc. Thom. Aqu. 1. qu. Artic. 6. 45.) The justification of a
Sinner does belong unto the goodness, and mercy of God abundantly diffusing it
self: But we neither can nor ought apprehend or seek the goodness and mercy
of GOD, beyond, and without the promises of grace which are made unto us in
CHRIST our Mediator: And therefore in these only (as in the proper object) is
exercised the act of justifying Faith, when, and as it justifies.

Secondly, this is evident also from the distribution of the word: which is
divided into the Law and the Gospel: Now in the Doctrine of the Law we
neither must seek, nor can have Justification (because the conscience of every
man who has any in-sight into himself, will tell him that he can never be
Justified by that legal covenant, he not being able to fulfill the Law.) And
therefore it remains that Justification is to be sought only in the Gospel,
that is, in the promises of grace, and that the act of faith as it justifies is
principally to be directed unto these promises.

Thirdly, this is manifest from these two clear testimonies of Scripture:
namely.

I. Acts 13.38, 39. For by Christ is preached unto you the forgiveness of
sins, and by him all that believe, are justified from all things, from which
ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses.

II. Romans 3.21. But now the righteousness of God without the Law is
manifested, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets. Bp. Davenant in Colos.
1.4. Page 32.

Ye shall receive.]



That if we desire to receive we must ask; if we would have our wants
supplied, or our evils redressed and removed, we must pray. Read Matthew. 7.7.
and 1. Thessal. 5.17. and 1. Timoth. 2.1, 8. and James 5.13. and 1. Peter 3.7.





I. It is a principal part of his worship. And

II. Thereby we testify that we depend upon God, 2. Corinthians. 5.7. And
therefore if we desire to glorify and honor our good God, there is great
reason that we should pray.









I. By prayer we receive those things which we want. And

II. By prayer we have liberty to use those things which we have. And

III. By prayer the good gifts of God are confirmed, yea blessed unto us. 1,
Timoth. 4.5. And therefore if we desire preservation from evil, and remission
of our sins, and the grace of God, and the possession of those things which
are necessary for us, we must pray.

VERSE. 31.32. Whether of them twain did the will of his Father? They said unto
him the first, JESUS says unto them, verily I say unto you that the Publicanes
and the harlots, go into the Kingdom of God before you. For John came unto
you in the way of righteousness, and ye believed him not: But the Publicanes
and the Harlots believed him. And ye, when ye had seen it, repented not
afterward, that ye might believe him.
Verily I say unto you.]



That we must not swear, Matthew. 5.34. and James 5.12,





First, a Religious use, in vowing vows unto God.

Secondly, a Civil use; when men are enjoined by the Magistrates to swear, or
examined upon oath, for the finding out of some truth, and this

I. Sometimes concerns a man's self, when he is compelled to swear for the
purging and acquitting of himself of some crime, whereof he is accused. And

II. Sometimes this concerns a man's Brother, when he swears only as a
witness, or to testify something of or for, or against his brother.

Thirdly, there is a private use of swearing, in the binding of bargains, and
confirming of contracts, in stead of bonds. This is lawful if reverently and
religiously undertaken, and seems to be warranted from Psalm. 15.4.

Fourthly, there is an ordinary, and customary use of swearing, which is
unlawful and wicked, and therefore our communication must be y^^, yea nay nay,
because whatsoever is more comes of evil, that is, from sin. Matthew. 5.36.

How many kind of unlawful swearers are

First, there are ignorant swearers, who use certain

Secondly, there are inconsiderate swearers; who

Thirdly, there are foolish and unwary swearers,

Fourthly, there are erroneous swearers, who Matthew. 5.36. And therefore he will
be a swift witness against all such.

Fifthly, there are hasty swearers, who as soon

Sixthly, there are generous and gentile swearers,

Seventhly, there are envious and malicious Galath 6.7. and take heed that they
do not deceive their own souls, for they cannot deceive the Lord, who will
reward them according to their wicked works.

. 2. The Publicanes and the harlots go into

By what means the Publicanes and harlots were converted, our Savior
expresses in the next words, namely, by the preaching of John; but the Scribes
and Pharisees were not brought unto the fold of Christ thereby; whence we may
learn.

That the preaching of the Gospel brings great sinners sooner home then those
who are less, faith and obedience of the Gospel, then Scribes and Pharisees;
Who gloried in an external form of Godliness. Vid. Luc. Brugens. in hunc loc.





For the understanding hereof observe; That there are two things belonging unto
conversion, viz.

I. The Law, which lets us see our sins: and this work is sooner wrought in
great Sinners, and longer a working in such lesser. For the Law sooner
convinces a gross offender of the breach thereof, then a proud Pharisaicall
sinner.

II. The Gospel, which does allure us to lay hold upon mercy offered therein:
Now this is sooner received of him that is wounded with his sins, then of him
who is not sensible of sin.

John 9.











First, there is no merit in him at all either of condignity, or congruity:

Secondly, there is no preparation in us of our selves.

Thirdly, there is no power in man to do any good thing as of himself.











I. Men's Creation might teach them Gods mercy.

II. Gods protecting of them, and providing for them daily, should allure them
to rely upon God; and to trust in him, but they take no notice of these or the
like things.

Fifthly, men have the book of the Word,

Sixthly, men have the Book of Conscience,

Seventhly, God often gives general graces to

Eighthly, he who neglects grace offered sins

Ninthly, he that transgresses the Law of nature

Tenthly, he that violates the Law of nature sins inexcusably,

Lastly, the reason of our impotency in doing

How is grace wrought ordinarily in great

The manner of vvorking grace in profane persons, and great sinners, for the
most part is this;

First, their own misery; Here observe that they ascend to the sight of their
misery by these steps.

I. They see their own sins which they have committed against God.

II. They see the severity of that Law, which they have transgressed, and of
that Lord, which they have offended, into whose hands it is a fearful thing
to fall. Hence

III. They tremble, and fear by reason of the righteous judgments of God. And

IV. Greeve and mourn that by their sins they have roused a sleeping Lion,
and incensed and stirred up against them so potent a Foe. And

V. They confess and acknowledge, that they are unworthy to come unto God, or
to receive mercy from him.

Secondly, they see Gods Mercy, and attain unto the sight thereof by these
degrees:

I. They see the Promises of the Gospel, and the condition of Repentance
expressed in the Gospel. Then

II. They come humbly unto CHRIST, desiring that he would be pleased to
mediate and intercede unto his Father in their behalf, and to reconcile him
unto them. And

III. They accept of the conditions, which the Gospel requires: that is, they
promise unto God, that if he will give them an interest into Christ, and for
his sake make good the promises of the Gospel unto them, that they will repeat
them of their sins bypast, and labor to obey him for the time to come, and
expect salvation only from him. Then

IV. They come unto the holy Eucharist, as a symboll, and confirmation of all
these.

And yet ye repented not.]





I. Contrition or humiliation.

II. Conversion or reformation.

First, Repentance consists of Contrition or humiliation, as appears by the
consent of languages; For repentance is called in Hebrew (Nacham) which
signifies Irking; and in Greek it is called (...), after-griefe; and in Latin
Poenitentia, which imports the pains of grief; which harmony of Languages
show, that Contrition and humiliation is a part of Repentance.

Corinth. 7.10. says, That Godly sorrow works Repentance: where sorrow is
distinguished from repentance, as the cause is from the effect. And therefore
sorrow or contrition is not a part of Repentance.

Repentance sometimes signifies only one part of Repentance, and sometimes
only the change and alteration of the mind, and sometime only the touch of
the affection;

First, sometimes Repentance signifies only eno part of Repentance, as in the
place objected, and Ierem. 18. If they repent, it shall repent me etc. That
is, J will alter my mind, and repent me of myh threatenings.

Secondly, sometimes Repentance signifies only the change and alteration of
the mind; as Acts. 11.18. where they call the strange change of their mind, by
the descent of the holy Ghost, Repentance.

Thirdly, sometimes Repentance signifies only the touch of the affections; as
Genes. 6. It Repents me that I made man; and Acts. 26.20. And he showed unto
them, that they should repent and turn to God; where Repentance being so
plainly distinguished from conversion, must needs be restrained to the
signification of sorrow and humiliation. And as from this place we may not
gather, that Repentance is not a turning to God; so no more may we from. 2.
Cor. 7.10. that it is not a godly sorrow.

One part is not a cause of his fellow-part, but sorrow is a cause of the
change of the mind. 2. Cor.

One part may be a cause of his fellow-part,

Contrition seems to be a part of the change and humiliation and alteration
are not two distinct parts of repentance.

The Apostle himself (2. Cor. 7.10.11.) distinguishes them plainly, saying,
Godly sorrow causes repentance, that is, the change of the mind: for although
godly sorrow be a part, and piece of that passive change, which is wrought in
us, at the first instant of our calling by God, yet it is a cause of the active
change, whereby we change, and alter the purpose, and resolution of our hearts
before set on sin, and now turn them to the Lord: for if we felt not the
bitterness of our sins, and were truly touched in conscience for them, we
would never heartely forsake, and renounce them.

Are not the soul threatenings and curses of the Iosiahs heart (2. Chron.
34.27.) was troubled, upon the hearing of the threatenings?

Those threatenings were not merely legal, Josiah apprehended mercy in those
threatenings, looking upon them as proceeding from Gods Love, and accounting of
them as the wounds of a friend, and thence came the melting of his heart.

Secondly, the next part of Repentance, is Coversion, or Reformation: observe
in this part, as in the former, the harmony of Languages: Repentance is called
in Hebrew (Theshuba) a turning: in Greek (...). After-wit; in Latin
Resipiscentia, the be coming wiser after our folly: And thus this consent of
tongues show that the two parts of Repentance are Contrition and humiliation,
and Conversion and reformation; Now this second part in a turning from sin, a
change not of place but of qualities, manners, and dispositions from evil to
good: and this change is twofold; viz.

First, Passive, whereby God changes and turns us: now in this we are mere
patients, and God only works: And this is called Regeneration.

Secondly, Active, whereby we being turned and changed by God, do further
labor to turn and change our selves; And this is called Repentance. Read Isa.
30.20.21.22. Ierem. 31.18. and 1. John. 3.3.

What are the properties of true Conversion.

The properties are these, viz. First, it must be an orderly change, beginning
in the soul, and so proceeding to the Ephesians. 4.23.24. Ierem. 4.14. Secondly,
it must be a thorow-change, both in body, soul, and spirit, 1. Thessal. 5.23.
Not I. As some do who turn from one sin to another. Or II. As others, who
turn their understandings from error to truth, but not their wills from evil
to good: as those who of Papists become loose and dissolute Protestants. Or As
those, who turn from many sins, and with Herod do many good things, but yet
they remain unturned from some one special sin.
Thirdly, it must be a constant change; for although it be a perfect change in
regard of parts, as a child is a perfect man, yet it is imperfect in degrees;
and therefore so long as we live, we must strive unto perfection.


VERSE. 33, 34. There was a certain householder, which planted a vineyard, and
hedged it round about, and dug a wine press in it, and built t Tower, and
let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far Country. And when the time of
the fruit drew near, he sent his servants to the husbandmen, that they might
receive the fruits of it, etc.
Esaias. 5.2. etc. Acts. 17.30. Romans 6.4. Ephesians. 4.21, 22, 24. and 2. Timoth.
2.25.



Job. 35.6, 7. Matthew. 5.16.

Corinth. 12.7.) that is, that we might be brought unto Repentance, and the
fruits thereof, Romans 2.4. and Titus. 2.12. The Talents were given to use unto
advantage, because he is an unprofitable servant who brings no gain unto his
Master, Luke. 19.2^. and 22.32.

Acts. 5.31. Repentance and Remission are joined together. Acts. 20.21.
Repentance and faith are joined together.

Fourthly, because if we bring not forth fruit we Esaias 5.5.6.7. Hebr. 6.8.
John. 5.14.

Fifthly, because if we do not answer the Lords expectation, we shall not
receive an eternal reward Acts 11.18. and 26.18. etc. Hebr. 12.14. and 2.
Peter 3.11. Luke 13.7. and 2. Corinthians. 12.21.

And therefore those unto whom God has given more blessings, and afforded more
mercies, must know, that more holiness, obedience, and pious fruits are
expected from them, then from others. Read Esa. 5.1.2. etc. and Ezechiel 16.1,
15. etc.

To whom may this not unfitly be applied?

First, it may be applied unto those to whom God has given his word: and does

Teach all that are under the Gospel to bring forth better fruits then they,
who enjoy not the word. Certainly many things were pardoned to the Fathers of
the old Testament, which shall not be remitted to us, because they wanted that
light which we have. For although there was amongst them great ignorance; yet
because

First, they depended upon the Messiah and Savior of the World. And

Secondly, desired to serve God truly, and sincerely. And

Thirdly, obeyed the Lord in the greatest things (to wit, in the observance of
the Moral Law) although in diverse other things they erred. And

Fourthly, retained and hold fast the Foundation: Therefore they had great
hope, that God would be merciful unto them. But we sit in the Sunshine and
clear light, and either do know or may know the will of God; and therefore if
we abound not in good works we are left without excuse, yea a double woe
belongs unto us, John 5.45.

Secondly, this may be applied to those who have

I. Those, who live under the care and tuition of others. More good fruit is
expected from those Pupils, Children, and Servants, who live under careful and
religious Tutors, Masters and Fathers, then is from those who live under them
which are licentious and vicious.

II. Those who live a among the good; For more holy fruits are expected from
those who live in good places, and enjoy good examples, admonitions, and
instructions; then from those who live in wicked places, where they hear nor
see nothing but wickedness.

Thirdly, this may be applied to those who enjoy

VERSE. 41, 42, 43. They say unto him, let out his vineyard unto other
husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in their seasons. JESUS says
unto them., Did ye never read in the Scriptures, The stone which the builders
rejected, the same is become the head of the corner? This is the Lords doing,
and it is mavelous in our eyes. Therefore say I unto you, The Kingdom of God
shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits
thereof.
He will miserably destroy those wicked men.]



That God suffers long before he smites; and permits wicked men a great while
before he punishes. Read these places following, where we shall find both
proofs and examples hereof, Esa. 30.18. and 65.2. Psalm. 95. and 2. Chron.
36.15. Nehem. 9.30. Genes. 6.3. and 1. Peter. 3.20. Act. 13.8.



Exodus 34.6. and Psalm. 86.13. and 103.8. Joel. 2.13. Numb. 14.18.

Psalm. 106.23.30. Luke. 13.8.



I. They may be converted, and turn unto him 2 Chronicles. 30.9. Ezech. 33.11. and
1 Timothy 2.4. and 2 Pet. 3.9. Or

II. That he may be excused, by sparing so long, Psalm. 51.4. Romans 3.4. Or

III. That the punishment of the wicked may be the greater: for the higher the
blow is fetched the heavier it falls. Psalm. 7.12. etc. Eccles. 8.13. Ierem. 4, 4.

He will let out his vineyard.]

Acts. 13.46. Romans 11.20. For

First, God is obliged to no man, any further then they keep his
Commandments; and therefore if any particular Church depart from him, and his
obedience, he will also depart from her.

Secondly, when God admonishes any, and they despise it, he takes it so much
the worse. And therefore there is no one Church so dear unto God, but if it
despise his admonitions it shall be rejected.

Thirdly, when men enter into a Covenant with God, and promise to serve him,
and keep not their words, he takes it worst of all: for he had rather have an
open disobedient person, then a dissembler, Ierem. 3.10. And therefore when a
Church shall fall from her first love and faith, and not pay her vows to her
God, she may expect, that the vineyard shall be taken from her, and let out to
other husbandmen.

. 3. Unto other husbandmen.]

We may observe hence, that Conscience is either Good, whereof I now speak
not. O^ Bad: which either Accuses truly, of which J now speak not. Or
Excuses falsely; and that two manner of ways: namely




First, Conscience excuses an unregenerate man falsely, when he hears the
curses of the Law, and blesses himself in the mean time: as Deuter. 29.19.
John. 16.2. And

Secondly, it excuses him falsely, when he assenteth to the principles in
general; but when he comes to the particular application he concludes not
truly: as for example, When the husbandmen killed the Lord of the vineyard,
CHRIST asked of the Jews, what should become of these husband men? they
answered, He will destroy these wicked men, and let out the vineyard to others:
but Luke. 20.16. When they consider this, that the matter touched them
something nearely, then they said, God forbid. The thing which they assented
unto in the general, they shun in the particular, as if they should say, we
are no such men, and we hope that God will not so deal with us.

. 4. Is become the corner stone.]

What, or how manifold is the use of this corner stone?

Twofold, namely First, Secondly, that it should be a stone of offense to all
that perish; and that I. Per modum offensionis, because many are offended
therewith. And II. Per modum condemnationis, because many shall be judged, and
condemned thereby.
First, some perish by falling upon this stone, and by being offended
therewith. Secondly, some perish by reason of this stones falling upon them.


CHAP. XXII.
VERSE. 1.2, 3. And JESUS answered, and spoke unto them again by parables, and
said; The Kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain King, which made a
marriage for his so^^^ and sent forth his servants to call them that were
bidden to the wedding, and they would not come etc.
. 1. And JESUS answered, and spoke unto

To how many sorts of m^n does CHRIST speak?

To this a learned Friar answers, Dormisecure de temp. sermon. 41.) That Christ
speaks to four sorts of men, namely

First, to those who are ignorant, as a gracious instructor, and teacher; for
he admonishes the simple, and gives to the ignorant wisdom and knowledge.

Secondly, he speaks to those who pray, as a sweet and cheerful Comforter;
for those who pray in his name shall be heard, and their requests granted, if
it may be for Gods glory, and their good.

Thirdly; he speaks to those who are penitent, as a faithful peacemaker, and
gracious reconciler; for he speaks peace to the consciences of those who are
truly sorry and contrite for their sins.

Fourthly, he speaks to obstinate and obdurate sinners, as a wrathful Judge,
and terrible avenger. For unto such he will speak in his anger, and vex them
in his heavy displeasure.

The Kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain King, which made a marriage for
his Son.]

CHRIST (we see here) does express our union and communion with him, by a
marriage, because it is a spiritual marriage indeed. Whence diverse questions
may be propounded.





First, contracted unto Christ; and that is when we enter into a new Covenant
with him, and give our selves wholly unto him, to serve him, and to depend upon
him.

Secondly, we are married unto CHRIST in our souls; and that is at the day of
death, when the soul comfortably enjoyes the presence of CHRIST.

Thirdly, we are married unto Christ, both in soul and body, for ever; and
that is at the day of judgment, or Resurrection, when the body being conjoined
unto the soul they shall both enjoy CHRIST with unspeakeable joy and
blessedness.





I. The Father rejoices in the Bridegroom his Son. Matthew. 3. This is my
beloved Son. And

II. The Bridegroom rejoices in the Bride. And

III. The Bride rejoices in the Bridegroom. For the prpofe of this particular
and the form^^ read Salomons Song; wherein is lively expressed both the joy
and delight of Christ in his Church, and of the Church in Christ. And

IV. The Friends of the Bridegroom and Bride rejoice at this marriage; now
these friends are the Angels, and therefore it is said, That th^^^ was joy in
Heaven, when the Bride was married to the Lamb.

Secondly, as there is pomp and bravery at corporal Psalm. 45. Where the rich
and royal Robes of CHRIST and the Church are lively portrayed.

Thirdly, as there are Feasts and banquets at corporal Marriages; where the
guests fit at the table; so at the day of Judgment when the marriage of the
Church shall be consummate, then all the Elect shall sit with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God, and shall feast with the Lamb.

Who are invited and called to this Spiritual

Hereunto are called both

First, the Jews, by the Prophets of the Lord;

Secondly, the Gentiles, by the Apostles and Ministers of Christ: And therefore
we must not neglect this call, but labor that we may be married unto our Lord
Christ, by an everlasting covenant.

Why must we be thus careful to be married

First, because he is the Son and Heir of the Corinth. 3.21. All things are
yours if ye be Christ's, says the Apostle: yea Christ is the Son of God, and
God with God; and therefore if we be united unto Christ, we are ingrafted (as
it were) into God, and made his children.

Secondly, Christ is adorned with all virtues and graces, and is worthy of all
praise; but we are destitute and deprived of all graces and virtues, and worthy
of nothing but shame and disgrace. And therefore great reason there is that
above all things we should labor to contract this marriage, and unite our
selves unto Christ. Here observe what Christ is without us, of himself, and
what we are of our selves without Christ.

I. Christ of himself without us, is

First, most fair yea the fairest amongst men. Psalm. 45. And

Secondly, most rich; for all Power is given to him, and all things are his. And

Thirdly, most noble; he being the only begotten Son of God. And

Fourthly, most virtuous and gracious; all graces being in him without measure.

II. We of our selves without Christ, are

First, most deformed and loathsome to look upon, Ezech. 16. And

Secondly, most poor and beggarly, destitute of all grace and goodness;
Revel. ^.18. And

Thirdly, most base of birth, our Father being an Amorite, and our Mother an
Hittite, Ezec. 16. And

Fourthly, most vicious, having the seed and spawne of all manner of iniquity
in us. And therefore seeing there is such an immense and vast disproportion
between our Lord and us, how should we desire this marriage, how should we
endeavor after it, and how happy should ^^e ^^^ke our selves, if Christ would
but vouchsafe to cast the eye of his love upon us?

First, Conjugium pacificum, a peaceable marriage; for by this new covenant we
obtain pardon and remission of all our sins, and are reconciled unto God,
Ierem. 31.33, 34. Romans 5.1. Secondly, Conjugium faecundum, a fruitful
marriage: under the Law we were barren of all good works, it enjoining us to
do those things, which we lacked power to perform: but Christ gives us power
in some measure to do that, which he requires of us, and so under the Gospel
we become fruitful in every good work. Thirdly, Conjugium amabile, a loving
marriage; for as the husband and wife are one body, so is CHRIST and his
Church, Ephesians. 5. The husband calls the wife his delight, Esa, 62.6. And the
wife answers the husband, That she loves him with her whole heart, Psalm. 18.2.
And hence follows that sweet Sympathy and kind Communion between Christ and
his Children who are married unto him. I. As Christ suffered in the flesh, so
does his spouse the Church, 1. Peter 4.1. II. As Christ was crucified, so the
Church crucifieth her carnal members, Colos. 3.5. Galath. 5. III. As Christ
died, so by little and little the old man dies in the faithful, John 11.25.
IV. As Christ was buried, so by Baptism we are buried into his death, Romans 6.
V. As Christ is now in glory, so the faithful shall be glorified with him at
the last, Colos. 3.3. and 1. John 3. VI. As Christ bare our infirmities, so he
is still sensible of our miseries; as appears by his own words unto Saul,
when he persecuted the Church; Saul Saul why persecutest thou me? Acts, 8.
Fourthly, Conjugium insolubile, a knot never to be untied, a match which can
never be unmade; and a marriage which shall never be made void. Death may
separate husbands and wives, and dissolve corporal marriages, but nothing
shall separate the faithful from Christ, Romans 8.36. etc. And therefore seeing
it is so peaceable, fruitful, amiable, and in dissoluble a marriage, we may
safely conclude, that it is a happy marriage, and because happy, therefore
worthy to be labored for.








First, we are made the worse by abstaining; and therefore we must not forbear
to come. The longer the wounded person absents himself from the

Secondly, they who fear to come, and forbear

Thirdly, by abstaining from the Lords Table, Chronic. 30.19. etc.

Fourthly, those who abstain from coming

Fifthly, to forbear coming upon such a pretense, Corinth. 11.28. Let a man
therefore examine himself, and so let him eat, etc.

Sixthly, those who are most unfit to come unto

Seventhly, we must take heed how we deny, or verse 3.7.

What resemblance was there between the Passover, Eucharist?

First, the Paschall Lamb was

I. A token of perseverance in Religion, notwithstanding afflictions and
persecutions. And

II. A memorial of our deliverance from Egypt. And

III. A Thankesgiving for the slaughter of the first borne in Egypt. And

IV. A Lamb called the Lords Passover, although it be but a sign of his
Passover.

Secondly, the Lords Supper is

I. A token of perseverance in profession, though we be persecuted for it, for
CHRIST'S sake. And

II. A memorial of our redemption from death sin, and Hell. And

III. A Thankesgiving for the death of Christ. And

IV. Called the body of CHRIST, although it be but the Sacrament of CHRIST'S
body unto us.

What resemblance is there between Baptism,

First, Baptism is

I. That, whereby we testify our entering into Christ's body. And

II. The badge of our faith. And

III. Our initiation in Gods worship.

Secondly, the Eucharist is, that,

I. Whereby we testify our union with Christ's

II. A token of our love to God and our Neighbor. And

III. That whereby we testify our continuance in Gods worship.

VERSE. 11, 12, 13, 14. And when the King came in to see his gnosts, he saw
there a man, which had not on a wedding garment, And he says unto him; Friend
how came thou in hither, not having a wedding garment? And he was
speechless. Then said the King to his Servants, bind him hand and foot, and
take him away, and cast him into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth. For many are called, but few are chosen.
He saw there a man.]

Zephan. 1.12. Hebrew. 4.13.







Friend how came thou in hither?]

Friend, would teach us, That God deals in a peaceable manner even with
Sinners; as we see by his dealing with Adam, Eve, and Cain. Genes. 3.









Not having on a wedding garment.]





First, we must be careful to strip us of our Isaiah, 5.5, 7. Ephesians. 4.22.

Secondly, we must desire this garment, and long Psalm 27.4. and 42, 2. and
Esaias, 55.1. Philip. 3.9.

Thirdly, we must seek it where it may be Corinth. 10.16. and James 1.18.

. 4. Take him away, and cast him forth.]

Because our Savior here says, that this presumptuous and unprepared person
was utterly rejected and cast off by God, it will not be amiss to propound a
question or two concerning these terms of Rejecting, casting off, and casting
away.

How manifold is casting off,

Twofold,

First, Literal and Historical, and this is either

I. Of living Creatures: as Genesis, 21.15. Hagar cast away her Son Ismaell.
Or

II. Of inanimate things; and thus

First, some cast away their Jdols, and strange Gods: as Genesis, 35.2. Isa,
31.7. Ezechiel, 20.7.

Secondly, some cast away their weapons: as 2. Samuel, 1.21.

Thirdly, some reject their meat; this Paul would have none to do, but to eat
what is set before them, and give thanks, 1 Timothy, 4.4.

Fourthly, some reject and cast away their riches, and possessions; as Eccles.
3.6.

Fifthly, some reject their houses and habitations: as 2. Chron. 11.14.

Sixthly, some cast away their garments: as Ezechiel, 26.16. Jonah 3.6. Mark
14.52.

Secondly, Metaphorical, and Figurative; and thus it is either referred,

I. To the Church, whom God says was cast out ( Ezech. 16.5.) into the Fields,
that is, deprived, and destitute of all help. Or

II. To men; and that many ways: For

First, sometimes man rejects, casts off, and slights man: as Psalm. 22.6.
Lament. 3.45. Esa, 54.6. and 66.5. Yea even sometimes the Ministers and
Prophets of the Lord, 1. Samuel 8.7.

Secondly, sometimes man rejects, and casts off God; and that diverse ways,
viz. either,

I. By casting off the Law, Commandments, and obedience of God; as Levitic.
26.43. and 1. Sam. 15.23. and 2. King. 17.15. Esa. 5.24. Hose, 19.17. Amos,
2.4. Or

II. By casting off the Lord himself: as 1. Samuel 8.7. Or

III. By casting off and slighting the correction of God, Proverb. 3.11. and
15.32. Or

IV. By slighting divine and heavenly wisdom, Proverb. 8.33. Or

V. By rejecting the protection of God: as Esa. 8.6. it is said, The people
cast away the waters of Shiloah; that is, they were not content with those
defenses; they had, nor would adhere to the promise of God, who had said that
he would preserve them, and by his own holy arm and power save them from all
their Enemies, but provided other prohibited and humane helps for the driving
away of their Enemies. Or

VI. By slighting; and rejecting the Sacrifices of God: as 1 Samuel, 2.29.

Thirdly, sometimes man rejects, and cast off, and away his sins: as Romans
13.12. Or

III. It is referred sometimes to God, who is said to reject, and cast of man:
as Levit. 26.11, 44. and 1 Samuel 15.23. Ierem. 22.28. Ezech. 32.4. Hose 9.17.
Now in this Rejection observe these three things; to wit,

First, God rejects, and casts off none without their fault, and demerit, Job.
36.5.

Secondly, God will never indeed reject, and cast off his elect people, Esa.
41.9.

Thirdly, yet notwithstanding;

I. Man falsely imagines oftentimes that God has cast off his peculiar people:
as Ierem, 33.44. The Lord has cast off his people: They looking upon the
present miseries and calamities of the Lords people, judged them thereby to be
wholly rejected of God.

II. Sometimes particular Saints may falsely think themselves to be rejected
of God: as Jonah did, I have said, I am cast out of thy sight. Ion. 2.4.

III. Yea sometimes GOD does indeed reject and cast off a people, with whom he
has made an external and conditional covenant: and thus the Jews are
rejected and cast off.







Saul, 1 Samuel, 65.23.





First, his own free Mercy, and Love, Levitic. 26.44. Esa. 54.6. Secondly, his
Covenant made with them, Levit. 26.44, 45. Thirdly, his Truth, Levit. 26.44,
45. Fourthly, because he is their God. Levit. 26.44. Esa. 41.9. Fifthly,
because they are the servants and people of God, Esa. 41.9. Sixthly, because
they are elected by him, Esa. 41.9. Seventhly, because his love is constant and
immutable, Ierem. 31.36, 37.



viz.

First, the desolation, ruin, and destruction of the Land; that is, if the
rejection of God be general and national, Levitic. 26.43. and 2 Kings 17.15,
18. Hos. 9.17. And

Secondly, the wrath of God; 2. King. 17.15, 18. Esa. 5.24. And

Thirdly, the invasion of enemies; this is also to be understood of a general
casting off God. Read Esa. 8.6, 7. And

Fourthly, the evil of punishment, either upon their bodies or estates,
Levitic. 26.43. And

Fifthly, eternal condemnation: thus because this man cast off the fear of
God, and presumptuously approached into his presence, clothed with his sins,
therefore he is here cast into utter darkness.

. 5. Into utter darkness.]

We see here that this poor miserable man is cast into utter darkness (that
is, into the eternal torments of Hell) because he came to this spiritual
wedding without a wedding garment. Whence it may be demanded;

Why does the Lord punish transitory,

First, because man sins against God in aeterno as long as he lives;
therefore he shall be punished by God, in suo aeterno; as long as he lives;
that is for ever and ever.

Secondly, the stain, blot, guilt, and pollution of

Thirdly, the sin committed is an offense against

Fourthly, man by his sin and fall lost a good

Fifthly, the will of wicked men is eternal in evil;

Sixthly, the principal faculties err infinitely; and

Seventhly, the wicked reprobate can never truly

. 6. Weeping and gnashing of teeth.]

What are the torments of Hell?

Intolerable cold, and unquenchable heat:

First, weeping which comes from the moistness of the eyes, is occasioned and
provoked by heat.

Secondly, the gnashing of the teeth comes from cold, August. de gaud Elect and
damnat. imp. Or

I. Weeping comes because of that fire, which can never be quenched. And

II. Gnashing of teeth because of that worm which never dies. Or

First, weeping comes from sorrow. And

Secondly, Gnashing of teeth from fury, and rage, Bernard. Acts 7.54.





First, they live so as always a dying, but so die as that they always live.
And

Secondly, they which torment, and inflict punishment shall never be weary; and
those who are tormented and punished shall never be killed. And

Thirdly, at the day of Judgment when this weeping and gnashing of teeth shall
begin, they shall be deprived of all comfort, and plunged into the pit of
perpetual pain; For

I. If they look below them, they shall see Hell, which gapes for them.

II. Jf they look above them, they shall see an angry Judge, who frowneth upon
them.

III. If they look within them, they shall see a gnawing worm of conscience.

IV. Jf they look without them, they shall see the world and Elements on fire.
And thus nothing remains for them, but a certain fearful looking for of
Judgment to come.

VERSE. 16, 17. And the Pharisees sent out unto him their Disciples, with the
Herodians saying, Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the way of
God in truth; neither carest thou for any man: for thou regardest not the
person of men; Tell us therefore, what think thou? Is it lawful to give
tribute unto Caesar, or not?
We know that thou art true.]



First, that he is true; that is, a constant affirmer of truth, and a stranger
to lies, dissimulation, and falsehood. And Secondly, that he teaches the way
of God in truth; they call the Law and the Commandments of God, the way of
God; and they confess that Christ is a sincere and faithful interpreter of
them. And Thirdly, that he cares for no man; that is, as they will expound it,
that he regards not the person of any, that is, neither of Caesar, nor Herod,
nor the Pharisees, nor their Rulers. And these are indeed three excellent good
properties of a good Preacher, and were truly in CHRIST.


And teach the way of God in truth.]



There is a double truth, to wit,

First, Veritas Christi, the truth written; and of this they speak in this
place, Thou teach the way of God in truth.

Secondly, Veritas Christus, the truth begotten; and of this Christ speaks
John 14.6. I am the truth. Now Christ did the former Doctrinally, and he was
the latter Essentially, Squire. 2 These. 2. Page 565.

. 3. Thou regardest not the person of any.]

What is meant by this word Person?

First, sometimes it is taken for quality, or estate; Thou regardest no man's
Person; that is, thou respectest not the quality, greatness, place or
authority of any.

Secondly, sometimes it is taken for a substance, Ratione individua, sed
finita: and thus Angels and men are Persons.

Thirdly, sometimes it is taken for a substance Ratione individua, sed
infinita, et immensa; and such are the persons in the divine essence, which are
indeed distinct, but cannot be disjoined, because they are of the same nature
and essence: yea they are the very divine essence it self.

. 4. Is it lawful to give Tribute to Caesar?]

J wholly omit the explication, and unfolding of this question, because if the
Reader would see it illustrated to the life, and followed home, together with
the four following verses, let him read Mr. Weemse, Of the Judicial Law of
Moses, Lib. 1. Chap. 13. Page 49. unto Page 54.

VERSE. 19, 20, 21. And JESUS said,
. 1. And they brought unto him a Penny.]

What was this penny?

This penny was their Tribute money.

First, the common penny, which valued of our money 7. d. ob. and of this our
Savior speaks, Chapt. 18.28.

Secondy, the penny of the Sanctuary, which valued, 1. s. 3. d. of our money,
and was answerable to their Didrachmum, and of this St. Matthew speaks in this
place; for their Tribute money was Didrachmum, as before has been showed upon
Chap. 17.24. Tremel. in hunc locum.

This Didrachmum, or half Shekel, was formerly paid by the Israelites, every
year after they were twenty years old, toward their Temple, Exo. 30.13. (
Aben Esra in Nehem. 10.32.) Now Caesar by taking away this money from the
Temple, and changing it into a Tribute for his own coffers, did in truth take
away from God that which was GODS. Hence is the question here proposed unto
CHRIST [Js it lawful to give tribute to Caesar or not?] Christ answers,
Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto God, the things that
are Gods.

Give unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's.]

Caesar or unlawful?



First, if he affirm that it is lawful to pay tribute, then he incurres the
hatred of the people; because

I. It was a sore, and grievous thing for them to pay Tithes, first fruits,
oblations, and an annual penny unto the Temple; and either besides that
Didrachmum which they paid unto the Temple, pay Tribute to Caesar (as some
think) or else have that Didrachmum, which they paid toward the repairing of
the Temple, seized upon by Caesar, and converted unto his own proper use, as
others think. Now this paying of Tribute to Caesar was so detestable; and
burdensome unto the Jews generally, that our Savior had incurred their
hatred, if he had answered affirmatively to the question propounded.

II. It seemed an unjust, and unequal thing, that the Children and seed of
Abraham should give, and not rather receive from the Gentiles tribute and
custom: and therefore if Christ had directly affirmed the question, he had
lost the love of the people.

Secondly, if he deny the question, and say that it is not lawful for them to
pay any such Tribute unto Caesar, then he provokes the anger of the King
against him. For it was a capital crime to deny this; as Gamaliel afterward
showed, who relates how Judas of Galilee perished for this same cause, Acts
5.37. And thus it was dangerous either to deny or to affirm this question.





Major. It is fit and behovefull to give to every man his own; and
consequently it is equal for Subjects to pay tribute to their Governors. This
proposition is implied.

Minor, But the Roman penny which ye use and pay, is a sign of their
Sovereignty, and Lordship over you. This proposition is expressed, verse 18,
19, 20.

Conclusio. Give therefore unto Caesar, the things which are Caesar's, and unto
God the things which are Gods. For God and Caesar are not contrary, but
subordinate Magistrates; GOD is the chief, and Caesar subordinate. And
therefore render to both of them what is theirs. This is expressed, verse 21.

Caesar that which is, Caesar's, does plainly imply, that it is lawful for them
to pay this tributary penny unto Caesar. And that.

I. Because the penny was Caesar's, both in regard of the matter, and form. And

II. Because it was but a kind of requital paid unto Caesar for his
patronizing, and defending of them: And therefore our Savior says, Reddite;
Render unto Caesar etc. And

III. Because this penny was a very tolerable Tribute.

Whether is it lawful for Subjects to disobey

First, the Papists say, that if Princes be excommunicated

Secondly, we the Protestants answer, That the Give unto Caesar that which is
Caesar's, and unto G^d that which is Gods: and also upon St. Paul's testimony
Titus 3.1. and St. Peter's. 1. Peter 2.13. Jf the Reader would see this question
largely and learnedly prosecuted, J refer him to Bp Davenant, Determine. qu.
48. Page 227, etc.

Whether is the Pope the Caesar, and Sovereign

First, some of the Papists say, that the Pope is Bellarmine (de Pontif. Lib.
5. cap. 2. 7. et 4.) very confidently, and learnedly refuteth the same.

Secondly, Bellarmine there says, That the Pope

I. He shows that the Pope is not sovereign Lord of the whole world; and
proves it by this undeniable ground, because he is not Lord of those provinces
which are possessed by Infidels.

His Argument seems to be this.

Major. He who is not Lord of those provinces and Lands which are possessed by
Heathens, and Infidels, is not Lord of the whole world.

Minor. But the Pope is not Lord of those Provinces and Lands which are
possessed by Heathens and Infidels.

Conclusion. Therefore the Pope is not Lord of all the whole World.

The Major is unanswerable, because he cannot be Lord of the whole world, who
is not Lord of every Kingdom, Province, and Jland thereof.

The Minor he demonstrates thus:

First, because Christ committed none but only his sheep to Peter; and
therefore gave him no authority over Infidels, which are not his sheep, 1. Corinthians. 5.12.

Secondly, because dominion and the right of Princes, is not founded in grace
or faith, but in free will and reason, and has not sprung from the written Law
of Moses, or CHRIST, but from the Law of Nations, and Nature which is most
clear, in that God both in the old and new Testament approves the Kingdom of
the Gentiles and Infidels as is evident both from Daniel 2.37. and this place,
Give unto Caesar the thing that are Caesar's: with whom St. Paul agrees
requiring the Christians, Romans 13.5. of his time, not only to pay tribute to
Heathen Kings, but also to obey them for conscience sake; which men were not
bound to do, if they had no authority and right to command.

II. Bellarmine shows, that the Pope is not temporal Lord of the Christian
world; And that

First, because if the Pope were sovereign Lord of all the Christian world,
then Bishops should be temporal Lords of their Cities, and the places
adjoining subject to them, which the Papists will not affirm.

Secondly, he shows this out of the confession of Popes; Pope Leo confessing,
that Martianus the Emperor, was appointed to the Empire by God: he recites
also the confession of Gelasius writing to Anastasius, and also of Gregory.

III. He shows, that the Pope is temporal Lord of no part of the World, in
the right of Peter's successor, and Christ's Vicar. For

First, CHRIST neither invested Peter nor his successors with any Kingly
authority. Nor

Secondly, was Christ himself while he was on the Earth, a temporal Lord or
King; and therefore much less gave any temporal dominion or Kingdom to his
Apostles.

Field of the Church, Lib. 5. Cap. 44, 45.

Caesar's, and earthly Kings, that our Savior here bids us to give unto Caesar
what is due unto him?

Honorem, honor; and therefore St. Peter says, Fear God, and honor the
King, 1. Peter 2. Jf it be demanded.



I. We must esteem honorably and venerably of them: as the people did of
David, 2. Sam. 18.

II. We must both know and acknowledge their superiority over us.

III. We must pray for them unto God, 1. Timoth. 2.1, 2.

IV. We must show a fitting submissive reverence in our carriage before them.

V. We must reverence and honor their Majesty and state, as divine. Psalm.
82.6.

What if Kings or Magistrates be wicked, or Fools?

Suppose they be, yet they must be honored; and that

First, by hiding, covering, and concealing of their infirmities. And

Secondly, by praying heartily unto God for them.

Secondly, unto earthly Kings and Princes we Obedientiam, obedience, and that
general in politic things, because we are commanded to be subject to the
higher powers, Romans 13.1.

Thirdly, we owe unto them Tributum, Tribute, Paul says, Give tribute to whom
tribute is due, Romans 13.

. 3. And give unto God that which is his.]

What do we owe unto God?

First, it is our duty to worship him, as himself

Secondly, to prefer his precepts before the

VERSE. 23. The same day came to him the Sadduces, which say, there is no
Resurrection.
What are the principal errors,

Their Dogmata, Canons,

First, they rejected the Prophets, and all other Scripture, save only the
five Books of Moses, (Joseph Antiq. Lib. 13. Cap. 18.) Therefore our Savior
when he would confute their error concerning the Resurrection of the dead, he
proves it not out of the Prophets, but out of Exodus 3.6. I am the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; in this Chapter verse 32.

Secondly, they rejected all traditions; whence

I. They were called (Minai) that is, Heretics, in respect of the general
opposition between them and the Pharisees;

First, because the Pharisees were in repute the only Catholics: And

Secondly, because in their doctrine, the Pharisees were much nearer the truth
then the Sadduces. And

II. In respect of this particular opposition, in the ones rejecting, the
others urging of traditions, the Sadduces were termed (Karaim) Biblers or
Scripturists, Drusius de trib. Sect. Cap. 8. Lib. 3 Page 130.

Thirdly, they said there was no reward for good works, nor punishment for ill
in the world to come. Hence St. Paul perceiving that in the Counsel, the one
part were Sadduces, and the other Pharisees, he cried out, Of the hope, that
is, of the reward expected, and of the Resurrection of the dead, I am called in
question, Acts. 23.6.

Fourthly, they denied the Resurrection of the body, Acts 23.8. and in this
verse.

Fifthly, they said, that the souls of men are annihilated at their death.
Joseph de Bello Lib. 2. Cap. 12.

Sixthly, they denied Angels and Spirits, Acts 23.8. For a further
amplification and illustration of these three latter errors J refer the
Reader to Iunius Parallels, Lib. 1. Parallel. 42. Page 64. 65.

Seventhly, they wholly denied, Fate, and Destiny, and ascribed all to man's
free will, Joseph. Lib. 13. Cap. 9.

VERSE. 28, 29 30., Therefore in the Resurrection whose wife shall she be of
the seven? for they all had her. JESUS answered and said unto them, ye do
err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God; For in the Resurrection
they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the Angels of God in
heaven.
Therefore in the Resurrection whose wife shall she be.]

The Sadduces held (as was showed before) that there was no Resurrection, and
here they propound a question (as it seems) to prove from an absurdity, that
there shall be none. Whence it may be demanded.





I. Because God is not able to raise up the dead: and to affirm this is
impiety, and blasphemy. Or

II. Because God is able to raise them up, but yet does it not, because it is
altogether unprofitable for men: and to affirm this is ridiculous.

Paul points at 1 Cor. 15.19.















Justin. Martyr.

Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures.]

It is questioned between us and the Church of Rome, whether the Scriptures be
necessary, or not; and we affirm, That they are necessary for the people of
God, the reading, preaching, and understanding thereof being the only ordinary
means to beget faith in us.



That whereby we are kept from error and doubtfulnesse in matters of faith, is
necessary; but this is performed by the Scripture: Therefore it is necessary.
Here two things are to be showed; namely

First, that the Scripture keeps us from error: this is clear from these
words, ye err not knowing the Scripture: where our Savior shows, that the
ignorance of Scripture was the cause of their error. And

Secondly, if our knowledge were only builded upon Tradition without
Scripture, we should then be doubtful, and uncertain of the truth: Thus St.
Luke says, in his Preface to Theophilus; I have written (says he) that thou
might be certain of those things, whereof thou have been instructed.
Whence we conclude that although we might know the truth without Scripture as
Theophilus did, yet we cannot know it certainly without it.

. 3. But shall be as the Angels.]

The Papists teach us to pray unto the Saints, and that we may be the easilier
induced to learn this lesson, they assure us, That the Saints hear our
prayers; and because they fear, we will not credit this without proof,
therefore our learned Countrymen who can draw Quidlibet ex quolibet, produce
this place for the proof thereof: arguing thus:

As CHRIST proves here that in heaven the Saints neither marry nor are
married,

So by the very same reason is proved, that Saints may hear our prayers and
help us, be they near or far off, because the Angels do so, and in every
moment are present where they list, and need not to be near us, when they
hear or help us. Rhemist. sup.. 4.

First, our Savior CHRIST speaks not of the

Secondly, CHRIST does not in all points compare

Thirdly, it is false, that the Angels may be present Fulke.

Whether are or ought the Saints and faithful in this life to be like unto the
Angels,

They should labor to be like the Angels,

First, in rejoicing at the conversion of sinners, Luke. 15. And

Secondly, in reverencing the divine Majesty like the Angels, who cover their
faces before him, Esa. 6.2. And

Thirdly, in standing ready pressed, to execute the will of the Lord, as the
Angels do, Psalm. 103.20, 21. And

Fourthly, in executing the will of God for the manner as the Angels do; that
is, with cheerfulness, with sincerity, and without weariness.

VERSE. 32. I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,
God is not the God of the dead but of the living.
Deus viventium, the God of the living?

Ratione causalitatis and providentiae, because he both created all perfect
living creatures, and also provides for all: Now providence has place only in
those things which have an existence or being in rerum natura: but when God
pronounced these words unto Moses, Exodus 3.6. the Patriarchs were corporally
dead, and their bodies dissolved; and therefore it was necessary, that their
souls should remain, and be alive.









verse stand with Romans 14.9? For it is said

Here, God is not the God of the dead but of the living. And

There, CHRIST died that he might be Lord both of the dead and living.



Glory cannot be conferred upon dead men, as dead men.

But glory shall be conferred upon Abraham, and all the faithful.

Therefore they shall not remain always dead, or in an estate of death, but
shall rise again at the last.

Hence the Apostle says, That CHRIST is Lord both of the living and of the
dead; that is, of all the faithful, who either now live, or are dead, but
shall rise at the last day, and of dead shall be made living: as it is said in
the Creed, He shall judge both the quick and the dead; that is, those who now
are dead shall live again at the last day.

VERSE. 37.38.39.40. JESUS said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind; This is the first
and great Commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self, On these two Commandments hang all the Law, and the
Prophets.
. 1. Thou shall love the Lord thy God.]

Whether can we love the Lord above all things,

We cannot love the Lord above al things by nature;

First, the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by his holy Spirit, Romans
5. and the fruit of the Spirit is love, Galath. 5. yea love is of God 1 John.
4. And therefore without the grace of God, and of his good Spirit, we cannot
love him above althings, or as we ought to do.

Secondly, we cannot fulfill the Law of God without the grace of God; now love
is the fulfilling of the Law: and therefore we cannot love God as we ought
without grace.

Thirdly, except man (in the state of corrupt nature) be healed by grace, he is
averse from God, as from the chief and maine end, and turned unto the
creature, and to himself, as to the principal and last end (as is affirmed
both by Thomas and Greg. de Valent.) and therefore a man cannot love God, above
all, or as his chiefest good, except by grace he be converted and turned unto
God.

. 2. With all thy heart, and with all thy soul, 10.27. adds) and with all thy
strength.]

What is the meaning of these words, and how are heart, soul, mind, and
strength distinguished?

First, by Heart here are understood all the affections,

Secondly, by Soul here is meant that part

Thirdly, by Mind or Cogitation is meant the Cor. 13.10, 11.

Fourthly, by strength, all inward actions agreeable

Against the Popish Counsel of perfection we urge this place, thus:

We are bound to love God with all our Heart, Therefore whatsoever thing there
is, whereby we may express the love of God, we are bound by Commandment to
do it, it not being left to our own will: For it is a grievous sin not to
love God more then we do, if it lie in our power.

First, Bellarmine (de Monach lib. 2. Cap. 13.) answers thus, Qui Deum diligit
super omnia etc.

He that loves God above all things, although he love him not entirely, as
perhaps he may, neither does all things for his sake that lie in his power: yet
for all this he esteems of God as his chiefest good etc.

Sophister he would obtrude upon us Contradictory speeches, and falsely
persuade us that they are true: for he says, a man may love God perfectly and
above all, and yet not love him so much as he is able, that is, imperfectly:
and so by his divinity a man may love God above all, and yet not love him above
all; for if he did he would refuse to do nothing for Gods love, that is in his
power.

Bellarmine answers thus, Diligere cord, anima etc. est diligere vere,
sincere, non ficte, non simulate. To l^ve the Lord with all the heart, soul,
mind, and strength, is to love him sincerely and truly, not fainedly or
dissemblingly.



With all the heart, soul, mind, and strength; and that because the amplitude
of the Precepts of God require it, wherein many things are included and folded
up in few words, and not one and the same thing in many words. If the Reader
would see how this Argument of ours is further excepted against and answered,
let him read Ames. Bellarm. enervat. Page. 169. tom. 2.



To love with all thy heart, soul, and mind.



I. Because this is principally required in the works of Religion, and duties
of holiness. And

II. Because in the works of righteousness, it is not required that we should
do them with all our hearts, souls, and minds, in regard of our brethren to
whom they are immediately done, but in regard of God and Religion, who commands
and enjoyes them to be done, and who must be obeyed in all things with the
heart. And

III. Because a man may love his neighbor too much, and with too much
intension, in regard of the material act of loving, although not as it is a
duty of Religion, or Christian love: but we can no way love God too much, or
with too much intension.

It is here objected, if we ought to love God with all our hearts, then we must
not love our Parents?

It is lawful to love other things besides God,

. 3. This is the first, and great Commandment.]

What is contained in this first and great Commandment?

The worship, service, and love,

First, in our Understanding; by knowing of him; and his Attributes,
properties, and actions, so far forth as he has revealed himself in his
word and works 1 Chronicles. 28.9. John 17.3. Contrary unto this, is spiritual
blindness and ignorance. And

Secondly, we ought to have God in our Will; by desiring to obey him, and by
believing in him, and by placing our confidence wholly upon him: Contrary
whereunto is infidelity, unwillingnesse to obey, and confidence and trust, in
others, or other things besides God: whether

I. Jn our selves, as Proverb. 28.26. whence comes pride, and arrogancy (
Deuter. 8.17.18. Daniel. 4.27. Habuk. 1.16.) and vain glory, or carnal
boasting, John. 5.44. Luke. 10.20. Or

II. Jn other men, as Isai. 36, 6. and Ierem. 17.7. Or

III. Jn other things; as Riches ( Job. 31.24. and 1 Timothy 6.17. Psalm. 62.10.
Ierem. 49.16.) Honor, strong holds, and the like ( Obadiah. verse. 3.4, Psalm.
146.3.) which are but means given us of God, whereby to glorify him the
better; And therefore our duty in regard of these and other good means is, to
trust him no less when we have them then when we want them, John 13.15. Now
from this Confidence proceeds hope (2 Chronicles. 20.1. and Isa. 8.17. and Psalm.
27.14.) which brings forth spiritual courage; which courage consists in these
things, namely

First, in spiritual security; Psalm. 3.5, 6. And.

Secondly, in constancy in good things. And

Thirdly, in patience in time of trouble, and adversity: as 2 Samuel. 15.10,
11, 12. and James 5.11. and Hebr. 11.27.

Thirdly, we ought to have God in our Affections: and that

I. By loving him: as Deuter. 6.5. Luke. 10.27. and in this place; that as we
know and believe him to be good, yea the chiefest good, so we love him above
all: and this love is then in truth in us, when we love his word and
Commandments ( John. 14.15.21.23. Psalm. 119.55.97.) and discover our love in
often thinking and speaking of God to his glory ( Psalm. 119.55. Acts. 17.28.
James. 1.17. Malach. 3.16.) and by desiring of his presence (2 Timothy 4.8. Psalm
27.4. and 422.) and by being zealous of his glory above all things, and doing
his will cheerfully, Psalm. 16.3. and 119.97, ^31. Contrary to this love is
such a love of our selves and wordly pleasures, as causes us to leave those
duties undone which God requires of us (1 Ioh. 2.15, 16.) and spiritual
slothfulness ( Revelat. 3.15.) and inconsiderate zeal ( Luke. 9.54.) whereas
the true love of God will move us with Moses and Paul to wish our selves
accursed rather, then that the glory of God should any thing at all be stained
by us, Exodus 32.32, Romans 9.3.

II. We must have God in our Affections by fearing him, above all other
things: because he (above all others) is most powerful and just, Matthew. 10.28.
Esa. 8.13. Hebr. 12.28, 29. Genesis 18.27. Job. 31.23. Now this fear works in us
a care to approve our selves unto God in all things ( Proverb. 8.13. Genesis
20.11. Romans 3.18.) and is a child-like fear, Psalm. 130.4. Genesis 39.9. and 1
Peter. 1.17. Opposites unto this fear, are, the servile and slavish fear (1
John. 4.18.) and presumption (2 Samuel. 4.5.7. Eccles. 11.6. Deuter. 29.19.20.
Jude, 4.) and desperation ( Genesis 4.13. and 1 Kings. 19.4. Acts. 16.27. and 2
Cor. 2.7.) Now this good fear of God is then in us, when it is stronge^ to
move us to good, then the fear of men is to keep us from good, or to move us
unto evil. And when we do not the good we do only or principally for fear
of men, but of God. Now from this good fear proceeds Reverence of the Majesty
of God, in regard whereof we should carry such holy shamefastness in all our
actions, that no unseemely behavior proceed from us, that may any ways be
offensive to him. This holy Reverence was specially prefigured, Deuteronomy. 23.12,
14. Where men are enjoined, when they would ease themselves, to go without the
Host, and carry a Paddle with them to cover that withal, which came from
them; because (says the Lord) I am in the midst of them: whereby the impurity
and filthiness of the Mind was forbidden, more then of the body, and the
equity thereof reaches also unto us. Contrary hereunto is irreverence, and
profaneness, when men regard not how basely, vilely, and unseemly, they behave
themselves before God.





First, because it is the efficient, and impulsive cause. And

Secondly, because it is the final cause or end which the rest propose, which
is for to declare our love toward God. That is, the love of God constraines us
to obey him.







. 4. And the second is like unto it.]

Why is the love of our Neighbor called the

First, because it contains the sum of the

Secondly, because the love of our Neighbor

How is the second Table like unto the first? or,

First, because the second Table of the Moral

Secondly, because the same kind of Punishment,

Thirdly, in regard of the coherence and dependence,

Fourthly, in regard of the Lawgiver, which was one and the same of both,
James, 4.12. And

Fifthly, the second Table is not like unto the

Sixthly, in regard of the subject matter or qualities,

Seventhly, because as the Love of God is the

Here against the words of the text it may be The second Commandment is like
unto the first; therefore the first is not the greatest.

The love of our Neighbor is like unto the love of God,

It may be objected again, If the second Table

First, the love of our Neighbor is like unto

Secondly, the love of God, and of our neighbor viz.

I. In respect of the objects, or things loved: For God and man who are to be
loved are diverse objects.

II. In respect of the original; For the love of our Neighbor springs from
the love of God; but not contrarily.

III. In respect of the degree; for we are to love God more then our Neighbor.

Thou shall love thy neighbor.]





John. 4.20.

As thy self.]



Sicent, As, does not denote an universal and absolute parity, or equality,
but an analogy, and resemblance, which likeness or resemblance principally
consists in these things; namely

First, as we would neither do, nor wish evil unto our selves; so neither
must we unto our neighbor.

Secondly, as we wish well, and do good unto our selves; so we must also unto
our neighbor.

Thirdly, as we do this unto our selves out of a true love unto our selves; so
also must we unto our brethren.

Fourthly, as we love our selves for Gods sake; so we must love our brother
for his sake also.

Fifthly, as we must not so love our selves, that we would sin rather then
displease our selves; so neither must we so love our brethren, that we would
condescend unto evil, rather then displease them.

Sixthly, as we must not love our selves more then God, so neither must we love
our neighbor more then him.

Upon these two hang all the Law and the Prophets.]



Love, Romans 13.10. Love is the fulfilling of the Law.

verse 37) Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart: and thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self.

Thirdly, he has enlarged these two into ten words, Deuter. 10.4. And he wrote
on the Tables

Fourthly, he has yet further enlarged them into Moses and the Prophets, in
this verse. On these two Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets; (...)
pendent, hang, even as we hang a thing upon a nail ( Esaias, 22.23.) so the Law
and the Prophets hang upon these two precepts.

Fifthly, Love, the contents of the Law is twofold; viz.

I. Of God, which consists in worship; and therefore

First, we must worship the true God, with internal worship, and the love of
the heart. Precept 1.

Secondly, we must worship the true God truly: Now this true worship of God is
described, both

I. Generally; that is, we must worship nothing with God, but worship him
without all mixture of Idolatry. Precept 2. And also

II. Particularly: where we learn, that his worship is either.

First, private; for we must honor and reverence his name, and not blaspheme
it. Precept 3. Or

Secondly, public; which consists in the works of the Lords day.

II. Of our brother: Now this love is either

First, external; and consists in duties which are either.

I. Public, and enjoined. Precept 5. Or

II. Private, toward our neighbor: that is,

First, toward his person. Precept 6.

Secondly, toward his chastity. Precept 7.

Thirdly, toward his substance. Precept 8.

Fourthly, toward his reputation, and good name. Precept 9. Or

Secondly, internal; described Precept 10. And thus we see the sum and
contents of the Law.

Why does our Savior reduce all the Commandments

Because as man consists of two things, namely, viz, the love of God, and of
our neighbor) we see, hear, and work all things that are necessary to
salvation. And therefore aptly are they reduced by our Savior unto these two.
Aureum opus, Page 45.

What is the meaning of these words; On these

The meaning is, that all other legal obedience, Moses and the Prophets, does
spring from our love unto God and our neighbor.

In the Prophets also is the promise or doctrine of the Gospel: speak aright
in this place.

He speaks of the doctrine of the Law not of the Promises of the Gospel;
which was the chief Commandment? not, which was the chief Promise? And
therefore CHRIST answers him directly.

VERSE. 43.44.45. He says unto them, How then does David in spirit call him
Lord, saying, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I
make thine enemies, thy footstole? If David then call him Lord, how is he his
Son?
How then does David in Spirit call him Lord.]

David here Prophesying of CHRIST, and ordinarily called The Prophet David, may
move this Quaere, How he was a Prophet, and how he Prophesied?

Prophets, namely

Prophets by inspiration and office, that is, who continued still to be
Prophets as Esaias and Jeremy; now these were properly called Prophets; and
ordinarily the Jews called them Prophetae per missionem, Prophets by message,
Rabbi, David Rimchi praefat in Psalm.

Secondly, some were Prophets only by inspiration; and these lived not as
Prophets, neither continued they in that calling: and thus David and Daniel are
called Prophets, although the one was a King, and the other a Courtier; and
these the Jews called Prophetae per Spiritum sanctum, Prophets by the holy
Spirit only, because their calling was not still to be Prophets. And thus
David was a Prophet, and by the inspiration of the Spirit prophesied of CHRIST.

If it be objected, That by this reason Samuel should not be placed among the
Prophets, because he was a Judge. I answer

Samuel was a Judge, yet he continued still a Prophet, and was Rector of the
School of the Prophets.

Sit thou on my right hand.]





First, in regard of his Deity thus; Sit on my right hand, that is reside with
me, and be equal unto me, and partake equally with me of my Majesty and glory:
thus the Apostle seems to expound the words, Hebr. 1.3.

Secondly, in regard of his Humanity thus; Sit on my right hand, that is, be
thou above all other creatures, and of all other most near and dear unto me,
and do thou perfectly and infinitely abound in virtue, grace, honor and
glory, above all others, Angels and men, Carthus. Page. 282.





Secondly, we grant that the right hand of God

Thirdly, this speech [to sit at Gods right hand] is a figurative speech for
God properly has neither right nor left hand. Here observe that Gods right
hand has a threefold signification in Scripture: namely

I. The right hand of God signifies his power, or omnipotency; by which he
does all things, and also shows himself powerful; as men oftentimes call
their strength, especially in war, by their right hand, by which they most
use to fight against their enemies. So the power of God, especially that which
he shows against his enemies, is signified under the name of his arm, and
right hand, as Exodus 15.6. and Psalm. 118.16. Now in this sense CHRIST is every
where in regard of his Deity, because in power he is equal to his Father,
being God with God; but not in regard of his humanity, he not being (as he is
man) of equal power with the Father: And therefore his Humanity is not every
where.

II. The right hand of God signifies sometimes the word, the second Person in
Trinity, because by him the Father created, preserves, and rules all things.
And the Fathers often by Gods right hand understand the Son of God, as Christ
calls the Spirit the finger of God. Now in this sense it follows only, That
wheresoever the right hand of God, is there CHRIST is; but it follows not,
that there is his Humanity: for that is not wheresoever his Deity is, which is
indeed every where.

III. The right hand of God in this place [Sit thou on my right hand]
signifies the dignity, honor, glory, great power, and felicity of God,
reigning in heaven. So for CHRIST as he is man, to sit at his Fathers right
hand, is nothing else, but that after he had undergone, and overcome his
troublesome labors, and finished his work upon earth, he does sit, that is,
rest with his Father in all felicity and quiet: and has the next seat and
place of dignity, honor, and glory to his Father: and that he enjoys as
great authority and power as any creature can enjoy, viz. a finite power, but
in such sort as it far surpasses the dignity, glory, and power of all other
Creatures, they being all subject to the same. If the Reader would see this
Objection prosecuted, I refer him to Mr. Hill of the knowledge of the true
God, Lib. 2. page 119, 120, 121, 122.

. 3. Until I make thine enemies thy footstool.]

What is the meaning of these words, or,

Paul, who both shows what is meant by sitting at the right hand of God, and
also by the subduing of his Enemies, 1. Corinthians. 15.24, 25, 26. He must reign,
till he has put all enemies under his feet; and put down all rule,
authority, and power. And the last enemy which shall be d^stroyed is death. In
these words, these four things are implied, and signified; to wit,

First, that the Kingdom of Christ shall have many enemies, who will labor to
oppress both the Church and the word. And

Secondly, that Christ reigns in the midst of his enemies, and is more potent,
and powerful then they all: that is, maugre all their power and policy, he
will so save and defend his Church on the Earth, that they shall never wholly
prevail against it. Yea

Thirdly, that at length, his enemies shall be made his Footstool; that is,
at the day of judgment he will save, and glorify his Church, but cast all the
Enemies thereof into eternal fire, And

Fourthly, that all the Enemies of the Church being abolished, vanquished, and
put down, CHRIST shall deliver up the Kingdom to his Father: which is not to
be understood of a direct, and real resigning, or forsaking, or giving over of
the Kingdom [For of his Kingdom there shall be no end] but of a double change
of the form of the Kingdom; For

I. In the triumphant Church he shall rule, and reign, without the means of
the Ministry, of the word, and Sacraments; by which he governes, and regulates
the Militant Church* And

II. The triumphant Church shall be subject to no opposition of enemies, nor
disturbance of any, as the Militant Church now is.

CHAP. XXIII.
VERSE. 2, 3, 4, 5. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat: All therefore
whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do, but do not ye after
their works; for they say, and do not. For they bind heavy burdens, and
greevous to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders, but they themselves will
not move them with one of their fingers. But all their works they do, for to
be seen of men; they make broad their Phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of
their garments.
The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat: All therefore whatsoever they bid
you observe, that observe, and do.]





I. That there was a God, and that he was one. And

II. That the Messiah should come, and by his coming bring much benefit to
mankind. And

III. That the Law of Moses and the Commonwealth of the Jews, was of and from
God. And

IV. That the seed of Abraham was the Church of God. And

V. That the souls did not dye with the bodies, but remained immortal. And

VI. That there should be a Resurrection, when all men should receive according
to their works: and diverse the like truths.



I. They believed that there was but one true God, and one only Person: and
hence they said that CHRIST blasphemed, when he affirmed himself to be the
true Son of God, and true God, John 8. And

II. They thought, that the Messiah should only have a humane nature, and
taught that he should restore the temporal Kingdom of the Jews: and from the
School of the Pharisees it came, that the Mother of the Sons of Zebedee said
unto Christ, Lord let one of my Sons sit on thy right hand, and the other on
thy left, in thy Kingdom. And hence also it was that after Christ's
Resurrection, his Disciples asked him, Master will thou now restore the
Kingdom to Israel?

III. They taught that the observation of the Law consisted only in outward
works, and not in inward; and that the Law did not injoyne absolute obedience.
And

IV. They attributed many things, though not all to Stoicall fate; and taught
that there was freewill in man, it being (for the most part) in his power,
either to do, or to leave undone that which was good, but yet in some things
God and Fate helped. And hence they affirmed that it was in the power of man to
fulfill the Law of God; yea hence they were puffed up with pride, and boasting,
and confidence in their own merits, and righteousness (as perfect obeyers of
the whole Law) and despised the grace, and righteousness of GOD. And

V. They so strictly abstained themselves from all works on the Sabbath day,
and taught others so to do; that the healing of the sick upon that day
(although it were done with a word) and the plucking of ears of corn
(although for hunger) were esteemed heinous offenses by them. Jf the Reader
would see more of their errors, J refer him to Hospinian de origin Monach.
Page 4.6.

The Papists produce this place to prove the authority of the Church in judging
of matters of faith; Bellarmine (de verbo Dei, Lib. 3. Cap. 5. Testimon. 3.)
argues thus, Our Savior here says, The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses
chair, all things that they bid you observe, that observe and do: Therefore
we must stand to the Judgment, and interpretation of the Prelates of the
Church. Christ (says he) in this Chapter does principally tax and reprove the
sins and vices of the Pharisees: and because those who are infirm and weak
may think or collect from hence, that the Prelates are not to be believed or
obeyed, because their lives are vicious and corrupt: therefore our Savior does
first teach, that notwithstanding the evil life of the Pharisees, their
doctrine is to be believed and obeyed in all things.

Bartholomeus Latomus (in defens. advers. Bucer) argues thus: In these words of
our Saviors (says he) the authority of the Ministers of the Church is laid
down, which authority of theirs is absolute; and therefore the authority of
the Ministers is necessary to be obeyed.

Stapleton, the Rhemists, and others argue thus; Christ says, The Pharisees
sit in Moses chair, and all things that they shall say, do. Where by the
Chair of Moses is signified the infallibity of the Priesthood under the Law,
and was a type of the truth of Religion, in the Apostolic Sea of Rome. Vide
Staplet. apud Whitak. de author. Script. Lib. 3. page 4, 4 and Bp. Mort. Lib.
3. Cap. 15.. 5.

Moses Chair,

Moses chair is meant neither outward succession, nor judicial authority, but
the profession of Moses Law. Or, To sit in the chair of Moses, is not to
succeed in the place of Moses, but to teach according to the Law of Moses; the
Pharisees then teaching Doctrines not agreeable to that Law, did therein not
sit in Moses Chair. And therefore from this place is neither proved an
infallibility of judgment in the Prelates of the Church to interpret
Scripture, nor a necessity of obedience.

Moses chair, that is, to say according to Moses Law, must be followed. And
thus that which Bellarmine affirms, [That the Doctrine of the Prelates must be
obeyed, and beleeved] is to be restrained and limited, that is, it must not be
understood absolutely, and simply, but as they sit in Moses chair, that is,
teach that which Moses taught. For otherwise it is, Captio ab Hom^nymia,
because this word Chair may be taken two manner of ways; namely either

I. For the Doctrine they taught: Or

II. For their office, or persons. Now it is evident and clear, that CHRIST
here commands, that the Prelates of the Church should be heard, but in those
things only in which they teach nothing contrary to the revealed will of God;
and therefore obedience is due unto those who have the oversight of our
souls, and is to be performed with this exception, if they injoyne and teach
nothing contrary to God. And therefore we should always seriously consider,
whether the thing commanded and taught by them be contrary, or according to the
Commandment of God; and to know this, is required the judgment of discerning.
If we should demand of any of the Papists above mentioned: Whether they think
the people of the Jews were bound to believe the Scribes and Pharisees, when
they affirmed, and taught. That CHRIST was an impostor, and deceiver; J know
none of them would have held the affirmative, but would have blushed to say it:
and therefore, let them remember themselves, and allow of some fitting
limitation in the interpretation of these words, Whatsoever* they shall say
unto you, observe and do. If the opponents and objecters will not grant us
without proof, that these words are to be restrained, and limited, we can
easily evince it by these ensuing reasons; namely,

First, because both their own and other Expositors have limited the words; As

I. Stella (in hunc locum) says, They sit in Moses Chair, Cum bona docebant,
etc. when they taught good things, such as Moses prescribed.

II. Iansenius (Concord. in Matthew. 23.2. Cap. 120.) says, Non est illis
obediendum, etc. They must not be obeyed when they teach any thing contrary to
that Chair.

III. Emanuel Sa (in hunc locum) says, Non tenemur hoc loco etc. This place
binds us not to obey them, if they teach that which is evil, for that is to
teach against the Chair.

IV. Maldonate (in locum) says, de doctrina legis, et Mosis loquitur, He
speaks only of the Doctrine of the Law and of Moses.

V. Carthusian (in hunc locum) says, Hoc non est absolute, et universaliter
intelligendum etc. When our Savior says, Do whatsoever they bid you, we must
not understand it universally and absolutely, but of their lessons and
doctrines which are not contrary to the Law of Moses.

VI. Erasmus (s. Matthew. 23.3.) says, Cathedra Mosis etc. Christ did not
understand by Moses chair the doctrine of the Priests, but the Law of Moses;
neither were they to be obeyed, further then they taught according to that Law.

VII. Ferus (Lib. 3. in Matthew. 23.) says, Praeceptum Christi, quaecunque
dixerius vobis servate et facite ctc. That CHRIST'S Commandment, Observe and
do whatsoever they bid you, bound them not to observe all the Decrees of the
Pharisees, but so far forth as they agreed with the Law, etc.

VIII. Let the Reader if he desires more Expositors, read Gloss. in Matthew.
23.2. and Nicol. Gorr. ibid. and Ariat Montan. elucid. ibid. and Aquinas 2. 2.
qu. 104. Artic. 5. et August. Tract. 46. in Johan. Where he shall hear them
with one mouth and mind say, Sedere super cathedram Mosis etc. To sit in Moses
chair, is to teach according to the Doctrine and rule of Moses Law, and to
command things agreeable thereunto; that is to say, true doctrine, and the same
that Moses taught: wherein only they might be followed, and no further.

Secondly, because if the Pharisees be not to be heard, believed, and obeyed,
in all things, but in some only, then of necessity we must have another rule,
whereby we may be directed in our hearing; for else how can we tell wherein we
must follow our teachers, and wherein we must not. And therefore there must be
a Judge in Religion, and the matters of faith above the interpretation of the
Prelates of the Church.

Thirdly, the Pharisees taught many errors and blasphemies; and that

I. Both against the Law of Moses, Matthew. 5.20. and 15.3. and 25.13. And also

II. Against the divinity of Christ ( Mark 14.64. John 7.48. and 8.13. and
9.22, 24. and 19.7, 15.) And in this regard our Savior bad his Disciples,
Matthew. 16.6, 12. to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which was their
Doctrine. Wherein he had gaine-said himself, if by Moses chair he had meant
any thing but the prescript of the Law, or by those words had commanded us, in
all points to do according to the Prelates doctrine: for then the Jews must
not have honored Parents, nor loved their Enemies, nor believed in Christ,
because the Pharisees taught against these things. I enlarge not this here,
because both in the foregoing question something has been said, and in the
following answer of this objection something shall be said of the errors of
the Pharisees.

Fourthly, Moses himself did preadmonish us not always to hear all, who sat
in his chair, Deuter. 18, 19, 30, 21. And therefore the Prelates are not to be
obeyed in all things which they teach.

Latomus his Argument: CHRIST says, Whatsoever they bid you do, that observe
and do; therefore the authority of Ministers is necessarily to be obeyed in
all that they teach. We deny the consequent; and that for these reasons, viz.

I. Because when the authority of the Ministers is named in the conclusion,
either it is to be understood,

First, of all Ministers together in general; now if he thus understand it, he
declines wholly from the true sense of the place: for when CHRIST named the
Scribes and Pharisees he understood not every one, as appears by that which
follows, They love the uppermost rooms at Feasts, verse 6. And they say and
do not, verse 3. And do not after their works, verse 3. All which cannot be
understood but of particular persons; and almost all the Fathers have applied
this [Doe not after their workes] unto particular Pastors: as if our Savior
would say (according to the Aphorism) Vivimus legibus non exemplis; People
must frame, and direct their lives, according to the Pastors Doctrine out of
the word, and not according to their lives and conversations. Or

Secondly, by the authority of Ministers, is to be understood every particular
Minister whatsoever; now if he thus understand it; then

I. He does not touch the question, which is concerning the authority of the
Church, in judging of matters of Faith; for the Church is not in every
particular Minister. And

II. The Papists themselves will not say, That every one that sits in Cathedra,
or to whom is given Ecclesiastical authority, is an absolute Judge of all
controversies.

II. Because if the authority of the Ministers of the Church be absolute, and
that it is necessary to obey them in all they teach; then it is necessary, that
such authority should have been given unto the Scribes and Pharisees, and such
an infallibility in them. For if the Papists will go about from hence to prove
the absolute authority of the Church in judging of all matters of faith and
doctrine; then they must needs grant such a power, and authority to have been
in the Scribes and Pharisees; and therefore seeing theirs was not absolute and
supreme, no more is the Ministers now. That the authority of the Scribes and
Pharisees was not absolute, appears both by the several expositions of the
Interpreters of this text, mentioned in the former answer; and also by this
Medium. If their authority had been absolute, and that it was necessary to
have obeyed them in all things, then we should never have departed from them;
but this is false; for Matthew. 16.6. CHRIST says, Take heed of the leaven of
the Pharisees, which the Evangelist expounds to be meant of their Doctrine.
Whence we see plainly, that somethings were to be avoided which they maintained
and taught; therefore these words of CHRIST'S [The Chair of Moses] do not
signify absolute authority.

III. Because if the authority of the Scribes and Pharisees had been such, as
that it was necessary to obey them in all things; then they should have been
the rule of truth; but this is false: for the rule is always like it self,
and never declines a Rectitudine, from truth, and rectitude, but the Pharisees
were not always like themselves, (that is, as those that sit in Moses Chair)
and very often did depart from the sincerity of Doctrine, as appears thus. Jf
sometimes they taught those which was true, and sometimes (yea more often) that
which was false, then they did often depart from the truth, and sincerity of
Doctrine: But the former is true, therefore the latter. The Assumption is
proved from Matthew 15.3, 4, 5, 6. and 16.6. From whence it appears plainly,
That the Scribes and Pharisees not only offended in this, that they did not
order their lives and conversations according to the prescript rule of the Law,
which they propounded to others: but also in the expounding of that Law, they
did heap together many Traditions not lawful yea and weaken the Law it self.
Whence it follows, that those who sat in Moses chair were neither the rule
of the Law, or truth, neither the rule, and absolute Judges of Interpretations.
J conclude therefore this great Objection thus: Seeing the Scribes and
Pharisees sometimes taught amiss, and sometimes were to be avoided; it is
therefore necessary that when Christ says here, Because they sit in Moses
Chair, therefore obey them, that by the Chair of Moses is to be understood
not any authority of theirs, but rather some Rule, by which it might appear,
when they taught well, when ill. I hold this an insoluble and plain solution,
If the Pastors sitting in the Chair, are then to be obeyed when they teach
according to the chair, and if teaching contrary to the chair they are not to
be obeyed, (which* think none will deny) then the chair is the Rule of
obedience due unto the Pastors; but this chair is the Law of Moses (as was
amply proved before) therefore the Law of Moses 1 the Rule of obedience, which
Law is the Scripture, and consequently the Scripture is that Rule of obedience.

They make broad their Phylacteries.]

Having spoken before of these Phylacteries J here pass them by; but if the
studious Reader would know further, what these Phylacteries were, what was
written in them, whence they were so called, and what is meant by the enlarging
of their Phylacteries: Let him read Senens. biblioth. sanct. Lib. 2. Page 9^.
et Sylloge vocum exotic. Page 153. etc. ad 160. et Godwyn, in his Jewish
antiquities, Lib. 1. Cap. 10. Page 51, 52, 53, 54.

VERSE. 6. And they love the chief seats in Synagogues:


Philo Iudaeus (quod omnis probus. page 679.) The chief Rabbis sat in
reserved chaires, these are those chief Seats in the Synagogues, which the
Scribes and Pharisees so much affected Their compa^ions sat upon benches, or
lower forms; and their Scholars on the ground, at the feet of their Teachers.

VERSE. 9. And call no man your Father upon the Earth; for one is your Father
which is in heaven.
Father?

Grecians were wont to call the Students in Physic, (...) (Erasm. epist.
dedic, Hilario praefix.) The children of the Physicians; so the Jews termed
the Scholars of the Prophets. Filis Prophetarum, The children of the Pr phets,
(2. King. 6.1.) by reason whereof the Prophets sometimes were called Fathers:
as appears by Elisha's cry, My Father, my Father, (2. King. 2.12.) whence the
Rabbis grew very ambitious of the name Father, which was the reason of this
our Saviors speech, Call no man Father upon earth.

How can this command [Call no man Father upon stand with the Law of God (which
commands honor to parents) and the precept of Christ (which elsewhere
enjoynes children to honor their parents) and the practice of the Apostle
Paul, who calls himself the Corinthians Father.

First, this place must not be understood simply,

I. St. Paul should have been contrary to his Master, who makes himself a
spiritual Father to the Corinthians, 1. Corinthians. 4.15. Yea

II. Christ then should have been contrary to his Father, who has himself
termed Superiors Fathers, in the fifth Commandment; and commanded Inferiors
to honor them, a part of which honor is to call them Father. Yea

III. Christ then should have been contrary to himself, who rep^oveth the
Scribes and Pharisees, because they perverted the children, and suffered them
not to do any thing for their Fathers and Mothers, Mark 7.11. And therefore
Christ does not forbid a bare and simple appellation of Father.

Secondly, Christ reproves here only the ambitious

Thirdly, our Saviors meaning here is, that they

Fourthly, a Christian has in him a double man;

I. An old man, in which respect he has a carnal Father, whom he must honor
so long as he enjoyes his life. And

II. A new man, in which respect he has God to be his Father, who in CHRIST
has regenerated him by his holy Spirit, and has given him power to be made
his Son.

Fifthly, although there be some who in Scripture Paul calls Timothy Son (^.
Timoth. 1.2, 18.) in regard of the Gospel which he had made known unto him.

Sixthly, St. Paul calls himself (1. Corinthians. 4.15.) Corinthians in respect of
their conversion, but not primarily, but secondarily; because he was only the
instrument which God first used for their vocation, and regeneration by the
Gospel, and not the author or efficient cause thereof.

VERSE. 13, 14, 15. But we unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites for ye
shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men; for ye neither go in your selves,
neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in. Woe unto you Scribes, and
Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye devour Widows houses, and for a pretense make
long prayer; therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation. Woe unto you
Scribes, and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye compass Sea and Land to make one
Proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child of Hell then
your selves.
Woe unto you Scribes, and Pharisees, Hypocrites.]

These Scribes and Pharisees were of high esteem, and reckoning, both in their
own conceits, and also in the opinion of others, none being thought better
then they; and yet we see here that Christ slights them, calls them Hypocrites,
and denounces many Woes against them in this Chapter, to teach us:





First, from these places, Psalm, 50.22. Esa, 58.3. Galath. 6.3. Revelat. 3.17.
Matthew. 3.9. and 7.22. John 6.39. Secondly, because God sees not as man sees:
man sees only the outward appearance, but God sees the heart, 1. Samuel 16.7.
Thirdly, because we are partial Judges in our own causes, every man's way
seeming good in his own eyes, Proverb. 16.2. but God judges according to
truth.






I. We must take heed of all popular judgment, (Non si quid turbida Roma) and
not believe the applauses and acclamations, and good reports of the world: in a
word, we must not therefore think our selves good, because our Neighbors, and
the world proclaim us to be such.

II. We must take heed of our owe proper judgment, and not rest upon a
self-conceit of goodness, as many do, who think themselves to be good
enough, and their sins to be but small and trivial. Self-love makes us to
think well of our selves, and hinders us from condemning our selves; for no
Malefactor would die for his offense (though never so heinous) if he were made
his own Judge.

III. We must be careful to fit and prepare our selves for the judgment of
God, laboring that we may be such, as that he may approve of us, as follows
in the next Answer.

Hebr. 9.27.) from whose eye nothing is hid, but all things manifest; And
therefore we should be careful to labor to do those things, which are
agreeable unto his word, and shall be approved by him; for woe be unto those
who are wicked in Gods sight.



First, he sees some great and rich men, which justify themselves, and will
not be reproved: and unto these he says, That riches avail not at the 10.2.
but Potentes potenter tormenta patientur, great men shall have great torments.

Secondly, the Lord sees some who have a form Timoth. 3.5. and these are
either

I. Private Papists, who join with us in outward show, and come to the house
of God with us, but their hearts run after the Pope. Or

II. Atheists, who seem to believe God, but their hearts are atheistical,
Psalm 14.1. Now these the Lord persuades not to deceive themselves, for they
cannot deceive him, Galath. 6.7.

Thirdly, he sees some who have honesty without That except their
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees they
cannot be saved, Mat. 5.20. Such neither

I. Hungring after the word of God, or religious duties. Nor

II. Being sensible of their sins, or sorrowful for them. Nor

III. Seeking the glory of God in all things, and above all things.

Fourthly, the Lord sees some, who serve him That the hope of the Hypocrite
shall perish.

Fifthly, the Lord sees some who have many Depart from me I know ye not,
Matthew. 7.25.

How may we be certain that the Lord will

We may be sure he will,

First, the Rule is, Do that which is good, and agreeable to the Law, and word
of God? The Caution is, Do nothing which is evil, or contrary to the Law and
word of God. And both Rule and Caution is laid down, Psalm 34.14. Eschew
evil, and do good.

Secondly, the Rule is, Do that which is good in sincerity, and truth; the
Caution is, Do not that which is good for some second end and scope. We must
serve God in fear, and love, and out of a desire to approve our selves unto
him, and to glorify his name.

Thirdly, the Rule is, Use carefully the means which God has appointed for
the making of us good: the Caution is, neglect not those holy means which God
has ordained. We must. I. Hunger after the word of God, and delight in the
hearing thereof: and not call it a weariness unto us, or a hard saying. II. We
must be diligent in the duties and exercises of holiness, and not remiss or
careless. III. We must frequent, and delight our selves in the society of the
righteous; for of good men we shall learn goodness.

Fourthly, the Rule is, be zealous in the service of the Lord, the Caution is,
be not key-cold, or luke warm, Apocal. 3.15. We must not only labor to
endure derision, danger; and loss, rather then neglect or omit the Service of
God, but we must also despise the care of worldly things, yea necessary things,
rather than forget our duty toward God: For as the body is more worth then
meat, so is the soul more worth then the body; and therefore the service of
our God, and the salvation of our souls, are to be preferred far before all
other things.

Fifthly, the Rule is, be industrious and constant in the service of God, and
works of holiness; the Caution is, serve not God by fits and starts. We must
not sometimes serve God, and sometimes Satan, or sometimes withstand sin,
and sometimes yield unto it; but we must strive and struggle against sin, and
labor after whatsoever is good, for term of life,

Sixthly, the Rule is, be circumspect and watchful, Mark 13.33. and 1. Peter
5.8. The Caution is, be not careless and negligent. We must

I. Like Prometheus be wise before hand, and warily avoid all the occasions of
evil. And

II. We must like Epimetheus, at least be wise after hand, examining our former
life, and our former errors; that we may avoid them for the time to come, and
seriously repent us o^ what is past. Here

First, A Longinquo, we must examine the errors of our life; and see whether

I. They remain or not, at least in our affections and will. Or

II. Whether we be changed from evil to evil, or from evil to worse, as from
lying to blasphemy and perjury; from prodigality to usury and oppression, and
the like; now this is to be perverted and not converted.

Secondy, A propinquo, we must examine our lives and actions, for the last day,
or week, or month, or year; and see what we have done which we should not
have committed, and what we have not done, which we should not have omitted,

Seventhly, the Rule is, we must walk wisely, as well as warily: the Caution
is, we must not walk foolishly, and imprudently, Ephesians. 5.15. We must observe
and mark

I. What sins do most annoy us, and assail us; and oppose these manfully
even unto blood, Hebr. 12.1, 4. And

II. What the occasions of sin are which most usually prevail against us,
and deceive us. And

III. By what ways and means we may the easiliest, and best resist both sin
and the occasions thereof. Now here is need both of invention, and wisdom,
and labor, how we may most easily, and safely, and happily, both hinder the
course of sin and further the course of piety and holiness. J conclude with
the Apostle: He that walks according to these Rules, peace shall be upon him,
and God will approve of him. Galath. 6.16.

. 2. Ye shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against

We in opposition to the Church of Rome affirm, that the Militant and Visible
Church may err, and we confirm it from this place, and by other midstes thus.

First, Psalmist says, All men are Liars, that is, subject to this vanity,
that they may fall, and err, and deceive, and be deceived, according to that
trite saying, Humanum est errare, Man may err, and is subject and prone unto
error.

Secondly, the Militant Church often in this life sins, yea may sin
always; for no member of the Church Militant is absolutely freed and exempted
from sin: Now if it may sin, then in like manner, yea much more, it may
err. For sin (which is the vice of the will) is worse then simply to err,
or be deceived in the mind and understanding.

Thirdly, betwixt the Church Militant, and Triumphant this is the difference,
that the Triumphant Church in Heaven is freed both from sin and error; and
therefore the Church Militant labors and travels with both..

Fourthly, we are commanded to examine the words and works, doctrines and
deeds of all, by the Rule of the word of God. Hence our Savior in this Chapter
bids his Apostles, and the multitude to hear the Scribes and Pharisees, but
yet withal they must examine whether they taught according to the Law of
Moses; and in these verses, and those which follow he shows direct and
palpable errors in them, although they were indeed the Governors, and in
esteem the principal members of the Judaicall Church. Read Matthew. 5. and
16.6. and 1. Thessal. 5.20. and 1. John, 4.1. and Philip. 3.3. From these
places we may directly conclude, That the Rulers and Governors of the Church
may err, and the people may err, and consequently the Church may err,
because that consists only of Pastors and people.

Fifthly, Augustine (Contra Epist. Pelag. lib. 4. Cap. 7.) says, Quomodo
Ecclesia in isto tempore perfecta sine ruga et macula, cujus membra non
mendaciter confitentur, se habere peccata. How can the Church in this world be
perfect and without spot or wrinkle, seeing the members thereof do most truly
confess that they are stained and contaminated with sin?

VERSE. 16, 17, 18, 19. Woe unto you ye blind guides, which say, Whosoever shall
swear by the Temple, it is nothing: But whosoever shall swear by the gold of
the Temple he is a debtor. Ye fools and blind: Whether is greater, the Gold,
or the Temple that sanctifies the Gold. And whosoever shall swear by the
Altar it is nothing, but whosoever swears by the gift that is upon it, he is
guilty. Ye fools and blind, whether is greater, the gift or the Altar that
sanctifies the gift.
Whosoever shall swear by the Temple it is nothing.]

The Jews had certain forms of foolishness, and also pretenses for their
Swearing; teaching that if men swear by the Temple, or Altar, it was no sin.
And thus amongst us many have these, or the like pretenses for their wicked
oaths; viz.

First, some say they swear the truth, and nothing else: but every truth must
not be sworn, the Lord forbidding all swearing in ordinary communication.

Secondly, other ignorant people say, they swear by nothing but good things;
but this does not extenuate, but aggravate the offense, in the abuse thereof.

Thirdly, others say, they cannot be believed upon their bare words, and
therefore they are enforced to swear: but Gods Commandments must not be
broken, to win credit in the world, or to our own speeches.

Fourthly, others, as soldiers and young gallants, use to swear to testify
their courage and gentry: but let them mark the third Commandment, where the
Lord (who performs all he speaks) has said, That he will not hold him
guiltless, who takes his name in vain.

Ye fools and blind.]

We may note here how CHRIST openly opposes himself against all error and
false-hood; although it be in the Rulers and Governors of the Church, or in
the whole Church, to teach us.



First, we must not betray the truth, but stand for it, although like Elias we
be alone and forsaken of all, 1 Kings, 19.10, 14.

Secondly, we must not forbear to publish, and profess the truth, although
the Governors of the Church should command us, Acts, 4.19. and 5.29.

Thirdly, we must not flinch from the truth, nor fear to profess and
maintain it, although the King himself with fire and faggot should enjoyne it.
Daniel. 3.18, And the reason of all this is double, to wit.

I. Because they who fear men, fear not God. John. 12.43. Galath. 1.10. And

II. Because those who deny Christ, shall be denied by him.







I. Those who dare not reprove the sins of those great men who are under
their charge:

II. Those also deserve reproof, who dare not profess CHRIST and the truth,
in the times, and places of danger, and persecution: because we should
prefer God and the truth, before our own lives.

How must our profession, and boldness in

First, let that be certain and true, which we

Secondly, let that be fit, and necessary to be

Thirdly, let us have a warrant, and calling for

I. Because our ordinary callings warrant us: thus Ministers who are set over,
and appointed to speak may reprove those things which others have no warrant
to tax; and Counselors may speak those things which becomes not an ordinary
man to utter. Or

II. Because we are friends unto, and intimate with those who deserve for some
thing or other to be reproved: for the greater our acquaintance is, the better
is our warrant to speak. Or

III. Because we groan under the same burden; if we see others oppressed, and
wronged, and we our selves be in the same case, we may then (J conceive) very
lawfully complain of our injuries and wrongs. Or

IV. Because we are Christians, and Gods glory is endangerd: and therefore our
general calling warrants us to speak and reprove. Or

V. Because we have opportunity, and fit time to speak; and therefore are
warranted by a special calling and providence of God, who has offered unto us
so fit an occasion.

Fourthly, let us exhort, dehort, and reprove, prudently,

I. Let us take the fittest opportunity, and wait for the aptest occasion, when
there is hope that we may speak, and persuade, and reprove, and yet not
provoke unto anger. For every time is not fit for reproof.

II. Let us reprove gently, and in the spirit of meekness; not in
bitterness, or with satyricall taunts or checks.

Fifthly, Let us when we either reprove or admonish,

Does not our Savior contradict himself, in Matthew. 5.22. he said, Whosoever
shall say unto his brother Racha shall be in danger of the Counsel, but
whosoever shall say: Thou fool shall be in danger of hell fire: and yet
himself here calls the Scribes and Pharisees, Fools and blind guides.

As the true Christian, and child of God, viz, carnal and spiritual, so there
is in him a double anger namely, carnal and spiritual; now

The carnal anger is the fruit of the flesh, and of man, as he is corrupted;
and therefore is sin and death, Romans 8.6. and as evil is forbidden by
CHRIST. But

The spiritual anger is the fruit of the Spirit, unto which the faithful is
led and moved, that thereby sin may be amended, and vice reformed; and by
this Spirit, was CHRIST led unto this spiritual anger against the Pharisees;
which is rather to be called Christian reproof then anger.

When wicked men are angry, they are transported with madness, fury, and rage;
not that they may thereby amend those with whom they are angry, but that they
may oppress, disgrace, or destroy them. And this was the anger of the Jews
against the Prophets, and the promised Messiah. Now that anger which proceeds
from pride, hatred, contempt, and a study of revenge is absolutely forbidden as
sinful: but this prohibition does not take away neither public nor private
reproves which are joined and accompanied with Love: And thus CHRIST out of
his Love unto the Pharisees, and his duty to God, as he was a Prophet, and his
desire that they might be amended calls them fools and blind guides.

Whosoever swears by the gift that is upon the Altar, is guilty.]



Allium, porrum, and caepas inter Deos jurejurando habuerunt Aegyptii. Plin.
Lib. 19. Cap. 6. Item Iuvenalis Sat. 15) but the Jews chiefly by Jerusalem, by
the Temple, by the gold of the Temple, by the Altar, and the gift on the Altar,
Now this gift in Hebrew was called Corban, and it was one of those oaths,
which in our Savior Christ's time the Scribes and Pharisees accounted
Principally obligatory. If any swore by the Altar it was nothing: but if any
swore by the oblation of the Altar, he was bound to perform it. Hence although
Gods Law enjoined honor, and relief toward Parents, yet if they had bound
then selves by this oath Corban, that they would not help or releeve them,
then they taught they were discharged. Joseph contr. Apion. lib. 1. Page 147.

Whether is greater, the gift, or the Altar that sanctifies the gift.]

Because Smaltius indeed produces many Arguments to prove that the death of
Christ was no Sacrifice; therefore some of the Schoolmen, and Jesuits, for
the exercise of their wit, and disputation sake, frame many Arguments for the
same purpose, one of which is this.



Perkins (in his reformed Catholic) answers, That the divinity of Christ was
this Altar upon which the humanity was sacrificed: but I dare not subscribe to
this there being no similitude or resemblance between an Altar, and the
divinity of Christ. For

I. Wherein can wood or stone be like unto the divinity of CHRIST? and how may
we lawfully compare it unto these, seeing in the Law we are forbidden to liken
God unto wood or stone?

II. Every Altar seems to be inferriour to its sacrifice, but the divinity of
Christ is superior to his humanity: therefore his divinity was not the Altar
whereon his humanity was offered.

Against this, this place may be objected; our Whether is greater, the gift, or
the Altar that sanctifies the gift? wherein Christ seems to imply, That the
altar is greater then the sacrifice. To this we answer;

That as the Altar sanctifies the gift,

III. The divinity of Christ may indeed be said to be an Altar, but not save
only a Metaphorical one: now we enquire after a true Altar, for the Papists
say, that a true sacrifice should have a true Altar; and we say, that the death
of CHRIST is a true sacrifice (and not as some of the Transilvanians say, that
it may in some sort be called Metaphorically a Sacrifice) and therefore it
requires a true Altar.

Secondly, the vulgar answer is, that the Cross cross properly is not an
Altar, although it is frequent with the Fathers to call the death of Christ,
Sacrificium crucis, the sacrifice of the cross; and St. Peter says (1 Peter
2.24.) That CHRIST bare our sins in his own body on the tree; and St. Paul
says* ( Colos. 2.15.) Having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a show
of them openly, triumphing ever them in it, that is, in the cross. And the
same Apostle says, That he will glory in nothing save in the Cross of CHRIST:
and Bellarmine, when he had accurately handled all the things which belong unto
a Sacrifice, he can find nothing to make an Altar of, but the Cross: But the
Cross is not an Altar properly so called, for the cross, and the Altar differ
in their very ends, and scope, for the cross is ordained for punishment, and
the Altar for sacrifice.

Thirdly, we answer, those things which are required

I. Some things belong unto the very essence and nature of a Sacrifice. And

II. Some things belong unto the solemnity, decency, and comeliness of a
Sacrifice. Now an Altar does not belong unto the first sort, but unto the
second; and therefore there may be a sacrifice without an Altar.

Fourthly, we answer, that usual and ordinary

VERSE. 20.21. Who so therefore shall swear by the Altar, swears by it, and
all things thereon. And who so swears by the Temple, swears by it, and him
that dwells therein.


Rhemists (in hunc locum) err, who maintains swearing by the name of Saints.
The truth of this answer appears evidently by these particulars; viz.

First, God commands that we should swear only by his Name, Deuteronomy. 6.13. and
10.20. Exodus 23.13.

Secondly, God reproves those which swear by any other then by him: as
Zephan. 1.5.

Thirdly, Invocation belongs only unto God, but the taking of an oath is a
kind of invocation; therefore it is a service due only unto God.

Fourthly, in taking of an Oath, we call God to be a witness unto our Soul;
but God only knows the secrets of the heart, and neither Angel nor Saint,
nor any other Creature; and therefore we are to swear by none but God only.

Fifthly, he that swears, gives unto him by whom he swears, power to
punish, if he swear falsely; but God only is able to punish the Soul, Matthew.
10.28. And therefore we must swear only by him.

Rhemists object thus, It is lawful to swear by the name of Saints, because
all is referred to the honor of God; as, he that swears by the Temple,
swears by him that dwells therein.

verse. 16. CHRIST here shows, that they could not avoid swearing by God when
they did swear by the Temple, because it was the place of his habitation: and
so they did in such an oath take the name of God in vain. And thus we see the
boldness of our Rhemists, who dare justify swearing by creatures by the same
reason that CHRIST condemns it.



He that swears by heaves swears by the throne of God, he should be
contrary to himself: [for elsewhere he says, Swear not at all, neither by
heaven, for it is the throne of God, Matthew. 5.34.]

VERSE. 23. Woe unto you Scribes, and Pharisees, hypocrites; for ye pay tithe
of mint and annise, and cummin, and have omitted the weightier
What things in general were tithe able amongst the Jews?

First, their yearly increase, was either cattle, verse.

Secondly, after many corruptions in the Church of the Jews, many things
became questionable, whether they were citheable or no? whence the high Court
of their Sanhedrim decreed, That in the things doubtful which they termed
(Demai) though they paid neither first, nor poor men's tithe, yet they should
pay a second tithe, and a small heave offering; namely, one part of an hundred.
Moses Rotsens. fol. 199. Colum. 3. Now mint, annise, and cummin, seem to have
been of these doubtful things, in which, though the decree of their Sanhedrim
required but one in the hundred, yet the Pharisees would pay a just tenth; as
appears by this verse; whence it was, that they boasted, That they gave tithes
of all that they possessed. Luke, 18.12. In which they out-stripped the other
Jews, who in these payments, took the liberty granted them in the Sanhedrim.

VERSE. 24. Ye blind guides,
Bellarmine (Lib. 2. Cap. 1. de Peccato) produces this place for the proof of
Venial sins; Gnats, and some to Camels; and Luke. 6. some to motes, some to
beams; and therefore some are venial, some mortal.

First, these are proverbiall speeches, and therefore

Secondly, that which is a gnat or a mote comparatively, Bellarmine himself (I
know) would confess if he were alive, that simple fornication were but a small
sin, in comparison of poisoning, and murdering, the Pope, and Cardinals, and
Clergy of Rome, and burning to ashes the whole City: but from hence to
conclude, that therefore fornication is a venial sin, were

I. To fall into a heathenist error (Non est flagitium, juvenem fornicari) who
thought that for a young man to commit fornication with a single woman, was a
pardonable offense.

II. This were to contradict, and oppose the Apostle Paul even in the very
terms; who distinguishes, and distinctly names Adultery and Fornication, and
positively affirms, that not only the Adulterer, but also the fornicator,
shall never enter into the Kingdom of heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9, 13.

ye least good works merit eternal life as well as the greatest, and
therefore not a mote, but a beam is in their eye, who cannot see the least
sins truly to merit eternal death.

VERSE 25.26. Woe unto you Scribes, and Pharisees, hypocrites; for ye make
clean the outside of the cup and platter, but within they are full of
extortion an^ excess. Thou blind Pharisee cleanse first that which is within
the cup and platter, that the outside of them may be clean also.
Genesis 22.18.) in whom all the nations of the earth are blessed ( Galath. 3.16.)
who was not sent to condemn the world, but to save it: ( John. 3.17. and
12.47. ^cts. 3.26.) and will he twit, and reproach, and disgrace with
reproachful terms and names any. Yea although they were sinners, yet he is
merciful, and meek, of whom it was foretold. That he should be like a Lamb
dumb before the shearer, not opening his mouth against his persecuters: and we
are commanded by him to learn of him to be lowly, and meek, Matthew. 11.28. And
therefore how does he now upbraid so tartly the Scribes and Pharisees?

John. 7.20. and 8.52.) but out of love. Indeed we read that he called Herod
Fox, and the Pharis^es, fools, and blind guides* verse. 16. and blind
Pharisees* verse 25. and painted sepulchers. verse. 27. and hypocrites, or
dissemblers, and counterfeits, in many verses of this Chapter. but these were
only reprehensions and comminations because they slighted and abused the
Gospel. Hence then we may learn.

Esa. 58. and become Boanerges Sons of Thunder. Moses was the meekest man in
the world, and yet he brake the two Tables for anger, when he saw the Idolatry,
and wickedness of the people, Exodus 32. and afterward was very angry with
Korah and his company, Numb. 16.15. CHRIST was meekness it self, and yet he
was angry when the Gospel was despised, and the Messiah, the true Corner stone
rejected, Mark 3.5. and denounces many woes against such Contemners, verse
13, 14, 15, 16, 25, 27, 29. of this Chapter. Paul, when the Gospel and word of
God was slighted and spurned at, separates the Apostles, and departs, and
shakes off the dust of his feet, Acts, 19.9.

Why must the true Ministers of the word be so

First, because the Gospel is a great grace (Read Romans 15.29. and 1.11. and 1
These. 1.5.) and therefore it is a great ingratitude to slight or reject it,
Ierem. 51.9. Luke, 19.42. Math. 23.37.

Secondly, because the contempt of the Gospel,

Thirdly, because the contempt of the Gospel is

I. In regard of the contemners, whose punishment shall be intolerable if they
repent not. And also

II. In regard of God, who is despised, when his word is disrespected. And
likewise

III. In regard of the Gospel, which becomes odious unto those who enjoy it
not, when it is slighted and contemned of those who possess it.

What is here required of those people or persons

First, it is required, that they endure patiently

Secondly, it is required of them, to take heed Satan provoke us, and the Law
condemn us, and the Lord be angry with us, yet CHRIST could reconcile us, and
would if we prize as we ought the word of reconciliation, Romans 8.25. etc. and 2
Cor. 5.19, 20. But if CHRIST be angry with us, who shall mediate or intercede
for us. If he shut the gates against us ( Matthew. 25.22.) and will not own us:
( Matthew. 7.) what will become of us? how miserable will our estate and
condition be? And therefore if we desire that CHRIST may be our friend, and we
Gods favorites, we must not contemn and reject, but respect, value, and obey
the Preaching of the Gospel.

Our Savior having reproved the hypocrisy of the Scribes and Pharisees, who
made clean only the out side of the cup and platter verse 25; does now exhort
them to cleanse also, yea first, the inside of them. The word here used is
worth observing, namely, (...) which signifies to purge in the Physicians
sense, as follows by and by.

The care of the Pharisees being only to keep the outward man free from the
corruptions of the world, and not the inward pure in the sight of God are
reproved here for it by our Savior, and advised by him unto the contrary: for
this 26 verse contains the counsel of CHRIST, concerning the purging of the
inward man of the heart: where although the proposition seem to be single, yet
it is indeed double; for our Savior grants the Thesis, that he may remove the
Hypothesis.

The Thesis is purge; The Hypothesis is, not the outward man only but the
inward also, and principally; but I conjoyne them together.

Purge? Purge first the inside of the Cup.



Emphasis, and to signify something more then all these: And therefore because
Physicians who are next unto Divines [I say next, because Theologues are
conversant about the soul, Physicians about the body, and Lawyers about the
estate; and in that regard the Divine is first, the Physician second, and the
Lawyer third; for as the body is more worth then the estate, so the soul is
more worth then the body] use this word in their Art much (...) to Purge, and
(...) Purgation, or purging Potion: and because CHRIST professed himself to be
a Physician; and also because the Prophets under the names of diseases and
sicknesses did foretell of the curing of our sins; we will take the word
here in the Physicians sense, (...), Purge, that is, take a purgation, and
purgative potion.

Purging?



First, the medicine purging: wherein two things are considerable; to wit,

I. What this purgation is?

II. How it comes to be purgative? or whence it is, that so small a potion
taken into the stomach, or ventricle, works so much, and produces such
effects? namely

First, by its heat.

Secondly, by its attraction.

Thirdly, by its displicencie.

Fourthly, by its contrariety of nature.

Secondly, in purging we must observe also the manner of the receiving of the
purgation.

Now here three things are worth our consideration; viz

I. What is to be purged out: viz.

First, Plethora, the superfluity of good blood.

Secondly, Pinguedo, fatness, and windy humors. And

Thirdly, Cacochymia, evil, and obnoxionus humors.

II. When we must Purge: namely,

First, in respect of the year, we must purge in the spring.

Secondly, in respect of the disease, we must purge before the malady be come
to its height.

Thirdly, in respect of our age, we must purge in our youth.

III. How long must we purge: to wit,

First, until we have purged the evil humor out of the body. And

Secondly, until we have purged it wholly out of the body. Now of all these
particularly, and in their order.

First, we must consider Medicamentum purgans, the purgation, or purging
potion: wherein we have two things to enquire after, namely

First, Quid? What this purgation is,

I. Some say, that it is the cross, and affliction;

II. The holy Ghost may indeed be said to be Metonymie of the cause for the
effect, otherwise not.

III. CHRIST indeed is the Physician of the Matthew. 9.11.) and the blessed
Spirit is the Apothecary, or the hand that reaches forth Christ unto us, or
(more truly) both: and the purgation it self, is neither affliction it self,
nor tentation it self, nor any external or outward things; but the internal
motions of the holy Spirit in our hearts. For as the substance of the purgation
purges not, but the vapors, fumes, and spirits which arise from thence; so it
is neither temptation it self, nor affliction it self that purges from sin
(for then all that are tempted or afflicted should be pure from all pollution,
which experience proves false) but it is the holy Ghost that works in, and by
these. And therefore if we desire to be washed, and purged from sin and
uncleanness, we must pray unto CHRIST the Physician of our souls, that he
would be pleased to cleanse us by his holy Spirit.

Secondly, let us now consider, Quomodo catharticum?

I. Calore, the purgation purges by his heat Omne medicamentum purgans est
calidum: That all purgatives are hot; and if a potion were compounded of all
cold things it would never purge.

Hence then we may learn: Luke. 3.16. and 12.49. and Mark. 9.49. and Romans
12.16. and 2 Cor. 11.29. And therefore let us labor that we may be zealous in
our Love unto God, and whatsoever is good, and in our hatred unto sin. Here
observe; Satan knowing the power and might of true zeal, and how it is able
to cast down all his strong holds, and cast him out of our souls; does
therefore endeavor to defame and scandalize true zeal, and that either

First, Taedio by wearisomenesse, and irkesomenesse; it is wonderful to see in
a Christian commonwealth, how little the zeal of Religion is prized, and how
much it is slighted, and scorned: which certainly is the work of the devil
himself, who is an enemy to man, and whatsoever is truly and spiritually good
for man. And therefore we must follow hard after holiness, without which we
cannot be saved 1 Hebr. 12.14. remembering that zeal is the fiery Chariot of
Elias whereby we are carried or transported, up unto heaven 2 King. 2.11. And
those who are lukewarm shall be spewed out of Gods mouth, Revel. 3.16. God
commanded that the fire which was upon the Altar should never go out, Levit.
6.12. thereby to teach us, that the fire of zeal should always burn in the
Altar of our hearts, and never be extinguished: without fire the sacrifice
could not be consumed; and without the fire of zeal, the sacrifice of sin
cannot be destroyed.

Secondly, the devil does endeavor to defame, or hinder true zeal, Odio, by
hatred; and that two manner of ways; namely

I. Defamando, by defaming those who are zealous, by a pretense or intimation
of hypocrisy: Here

First, those who are thus judged and censured, must (with St. Paul) learn not
to set by man's judgment, but labor to approve themselves unto God, by whom
they must be judged at the last. And

Secondly, of those who judge and condemn the generation of the just, we
demand, why they judge those things which they know not? For

I. Charity forbids this, because that covers a multitude of sins, which are
seen, and not discovers those which are hid, Prove. 10.12. and 1 Peter. 4.8. And

II. What do they see who thus censure, and judge? Only good works, and holy
actions, and an unblameable outward life, and conversation; and therefore they
should judge the intention by the work. Jndeed the Lord judges the action by
the intention, but this is his prerogative, because he is the searcher of the
heart, and the trier of the reins: but man knows not the intention of the
heart (for who knows what is in man, but the heart within?) and therefore he
must judge the tree by his fruit, Matthew. 7.20. and not censure and condemn to
the fire the tree as bad, when the fruit is good, Romans 14.4. and 1 Corinthians. 4.5.

II. Satan labors to make zeal odious, Adulterando, by adulteration of it;
he is Gods ape, and can transform himself into an Angel of light, and make
many hypocrites, yea heretics to seem outwardly zealous, that so zeal may
be had in disgrace: The old Pharisees (as may be seen in this Chapter) seemed
very zealous, and the new Pharisees (the Papists) seem so also in many things,
and diverse at this present seem outwardly zealous, only out of hypocrisy.
But shall we condemn zeal therefore in the Abstract? What if some of the
Citizens of LONDON or YORK were covetous, or usurers, or oppressors, or the
like; were it therefore a wicked thing to be a Citizen? Suppose that some
Lawyers were haters of peace, and stirrers up of strife, and no better then
pick-purses; shall we therefore conclude that the Law is evil? Jf the hands of
Judges and Magistrates should be full of bribes, and their hearts of
covetousness; shall we therefore say, that Judgment is evil? It is necessary
that there should be evil men, that the good may be discerned and known:
zeal in it self is good, though it be abused by many; and therefore we must
take away the abuse, but retain zeal still.

II. Attractione, the purgation becomes to be Omne purgans attrahit, every
thing that purges, has an attractive faculty in it. The humor which is
dispersed, and seated, in the more ignoble parts of the body, is by the
purgation brought into the ventricle (which is the only vessel ordained for
the receiving of the purgative potion) now the ventricle being overcharged with
the weight of the humor, by an avoiding, or ejecting faculty, does expel it,
and cast it forth. Thus sin having long been in the habit of the life, and
long lurked within, in the hidden man of the heart, is not Purged out, until
it be first attracted, and brought into the Conscience. Whence we may learn,
That sin is purged out by the Conscience; that Romans 2.15. and 2 Cor. 1.12.
and Hebr. 10.22. and Psalm. 139.21. And therefore let us principally take heed
of cauterized consciences. 1 Timothy 4.2. For so long as we have no conscience of
sin, so long sin is not purged out. So long as Joshua had the mouth of the
Cave stopped with a great stone, so long he was sure that his enemies, the
Kings were there; and so long as a stony heart, stop the mouth of conscience,
so long the devil knows, that sin is there. Wherefore let us arraigne all
our sins, and summon them to the bar, in the Court of conscience,
remembering that if the conscience be wrought to a sight of sin, and a true
hatred thereof, then they shall be pardoned, and purged out.

III. Displicentia, the purgative potion purges Omne medicamentum purgans est
nauseae provocativum, every purging thing is loathsome to the Ventricle; and
that either

First, because they are bitter, and of a harsh and unpleasant taste; as Aloes,
and Coloquintida. Or else

Secondly, because they are irksome, and loathsome to the Ventricle as all
purgatives are (that I know of) except Aloes. Thus sin is cast out by viz

I. It is bitter: we naturally call the word of God a hard saying, John. 6.60.
and frequently cry out, that the old way of sin is better, then the new way
of repentance and true obedience, Luke. 5.39. And

II. Repentance is greevous and irksome unto us; we are ashamed by repentance,
to condemn our former lives; and such is the corruption of nature, that we had
rather continue in our wicked ways, then by repentance confess, that hitherto
we have erred from the right way. Repugnat poenitentiae natura and verecundia;
Natura, quia omnes sub peccato: Verecundia, quia erubescit quisque culpam
confiteri, August. Epist. 3. ad Simpl, that is, Both nature and shame are
opposite unto repentance; Nature, because all naturally are in sin: and
shame, because all naturally are ashamed to confess their sins. And this is
the reason, why so few are converted, and turned unto God; namely, either

First, because idly they spare themselves, and will not take pains to examine
their ways, or sins: as many do, who forbear this labor because it is no
better a work then raking in a stinking Ditch, and because it would make them
out of love with themselves. Or

Secondly, because they are ashamed to confess and acknowledge their sins
and errors, John 9.40. Now we must remember here these four things, namely.

I. That if we do not judge and condemn our selves here, God will judge, and
condemn us hereafter: And therefore it is better to examine our ways our
selves, and to labor to find out our iniquities, while we have leave and space
of repentance, then to leave them to be enquired, and sought out by an
all-seeing God, when we shall not obtain one drop or dram of mercy, though
we seek it with tears. And

II. We must remember, that it is worse to cover then to discover our sins,
worse to conceal, then to reveal our iniquities, worse to excuse then to
accuse our selves, worse to hide then to confess our faults: For

First, he that hides his sin shall not prosper, but he that confesses shall
find mercy, and favor. And

Secondly, he that hides his sin dishonours his GOD (1 John 1.9.) but he
that confesses honors his Maker: Whence Joshua said to Achan, confess thy
sins and give glory to GOD, Joshua, 7. And

Thirdly, he that hides his sin shows evidency, that he preferres either the
love of his sin, or his estimation and credit, before the glory of God, and
the good of his own soul; but he that confesses his sins ingenuously unto
God shows plainly, that he preferres the Glory of his GOD, and the good of his
soul before the shame and disgrace of the World, or his own credit. And

III. We must remember, that Repentance is rightly called, Poenitentia nunquam
poenitenda, Repentance never to be repented of, 2. Corinthians. 7.10. For he who
labors truly to find out his sins; will never repent him of that labor: he
that is truly sorrowful for those sins which he finds out, will never repent
him of that his sorrow: he that truly confesses those sins unto GOD which he
sorrows for, will never repent him of that his confession: he that labors to
hate all those sins which he has confessed himself guilty of, will never
repent him of that hatred: he that purposes to leave all sins which he does
or should hate, will never repent him of that purpose, he that promises unto
GOD to serve him for the time to come in righteousness and true holiness,
will never repent him of that promise: in a word, he that turns from sin
and whatsoever is evil, and turns unto God and whatsoever is good, will
never repent him of this his repentance and conversion. But on the other side,
he who neglects to find out his sins, and to sorrow for his sins, and to
confess his sins, and to hate his sins, and neither purposes to leave his
sins, nor promises to serve God, but continues in sin and disobedience
against him, will certainly repent him (when it is too late) of this his great
neglect.

IV. We must remember the reward which is promised unto us, and prepared for
us, if we truly repent, notwithstanding the bitterness, and irkesomnesse
thereof unto nature, and flesh and blood* Now this reward is either

First, spiritual; namely, peace of Conscience, and joy of the holy Ghost. as
John 16.33. Philip. 4.7. Or

Secondly, eternal; to wit, everlasting life, and perfect liberty, and
eternal glory, Romans 8.18. Now of this reward we have spoken amply before, viz.
Chapter 5.48. and 6.33. and 19.29.

IV. Purgations: become purgative Contrarietate by a certain contrariety that
is in them; For Omne catharticum est natura contrarium, every thing that
purges is contrary to the nature of the Ventricle, which receives the Potion.
And the reason hereof is, Vt agat in naturam, et non patiatur ab ea; that so
the purgation may work upon nature, and not be wrought upon by nature; and
(according to the Physicians) this is the difference between meat and medicine
viz.

First, Alimentum, Food received into the stomach, is there Passive, nature
working upon it, and disgesting and concocting it, and dispersing the
nourishment and moisture thereof into the several parts of the body. But

Secondly, Medicamentum, Physic received into the Ventricle, is there active,
working upon nature, and ejecting and sending forth what it meets withal.
Hence observe

That there is a contrariety and strife between Romans 8.6, 7, 12. and 1
Corinthians 2.14. Romans 7.23. Galath. 5.17. J enlarge not this, because we have
spoken something of this spiritual strife before, Chap. 19.28. qu. 12. Answ. 1.

V. J might add, that potions become purgative, Modo operandi, by the manner
of their working; for a purgation performs a double work; namely,

First, it attracts and draws all the humors that are to be purged out into
the Ventricle. And so repentance brings all our sins into the conscience. Then

Secondly, the purgation provokes and irritates the expulsive faculty of the
Ventricle, to expel Medicamentum purgans, the Potion which purges.

Secondly, the next part is, Modus accipiendi, the manner of the receiving of
this purgation; wherein we have three things to consider of; to wit,

Quid purgandum, What is to be purged out?

Plethora, an overplus of good blood; or an abundance or fullness of good
humors in the body; this the Physicians call, A furnished man, or Athletarum
habitus: but iste habitus periculosissimus (Hippocr. et Galen.) It is dangerous
for a man so exceedingly to abound with good blood or humors, for Omne nimium
vertitur in vitium, the overplus of good humors will turn into bad, and upon
the lest distemper or disorder such a man's health is much endangered. This
Plethora is Divitiae, Riches, to teach us:

Divitiarum Plethora, an abundance of riches is very dangerous, a man thereby
having fuel for every hellish fire: that is, if a man be rich, he has a ready
supply for the satisfying of every ungodly lust. If a rich man be tempted unto
pride in apparel, his money will procure him most rich roabes, if unto
drunkenness or gluttony, his money will buy him the most delicious meat and
drink that is to be had; if unto revenge, for his money he may have
instruments of cruelty, or suborne perjurers, or avenge himself by suits: if
the rich man desire to know any secrets, he has a golden key which will open
any lock, and make a silent man speak: if he be tempted to uncleanness, his
riches persuade him (...) Argenteis telis pugnare, to fight with golden weapons
and he shall overcome, because Pecuniae obediunt omnia, Golden Bullets will
scale the strongest Fort. Now by these and the like animadversions, we may
easily see, how dangerous abundance of riches is unto us: if any would see it
proved from Scripture, let him read these places, Matthew. 13.22. and 1 Timoth.
6.9. Genes. 19.32. John 2.10. and Prove. 30.9.10, 15. and 27.20. But we have
spoken largely of this before. Chap. 6.14.

Obaesitas, fatness and grossness is to be purged out: or, Obaesitas is a
phlegmaticall, and windy repletion, which makes the body thick and fat: and
such an one the Physician calls A gross or grown man. This Obesitas, is
Ventositas honoris, the windiness of honor; to teach us:

Honores mutant mores, honors change manners; and therefore the Prophet
rightly calls it Locus lubricus, a slippery place, Psalm. 73.17. Vt fumus petit
coelum sed perit in aere. As the smoke ascends, and tends upwards, as though
it would top the Clouds, and clime the Heavens, but perishes in the Air, and
vanishes and comes to nothing: so the ambitious man strives to aspire higher
and higher, but at last with proud Lucifer is cast down into Hell.

Is not honor good? and if so, why then is it to

First, honor in it self (when it is conferred upon

Secondly, J say not that honor is to be purged out, but ambition, and the
ambitious desire of honor. Yet

Thirdly, honor, preferment, and high places, viz.

I. Facilitate peccandi, in regard of their pronnesse unto sin: for such know
that they are potent, and can defend themselves, and like Lycurgus his great
Flies, break through the Law, and escape from it: as the Tribe of Dan did,
Judge. 18.25.

II. Difficultate reprehendendi, in regard of the difficulty of reprehension;
for few dare reprove great men, and few great men will suffer themselves to be
reproved, or care for those who reprehend them. Read 1 King. 22.27. Amos 7.12.

III. Difficultate poenitendi, in regard of the difficulty of repentance, for
as great men are prone to sin, and unwilling to be reproved for their sins,
so they are hardly drawn to repentance though they be reproved. Peccavit David
sic Reges solent; Paenituit David, sic Reges non solent, August. Lib. 1. de
Dav. David sinned, so most great men do; David repented him of his sin, and
endured the word of reproof patiently, and so few great men do.

III. Cacochymia, all ill juice, and obnoxious Luke 3.3.8. Acts 2.28. and 3.19.
J enlarge not this because we have handled it before, Chap. 3.2.

And thus we have heard, Quid purgandum? what is to be purged out?

Secondly, Quando, when are these things to be

I. Vere, in the Spring; Quia tum rore caeli et Because then by reason of the
dew of Heaven, and the heat of the Sun, the humors in the body become more
thin, moist, and tender. And so the dew and heat of the Spirit mollifies our
hearts. Hence observe.

That the best time to purge our sin, is when our hearts are mollified, and
softened by the motions and operations of the holy Spirit. Here observe three
things; viz.

First, our hearts naturally are stony, and stones we know will receive no
stamp nor impression; But

Secondly, God powers water upon our hard hearts and then they begin to grow
soft: Read Esa 44.3. Joel, 2.28. John, 7.37. Ezech. 36.25, 26. for these places
both prove and explain the point. And

Thirdly, when our hearts are thus mollified by the work of the holy Ghost,
then is the fittest time for us to labor, to cast out sin.





Bethesda. For the Lake is the conscience, the Angel is the holy Ghost, the
sick and diseased, are sinners: and the sick were not cured, except they
presently stepped in, so except, when the Spirit touches and wounds the
conscience, we bring our sins into our consciences, we cannot be healed. And
this is the cause, why

First, many go unto perdition; because they will not acknowledge the time of
their visitation, Luke 19.44. And

Secondly, why their damnation is just; because they will not hear the Lords
call: As those who are in prison should wait for the opening of the Prison
door, so we (who by nature are the captives of Satan) should wait, when the
Lord opens the prison doors, and calls us forth, for otherwise we shall be left
without excuse, Prove. 1.24, 26. etc. Amos 8.12.

Front capillata, post est occasio calva; that is, Before occasion has much
hair,
But she he hind is wholly bare.


When occasion presents her self unto us, we should lay hold upon her,
because if she turn her back upon us we cannot then hold her though we would.
The Grecians observed a true difference between (...) Occasion, and (...)
Time, to wit, that every (...) Occasion, was (...) a Time; but not contrarily,
that every Time was an Occasion; and therefore we must strike while the iron is
hot; and work while the wax is warm and soft; we must convey our selves
from the Jlands of sin before the ycy hardness of our hearts be again
congealed; we must neither delay the time, nor delude our selves, nor despise
the Spirit, nor destroy our own souls through a slothful lingering: but
labor that all the sparks of the Spirit may be kindled into a flame, and all
the conditions of mercy willingly accepted, and yielded unto.

Viribus constantibus, we must purge while

We must repent us of our sins, before our Principiis obsta, sero medicina
paratur, Ovid.

Cum mala per longas convaluere moras:
That is, If Physic be neglected long,
Our pains and grief must needs be strong.
Therefore at first withstand that ill.
Which daily grows worser still.


We must give no way to the water course, but stop the breach at the first,
withstand the least and smallest beginnings of sin. We are wont to say of our
sins, as Lot did of Zoar, These are little ones, and little regard or care is
to be had of them: At ne despicias quia parva, sed time quia plura (August. de
10. chordis) We must not despise them because they are small, but fear them
because they are many. Many drops may hollow a stone, and sink a Ship; yea
drown the World, many Bees may kill a Bear, and worms may destroy Antiochus,
and Lice Herod: and therefore we must slight no sins because they are petty
ones in our eyes, but remember that there is nothing so little that shall go
for naught. We think the neglect of preaching, and public Prayers, and the
profanation of the Lords day, and petty oaths, to be small sins, not worth
the speaking of, thus heaping (as the Proverb is) Athos upon Aetna so long,
till the stomach being debilitated vomit up all good means. If David had
(with Job) made a covenant with his eyes, he had not fallen. If Peter had
marked the first crowing of the Cock, he had not sworn; and if Esau had
sought for mercy in time with tears, he had not been rejected, Hebr. 12.17.

III. Aetate juvenili, we must purge when Quia in seen humores fiunt viscidi;
Because the humors in old men are more tough, viscous, and clammy: Thus sin
by custom becomes habitual, and habites like a second nature, are hardly
left: Wherefore we must learn to repent in our youth, and to serve our God in
our best and young years, Eccles. 12.1.

There are three watches; Whereof

The first is, Pueritia, Childhood: And

The second Adolescentia, Youth, And

The third Stnectus, old age. Now those who have neglected to purge out sin
in their Childhood, must defer it no longer, but forthwith purge it out in
their youth, and those who have spent both Childhood and Youth in vanity, must
not delay it a day more, but while it is said, To day, turn to the Lord, lest
sin become so habitual, usual, and natural unto them, that they cannot
cease to sin, 2. Peter 2.14. Nam quos diu ut convertantur tolerat, non
conversos durius damnat (Hier. s. Matthew. 20.) The longer time and space that
God gives us unto repentance, the greater shall our punishment be, if we repent
not. And therefore we must do as Seneca said he did: that is, [Ante senectutem
ut been viverem, in senectute ut been moriar] labor in our youth to live well,
and in our age to dye well: because if we should not turn from our sins
until our old age, then we should not leave sin, but sin us: and this is
the great and gross error of the world, for men not to begin to repent until
they be going out of the world, nor to think of living well, until they are a
dying: but this we must take heed of, because they seldom dye well, who live
ill, if we live unto Satan, we must not expect to dye unto God.

Quousque purgandum? How long must we purge?

E Corpore, we must purge, till we have purged that which was hurtful out of
our body; for otherwise if the obnoxious humor be brought into the ventricle
and not then cast our, it kills by overcharging and suppressing the stomach. So
if sin be brought into the Conscience, and not then purged out, it drives to
insensibility, or desperation.

Totum, we must labor to purge all the evil humors out of the body; lest
otherwise we fall into a Relapse (if any remainders be left behind) and our
second sickness proves more perilous then the first. Hence two things are
observable, to wit,

First, that we must labor to leave all our sins; for he that is guilty of
one sin is guilty of all And

Secondly, that we must labor to leave all sin for ever, Matthew, 12.45. 2.
Peter 2.20.

One question more may be demanded from these verses, and the precedents namely,





First, to the praise of his Father; and many are the speeches to this end, in
St. John, and Matthew. 11.25. etc. Or

Secondly, to teach men what to do; and hereunto belong all the precepts and
instructions of the Gospel. Or

Thirdly, to reprehend wickedness and vice; and hereunto are referred all the
reprehensions, and comminations of the Gospel, and this Chapter speaks
principally of these.

VERSE. 34, 35. Wherefore behold, I send unto you Prophets, and Wisemen, and
Scribes, and some of them ye shall kill and crucify, and some of them shall ye
scourge in your Synagogues, and persecute them from City, to City: That upon
you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the Earth, from the blood of
righteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias, the son of Barachias, whom ye
slew between the Temple and the Altar.
. 1. Behold I send unto you Prophets, and many

It is disputed between us, and the Romanists, Peter were at Rome or not? and
we say that if he were there, yet he could not sit there five and twenty years
as they hold; but that it is probable, that he was never there: and herein we
have some evidence even from other Churches: viz.

First, from some of their own side: as Lyranus (upon this place) says, Some
of them ye shall kill, as James the Brother of John, etc. and some ye shall
crucify, as Peter and Andrew his Brother. And thus he thinks that Peter was
crucified at Jerusalem.

Secondly, from the Greek Church; as Chrysostom (upon this place) says,
Behold I send unto you Prophets etc. Intelligit Apostolos, et qui cum Apostolis
fuerunt: He understands the Apostles, and those who were with the Apostles;
whence it appears, that his opinion is, That some of the Apostles should be
crucified at Jerusalem: But they can show non else to have been crucified
there, unless it were Peter or Andrew: and Bellarmine (Lib. 2. de Pontif. Cap.
10.) confesses that Andrew was put to death in Achaia.

Thirdly, from other Divines of the reformed Churches, who have objected also
against Peter's being, and dying at Rome: as Vldaricus Velenus, who has written
a Treatise of this Argument: and Jllyricus, Lib. cont. primat. pap. and Calvin:
Lib. 4. Instit. Cap. 6.. 15. Magdeburgens. Centur. 1. Lib. 2. Cap. 10. Col. 561.

Fourthly, from the South and Aethiopike Churches although they deny not Peter
to have been at Rome, yet they hold it of more certainty that he was at
Antioch, which made the great Emperor there ask Alvares (Alvares descript.
Aethiop. Cap. 29.) Why they divided the Churches of Antioch and Rome, seeing
the Church of Antioch was in a manner the chiefest, until the Counsel of Pope
Leo etc. And indeed of Peter's being at Antioch there is evidence in Scripture,
Galath. 2.11. but of his being at Rome none at all.

. 2. From the blood of righteous Abel.]

At whom did the Church of the faithful begin?

At Abel; and thus our Savior seems here to begin it.

Against this it may be objected, Abel, we leave out Adam who was the first
faithful man.

First, the Fathers used so to account the Church: Augustine (s. Psalm. 92.)
Ecclesia est, qua ab ipso Abel usque ad finem: The Church begins at Abel, and
continues to the end of the World.

Secondly, our men also reckon the Church from Abel, Lubbert. de eccles. page
7. 13, 23. And

Field gives the reason: God wanted not a Church in Adam, yet because Abel was
the first, that the Scripture reports,

I. To have worshipped God with Sacrifice. And

II. To have been divided from cursed Cain. Therefore we usually say, That the
Church of the redeemed began in Abel. De eccles. page 9.

Alexander de Ales (part. 3. quaest. 95. memb. 4.) says, Ab Abel dicitur
incepisse Ecclesia justorum, sicut ecclesia malignantium a Cain. The Church of
the righteous is said to begin at Abel, as the Church of the wicked does at
Cain. Ratio hujus est etc. And the reason hereof is, because although Adam was
the first righteous man, yet if the Church of the Righteous should therefore be
said to begin at him; then by the same reason the Church of the wicked should
begin at him also, because as he was the first Saint, so he was also the first
Sinner; as he was the first righteous man, so he was the first rebellious. Now
it is not meet that both the Churches should take their beginning at one and
the same man: Et ideo recte distinguuntur duo etc. And therefore fitly there
are two distinguished; that so from a Righteous man (namely Abel) the Church of
the Righteous might take her beginning: and contrarily, from Cain, who was
finally wicked, the Church of the wicked might likewise take hers.

Unto the blood of Zacharias, whom ye slew between the Temple and the Altar.]

St. Augustine [Serm. 242. de tempore] lays down the History of this Zachary
thus. Zacharias the high Priest, reproving the rebellious people for their
neglect of the worship of God, and his sacred Laws, was slain of the people;
and the detestable band of the Jews dyed the pavement with his blood, in the
ninth year of the reign of Joas King of Judah: which cruelty against this
good man the whole Nation of the Jews paid dear for; for when a year was
past, an Army of the Syrians came up against Ioas, and slew all the Princes of
Judah and Jerusalem; Rabbi Iehosua reports that 211000. were slain in the
Field, and 94000. in the City, for the expiation of the blood of Zacharias,
which blood boiled out of the earth till that day, as it were out of a seething
Caldron.





First, when the Jews slew Zacharias they slew a Prophet; and they who receive
the Lords Supper unworthily, slay the chiefest Prophet of all.

Secondly, as Zacharias was slain by the Jews on the Sabbath day; so is
Christ by the unworthy receivers of this Sacrament, it being ordinarily
celebrated upon the Lords day.

Thirdly, as the Jews shed Zacharias his blood in the Temple, so do
unprepared Communicants spill and spurn the blood of Christ in his Fathers
house.

Fourthly, as the Jews slew him upon the Altar, so Christ is crucified again
upon the Lords Table (the Metaphorical Altar) by wicked receivers.

Fifthly, as there was no dust to cover the blood of Zacharias, where it was
shed, so no more is there at the Lords Table. Weemse christian synag. page 287.

VERSE. 37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
. 1. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem.]

Why does our Savior repeat,

First, he shows hereby, how he is (in a manner)

Secondly, he shows hereby his detestation of

Thirdly, he excites them hereby unto a serious

. 2. How gladly would I have gathered you together

What is the true sense and meaning of these words, Oh Jerusalem, I would
gladly have gathered thy children together, but ye would not?

First, some answer that Christ by his Antecedent Damascene (de orthodox fid.
Lib. 2. Cap. 29.) does set down two wills of God; the one (...) or Antecedent;
the other (...) or Consequent. Now some Modern Divines describe both the parts
of it thus.

I. The Antecedent will of God (say they) is that whereby God does wills any
thing to the reasonable creature, before all the actions of it, or before any
act of that creature.

II. The Consequent will is that, whereby he does will any thing to the
reasonable creature, after any one act, or after many acts of the creature.
Their meaning is this, God at first did really, and fully intend, and will, to
save the Jews, but afterward perceiving their stubbornness, obstinacy, and
disobedience, he did intend and will to destroy them.

Secondly, others answer that Christ as man willed

Thirdly, Christ speaks this by way of approbation in regard of them, and
their good: I would have gathered them together, etc. That is, it would have
been well with them, and for them, if they would have heard my calls, and
turned unto me, but they would not, and therefore they shall be made desolate
and miserable, verse 38. Or

Fourthly, our Savior speaks this by way of I would have gathered you
together, etc. That is, I commanded you to come unto me, and it was your duty
to have come at my call, and to have given the utmost of your endeavor to obey
my behests; but ye would not; and therefore for the neglect of your duty, you
are left without excuse. Or

Fifthly, Christ hereby shows the nature of his word, and the dispensation
thereof: which does



Jerusalem, and says, That he would have gathered her Children together; but
Jerusalem her self resisted with all her power. Now Jerusalem is one thing,
and her children another, who here are expressly distinguished from the City.

I. By Jerusalem we may understand the Priests, Levits, Scribes, Pharisees,
and the Prince of the people, for these did most of all withstand CHRIST.

II. By her Children, we may understand the people. Now our Savior says, That
he would have gathered together these children (and questionless he g^thered
together many of the^) but the Scribes, Pharisees, and Priests, did withstand
it with all their might, and as much as in them lay.

Calvin (harm. Evang.) says, That the will of God here spoken of, is to be
considered by the effect. When he sends forth Preachers to move all to turn
unto him, he is rightly said, that he would gather them; Cajetane (in hunc
locum) excellently explicates these words of our Saviors: Quoties volui?
voluntate signi, praecipiendo, monendo, visitando per Prophetas, et demum per
meipsum. How often would I have gathered you together? that is, by my revealed
will; for I have counseled and advised you, I have commanded and enjoined you,
I have visited and called upon you both by my Prophets, and also by my self.
Now this appears to be the genuine sense of these words, by these particulars;
viz.

I. From these words, woe be unto you which kill the Prophets, and stone those
who are sent unto you.

II. From that Adverbe of number (Quoties, how often,) which is adjoined to the
act of willing; Quoties volui? How often would I?

Ninthly, for the complaint of Christ: we say,

. 3. As a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings.]

What analogy or resemblance is there between Christ's love unto his people,

First, as the Hen nourishes her Chickens with

Secondly, as the Hen provideth food for her Chickens, Lord cares for his
Children, and provideth for them whatsoever he sees them to want and stand in
need of, whether spiritual or temporal.

Thirdly, as the Hen defends her young ones against

CHAP. XXIIII.
VERSE. 1, 2. And JESUS went out and departed from the Temple, and his Disciples
came to him for to show him the buildings of the Temple. And Jesus said unto
them, See ye not all these things? Verily I say unto you there shall not be
left here one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down.
Why do Christ's Disciples show him the buildings of the Temple, which they
knew were not unknown unto him?

First, they did this to move him to mercy, and lest the Temple should have
been destroyed, as he affirmed before, Chapter 23. 38. Or

Secondly, the Disciples did this, that upon a serious consideration and
observation of the Pomp and stateliness of the building, our Savior might be
the more careful to preserve it from destruction; as though God regarded
outward ornaments and pomp. Or

Thirdly, they showed him the Temple to insinuate secretly thereby, how
difficult, yea impossible it was for it to be destroyed, especially considering
the strength of the City also. And hence our Savior seems to answer, See ye
not all these things, etc.

When was this prediction fulfilled, That not one stone should be left upon
another, which should not be thrown down?

This prophecy was not only accomplished in the destruction of the old
Temple, but then also, when in Julian the Apostates time, the Jews being by
him encouraged to build the Temple, what was built in the day, was cast down
in the night; and besides a fire fell from Heaven, that consumed the work, and
worke-mens instruments: which Cyrillus Bishop of Jerusalem then seeing,
applied unto that event this prediction of our Savior. Sic Socrat. Lib. 3.
Cap. 17.

VERSE. 3. And his Disciples said, Tell us, What shall be the Sign of thy
coming, and of the end of the world?
The Apostles ask CHRIST a question, but receive no direct or definite answer;
they would know when the day of Judgment would come; but CHRIST answers them
generally, that the coming thereof is uncertain, and will not be yet a good
while: whence two Questions may be made, viz.











Secondly, that thereby he may prove the faith, hope, and patience of his
children. And

Thirdly, that the godly may be incited thereby unto Sanctification and purity,
Luke, 21.34. And

Fourthly, that the wicked may be left without excuse, Romans 2.1, 4. and 2 Pet.
3.8, 9.

VERSE. 5. For many shall come in my Name saying; I am CHRIST: and shall deceive
many.
Our Savior in saying here, that many shall come in his name, saying, they are
CHRIST, seems to imply, that many Antichrists under the name of Christ shall
deceive many. Whence these questions may be demanded; namely,

Many shall come in his Name, saying, they are Christ's?



I. More largely for the whole body of those who profess the name of Christ,
whereof some are members of Christ in title and profession only. Or,

II. More strictly for the society of the Elect, the Citizens of heaven, who
have the mark of God ( Revel. 9.4.) and are not only in show and profession,
but also indeed and in truth members of the mystical body of CHRIST.



VERSE. 6, 7. And ye shall hear of Wars and rumors of wars: See that ye
be not troubled: for all these things must come to pass, but the end is not
yet. For Nation shall rise against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom, and
there shall be Famines, and Pestilences, and Earthquakes in diverse places.
These verses, and diverse others which follow in this Chapter, do partly
respect the troubles of the Church, and partly the destruction of Jerusalem,
and the wonders which went before it: and therefore a word of either.

When was this fulfilled, There shall be wars

There have been Wars and rumor of wars in former ages. Europe the Church
of God has been wonderfully persecuted by the Romanists in the hundred years
last past, and upwards. And thus this Prediction respects the Church of Christ.

What prodigious and wonderful things fell Jerusalem?

The wonders which were seen before Jerusalem was destroyed, Jews of their
Calamities and miseries not then believed, but afterward felt. These, are the
words of Josephus, and those which follow, Joseph. l. 7. c. 12.

First, they saw right over the City of Jerusalem, a fiery burning Comet, most
like a bloody naked Sword flourishing to and fro over the City, which
continued for the space of one whole year.

Secondly, there was a sudden clear shining Light, as bright as daylight
being in the nightime. Now this light only shined about Salomons Temple, and
about the sacrificing Altars, the which the Jews construed to be their better
fortune, but were therein deceived.

Thirdly, an Ox being brought to the Temple to be slain and sacrificed upon a
festival day, according to the Jewish manner, brought forth (against the
course of nature) a Lamb in the midst of the Temple, which was terrible and
monstrous.

Fourthly the East brazen gate of Salomons Temple [which was so great, and so
heavy with iron bars, and great brazen bolts, that Vix a viginti viris
clauderetur, twenty strong men could scant shut it] opened it self most
willingly. And this some of the ignorant Jews prognosticated should be some
great good thing to come.

Fifthly, upon the 21 day of May was seen a sight, which seemed to be an host
of men armed running on Horseback, and in Chariots, about the City in the
skies, a little before Sunsetting.

Sixthly, when the Priests went unto the Temple in the Feast of Pentecost, as
they were wont to do by Night, to celebrate divine Service, they upon a sudden
felt the ground quiver under their feet, and the Temple shook, and a voice
speaking, Migremus hinc, let us depart hence.

Seventhly, and lastly, there was a Countryman, one Jesus the son of Ananus,
who for 7. years and five months before the destruction, ceased not daily
crying and exclaiming in every corner of the City, and in every street, but
especially in the Temple upon the Sabbath day, saying, Vox ab orient, vox ab
occidente, vox a quatuor ventis, vox in Ierosolymam, and Templum and vox in
omnem hunc populum. That is, a voice from the East, and West, and the four
corners of the world; a voice against Jerusalem, the Temple, and the whole
Nation of the Jews. This cry he continued, though he was punished by the
Magistrates, and brought before Albinus the Roman, which was then Caesar's
Deputy in Jerusalem, insomuch as he was thought to be some furious fool; and
therefore they whipped him, and let him go, and being gone from them he cried,
Vae, vae civitati, vae phano, vae populo, and vae mihi. Woe, woe be to this
City, woe be to the Temple, woe be to the Jews, and last of all, woe is me for
my self. This ^osephus (who wrote this History) saw with his eyes, and heard
with his ears.

VERSE. 9. Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you:
and ye shall be hated of all nations for my Names sake.
Our Savior here foretelling his Disciples of the afflictions and
persecutions which attend the faithful, may occasion these two questions: viz

Vim virepellere, if we be persecuted, to resist, and rebel, and take up arms
against those who persecute us, though it were the King himself?

Saul through wicked Doegs means slew 85 Priests. 1 Samuel. 22.18. And yet
Daivd will not suffer his servants to avenge it. 1 Samuel 26.9. Ahab by Iezabel
slew Naboth, and yet Elias does not depose him, 1 Kings, 21.8, 18. Herod slew
James, and would have slain Peter, Acts, 12.2. And yet Peter deals not with
him, as with Ananias, Acts, 5.



Math. 10.23.

Secondly, if we cannot flee from it, we must suffer it, Math. 24.13. Luke
21.19.

Thirdly, we must pray against it, Psalm. 50.15. Dan. 6.10. Acts, 12.5.

Fourthly, we must refer, commit, and commend our selves to God. Dan. 3.17.

Fifthly, we must cheerfully expect that heavenly and happy reward which is
promised unto all those who suffer for CHRIST patiently. Matthew. 5.11. Romans 8.18.

VERSE. 11. And many false Prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many.
Romans 16.18. and Titus, 1.10. and 2 Pet. 2.1.



Ierem. 23.1. and 29.9. Philip. 3.18. and 1 Timothy 4.1. and 2 Pet. 1.12.

Secondly, some deceive through Covetousness, Pet. 2.15. Jude, 11.

Thirdly, some deceive through pleasure, and drunkenness, Esa. 28.7.

Fourthly, some being past feeling themselves, and of cauterized Consciences,
labor to deceive others, Ephesians. 4.19. and 2 Timothy 4.2.

Fifthly, others seduce and are seduced, that is, do deceive others, and are
deceived themselves. (Read 1 Kings, 22.23. and 2 Timothy 3.13. Ezech. 14.9. and 2
Thessal. 2.11.) And that either

I. Because they are ignorant, and blind; as Esaias, 56.10. Or

II. Because they do not examine, whether that which they teach, be true or
false. And therefore seeing there are so many false Teachers, we must take
heed, and not believe every spirit.

How may we know, or discern false Teachers,

First, we may know them by their Covetousness;

Secondly, we may know them by their flattery; for such for the most part are
fawning flatterers.

Thirdly, they go unto those that are ignorant, credulous, and simple, 2 Timothy
3.16.

Fourthly, they go when, and whither they were not sent, Ierem. 14.15.

Fifthly, they labor to hinder and harm the true Prophets of the Lord, Amos,
7.10.

Sixthly, they teach secretly, and like wild beasts creep abroad in the
night, Psalm. 104.20. whereas Veritas non quarit angulos, Truth seeks no
corners.

Seventhly, they laud, praise, and commend Ignorance, contrary to the Apostle,
Colos. 3.16.

Eighthly, they prohibit the Scriptures, and hinder the Preaching of the word.
Lucernam extinguunt fures, Thieves put out the light; because darkness best
becomes their deeds of darkness: now the Word is a light; and therefore false
Teachers are afraid to be discovered by it.

Ninthly, they appoint and choose another Judge besides the Scripture for the
trial of their Doctrine; namely, Traditions, and custom, and the like, Math.
15.9. Colos. 2.8.

Tenthly, they teach another Gospel besides the Gospel of CHRIST; and
doctrines contrary to the word of God, Deuteronomy. 18.20. Gal. 1.8. Ezech. 13.3, 14.
and 1 Timoth. 1.3. and 6.3. Although Teachers should neither do nor speak
against the truth, 2 Cor. 13.8. Thus the Papists teach,

I. That the Father may be painted; contrary to Deuteronomy. 4.15. And

II. That Creatures may be worshipped; contrary to Acts. 10.26. Revel. 19.10.
and 22.9. And

III. They teach humane devices, and will worship; contrary to Colos. 2.18, 23.

Eleventhly, they teach divellish doctrines, 1 Timothy 4.3. And

Twelfthly, they despise Authority, 2 Pet. 2.10. Jude, 8.

Thirteenthly, they teach lies, and (Pias frauds) godly deceits, Ierem. 29.9.
and 1 King. 13.18.

How may we beware and avoid these, or, What

Ephesians. 4.14. Heb. 13.9.

Pet. 2.2.

John, 5.39. Acts, 17.11.

Iam. 1.5. Psalm. 119.33.

Shall be saved.]

Matthew. 5.3, 8, 10. and 13.43. Mark. 10.30. Luke. 12.32. and 22.29. and John.
3.15, 16, 36.



viz,

First, that we might enjoy him for a time in grace. And

Secondly, that at length we might enjoy him for ever in glory. We

I. Know God darkely, and imperfectly. And

II. At last we know him perfectly, and clearly. 1 Cor. 13. We are now in
darkness, and the image of God is naturally obliterated in us: but it shall
be restored again in the knowledge of God ( John 17.3.) and that

First, in grace, And

Secondly, afterward in glory: which is called life eternal.





First, some at first are like bruit beasts, wallowing in pleasure, and wholly
following sense, and appetite; when they are weary of this, then

Secondly, afterward they become foolish ( Romans 1.21.) turning from pleasure,
unto the world, and riches, and oppressions, and cruelty, and covetousness,
and deceit, thinking gain godliness, 1 Timoth. 6.

Thirdly, then they grow sluggish in Religion, beginning with Balaam to wish
for heaven and happiness, but in the mean time do nothing for the obtaining
thereof.

Fourthly, if they do perform any Religious duties, and holy exercises, then
by and by they grow proud Pharisees; hoping to obtain heaven by their own
endeavors, or works of righteousness, or outward observances; and here stop,
dreaming of salvation, and resting in these dreams, until being awakened unto
Judgment, they find that they are but wels without water, and lamps without
oil.



To labor and endeavor to be made partakers of this salvation. Here observe,
that there are two things to be labored for:

First, that we may enjoy Christ, Philip. 1.23. This is the first in our
intention, though the last in execution: and it is a good degree and step unto
heaven, to long for it, and above all things to desire it. And

Secondly, that we may obtain Christ. This goes before the other in work, for
we must obtain Christ by faith on Earth, before we can enjoy him in Heaven.
And therefore we must deny our selves, and go out of our selves, placing no
confidence or trust in our selves at all, but only in CHRIST JESUS, laboring
to apply him by faith unto our souls, John 5.24. And endeavoring to increase
in obedience, faith, and all graces, until we enjoy him fully in heaven.

. 3. This Gospel of the Kingdom.]

What names,

First, it is called the Gospel and word of God, 2. Corinthians. 2.17. and 11.7.
and Ephesians. 6.7. And

Secondly, the Gospel of CHRIST, Mark 1.1. Colos. 3.16. And

Thirdly, from its quality, it is called the good word of God, Hebr. 6.1. and
1. Timoth. 4.6. and good seed, Matthew. 13.23. and sound doctrine, Titus 2.1. And

Fourthly, the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, Mark 1.1. and in this verse. And

Fifthly, the word of grace, and salvation to those who believe, Romans 1.16. and
1. Corinthians. 1.21. and Ephesians. 1.13, 14. And

Sixthly, the word of life, Philip. 2.16. both because it shows us, that faith
is the way and means to come unto life, and also because it is a means to
beget faith and spiritual life in us.

Seventhly, it is called the word of reconciliation and peace, because it
shows unto us that reconciliation which is wrought between Christ and us, 2. Corinthians. 5.18, 19. Ephesians. 6.15. And

Eighthly, the word of truth, Colos. 1.5. and 2. Timoth. 2.15. and 1. King.
10.6. and 17.24. And

Ninthly, the word of faith, Romans. 10.8. And

Tenthly, the eternal Gospel. Revelat. 14.6. And

Eleventhly, the doctrine of the Spirit. 1 Cor. 2.4. And

Twelfthly, the sword of the Spirit. Ephesians. 6.17. And

Thirteenthly, it is called seed, Matthew. 13.33. because it brings forth fruit
according to its proper kind. And

Fourteenthly, food. Matthew. 24.44, 49. And hence feeding is sometimes put for
Preaching: as John 21.15. And

Fifteenthly, the word of the cross, because it lays down, and shows unto
us the history of CHRIST crucified. 1 Cor. 1.17, 23. Galath. 6.14. And

Lastly, it is called the Gospel of the glory of Christ. 2 Cor. 4.4. and
Ephesians. 1.5, 6. and 1 Timothy 1.11. and Ephesians. 1.12, 17, 18.

The names of the Gospel show its nature, excellency and worth.

This Gospel shall be preached in all the world.]

Bellarmine (de Roman. Pontif. Lib. 3. Cap. 4.) urges this place as an
Argument to prove, that Antichrist is not yet come; because before the coming
of Antichrist the Gospel must be preached in all the world; for at his coming
all exercise of Religion shall be hindered, by reason of the great persecution
which shall be under him. But there are many great Countries, which never yet
heard of the Gospel; and therefore as yet it has not been preached in all the
world: and consequently, Antichrist is not yet come.

Antichrist, that being added only by the Cardinal: our Savior lays down
this Proposition; viz, Before Christ's second coming the Gospel shall be
preached in all the world. The Jesuit adds that, Before Antichrists first
coming the Gospel shall be preached in all the world.

Antichrists coming, but of the preaching of the Gospel Vniverso orbi, To all
the world, before the destruction of Jerusalem; as appears from verse 16. Then
let them which be in Judea flee into the mountains. See Answer 5.

Bellarmines reason is weak. He says, The Gospel shall not be preached in
the world, after Antichrist is once revealed, because of the great persecution
which shall be under him. This is no good Argument, for notwithstanding the
most grievous persecutions in the Primitive Church under the pagan Roman
Emperor, yet the Gospel was propagated, and increased still.

Carthusian (in hunc locum) by the preaching of the Gospel in the whole world,
understands the co^version of some of all sorts, degrees and nations, unto the
truth, and profession of the Gospel. And in this sense he conceives (and it is
very probable) that this prediction was fulfilled in the time of the Apostles,
and before the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans. Hence St. Paul speaking
of the Apostles, alleges that of the Psalmist, Surely, their line, or sound
went through all the world. And CHRIST says to his Disciples, ye shall be my
witnesses in Judea, and Samaria, yea even unto the utmost parts of the earth:
and commands them to preach the Gospel to every creature, and to go to all
nations to teach them. And hence St. Paul says, The word of the truth of the
Gospel is come unto you, as it is in all the world: Colos. 1.5, 6.

Chrysostom, Theophylact, Euthymius, and Hillary, interpret this place of the
end and destruction of Jerusalem, before the which the Gospel was preached to
most parts of the world: but our Savior immediately before having spoken of
the whole earth, I conceive he means here the end of the same.

[The Gospel shall be preached in all the world] That the Gospel must be
preached to the whole world at one time: for that was never yet seen, neither
(as I take it) shall be: but that it shall be published distinctly and
successively, at several times, to one nation after another: and in this sense
Mr. Perkins conceives the Gospel to have been already preached to the whole
world: and concludes from hence that the first sign of Christ's coming is
already past. If the Reader would see, how this is opposed by Bellarmine, and
answered by Dr. Willet, let him read his Synops. page 1167. arg. 1.

Seventhly, we must not by the whole world, understand all the particles of the
world, but many (or the most) parts thereof; and yet the same Gospel shall
come unto the rest virtually, because no sorts of men shall be excluded from
the participation of the benefits thereof, as is plain from Romans 10.18. and
Colos. 1.6, 23. If the Reader would see how this answer is opposed also by the
Cardinal, let him read Ames. Bell. enerv. tom. 2. Page 196, 197.

VERSE. 15. When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of
by Daniel the Prophet, stand in the holy place; who so reads let him
understand.
. 1. When ye shall see the abomination of desolation

When was this fulfilled and accomplished, or,

This was accomplished when the Romans caused the spread Eagle, Alex ab
Alexandro.

. 2. Who so reads let him understand.]

Salmeron the Jesuit urges thus these words, Daniel, admonishes those who
read to understand what they read; where it is remarkable, and observable that
Christ begins in the plural number [Cum videritis abominationem, when ye shall
see the abomination, etc.] but ends in the singular [Qui legit, intelligat, Let
him that reads understand] whereby he would teach us, That more shall read the
Scripture then shall understand it.

First, the consequence is naught, More people

Secondly, our Savior speaks here of one only then do understand them;
therefore also historical; yea, therefore none must read historical, or any
other places or parts of Scripture.

Fourthly, our Savior speaks not here, Per modum Prohibitionis, sed per modum
admonitionis, by way of prohibition, but of admonition; he forbids none to
read either Daniel or any other book of holy writ, but admonishes all to
attend and mark diligently the place, that in the reading of it they may in
some measure understand it, and learn from it, how truly things long before
foretold, come to pass, and are accomplished according to the prediction.
(...) to understand, is common to all the places of Scripture, and not peculiar
to this prophetical place; and therefore all Scripture that is read should be
diligently observed and considered, that in the reading thereof we may
understand it.

VERSE, 21.22. For then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the
beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be. And except those
days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved: but for the Elects
sake those days shall be shortened.
For then shall be great tribulation etc.]

Antichrist shall not come till toward the end of the world, when shall be the
greatest persecution that ever was ( Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. lib. 3. Cap. 7.)
and they would prove it from this place. CHRIST says, There shall be then such
great tribulation in the world, as was not since the beginning of the world,
neither shall be: Therefore the greatest persecution shall be toward the end
of the world.

verse before he says, pray that your flight be not in the winter: and then it
follows, There shall be then, or, as St. Mark says, In those days there
shall be such tribulation, 13.19. And in the 17. verse, Woe shall be to them
that give suck in those days; which must needs be understood of the
destruction of Jerusalem: for at the coming of CHRIST, there shall be one and
the same case of all, whether of those that give suck, or of those who give
none.

That as there was none such since the beginning of the world; so there shall
be none such after: Therefore there shall be tribulation after, though none
such.

And except those days should be shortened, none could be saved, etc.]

Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. lib. 3. cap. 4. Rhemist. in Apoc. 11.. 2. 4.) and
they argue from this place, thus, The Lord says here, That unless those days
(that is, of Antichrists persecution) should be shortened, and consequently the
Persecution very short, no flesh could be saved: but how can the time of
Antichrists persecution be very short, if it shall last above or about a
thousand years? Bellar. de Romans Pontif. lib. 3. cap. 8. and Rhemist. in hunc
locum.. 6.

First, though Antichrist reign above or about

Secondly, the whole time from Christ's Ascension until his coming again, is
counted but Revelat. 22.20. I come quickly: and St. Peter says, That a
thousand years before God is as one day, and a day as a thousand years, 2.
Pet. 3.8. And therefore it follows not, that if Antichrist shall reign a
thousand years, his reign cannot be short.

Thirdly, we are to distinguish betwixt the time of Antichrists continuance,
and the time of his Bellarmine confounds,) the latter being much shorter then
the former.

Fourthly, our Savior here says, That except (to wit, of tribulation) were
shortened, none could be saved: Now by Salvation here is either meant the
salvation of the body, or, of the soul:

I. If we understand the salvation of the soul, then the souls of the Elect
and faithful perish no more by persecution, then by dissolution or mutation.
None could be saved (says CHRIST) except those days of tribulation should be
shortened; that is, (says the Romanist) except God should put an end to that
tribulation by putting an end to the world. If then by salvation here be meant
the salvation of the soul, then (in their sense) which is absurd the meaning
is this, That except God put an end to the persecution of his children, by
putting an end to the world, their souls could not be saved.

II. If by salvation here be meant the salvation of the body [as is plain from
the phrase, No flesh shall be saved] then, an end must be so put to their
tribulation, that they may live longer on earth, being freed in their bodies
from it: for how are their bodies properly saved, if God put an end to their
persecution, by putting an end to their lives, or to the world? and therefore
if by salvation here, be meant the safety and preservation of their bodies,
then of necessity the world must not then end, when they are freed and
delivered from their tribulation.

Fifthly, the tribulation here spoken of, is to be Jerusalem; which if it had
continued any longer the nation of the Jews had been utterly destroyed. See
for the proof of this, the first answer of the former objection.

VERSE. 24. For their shall arise false Christ's,
. 2. They shall show great signs and wonders.]

If the Reader would see those many particulars wherein we and the Church of
Rome differ concerning Miracles, clearly treated upon, and fully determined; I
refer him to that Reverend Prelate Bp. Mort. Appeal lib. 3. Cap. 17.18, 19.
where Romish Miracles are amply confuted both from this text of Scripture and
others.

Insomuch that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the very Elect.]

Our Savior here does intimate, that it cannot be that the Elect should be
seduced, or perish.



Tim. 2.19. That is, if any hope to be saved by CHRIST, or, to come unto God,
they must abstain from sin, and walk in that way which leads unto heaven.



John. 3.9. And

Psalm 37.24) and sustaineth him by his grace. 2 Cor. 12.8, 9. But those who
turn the grace of God into wantonness, are reserved by him unto judgment,
Jude 4.

VERSE. 27. For as the lightning comes out of the East, and shines even unto
the West: so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.
That his coming shall be as the lightning that shines from East to West.
Bellarm. de cultu sanctor. lib. 3. Cap. 3.



That the Kingdom of God comes not with observation (Luke. 17.20.) either of
time or place. And therefore when men say unto us, Behold here, or, Behold
there, we ought not to believe them, verse 23. As though they could point out
CHRIST'S coming with the finger, either in the East or West. If the Reader
would see these answers confirmed by the expositions both of Fathers, and
modern Interpreters, I refer him to Dr. Willets synops. page 1176. of the
fifth edition.

VERSE. 28. For wheresoever the carkase is, there will the Eagles be gathered
together.


Paracelsus for his weapon-salvessake thus wrests the words, where the carkase
is [that is, the body] there will the Eagles [that is, the spirits of the
blood] be gathered together. The absurdity of this exposition is clearly
showed by Mr. Foster, in his sponge to wipe away this Weapon salve; and J do
not believe that Mr. Flood who so stoutly maintains the lawfulness of that
wonderful salve against him, will defend this exposition, or undertake to
prove this to be the sense of this place.

Secondly, Origin by the carkase understands Church, by the Eagles the Doctors
of the Church, and by their gathering together, their union and consent in the
faith of CHRIST crucified.

Thirdly, some by Carkase here understand the by the Eagles the Saints, and by
their gathering together the efficacy of his merits sufficient for all,
Hierome.

Fourthly, others understand this place to be an carkase understanding CHRIST
the Judge, by the Eagles the souls going to judgment, and by the gathering
together, the general judgment. Thus Chrysostom. Hilar. Ferus, Aretius, Stella,
Maldonat.

Fifthly, others interpret this place of the Saints ascending August. and
Gregor. and Muscul. And this seems to be the truth; for the Disciples ( Luke.
17.37.) had asked Christ, whether the Elect should he taken? To this Christ
answers, wheresoever the body is, etc. In which similitude we must observe,
That as the nature of the Eagle is to fly unto the carkase though it be far
off; so the faithful and heavenly Eagles above all things long to feed of
Christ, and to be where he is. And again, as the Eagle is content with the
carcass, in what place soever it is, so the Elect regard no more, nor more
then this to be where CHRIST is.

VERSE. 30. And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven.
What is meant by the sign of the Son of man?

I dare not undertake to determine this question,

First, Lyranus thinks that this sign shall be ye

Secondly, Lactantius is of opinion, that before Cadet repent gladius e Coelo,
a sword shall suddenly fall from heaven, that the righteous may know, that the
Captain of the Lords host is coming. Lactant. lib. 7. Cap. 1.

Thirdly, Zaga Zabo the Aethiopike Bishop and in manu gladium, and a sword in
his hand, to avenge himself upon his crucifiers, and all the enemies of his
Cross. Damianus de morib. Aethiop.



I. ^ome think this sign shall be the sign of the Cross in men's foreheads.

II. Others think that this sign shall be a banner (with the sign of the
Cross in it) displayed before in sign of victory. Gloss. interlin.

III. Others avouch, that the Son of man shall appear in the day of
judgment, with a Cross borne before him. Bellarm. de sanct. Lib. 2. Cap. 28
et Rhemist. in hunc locum et Chrysostom. et Muscul. And Chrysostom renders the
reason, why this sign of the Cross shall appear; namely, for the
justification of Chrst, when he shall enter into judgment with his enemies: as
if a man being hurt by the throwing of a stone at him, should bring the stone
along with him unto judgment, for the quicker convincing, and greater
confusion of him that threw it at him. Musculus thinks that it shall be borne
in triumph, against all the wicked, and also against the Prince of the world
himself, both to show the freedom and deliverance of the Elect, and also to
declare unto all the world, that this JESUS which was crucified is the Almighty
Lord of Heaven and Earth.

Chrysostom thinks that this may be: And Dr. Willet does incline to this
rather then the former, although simply he assents to neither. It is more like
(says he) that Christ at his coming should show the marks and prints of the
nails, and spear in his body, then the sign of the Cross: for those were
felt and seen in his body after the Resurrection, so was not the other. but it
is a bare conjecture without any ground of Scripture, that the wounds are
either now in Heaven to be seen in the glorious body of Christ, or that they
shall be beheld and looked upon in the day of Judgment. The wicked indeed
shall behold him whom they have pierced; but it follows not thereupon, that
he shall appear as pierced. How is it possible that either the body of Christ
being perfectly glorified, should still retain any spots or blemishes, or that
they could be espied in so glorious a body, which with the brightness thereof
shall obscure the Sun.

Caelesti potentia praeditus, quasi signo in sublime erecto, etc. Being endowed
with celestial power, as with a sign he shall turn the eyes of the world
toward him, Calvin et P. Martyr.

Mark 13.19. and Luke 21 27.) Then shall they see the Son of man. Whereby it
appears (or at least seems) that the sign of the Son of man, is the Son
himself in his glorious appearing.

Eighthly, it is great presumption, so boldly to Bellarmine does, that it shall
be the sign of the Cross, having no Scripture for it at all. Other signs we
find, that Christ has appeared with, as the sign of the Rainbow ( Revelat.
10.1.) with a two edged sword ( Revelat. 1.16.) and with a book in his hand (
Revelat. 10.2.) Now we have more reason to believe, that Christ may appear
with those signs, by the which he has sometime showed himself, then they
have for the sign of the Cross.

VERSE. 31. And he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, and
they shall gather together his Elect from the four winds, from one end of
heaven to the other.
The Jews had a Feast called the Feast of Trumpets, which differed from other
new Moons in this, In other new Moons they blowed no Trumpets; but in this
they blowed from the Sun rising till night, Shin^ ^^in voce (...)

What was the reason of this blowing and great noise of Trumpets?

The reason hereof in general, viz.

First, the Hebrews think, it was done in memory of Isaac his deliverance,
and that they did therefore sound Rams horns, because a Ram was sacrificed
instead of him, Fag. in Levit. 23.

Secondly, Basil. (in Psalm. 80.) is of opinion, that the people were hereby
put in mind of that day, wherein they received the Law in Mount Sinai with
blowing of Trumpets.

Thirdly, others think it was to put them in remembrance of the Resurrection,
which shall be with the found of Trumpets; according to our Saviors words in
this place, He shall send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet.

VERSE. 36. But of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels of
heaven but my Father only, St. Mark 13.32. adds, Neither the Son of man.
. 1. But of that day knows no man.]

The Papists say, Antichrist shall reign but three years and a half, and
shortly after that time the world shall end: against which groundless opinion
we urge this place thus, Jf Antichrist should reign but three years and a
half, as our Adversaries teach, and that then immediately the world should end;
then it is possible to assign the time of Christ's coming to judgment, so
soon as Antichrist is revealed; But our Savior says here, of that day and
hour knows no man, no not the Angels; yet Bellarmine takes upon him to set
down the very day of Christ's coming, to wit, just 45. days after the
destruction of Antichrist.

No not the Angels, nor the Son of man.]

(ut significaret eis) that he would tell them. And thus Ambrose, Chrysost^me,
Theophilus, and Basil expound it. And Garnet at his arraingment objected St.
Augustine, and wholly depended upon his judgment in the same exposition.

Aequivocator, who otherwise expounded these words, but forbear it, only
reciting ye words of their own Jesuit Maldonate, Multi veteres patres
(Athansa. Nazian. Gregor. Theodor. Cyrillus, Author operis imperfecti in Matthew.)
docuerunt Christum, quatenus hominem diem judicii ignorasse; that is, Many
ancient Fathers have taught, that as Christ was man he knew not the day o^
judgment.

Augustines exposition (which Garn^t did only select) does imply no mental
Aequivocatio^ is amply proved by Bp. Morton, in his modest Answerer, ^art 3.
Chap. 11. Page 74 unto which place J refer the Reader, because it is
something long.

It is not for you to know the times and seasons, Acts 1.7. And why was not
that (ut vobis significem) at this time also seasonable for them to understand?
Yes doubtless, if that were the meaning of his words, they understood it, and
then it was no concealed reservation; and if it were not his meaning, there was
no aequivocation.

Aequivocator is by his secret reservation. To delude his bearer, now this were
blasphemy to say that Christ did aequivocate, that is, delude and deceive his
Disciples. If the Reader would see this Obj ction further answered, let him
read Bp. Mort. in his answer to the modest answerer, part 3. Chap. 11. Page 75,
76.

Arrians did frequently object this place to the godly for the proof of the^r
pernicious and blasphemous doctrine, that Christ was not God; they argued thus,
God knows all things, Christ knew not all things [for he was ignorant of the
day of judgement] Therefore CHRIST is not God.

where Lazarus was buried? as God he knew it, for he had before told his
Disciples that Lazarus was dead. As man he asks what men thought, and said of
him? as God he knew, for he was not ignorant of their very thoughts, as is
plain from these Texts, Jesus knew their thoughts; and why think you evil in
your hearts? and the like.

Nazianzene answer^ further, that Christ speaks [No man] and Angels [No not
the Angels] and himself [Nor the Son of man] that all men might learn to
honor the Father above all, and to seek his glory more then their own.

Again Nazianzene says, That to know signifies Simler de filio Dei Lib. 2.
page 112. a.b.) that the first Answer is the truth, viz. that Christ knew it as
God, but not as man.

How does it appear, or how may it be proved,

First, Christ is the wisdom of the Father [ Heb. rrians deny not) then he
cannot be ignorant thereof.

Secondly, Christ was in the Father, and the Father John 17.21.] And therefore
those things which the Father knew, the Son could not be ignorant of.

Thirdly, Christ knew the Father, which of all John 10.15.) And therefore we
must not imagine that he was (in regard of his Deity) ignorant of the last day.

Fourthly, Christ is the Author of time ( John 1.1.)

Fifthly, he foretold all those things which should go

Sixthly, Christ's ignorance of the day of judgment was a testimony of his
humane nature, and showed that he was true man; and therefore he was ignorant
thereof only as man.

Seventhly, our Savior does not say ( Mark 13.32.) None knows that day, Ne
filius quidem Dei, No not the Son of GOD, but Ne filius, No not the Son;
and therefore as he was the Son of God he knew it.

Eighthly, our Savior does not say, The Angels

Ninthly, our Savior does not say unto his Apostles, Watch, because I know not,
but, because ye know not when the time is, or when the Master of the house
comes, Mark 13.33, 35. Intimating thereby that he knew the time of his
second coming, but he would not make it known unto them, that they might be
the more watchful, and circumspect.

John, 5.22. and Acts 17.31. Romans 16. and diverse other places) then it is
against sense and reason to imagine that he should be ignorant of the time,
when he will come. If the studious Reader would see this Question amply
handled, J refer him to Athanasius Orat. 4. contr. Arianos, where diverse and
sundry other reasons are brought to prove that Christ as God knew of the hour
and day of judgment, and was only ignorant thereof as man.

VERSE. 37, 38, 39. But as the days of Noe were, so shall also the coming of
the Son of man be. For as in the days which were before the Flood, they were
eating and drinking, marrying, and giving in marriage, until the day that Noe
entered into the Arc; and knew not until the Flood came, and took them all
away: so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.
But as the days of Noe were. etc.]

The scope of our Savior seems here to be twofold, viz. to teach us,

First, that the day of judgment is certain, though the time be uncertain: of
which elsewhere



How manifold is Security?



I. Of danger: and this is twofold, to wit, either

First, temporal; and this security is

I. Sometimes found in the faithful, who often are bold and venturous without
warrant, and so tempt the providence of God. And is

II. Sometimes found in the wicked, who neglect lawful means for the
preventing of danger, yea oftentimes run into danger, and never consider how
they have incensed the Lord by their sins. Or

Secondly, spiritual; and this is the security

I. Of evil, and wicked men who cry, tush no evil shall come unto them, but it
shall go well with them both here, and hereafter. Or

II. Of state; now this security also is twofold, namely, either

First, temporal; and this security is

I. Sometimes found in the godly; David in his prosperity said, he should never
be moved, Psalm. 30.6.

II. It is frequently found in the wicked, who being in honor, and prosperity,
nev^r think of any change of state or condition, but bear themselves as
though they should never be moved indeed. Or

Secondly, Spiritual which has place in the wicked.

Now this carnal security consists in these two things; namely,

First, in a lack or want of fear: Carnal men not fearing the wrath, anger,
and righteous judgments of God, become secure. And

Secondly, in a neglect of the means, and acts, and exercises of Religion, for
none are so secure as those who never trouble themselves with the duties or
works of Religion at all.

Secondly, there is a general security, both of State Jerusalem, insomuch as
they would not believe the wonders and signs which went before it, and which
were mentioned before verse 6, 7. Quest. 3. And the world shall be as secure as
ever, when the day of judgment comes: and Nations ordinarily shall be, and are
most secure when dangers approach, and judgment is near even at the door:
And therefore we should all labor carefully to avoid this carnal security, as
a sure forerunner of some ensuing Judgment.

Why must we take heed of Security, and so

First, because this carnal security is a sign of

Secondly, carnal security in sin, or notwithstanding Matthew. 3.7, 8. And
therefore if we desire freedom from the fearful judgments of God, we must
take heed of security.

Thirdly, GOD commands us to be watchful, Mark 13.32, 35. and therefore we
must take heed of carnal security.

Fourthly, God reveals his will unto his servants Noah foreseeing the
unparallelled deluge preached repentance unto the world, so) do preach
repentance unto us, and daily threaten some judgment (either temporal or
spiritual) to come upon the Land, if we lie drowned in carnal security, and
do not awake unto repentance and new obedience: And therefore it is not
without cause that we should carefully avoid carnal security.

Fifthly, watchfulness is good, security frequently brings along with it evil
and mischief; and therefore it is carefully to be avoided. Fear does often
produce a good effect, and the watchful man does frequently prevent danger;
whereas the secure falls into it.



I. Our sins, and the nature of them, and our continuance in sin. And

II. Our God, whom we offend by our sins, and who sees, and registers all our
sins, and who is able to avenge himself upon us for our sins, and whose
justice and truth will not permit him to spare our sins without repentance.
And

III. How God has punished others for our admonition and terror: we have
heard of Plague, Famine, and War, amongst our neighbors, wherewith they have
been wasted; which heavy judgments we cannot but think (in regard of Gods
infinite justice) to have come upon them for their sins; and we have cause to
think that CHRIST says unto us, That they were not greater sinners then we
are; and therefore except we repent, we shall likewise perish. Wherefore it is
most dangerous for us to be secure.





Secondly, those also are to be taxed, who think the godly to be melancholy
men, because they fear danger, when neither danger nor distress appears:









Rabbi, Repent one day before thy death; that is, every day; we should daily
expect death, and by unfeigned repentance prepare daily for it.

Fifthly, we must do as Noah did, make an



What are the causes of security, and the remedies

First, ignorance, error, or an erroneous opinion Heathens thought) all these
terrene and sublunary things are ruled by chance and Fortune. The ignorance of
God, and of the nature of sin, or the incogitancy of both causes security;
for no wonder if we do not fear those things, which we neither remember,
think of, nor know.

The Remedy against this Cause is, to think sin to be out of measure
sinful, and to learn to know the Lord, to be Omnipotent, Omniscient, and
Omnipresent. We must remember, that God sees all things, and by his providence
governes all things, and hates sin with a perfect hatred, and will punish
(undoubtedly) sin in all those who will not repent them of it, and turn from
it.

Secondly, a neglect of those means which God

Thirdly, incredulity of the word of God, and of his judgments causes
security: when men's hearts grow hard, sleepy, and unfaithful, neither
believing the promises, nor threatenings of the word, nor the judgments of God,
then they grow secure. Now this infidelity is strengthened by our sensuality;
for as the light of the Sun darkens the light of the Stars, so the light of
sense darkens and obscure the light of holy and spiritual things, we being
naturally backward to believe any thing which is not plain and perspicuous to
sense. The Remedy against this cause is to labor for the knowledge of the
word, and to assent to every good word of God, as infallibly true; yea to
remember that Heaven and Earth shall pass away, before one jot, or tittle of
the word fall to the ground unaccomplished; because if God have spoken, he will
also certainly do it. And therefore we must fear his threatenings, and believe
his promises.

Fourthly, a presumption of the mercy of God causes That though he be
merciful and gracious etc. yet he will by no means let the impenitent sinner
go unpunished (Exodus 34.4, 5, 6.) And again, that he that made men, will not
have mercy on them, and he that formed them will show them no favor, if they
be wicked and rebellious, Esa. 27.11.

Fifthly, prosperity causes security, and makes David, who in his prosperity
said, that he should never be moved, Psalm. 30.6. And in Job, who said, I shall
dye in my nest, Job 29.18. And in the Church of Laodicea, Revelat. 3.17. The
remedy against this is, I. To remember, that neither love nor hatred is known
by these things, Eccles. 9.1. And II. That all these outward things are vain,
transitory, and as mutable as the Moon. And III. That all our riches and
abundance cannot avail us at the last day, nor free us from the judgments of
God here. Read Proverb. 10.4. and 11.4. and Job. 15.21. and 21.7. etc. unto 14.
verse, and Psalm. 73.3. etc. unto the 18 verse.

Quod differtur non aufertur, That forbearance is no payment, but although the
Lord spare long, yet he will not spare always, but punish at the last, The
longer the blow is a coming, the deeper and deadlier it wounds; and the longer
God spares, the stronger are his strokes; for his Mill works but slowly, but
when it grinds, it grinds men to powder.

Philautia, self-love, humane confidence, and pride of heart causes security;
for when men are proud or selfe-conceited, or lovers of themselves, they then
quickly grow secure, trusting to broken Reeds, and Egyptian staves, which will
fail them at the last. The remedy against this is, to deny our selves, and
renounce all confidence in our selves, and to flee only to the merits, and
mercies of CHRIST.



I. Custom takes away the sense of sin making it habitual and natural unto
us. And

II. Custom is corroborated with the shame of mutation and alteration: For men
are ashamed to be Changlings, and to turn from their former ways, thereby
acknowledging their former errors; and say to themselves, Sciens vidensque
pereo, Although I see my sin, and foresee my ruin, yet I will perish rather
then now forsake that which J have so long followed. The Remedy against this,
is to labor against the customary practice of sin, and to learn to be truly
sensible of sin, and to remember that it is not evil but good, not miserable
but happy, not disgraceful but praiseworthy, to turn from evil unto good,
from the Devil unto God, from sin unto grace, from error unto truth, from
the wrong way to the right, and from the way that leads unto perdition, to the
way that leads to life and salvation.

John 2.15.) nor to labor for the World (1. Timoth. 6.9.) but to seek first
the Kingdom of Heaven, and the righteousness thereof, and then not fear, but
God will afford unto us those temporal things which are needful for us, Mat.
6.33.

Tenthly, false Teachers are causes of security, for There is no peace, Esa. 41.

. 2. So shall the coming of the Son of

How manifold is the coming of Christ?

First, some say that there is a double coming

I. Bypast, which Coming the Jews understood not. And

II. To come, which Coming we expect and look for, August. super. 9 Psalm.
Now the difference between these is this; the first Coming was in the flesh,
the second is unto Judgment; the first was for the manifestation of the truth,
and for freeing us from sin, and for the drawing of of us unto God, but the
second shall be for the judging of all men. Thom. Aq. 3. part qu. 1. art. 6.
ad. 3. qu. 36. art. 1. qu. 40. art. 1. et Chrysostom. super illud Iohannis. Non
misit Deus silium suum ut judicet.

Secondly, others [Gerson vero part. 2. Sermon. de 11.28. Venite ad me omnes,
etc. et Pelbart. Lib. 3. Rosarii Theo.] say, that there is a fourefold coming
of CHRIST; namely,

I. His coming in the flesh; Hence it is said ( John 1.) The word was made
flesh; and he came unto his own, and his own received him not.

II. His coming into the mind; and of this he speaks, John 14. If any man
love me, we will come unto him; that is, not only God the Father, and God the
holy Ghost, but also God the Son.

III. His coming unto the death of man: as Mark. 13. Watch and be prepared,
for ye know not the hour when the Son of man will come; namely to call you
unto death.

IV. His coming unto the final judgment; and of this he speaks, Luke 21.
Then shall ye see the Son of man coming in his glory. Now this last Advent
is a happy coming unto the good and godly, for then shall they be made
partakers of everlasting happiness, but a miserable and most unhappy coming
to the wicked and ungodly, for then shall they be condemned and bound over unto
eternal torments for ever and ever, Mat. 25.41.

VERSE. 42. Watch therefore, for ye know not, what hour your Lord does come.
Our Savior (by an unanimous consent of all Interpreters) speaks here of the
day of Judgment: but because there is a particular Judgment of every
particular person at the day of death, and a general judgment of all men and
women in general, at the last day; therefore some apply this (and that neither
unfitly, nor unprofitably) unto the hour of death, and some unto the day of
Judgment: of the last more amply by and by, and of the first briefly from this
verse.

Christ gives us here to understand, that we are altogether uncertain of the
day and hour when he will come to call us either to death or judgment; and
therefore because we are sure that he will come, but unsure when* we must watch
and prepare our selves against his coming to call us unto death.









Bring oh Lord my soul out of prison.



Job says, we are involved in darkness, and replenished with misery and
labor; and so long as we live we are subject to many evils.



Thirdly, because we shall be more happy in heaven then we can be in Earth: And
therefore if we desire perfectly to be freed from all evil, and perfectly to
enjoy whatsoever is good, and perfectly to obey and serve our God; we must then
desire, (and not dread) death, because then and never till then, shall these
truly and perfectly be.

VERSE. 44. Therefore be ye also ready,
. 1. Therefore be ye also ready.]

Our Savior speaks here of their preparation, and expectation of the last
Judgment; wherein there are two things observable; to wit,

First, the persons exhorted: Ye.

Secondly, the thing whereunto they are exhorted.

First, from the persons exhorted three things may be observed; namely,

I. Although the Disciples and Apostles of Christ John 6.66. Yet even they are
admonished of the day of Judgment: to teach us, That the godly are to be
warned to prepare themselves against the day of Judgment;

Why must the godly be admonished hereof?

First, because the day and time is uncertain unto

Secondly, because the good are prone to neglect in tanto the expectation
thereof, and preparation

II. Although Christ knew that his Disciples should be safe and saved at the
day of judgment. Yea had foretold them, that they should sit on twelve Thrones
then, to judge the twelve Tribes of Israel, Chap. 19.28. Yet he does exhort
them to expect it, and to prepare for it: To teach us, That it is needful to
exhort the best to prepare themselves

III. Although, the Apostles lived many hundred years before the day of
Judgment, yet Christ exhorts them to prepare themselves for it, and to expect
it: To teach us,

That a frequent expectation of the last day, and

Secondly, the thing whereunto they are exhorted, is to prepare themselves; Be
ye ready; that is, (as is expounded, verse 42.) Be ye watchful: To teach us.

That we ought to be principally careful, that Mark 13.37.

Why must we be thus careful to watch, wait

First, because it is a matter of the greatest moment; for if the day of
judgment should come upon us unawares, and unprepared, we should then
suddenly loose Earth, Heaven, God, and all good things; and be made partakers
of horror, Hell, the wrath of God, and all evil things.

Secondly, because none can escape the day of the Lord, therefore all should
carefully wait for it: The truth of this appears thus.

I. God is not blind, neither can he be deceived, Galath. 6.7. For at the last
day, the Books shall be opened ( Daniel. 7.10.) wherein the names, and actions
of all persons are written.

II. Satan will accuse all, and because his time is then at the last period,
he will rage the more, and more vehemently prosecute all wicked men with hatred
and malice.

III. The conscience of every wicked man will cry against him, and the mouth
thereof then will not be stopped. And therefore it is unpossible that any
wicked man should escape that day seeing every wicked man has so all-seeing a
Judge, and so clamorous a witness, and so malicious an accuser.



Pet. 5.8.

Secondly, we must meditate always of the day of Judgment; that is, both of
the uncertainty thereof, and also of the sudden coming thereof, and likewise
of the nature thereof. Quoties diem illum considero, toto corpore contremisco,
sive enim comedo, sire bibo, sive aliquid aliud facio, semper videtur illa tuba
terribilis sonare in auribus meis; Surgite mortui, venite ad judicium. As often
(says Hierome upon Matthew.) as I consider the day of Judgment, my whole body
trembles; yea, whether I eat, or drink, or what else soever I do, me
thinks, I hear that terrible Trumpet sounding in my ears: Arise ye dead,
and come to judgment.

Lydius lapis, or touchstone.

For in such an hour as you think not of, the Son of man comes.]



First, the coming of Christ; wherein there is -- First, the certainty
thereof: wherein there is. First, the person; The Son of Man. 2ly, the
action; He shall come.
Secondly, the Effect thereof
I. Unknown. And. II. Sudden. And III. Unexpected.



Quis? Who shall come?

The Son of man, that is, CHRIST; observe here that many names are given unto
him, but the holy Ghost uses this [The Son of man] when he speaks of the
humane nature. Here therefore he means that CHRIST shall come in his humanity,
and hence would teach us,

Acts. 1.11. Job. 19.25.

Quid? what shall CHRIST do?

Veniet, He shall come. Whence we may learn:

That the coming of Christ unto judgment is most certain, when there shall
be time no longer.

Against this Atheists object, The world has

I. It is false that the world has been always; Perkins from Scripture.

II. The world was destroyed by the Flood;

III. As the world was first destroyed by water. the fire.

The Atheists object again, It is a thing unbeseeming Genesis 1.13. yea perfect,
Deuteronomy. 32.4.

All things which the Lord created were good in a threefold regard:

First, in respect of their beginning, and original; for they were good as God
created them, but man has fallen from God, and is now become evil. And

Secondly, in respect of their end, viz, the glo-of God; for all things were
made for his glory. And

Thirdly, in respect of their perfection, as they were Gods works; for anger,
revenge, drowning of the world, burning of the world, yea the condemnation of
the world, and whatsoever the Lord does or shall do, is perfectly just, and
consequently good in respect of God.

How does it appear that Christ shall come unto

I. Against the Philosophers it may be thus

First, from this reason, because that which is moved by another, is not
eternal; and therefore the world is not eternal either a part ante, or, a
part post. To this,

I. Some answer, that the world is a living thing, and that the Sun is the
life thereof. But what can be more foolish then this?

II. Others answer that Heaven is a living thing; and Aristotle calls it, The
first mover, and Plato, The God of nature, yea Aristotle (...), The being of
all things; which can be no other then God, and consequently he is the Mover,
and moderator of all things. And

Secondly, from this reason, because (...), happiness, is the perfection of
man, as Aristotle says: but in this life there is no true happiness;
therefore it is necessary that there should be another life besides this. Solon
said truly to Croesus.

-- dicique beatus
Ante obitum nemo, supremaque funera debet.
That is, None perfect joy, and bliss can have,
Till death have shrouded them in Grave.


Thirdly, from these testimonies; to wit,

I. Of all Nations, who dream of some Religion, some kind of Eternity, some
God, some supreme Power, and some manner of life after death. And

II. Of the Philosophers; to name but one or two, Zoroastres (who lived 400
years before the Trojane war) and Athenagoras, and Pythagoras; and others:
Tunc ille Dominus, mundi Monarcha, malignitatem, vel illuvione diluens, vel
igne consumens, vel etc. Hermes trism. de mundo. Et Sybilla Exuret terras
ignis, pontumque polumque -- and post
Sanctorum sed enim cunctae lux libera carni
Tradetur, sontes aeternaque flamma cremabit
-- Tunc quisque loquetur
Secreta, atque Deus reserabit pectora luci.
Tunc erit and luctus, stridebunt dentibus omnes.
(August. de Civit. Dei, 18. 23.

Atheists, or Atheistical Christians it may be thus proved; namely,

First, from these ensuing reasons; to wit,

I. From the end of Christ's coming, which was to destroy the works of Satan,
1 John, 3.8. Now his chiefest works were Sin and Death; and therefore the
time shall come, when the faithful shall cease from Sin, and when Death
shall be swallowed up in victory.

II. From the justice of God, who has threatened in Justice to recompense
tribulation, and anguish, and wrath, etc. to every one that is wicked, Romans
1.6. etc. But this is not fulfilled upon them in this life: and therefore
necessarily there must be another, Luke, 16.

Secondly, from these Testimonies; to wit,

I. Of many who either dyed not, or else have risen again, and have been
restored again unto life; as Henoch, Elias, Lazarus, and many who arose with
CHRIST, as witnesses of his Resurrection, and diverse who were raised up by the
Apostles.

II. Of many plain places of Scripture. Read Job, 19.25. and 1 Corinthians. 15.
Dan. 12.2. and Jude, 4. and 1 Thessalonians. 4. And therefore seeing undoubtedly the
world shall end, and that at the end thereof CHRIST will come unto Judgment,
let us watch, and be ready, and examine our selves.





First, our change; whether we be changed or not; whether we hate sin with a
perfect hatred or not; and whether ingenuously we condemn our forepassed life;
And

Secondly, our cheerfulness; whether we forsake our sins with the consent of
our hearts; yea rejoicing in the leaving of them, as a Conqueror rejoices in
his Triumph. And

Thirdly, our humility; whether we boast of what we do, or work out the work
of our salvation with fear and trembling?

II. We must carefully examine our repentance,

Thirdly, Cur venie^, Why he will come?

I answer he will come, first to judge the world, and secondly to end and
destroy the world. Now here three things are laid down in this history; viz,

I. That this Coming will be full of horror and terror unto the wicked,
verse 30. And

II. That at this Coming all the Saints shall be gathered together, verse. 31.
And

III. That then all these things shall be dissolved, verse 35. and 1 Peter. 4.7.

Concerning the day, and hour of CHRIST'S When he will come?

First, the day and hour is unknown, Daniel verse 36. of this Chapter. and
Mark. 13.32. and Revel. 10.14. Acts. 1.7.

Secondly, this day whenever it comes will Cor. 15.52. and 1 Thessal. 4.17.
yea so suddenly that we shall then have no time to prepare our selves. Matthew.
25.10. Because this is the time of preparation, that will be the time of
retribution; and a tree being once fallen cannot turn it self on the other
side. This is the difference between death and the last judgment; before the
sudden approach of death we may repent, as Mr. Latymer said, between the
falling of the hatchet, and the separation of the head: but no repentance at
the approach at the last day. And therefore we should (before it comes) prepare
our selves, and that

I. By repentance and true conversion unto God, Hebr. 3.13. etc. While it is
said to day. And

II. By faith; for without faith we cannot please God ( Hebr. 11.6.) and there
can be no true faith without repentance (2 Timothy 4.4.) and new obedience.

Thirdly, the time of CHRIST coming will

That Christ will come unto judgment, when viz

First, the Causes, why we neglect the Coming of Christ: that wicked men
neglect Christ's Coming, is plain from Luke. 21.34. and verses 38. and 49. of
this Chapter. Now the Causes why they neglect his coming are principally these
two; namely

I. The joys and delights of the world: which are either

First, lawful, as laughter, play, mirth; now concerning these the Apostle
says, Let those who rejoice be as though they rejoiced not (1 Cor. 7.3^.) that
is, they must not be profuse in their laughter, but moderate in all worldly
delights and pleasures. Or

Secondly, unlawful; as drunkenness gluttony, uncleanness, and the like,
wherein wicked men wickedly rejoice Re^d, Luke. 21.34. and verses. 38. and 49.
of this Chapter.

II. The cares, distractions, and employments, of the world cause us to neglect
the coming of CHRIST.

Here observe three Causes; to wit,

First, Causa juvans, the helping and furthering Cause; and that is, the care
of our vocations, and callings. Now although callings are warrantable and
lawful, and a provident care in the managing and following of our callings be
warrantable and lawful, yet our care may be too excessive, and immoderate even
in our Vocations. Psalm. 127. And hence the Apostle exhorts those who buy to be
as though they bought not etc. 1 Cor. 7.31.

Secondly, there is Causa laqueans, the bewitching, and enthralling cause, and
that is, Coveteousnesse, oppression, and the like. Matthew. 13.22. and 1 Timothy
6.9. These we must principally take heed off, they being as pernicious to our
poor souls, as bird-lime, or snares, are to the poor birds.

Thirdly, there is Causa occidens, the killing cause, to wit, worldly sorrow (2
Cor. 7.10.) which causes death.

Secondly, men being once overcome with these causes, they then become secure,
and sleep fearelessely, Matthew. 2^.5. and verse 38 of this Chap. and verse 48.
That is, they either regard not Christ's Coming, or else they presume that he
will defer his coming. And

Thirdly, then CHRIST will come, in the night in the last watch of the night,
when men sleep; Matthew. 1^.25. and verse 43. of this Chapt. That is, when he is
not expected or looked for.

VERSE. 46, 47. Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes, shall
find so doing. Verily I say unto you, that he shall make him ruler over all his
goods.
Bellarm. de beat. Sanct. Cap. 28. and Coster. Enchir Cap. 14.

Maldonate, that it is, an explanation of the parable going before, Chapt.
25.19. where it is said [A long time after will his Lord come] whereby
doubtless is meant the second coming of CHRIST. Maldonat. ^es. com. in Matthew.
25.19, 31. And in this same Chapter it is said, when his Lord shall come* which
cannot be understood, but of the second coming of Christ.

VERSE. 48, 49, 50, 51. But and if that evil servant shall say in his heart, My
Lord delayeth his Coming, and shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and
to eat and drink with the drunken: the Lord of that servant shall come in a
day when he looks not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of: and
shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites ^ there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
. 1. But if that evil Servant shall say in his

The scope of our Savior in these words (as I take it) is to teach us, Genesis
4.7. and 7. Matthew. 25.5, 10. and Revel. 3.10. and Esa. 5.26.27.

Who are here to be blamed, and reproved?

First, those who deride the judgments of God. Esa. 5.19. Ierem. 17.15. and
20.8. Ierem. 4.4. Many there are who laugh at the comminations and me^^ces of
the Ministers of the word, and in their wickedness and drunkenness say: Let
him preach anger, and judgment, for we fear it not, certainly unto such the
Lord will come, in an hour when they are not aware, and give them their
portion in hat Lake where there is nothing but weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Secondly, they also are to be reproved, who although Non morieris, thou shall
not dye, was the first dart that the Devil threw at man. Genesis 3.2. And
presumption like the Trojane horse, brings a concealed enemy in the belly
thereof, which wounds before it warnes: And therefore we must not presume.

To whom may this be fitly applied?

First, to those who think that though they Eccles. 5.4. etc.) neither shall
they be punished at all. Many argue

I. From the mercy of God, thus, God is merciful; and therefore he will not
punish sin, And

II. From others, thus: such and such have sinned greatly and grievously, and
yet no evil has come unto them; therefore sin shall not be punished at all.
And

III. From themselves, thus; we have taken this course, and followed this way
long, and as yet God has not manifested his anger against us: and therefore we
hope, that our sins shall never come unto judgment, nor we for our sins
unto condemnation. And thus they altogether forget, that

First, God is just as well as merciful. And

Secondly, that his word is true, and shall certainly be accomplished. And

Thirdly, that the longer the Lord spares, the more exquisitely, and
unexpectedly he will punish. And

Fourthly, that by these arguments they show themselves to be the Devils
Proctors, pleading with all their might for sin and rebellion against the
Lord of glory.



I. Although these sins should be granted to be but small, yet they are many;
and therefore will certainly condemn without repentance. But

II. They are not small. For

First, God has said, that he will never hold the swearer guiltless Command.
4. And

Secondly, lying is a sin directly against CHRIST, who is truth it self; and
therefore St. John says, that all liars shall be shut out of the Kingdom of
heaven, Revel. 21. And

Thirdly, wicked thoughts draw down Gods heavy judgments upon such as
harbor, and give way unto them ( Genesis 6.5) therefore much more will wicked
words destroy the soul. Wisdom. 11.1.

Fourthly, to neglect the duties and exercises of Religion, is to neglect the
service of God, and consequently to be unprofitable servants; now all such
shall be cast into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth, Matthew. 25.^0. And therefore let us not deceive our selves by the
smalnesse of our sins.

And give him his portion with Hypocrites.]







I. A knowledge of the word. And

II. A persuasion of the truth and authority thereof.











Herod did, Mark. 6.20.





First, he conferres himself with wicked men, and then concludes, I am not
like this Publicane, but much better then he, or these wicked ones; and
therefore I need not fear.

Secondly, he compares himself with himself, and then concludes, that his
knowledge in divine things is more then it has been, and his profession fairer
then formerly, and his life more refined, then it was at such a time: and
therefore in regard of this clear change that is wrought in him, he needs not
fear.

Thirdly, he compares himself with the righteous, and he hears what the world
says of them, that (because they oppose themselves against the vices of the
times, therefore) they are contentious and proud, Esa. 8.18. Wisdom. 2.15, 16.
And therefore he thinks himself in a righter, and better way then they, and
consequently needs fear no evil.

Fourthly, he judges himself by his outward estate: and because God blesses
and prospers him in whatsoever he takes in hand; therefore he confidently
persuades himself, that his paths are straight, and his ways pleasing unto
God, although a wicked man may abound in all outward good things, Read Job.
21. Ierem. 12.1, 2. Malach. 3.15.

Fifthly, he imagines that because Gods mercies are above all his works,
therefore they shall also be extended beyond his promises: and consequently
that he need not fear, though he be faulty.

Sixthly, he perceives that he is free from the temptations of Satan, which
others feel, and groan under; and therefore he persuades himself that the
Devil dares not deal with him, and consequently that he needs not fear any
evil to come.

Bellarmine affirms that Solomon was damned, verse: But Solomon was a most
palpable and gross hypocrite, neither did ever adhere unto God sincerely,
although he had a show of zeal at the first, as is evident from 1 King. 11.4.
where it is plainly said, That his heart was not perfect with the Lord his God,
as was the heart of David his Father.

First, this place proves not that the heart of Solomon was in no sort entire
and sincere, but only that it was not so entire and sincere, as was the heart
of David his Father: for sanctification is given to the elect unequally in this
life; and therefore that is not presently evil which is less good.

Secondly, this particle Sicut, As, is, not here His heart was not perfect,
(that is, as perfect) as was the heart of his Father David] do not simply
denote the quality, but only the same degree o^ quality: for that place of
Scripture aims at no other thing then that the Kingdom was not so well
ordered and governed under, or, by Solomon, as it was by David; who although he
were not free from all blame, yet he never suffered the true worship of God to
be corrupted in his Kingdom, neither did defile himself with any Idolatry;
which things Salo^^n was guilty of, and which considered in themselves are so
great and greevous sins, that St. Peter (by an Antonomasia) calls them, The
pollution of the world. 2 Peter. 2.20. But yet not so great as that the Lord
cannot renew his children from them by repentance, and did Solomon, as appears
by the Book of Ecclesiastes which was writ after his fall, to testify his
repentance.

CHAP. XXV.
V^ s. 6.
VERSE. 6. And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold the Bridegroom comes,
go ye out to meet him.
. 1. And at midnight there was a cry made.]

Ten Virgins expect the Bridegroomes coming, and at length at midnight there
was a cry etc.

Whence many things might be observed, which I but only name; to wit,

First, that our life is a perpetual expectation or CHRIST; or, we ought to
expect Christ through the whole course of our lives. And

Secondly, that we ought to expect CHRIST always with our Lamps burning, and
oil in our Lamps, like the wise Virgins. And

Thirdly, that CHRIST will come, when we least of all expect it.

Behold the Bridegroom comes.]

Ephesians. 5.25. etc. For

First, he loves it. And

Secondly, he wooes and makes suit unto it. And

Thirdly, he contracts and marries himself unto it, Hose. 2.19. And

Fourthly, he protects and defends it. And

Fifthly, he communicates all good things unto it, and gives it an interest
into whatsoever is his. 1 Cor. 3.21. And

Sixthly, he gives himself unto it. And

Seventhly, he is careful to beautify and adorn it, Ephesians ^. 5.25.



That the coming of CHRIST is a thing of great moment, Read Luke. 2.1^, and
Joel. 1.9.



Esa. 61.1. etc. and 62.11. and Zachar. 9.9.) and is now past.

Psalm. 50.2. Joel. ^. and Acts. 1.7. and is yet to come.



I. Sometimes for to revenge, as we may see in these places Psalm, 50.2. Esa.
13.9. and 30.27. and Amos. 4.12.

II. Sometimes for to help, and succor: as Psalm. 80.2. Esa. 40.9. etc. and
59.20. And

III. Sometimes for to comfort, and cherish, as Esa. 61..1 etc. John, 15.20.
Hebr. 13.37.

. 3. Go ye out to meet him.]

Our Savior would teach us in these words, Amos. 4.12. Or, because he will
come unto us, therefore we must prepare to meet him.

How must we prepare to meet the Lord?

First, in general by walking in his ways, Psalm.

Secondly, we must prepare to meet the Lord, Amos. 4.12. And

Thirdly, with our Lamps in our hands, not extinguished Luke, 12.35. And

Fourthly, with a wedding garment upon us, Matthew. 22. And

Fifthly, which joy and delight. Matthew. 21.5.

VERSE. 9. But the wise answered, saying,
It is questioned betwixt us and the Papists, Augustine writes thus,
Vnusquisque pro se rationem reddet, nec alieno testimonio quicquam adjuvatur
apud Deum etc. August. sermon. 22. in Matthew. Every man shall give account for
himself, neither is a man helped by another testimony before God, to whom the
secrets of the heart are evident: every man scarce suffices for himself, to
whom his own conscience does bear witness. Now if the other words which
follow be objected, Go to them rather that sell, and buy for your selves;
Origin shall make answer, who understands by those who Sell, the Doctors rnd
Teachers of the Church. Non omnium habentium oleum, est etiam dare ex eo aliis,
etc, Orig. tract. 32. in Matthew. It is not the part of all that have oil to
give to others, but it belongs only unto them which are appointed to sell
it: one has gathered doctrine, which may be sufficient for himself to live
well, but not to be a Doctor or Teacher to others.

Rome, whether the sufferings of the Saints belong to the Church treasure? And
we say, th t it is a most horrible blasphemy to affirm that the passions of
the Saints must be added to Christ's satisfactions to make up the treasure of
the Church. Yea this opinion is so impious, that Duran^us himself dislikes it,
and argues against it from this verse; The wise Virgins say, lest there will
not be enough for you and us; Durand. in 4. did. 20. quest. 3. Therefore the
Saints have nothing to communicate to others.

Bellarmine answers, That the Virgins speak not of satisfaction, but of the
oil of grace and love, which every one keeps to himself, and cannot power
forth upon another, Bellar. lib 1. de Indulg. Cap. 4. To this we answer two
things; viz

Cor. 13.3. And therefore a man cannot lend the price of his works, but he
must also lend his charity, which makes them precious.

Bernard expounds the words, Give us of your oil; Stulta petitio; vix justus
salvabitur, etc. Bern. sermon. de Virgin. A foolish request: for the righteous
shall scarce be saved, and the oil of their own righteousness hardly
suffices the Saints unto salvation, how much less themselves and their
neighbor. Noe, Daniel, and Job, shall not deliver* a son or daughter, but
like as the soul that sins shall dye, so that soul that does
righteousness only shall be saved.

VERSE. 10. And while they went to buy, the Bridegroom came;
Bellarmine (lib. 1. de Indulg. Cap. 14. qu. 1.) proves it (at least in his
own opinion) thus. The prayers of the living and other works by way of
impetration profit the dead: therefore, the same works, as prayer and fasting,
being also satisfactory do also benefit them by way of satisfaction.



verse, for after the gate is shut there is no entering, Willet, synops. fol.
1212.

VERSE. 11. Afterward came also the other Virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open
unto us.
Although these foolish Virgins have no part in CHRIST, yet they come boldly,
Luke. 18.11. Matthew. 7.22. John. 7.49. and 9.24.

From whence comes it, that so many are seduced

First, it proceeds sometimes from internal self-love; Romans 2.2.

Secondly, this comes sometimes from some external

I. They see some to be worse then themselves. And

II. Many to be as bad as themselves. And

III. They highly price that honesty which they see in themselves. And

IV. They have a form of Godliness in their lives and conversations. 2 Timothy
3.5. And

V. They have (perhaps) some sparks of the conscience of sin, and of sorrow
for sin, and some desire of God and heaven, and some hope to enjoy them. But
these, and greater then these may be in reprobates, Hebr. 6.4. and 10.26. 2
Peter 2.20.

VERSE. 12. But he answered and said,
Is not CHRIST omniscient? I know you not?

There is a double knowledge;

First, Negative, and this the present text speaks of; Verily I know you not;
and Chapt. 7.23. Depart from me, I know you not: that is, I acknowledge you
not, neither ever did, as mine; and therefore depart from me.

Secondly, Positive; and this knowledge of God is threefold; viz.

I. Intuitiva, whereby God knows all men, and all things And

II. Approbativa, whereby God knows all the faithful. And

III. Vindicativa, whereby God knows all wicked men.

VERSE. 19. After a long time the Lord of those servants comes, and reckons
with them.
. 1. After a long time.]

How many things are observable in this verse.

First, Tempus, the time when the Master comes, and that is, after a long
time, Quando? Secondly, Author, The person coming; and that is, Christ, the
Lord of those servants. Quis? Thirdly, Wherefore this Lord comes, and that
is, to reckon with his servants. Quorsum?


Matthew. 28.20.



Cryptica, and secret; and thus Christ is perpetually present with his
servants. II. Apocalyptica, and revealed; and thus we expect him in the Clouds
hereafter. And of this the Text speaks.

[After a long time] would teach us, That the Lord does not presently, but
after many delays, and much prolonging of the time, judge the wicked. Read
Exodus 34.6. Numb. 14.18. Psalm. 103.8. and 145.8. Luke 20.9. Genes. 15.13, 16.
and 6.3. and 2 Chronicles. 36.16. Esa 30.^8. etc.



Esa 5.19. and 2 Peter 3.4. and 2 Thessal. 2.11. And therefore the opinion of
the common sort of people is foolish and false, who I. Think the godly
miserable, because they are not presently freed from calamity and misery,
Wisdom 31. etc. and 5.4. II. Think the great ones of the world happy, because
no evil befalls the^ at all, Job. 21.7. etc Psalm. 73.4. etc. But if they be
wicked they shall be cut off at the last, Job. 21.4. Psalm. 73.18. None are
blessed, but they whose sins shall not be imputed unto them, Psalm. 31.1. etc.
And therefore wicked men (though never so great) are not happy, 2 Peter 2.4, 9.

Peter 1.7. and Esa. 57.17. but most plainly in Job, who was afflicted, and
that sharply in all kinds; viz.

I. Jn his cattle, Chap. 1. II. In his children, Chap. 1. III. In his own
body, Chap. 2.7. IV. In his kindred, Chap. 6.4. and 19.13. V. Jn his servants,
Chap. 19.15. VI. In his wife, Chap. 19.17. VII. Jn his soul in his sleep and
dreams, Chap. 7.14 VIII. By his wife. Chap. 2.9. IX. By impatiencie, Chap. 7.
X. By his three friends, Chap. 16.2. XI. But more particularly by Elihu, Chap.
32. Yea XII. By the Lord himself, Chap. 38. And all for the trial of his
patience, confidence, and perseverance.

Peter 3.9. Luke 13.7. and 1 Timoth. 2.4.

What is here required of us, Or what may we

First, Judges must learn hence to punish gently, Lacedaemonians always before
battle offered sacrifice to the Muses and Clemencies. The Romans tied a bundle
of rods or sticks to their mortal hatchet, that so (before any could be
beheaded therewith) they might have time to consider, whether the party
deserved death justly or not. So the Venetians carried the punishing sword
always covered, that there might be time to consider of the fact before
execution. Athenodorus advised Augustus, to s^y over (when he was angry) the
Greek alphabet, before he executed his anger, or punished him with whom he was
angry. Charilaus the King of the Lacedmeonians, being incensed said, Occiacre^
nisi irascerer J would kill thee if J were not angry. And therefore from the
Lords long suffering, and these examples, Judges may learn to execute
judgment in clemency and with mature advice.

Secondly, we must learn not to frustrate the Luke 13.9.) and with the
unprofitable thorns and thistles we shall be cast into the fire, Hebr. 6.8.
And therefore we ought seriously to ruminate, and remember these few things; to
wit, I. How long God has spared us, and withheld his just judgments from us.
II. How often, and how long we have provoked the Lord unto anger by our sins.
III. How small time (for any thing we know) remains behind to glorify our God
in, and to work out our own salvation, and to repent us of our sins. IV.
How suddenly the Lord comes; viz. like a thief in the night, when we expect
him not. V. Why he will come when he comes; namely, to take account of us, and
to punish us with everlasting fire, if he find us in our sins. VI. We should
seriously consider, how long we intend to continue and proceed on in our
sins, and when we mean to loath and leave them, whether we resolve to live
in sin, and dye in iniquity or not; Or whether we think it probable, that
although we spend our lives in disobedience and rebellion against God, yet he
will accept of us at our death.

. 2. The Lord of those servants comes.]

Who is this Lord?

God, or rather JESUS CHRIST; For

First, this Lord punishes with perpetual pains, verse 20. And

Secondly, is called the Son of man, verse 31. Who although he defer his
coming a long time, yet he comes at last: to teach us

That although the Lord seems to procrastinate his coming yet he will certainly
come. Genesis 15.14. Nahum. 1.2. Psa. 50.21. Deuteronomy. 32.37. Psa. 7.12. and 78.66.
Esa 30.18. etc. Ierem. 51.56. Now the reasons hereof are these two; viz.

First, because the Lord does not spare for ever, but only for a time. And

Secondly, because he should not be just, if he did not punish rebels at the
last, Psalm. 12.5.



Matthew. 25.32. that is, both those who are under the Law, and those who are
without Law, Romans 2.15. And

Revelat. 6.15. and 19.18. and 20.13, 15. and 7.3. etc. and 17.14. and 19.9.
and 21.27. And

Rev. 20.12.

And reckons with them.]



verse ^1, 23, 30. Quidam de longanimitate Dei, at mihi videtur Resurrectio
quoque significari. Chrysostom. s.



Romans 14.12. that is, of those things which we have done in this life 2 Cor.
5.10.

Matthew. 18.23, 24. where (and every where) it signifies to render an account,
or to make up a reckoning. Computare.

How manifold is the spiritual account or reckoning?

Twofold, namely either

First, of men amongst themselves; and this is twofold; to wit, either, I. When
a man reckons with his neighbor whom he has offended; and this is called
satisfaction. II. When a man reckons with himself; and this is threefold; viz.

First, when a man computes and counts his afflictions; as Romans 8.18. and 2.
Cor. 4.17. And

Secondly, when a man computes and counts his pleasures; as Philip. 3.8. etc.
And

Thirdly, when a man computes and counts his perseverance in labor, Mat.
18.23. But this present portion of Scripture speaks of none of these:
therefore I pass them.

Secondly, of men with God; and this is twofold; namely either

I. When men give account unto God for others; that is, those who are under
their charge; as Acts 20.28. and Hebr. 13.17. Or

II. When we give account unto God for themselves, and those graces and gifts
which the Lord has bestowed upon them: as Romans 14.12. and 2. Cor. 5.10. And of
this the Text speaks. Whence we may learn.

Luke 16.2. For the better confirming of this, mark these three things; to wit,

First, that all things we have are given us by God, and therefore he may call
for them, and call us to account for them, when he pleases, Job, 21.

Secondly, those things which we have are not given, but only lent unto us by
God; and therefore he may justly call us to account for the use of them, Levit.
19.9.

Thirdly, God has lent us those things we have, not to lie idle by us, but to
improve, and augment, 1 Cor. 12.7. All gifts and graces are given to profit
withal; that is,

I. Spiritual graces are given for augmentation, and increase, 1 Peter 2.2.

II. Other gifts and good things are given for the help of Spiritual graces;
that is, either

First, Vt adjumenta, as helps, and thus wisdom and memory are given for the
greater increase and furtherance of piety and Religion: and external good
things are given for the better quieting of the mind, and showing forth of the
works of charity.

Secondly, Vt solamina, they are given as comforts; that the mind being
employed intently in the service of the Lord, it may be refreshed, and the
spirits supported, by a moderate use of the refreshments afforded.

Who are here to be taxed?

Those who think themselves full, and whole,

For what end or use does God give Riches, and temporal things unto men?

First, for his own glory; for he has made all Cor. 10.31. Colos. 3.17.)
wherefore we must examine our selves, how we glorify our God by those things
which we enjoy.

Secondly, for their good, that they may be the

Thirdly, for the example of their brethren; that by

Fourthly, for the comfort of their lives, and the

What is here required of us?

We must prepare our selves for this reckoning and cast up our own accounts,

First, in general we must examine our selves

Secondly, more particularly, two things are to

I. Our actions and sins, especially those sins which are observed, and marked,
and which shall be most severely punished at ye day of judgment* as for example

First, diffidence and distrust of God, 1. Diffidentia.
as Esa 30.8. we usually place our hope and trust upon the world, Job. 31.24.
And if we be in penury have no peace at all within our selves, fides est quod
vides, we believe no more then we see; and therefore when our riches fail, our
faith fades.

2 Contemptus verbi.
Secondly, a contempt of the word, and Law of God, Esa 5.24.

3 Superbi^.
Thirdly, pride, Esa. 47.7. either against God or man.

4. Odium.
Fourthly, hatred of our brethren, and the ways of God.

5. Provocati^ fratrum.
Fifthly, provocation of our Brethren, 1 Peter 4.3. And that I. Sometimes unto
duels and slaughters. And II. Sometimes unto the profanation of the Lords day.
And III. Sometimes unto adultery and fornication. IV. Sometimes unto
drunkenness, Abak. 2.15.


6. Verba ^tiosa.
Sixthly, idle words, for even these are observed, and threatened, Matthew. 12.36.
Now there are three sorts of these; to wit, I. Some are contrary to holiness;
as swearing, blasphemy, and scoffing at holy things. II. Some are contrary to
righteousness; as lying, brawling, and the like, Revelat. 21.8. and 22.15.
III. Some are contrary to sobriety; as filthy, and lascivious words, or songs,
Ephesians. 5.4.


Now because the Lord sees, and marks, and threatnes to punish all these, we
must examine which and how many of them have been in us, or committed by us,
that so we may labor seriously to repent what is bypast, and to amend for the
time to come. We must take heed that we do not distrust either the providence,
promise, or love of God; we must be principally careful, not to despise the
will and word of God; we must beware of pride, hatred, and wicked words in our
selves, and of provoking others unto wickedness; because all these shall be
punished when the Lord comes to reckon with us.

Benedictionesaliae Spirituales.
II. We must examine and carefully cast up the blessings and mercies given unto
us by God, whether Spiritual, or corporal, or External.

First, there are Spiritual graces given unto us by God, which we must give
account unto him of, as

1. Verbum
I. The word, and the preaching thereof, John 12.48. Hebr. 2.3. And herein two
things are to be examined. viz.

First, how we love it, and whether we prepone or postpone other things before
it?

Secondly, how do we apply the word, do we make it a Rule, a Balance, a
Touchstone, applying it to our words, works, and thoughts? In a word, do we
direct our lives thereby? These things we had need examine, because they will
be inquired and searched into, when the Lord comes to take account of us.

2. Spiritus
II. The holy Spirit is another spiritual grace given unto us: for as the Lord
gives the word unto our years, so he gives also the Spirit unto our hearts;
and as the word without calls, so the Spirit within moves us; and therefore we
must examine,

First, whether we strive against these good motions, laboring to extinguish
them; or whether we embrace, nourish, and labor to kindle these sparks into a
flame? And

Secondly, whether do we acknowledge in these good cogitations, compunctions,
and motions the finger of God, and his gracious call, or whether do we think
them idle thoughts, and so (as needless or unnecessary) let them suddenly
fade and dye?

Thirdly, whether do we follow and obey the counsel, and direction of the
Spirit, or whether do we disobey and despise it? For we must give account of
these at the coming of our Master, and therefore in the mean time we ought to
examine our selves in them.

III. The communion of the Saints is another spiritual grace given unto us by
God; that is, 3. Communio sanctorum*
as the Lord gives us the call of his word, and the motions of his spirit, so
he also gives us the examples and exhortations of the godly; and as this is a
great blessing, so no small account must we give of it at the last. And
therefore we should examine these three things; viz.

First, whether we love and like the society of wicked or righteous men most.

Secondly, whether we like and approve of the good examples of the godly, or
whether we despise and deride them?

Thirdly, whether we follow the good examples of good men, or praise them
only, but imitate them not at all? For for these we must give account of unto
God at the last.

Secondly, Corporale^
there are corporal endowments given unto us by God, which we must be
accountable unto God for: as for example,

I. Wisdom, 1 Prude^tio
which is a gift coming from heaven, and excels all temporal things: Now
herein we must examine,

First, whether we bend our wit unto oppressions, wrong, injury, strife,
contention, and the like. Or

Secondly, whether we employ it in gathering together the thick clay of this
world. Or

Thirdly, whether we bury it in pleasure, as the unprofitable servant did his
Talent in a napkin. Or

Fourthly, whether we use our wisdom unto the glory of God, or the
advancement of Religion, or the good of our brethren, or the increase of our
own grace and goodness?

II. 2. Ingeni^
Wit is another corporal blessing given unto us; and therefore we must
examine, whether we use our quickness and wit (with Bezaleel and Aholiab) unto
the service of the Church, or (with many) to the composing of chaffie, and lewd
poemes, and idle unprofitable Books?

III. 3. Consta^tia Magnanimites.
Constancy and Magnanimity may well be called a corporal blessing, and is
given by God, it being a rare moral virtue, if it be not rash, but prudent.
And therefore those who are endued herewith must examine; Whether

First, they convert this their constancy unto revenge? Or whether

Secondly, they convert it, unto the protection of the Gospel, or the good of
Religion?

IV. Courtesy, 4. Comita^ morum.
and affability is a singular corporal blessing given unto many by God, who
must examine if

First, they use it not to adulation and flattery, like Court-holy-water.

Secondly, if they use it to the winning and reclaiming of their brother from
his wicked ways?

V. 5. Memori^
Memory is another Corporal blessing given by God unto many, who must use it
to the bettering of their inward man: That is, they must employ their memories
in retaining and treasuring up of those saving truths which they either hear
or read from the word of God. For the Lord will take a reckoning of all these.

Externae
Thirdly, there are External blessings given unto us by God, which we must be
accountable unto him for; as for example

1. Honor.
I. Honor, which is given for the good and help of the Church and
Commonwealth; but is used

First, by some unto seditions and factions in the Commonwealth. And

Secondly, by others unto oppression and revenge. And

Thirdly, by others to help their friends, kindred, and acquaintance in evil,
and to free them from the punishment of the Law. And

Fourthly, by others unto pride and a contempt of others. And

Fifthly, by others unto wantonness and all manner of lasciviousness. But if
we be raised by God unto honor either in Church or Commonwealth, and desire
to give an acceptable account thereof unto him: let us employ our honor

I. Unto a just execution of righteous judgment, without partiality.

II. Unto the honor of the Gospel.

III. Unto the help and comfort of the godly. Read Hester. 4.14.

IV. Unto an example of piety, and purity, Phil. 2.15.

2. Divitiae
II. Riches, are given by God unto some, who unthankfully, and wickedly use them
either;

First, unto the oppression, and utter impoverishing of the poor. Or

Secondly, unto covetousness, and usury, and the like. Or

Thirdly, unto pleasure, and idleness. Or

Fourthly, unto uncleanness, prodigality, and all dissolute courses. Or

Fifthly, unto pride in apparel. Or

Sixthly, to voluptuousness, gluttony, drunkenness, and the like. Indeed it
is lawful to spend much in building, planting, apparel, meat, etc. if it be
done modestly. And therefore we must examine these few things; namely, I.
Whether we be wholly transported with these or not. And II. Whether we make our
gold our Gods, or whether we can despise it, and are able to judge of those
things which are more excellent. And III. Whether the back and the belly of
the poor bless us for feeding and clothing them?


3. Excercitia.
III. Exercises and Recreations are lawful, and allowed by God modestly, and
moderatly used; But

First, some are not content with lawful Recreations, but think there can be
no mirth or delight, without drunkenness, swearing, revelling, wantonness,
and the like.

Secondly, some are too immoderate in the use of lawful Recreations, spending
whole days and nights in gaming and play, using them more like callings then
refreshments.

4. Pax.
IV. Peace, a singular temporal blessing is given unto us by God, although many
of our neighbors have been worn out and wearied with War. Hebr. 11.37. etc.
Amos 8.12. Now what has this long temporal peace brought forth?

First, in some ignorance. And

Secondly, in others carelessenesse. And

Thirdly, in others atheism. And

Fourthly, in others carnal security, and a contempt of the word. And

Fifthly, but in a very few thankfulness and obedience. These things we had
need exactly to cast up, because our Lord will call us to account for them all
at the last day.

VERSE. 21. His Lord said unto him,
. 1. Well done thou good and faithful servant.]

Wherein does the fidelity of a servant consist,

First, it is required of him not to wast, or scatter, Luke 16. And therefore
we must take heed that we do not mis-spend any of the Lords Talents betrusted
unto us, whether spiritual, corporal, or external.

Secondly, it is required of him not to take unto him the goods of his Master;
that is, not to defraud Judas did who carried the bag and was a Thief. And
therefore we must take heed that we rob not God of his honor, by arrogating
and ascribing any thing unto our selves which is good, and derogating from him,
who is the Author and Fountain of every good gift, and every perfect being,
James 1.17. For we have nothing which we have not received from him, and
therefore we ought not to boast of it; as is clear from this Parable, none of
the servants having any thing of themselves, but receiving all their Talents
from the Lord.

Thirdly, it is required of a faithful servant not

. 2. Thou have been faithful over a few things.]

Because Riches (as was showed before) is one of the Lords Talents betrusted
unto men, it may be (and that not unfitly) demanded;

How Riches may be aright possessed?

Because this has been largely handled before, Chap. 6.19, 24. J therefore
briefly answer it here with Antoninus (Part 4. Titul. 5. Cap. 17.. 1.) A man
uses his Talent aright

First, when he gives to every man his right, paying his debts, and keeping his
covenants, contracts, bargains, and promises with all men.

Secondly, when he is liberal and merciful unto all that stands in need, and
upon every occasion.

Thirdly, when he is magnificent in the effecting of great works, when he is
able to go through with them; as the building of Schools, Hospitals,
Churches, or the like.

Fourthly, when he is hospitable and helpefull unto strangers, captives, and
incarcerated persons.

Fifthly, when he is charitable, and bountiful to his poor friends and
kindred,

VERSE. 24, 25, 26, 27. Then he which had received the one Talent,
Thou wicked and slothful Servant.]





Behold (says he) thou have that thine is. And

I knew that thou were an hard man, etc, I enlarge not these because they are
illustrated by Musculus, in hunc locum.

J should have received my own with usury.]

Why did thou not put forth my money etc. Concerning Usury we have laid down
our opinion before ( Chap. 5.31.42.) Christ shall come as a thief in the
night. Luke 10.1. or of the Heathen Olympicke games, in comparing the practice
of Christianity to those races, 1 Corinthians. 9.24. and 1 Thessal. 5.2. or of
charms and incantations in likening the wicked to the deaf Adder, not hearing
the voice of the Charmer.

VERSE. 28, 29, 30. Take therefore the Talent from him, and give it unto him
that has ten talents. For unto every one that has shall be given, and he
shall have abundance, but from him that has not, shall be taken away, even
that which he has. And cast ye the unprofitable servant into utter darkness,
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
. 1. And give unto him that has ten talents.]

Jlla bona quae uni detrahuntur, ne aliquid boni pereat, alteri dantur; ut si
quis moriatur morte corporali, fratres ejus et affines in ejus bona succedunt.
Bonavent.

. 2. Cast the unprofitable servant into utter

For the understanding of these words observe, That there were some prisons
within the City of Jerusalem, and some without the City. Within the City, as
the house of Jonathan, which was near the Kings Palace, Ierem. 37.15. So the
Dungeon of Malchior, the son of Hammelech, Ierem. 38.6. So they had prisons
without the Gate, as that Prison wherein Peter was put, Acts 12.10. And when
they had passed the first and second Ward (that is, the quaternions of
Soldiers which kept him) they came unto the iron Gate which leads unto the
City: This Prison was without the Gate near Mount Calvarie, and it was the
loathsomest and vilest prison of all, for in it the Thieves who were carried to
Calvarie to be executed were kept. And Christ alludeth to this prison in this
place, Cast him into utter darkness, etc. which allusion could not be
understood, unless there had been a dark prison without the City, where was
utter darkness.

VERSE. 31, 32, etc. When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the
holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of his glory. And
before him shall be gathered all nations, and he shall separate them one from
another, as a Shepherd separateth the sheep from the Goats. And he shall set
the sheep on his right hand, and the goats on the left hand. Then shall the
King say to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father: inherit ye
the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundations of the world. For I was an
hungered, and ye gave me meat: I thirsted and ye gave me drink: I was a
stranger, and ye lodged me. J was naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye
visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me. Then shall the righteous
answer him, saying, Lord when saw we thee an hungered, and fed thee? or a
thirst, and gave thee drink? And when saw we thee a stranger, and lodged thee,
or naked and clothed thee? Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came
unto thee? And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you,
inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have
done it to me.
. 1. When the Son of man shall come in his glory.]

What is the difference between the first and second coming of Christ, that
it is said here,

First, his first coming was in the flesh, in a most Esa 53.2. but his second
shall be glorious both in regard of body and soul.

Secondly, his first coming was in the form of a Servant; Philip. 2.7. but
his second as the Hebr. 1.2.

(John Baptist) who preached and proclaimed his coming in a solitary place;
but at his second he shall come with a shout, and shall descend from heaven
with the voice of an Archangell, and the Trumpet of God, 1. Thessal. 4.16.
Psalm. 50.3.

verse) and of Saints, Jude 14.

Chap. 24.30.

John 5.28.

He shall separate them, as a Shepherd divides his sheep from the Goats.]

The Papists say, that those who are guilty of Original sin only, shall not
be punished with Hell fire, but (if they dyed before the committing of Actual
sin, and without Baptism) they shall be shut up in Limbo infantum, where
they shall neither be sensible of pain nor pleasure. Against this Tenet we
object this place, viz. the right hand, and the left; and therefore necessarily
those who are polluted only with Original sin and not washed, with the
blood of Christ, must be either sheep or goats, placed either on the right
hand, or on the left; but they are not sheep* nor shall be placed at Christ's
right hand, for such shall possess life eternal (as is here plainly affirmed)
yea the Papists say that those who are polluted with original sin, and not
purged with the blood of Christ, shall never enjoy the Kingdom of Heaven: And
therefore such shall be set on Christ's left hand amongst the goats. Now those
who are placed on Christ's left hand, are not only called accursed (Go ye
cursed) but are also condemned unto eternal fire, which is a sensible
punishment.

And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, and the goats on his left.]

For the understanding of this phrase of the right hand, and the left observe,
that when three are going together, or sitting together, he that is in the
midst is in the chief place, but he that stands upon his right hand is in
the second place; and he that stands on his left hand is in the third place;
and in this sense we are to understand these places; viz. Matthew 20.21. where
the Mother of Zebedees Children desires that one of her sons may sit at
Christ's right hand, and another at his left, where Christ is in the highest
place, and he that sits on his right hand in the second place, and he that sits
on the left in the third place. So here, He shall set the sheep at his right
hand, and the goats at his left, where Christ is in the highest place, and the
Sheep in the second, and the Goats in the third, and last.

. 4. Come ye blessed of my Father, possess the

Why does not the Judge of all the World say, Inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you, because you have worshipped and served God aright, or because you have
believed on him aright, or because you have persevered in faith? but omitting
these, only reckons up the works of mercy and charity? In a word why does the
Lord here rather recite these works of charity, then others of piety, or
constancy in Religion even to the death?

First, the Judge of all the World alleges and those then these.

Secondly, the Judge of all the world does rather

Thirdly, these works of mercy are here mentioned,

Fourthly, because the works of mercy directly

Fifthly, because Christ hereby would excite and verses 34, 46.

Sixthly, the Judge mentions the works of

Seventhly, that he might intimate, that the estate

I. That this misery and affliction of theirs, is his, In as much as ye did it
to them ye did it to me, and hence the Apostle St. Paul calls his sufferings,
Christ's sufferings, 2. Cor. 1. and this he learnt from Christ himself, who
cried unto him (when he was going to afflict the members of Christ; Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me? Acts. 9. And

II. That the afflictions and miseries of this life shall be rewarded with life
eternal.

Carthusian (in hunc locum) says, the Judge of all the world alleges these
works of mercy oney, because the Scripture is most plentiful and copious in
the commanding, and commending of these works. And

Carthus. s. Page 204. a.

Bellarmine produces this place to prove the works of charity and mercy, or
alms deeds to be meritorious; Christ says here, Receive the Kingdom prepared
for you; for when I was hungry you fed me etc. Therefore Alms merit eternal
life. Bellarm. de bon. operib. in particular lib. 3. Cap. 4.









I. Will visit only great and rich men, and not poor; and come only to
fair buildings, not at all to poor Cottages. And

II. Who having skillful Physicians near them, will neither (when they are
sick) send for them, or unto them.

Secondly, it is lawful for people to visit those who are sick (if the
sickness be not infectious) and is their duty so to do; as appears thus.

I. We must do to others as we would have others do unto us: now who would
not be glad to be comforted, and visited by friends, when they are sick? And
therefore this is peoples duty one toward another. And

II. To visit the sick is a Christian work and a work best beseeming a
Christian: and therefore no Christian should be a stranger unto it. And

III. It is a most equal and fitting thing to visit the sick: for who will
hide his face from his own flesh? Esa. 58.7. Now Christians are members of one
another: and therefore should not be strangers unto this duty. And

IV. To visit the sick is commended in the Scripture, Job. 2.11, 12, 13. yea
lauded by Christ in this place, verse 36. And

V. This duty shall be rewarded, both on earth, Psalm. 41.1. and in heaven, in
this place. And therefore if people desire either the praise, or reward of
Christ; they must visit the sick.

Thirdly, it is the Ministers duty to visit the sick who are under his
charge, if (as our Canon excepts) the sickness be not contagious; as appears
thus.

I. They must take care for their whole flock in general, and for every
member of their flock in particular; and therefore they must not absent
themselves from them in the time of their sickness, it being a fitting season
to administer saving advice and counsel unto them. Read Ezech 34.1.2, 3, 4.

II. People principally stand in need of consolation and comfort when they are
sick; whence we see that Christ was cheered and refreshed in his agony by the
company and consolation of Angels, Luke. 2^.43. And therefore Ministers must
visit their sheep, when they lie on their sick beds.

III. Those who are sick are exhorted to desire the visitation of the
Ministers, and the Ministers are commanded to visit those who are visited with
the hand of sickness, James. 5.14. And therefore they neglect both their
duties to God and man, if they be back-ward herein.

What are the fruits of hospitality, that our Savior

First, if the studious Reader would see this enlarged Stapleton, Antidot.
animae. page 181. 182, 183. where he shall find something false, something
fabulous, and something true.

Secondly, God is so well pleased with this duty Raguel the Priest of Madian
for his hospitality unto Moses, was (by the providence of God) rewarded with
this, That that great and incomparable Prophet became his son in Law, Exodus 2.

Thirdly, God is so delighted with this duty Shunamite, 2 King. 4 for whom
the-Prophet of God obtained a son, because she ordinarily received him with
joy into her house.

Fourthly, some for hospitality have had their Rahab Josh. 2, And

Fifthly, it is of such force, that by means of it corporal diseases have
been cured in the houses of them, who have kindly entertained the servants of
God even by the servants of God themselves: as we may see from Acts. 18.

Sixthly, for this duty of hospitality, God has King. 17. where the widow was
rewarded (for her entertainment to the Prophet) with a multiplication, and
miraculous augmentation of her oil and meal.

Seventhly, it is of such virtue, that it is oftentimes Zacheus did, who having
received beyond his expectation JESUS CHRIST in to his house, and entertaining
him as kindly as possibly he might; hears that which was as marrow to his
bones, viz, This day salvation is come unto thine house.

Genesis 18. and in Lot, Genesis 19. and Hebrew. 13.2.



Perkins

Minor proposition they confirm thus; The Judge here says, inherit the
Kingdom, for I was hungry, and ye gave me meat: For that is, because ye fed
me; for the causuall particle Enim, For, does express the true cause of the
inheriting of this Kingdom. Canisius Catech. and. Rhemist.

First, some say that good works are the efficient [Non per modum meriti, sed
per modum viae and medii] not by way of merit, but of means; because (as
follows in the next Answer) they are the way and means unto this Kingdom.

Habet vitam eternam fides etc. Faith has life eternal, as a good foundation,
and good works also, whereby a righteous man is proved in word and deed.
Ambros. officior. lib. 2. Cap. 2. Good works then are recompensed as
testimonies and proofs of our faith or as signs showing the sincerity of our
faith, and not alleged as the meritorious cause of life eternal. And this is
evident from the very text. For

I. CHRIST says, Inherit the Kingdom, or take and enjoy the Kingdom as an
inheritance; now an inheritance is not of merit. Again he says, which was
prepared for you from the beginning of the world; That is, before ye were, and
before ye had either done good or evil; and therefore it was prepared, and is
imparted freely.

II. The elect and faithful themselves do plainly deny all merit, in these
words, Lord when saw we thee hungry, or naked etc. As if they would say, it is
nothing which we have done neither of such worth that thou O Lord should thus
accept it as done unto thee, or thus infinitely reward it, Scultet. Idea conc.
Page 646.

Thirdly, there is but one work only, which

Fourthly, the Assumption is false; for not for

Fifthly, unto the causall particle enim, For we Enim) learnedly enlarged, and
fully prosecuted, Let him read Bp. Daven. de just. actual. Cap. 32. page 411.
obj. 9. and Pareus. s. Page 848. b. and Amestus Bell. enerv. tom. 4. p. 207.

Against our last words of our former Answer For does denote the meritorious
cause, and not a declarative cause only of the justice and equity of the
sentence.

First, as the Judge does not say, inherit the

Secondly, the Reason why our Savior does

VERSE. 41, 42, etc. Then shall he say unto them on the left hand, Depart from
me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I thirsted, and ye gave
me no drink: I was a stranger, and ye lodged me not: I was naked and ye
clothed me not: sick, and in prison, and yet visited me not. Then shall they
also answer him, saying, Lord, wh^^ saw me the^ an hungered, or a thirst, (...)
a stranger, or naked, or sick or in prison, and did not minister unto thee?
Then shall he answer them, and say, Verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye did
it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire.]

The four last things are Death, Judgment, Hell, and Heaven, and they are
thus differenced, Nothing is more horrible then Death, nothing more terrible
then Judgment, nothing more intolerable then Hell, nothing more delectable
then heaven, Bern. And therefore blessed are they who by death are brought unto
heaven, but wretched and infinitely miserable are all they who by Judgment are
sent unto hell.



Sphinx answers, th^se in the text, in this Elegiake. Aspera vox, Ite, sed vox
benedicta, Venite.
Ite malis vox est apta, Venite, bonis.
that is, This word DEPART, the Goats with horror hears
But this word COME, the Sheep to joy appears.


And hence Bernard (in Psalm. 91.) prays O Domine in die illo libera me a
verbo Aspere; O Lord deliver me at the great day from that soul, killing word,
Depart.

Depart or in the whole sentence?



First, Depart, get you gone, flee hence, out of my sight, and from the society
of the Elect, for ever.

Secondly, ye cursed, which loved not blessing; and therefore are now justly
excluded out of heaven, and deprived of all felicit and happiness.

Thirdly, into the fire; not into the scorching flame, or parching heat, but
into the burning fire.

Fourthly, into everlasting fire; not into a fire that will either burn and
quite consume them, or, which will be consumed it self at the last; which will
either cause them to dye, or dye and extinguish it self: but into everlasting
fire, which shall never go out, but torment them world without end.

Fifthly, with the Devil and his Angels; as they said unto the Almighty,
depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thee or thy Law, and wished that
the righteous might be taken out of their sight; so they shall be excluded and
driven out of the presence of God, and deprived of the society of Saints and
Angels, their companions thenceforward being only devils, wicked Angels, and
damned spirits. Then will they (oppressed with grief) cry out,

I. To the Sun; O Sun, hitherto thou have refreshed us with thy comfortable
light, but now we shall never see thee more, but must be cast into everlasting
darkness. And

II. To the Air; oh air thou have often refreshed me with thy sweet breath,
and wholesome smell; but now I must enjoy no air but detestable stinking
vapors, and stif^ling sents. And

III. To the Earth; oh eartn thou have often delighted me with many rare
dainties, fruits, liquors, and the like, but now I must never taste good bit or
drop more, but be reserved unto endless hunger. And

IV. To the Water; oh water how often have I been cheered with thy drops and
draughts, but now I must go where I shall thirst eternally. And

V. To the faithful; oh holy Saints, for your sakes and societies, I have
escaped many temporal judgments, and enjoyed many temporal mercies, but now
I must never come into your company nor see you any more, but must converse
with devils for ever and ever. And

VI. Lastly to CHRIST; oh holy Lord, thou have often called me unto repentance,
obedience, and faith, promising to receive me into favor, to be reconciled
unto me, and to pardon all my sins, but now for my impenitency and hardness
of heart, J am justly cast out of thy favor and presence and must now suffer
for my sins, insufferable sorrow and smart, in everlasting fire. And thus
those who are not like unto the righteous in piety, shall never be like them in
eternal felicity.

This place is urged by the Papists against us, to prove, that Infants dying
unbaptized shall not suffer any sensible torment in hell: and is produced also
by us against them, that they do. I will consider and treat briefly of them
particularly.

Salmeron the Jesuit argues hence thus; Those Limbus infantum) between the
glory of heaven, and the torments of hell, for these Infants. His Argument
seems to be this.

Whosoever are sent unto hell fire, are to be reckoned up with those who could,
but would not perform the works of charity, and mercy.

But children are not of this number; Therefore children shall not be sent into
hell fire.

First, the Major is the Jesuits, not our Iesuses;

Secondly, we may distinguish of this word Connumerari, to be numbered together,
or to be reckoned up with such or such; for this is twofold; to wit,

I. Connumerari in peccato, to be numbered together in sin, that is, to commit
the same kind of sins and thus drunkards are reckoned up with drunkards, and
swearers with swearers, and fornicators with fornicators, and thieves with
thieves, and the like. Now in this sense the Major is false: for undoubtedly
other sinners (besides unmercifull and uncharitable men) are cast into hell
fire: and therefore why not Infants stained with man's first transgression?

II. Connumerari in poena, to be numbered together in punishment, that is to be
tormented with the same kind of punishment, wherewith others are tormented. Now
in this sense the Minor is false; for into the same fire are cast murderers,
swearers, drunkards, adulterers, liars, and idolaters, and therefore why not
children polluted with original sin? Cham. t. 3. de poenis peccati lib. 6.
Cap. 4.. 9. 10. fol. 165.

Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and
his Angels: But of this number are Infants which are condemned to hell:
Therefore they shall suffer torments in everlasting fire. If the Reader would
see this argument opposed, and the reply answered, let him read Dr. Willets
synops. fol. 877.

VERSE. 46. And those shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the
righteous into eternal fire.
How do the wicked enter into hell, and the

By the powerful and commanding voice of CHRIST, which is of that force,

How can these words [The wicked shall go into stand, or accord with those of
the Prophet, The Lord is merciful, and will not be angry for ever, Ierem. 3.12.

The Prophet speaks of Gods anger in regard of those who repented; Esa. 5.7.
and Ierem. 18. and Ezech. 18.) and when they repent and turn unto him, then he
repents him of his punishments, and corrections, and turns unto them in love.

Now Christ speaks here of perverse and obstinate sinners, who will not (by
the long suffering of God) be led unto repentance, and unto whom God will be a
swift, and severe Judge.

CHAP. XXVI.
VERSE. 1, 2. And it came to pass, when JESUS had finished all these sayings,
he said unto his Disciples, ye know that after two days is the Feast of the
Passover, and the Son of man is betrayed to be crucified.
After two days is the Feast of the Passover.]

Feast called the Feast of the Passover?

passione from suffering (as some think) but from passing: for (...) in Hebrew
is (Pesaech) which comes from the root (Pasach) Transiit, or Transultavit: to
pass over. For from Exodus. 12. it appears that

First, the children of Israel that night went forth with have out of Egypt. And

Secondly, that the Angel who slew the first borne of the Egyptians, did that
night pass over the houses of the Israelites, seeing their doors sprinkled
with blood. Yea

Thirdly, this their Passing out of Egypt, was a Type of Christ's passing from
this world to his Father, as thinks Carthusian. s. page 204. b.

Evangelists be reconciled, who in show seem to differ in the laying down of
this History? For in this verse, St. Matthew says, that after two days was
the Feast of the Passe-over, but verse 17. he says, that this was done in the
first day of unleavened bread, which St. Mark expounds to be the first day of
the Passe-over: And therefore St. Matthew seems to contradict himself, in the
one verse saying, that it was two days before the Passe-over, in the other
verse that it was the first day of the passe-over. Again St. John Chapt. 13.1.
says this was before the Feast of the Passe-over: St. Mark. Chapt. 14.12.
says it was on the first day of unleavened bread, when they killed the
Passe-over: which seems to cross one another.

For the reconciling of these,

First, that the Hebrews begun their day at even; as appears by Levit. 23.32.

Secondly, that the Passe-over according to the Law was to be celebrated upon
the fourteenth day of the first month Nisan: as appears, Exodus 12.6, 18. And
from the beginning of that day (that is, from the Even) they were wont to eat
unleavened bread.

Thirdly, CHRIST celebrated the Passe-over upon that day which was prescribed
by the Law: because he would be subject to the Law in all things.

Fourthly, the day of preparation was the day before the Passe-over, which
answers to our Friday, See after verse 17.

Fifthly, the first day of unleavened bread was the fourteenth day of the
month Nisan, which was the first day of the weekly Feast of the Passe-over
(For the celebration of this Feast continued seven days) Now this fourteenth
day of the month Nisan, is not to be understood from the beginning of the day,
(that is, from the setting of the Sun of the thirteenth day) but from the last
part of it; and in this last part was the Lamp killed, and eaten betwixt two
Evens, according to the Law, Exodus 12.6. And therefore this was done in the
former part of the first day of unleavened bread, that is, about sunset of the
thirteenth day of the Month Nisan, Let the Reader for a more full satisfaction
of this question, look upon Sharp. symphon. 330. See also. Carthus. s. page
108. a. and Jewish Antiq. 139.

The Son of man is betrayed to be crucified.]









VERSE. 7. There came unto him a woman, having an alabaster box of very
precious ointment, and powered it on his head, as he sat at meat.


Mary.

Mary was it?

Mary's, who anointed CHRIST, namely

I. She who anointed him in the Pharisees house, 7.27, 38. And this was Mary
the harlot.

II. She who anointed his feet in Bethany in her own house: And this was
Mary the sister of Lazarus, John. 12.3.

III. She who powered the ointment upon his head in the house of Simon the
Leper, Mark. 14.3. and in this verse. Now of this mind are Origin tract. in
Matthew. 35. Theophilact in Luc. 7. Euthymius in Matthew. 26.

Mary's who anointed CHRIST; to wit,

I. Mary the harlot, who first in the Pharisees house anointed his feet, and
afterward in the house of Simon the Leper anointed his head.

II. Mary the sister of Lazarus, who anointed his feet when he supped at her
house. Of this opinion are Chrysostom. hom. in Matthew. 81. and in John. 61.
Bernard. in sermon. de Magdalena.

Mary who anointed Christ; and that was Mary the sister of Lazarus, who was
also called Magdalene; who anointed his head both in the house of the
Pharisee, and in the house of Simon the Leper, and also in her brother Lazarus
his hour. Of this mind are August. lib. 2. de consensu Evang. Cap. 9. Greg.
hom. de Magdalena. Beda. s. luc. 7. Rabanus in luc. 7. Druthmanus in Matthew. 26.
and diverse others, who expressed their opinion in this Hymn or Ode; Maria
soror Lazari,
Quae tot commisit crimina
Ab ipsa fauce Tartari
Redit ad vitae limina.
That is, MARY the Sister of LAZARUS,
Who sinned many a time,
Has left the Isle of Tartarus,
And purged off her crime.


Fourthly, St. Ambrose (Lib. 6. in Luc.) says,

Fifthly, I conceive that it is but one History viz. Matthew. 26.7. Mark. 14.3.
Luke. 7, 37, 38. John. 12.3. For the Pharisee and Simon the Leper were one, and
when Christ eat with him, Martha helped to attend upon the table, and her
brother Lazarus was invited as a guest; for it is not probable that he would
have sit down at the Table in his own house, when he wel-commed so great a
guest as Christ was.

Against this it will be objected, St. John says, Mary which he speaks of,
anointed his feet, but that Mary which St. Matthew and St. Mark mention
anointed his head: Therefore it is either not one and the same history; or at
least there is a contradiction in the Evangelists.

The history is one,

The Papists object this place for the proof of Mary's was a good work; and
yet there was no Commandment for it in Gods word: Therefore there are good
works, which are not commanded; and consequently which we are not bound to
do, or which if we do, we do more then we need.

First, Mary's fact was a work of confession, Perkins.

Secondly, Mary was moved to this work by a verse 12. (as Christ himself
testifies) because his burial was so speedy after his death, in regard of the
approaching of the Sabbath, that they could not imbalme him, as the manner of
the Jews was. Now every instinct of Gods Spirit, in the conscience of the
doer, has the force of a particular command.

VERSE. 11. Vnws 11
For ye have the poor always with you, but me ye have not always.
How does this verse accord with Chapt. 28.20. For in the one place he says,
Me ye have not always with you; and in the other, I am with you to the end of
the world.

man, but God also: for as Man we have not his corporal presence, neither
shall we have it before his return from heaven, he being now ascended into
heaven, where he shall remain, until he come unto judgment. But as he is
God, so the presence of his grace and Spirit does never leave or depart from
us, but is with us unto the end of the world.

Eucharist object this place; The poor ye have always, but me ye shall not
have always.

To this the Papists answer by this distinction, that Christ is not now present
in body, Visibili and corporali praesentia: by his Visible or corporal
presence: or, Secundum humanam conversationem, after his conversation, or as he
was conversant among men; but invisible he may be present, and after another
manner. Bellarm. de Euchar. lib. 1. Cap. 14. resp. ad loc. 4.

Peter says, The heavens must contain or receive CHRIST till his coming
again, Acts. 3.21. Whence this follows plainly, He cannot in his body be
absent from heaven till that time; therefore he cannot any way be present in
earth. If they answer as they do, that he may be in heaven and in the
Eucharist all at one time; we then confute them with this place, He is not
here, for he is risen. Matthew. 28.6. Now this had been no good argument, if the
body of Christ could have been in two places at once,

VERSE. 12. For in that she has powered this ointment on my body, she did it for
my burial.
We may observe hence, that there was a threefold ointment; to wit,

First, Vnguentum militare, wherewith their Kings were anointed to go out as
their Captains before them to the battle; So David was anointed amongst the
midst of his brethren, to be their Captain and King. 1, Samuel. 16.13.

Secondly, there was Vnguentum convivale, an ointment used at Feasts: Eccles.
9.8.

Thirdly, there was Vnguentum funebre; an ointment used at Funerals; and unto
this has our Savior reference in this place.

VERSE. 17. Now the first day of the Feast of unleavened Bread, JESUS, saying
unto him; Where will thou, that we prepare for thee to eat the Passover?


First, for the whole week of unleavened Bread: thus Act. 18. it is said, That
after the Passover Herod intended to bring forth Peter unto the people.
Secondly, for the day which followed the Even, wherein the Paschall Lamb was
eaten; that is for the fifteenth day of the first Month. Thus St. Paul says,
The feast day of unleavened bread which is called the Passover did approach.
Thirdly, for the hour of the killing and eating of the Paschall Lamb:
according to that of St. Mark, After two days was the Passover, and the
feast of unleavened bread. Fourthly, for any bread or meat which the Jews eat
during the feast of the Passover: Thus St. John says, The Jews would not
enter into the Judgment hall, lest they should be defiled: but that they might
eat the Passover (John 18.28.) Now here by Passover, John does not
understand the Paschall Lamb, but unleavened bread, which they were to eat
for the space of seven days: And which it was not lawful for them to eat,
except they were clean according to the Law; now to have entered into Pilates
house would have defiled them. Fifthly, for the Paschall Lamb it self.
Sixthly, for Christ, who was figured by the Lamb, 1 Cor. 5.7. Carthus. s.


VERSE. 20. Now when the Even was come,
Whether was it required of the Jews by the Lord to stand at the eating of the
Passe-over or to sit?

First, Pererius (s. Exodus 12.8.) thinks, standing was none of the Ceremonies
enjoined, because our Savior Christ did sit at the Passe-over, as St. Matthew
here expresses.

Secondly, Philo, whose judgment is somewhat Hebrews, thinks, that they
stood at the Passe-over. lib. de sacrif. Cain and Abel.

Thirdly, it is clear that they stood, by the other Because they did eat in
have: Now he that stands is more ready to go, then he that sits, and he
which sits has no need to stay his hand upon a staff. Yea the Apostle
saying, Stand therefore and your loins girded about, Ephesians. 6.13. seems to
allude to this ceremony.

Fourthly, and though our Savior did sit at the Passe-over, yet this shows
not that the Jews did not then stand, but that it was no perpetual ceremony,
only prescribed for that time, as the rest belonging to their habit, which
were likewise omitted by our Savior.

Fifthly, It is the opinion also of the Hebrews, stand in the eating of the
Passe-over, in token of their servitude in Egypt, for servants used to eat
their meat standing. And Simler (in Exodus 12.8.) is of opinion, that CHRIST
first stood, till the Passe-over was eaten, and then sat down at the rest of
the supper: for it was lawful after the eating of the Passe-ouer to use other
meats, to make an end of the feast as our Savior also did. But it appears to
be otherwise by this our Evangelist, that our Savior did sit at the eating of
the Passover, as in this verse, When the Even was come, he sat down with the
twelve. Wherefore it is not otherwise to be judged, but that standing at the
Passover was a rite only prescribed at that time.

VERSE. 22. And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to
say unto him, Lord is it I?
sorrowful?

sorrowed for the approaching death, and most impious delivering, and betraying
of their Liege, loved, and innocent Lord.

sorrowful, because every one feared himself, knowing that it was impossible
that their Master should lie, but it was possible enough that through humane
frailty they might fall into such a gulf, and horrible impiety.

greeved that there should be one so wicked amongst them, as to betray his own
Master: for the offense of one of a congregation does often reflect upon the
whole congregation: yet a good colleague or companion does mourn for his
fellows fault, as though it were his own.

VERSE. 24. The Son of man goes as it is written of him: but woe unto that
man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed: it had benee good for that man if he
had not been borne.
it had been good for Judas, if he had never been borne, that is, if he had
never been?

never been borne, or never been, he could never have been a Traitor, nor
listened to any such wicked counselil. And it better by much not to be, then to
be a betraiour of the Lord of glory.

it had been good for Judas, if he had never been, because it is better Non
esse then Male esse, not to be at all, then to be eternally miserable, as he is
and shall be for ever: for if he had never been he could never have been
damned.

VERSE. 26, 27, 28. And as they were eating Jesus took bread, and blessed it,
and brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my
body. And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them saying:
Drink ye all of it: For this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed
for many for the remission of sins.
In these verses is laid down the institution of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, and therefore J will not handle them particularly by Sections, as J do
in the rest, but only propound some general questions, which J conceive are
most needful to be known, and learnt by those, who desire to be worthy, and
blessed receivers of this holy Sacrament.

What is that we call the Lords Supper?

That which Christians are commanded to receive together in their solemn
assemblies, in remembrance of Christ: Or it is the Communion of bread and wine,
instituted by CHRIST in remembrance of his death, Luke 22.19. and 1 Corinthians.
11.24, 33. and 10.17.

Whether is the Eucharist a Sacrament, being

The Papists say, This is my body, the elements are the very body and blood of
Christ, though they be kept in boexs or pixes, and other Church vessels, and
never eaten. Trident Council. sess. 13. Can. 47. Bellarm. de Euchar. Lib. 4.
Cap. 2.

Now because we deny this, and say, That the Eucharist is no Sacrament beside
or without the use thereof; that is, though some form of words be pronounced
over the Elements, yet if they be not received and eaten and drunk, it is no
Sacrament, they object this place thus, Christ's words which were spoken over
the bread, This is my body, were true as soon as they were pronounced, yea
before he said, Take eat, and so likewise of the Cup: therefore it was a
Sacrament before they did receive and eat it, yea and had been a Sacrament
though it had not been received at all at that time.

First, these words of our Saviors, This is my body, Matthew here sets it
down, he brake the bread, and gave it to his Disciples, saying, Take, eat, and
then follow these words, This is my body, which seem to have been uttered
even in that instant, when they took the bread, and began to eat it.

Secondly, the institution of a Sacrament consists promise, partly of a
precept; The promise is this, This is my body; the precept, Take, eat: Now
Christ does no otherwise make good his promise; then we perform the condition:
unless therefore accordingly we do take and eat it, it is not the body of
Christ. If the Reader desire to see, how both these answers are opposed by
Bellarmine, and how his oppositions are fully answered, let him read Willet
synops. 621, 622.

By whom, and when was this Sacrament of Lords Supper instituted?

By the Lord JESUS in the night wherein he was betrayed. As in this place,
Corinthians 11.23.

Why in the institution of this Sacrament did bless the Elements (as it is
here said) or give thanks as St. Luke, and Saint Paul say.

First, CHRIST gave thanks, that he might thankfulness.

Secondly, he gave thanks, to show that willingly, and of his own free accord
he laid down his

gave thanks, to teach us, that we must suffer and undergo whatsoever is laid
upon us, with thankesgiving, like Job who blessed God for crosses, as well as
blessings, Job. 1.21.

gave thanks, that thereby he might signify, that he was delivered to death
for the benefit of us, and our salvation. And this is the true meaning of these
words, he took the elements of bread and wine, and blessed them, that is, he
gave thanks to God his Father, for his inestimable mercy toward mankind, and
for that inestimable mystery of their redemption, which was now about to be
showed forth,

Sacrament of his Supper?





Sacrament, wherein he is held forth unto them.



Sacrament of the Lords Supper?

verse. and Mark. 14.22. and 1 Corinthians. 10.16. Where we see that the Elements
are bread and wine, which being consecrated or blessed, are changed
Sacramentally, but not substantially: I say Sacramentally; because they are
separated and set apart for the Sacrament: and are not to be reduced or turned
unto a common use, durng the continuance of the Sacrament.

Bread and Wine and the Body and Blood of Christ, that our Savior here uses
these Elements of Bread and Wine to signify his Body and Blood?

Bread and Wine and the Body and Blood of CHRIST; that as those nourish the
life of man, being meat and drink; according to the Psalmist, God gives bread
to strengthen the heart of man, and Wine to make him cheerful, Psalm. 104. So
the participation of the Body and Blood of Christ, does so nourish and sustain
our souls, that we shall never spiritually die any more, I amplify not this
answer, because I have to consider of the resemblance betwixt these signs and
the things they signify, more amply in another place.

Bread and the Body of Christ and Wine and the Blood of Christ, is a threfold
dissimilitude, and unlikenesse, namely,

I. In Bread and Wine there is a temporary satiety but in the Body and Blood of
Christ an eternal. Bread and Wine do only satisfy the hunger, and quench
the thirst for a time: but he that eats the flesh of Christ, and drinks his
blood, shall neither hunger nor thirst, for ever.

II. Bread feeds man, but not only Bread; for a man cannot live only of that
food without any other: But the Body of Christ alone feeds, nourishes, and
preserves the soul alive: yea that is the only food of the soul, and he that
eats not of that can never have life eternal.

III. Earthly Bread being eaten consumes and wastes; but the flesh of Christ
which is meat indeed will never consume, but live for ever.

How many things does our Savior intimate [He took the cup, and gave thanks,
and gave it to them, saying; Drink ye all of it, for this is my Blood of the
New Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sinnes]

Goranus upon these words says that our Savior implies four things in them,
viz.

First, Sacramenti veritatem, the truth of the Sacrament in these words, This
is my blood.

Secondly, Sacramenti dignitatem, the excellency of the Sacrament, in these
words. Of the New Testament.

Thirdly, Sacramenti utilitatem, the commodity and utility of the Sacrament; in
these words which is shed for many.

Fourthly, Communicandi generalitatem, the generality of the Communion and
participation of the Sacrament, in these words, Drink ye all of it, that is,
All, both Priest and People, Clergy, and Laity, are to partake of the Cup, as
well as of the Bread, in the Celebration of this Sacrament. And therefore
extremely injurious are the Papists to the people (in denying unto them the
Cup) and directly opposite unto Christ, in their celebration of this Sacrament.
For

I. This Sacrament was instituted to be received in both kinds; Christ took
the Bread, and also the Cup, and gave it, in these verses.

II. The Church was enjoined to receive it in both kinds: 1 Corinthians. 11.28. Let
a man (that is, every receiver) examine himself, and so let him eat of this
Bread, and drink of this Cup.

III. Christ did single out the Cup, as it were with a prophetical Cave,
Drink ye all of this, in this place. Squire in 2. Thessal. 2. Page 7. 2.

Against this Bellarm. objects, That these words, Drink ye all of this, were
spoken only to the Apostles, who then sat at Supper with Christ, And
therefore not all receivers, but Ministers only must taste and partake the Cup.

First, if we should deny it, they could not he sat down with the twelve,
and, he gave it to his Disciples, do not necessarily import that there were
none but them, but that all the twelve were there when he began to eat the
Passover.

Secondly, if these words, (Drink ye all of this) consequently, that the
people must not communicate at all: for as it was said unto the Apostles, Drink
ye all of this, so it was also said unto them, Take eat: And therefore by
Bellarmines argument, if none but Apostles were present, when these words were
uttered, and that they were spoken to them only, and because they were spoken
only unto them, therefore the people must not communicate of the Cup, then by
the same reason they must not partake of the Bread neither, because unto the
Apostles only our Savior said, Take, eat. And thus the people (in
Bellarmines judgment) are wholly cut of from the use of this Sacrament.

Sacrament from him, and with him, was not spoken unto them, as they were
Apostles, but as they were faithful, having communion with CHRIST, and
consequently with all the faithful.

How does it appear, that the Cup is to be given Bread?

Sacrament in both kinds, giving charge and commandment to all Christians in
the same manner to celebrate it: for he says here, Drink ye all of this,
where it is worth observing, that Christ says after the Cup, Drink ye all of
this, but after the giving of the Bread, he says not, Eat ye all of this, so
that our Savior did as it were foresee, that the Cup should be denied to
some, and therefore directly commands that to be used of all.

Secondly, it appears also hence; Our Savior Cup, This is my blood which is
shed for you, and for many: wherefore the blood of Christ must be given to all
those for whom it was shed; and so consequently to Laymen also.

What does Christ point at in these words, This

He did not mean, that it was his blood indeed which was in the Cup, wine: For
the understanding hereof observe, that when Moses said, Exodus 24.8. Behold the
blood of the Covenant; there the word Blood is properly to be understood:
because their covenants were confirmed with blood, and there were no
sacrifices, without blood. But when CHRIST said here, This is my blood of the
New Testament, there was no blood in the Cup here, but he had relation to his
own blood, which was signified by the wine in the cup.

When CHRIST says, This is my body, This is (as in these verses) how was he
present with the bread and wine there?

present four manner of ways; namely,

First, (...), when a man is bodily present.

Secondly, (...), when a man is present by his picture.

Thirdly, (...), as the Sun is present by operation, in heating and
nourishing things here below.

Fourthly, (...), when we apprehend a thing in our mind. Now when Christ said
this is my body, and this is my blood, he was present there (...) corporally,
but he was not in the bread and the wine (...), for then his blood should have
been there before it was shed; yea then he should have had two bodies, one
visible and another invisible: But he was present in the bread and the wine
(...), representatively, because the bread and the wine represented his body
and his blood. So he was present there (...), operatively, by his Spirit
working in their hearts, And lastly he was present to them by Faith (...),
apprehensively, when they did spiritually eat his body, and drink his blood,
and this is the true and literal sense of the words. Weemse of the sense of
the Scripture. Page 181.

Before Question 6. we affirmed that in this Sacrament of the Lords Supper, was
outwardly communicated bread and wine, which must be consecrated or blessed
according to the institution of CHRIST. Now hence it may be demanded.

Whether this consecration change their substance,

No, substance of the Elements are not changed by their consecration, but they
remain bread and wine still.

Which are the words of Consecration?

First, the Papists say, these words, This is my and This is the New Testament
in my blood, are the very forms of this Sacrament, and words of consecration;
which words being spoken over the bread, and over the wine, immediately the
Elements are changed into the body and blood of Christ, Rhemist. 1 Corinthians.
11.. 11. Bellarm. Lib. 1. de Sacram. Cap. 13.

Secondly, we the Protestants lay down our viz.

I. We acknowledge no such consecration at all, by virtue whereof the Elements
are converted, and transsubstantiated into the body and blood of Christ.

II. A consecration we grant, which is a setting apart of the Elements, which
before were common, to holy use, and by the virtue of Christ's institution, to
be made unto us signs of holy things.

III. Only these words, This is my body, and This is the cup of my blood, are
not the words of consecration: but the whole sentence, Take ye, eat ye, this
is my body, The body of Christ is sacramentally to be taken and eaten; and
therefore by taking and eating the elements also are consecrated, and not only
by saying of the words. Now this we prove from this place, by this Argument.

If the whole consecration do consist in these words, This is my body, and
this is my blood; then before the prolation, and pronouncing of these words,
Christ did not consecrate the Elements.

But Christ did consecrate them, before the uttering of these words.

Therefore the whole consecration does not consist in these words, This is my
body, and This is my blood.

The consequent is undeniable, and manifest by it self.

The assumption is thus proved from the words of the Evangelist, When Christ
had taken bread, and blessed it, he brak it and gave it to his Disciples
saying, take, eat, this is my body; and having taken the Cup, and given
thanks, he gave it to them saying, Drink ye all of this, for this is my
blood. For the words of this our Evangelist are thus truly rendered, and
translated by Beza.

Thus it appears that these are not the only words of consecration, because
both the bread was broken and distributed, and the cup also, before Christ
spoke those words. For first Christ says, Take eat, and Take and drink,
before he had said, either this is my body, or this is my blood. Again St.
Luke adds, This is my body which is given for you; and St. Paul says, which
is broken for you, 1 Corinthians 11.24. Yea St. Luke and St. Paul have these
words, Do this in remembrance of me, which are omitted both by St. Matthew and
St. Mark. Wherefore seeing all these are the words of CHRIST, it follows,
that they are all effectual and forcible to constitute the Sacrament (unless
they will say, that some of Christ's words are superfluous) Therefore these
only words, This is my body, This is my blood, are not all the words of
consecration.

This is my body, This is my blood?

present, and understands the thing that is not present; He had the bread and
cup in his hand, and he said, This is my body, this is my blood; in which
propositions are two things to be considered, namely,

First, the Subject, and that is, the Bread and Wine, which he does demonstrate.

Secondly, the Attribute, and that is, the thing which is signified by the
Bread and Wine; and these two make up but one sense, When a man look h upon a
picture, he says, This picture is my Father; and hereby understands two
things, to wit, the picture it self, and his Father represented by the
picture; for the picture at which he points is not his Father properly, but
only it represents his Father. And so the bread and wine are not the body
and blood of Christ properly, or proprie loquendo but figurata locutione,
because they represent or typifie his body and blood.

Trope in this sentence, This is my body, then where is it, or in what word?

Hoc, This, nor in the Copula, or verb est, is; but in the consequent
substantive, Body; for Corpus Body, is put for the sign of the Body; And the
meaning is, this is my body, that is, this is the sign of my body: Yet we must
not exclude the true and proper body of Christ out of that sentence, but rather
include it, by that relation which the sign has to the thing signified: but
of this more fully by and by.

Trope only in this word Body, or more then one?

In this Word there is a threefold Trope,

First, there is a Metaphore, whereby one thing is put for another thing like
unto it; to which also a Metonymie of the adjunct does adhere and cleave: For
Bread is not only like unto the Body of Christ, but also by the institution of
God is made an adjunct thereof.

Secondly, there is a Synechdoche of a part for the whole, whereby the Body of
Christ is put for whole Christ.

Thirdly, there is a Metonymie of the subject for the adjunct: for Christ is
put for all those benefits which are derived unto us from him. The Papists
utterly dislike this, affirming that Christ instituting of a Sacrament, and
speaking to his Apostles, who were illiterate men, it is not to be imagined,
that he would use any Tropes or Figures, but in all probability that he would
speak literally and plainly. This they say in opposition to our figurative
exposition of this sentence, This is my body; but in the mean time, they
themselves have interpreted first the Pronoune (This) by under this; the verb
(is) by does signify, the possessive (Mine) spoken by the Priest, to betoken
Christ, the Adjective (given) by is crucified; the verb active (eat) by
believe; the verb passive (is broken) by it seems to be broken; the subject
(Cup) by the matter contained in the cup; and lastly the participle (shed) as
peradventure signifying sprinkled upon their souls; all which are not proper
but figurative senses, some synechdochicall, some metaphorical, some
metonymicall; And thus while our Adversaries condemn Protestants for admitting
but two figures, or three at the most, they themselves are become chargeable
for seven. If the Reader would see this handled to the life, and made as clear
as the Sun, let him read Bp. Mort. Appeal, Lib. 2. cap. 2.. 24. Fol. 121,
22, 123, 124.

What is meant by Hoc, This?

It demonstrates that which Christ brake, Bread which he had blessed. So that
the meaning is, Hoc, This, that is, Hic paenis, This bread which I give unto
you. This is evident

First, from the natural order of the words; for he took Bread, and brake
Bread, and gave Bread unto his Disciples, and said of the Bread, This is my
body.

Secondly, the truth of this interpretation appears from St. Lukes words,
concerning the Cup, (...), This cup (that is, this wine in this Cup) is the New
Testament in my blood, Luke 22.20. so Hoc est corpus meum, This (that is, This
bread which I hold in my hand) is my body.

Thirdly, it is further clear from the Apostle Paul's interpretation, whom we
must rather believe, then any Romanist whatsoever: In 1. Corinthians 10.16. St.
Paul says, The bread which we break; and again, As often as ye shall eat
this bread, etc. And therefore it is clear, that the Substance is not changed
after consecration, but that it continues ^^^ad still.

Fourthly, it is further manifest from the general consent of the Fathers,
until the Schoole-mens time. If the learned Reader would see this last
particular proved, let him read Pareus Controvers. 3. de Eucharist. Lib. 3.
Cap. 5. and Lib. cap. 7. page 23. et lib. 2. cap. 7. page 68.

real presence?

presence of Christ's body, and blood in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; and
that no fained, but a true, and real presence: which is to be considered two
manner of ways; namely,

First, in respect of the signs, and herein we hold and teach, that Christ's
body and blood, are truly present with the bread and wine, the signs in the
Sacrament. If it be here demanded.

present with the Elements? We answer.

present together. Even so at the Lords table Bread and Wine must not be
considered barely, as substances, and creatures, but as outward signs, in
relation to the body and blood of Christ: and this relation arising from the
very institution of the Sacrament, stands in this, that when the elements of
bread and wine are present to the hand and to the mouth of the receiver; at the
very same time the body and blood of CHRIST are presented to the mind. Thus is
CHRIST truly present with the signs.

Secondly, in respect of the Communicants, to whose believing hearts he is also
really present (as was showed before Quest. 18.) (...). If the Reader would see
illustrated, what kind of presence this is, let him read Perkins reformed
Catholic, of real presence, Page 186, 187, etc.

real presence?

presence it self, but only in the manner of presence: for though we hold a
real presence of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament, yet do we not take
it to be local, bodily, or substantial, but spiritual and mystical; to the
signs by Sacramental relation, and to the Communicants by faith alone. On the
contrary the Church of Rome maintains Transsubstantiation, that is, a local,
bodily, and substantial presence of Christ's body and blood, by a change and
conversion of the bread and wine, into the said body and blood, and that
wheresoever this Sacrament is administered; that is, if this Sacrament were
celebrated in all the Cities, and Towns, and parts of the World at one and the
same instant, in all those places were Christ bodily, locally and substantially
present.

Now this we deny, and they thus hence endeavor to prove it.

Our Savior in the institution of his Supper This is my body: Therefore if his
words be true, wheresoever his supper is celebrated, there his body must needs
be; and consequently every where at once, if the Sacrament at once were every
where celebrated.

That which was spoken by our Savior, figuratively, and tropically, they take
literally, and properly; Now that the words are figurative and not proper, it
well appears.

First, if we compare this action which he did then institute, with that which
he did at the same time make an end of; and which was a type of this. The Lords
supper succeeded the Passover. As then of it he spoke figuratively when he
said, I have greatly desired to eat the Passover with you; So when he said,
This is my body he could not but speak figuratively: And as the Lamb which he
did then eat, and instead whereof he did institute the bread, was the
Passover, namely Sacramentally: So the bread Sacramentally is the body of
Christ.

Secondly, it appears also by the phrase of speech used by St. Luke 22.20. and
by St. Paul, 1 Corinthians. 11.25. in speaking of the other part of this Sacrament;
This Cup is the new Testament in my blood. Now to speak properly neither was
the Cup, nor the wine in the Cup, the New Testament. And therefore if the
phrase used concerning the Cup, must needs be understood figuratively, and
tropically, then why not also the phrase concerning the bread?

Thirdly, it cannot be denied but that CHRIST in giving the bread, and saying,
This, did show forth bread, yea such bread, with all its accidents, as he gave:
And therefore either

I. Did he then call the bread alone his body: and if so, then is the speech
figurative, because he calls that his body, which is not his body. Or

II. He did then call the accidents of the bread alone his body; And if so,
which no man durst ever yet avouch, the speech also must needs be figurative. Or

III. He did then call both together (that is, the bread, and its accidents)
his body: And if so it is figurative in like sort; seeing that the substance of
the bread could not be the body of CHRIST, much less the accidents either
alone or with the bread. Or

IV. He did then call neither the bread nor the accidents thereof, his body,
but some other thing: And if so, then out of all question there is then a
figure, whilst showing one thing and calling it his body, he would
notwithstanding have another thing, far different from it, to be understood
by the name of his body. And thus howsoever they expound the words, they must
needs confess a Trope and Figure in them.

Against this Bellarmine (de sacrament Euchar. 1. cap. 9.) objects, Christ the
institution of this Sacrament, said unto his Apostles, after he had given
thanks, and blessed the Elements; This is my body, that is, that which is
contained in this bread, or under the forms of this bread, is my body. And
therefore these words must needs be taken properly; not tropically, This he
further proves by three reasons, viz.

First, because it is not the manner of the Scriptures to set down flat
Precepts and Commandments, and directory rules in obscure terms, or
figurative speeches, but plainly and evidently: Therefore it is not like, that
Christ being now to prescribe unto his Apostles the perpetual Law and form of
this Sacrament, would speak obscurely.

Secondly, because although he spoke often to the Pharisees by parables and
signs, yet there was no cause why he should now so do, none being present but
his Apostles.

Thirdly, because neither these words, This is my body, nor any other speech of
Scripture is to be taken figuratively, unless either some other Scripture do
show it so to be taken, or it be repugnant to some Article of the faith, as
this speech of Christ is not. For whereas the Protestants allege that it is
contrary to Christ's ascension, yet we Catholics do both believe that Article,
and also hold the real presence of Christ notwithstanding, Bellarm. Cap. 9.
Argum. 3.

First, the Cardinal does here strangely overshoot This is my body, must needs
be taken properly, and not figuratively, or tropically; and he gives them this
proper interpretation, That the pronoune (This) does neither signify bread nor
body, nor yet accidents properly; but (This) that is, says he, under these
accidents is my body; as he shows by an example which proves, that this is
so plainly a figurative speech, as when a man promises his friend the use of
his purse, does figuratively mean the money in his purse. Let the Reader read
Bellarm. Lib. 1. de Euchar, Cap. 11.. Nota secundo et. Est igitur, and there he
shall see his exposition of these words, This is my body, according as we have
laid them down, Sub speciebus est corpus meum, under these accidents is my
body. His example is laid down in the same place. Sed S. Thomas, which for the
Readers satisfaction I will set down. Esset aptum exemplum, si Dominus quando
mutavit aquam in vinum, ostendisset hydrias aquae, and dixisset, Hoc est vinum:
et illis verbis mutasset aquam in vinum; neque enim possumus ita exponere istam
sententiam, Hoc est vinum, id est, haec aqua est vinum, id enim falsum esset:
neque ita, Hoc id est, vinum est vinum; nam falsa fuisset demonstratio: non
enim aderat vinum cum diceretur, Hoc, sed hic est sensus, Hoc est vinum, id
est, in hoc vase est vinum. That is, that the meaning of these words, This is
my body, is, under these accidents is my body, will appear by this pregnant
example; If our Savior when he changed the water into wine, had showed the
pots of water, and had said, This is wine, and with those words, had changed
water into wine: yet we could neither expound this sentence, This is wine,
thus, that is, this water is wine, for this were false; nor thus, This, that
is, This wine is wine; for then the demonstration is false; for it was not
wine, when he said this, but the meaning is, This is wine, that is in this
vessel is wine, which every Novice knows is as direct a Metonymy, as if I
should say to my friend, my purse is at your command, meaning the money in my
purse. And thus in his assertion he does affirm these words, This is my body,
to be proper, and not figurative, and in his exposition, and illustration does
confirm them to be tropologicall and figurative. And thus much for the answer
to his assertion; I come to his reasons.

Secondly, the Cardinal loses more then he

Thirdly, to his first reason I answer again, figures nor tropes, in the
Declaration of the Laws and Sacraments of the Church: For St. Paul speaking of
the Sacraments of the Jews, says, The Rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4. That is,
the Rock signified Christ: So verse 17. We that are many are one bread: that
is, our spiritual unity and conjunction is represented, in that we are
partakers of one bread.

Fourthly, to his second reason I answer, that beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees, Mark 8.15. Yea this speech of our Saviors uttered in the hearing of
the Apostles, This is my body, was neither so dark nor obscure, that the
Apostles need much be troubled about the understanding of them. Nay many things
being spoken in borrowed and Metaphorical words, are uttered with greater
grace, and carry a fuller sense. When Christ said, I am the door, John 10.9.
and I am the Vine, John 15.1. he spoke by a figure as he does here; for neither
was he a Vine, nor a door, as the bread was not his body: And yet which of the
Apostles was there, that understood him not, when he called himself a Vine,
and a door? Neither could they doubt of our Savior Christ's meaning here.

Fifthly, to his third reason I answer two things,

I. Other places of Scripture which must be understood in a figure (as where
CHRIST says, I am the door, the vine, etc.) do also insinuate how Christ is
to be understood here.

II. If the Papists did believe the Article of Christ's ascension aright, as St.
Peter does. (Acts. 3.21. saying, whom the heavens must contain until etc.)
they should not then contain him in earth under the forms of bread and wine,
who must yet be contained in heaven: for if CHRIST could be contained in diverse
places at once, the Angel had not reasoned soundly. Matthew. 28.6. He is not
here, for he is risen.

Bellarmine (lib. 3. de Euchar. Cap. 19.) urges these words further for ye
proof of Transsubstantiation, thus; Our Savior says, This is my body, which
words do signify a substantial not a figurative change only of the bread
into Christ's body: for otherwise the bread, and the flesh of CHRIST being
things of diverse natures, cannot be one pronounced or affirmed of another: for
bread is not flesh remaining in it own nature,

this substance is my body, which is all one in their sense to say, This is my
body.

figurative change is sufficient according to the phrase of Scripture, though
there be no material or substantial mutation in this proposition, This is my
body, that is, this bread signifies my body: like as when Christ breathed upon
his Apostles, he said, Receive ye the holy Ghost: calling the very breath the
Spirit, which it signified and exhibited only; So the holy Ghost descending
upon Christ in his Baptism is called the Dove: So then, as the breath of
Christ is the Spirit, and the Dove the holy Ghost; so is the bread Christ's
body, that is, in figure and signification, and not in substantial mutation;
Willet. synop. 615.

substantially changed, or transubstantiated, or, what Reasons may be given
against Transsubstantiation?

Transsubstantiation does overthrowe the distinction of the outward, and inward
action of the Communicant in the celebration of the Lords supper: which
distinction is warranted by Scripture, and grounded upon Scripture; and
therefore that Tenet is not to be maintained. For the clear understanding
hereof, observe, that in the receiving of the blessed Sacrament we are to
distinguish between the outward and inward action of the Communicant. In the
Outward with our bodily mouth, we receive really the visible elements of Bread
and Wine. In the inward we do by faith really receive the body and blood of
our Lord: that is to say, we are truly and indeed made partakers of Christ
crucified, to the spiritual strengthening of the inward man. Now this
distinction between the Sacrament, and the thing whereof it is a Sacrament,
and consequently between the Sacramental and Real eating of the body of
Christ, is briefly and excellently expressed by St. Augustine (in Ioh. 6.
tract. 26.) in these words. Hujus rei sacramentum de mensa Dominica sumitur,
quibusdam ad vitam, quibusdam ad exitium. Res vero ipsa cujus sacramentum est
omni homini ad vitam, nulli ad exitium, quicunque ejus particeps fuerit. That
is, the Sacrament of the Lords supper is received by some unto life, and by
some unto death; but whosoever is made partaker of that thing whereof it is a
Sacrament is made partaker of life and not of death. From hence we draw this
conclusion, The body, and blood of Christ is received by all unto life and by
none unto condemnation; But that substance which is outwardly delivered in the
Sacrament, is not received by all unto life, but by many unto condemnation:
Therefore that substance which is outwardly delivered in the Sacrament, is not
really the body and blood of Christ.

The Major is proved out of Augustines forenamed place, and out of the true
exposition of those verses of John. 6. viz. verses. 27, 33, 35, 48, 50, 51, 53,
54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 63.

The Minor is manifest both by common experience, and the testimony of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.17, 27, 29. We may therefore conclude that the 6. of John is
so far from giving any furtherance to the doctrine of the Romanists
concerning Transsubstantiation, that it utterly overthrows their fond
opinion, who imagine the body and blood of CHRIST to be in such a sort present,
under the visible forms of bread and wine, that whosoever receives the one,
must of force also really be made partaker of the other. And thus we see that
both this distinction of the outward receiving of the signs, and the inward
receiving of the thing signified, is grounded upon Scripture and also that it
is overthrown by this doctrine of Transubstantion; every one by that doctrine
being truly made partaker of the very flesh and blood of Christ, and the bread
the Lord; whereof who so eats, shall live for ever; John. 6.50. etc. And
therefore this opinion as contrary to Scripture is to be detested.

Secondly, this doctrine is to be rejected, because Paschasius Raabertus, who
was one of the first setters forward of this doctrine of Transsubstantiation in
the West, spends a whole Chapter to prove, that the body and blood of Christ
is in such a sort present, under the visible forms of bread and wine, that
whosoever receives the one, must of force also really be made partaker of the
other; Paschas. de corp. and sang. dom. Cap. 14. And in the same place for the
further confirmation hereof tells us, that Christ in the Sacrament did show
himself oftentimes in a visible shape: but especially he insisteth upon a
narration which he found In gestis Anglorum (but deserved well for the
goodness of it to be put into Gesta Romanorum) of one Plegilus a Priest, to
whom an Angel showed Christ in the form of a child upon ye Altar, whom first
the Priest took in his arms and kissed, but ate him up afterward, when he
was returned to his former shape of bread again. Such another story Johannes
Diaconus reports in the life of Gregory the first, of a Roman Matron who
found a piece of the Sacramental bread, turned into the fashion of a finger
all bloody, which afterward upon the prayers of St. Gregory, was converted to
his former shape again. It is likewise credibly related (and on their side
faithfully believed) and still is to be read in the Legend of Simeon
Metaphrastes, in the life of Arsenius, how that a little child was seen upon
the Altar, and an Angel cutting him into small pieces with a knife, and
receiving his blood into the Chalice, as long as the Priest was breaking the
bread into little parts.

corporal presence overturnes an Article of our faith. For we believe that the
body of Christ was made of the pure substance of the Virgin Mary, and that but
once, namely, when he was conceived by the holy Ghost, and borne. But this
cannot stand if the body of CHRIST be made of bread, and his blood of wine, as
they must needs be, if there be no succession, nor annihilation but a real
conversion of substances in the Sacrament: unless we must believe
contrarieties, that his body was made of the substance of the Virgin, and not
of the Virgin; made once and not once but often.

bodily presence overturnes the nature of a true body, whose common nature or
essential property it is, to have length, breadth, and thickness, which being
taken away, a body is no more a body. And by reason of these three dimensions,
a body can occupy but one place at once, as Aristotle (de Categor. quant.)
said, The property of a body is to be seated in some place, so as a man may say
where it is. They therefore that hold the body of CHRIST to be in many places
at once, do make it no body at all, but rather a spirit, and that infinite.

Transsubstantiation overturnes the very supper of the Lord. For in every
Sacrament there must be a sign, a thing signified, and a proportion or
relation between them both. Now Transsubstantiation takes away all: for when
the bread is really turned into Christ's body, and the wine into his blood, then
the sign is abolished, and there remains nothing but the outward forms or
appearance of bread and wine: And the sign being abolished, the thing
signified falls to the ground, they being Relata.

this is my body, did demonstrate or show something in sight, for a thing
absent and invisible cannot be demonstrated: but Christ's body, which they
imagine was hid under the forms, was not seen. Therefore it could not be
showed. And consequently, these words do not signify any substantial change,
neither are to be taken properly, and literally, but figuratively, and
tropologically.

Seventhly, as Christ says here (pointing to the This is my body, so he says,
John 6.35. I am the bread of life: but in this place he was not changed into
bread; why then in the other place should the bread be turned into his body,
for the speech is all one.

This is my body, the bread was transsubstantiated before, or after, or the
while these words were spoken. Before, they will not say, for the elements were
not then consecrated. Nor after, for then Christ's words, This is my body, had
not been true in that instant, when they were spoken. Neither was the
Transsubstantiation wrought in the while of speaking; for then should it not
have been done all at once, but successively, and one part after another, as
the words were spoken one after another. But this is also contrary to the
opinion of the Papists, for they would have it done altogether.

Ninthly, we may not credit this Tenet of Transsubstantiation, bread still
after the consecration. 1 Cor. 10.17, and 11.26, 27, 28.

Tenthly, the judgment of the ancient Church Transsubstantiation: If the
Reader would see how the Ancients expounded this phrase, and how it appears,
they held not this doctrine, Let him read, Perkins reformed Catholic of the
real presence. Page 196, 197, 198, And thus we have seen the reasons, why we
must not believe this fancy of Transsubstan^iation.

Do any absurdities follow this doctrine?

This Tenet of Transsubstantiation does bring along with it four absurdities,

First, if the bread and wine should be turned into the body and blood of JESUS
CHRIST, there should be no sign in the supper, and so there should be no
Sacrament, which cannot be without a visible sign.

Secondly, if the bread and wine should be turned into the body and blood of
Christ; then the blood must needs be separated from the body, which is absurd
and impossible.

Thirdly, if this doctrine of Transsubstantiation were true, then it would
follow that Christ should have a body infinite, and by consequent, he should
not be true man, nor truly ascended into heaven; which would overthrow the
principal Articles of our faith.

Fourthly, if this opinion be true, then it will follow that infidels, and
hypocrites coming to the Lords supper, should truly participate the body and
blood of Christ; and so it must needs follow, that God and the devil should be
lodged together. Many are the absurdities which follow Transsubstantiation,
which our adversaries w^pe easily off, with telling us, that they are not
incongruities but Miracles: For the proof hereof observe, That Johan. de
Combis, comp. Theolog. lib. 6. Cap. 14. makes nine wonders in this Sacrament,
viz.

First, that Christ's body is in the Eucharist in as large a quantity as he was
upon the cross, and is now in heaven, and yet exceeds not the quantity of the
bread.

Secondly, that in this sacrament there be accidents without a subject.

Thirdly, that the bread is turned into the body of Christ, and yet is not the
matter of the body, nor resolved to nothing.

Fourthly, that the body increases not by consecration of many hosts, neither
is diminished by often receiving.

Fifthly, that the body of Christ is under many consecrated hosts.

Sixthly, that when the host is divided, the body of Christ is not divided, but
under every part thereof is whole Christ.

Seventhly, that when the Priest holds the host in his hand, the body of Christ
is not felt by him nor seen, but only the forms of the bread and wine.

Eighthly, that when the forms of bread and wine cease, the body and blood of
Christ cease also to be there.

Ninthly, that the accidents of bread and wine have the same effects with the
bread and wine it self, which are to nourish and to fill. Antoninus part. 3.
Tit. 13. Cap. 6.. 16, reckons up twelve Miracles, and strange ones that are in
this Sacrament, and he has them from Johan. de sancto Geminiano in s^rmone
quodam. I conclude this question thus, That on this manner it shall be easy
for any man to defend the most absurd opinion that is or can be, if he may have
liberty to answer the arguments alleged to the contrary by wonders and
miracles.

Almighty, and therefore nothing is unpossible unto him, he can do all these
things which are above rehearsed, and change bread and wine into the body and
blood of CHRIST.

Almighty, but in this and like matters we must not dispute, what God can do,
but what he will.

Omnipotent, therefore there be some things, which he cannot (or rather will
not) do; as for him to deny himself, to lie, and to make the parts of a
contradiction to be both true at the same time.

Thirdly, if God should make the very body of no body while it remains a body:
and to be circumscribed in some one place, and not circumscribed, because it is
in many places at the same time: yea he should make the very body of Christ to
be visible in heaven, and invisible in the Sacrament: And thus should he make
contradictions to be true: which to do is against his nature, and argues
rather impotencie then power. vide. August. de symb. ad Catech. lib. 1. Cap. 1.



Supper, and said these words, This is my body.

Acts. 3.21. That the heavens should contain him until the day of judgment,
when he shall visibly descend, as he was seen to ascend.

Eucharist of necessity to be received of all men of discretion?

Sacrament of Christ's flesh, whereby all men must be saved. Read verse. 27. of
this Chapter. and John. 6.53. and 1 Cor. 10.17. As Baptism is sometimes
compared or resembled unto a begetting, so the Lords Supper is to food; and
therefore as food is necessary for the body, so is this Sacrament of the Lords
body necessary for the soul. Wherefore three sorts of people are much to
blame, namely

First, those who care not at all for coming to the Lords Supper.

Secondly, those who will never come but at Easter.

Thirdly, those w^o omit, and forbear coming, either

I. Because they are so taken up with worldly employments, that they have no
leisure to fit and prepare themselves. Or

II. Because they are at Law with some, or have been injured by some, whom
they will not forgive, but rather forbear coming to the Lords Table.

How often must we receive this Sacrament?

With an ordinary continuance, Act. 2.42. and 20.7. and 1 Cor. 11.25. This
Sacrament must not be once celebrated as Baptism is, but often.

First, because we are once borne, but often fed and nourished.

Secondly, because as often as we worthily celebrate this Supper, so often we
honor our Christ And hence it was that the Ancients did celebrate this
Sacrament every Lords day.

What is inwardly signified by these Elements bread and wine?

Our communicating in ye body and blood of Christ by faith.

First, bread signifies the body of CHRIST, John. 6.35, 55. And in this verse,
he took the bread and said, This is my body. And

Secondly, this Sacrament must be Communicated, and is therefore called a
Communion. 1 Cor. 10.16. Wherefore the end of the Sacrament is neither

I. Oblatio, an offering up of it unto God, as a Propitiatory sacrifice. Nor

II. Reservatio, a reserving or keeping of it in boxes, or pixes. Nor

III. Circumgestatio, a carrying of it about in Progress or procession. Nor

IV. Adoratio, a falling down before it, and worshipping it. But

V. Communicatio, only a communicating of it by the faithful.

What is the use or scope of this Sacrament?

First, Luke. 22.19. and 1 Cor. 11.24, 25, 26. And hence it is called
Eucharistia, because it is to be celebrated with thankesgiving unto God.

Secondly, to show our union into one body, 1 Cor. 10.17. And hence

I. It is necessary, that there should be an assembly, or congregation, ot at
least more then one or two at the celebration of this Communion. The Sacrament
is to show, our union and conjunction with the members of CHRIST, and therefore
it is required, that it should be communicated by more then one.

II. Because the use of this Sacrament is to show our union into one body;
therefore it is necessary that those who come unto it, should be reconciled
unto all men, Matthew. 5.

Thirdly, another end of this Sacrament is to John. 6.54, 56. For as the
unworthy receiving of this Supper is punished with condemnation, 1 Cor. 11.29.
So the worthy receiving thereof is rewarded with salvation. Now this Union of
o^^s with CHRIST which is confirmed unto us in the Eucharist, does include in
it these two things, viz.

I. On our part a condition of Repentance. And

II. On Christ's part a promise of union, that is, if we will but come unto the
table of the Lord with true and unfeigned repentance of all our sins, then
CHRIST promises to knit and unite us unto himself.









Sacrament is to show us our duty, yt we are now none of our own, but being
redeemed by the blood of Christ, are obliged to serve him both in body, soul,
and spirit, 1 Cor. 6.20. And therefore when we come unto the Lords Supper, we
must come with a promise and purpose of new obedience, and true sanctification,
both in heart and life, as follows afterward.

Sacrament is to nourish and feed the ^oule. Now because this is controverted,
therefore J lay down these three things, viz,

I. We confess that the soul of the worthy receiver is nourished by the body
and blood of Christ in the Sacrament; and therefore in vain is that place
urged against us, My flesh is meat indeed, John. 6.

II. We say, that this spiritual food and nourishment is neither conferred
upon any Ex Opere operato, by the bare work wrought, nor conferred and given
to all that receive this Sacrament, but is only imparted to the faithful and
worthy receive by the inward working of the holy Spirit.



I The question is concerning the proper effect and use of the Lords Supper:
Whereunto the Papists say, That it was not properly ordained for remission of
sins, neither that it has any such use: but it serves only as a
preservative against sin. Trid. Conc. sess- 13. Can 5. and Bellarm. de
sacram. lib. 4. Cap. 17. Now we affirm and teach, that an especial and
principal use of the Eucharist or Communion, is to strengthen and assure our
faith of the remission of our sins: though that be not the only scope and
use of that Sacrament, as is showed by the other use before mentioned.

II. That amongst the other ends and uses of this Sacrament, it also assures
us of remission of sins, is thus proved, from this place; Christ here says,
This is the blood of the New Testament, that is shed for many for remission of
sins: But the new Testament includes a promise of remission of sins,
Ierem. 31.34. yea our Savior sets it down in plain terms: for why else
should our Savior make express mention of forgiveness of sins, if this
Sacrament amongst other uses did not serve for that use also? Against this they
object many things, to wit,

First, Bellarmine says, that these words of our Eucharist. Bell. de Sacram.
lib. 4. Cap. 19. resp. ad Arg. 3,

First, in the Eucharist the death of Christ with

Secondly, St, Paul says, that the unworthy Cor. 11.27.29. Now if unworthy
receiving does verily add sin unto them, then the worthy receiving, which is
a showing forth of Christ's death, does verily obtain remission of sins.

Secondly, they object; Remission of sins is John, where the fruits of this
Sacrament are expressed. And therefore this is no end of this Sacrament.

First, Remission of sin is not there named:

Secondly, J grant the pardon of sin is not

Thirdly, we confess that the Sacrament is only Signaculum a seal of the
remission and pardon of our sins; for the Eucharist does not confer
Remission upon us, but confirm remission unto us.

Fourthly, although the Remission of sin be

I. From the covenant of mercy which God in Christ makes with the faithful. And

II. From their union and communion with CHRIST.

Who is fit to receive the Lords Supper?

He who is careful aright to prepare himself.

How must we prepare our selves, or how may

There is a double preparation, viz,

I. A general preparation, and a worthiness of the person.

II. A particular preparation, and a worthiness of the action.

First, there is a general preparation, and a worthiness of the person,
without any relation to the Sacrament: For no man has right unto divine and
spiritual things, except he be a man of GOD.





Is A purpose of repentance, which consists

First, in a knowledge, and acknowledgment of our sins: for we must labor to
see our sins, and then learn to confess them unto God, Luke. 1.75. Romans
2.25. Iam. 1.



Thirdly, in a promising and vowing of better things for the time to come.

II. The Practice of repentance, which consists.

First, in Mortification, and a dying unto sin, 1 Cor. 9.27, Hebr. 12.14,
Colos. 3, 5, 8.

Secondly, in Vivification, and a living unto God, the life of faith, and
grace, and new obedience, 1 Timothy 6, 18, Titus. 3.14, Romans 6, 19. Galath. 5.22.
and 2 Peter. 1.6, and Ephesians. 4. 22. etc. unto 5.10.

Thirdly, in a constant custom, and use of both these all the days of our
lives: that is, so long as we live we must be careful to eschew whatsoever is
evil, and to do whatsoever is good, and to abound therein, Galath. 5, 6.

Secondly, this general preparation and worthiness of the person consists in
Faith. Read, John. 6.47, 48. Galath. 2, 20. Ephesians. 3.17. For without faith
nothing is pleasing unto God, Hebr. 11.6. Now three things are required in this
Faith, to wit,

I. A knowledge of the promises of the Gospel, which comes by hearing of the
word, Romans 10.17. And therefore the Saints must be careful in hearing and
reading the Legacies which God has left them in his Will and Testament.

II. A belief in the promises; when we know what the Lord promises unto us;
then we must believe his promises, Hebr. 12.6.

III. An application of these promises unto our selves; for the two former are
to be found in devils, but not this. The evil spirits know what promises God
has made in his word, and they believe them to be true, but they cannot apply
them unto themselves. And therefore the children of God must never rest until
they can lay hold upon the promises and apply them unto themselves; Here
observe, that there are two sorts of men who apply the promises unto
themselves, viz.

First, some without any ground, or foundation at all, only, out of a bold,
and blind presumption, This is to be taken heed off, as a thing of greatest
peril.

Secondly, some from a true, solid, and warantable foundation; namely

I. Because the Spirit of God witnesses unto their hearts, that they are the
members of Christ, and the children of God; Romans 8.15, 16. Gal. 4.6.

II. Because they show forth the fruits of repentance and conversion in their
lives and conversations, serving God in sincerity though not perfectly, For the
tree is known by his fruits; and by the fruits of the Spirit, Galath. 5.22.
the testimony and evidence of the Spirit is known to be true.

To whom may these two parts of this general

First, they may be applied to the Profane person; viz.

I. They hence may see themselves to be miserable; and that

First, by confessing and acknowledging of their sins. Proverb. 28.13. and 1
Cor. 11.31. and 1 John. 1.9.

Secondly, by respecting, and looking unto the end of sin, namely, eternal
death, and condemnation, Psalm. 9.17. Esa. 2.19, Luke. 23, 30, Romans 2.4, 1, 12.
and 6, 24. and 1 Cor. 6.9. Hebr. 10.31, and 12, 29. Revelat. 6.16.

Thirdly, by trembling and quaking through the danger they have brought
themselves in by reason of their sins: yea if a wicked man could but see the
sword of vengeance, which hangs over his head, he would then certainly fear
and tremble exceedingly, 2 Cor. 7.9, 10.

II. When they are brought into this fear or danger, then let them come unto
CHRIST, and that

First, humbly, and with dejection; like Nehemia, Chapt. 9. and Daniel. 9. and
the prodigal child, who blashed, and were ashamed by reason of their
transgressions.

Secondly, they must pray fervently, from their hearts desiring the
intercession of Christ, and the participation of his blood.

Thirdly, they must then hope in his help, and mercy, 1 John. 2.1, For he who
is truly ashamed and confounded, for his sins, and prays frequently and
fervently, that CHRIST would be graciously pleased to mediate and intercede
unto God his Father for him, to wash him with his most precious blood, and to
reconcile him unto himself in, and through CHRIST, may confidently hope to
find favor at Gods hands, according to his most gracious promises. And

III. Then they must come unto this holy Sacrament, as a seal of their
repentance, and Gods mercy: but of this afterward.

Secondly, these parts of the general preparation may be applied to the Moral
man; who from hence may learn two things, namely

I. To condemn, and renounce his own righteousness: Now hereunto three
things are required of them, to wit,

First, they must know and acknowledge that they may do some good works, but
they can do none well, Matthew. 6.2, 5, 6. Luke 18.14. Because they are as yet
without CHRIST.

Secondly, they must know, that their works are not in CHRIST, nor performed
in faith, nor such as are wrought by the faithful, and spiritual man. Here
observe a fourfold difference between the works of the Moral and
Spiritual man.

I. They differ Origin, in the very beginning: For

First, the works of the Moral man proceeds either from nature, or reason, or
the example of some, or from judgment approving such, or such a thing to be
good. But

Secondly, the works of the Spiritual man proceed from the internal motion
of the Spirit of God, against which nature rebels and struggles, Romans 7.23.
Gal. 5.17.

II. They differ Fine in the end: For

First, the works of the Moral man are done hypocritically, and for vain
glory, or else for customs sake, or tradition, or the pleasing of men, or the
like base and by-ends. But

Secondly, the works of the Spiritual man are wrought either out of a desire
to glorify God thereby, or to approve our faith, or at least out of a
necessity of obedience which we owe unto God, Ephesians. 2.10. and 1 Pet. 1, 2.

III. They differ Modo, in the manner of doing; For

First, the Moral man works good works ad libitum, a^ he list himself; or,
he performs some particular good works according to the election and choice
of his own will. But

Secondly, the Spiritual man labors to perform all the will of God, and to
obey whatsoever the Lord requires of him, fearing to disobey the Lord in the
least thing.

IV. They differ Persuasione, vel effectu, in persuasion and effect, For

First, the moral works of the Moral man, do puff up and make the doer of
them boast, and swell with pride, Luke 18.11. At least they so please him that
he acquiesceth and rests in them. But

Secondly, the spiritual works of the spiritual man, do both

I. Humble him; as a tree laden stoopes the lower, 1 Timothy 1.15. And

II. Displease him as writing the sufficiency of sanctfiication, Romanus. 7.8,
19, 24. and Philip. 3.12, 13. And hence comes that constant labor and
endeavor to be more and more holy, and pure, and perfect.

Thirdly, the Moral man must learn to judge his life according to the law of
God: and here four things are to be learnt, namely

I. He must learn a difference between the literal exposition of the law and
the spiritual.

II. Hence he must confess that his sins are more then he thought them to
be. Yea

III. He must know, and acknowledge all his best works to be polluted, and
impure, Luke. 18.14. Romans ^.20.

IV. He must learn to acknowledge his blindness, and to fly unto Christ,
Romans 10.3. and Philip. 3.9, 12. But this follows in the next paricular.

II. The Moral man may learn from the parts of this general preparation, and
worthiness of the person, to flee unto Christ, and that four manner of ways,
viz.

First, by rejecting himself, and all selfe-confidence,

Secondly, by adding Religion to moral honesty; that is, he must learn,

I. To acknowledge himself bound in duty to do whatsoever he can, yea more
then ever he is able here perfectly to do, 1 Corinthians. 13.10. And

II. To make conscience of doing any thing which God forbids, or leaving undone
any thing which God commands, And

III. To be zealous for the glory of God, and in his service,

Thirdly, by laying hold upon the promises of the Gospel unto salvation. And

Fourthly, by adding the seal of the Sacrament unto it, Romans 4.11. And thus
much for the general preparation unto the Lords Supper, and the worthiness of
the person.

Secondly, there is a particular preparation, and a worthiness of the action.

Wherein does this worthiness of the action

First, in a preparation; which is twofold,

I. Jn the conscience; which is also double, to wit, either

First, a dejected and humbled conscience; cast down either

I. Through a fight and sense of natural misery: which is either

First, general; because we are dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2, 1.
And strangers from God, and from the Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2.12. And
heirs of death and destruction, because of our sins, Romans 6.21, 23. Or

Secondly, particular; when we are dejected and cast down, for our particular
offenses, and daily failings and falls. Or

II. Through shame for the sins committed, Nehem. 9. Erra. 9. Dan. 9. Or

Secondly, a cheerful, and erected conscience; which arises

I. From a knowledge of the love of God, and mercy of CHRIST. And

II. From the knowledge of the virtue, power, efficacy, and force of this
Sacrament. For

First, although the Lords Supper do not give grace Ex Opere operato, by a
bare communicating of the outward elements, but only confirms grace given,
Romans 4.11. yet

Secondly, grace is

I. Given by CHRIST. And

II. Exhibited, and showed forth in the Sacrament. And is

III. Sealed by the Sacrament. And therefore in the Sacrament are given outward
and visible signs. Thus in our preparation there are two things to be labored
for, or which we must labor to be sensible of: viz

First, the heavy burden of our sins which presses down.

Secondly, the assurance of mercy by CHRIST, which raises up.

II. This preparation consists Jn a right affection; which consist in three
things, namely

First, in a desire of the Sacrament, Here observe, that this desire is either

I, Evil, which arises either

First, from custom: thus many desire to communicate at Easter, because they
have been always accustomed to receive at that time. Or

Secondly, from thence; because they are of age, or stature sufficient. Or

Thirdly, from a false opinion Operis operati, that the very outward
communicating of the Elements will confer and give grace. Or

II. Good when men desire the Lord only for himself, and his own sake. Now
this good desire is twofold, to wit,

First, a desire of God himself. Read Psalm. 23.2. and 27.4. and 42.1. and
63.1. Philip. 3.8. And from this fervent desire of God, proceeds the hatred of
sin, and a desire and hope of reconciliation by CHRIST.

Secondly, a desire of the Sacrament for the confirming of these.

Secondly, in a full and faithful purpose of turning unto the Lord. For when
mercy is offered upon conditions, then the conditions are to be observed unto
the obtaining of mercy. Now three things are required in this purpose of
conversion, to wit,

I. It must be a true purpose, not a false and fained.

II. It must be a fervent purpose, not a ^ey co ld one, or sluggish, R^vel.
3.18.

III. It must be often reiterated, and renewed, at least, every time we receive
this Sacrament.

Thirdly, in true love, and charity toward our Brethren, 1 Cor. 10.17. Ephesians.
5.29. 1 John 2.9. and 4.20. Matthew. 5.23. and 1 Cor. 11.18. Men that feasted and
banqueted together were wont to wash their hands before they sat down, to
show that there was nothing but love and amity amongst them: and thus should
all who come unto the table of the Lord; wash their hands and hearts from all
malice, hatred, envy, rage, and the like. The places above mentioned do
efford us so many reasons, why we must be in love and charity with our brethren
when we come unto the Table of the Lord.

I. Because we must not presume to offer Sacrifice unto God, until we be
reconciled unto our Brethren, Matthew. 5.23.

II. Because otherwise we are unworthy to come unto the Lords Supper, 1 Corinthians. 11.18.

III. Because we are brethren and members of the same body, 1 Corinthians. 10.17.
but never any hated his own flesh, Ephesians. 5.29.

IV. Because if we love not our Brethren, we love not our Father, 1 John 4.20.

viz.

I. We must examine our knowledge, and prove what our estate and condition is;
for it behooves us to be in a state of grace when we come to this Sacrament,
because otherwise the Elements which we receive will be as bad as mortal
poison unto us, Calv. inst. 4. 17.. 40. Here observe two things, viz.

First, this state of grace in which we should be when we come to the Lords
Table is diversely defined; For

I. The Papists say, that it consists in Faith, repentance, and a confession of
sins, because it is necessary that he which comes to this holy Sacrament
should confess his sins to the Priest; and be penitent for them, and believe
with a general Faith the promises of the Gospel. Council. Trid.

II. We say that this state of grace in which we should labor to be, does
consist in a hatred of all sin, in a resolution to leave all sin, and in a
sure hope, and confidence of mercy in and through CHRIST.

Secondly, observe, that Bellarmine here taxes Calvin, because he says, that
men ought to come to the Lords Fable with a conscience of mortal sin. But we
answer for Calvin thus, That there is a double conscience of sin.

I. A conscience accusing of some sin which yet reigns in the heart, without
any confidence of remission: that is, when a man's conscience tells him, that
the old leaven of sin is not yet purged out, but remains and reigns in his
mortal body, neither has any hope that the sins past are pardoned; This is
an evil conscience, and it is dangerous for a man to come unto the Table of
the Lord, with such a conscience of sin.

II. There is a blushing conscience for sin, which remains within, and
presses down, both in regard of the time present and bypast. That is, when a
man blusheth and is ashamed both for his sins already committed, and also for
the relics of sin which remain within him, and strive and wrestle
continually against him. And this conscience of sin Calvin requires in every
one who approaches unto the Supper of the Lord.

II. We must examine our Faith and repentance, by those marks and properties
which were before showed, Quest. 31.

III. We must examine our desire of God, and his holy Sacrament: but of this we
speak before in this same question, answ. 1. And thus much for our Preparation.

Who are to be held unworthy to partake of this

First, it is not to be given to a Heathen, or

Secondly, it is not to be given to those who are

I. To those who are Infants aetate, children in years; And

II. To those who are Jnfants eruditione, et moribus, children in manners and
understanding, for there are many babies of threescore years old, who are as
ignorant of the grounds and principles of Religion as children of three. Both
these sorts ought to be kept back until they be thoroughly informed of the
doctrine and nature of the Sacrament: For Children and such ignorant ones as
cannot discern the Lords body are not to be admitted. 1 Cor. 11.29.



I. Such as are justly excommunicated, for giving some great and grievous
scandal and offense unto the congregation wherein they live. 1 Cor. 5.11. Or

II. Those who publicly commit some heinous and enormious offenses, and repent
them not of them: for there are many such offenders who are not Excommunicated,
and yet because they are such offenders they are to be debarred from this
sacred mystery. Here observe that a sign is made enormious diverse and sundry
ways, viz.

First, Gravitate facti, by the haynousnesse of the offense: Thus Adultery,
drunkenness, murder, swearing, blasphemy, treason, and the like, are enormious
sins.

Secondly, by a proud, and obstinate defending of it, as 1 Corinthians. 5.2. for
the defending and maintaining of what is evil, is a great aggravation of sin
and makes a little sin a great one.

Thirdly, sin is made enormious by a negligent continuing therein. And

Fourthly, by scandal and offense; as 1 Corinthians 5.11. and 2 Samuel 12.14.
Matthew 18.6. and 1. Corinthians 8.9. And therefore they who are given to
grievous sins, or who defend and justify their sins, or continue in their
iniquities, or give offense by their transgressions either to those within or
without the Church, are to be kept back from the Sacrament, until they have
showed some repentance and amendment of life.

Fourthly, this Sacrament is not to be given to a particular person (as in
private Masses) because it is a Communion of Christians, as was showed before.



Corinth. 11.30.

Corinth. 11.27, 29.



Corinthians 11.23.



Corinth. 10.16.

Fourthly, he must break the bread, Mark 14.22.

Fifthly, he must communicate it to a company,

Is not preaching needful, and required in the Minister

First, some answer here, that it is not necessarily to

I. Because it is not of the essence of the Sacrament, neither is once
mentioned in the Evangelists, or in 1 Corinthians. 10. or 11.

II. Because there is no commandment given any where to use it:

Secondly, J answer, that it is very useful, Ad and profitable for our
preparation and instruction:

Thirdly, there are many weighty causes, why

I. That we may be instructed in the nature of the Sacrament, and learn to
discern the Lords body, and to make a difference between coming unto the
Lords Table, and our own, and of taking those Elements, and our own repast at
home: which too many do not for want of instruction. And

II. That we might be admonished to prepare our selves to come unto the Lords
Supper with reverence. And

III. That by preaching our hearts might be the better excited, both

First, for the expectation of the promises which are made in the Gospel to
the worthy receiver. And also

Secondly, for the performing of the Promises, Articles, and Covenants, which
we make unto God in the Sacrament. And thus preaching is profitable, for our
instruction in the nature of the Sacrament, for our preparation unto the
Sacrament, for our admonition to perform what we promise in the Sacrament, and
for our consolation if we pay our vows unto our God, which we have behight.

Fourthly, J therefore conclude, and determine

I. That it is principally necessary, that first we should be taught, before we
communicate of these sacred mysteries: For if this Sacrament must not be
administered to Infants who are not able to discern of the Lords body, then
certainly neither ought it to be communicated to those, who are as ignorant and
stupide as Infants are.

II. Preaching does not seem to be absolutely necessary unto the Sacrament,
Toties quoties, or in omni Tunc, as often as the Sacrament is administered,
because then it could not be administered to the sick at home without a Sermon.

III. But it is most profitable, that there should be a Sermon when the
Eucharist is celebrated, for these reasons;

First, that thereby we may be taught what we do; and that

I. Lest we fall into the Popish, and Capernaitish errors; who said, Will this
man give us his flesh to eat? For without teaching we might easily fall into
the error of the Corporal presence. And

II. That we may know the mutual conditions of the obligation made between
God and us in the Sacrament, that is, what God promises unto us on his part,
and what we promise unto God on our parts: For it is necessary that those who
enter into bonds, should know what they seal unto, and what covenants they
make, and this the Lord did admonish his people of, when they entered into
covenants, ( Exodus 19.5. and Deuteronomy. 30.15. etc. and 1 Samuel 8.11.)

Secondly, Preaching is profitable before the Sacrament, that thereby our
affections may be excited: that is,

I. That our sorrow may be excited, and stirred up for our sins, which were
the cause of the death and suffering of our blessed Savior.

II. That our desire may be excited and stirred up, for grace and Christ, that
is, that we may long for Christ and his grace, which are only profitable unto
us for pardon of our sins past, and preservation against sin for the time
to come.

III. That our joy may be stirred up for that great love, that God shows unto
mankind in giving his only and dearly beloved Son to death for their
redemption, and for that hope which we have, that he died for our particular
sins, and rose again for our Justification. It is necessary, before we come
unto the Lords Table, that we should be admonished of all these; now how can we
better be admonished of them, then in and by the preaching of the word of God?

Thirdly, preaching is requisite before the Communion, because great is the
danger that they incur, that abuse, or profane it, or come not lcoathed with
a wedding garment thereunto (1 Cor. 11.28, 29. Matthew. 22.)



viz. the time Precedent, the time present, and the time Subsequent.

First, this Execution respects the time precedent, or going before the
receiving of this Supper; wherein two things are wont to be done by the
faithful, to wit,

First, a serious Meditation of what they are to undertake, and about to do;
namely,

I. They are going to enter into a Covenant with the Lord; that is, either to
renew that Covenant which they have often made, or at least to make that
contract which hitherto they have neglected: Now the scope of this Covenant is,
that they for their parts promise, and desire, that they may become new
creatures, 2. Corinthians 5.17. Galathians 6.15. And CHRIST for his part
promises that he will be theirs, 2. Corinthians 6.16. They come unto the Table
of the Lord with a desire to be ingrafted into CHRIST, John 15.4. and with a
purpose for the time to come to show themselves the godly branches of a holy
stock, Romans 11.16. etc.

II. They come to confess their sins, to pray unto God, and to praise his
name for his infinite mercies: and therefore that they may do these things
diligently, they either do perform, or ought to perform a threefold duty,
namely

First, consider how great gain does accrue unto them, from the death of
Christ; that the remembrance thereof may make them power forth themselves in
thankfulness unto God.

Secondly, they ought to search and inquire out all their sins, and all the
relics of concupiscence that remain within them; that so they may truly and
understandingly confess their sins, and blush for their sins, and crave
forgiveness of all their sins.

Thirdly, they must observe the state of their souls; principally their wants,
weaknesses, defects, and imperfections, that so they may desire the supply of
them with the greater zeal and fervor.

III. They come unto Christ, and to his Communion; they come unto a spiritual
Feast, and most rich treasure; And therefore they whet and sharpen their
appetite, that they may feed the harder, and be fully satisfied with the
fatness of Gods house. For if they be CHRIST'S and he theirs, if they be worthy
receivers of this holy Communion, and heavenly banquet, then they shall have

First, remission and pardon of all their sins, 1 John 2.1, 2. and 3.5. And

Secondly, reconciliation with the Lord their God, in and through Christ, 2
Cor. 5.19. etc. although formerly they have been enemies and strangers, Ephesians.
2.13. etc.

Thirdly, they shall have preservation from sin for the time to come; the
grace of God shall sustain them in the hour of temptation, 1 Samuel 25.32.
etc. 2 Corinthians. 12.9.

Fourthly, they shall have an increase of grace, and strength in the inward
man; they shall have both power to will and do, Philip. 2.13. Romans 7.25. And

Fifthly, a Communion of both the natures of CHRIST; that is, both of the
humane nature, and also of the divine, 2 Peter 14. and 1 John 1.3. Yea

Sixthly, they shall be made partakers of life eternal, Romans 6.23. and 1 Peter
1.5. Now these things the worthy and faithful receiver may expect and ought to
desire with all his heart, soul, and spirit.

Secondly, after the Meditation of the work which we are to undertake,
follows the fitting and preparing of our selves for these things above
mentioned; and that three manner of ways, viz.

First, by sequestring of our selves from all worldly employments and
distractions if it be possible, the day before we are to receive.

Secondly, by corroborating and strengthening our meditation by fasting. For this

I. Expels and drives away all sluggishnesse, dullness, and idleness. And

II. Sharpens the mind unto meditation and examination of our wants and
weaknesses. And

III. Does singularly help and further us in prayer. For as empty vessels
sound the loudest, so fasting and an empty stomach is a means to make us send
up loud and strong cries unto God.

Thirdly, by attending unto the word of God and the preaching thereof: that both

I. It may instruct us how to carry our selves in the receiving of this holy
Sacrament; And also.

II. That it may excite and kindle our affections unto that which is good, Acts
8.^. And thus we see, what is required of us in regard of the time, before we
come unto the Table of the Lord.

Secondly, this Execution respects the time present, wherein there are two
things to be considered, to wit,

First, the Action; or the receiving of the Elements; wherein also two things
are required, viz.

I. We must take the Elements into our hands, and in so doing remember,

First, that these are signs and seals of Gods love unto us, and that out of
his unspeakable love he has given us this bread (CHRIST) from heaven, John
6.50. And with him will afford unto us whatsoever is good, Romans 8.32. And

Secondly, we must remember, that by taking the Elements of bread and wine, we
do bind and oblige our selves unto the service of GOD; that is, we promise and
vow, that henceforth (seeing the Lord on his part has made such gracious
promises unto us) we will labor to cleanse our selves from all pollutions of
the flesh and spirit (a Corinthians 7.1.) and live, not according to the will
of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of the will of GOD, revealed in his
word, 1 Peter 4.2, 3.

II. We must eat the Elements, and receive them into our body; wherein two
things are to be done; namely,

First, as we are fed by these, so we must expect that Christ will feed our
souls; viz.

I. As corporal bread feeds the body, so this spiritual bread will feed the
soul, and so nourish it, that it shall grow and increase in spiritual
strength, because it is the flesh of CHRIST truly to those who are worthy
receivers.

II. As wine is profitable for the body, so is the blood of Christ for the
soul: For

First, it washes us from all pollution and contamination of sin, 1 John 1.7.

Secondly, it anoints us with grace and spiritual strength, 2. Corinthians
1.21. and 1 John 2.27.

Thirdly, it does renew, increase, and excite our affections, and internal
spirits; and does inflame our hearts with a strong and unfeigned love toward
God, Cantis. 1.1.

Secondly, if when we receive the Elements we do not think of these things,
neither are sensible of them, but remain yet as senseless as the child was,
notwithstanding Elisha's Servant laying his Masters staff upon it, 2. King.
4.31. Then

I. We must lament and mourn as Joshua did even until the Evening, 7.6, 7.
and as the Eleven Tribes did when they were overcome of the Benjamites. Judges
20.20. We must bewail, and grieve for this our insensibility.

II. We must besides this sorrow of heart, reiterate the supplications and
prayers of our mouths; crying mightily unto God for the pardon of our sins,
for the assurance of his love, and our regeneration, and incorporation into
CHRIST, and for preservation from sin, and in grace until he bring us to
glory.

Secondly, in the time of celebration, or receiving of the Lords Supper, beside
the Action of taking and eating the Elements, there is also to be considered
the manner of doing it; and that is, it must be done Reverently; For when we
come unto the Table of the Lord we may truly say, Surely the Lord is in this
place, Genes. 28.16. And we may think, that we hear the Lord speaking thus
unto us, Put of thy shoes for the place, whereon thou stand is holy ground,
Exodus 3.5.

Is it lawful to kneel at the receiving of the Lords Supper?

First, for answer hereunto J refer my Reader Morton, who has sufficiently
answered whatsoever malice it self can say against this practice of our
Church, in his defense of the Ceremonies, Page 244, etc. unto the end of the
Book.

Secondly, I only add a word or two, which J viz.

I. To kneel in worship to the creature is Jdolatry, Isa 45.23. and Exodus 20.5.

II. We must come reverently unto God, and no man can come too reverently
before him: yea Chrysostom calls this Sacrament Tremendum Mysterium, the
mystery to be admired, as wonderful and terrible: because the breaking of the
bread upon the Table does represent unto us the killing of Christ upon the
Altar, and the cutting of him (as it were) into pieces for our sakes; and
therefore how reverently should we partake of this Paschall Lamb?

III. The gesture of the body is in it self indifferent: I prove this

First, from our Church and State, who say (in the Preface of Cerem. in the
Book of Common prayers.) In our doings we condemn no other Nation nor
prescribe any thing but to our own people only. For we think it convenient,
that every Country should use such Ceremonies, as they shall think best. For
to sit, stand, kneel, or walk, be not of the substance of the Sacrament. And
therefore in these outward rites and Ceremonies we must observe the counsel
that Augustine says. ( August epist. ad Casulanum 86.) was given unto him by
Ambrose: For he demanding of Ambrose, whether it were lawful to fast on the
Sabbath day or not to fast, seeing that among the Churches there was some
diversity in this point: Quando hic sum (says he) non jejuno Sabbato, quando
Romae sum jejuno Sabbato, etc. When I am here I fast not on Saturday, when J am
at Rome I do fast on Saturday, and to what Church soever you come, keep the
custom thereof, if you will neither suffer nor give offense.

Secondly, from Fricius Lib. 2. de Eccles. tract. 8. In these words, Ad sacram
Domini coenam gratiarum actio, et precatio addenda est, in quibus est tota vis
adorandi; utrumque eorum fieri posse and flexis genibus, et sedendo, et
ambulando Christi exemplo doceri potest, etc. That is, The adoration which we
are and ought to give in the celebrating and receiving of the Lords Supper,
does consist in prayers and praises, both which (and that by the example of
CHRIST) may be performed either kneeling, or standing, or sitting, or walking;
for in the garden CHRIST fell upon his face (as says St. Matthew) or upon his
knee (^s says St. Luke 22.41.) when he prayed unto his Father: So he gives
thanks either sitting, or (as I rather think) standing, Matthew 11.15. Yea
CHRIST'S gesture was a kind of sitting when he celebrated the Lords Supper,
wherein when he had taken bread, he gave thanks; A coena item postquam
surrexit ambulando orat patrem: yea after he rose from Supper he prayed unto
his Father walking, Multi sunt aegroti, etc. There are many sick persons who
can only lie, and neither sit, nor stand, nor kneel, who are not to be denied
this holy Sacrament; for they may take it, and give thanks although they lie:
for Vetus est ve^bum Catonis, etc. both old and true is that saying of Cato's,
God being a Spirit must be worshipped with a pure mind; or according to our
Savior, in Spirit and truth, John 4.24. Non ergo rixemur de gestu externo,
nemo ^b hunc vel illum condemnet alium. Let us therefore notdisagree and jarre
about the outward gesture, neither let any one condemn another for that. Hence
from these two proofs we learn these two particular lessons, viz.

I. That the gesture of the body in the receiving of the Sacrament is not of
the essence of the Sacrament, but in it self an indifferent thing.

II. That the gesture of the body being not of the essence of the Sacrament,
but an indifferent thing, is to be used according to the custom and
constitution of that Church wherein we live.

IV. He who refuses to kneel at the receiving of the Lords Supper, cannot be
excused of uncharitableness, and that both i^ regard of the Church, and also
of the Minister of the Sacrament. For

First, our Church having by a Canon enjoined this posture of kneeling to be
used by the Communicant, he who refuses it as an Idolatrous thing, does
thereby intimate, that the King, and all those famous learned, and pious
Ministers who were assembled together in Convocation for the ordaining of
orders for the uniformity of our Church, were (at least) tainted with Idolatry,
or lovers of that which was merely superstitious, or else they would never have
constituted such a Canon, Charity, the Apostle says is not suspicious, but he
who refuses this posture as supersticious, does suspect those of superstition
and Idolatry, who did enjoyne it; and therefore is uncharitable to the Church
wherein he lives.

Secondly, our Church having by a Canon enjoined this gesture of kneeling and
threatened suspension to that Minister who shall give it to any that does not
kneel, he who refuses thus to receive it is very uncharitable to his
Minister, who by this his refusal is brought into a great strait, that is,
must either dismiss and send him (so refusing to kneel) empty away, and deny
this blessed Sacrament unto him, or else, if the Minister do give it to him
though he kneel not, does thereby expose himself to the censure of
suspension, and the danger of loosing his living.

V. Kneeling is appointed by our Church, not for the adoration of the Elements,
but for a signification of the humble and grateful acknowledgement of the
benefits of CHRIST, given to the worthy receivers Archbishop: Whitg. answer to
the admonition, Page 100. And therefore none should be more reverend in their
gesture, at the receiving of this blessed Sacrament, then those who come best
prepared, and most assured of true benefit and profit thereby.

VI. The lawfulness of kneeling at the receiving of these sacred Mysteries may
be confirmed by this Argument.

Whatsoever spiritual benefits I may lawfully seek on my knees with
supplication, that same J may lawfully receive on my knees with thankesgiving.

But I may lawfully on my knees with supplication seek salvation by JESUS
CHRIST. Therefore I may lawfully receive the seals and pledges thereof on my
knees Bp. Cooper.

If it be objected we must not kneel to an Idol.

I answer, we kneel to CHRIST, b^dy and blood: and it is mere madness either
to make them Idols as the Papists do, or call them Idols, as malcontents do.

VII. Lastly, this Sacrament of the Lords Supper is administered in our Church
with a most effectual prayer and thankesgiving; and therefore what gesture can
be fitter at that time then kneeling? with the Elements the Minister utters
these words, The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee,
preserve thy body and soul, etc. The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ which was
shed for thee preserve thy body and soul to everlasting life. Drink this in
remembrance that Christ's blood was shed for thee, and be thankful. Now when
the Minister in the behalf of the receiver powers forth so patheticall a
prayer and thankesgiving unto God; how can the receiver but with his heart, and
upon his knees beg this at the Lords hands in his own behalf? And thus we
have heard what is required of us both in regard of the Precedent, and Present
time of receiving the last remains.

Thirdly, this Execution respects the Subsequent time, and teaches us a double
duty after we have received the Lords Supper; namely,

First, we must depart; and that

I. With joy and thankesgiving, Acts 8.8.38, 39. Luke 17.17. And

II. With a purpose of keeping our covenant, and performing the promises of new
obedience, and true sanctification, all the days of our life. For the worthy
and faithful receiver, who is assured that Christ died for him, and offered up
himself a sacrifice for his sins; cannot but rejoice hereat, and break
forth in thankfulness unto God for so inestimable a grace, and desire and
endeavor to live wholly unto his Christ who has purchased him at so dear a
rate.

Secondly, we must sanctify that day unto the Lord, whereon we have been made
partakers of this holy Communion: For it is the festival of the Lord. Jf we
communicate upon the Lords day, we must be very careful to sanctify that day
strictly unto the Lord; but if upon a week day, then though we have no precept
to equal it unto the Lords da, yet we must not profane that day, as the
manner of some is who make that day whereon they communicate, a day of excess
and riot, and going from Alehouse to Alehouse. And thus much may suffice to
have been spoken of this Sacrament in this place.

VERSE. 29. But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of
the vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom.
Vbiquitaries object this place for the Vbiquitie of Christ, arguing thus,

Christ says, I will not dri^ke henceforth of this fruit of the Vine, until
that day when I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom.

But Christ often ate and drank with his Apostles after his Resurrection, and
before visibly he ascended into heaven.

Therefore seeing he was in heaven before his visible ascension, it is evident
that heaven is every where, and not limited or confined to any one place; and
consequently that Christ is not included in any determinate place but fills
all places, and is every where.

Deity, but not of his Humanity: but this pleases not the Objecters, who
contend for the Vbiquitie of Christ's corporal presence.

Secondly, J could answer with some of the Fathers,

Thirdly, CHRIST in these words, Until I drink does promise a communion and
participation of glory and eternally felicity unto his Apostles with himself.
For although meat and drink do not properly suite and agree with the
Kingdom of God, (where we shall neither be subject to hunger nor thirst) yet
it is usual with the holy Ghost in Scripture, in a figurative phrase of
speech, to express the participation, and communion of Spiritual graces, and
Celestial glory, and felicity, by corporal things. And hence our Savior
speaks here of a new kind of drinking (until I drink it new) to show that
the life which they shall have in heaven with him, shall not need to be
sustained and conserved by eating or drinking; but shall be an immortal and
incorruptible life.

Fourthly, it is false that these words of our Savior (Until I drink it new
with you in my Fathers Kingdom) were fulfilled when he ate and drank with
his Disciples after his Resurrection and before his visible ascension: For when
he was in a middle state between a mortal and celestial life, then the
Kingdom of God was not made manifest; and therefore he says unto MARY, Touch
me not, because I am not as yet ascended unto my Father; the meaning of which
words is this, that the state of his Resurrection was not perfect, and in every
degree complete, and absolute, until he were seated at his Fathers right hand
in the Kingdom of heaven.

Fifthly, the Apostles were not as yet entered into (until I drink it new with
you) was not fulfilled, when CHRIST ate and drank with them after his
Resurrection.

Sixthly, Christ before his visible Ascension was Heaven does declare a
certain region not seen or perceived by this visible world, but concealed
from it, into which Christ entering with his body, does now sit at the right
hand of his Father: And consequently that neither heaven, nor the humanity of
Christ is every where.

Seventhly, our Savior in these words [I will not henceforth drink of the
fruit of the vine until I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdome] does
import these two things, viz.

I. That henceforth he will not drink of the fruit of the earthly vine: and
hereby does intimate that this shall be his last draught. For as to men ready
to dye is given drink, instead of a farewell; so CHRIST being now about (by
the death of this corporal and earthly life) to be changed into an heavenly
condition, by this draught would (as it were) bid his Disciples farewell.

II. He implies here, that he will drink new wine with them in his Fathers
Kingdom: Now this particular is two manner of ways interpreted by Expositors,
to wit,

First, it may be understood of his Resurrection, which was the beginning of
the New Testament, and the Kingdom of the father: And thus Chrysostom by the
Kingdom of his Father understands his Resurrection; and by the new wine, which
therein he will drink with his Disciples, understands that corporal eating
and drinking of our Savior with his Apostles after his Resurrection,
mentioned, Luke 24.43. For thence it is evident that he ate corporally, though
not for any corporal necessity, but only to confirm the certainty of his
Resurrection. Indeed St. Luke in the place before cited mentions Christ's
eating, but not his drinking, but St. Peter Acts 10.40, 41. says, Him God
raised up the third day, and showed him openly; Not to all the people, but unto
witnesses chosen before of God, even to us who did eat and drink with him
after he rose from the dead. Now by St. Peter it appears, that Christ both ate
and drank with his Disciples after his Resurrection, but whether he drank
water or wine, or some other drink that is not mentioned; and therefore it
were a hard task to prove that he drank wine. But grant that this which he
drank was wine, and that this was the wine which in this verse he foretold
that he would drink with his Apostles, then we must understand it to be called
New, because he drank it after a singular new and unwonted manner; that is,
not in show or appearence only, but truly and really, not with a
fantastical, but with a true body he both ate and drank; although he were
now changed into a celestial immortal, and incorruptible estate, and was free
from all corruptible conditions of body. And thus we see (if our Savior
speaks of his corporal drinking here) what is meant by Kingdom, what by
wine, and what by new wine.

Secondly these words of our Saviors mentioned in this verse, may be (and I
conceive is rather to be) understood of life eternal, where many coming from
the East and West shall sit down and banquet with Christ, Luke 13.29. For by
the Kingdom of his Father, is meant, that Kingdom which the Elect shall enjoy
after this life in Heaven: and by his drinking of new wine with them, is not
meant any earthly drink (for there shall be no such in heaven) but some
celestial liquor, that is, no other thing, then that joy, delight, mirth and
eternal consolation, which after the period of this miserable life, the
faithful shall enjoy ^n the celestial Kingdom of their heavenly Father, with
their Lord Christ. And thus which way soever we interpret these words, they
make nothing for the Vbiquity of the Body of Christ.

This verse serves us as another Argument to confute the Popish
Transsubstantiation, That he will drink no more of this fruit of the vine.
etc. Therefore there remains wine still in the Sacrament: and consequently no
body or blood of Christ: For Wine and Blood cannot be both there corporally,
and substantially, as the Papstts teach,

VERSE. 30 And When they had sung an Hymn,
For the understanding of this verse observe that the Book of the Psalms was
divided according to the time when they were sung. For

Some were sung every morning, as Psalm. 22. at the morning Sacrifice. And

One was sung upon the Sabbath day, as Psalm. 92. And

At the Passover they sung from Psalm. 112. to verse 19. of Psalm. 118. And
this was that Hymn, which CHRIST and his Apostles here sang.

VERSE. 31. Then says JESUS unto them;
How may we know,

First, Stapleton (in John. 10.) gives us diverse

I. Some of them are in the heart, 1. In cord
and inward man; as for example,

First, sheep must be simple, 2 Cor. 11.3. that is, we must be

I. Obedient, without disputing, Psalm. 80.1. yea laboring to bring every
rebellious thought unto the obedience of God, 2 Cor. 10.5. And

II. Patient in all afflictions, tribulations, injuries, and the like, Matthew.
10.16. Luke 21.19. Philip. 1.28. And.

III. Jnnocent, and harmless, Matthew. 5.9. and 1 Peter. 2, 1.

Secondly, sheep must be fearful; that is, we must be

I. Fearful of our enemies; sheep will not stand lo look, or gaze upon the
wolf, but flee by and by; so we should shun every appearance of evil, and
the occasions of sin, as we would eschew Satan himself. And

II. Fearful of our feet, and paths, and affections, laboring to subdue
them.

II. Some of the signs of the sheep, 2. In ore.
are in the mouth, and tongue; that is, we must be

First, Vnivoci, of one tongue, and speech, both in prosperity and adversity,
giving thanks unto God in all estates and conditions; as Job did, 1.2. For
sheep have but one voice always. And

Secondly, Sapidi, men of seasoned tongues; as sheep loves to eat in salt
pastures, so should we have all our words seasoned with the salt of grace, and
our speeches savouring of religion and sanctification, Mark 9.50. Colos. 4, 6.

III. One mark of a sheep is to be seen in the life thereof, 3. In vita.
that is, they are sociable, and will go together: and so should we love our
brethren, because they are sheep of one and the same fold, belonging unto one
and the same Shepherd, John, 13.35.



I. To renounce the world, and whatsoever is evil, whether of opinion, or
Practice; and this is that which CHRIST means, when he says, That faithful
sheep will not hear the voice of Strangers, John, 10.4, 5. And

II. To hear and obey the voice of CHRIST expressed, and laid down in the
Word, John, 10.4, 5.

VERSE. 33. Peter answered and said unto him; Though all men should be offended
because of thee, yet will I never be offended.
Peter's to be condemned or commended?



First, the thing whereof he presumed ( viz. to dye with CHRIST) was no small
matter.

Secondly, he was never tried in this kind before, and consequently knew not
his own strength; and therefore, it argued a great deal of Presumption in him
so rashly to promise the performance of so great a work, the bitterness
whereof he never so much as tasted.

Thirdly, although Peter had formerly been tried in this kind, and had
acquitted himself manfully, yet he could not here be excused of a singular
inconsideration and presumption; because by this his protestation he opposes
the words of CHRIST, which he had confirmed from the testimony of the Prophet,
verse 21.

Fourthly, Peter's presumption appears also herein, that he prefer, himself
before all the other Apostles; yea, all the world: Though all men should
forsake thee, yet I will never forsake thee.

VERSE. 37, 38, 39. And he took with him Peter and the two Sons of Zebedee,
and began to be sorrowful and very heavy. Then says he unto them; My soul
is exceeding sorrowful unto death: tarry ye here and watch with me. And he
went a little further, and fell on his face, and prayed, saying; O my Father,
if it be possible let this Cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but
as thou will.
And he began to be sorrowful, and very heavy.]



First, there is a double sorrow, and heaviness, namely

I, Inordinate, which hinders reason; and this Solomon sorroweth for nothing;
that is, with that immoderate, and in ordinate sorrow which causes death, 2
Cor. 7.10.

II. Ordinate, good, virtuous, and natural, which follows reason and excludes
vanity.

Secondly, there is a double fear: namely

I. Inordinate; this the righteous ordinarily is not subject unto, he being as
bold as a lion, fearing nothing, as the wise man says.

II. There is a natural fear, which is free from all blame.

Thirdly, Christ was only subject to a natural Hierome) Propassiones
appetitus sensitivi.

Why did CHRIST assume these passions, or

First, to show the truth of his humane nature.

Secondly, for our consolation, that we might Carthus. s. page 213. b.

. 2. If it be possible, let this cup pass from

It is observed by some of our Divines, that some phrases of Scripture have a
contrary signification, as for example, the Prophet Jeremiah says ( Chapt.
23.9,) I am like a drunken man whom the wine has gone over; that is, whom the
wine has overcome; but here, let this cup pass over me; that is, Let it not
touch me; in a contrary signification.

How could Christ desire that this cup might

If we consider Christ's desire [Let this Cup passe] materially only,

In this prayer of Christ's we may observe four things, I will name the three
first, and prosecute only the last;

First, CHRIST here prays for a thing, in respect verse. 42. If this Cup
cannot pass away. etc.

Secondly, Christ here prays for that which viz, that the Cup of death and
sorrow prepared for him might pass.

Thirdly, Christ here prays in his humane and and irefull indignation,
wherewith he was so amazed at the first, and astonished, that in his humane
weakness he was carried [his Divinity now hiding and repressing it selfe] to
desire the passing of that cup, which he was to drink off, for the Redemption
of mankind. If the Reader desire to see how this is opposed by Feverdentius,
and his exceptions fully answered, I refer him to Dr. W. synops. fol. 1096.

Moses often prayed for Israel; and Christ here for a removal of this Cup.





First, we know not what Gods secret will is; and therefore we may pray against
his revealed. This we prove from David thus, God by his Prophet Nathan had
positively said, The child shall dye, 2 Samuel 12. And yet David prayed for the
child's life, and is condemned by none for thus praying, because he knew not
what the Lords secret will was.

Secondly, if it were not lawful to pray for those things which seem diverse
from the revealed will of God, then it were not lawful to pray against
afflictions, or for the removal of evils; [for these are the operations of
God, and testimonies of his revealed will] but this is lawful, as is plain
from James. 5.13. and Psalm, 50.15

Thirdly, Gods resolution is often hypotheticall, or conditional; as is
evident from Ezech. 3.17, 21. and Amos. 4.12. And therefore we may lawfully
pray for those things which seem diverse from the revealed will of God.

Fourthly, God oftentimes seems to will those things, which indeed he wills
not, only to prove us, as is evident from Matthew. 15.23, 24, 26. Luke 24.28.
Exodus 32.10. Numb. 14.10. And therefore we may lawfully pray for those things
which seem to be different from GODS will.

Fifthly, the Lord sometimes seriously changes his comminations, for our
prayers, as appears from Genesis 19.21. Esa. 38.2, 5. Jonah. 3.10.

Sam. 15.29. Iam. 1.17.

Deus non mutat voluntatem, Sed vult mutationem. Greg.

Not as I will, but as thou will.]

CHRIST our blessed Savior in subjecting his will to the will of God, may
occasion this Quaere.



The Will of man is subject to three superiors, namely

First, it is subject to reason. And

Secondly, it is subject to the Magistrate.

Thirdly, and above all it is subject unto God. And therefore wicked wilful
men are justly punished by all these three; And

I. They are punished by the sting of conscience, because they transgressed
against reason. And

II. They are punished by the Magistrate, because they disobeyed him. And

III. They shall be punished by God, who will give them over to the tortments
of hell: And therefore, we had need [with our blessed Saviour] submit and
subject our wills to the will of God. CHRIST in thus praying [Not as I will
Father, us as thou wilt] would teach us;

That it is much better for us to give our selves unto the Lord to be directed
by him, Father not as we would, but as thou will, and as seems best in thy
own eyes, Read for this purpose, Matthew. 6.10. Luke 1.38. and 1 Peter 4.19.

Why must we rather submit our selves to the

First, because God is infinite in wisdom, but we are fools; neither knowing

I. What will come hereafter, or what a night, or the time to come may bring
forth; whereas the Lord calls those things which are not, as though they
were, knowing as perfectly what will be hereafter, as what is now. Neither

II Do we know, what is profitable for us for the present; we often praying
for those things which are hurtful for us, Matthew. 7.9. James 4.3. But the
Lord knows what is good, and what is evil for us: And therefore great reason
there is, that we should submit our desires and wills to the will and good
pleasure of our GOD, And

Secondly, because we are weak in our judgments,

Thirdly, because naturally we savor too much

Fourthly, because we are [for the most part]

I. We are often seduced by Revenge, ready to call for fire from heaven, when
we are injured.

II. We are sometimes led away with carnal love, as Abraham was to Ismael, and
Samuel to Saul, 1 Samuel 16.1. Thus Jeremiah was prohibited to mourn for the
people, Ierem. 7.16. and yet notwithstanding this prohibition he weeps, Chap.
9, 1.

III. We are sometimes transported too far with zeal toward our brethren
and friends; as we see in Joshua, Numb. 11.27. and in John's Disciples, Mark.
9.38. John. 3.26. But the Lord

First, is infinite in wisdom, and knows all things. And

Secondly, is infinite in power, and can do all things. And

Thirdly, is infinite in love, and cares for his children. And

Fourthly, is infinite in purity, contemning earthly things. And

Fifthly, is infinite in prudence and judgment, and cannot be mislead, or
seduced by affection. And therefore great reason there is, that we should
submit our wills to the will of God, rather then draw God to our desires.



Father not as I will, but as thou will, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. Romans. 1.10. Hebr.
13.21.



I. We must be moderate in our desire of death, and corporal dissolution; not
like Elias, 1 King. 19.4. Although with St. Paul we must desire to be dissolved
( Philip, 1.23.) yet this desire must be accompanied with a patient waiting,
until the Lord opens the prison doors.

II. We must be moderate in our mourning and lamentation for sin; that is,
although it be a horrible thing for any to be without a true sight and sense of
their sins, yet we must take heed, that neither the sight nor sense of them,
drive us to despair: we must feel our sins to be a burden unto us, yet we
must not sink under it, but patiently brook it, as a corrosive and smarting
salve, Job. 7.20, 21, and 13, 15.

III. We must be moderate in our desire to be freed from some t^mptation that
lies upon us; that is, we must war against it undauntedly, and indefatigably,
as Jacob wrastled all night with the Angel, but yet we must be patient until
the Lord please to remove it.

IV. We must be moderate in our zeal to Gods glory, not letting it boil over,
or run beyond his bounds, Psalm. 74.10.





Revealed, and Concealed; or, secret, and disclosed.

First, sometimes the will of God is Revealed, that is, he shows us what his
will is; and here patience is required of us, 2 Samuel 12.20. Job. 1.21. John.
18.11. Wherefore two sorts of people are blameworthy, to wit,

I. Those who submit to the will of God with a distinction; thus many will say,
I am content, but I had rather that the Lord had done thus or thus. But this we
must take heed of, and learn absolutely to submit our selves to the Lords
will, not thinking our selves wiser then the Lord.

II. Those who submit to the will of God, with murmuring, which we call
patience perforce; they seem to be contented, because they cannot help it,
but if they could they would not be so patient. But we must learn in all
things to give thanks, 1 Thessal. 5.18.

Secondly, sometimes the will of God is Concealed and unknown: now here we
must deny our own wisdom, and will, and choice, committing our ways unto
the Lord, 2 Samuel 15.26. and 1 Pet. 5.7.

How must we commend our ways unto God?

First, some for answer hereunto distinguish between

Secondly, but the true distinction is in the manner

I. Some seek for temporal and spiritual things negligently, and supinely;
but this is to tempt Gods providence; and therefore we must neither be
careless and sluggish in our honest callings and vocations, nor in the
exercises of Religion and means of grace.

II. Some seek for temporal and spiritual things industriously; and these
the Lord crowns.

Here observe again what God forbids, and what he commands:

First, GOD prohibits these three things; namely,

I. The use of wicked means; we must not by indirect and evil courses labor
to enrich our selves, 2 Chronicles. 15.7. And

II. Care; we must not be solicitously careful for the things of this life,
Matthew. 6. And

III. Hope in the means in themselves; for although we must use the means
which God has apponited [because otherwise we tempt his providence] yet we
must not trust in the means, or to the means; for that is to distrust his
providence.

Secondly, the Lord forbids not, but rather commands, these three things; viz,

I. The use of the Means. And

II. A desire of the end, and prayer unto him, to bless the means for the
obtaining of the wished end. And

III. Labor, and industry, 2 King. 13.19. that is, we must use the means for
the obtaining both of temporal and spiritual things; and we must desire,
that God would make them effectual means, that by spiritual exercises our
inward man may grow up in grace, and by corporal exercises and employments,
our estate may be bettered; for it is lawful to pray to God for a blessing
upon our labors, and to prosper the work of our hands; nd lastly, we must be
industrious both in our temporal vocations, and in our spiritual actions and
performances. Thus J conceive, that in these particulars Spiritual and
temporal things differ not, but only in degree; For

First, as we must use the means for the obtaining of spiritual graces: so
also for the procuring of temporal blessings. And

Secondly, as we must desire a blessing from God upon the use of spiritual
means, for the obtaining of spiritual grace; so also upon temporal means
the procuring of temporal blessings. And

Thirdly, as we must be industrious in the use of spiritual exercises, for the
obtaining of those graces which belong unto the hidden man of the heart; so
also in our honest vocations for the procuring of those temporal things which
concern our being or well being, in regard of our outward lives, or temporal
estates. Only we must more earnestly desire, and more industriously
endeavor, for Spiritual then Temporal things; as is plain from Matthew. 6.33.
Hebr. 12.4.

VERSE. 45. Then comes he to his Disciples, and says unto them; Sleep on
now, and take your rest.
Sleep on now, and take your rest,

Answ. These words may be understood two manner of ways; to wit,

First, Per modum permissionis, by way of permission; as though he gave them
leave to sleep a little, And

Secondly, Per modum exprobrationis, by way of reproof, as if he would say, Is
it now time to sleep, when my taking and apprehension is at hand? And this
sense accords best with the following words, The hour is at hand, and the
Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners, verse. 45.

VERSE. 48. Now he that betrayed him, gave them a sign, saying; whomsoever I
shall kiss, that same is he, hold him fast.
Judas give them this sign, or, whence was it that he feared they would err
in the Person of CHRIST, and apprehend some other in his stead, seeing he was
so well known?

James the younger was most like unto CHRIST in the lineaments of the body; and
therefore lest they should mistake Christ, and take James for him, Judas (who
knew them both perfectly) gave this treacherous kiss unto his Master;

Judas gave this sign.

Judas thought that CHRIST would hide himself, and get out of the way, when he
saw that he was betrayed; and therefore he says, whomsoever I shall kiss,
that same is he, hold him fast: as if he would say, when you see me kiss one,
know that it is he whom ye seek, and whom you are sent to apprehend; and
therefore as soon as the token is given, take him, and hold him fast, lest he
slip out of your hands, as often he has escaped out of the hands of the Jews.

VERSE. 49. And forthwith he came to JESUS and said; Hail Rabbi, and kissed
him.
. 1. Hail Rabbi.]

It is most evident [although it be questioned by some] that every Rabbi in the
days of our Savior had Disciples, and that his own Disciples, and other
well-wishers styled him by the name of Rabbi: for John's Disciples saluted John
by the name of Rabbi, John. 3.26. And CHRIST al^o by the same name or title,
John. 1.31. And Judas his Master, God save thee Rabbi.

. 2. And kissed him.]

Why did CHRIST permit himself to be killed and saluted by a traitor?

First, some say, he suffers it, that hereby he Judas to repentance, and love.
Carthus. s.

Secondly, he permits it, for our example, to

Thirdly, to teach us not to suspect until we Judas was a public Disciple,
but a private hypocrite, and traitor; and therefore CHRIST will not suspect
him, until he have openly showed himself what he is.

Fourthly, CHRIST came into the world clothed

VERSE. 51, 52, 53. And behold one of them which were with JESUS, stretched out
his hand, and drew his Sword, and stroke a servant of the high Priests, and
smote off his ear. Then said JESUS unto him; Put up again thy sword into his
place; for all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword. Think
then that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more
then twelve legions of Angels?
. 1. And behold one of them streched out his ]

The Disciples seeing Christ their Master apprehended, ask him, if they shall
smite with the sword?

But Peter not staying for an answer, draws forth his sword, and smites off
Malchus his ear: Which fact his Master does not approve off, but reproves
commanding him to put up his sword into his sheath.

Why would not Christ permit his Disciples to defend him Vi etc. armis, with
dint of sword?

First, because all they which use the sword without a calling to use it, shall
perish by it, verse. 52.

Secondly, because he needed not the help and verse. 53.

Thirdly, because it was necessary that he should ver. 54.

Fourthly, because the Scriptures could not otherwise have been fulfilled,
then by the death, and bloodshed of Christ.

Put up thy sword into his place.]

If the studious Reader would see this point handled, viz, That it is not
lawful for a private man to murder an offender; and in what cases the
Schoolmen have allowed it, and in what cases not; let him read Antonin. sum.
part. 2. tit. 7. Cap. 8,. 2. If the vulgar reader would be satisfied in the
point, I refer him to Dr. Mayer upon Matthew. 26.52. page 313, 314.

Cannot I now pray unto my Father, and he would give me twelve legions of
Angels etc.]

If the Reader would know the derivation of this word Legion, and how many
soldiers it contained; let him read Sylloge vocum exotic. page 174, 175. If
the Reader shall observe some difference amongst the Evangelists concerning the
place where Christ was judged, or the time when he was judged; and desire to
see how they may be reconciled, I refer him to Pareus. s. Page 879, 880. and
Dr. Mayer. s. page 314, 315.

VERSE. 60, 61. At the last came two false witnesses, and said, this fellow
said, I am able to destroy the temple of God, and to build it in three days.
Matthew call these two false witnesses, seeing our Savior spoke some such
thing as they said? John. 2.

John. 2.19. he says, Destroy ye this body, and within three days I will
raise it up again; but they say, This fellow said, I am able to destroy this
temple made with hands etc. See Muscul. s. page 574. b.

VERSE. 63. But JESUS held his peace.






Thirdly, because the High Priest who sat in Muscul. Page 576. a. b.

Fourthly, because hereby he would teach us Carthus. s.

VERSE. 68. Prophecy unto us thou CHRIST,
It is not unworthy observation, how maliciously the Jews set themselves
against the offices of CHRIST, who was anointed King, Priest, and Prophet: For

First, they mock the Kingly office of Christ, Matthew. 27.19. when they put a
crown of thorns upon his head for a Crown; and a reed into his hand for a
Scepter.

Secondly, they mock the Priestly office, when they said, He saved others, let
him now save himself, Matthew. 27.40.

Thirdly, they mock his Prophetical office in these words, Prophecy unto us
thou Christ, etc.

VERSE. 75. And Peter remembered the words of JESUS, which said unto him, Before
the cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice. And he went out and wept bitterly.
. 1. And Peter remembered the words of JESUS.]

How many things are required unto true repentance, or, of the truly penitent?

Three things, as we may gather from this verse;

First, they must remember the Lord, whom they have offended: for as the
forgetfulness of God opens the door of the heart unto sin, so the
remembrance of him opens the door unto repentance. And therefore this our
Evangelist expressing Peter's repentance mentions his remembering of CHRIST'S
words.

Secondly, they must mourn and greeve, and repent, that they have offended so
good and gracious a God: like Peter who weeps, and that bitterly.

Thirdly, they must forsake the society of the wicked, who were the occasion of
their sin: and like Peter, go forth.

. 2. And wept bitterly.]

St. Ambrose, upon these words, is clear against Popish satisfaction thus,
Lachrymas Petrilego, satisfactionem non lege. I read of Peter's Penitent
tears, but not of his satisfaction.

CHAP. XXVII.
VERSE. 3, 4. Then Judas which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was
condemned, repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to
the chief Priests and Elders, saying; I have sinned, in that I have betrayed
the innocent blood. And they said, what is that to us, see thou to it.
. 1. Then Judas etc.]

Before I treat particularly of the words in the Text, I will speak a word or
two in general, and that,

First, of Judas, who was

I. An Apostle, and endued with a miraculous Faith. And

II. A Devil from the beginning, and an egregious sinner. And

III. A covetous person, and hence for money became a Traitor. And

IV. A contemner of instruction, for he was often admonished.

Secondly, of the History; where two questions come to be considered of; to wit,

I. Why this History was not suppressed?

II. For what end it is described by the Evangelist? Namely to show the anger
of God.

First, against murderers. And

Secondly, against traitors. Of all these briefly.

First, this traitor Judas was an Apostle, one of the twelve, and not only a
Disciple; greater (in regard of his place and office) then Nathaniel,
Nichodemus, or Joseph of Arimathea; and yet he was but a traitor; whence we may
learn two things; viz.

I. That a man may be eminent in place, and gifts, and yet fall away: yea rare
and singular in grace, and yet fall into sin; as we see in Lucifer, Adam,
Sampson, Salom^n, David, Hezekiah, Asa, and Peter. And therefore the best must
be careful to subdue their affections; and to watch over their actions, 1 Corinthians. 9.27.

II. That honor makes men forgetful of themselves, Hezekiahs heart was
exalted, and Nabuchadnezzar, Haman, and Saul waxed proud when they were
promoted unto honor. Again Judas wrought miracles and cast out Devils; for
Christ gave power unto his Apostles to cast them out, Matthew. ^0.1. and Judas is
particularly named as well as the rest, verse 4. And therefore he had that
power.

Secondly, Judas the traitor was evil from the beginning, yea a Devil
incarnate, and a Son of perdition; and yet Christ permits him, and suffers
him to enjoy his Apostleship. To teach us, That Christ suffers wicked men, even
unto the harvest, Matthew. 13.29.

Thirdly, Judas was covetous and carried the bag, hiding and cloaking his
avarice, under a pretended love unto the poor. Whence we learn,

That covetousness is a great sin, yea the root of evils; and covetous men
are the brethren of Judas, and the children of the Devil. Here observe four
things; to wit,

I. As Judas desired that all might come into his bag, and murmured because
the precious Ointment was not sold ( Mark 14.3. and John 12.3.) So coveteus
men cannot endure that any thing should fall besides them, but labor to
engrosse all into their own hands and power.

II. As Judas thought all too much which was bestowed upon Christ (as appears
by the ointment powered upon his head) so covetous men think every thing too
much which is given to the Church, or Churchmen, or any good uses.

III As Judas covered his covetousness with a pretense of love to the poor:
so many covetous projecters and Monopolistes have, and still in many places do,
pretend a gain to the Commonwealth, when indeed viper-like (by their
Monopolies and projects) they eat out the bowels of the Commonwealth, only
to enrich themselves.

IV. As Judas betrayed his own Master, when it came to this, we will give thee
to do it thirty pieces of silver: so the covetous man will sell Christ, and
his own soul for money, as the Gergeseus did.

How do covetous men sell Christ?

First, when they despise Religion, and stop the

Secondly, when they sell their brethren by destroying,

Thirdly, when they sell charity, the bond of peace

Fourthly, when they sell heaven, not hungring after it, or laboring for it at
all, then they sell Christ, the Lord of heaven. And therefore we should beware
of covetousness.

Fourthly, this traitor Judas was a contemner of counsel and instruction; for
he was often admonished; as appears by these speches, One of you shall betray
me, and he to whom I give the sop, the same shall betray me; and thou have said
it; and woe be unto him by whom the Son of man is betrayed. Whence two things
may be noted; to wit,

I. That God calls an and admonishes before he judges and punishes, Matthew.
22.3, 4, 7.

II. That many will not be fore-armed, though they have been forwarned, not be
advised, though they have been admonished: as we may see in Pharaoh, Cain, the
Jews, Balthazar, Daniel 5.30. Jerusalem, Matthew. 23.37.

Fifthly, we have now to consider of the history, wherein two questions are
considerable, viz.

Why is not this whole History of Judas betraying Herostratus his name was by
edict, when he had fired that famous Temple of Diana* and as his name is, who
first invented Gunpowder? Why does St. Matthew. mention it, seeing the holy Ghost
spe^king of such monstrous wicked men, says, Their names shall be razed out of
Israel?

First, fame is good, if it be a good fame, otherwise Cain, Ahab, Achitophel,
Iezabel, Doeg, Julian the Apostate, and diverse others. Hence we say in a
Proverb, He gave him a Judas kiss, and those who are perfidious we call them
Iudasses, or Jews. And thus the Lord would have this history written, for the
greater infamy and disgrace of this graceless traitor.

Secondly, the Lord would not have this History verse.

Sixthly, why, or for what end is this History so

I. To show us the fruits and effects of Covetousness, Judas to betray his
Master was covetousnes: and therefore we should avoid it with all our power,
through liberality some have entertained Angels into their houses, yea Christ
himself; but through covetousness some have expulsed CHRIST out of their
coasts (as the Gergesines) and some have sold Christ unto death; as Judas here
did. Wherefore let the horriblenesse of the fruit make us abhor the tree.

Judas was, he being a maine a better in the death of CHRIST. Hence we may
learn,





John 8.44.

Skin for skin, and all that a man has he will give for his life. Now a
murderer robs him whom he murders of this most precious temporal blessing.

Exodus 21, 23. and Deuter. 19.13. Numb. 35.31. Hence Jacob inveighes against,
yea curses his Sons cruelty and murder, although it was done for to revenge
that great indignity which was offered unto their Sister Dinah, Genes. 49.7.

Achitophel and Judas. And therefore Solomon says, J hate a Traitor.

Having handled some generals concerning this history, it remains now that we
should treat particularly of these two verses.

verses?



First, Judas his repentance, wherein we have three particulars observable, to
wit,

I. The occasion thereof, viz. when he saw that Christ was condemned.. 2.

II. The action; which is twofold, to wit,

First, he repented him of what he had done,. 3.

Secondly, he made restitution of the money back again.. 4.

III. His confession, which is twofold; namely,

First, he confesses his own sin.. 5.

Secondly, he confesses Christ's innocence.. 6.

Secondly, the Priests answer unto him; wherein two things are observable; viz.

I. Their excuse of themselves, What is that to us?. 7.

II. Their laying the blame upon him. See thou to it.. 8.

When he saw that Christ was condemned.]

What is meant here by Seeing?

First, some by Video to see, understand Intelligo or understand; as if the
meaning of our Evangelist were, when he understood that Christ was condemned to
death, etc. according to those phrases, Loquere ut videam, speak so that I may
understand, and know what thou say: and Christ saw their hearts, that is,
knew the thoughts of their hearts; as if Judas before now knew not that Christ
should dye, or that his death was intended or aimed at, by the Pharisees. But
this cannot be thus; For

I. Christ had plainly foretold his death; The Son of man must be betrayed
into the hands of sinful men, and crucified, and had told Judas that it should
be by him,

II. The Scripture says plainly; the Scribes and Pharisees sought to slay
Christ; and Judas hereupon asks, what will ye give me and I will betray him
unto you (Matthew. 26.15.) And therefore he could not be ignorant that his life
was aimed at.

III. If he were not guilty of the death of Christ, then why was his punishment
so great?

Secondly, to See, is to consider, or intently look

First, that for the most part, men sin inconsiderately, never considering
what they do, till the deed be done; and then like fools say, Non putaram, I
did not think it.

Secondly, that the conscience is quicker sighted when the sin is committed
then it was before: for although before sin, we see not the nature, fruit, or
end of it; yet after sin we do, Romans 6.21.

. 3. He repented.]

What arguments, or signs, or shows of repentance,

The Reprobate may have a certain repentance in him of sin; whereby,

First, he does acknowledge his sin. And

Secondly, is pricked with a feeling of Gods wrath for sin. And

Thirdly, is grieved for the punishment of sin. And

Fourthly, does confess and acknowledge his sin. And

Fifthly, acknowledges God to be just in the punishing of sin. And

Sixthly, desires to be saved. And

Seventhly, promises repentance in his misery and affliction in these words, I
will sin no more. And all these it may be were in Judas.

Js not repentance good, has not the Lord exhorted all unto repentance, and
promised pardon Ezech. 18. Matthew. 3. Acts 3.19. Why then is Judas his
repentance named and himself not pardoned?

First, as there is a good and true repentance, so there is a bad and false,
and therefore although







I. According to the motion thereof. Or

II. According to the moving cause thereof. Or

III. According to the effect thereof.

First, humiliation is divided according to the motion thereof; thus,

I. There is a solitary or sole humiliation, when sinners are only dejected
and cast down by reason of their sins.

II. There is a humiliation conjoined with comfort, and a certain ereandion of
the Spirits to some joy.



Psalm. 32.6.





First, temporal, and this is incident to the righteous; as appears by Job.
3. and David, Psalm. 32. and 80.

Secondly, final; and this the faithful never fall into.



viz.

First, of sin; and this is good, yea we should labor to be sensible of our
sins, and wish that our consciences would check us for sin. And

Secondly, of the anger of God for sin; now the mouth of this conscience they
must labor to stop, and not give way to this desperate fear, that God loves
them not, but hates them, and is wrathfully displeased at them: For in their
greatest humiliation they should say with Job, Though the Lord kill me yet will
I put my trust in him.



viz.



First, the testimony of the Spirit within, witnessing unto their Spirits, that
they are the Children of God. And

Secondly, if they be changed from what they were before, hating their former
beloved sins, and loving holiness and virtue formerly not beloved. And

Thirdly, if they love God, and be beloved of him, and assisted and guided by
the holy Spirit in the paths of piety. For these signs will deceive none; and,
therefore blessed are all they who can by these comfort themselves in the hour
of temptation.

II. If they cannot find these things in themselves, That at what time soever a
sinner does repent he shall find mercy, Ezech. 18. and a Father has said, That
true repentance comes never too late.

Secondly, humiliation is divided according to the cause moving it: For

I. There is a humiliation which arises only from the horror of Gods
judgment, and vengeance. And

II. There is a humiliation, which arises from the love of virtue, and the
hatred of sin as sin, and from the hope of reward. But of this we have
treated heretofore.

Thirdly, humiliation is divided according to the effects thereof. For

I. There is a humiliation which is without any good fruit or effect. And

II. There is a humiliation which works true repentance, and converted unto
God. Whence note,

First, that the righteous only have this true humiliation, which is called
conversion. Ezech. 18.21. Zach. 1.3. and Acts 3.19.
And

Secondly, that the wicked may have the false humiliation; as we see in Judas.

. 4. And he brought again the thirty pieces

In this Section two things are considerable; to wit,

I. The thing brought back; viz. the thirty pieces of silver. And

II. The action of bringing back; Reduxit, he brought again.

First, the thing brought back was the silver pieces.

What was meant by a silver piece?

First, it has no certain signification, but the Hebrews take it for a
shekel, as we may see, Zach. 11.12.

Secondly, the Jews had a double shekel;

I. The shekel of the Sanctuary, which was worth four drams. And

II. The vulgar or common shekel, which was worth two drams.

Thirdly, it is hard to determine or say certainly,

Fourthly, in our money some say that the Roman Matthew. 18.28.

Fifthly, it may suffice us to know, that it was Zach. 11.13.

Secondly, we have here his action of bringing back, where we see that he does
not bring a part of the money back, as did Sapphira, or Cain, who offered of
the worst of his fruits, but he brings back all, even every penny that he
received: and yet this satisfaction profits him not at all. To teach us:







First, a satisfaction due unto our neighbor, and is called restitution, and
it is of the fact, not of the sin; and this is altogether, or by all m anes
to be done, as principally necessary, with these exceptions, restrictions, and
cautions, namely,

I. Not as a satisfaction for the sin, for this we owe unto God. Nor

II. Through horror (as Judas here did) but out of a desire to be reconciled
unto our brother, and to satisfy him for the injury we have done, and to
appease and pacify our own consciences. Nor

III. Through some immediate necessity; for it may come to pass that he who
has done wrong unto his neighbor is not able to satisfy for the injury done:
and in this case, God can save the sinner without restitution, if so be the
offender do as much as in him lies. Now these conditions observed every greedy
oppressor, and griping usurer, and deceitful person is bound to make
restitution.

Secondly, there is a satisfaction due unto our God; wherein two things are
considerable; viz.

I. Wherein this satisfaction consists: namely,

First, not in oblations and pilgrimages. But

Secondly, partly to the poor in Alms deeds; as Daniel counseled
Nebuchadnezzar. And partly, to God, in repentance, and sincere sorrow, Acts
3.19. And

II. These things are not to be done, as a satisfaction of Gods justice for our
sin. But

First, as an argument of our obedience. And

Secondly, as a testimony of our thankfulness.

I have sinned.]

We have heard of Judas his Contrition, and Satisfaction, and now follows his
Confession: which is twofold, viz.

I. Of his own sin in this Section. And

II. Of CHRIST'S innocence in the next.

First, we see here that the Traitors tongue witnesses against it self, and
that his Conscience cannot dissemble; to teach us,

Genes. 3.10. and 42.21. and 2 Samuel 24.6.10. Proverb. 28.1. Esa 57.20. and we
shall find that an evil conscience is a continual fear and torment. Jnfinite
(in a manner) are the humane examples, whereby this might be confirmed, but J
will name but one or two.

Bessus having slain his Father, and being afterward banqueting with sundry
Nobles, arose from the table, and beat down a Swallows nest which was in the
chimny, saying, they lied to say that he he slew his Father; For his guilty
conscience made him think, that the Swallows when they chatt^^^^, proclaimed
his parricide to the World, Plut de sera vindict. Again

Theodoricus the King having slain Boethius, and Symmachus, and being
afterward at dinner, began to change countenance, his guilty conscience so
blinding his eyes, that he thought, the head of a fish which stood before him,
to have been the head of his Cosen Symmachus, who bit his lip at him and
threatened him; the horror whereof did so amaze him, that he presently dyed.
Sigonius de occid. imper. Again

Nero that Monster of nature having once slain his Mother, had never any more
peace within, but was astonished with horrors, fears, visions, and clamours,
which his guilty conscience set before him, and suggested unto him. Imo latens
in praedio, familiares suspectos habuit, vocem humanam horruit, ad catuli
latratum, galli cantum, rami ex vento motum terrebatur; loqui non ausus, ne
audiretur. Xiphil in Nerone, He suspected his nearest and dearest friends and
favorites, he trembled at the barking of a Puppy, and the crowing of a Cock,
yea the wagging of a leaf; and neither durst speak unto others, nor could
endure others to speak unto him (when he was retired into a private house)
lest the noise should be heard by some, who lay in wait for his life.

How many ways does the Conscience accuse sinners?

Two mannner of ways; namely,

First, sometimes unto repentance; and that is, when the conscience of sin
causes and works true sorrow (never to be sorrowed of) in the heart of the
sinner, 2 Corinthians. 7.10. as it did in Peter, Matthew. 26.75.

Secondly, sometimes the Conscience accuses unto vengeance, and eternal
condemnation; as it did in Cain, Achitophel, and Judas.

. 6. I have betrayed the innocent blood.]

We may observe here how Christ was always absolute without any blame, or
fault for the Pharisees durst not kill him, the Priests have no accusation to
bring against him, only Caiphas says, That it is necessary that one should
dye for the people, Pilates wife sends word that he is a righteous man; and
Pilate himself says, I find no fault in him, yea Judas here pronounces him
innocent, and what say the high Priests and Pharisees unto him they do not
answer, no, but he is a wicked man, but what is that to us? whence we may note,

That God will always manifest the innocence of his Saints, and Servants.
Joseph and Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 16.3.8. and 19.29. and 1 King. 2.44. and of the
three Children, Dan. 3. and of Paul, Acts 26.32, 28.

. 7. What is that unto us.]

The Priests and Pharisees hire Judas to betray

That wicked men are always prone to excuse themselves; as we see in Adam,
Evah, Saul, Prove. 30.20.

See thou to it.]



Mend your self as you can.

Judas to accuse himself; as if they would say, Jf thou think that thou
have sinned, then go and accuse thy self, that so thou may be cut of for
thy wickedness. Whence we may learn a double practice, viz.

I. The practice of the Pharisees, who reject Judas when he comes unto them,
though they had put him upon the work, to teach us, That they who persuade,
urge, and hire men unto sin, will after thee deed done, leave them yea be
more ready to accuse then excuse them, more prone to condemn, then to acquit
them. And

II. The practice of Satan is to be considered and observed in these
Pharisees: For as they

First, instigate Judas unto this fearful and damnable offense. And then

Secondly, when the offense is committed, labor to drive him to desperation.
So the Devil does

I. Tempt men unto most horrible, and heinous transgressions. And then

II. Labors to show them the ouglinesse of their sins, that so he may bring
them (with Judas) to final desperation.

VERSE. 5, 6, 7. And he cast down the pieces of silver in the Temple, and
departed, and went, and hanged himself. And the chief Priests took the
silver pieces and said, It is not lawful for to put them into the treasury,
because it is the price of blood. And they took counsel, and bought with them
the Potters field, to bury strangers in.
Judas?

Judas is propounded unto us,

First, a glass wherein we may clearly see an example of Gods anger; for as
his mercy and clemency appeared in Peter, who was received into favor upon
his true and unfeigned repentance, in the former Chap. for the comfort of all
penitent persons; so in Judas, his wrath, anger, and Justice appears, for the
terror and confusion of all impenitent sinners. And

Secondly, a glass wherein we may clearly see an example of Gods justice; for
as he is no respecter of persons, but receives all into favor and mercy who
truly repent, and lay hold upon CHRIST, so he spares none who reject Christ, or
are impenitent, be they what they will; as we see in Judas, who although he was
an Apostle, and numbered amongst the twelve, yet was not spared, but most
severely punished for his impenitency and hardness of heart. And

Thirdly, a glass wherein we may clearly see the power of Christ; for
although Judas thought it a matter of no great danger, to betray this innocent
Lamb; yet Christ in his swift vengeance lets him see, that justice sleeps
not, neither any can free him from his hand, but in his just anger, and
infinite power he gives him over to become a bloody butcher unto himself. And

Fourthly, a glass wherein we may see the deceit and fraud of Satan; who
before sin be committed makes it a matter of nothing, but afterward lets us
see the ougly face thereof unto desperation. And

Fifthly, a glass wherein we may see an example, of fruitless, and
unprofitable repentance; but of this we spoke before in the former verse,. 3.
question 1. And

Sixthly, a glass wherein we may see an evil, conscience, who never cease
crying against the sinner until it have brought him to perdition and
destruction, And

Seventhly, a glass wherein we may read both the nature and fruit of
covetousness; for as it leads men unto most notorious offenses, so it ends and
brings men unto most fearful judgments.

How many are the causes of Desperation, and Judas here fell into?

The causes of Desperation are many; namely,

First, a shame to confess sin, or to have sin to be known; many are so
confounded, when they think of the shame which will redound unto them, when
some sin, they have committed is published; that to prevent it, they
desperately cut the thread of their own lives.

Secondly, the next cause of Desperation is the multitude of sins; many
reviewing the Catalogue of their offenses, find them to be in number
numberless; the sight whereof does so amaze and affright them, that they
despair of mercy with Judas in the text.

Thirdly, another cause of Desperation is the greatness and enorm^ousnesse of
the offense; many see some sin which they have committed to be so heinous,
and horrible, that with this traitor they despair of mercy, and hasten
vengeance by their desperate enterprises.

Fourthly, the next cause of Desperation is the continuance in sin; many
calling to mind how long they have wallowed in the puddle of iniquity, despair
of mercy, and desperately lay violent hands upon themselves.

Fifthly, another cause of Desperation is a certain pusillanimity of mind; for
many considering the many and great works which God requires of them unto
salvation, do utterly despair of heaven and like faint-hearted Cowards give
over the work, and war unattempted, excusing themselves with the old
proverb, Vni atque geminis praestat involvi malis, they may as well sit still,
as rise and catch a fall; they may as well never undertake the task, as take
it in hand, and be enforced to give it over again unfinished.

Sixthly, the next cause of Desperation is a false imagination, or judgment of
our selves, and works; many are so sensible of their weakness and inability to
serve the Lord, and so sensible of their lukewarmenesse in his service and
work, and of the power and strength of temptation; that they are ready to
despair, because if they belonged unto God, then undoubtedly they think that
it could not, nor should not be thus with them. This cause has place sometimes
in the faithful, in whom it is only temporal, not at all final.

Seventhly, another cause of Desperation is the weight of some temporal
affliction; many being under some heavy burden of corporal calamity, think
to free themselves from it, by putting a Period to their lives skipping thus
(as the Proverb is) out of the pan into the fire, and passing from corporal
pains to eternal punishment.

Eighthly, the last cause of Desperation is Infidelity, many distrust of the
truth of the promises, of the power and love of God, and of the value of
CHRIST'S death; as though neither God nor CHRIST could nor would save them
although they should repent, crying our desperately with Cain, My sins are
greater then God can forgive.





First, if the shame of the world terrify us, then let us remember, that if
men condemn us for sin they will commend us for repentance; yea this shame
i^ temporal, but the infamy of desperate persons is perpetual, and eternal;
and although men blame them for sinning, yet God will pardon them, and blot all
their sins out of his remembrance; wherefore they need not set by the shame
of men, if they have the praise of God.

Secondly, if the multitude, and magnitude of our sins, come into our
remembrance, let us repent us of them, and be truly sorrowful for them, but
not despair; because the mercy of God is infinite, and the merits of Christ
are of an infinite value and worth, and his blood (which was shed for penitent
sinners) is sufficient to purge us from all our sins.

Thirdly, if we be almost at the Gate of Desperation by reason of the
consideration of our continuance in sin, then let us remember, that the time
of our former ignorance God will not regard, but willingly pass by, if now
from henceforth we labor to redeem the time, devoting our selves wholly up to
the service of our God.

Fourthly, if we begin to despair, and doubt, that we shall never be able to
do that which God requires of us unto salvation; then remember; Conanti aderit
Deus, God will be present with us if we do our endeavor; yea he will accept
of the will for the deed, if he see that with our minds we serve the Law of
God, yea he will give us both the will and the deed, and enable us in some
measure to do those things which he requires of us, if in sincerity of heart
we desire, and endeavor to serve him.

Fifthly, if we be dejected, and plunged into the pit of sorrow, through the
sense of the weakness of grace, and the strength of corruption in us; we must
then remember that the Lord has promised to strengthen the weak, and to cause
the barren to bring forth, and to feed and nourish babes, until they come to
strength, and to the measure of perfect men. And he is faithful in his
promises, and tender in his affections unto all his children, and will neither
quench a smoking flax, nor break a bruised reed, nor reject nor cast off any
of his babes, because they are sick and weak.

Sixthly, if the sense of any heavy affliction, lying upon us, be ready to
sink us in the Whirle-poole of desperation, let us then remember, that

I. The dear children of God have endured longer and heavier afflictions then
we have, or do; as we may see in Joseph, Job, and David.

II. That afflictions do attend all those who would be saved, yea that they
who would come unto heaven must suffer affliction; it being given unto them to
suffer, Philip. 1.29.

III. That God will lay no more upon us then he will enable us to undergo. By
these and the like meditations we must strengthen and arm our selves against
doubting and desperation.

VERSE. 9, 10. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the Prophet,
saying; And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was
valued, whom they of the children of Israel did value: and gave them for the
Potters field, as the Lord appointed me.
Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the Prophet] Sect.


From what Prophet, or place does the Evangelist

First, for answer unto this and the next qu. I would August de cons. Evang.
3.7. et Hier. s. et de opt. genesis Interpretandi, Origin. s. Eusebius. (...), lib.
20. Chrysostom. s. 2 Timoth. 3.8. Come. histor. Evang. cap. 161. page 240.
Erasm. s. Beza, s. Mayer s. Scharp. symph. proph. et Apost. page 337, 338. loc.
114. Iun. paral. 48. Chem. harm. part 2. Gerard. Fol. 88, 89. Weemse of the
judicial law of Moses, lib. 1. cap, 30. page 112, 113.

Secondly, some say that the words recited here Jeremy and Zachary. This is
disliked and rejected by Iunius and Scharpius, but approved as the most true
opinion by Gerard, Mayer and Weemse, and will appear by and by to be such.

Thirdly, some say, that these words are taken Jeremy; and of this opinion were
both Hierome and Origin; but it is both refused and refuted, by Iunius,
Scharpe, Gerard, and Mayer.

Fourthly, some say, that the Evangelist borrowed

Fifthly, that he learned them from some divine Chrysostom. gives these two
reasons, thinking them both satisfactory, but Ger. dislikes both.

Sixthly, some say, that St. Matthew took them Jeremy, or from the Septuagints
interpretation of Jeremy 32.9. And Sharp inclines to this, giving these
reasons for this opinion, to wit,

I. Because the seven sickels, and ten pieces of silver mentioned by the
Prophet, are the same with the thirty pieces of silver here mentioned. And

II. Because in both the places mention is made of the buying of a field. And

III. Because the Prophet (as well as the Evangelist) had said, that this field
should serve to bury strangers in, that is, those who were now strangers, but
should afterward return from captivity: This opinion is also named by Gerard,
and by him neither allowed nor disliked, but barely recited: but it will
appear false by and by, and is utterly rejected by Iunius.

Zachary. 11, 12, 13. And of this opinion is Beza in show, but Iunius directly,
and diverse others.

Matthew are not named by Jeremy, but by Zachary, whence come it that the
Evangelist names Jeremy [Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by the
Prophet Ieremy] and not Zachary?

Jeremy for Zachary: of this opinion is St. Augustine, but is justly refuted
both by Iunius, Sharp, Gerard, and Mayer.



I. Because in their abbreviations, or, contraction of voices (much used by the
Greeks in their writing) the letters (...) might be changed into (...), which
is an error easily fallen into. Or

II. By adding the name of Jeremy. For

First, the Syrian Paraphrase (which is well nigh if not altogether most
ancient) has only the Text [They took the thirty pieces of silver etc.] but
no name at all. And

Secondly, (some Glos. ordinar. s.) say, that many Greek Copies have not the
name of Jeremy, but only, the word Prophet: Then was that fulfilled which was
spoken by the Prophet, saying, etc. This answer is given by Hierome, Eusebius,
Erasmus, and leaned unto by Beza; but denied by Iunius, Sharp, Gerard, and
Mayer.

Matthew in this place, were written by the Prophet Jeremy, and when this
Gospel was writ were extant in the Hebrew Text; but now by the malice of the
Jews are obliterated. This conceit went for current both with Eusebius and
Justin, as Gerard says, but is justly refelled by him.

Augustine answers, that St. Matthew cites these words as written by Jeremy
when indeed they were written by Zachary, because all the Prophets had as it
were but one mouth; and therefore whatsoever was written by some one of them,
might be said to be written by any one of them: as if all their Prophesies had
come out of one man's mouth, and that any thing spoken by any one of them, is
common to all, and that all things spoken by them all, are proper to any one.
But this answer is not without cause misliked by Dr. Mayer.

Fifthly, some say that Zachary being instructed Jeremy wrote it; and therefore
Jeremy is here mentioned; both Iunius and Sharp incline to this answer, at
least, say nothing against it, but Dr. Mayer rejects it, because Zachary living
100 years after Jeremy could not be instructed by him.

Sixthly, others say, this was spoken (...), Jeremiah to come again; as we
may perceive by that answer of the Disciples, when Christ demanded, Whom do
men say that I am? Some say Jeremy, or one of the Prophets. But this is refuted
both by Sharp and Mayer.

Seventhly, some say that Zachary had two viz, Zachary and Jeremy, as many more
among the Hebrews had; as for Example. Achimelech and Abiathar; Iochanan and
Ioachaz; Penuel and Chareph; Ioach and Ethan; and many more. This answer of all
the rest is best liked by Iunius, Erasmus and Sharp, but is disliked by
Gerhard and Mayer. Indeed if it were certain that Zachary had two names, this
answer would sufficiently clear the doubt, but seeing the name whereby he was
most known, (yea altogether known, for any thing written in the Scripture to
the contrary) was Zachary, me thinks St. Matthew should not, leaving that
name, call him by another, whereby he was not formerly called or known. I have
been brief in all these answers, because I adhere to none of them all; if any
desire better information concerning them, let him consult with the Authors
and places mentioned before, quest. 1. answ. 1.

Eighthly; Gerhard, Weemse, and Mayer, answer

I. The mention of the thirty silver pieces here, is taken from Zachar. 11, 12,
13. and the buying of the field from Jeremiah. 32.7. etc. for in the
Septuagints translation of Zachary, there is nothing almost but the 30. pieces
of silver given, of the words here used, and that was the translation then in
use amongst all men, For after this the words are these, The Lord said unto me,
put them to the founder, and recount; if ought be tried, as I am tried of them,
and I took the thirty pieces, and put them into the house of the Lord to the
founder. But here it is, I gave them for a field of the Potter, as the Lord
commanded me. But now if we take in that of Jeremiah, there is a field
appointed to be bought, and the evidence is commanded to be put into an earthen
Pot, and hidden for many days. And so the first words here used seem to be
taken out of Zachary, but the last out of Jeremy; who may be said to have
bought a Potters field because he bought a field, and caused the evidence to be
laid up in a Potters pot.

II. The new Testament cites two places out of the old oftentimes, to make up
one testimony; Or, it is the manner of the new Testament to make up one
testimony of two cited out of the old Testament, although written in diverse
places in the old Testament: As for example, St. Peter, Acts. 1.20. makes up
but one testimony of diverse places collected out of the Psalms, 69.17. and
109.1, So 1 Peter, 2.7. is made up of diverse testimonies out of the Psalm.
118.22, and Esa. 8.14. So CHRIST, Matthew, 21.5. makes up one testimony out of
Esaias 62.11. and Zachar. 11, 11. So Matthew. 21, 14. is made up of Esa. 56.7.
and Ierem. 7.11.

III. The new Testament in citing of two Prophets, expresses him who has ye
chief part of the testimony; or, it is the manner of the new Testament, when
testimonies are cited out of two, they leave out the one, and express only
the other, and they cite the whole testimony as written by one. As for example
in Matthew. 21.5. there is a testimony cited out of two Prophets, yet they are
cited out as one testimony. It is cited out of these two Prophets, viz, Esa.
62.11. and Zachar. 9.9. and yet the Evangelist says, That it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet; the first words are Esayes, the
latter Zacharies, and yet they are cited, as if they were the words of Zachary.
So Mark. 1, 2. As it is written in the Prophet; this testimony is written both
in Esaias and Malachy, Behold I send my Messenger before thy face, etc. yet
Matthew. 3, 3. Esaias is only cited, and not Malachy.

Matthew is made up of the saying of Jeremy and Zachary, then why does St.
Matthew rather cite Jeremy then Zachary?

Jeremiah was the most famous of the two, he is named, and the other omitted,
and left to be searched out by the diligent Reader.

Zachary speaks nothing of the field that was bought; and therefore it had
not been pertinent for the Evangelist to have brought in the testimony of
Zachary here.

Jeremy, or Zachary, but is different from them both. And therefore cannot be
taken from them.

Matthew does usually take liberty (so that he keep him to the sense) to use
other words, for the greater evidence to the thing intended. Jn the thirty
pieces of silver given for Zachary, a poor price for one of that worth, was
mystically set forth, how meanly the head of all Prophets, Christ JESUS should
be valued: In that he was appointed to bring them to the house of the Lord, was
set forth Judas his bringing back again of his thirty pieces to the chief
Priests: and in that Jeremiah is commanded to buy a field, etc: is set forth
the Potters field bought with this money to bury in.

VERSE. 12.13. And when he was accused of the chief Priests and Elders, he
answered nothing. Then says Pilate unto him, Hear thou not, how many things
they witness against thee?
What was Christ accused of unto the Governors by the Scribes and Pharisees,

The heads of the Accusations which were laid against our Savior by them were
these; viz,

First, that he taught and preached without any lawful calling thereunto,
Matthew. 21. And

Secondly, that he made himself the Messiah, Luke 23. John. 17.10. And

Thirdly, that he affirmed, that he was the Son of God, yea equal to God the
Father, John. 5.8. Matthew. 26. And

Fourthly, that he disturbed, and went about to abrogate that religion which
was instituted by Moses, according to the word of the Lord; and labored to
seduce the people, Luke 23. And

Fifthly, that he taxed their ceremonious observations (besides the law) and
their superstitions, in the mean time receiving of sinners, and eating with
them, and condemning the righteousness of works, or salvation by or for
works, Matthew 5. Luke 15. Add

Sixthly, that he brake the Sabbath day, healing sick and weak men therein,
Matthew. 22 Luke 6.13 l And

Seventhly, that he took upon him to forgive sins unto those who were
penitent, Matthew. 9. And

Eighthly, that he said, he could destroy the Temple, and rebuild it in three
days, John. 2. Matthew. 26.

VERSE. 19. When Pilate was set down on the judgment seat, his wife sent unto
him, saying; Have then nothing to do with that just man: for I have suffered
many things this day in a dream, because of him.
. 1. I have suffered many things in a dream.]

Here it may be demanded, Is there any truth

First, some of the Philosophers viz, Protagoras, Willet upon Daniel, Chap. 1.
quest. 44. page 31.

Secondly, some Philosophers held the contrary Xenophanes, Caliphonius, and the
Epicures; for seeing all dreams were of the same nature, and some were vain,
and frivolous, all must be held to be so. Again say they, if there were any
certainty in dreams, they must proceed from some certain causes: either God,
or nature: but it is not like, Deum obire lectos dormientium, that God should
compass men's beds, when they are a sleep and cast dreams into their minds;
and nature is the cause of order, but in dreame^ there is confusion and
disorder. But the falsenesse of this Answer appears by those which follow.

Thirdly, all dreams are not of one nature, all are. But of this by and by, in
the second and third Question.











I Jnto natural dreams, which arise from our natural constitution. And

II. Jnto diabolical dreams, which are suggested by the devil, and are
delusive, and attractive unto evil. And

III. Jnto divine dreams, when the Lord by dreams does admonish us either of
something which is to be done, or to be be left undone: and thus he has
admonished both Jews, Gentiles, and Christians; as we may see by these
examples: God warnes Abimelech by a dream not to touch Sara, and Pharaoh of
the famine, and Nebuchadnezar of his fall, or humiliation and the wise men not
to return to Herod. He admonished Joseph in a dream to flee into Egypt, and
Esaiah of the Babyl^nish Captivity, and Jeremiah of the destruction of the
City. He admonished St. Paul in a dream to go to Macedonia, Acts. 16.9. and
of the shipwreck and safety of him and his company, Acts, 27, 23, 24.



I. To teach them, that his providence does extend it self, and belong unto,
both high and low, both those who are within the Church, and those who are
without. And

II. For his Churches sake, unto whom he does good oftentimes by the Ministry
of those who are without the Church. And thus it is evident, both that there is
truth and certainty in many dreams which heathens have, and also that
sometimes they have dreams sent from God for the admonishing either of
themselves or others, either for the doing, or leaving undone something.

Pilates wife?

Pilates wife, was diabolical, or from the devil, as though he had labored
thereby to hinder the death of CHRIST, and consequently our salvation.

Secondly, some answer that her dream was natural, and neither from the
Spirit of God, nor Satan, but was occasioned merely by the things which she
had heard before of CHRIST.

Thirdly, some answer that it was a divine viz. suggested by the Spirit of God.
Indeed I verily believe that it was from the Lord immediately, and that, both
to admonish her and her husband Pilate, and also to serve for a further
manifestation of CHRIST'S innocence;

VERSE. 21, 22, 23. The governor answered and said unto them; whether of the
twain will ye that I release unto you? they said, Barrabbas. Pilate said unto
them, what shall I do then with JESUS, which is called CHRIST? they all said
unto him, let him be crucified. And the governor said, Why what evil has he
done? But they cried out the more, let him be crucified.
. 1. And they said, Barabbas.]

A little before Immanuel Tremelius died, some that stood by desired to hear
his Novissima, or last words, whereupon he cried out, Vivat Christus and pereat
Barabbas, Let CHRIST live, and let Barabbas die; which was a joyful speech, it
showing that although he was a Jewe, yet now he disclaimed Iudaisme, and was
unlike to these Jews who cried, Let Barabbas live, and Christ die.

. 2. Quid faciam, What shall I do with who is called CHRIST?]

The scope of Pilates question was, that he might free CHRIST; whence it may be
demanded,

What did Pilate to deliver Christ?

First, he took the occasion of the Feast, when

Secondly, he conjoynes Christ with wicked turbulent Barabbas, hoping, that
they would undoubtedly rather desire that Christ should be released then he,

Thirdly, he confesses that Christ is innocent,

Fourthly, when he cannot prevail with them,

Why did Pilate all these things for Christ, or

First, that he might be famous for a righteous Festus, Acts. 25.16. and
Faelix. Acts. 23.35.

Secondly, the motion of his own conscience

Thirdly, his wife being admonished in a dream, Pilate, but they were but such
generals, as may be in any reprobate.

Fourthly, there was yet another cause, why Pilate labored to release Christ,
and that was, because

We see here that there was some good things, and good thoughts in Pilate at
the first, but at last he is corrupted, and condemns CHRIST, deal justly
indelivering him to be crucified i^to his enemies.







First, if they be weak and flexible, then they shall be overcome by
importunate prayers and suites.

Secondly, if they be coveteous, then they shall easily be mislead with bribes,
or hatred, or love, etc.

Thirdly, if they be ignorant either Iuris or facti, of the offense, or
punishment allotted for such or such an offense, then they will most easily be
deceived in judgment. And therefore it behooves Magistrates thus to
corroborate, and strengthen themselves; namely

I. With conscience and knowledge, both of the laws of God, and of the laws
of the land. And

II. With circumspection, doing nothing rashly, but all things with mature
deliberation. And

III. With an immunity, and fre^^ome from coveteousnesse, hatred, malice,
rancour, respect of persons, paritality and the like, Exodus 18.21. And

IV. With magnanimity and constancy.

Let him be crucified.]



Pontius Pilate who condemned him; I name him first, because I speak not of
him at this time.

viz.

I. Causa; the cause why they endeavored and procured the death of Christ? and
that was ambition: they loved the praise of men more then the praise of God,
and ye glory of the world, more then the glory of God, John. 12.42. and 5.44.
They saw that Christ derogated much from them, and spoke much against them; and
therefore they envy Christ, and frequently calumniate him.

II. Modus, the manner of procuring Christ's death, and that was corrupt, for
they suborne the people, and false witnesses, Read. Matthew. 26.59. and 28.12.
Wherefore we must take heed of subornation.

Why may we not use this suborning of others,

I. because subornation is the practice of King. 21.10.) and therefore if we
would be esteemed righteous, we must not use this practice.

II. because truth seeks no corners, but

III. because the suborning either of witnesses,

Thirdly, the people were guilty of, and accessory

I. The cause of their sin, which is twofold; to wit,

First, in constancy; for not long before this, they would have made Christ a
King, John. 6.15. and strawed their garments in his way, Matthew. 21.8. crying
Hosanna, verse, 9: but now they cry, crucify him, crucify him. And

Secondly, a desire of pleasing their Elders and Governors, who persuaded them
unto this. Christ certainly was not odious unto the common people, but yet
whilst they basely seek to please their Highpriests and Elders, they neglect
both equity, their own salvation.

II. The blackness, and horriblenesse of their offense; which shows it self
in these things; vi^,

First, they had two testimonies, from which they might, and ought to have
considered something; namely

I. Divine testimonies; as for example, a Prophetical speech, search the
Scriptures, for they testify of me, John. 5.39 yea a living voice from the
Father and God of heaven, Matthew. 3.17. yea the frequent presence and assistance
of the blessed Spirit of God: and diverse visions and apparitions of Angels, and
the confession of the devil himself, Mark. 1.24. yea many times CHRIST let
them see (if they would have observed it) that the secrets of their hearts were
not kept secret from him. Now these things they should seriously have
considered, before they had cried Crucify him.

II. Humane testimonies were not wanting unto them, if they had observed them;
and those were Christ's works: the works (says he) which I do testify of
me, John. 5.31. He cast out of devils, he cured the sick he quickened the dead,
he enlightneth the blind, he opened the ears of the deaf, he (with his word)
made his enemies to fall to the ground, be with his word appeased the raging of
the Sea. Read, Matthew. 8. and 9. and 11.5, 6. and John. 4.26. Luke. 5.17. and
John. 3, 2. Now these they ought to have considered. And

Secondly they preferred Barabbas before Christ, a murderer before the Lord of
life, a seditious turbulent person before the Prince of peace. When men (say
they John. 2.) are ^runke then the worst wine pleases the palate; so when men
are drunk with sin, and besotted upon, it then they will receive Theudas and
Iud^s Galilaeus for the true Messiah, then they will think Simon Magus to be
the great power of God, and then with the Gergesens they will prefer their
Hogs before CHRIST. And

Thirdly, they adjudge Christ unto death, desiring that he may be crucified,
although they were not able to accuse him of any evil, or to witness any
evil against him.

What evil has he done?]

Pilate here propounds the question, Whether Christ have done any evil or not?
And



John. 8. And

He has done all things well, and nothing amiss: And therefore there was
great reason why Pilate should ask this question, and thus seek to free
CHRIST from their hands, and power.





viz.

I. He healed and cured all diseases amongst the people. And

II. He cast Devils out of those who were possessed. And

III. He went up and down doing good, the Lord being with him, Acts. 10.38. And

IV. He stilled the raging waves of the Sea. And

V. He sed those who were hungry. And

IV. He raised up the dead unto life. Now if there had been no greater works
done by Christ then these, yet who would have lost such a treasure and rich
Magazin of all temporal blessings, if they could have kept it?



I. Christ reformed Religion, and taught the whole counsel of God, And

II. He reconciled us unto God, that in him we might have peace. And

III. He caused Satan to fall as lightning from heaven, and destroyed all his
works. And

IV. He sends his holy Spirit unto us whereby we are regenerated and
sanctified. And

V. He has taken away the veil, and laid open unto us a way unto the holy of
holyes. And

VI. In him all the promises of God are yea and Amen. And

VII. Of his fullness we all receive grace for grace, John. 1.16. And

VIII. By his Resurrection and Ascension, he has sealed unto us our
Resurrection and ascension (with him) unto life eternal. And therefore no
wonder if Pilate says, What evil has he done? seeing he was no other but a
rich treasury of all grace and virtue.

. 5. But they cried out the more, crucify

It may here be demanded, Pilates question, in the former words?

First, it was an absurd reasonlesse answer: for Pilate enquires after CHRIST'S
fault, and they answer they would have him punished: He says, What evil has
he done, and they say Crucify him: they object nothing against him and yet
cease not crying to have him punished. And

Secondly, it was a troublesome, rude, unmannerly,

VERSE. 24, 25, 26. When Pilate saw, JESUS, he delivered him to be crucified.
. 1. He washed his hands.]

How many sorts of washing of hands were there amongst the Jews?

There were three sorts in use amongst them; viz. First, Pharisaicall and
superstitious; now this was reproved. And

Secondly, Ordinary for outward decency; and this was allowed. And

Thirdly, in token of innocence, and this was commanded the Elders of the
neighbor Cities in case of murder, Deuter. 21.6. And this is that washing,
which Pilate here practices, and unto this the Prophet David alludes, Psalm.
26.6. I will wash my hands in innocence, and so I will compass thy altar.

. 2. His blood be upon us, and upon our children.]

What may we learn from this answer of the multitude?

First, we may learn hence the custom of the viz; The Judges and witnesses
(when sentence of death was pronounced against the malefactor) did put their
hands upon the condemned persons head, saying, Sanguis tuus super caput tuum;
Thy blood be upon thine own head. Now unto this the people have reference in
these words, His blood be upon us, and upon our children. As if they would say,
Be not thou so scrupulous to judge an offender, for if thou think est thou do
an unjust thing, let the vengeance of his innocence fall upon us and our
posterity.

Secondly, we may learn by that which followed, that this their answer was of
a deep dye, and Jerusalem there died by the famine and pestilence an
innumerable number; by fire and sword. 1000000. 2000 were found, who either
killed themselves, for one killed another, 7900 were taken Captives; whereof
7000 were sent into Egypt, and some were slain, and some reserved for triumph,
and all those who were 16. years of age or under, together with many other of
the common sort; Caesar sold for thirty a penny; that as they (or their Fathers)
sold CHRIST for thirty pence, so thirty of them (by the just judgment of God)
were sold for a penny Patriarchs, pilgrimage page 48. fine.
Jf the Reader would see this illustrated to the life, and what heavy
judgments followed the Jews, after this loud crying cry of theirs, and how
they were cursed in their souls, and bodies, and persons, and land, and
estates; Let him then read Mr. Weemse. his 4. degenerate Sons. Page. 328,
329, 330. etc.

Jerusalem, close by Pilates house, stood a high seat or Tribunal, made of
fair stone curiously wrought, on which Pilate taking water, washed his hands
before the people, saying, I am innocent of this man's blood; unto which the
people cried, His blood be upon us and upon our children: which afterward fell
upon them (by Gods appointment) according to their own wish. For in the same
place, and close by the same seat, were two bloody massacres executed upon
them, the one by Herod. [because they would not give him money out of their
Treasury (which they called Corban) for the making of a watercourse] and the
other by Florus General of the common soldiers, and this was more cruel and
barbarous by much then the former.

VERSE. 28, 29, 30. And they stripped him, and put on him a scarlet robe: And
when they had platted a Crown of thorns, they put it on his head, and a reed
in his right hand; and they bowed the knee before him, and mocked him, saying,
Hail King of the Jews. And they spit upon him, and took the reed, and smote
him on the head. etc.




First, we may learn the intolerable anguish and pain that he suffered for
us; Moses was not able to hold up his hands from morning until night, but was
glad to have a stone put under him, and his hands held up: how great then was
our dear Saviors pain, who hung upon the cross by the hands, all the weight
of his body hanging upon his arms?

Secondly, Christ died an accursed death, Deuteronomy. 21.22. to teach us, that he
only takes away the curse from us, by his death making all those happy and
blessed who believe on him.

Thirdly, Christ in his death was lifted up on high, viz, on the cross, that
so all eyes might be upon him; according to his own speech, when I am lifted
up from the earth, I will draw all unto me, John. 13.32. He was raised up, that
all might look upon him, as their only preserver from the wrath of God, and
reconciler unto God, and Doner of spiritual grace and heavenly glory.

Fourthly, Christ in his death hung betwixt heaven and earth, in the midst, to
show that he is the only Mediator between God and man.

Fifthly, CHRIST hung in the air, to show that by his death he overcame
Satan, the Prince of the air.

Sixthly, when CHRIST hung upon the cross, all his body was dyed with the
blood which issued from his hands and feet and side; to teach us, that our
sins (for which he suffered) was of a scarlet and bloody die, Esa. 1.18.

Seventhly, Christ in his death held down his head, as it were offering
himself to be kissed by us, thereby teaching, that he gave himself to death
out of his unspeakable love toward us.

Eighthly, by the Crown of thorn which was set upon Christ's head, is showed,
that by his death he has purchased a perpetual Kingdom for us, and will make
us all Kings with his Father, the King of Kings, Revel. 1.11.

Ninthly, his arms were stretched abroad in his death, as if thereby he would
destribute unto us the benefits of his passion; or, to show that now his arms
were always open to receive all that will come unto him.

Tenthly, Christ in his death received 5. wounds in his hands, feet, and side,
which may be fitly compared, either

I. To the 5. stones which David choose when he was to fight against Goliath;
for as he with these overthrew the Giant, so CHRIST by those overcame the
Devil. Or

II. To the 5. shekels which were given (in the old Testament) for the
redemption of the first borne, Numb. 3, 47. because we were redeemed by these
wounds of his.

Eleventhly, St. Paul. Colos. 2 14. does teach us to contemplate those nails
wherewith Christ was fastened to the cross, because by them the hand writing
which was against us is taken away, and nailed unto the cross. That is, as a
creditour gives in the bond, and tears it in pieces, when the debt is paid,
so by the nails of Christ's cross, and by his suffering, the hand writing
which was against us, is done away, and our sins pardoned, and our debts
paid, and full satisfaction made, and we freed from the judgment of God. If
the studious Reader would see these particulars enlarged, and diverse more
besides these, let him read Chemnit. harm. part. 2. addit Gerard. page 158, 159.

We observe before, Chap. 26, 28. that the Jews mocked CHRIST'S offices; namely

First, his Prophetical office, in that place, Prophecy who smote thee. And

Secondly, his Priestly office, in this Chap. verse. 42. He saved others he
cannot save himself. And

Thirdly, his Kingly office in this verse, Hail King of the Jews, Now we may
observe further,

That as they mocked his office, so they also despised his offices; For

First, they despise his Kingly office, We have no King but Caesar. John 19.15.
And

Secondly, they despise his Prophetical office; Deuter. 18.15. And

Thirdly, they despise his Priestly office, cleaving yet to the Ceremonies of
the Law; for so long as they stand to the Ceremonial Law, they cannot be made
partakers of Christ crucified; as is evident thus: That Sacrifice which was
burnt without the gate, the people cannot be partakers of (according to the
Leviticall Law) but Christ suffered without the gate; therefore the Jews who
cleave to the Ceremonial Law cannot be partakers of it, Hebrew 13.12, 13.

VERSE. 34, 35. They gave him vinegar to drink, mingled with gall; and when he
had tasted thereof, he would not drink. And they crucified him, and parted his
garments casting lots: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the
Prophets; They parted my garments among them, and upon my Vesture did they cast
lots.
They gave him gall in his drink.]

This was literally fulfilled in Christ (in this place) but figuratively in
David; that is, they vexed him, as if they had put gall in his drink, Psalm.
69.22.

They cast lots upon his garment.]

This was literally fulfilled in CHRIST (in this place) but typically in David,
that is, they parted his honor, and dignity, as if they were casting lots upon
them, Psalm. 22.18.

VERSE. 38. Then were there two Thieves crucified with him; one on the right
hand, and the other on the left.


Dismas and Gosmas; Dismas the happy and Gesmas the miserable Thief, according
to the Poet. Gesmas damnatur, Dismas ad astra levatur: that is, When Gesmas di
de to Dives he was sent,
When Dismas di de to Abraham up he went.


VERSE. 44. The thieves also which were crucified with him, cast the same in his
teeth.
verse stand with Luke 23, 39. for here it is said, The thieves mocked him, and
St. Luke says, only one of the teheves mocked him?

Synechdoche, does attribute that to the whole, which is proper to some part
only; and so here ascribes that to both the thieves, which agrees but to
one. Or

Mat. was an Hebrew, and the Hebrews ordinarily, and usually put the plural
number for the singular, as Judge. 12.17. He was buried in the Cities of David,
that is, in one of the Cities of David, so Psalm. 1.3. A tree planted by the
Rivers of waters, that is, one of the Rivers, so Jonas 1.5. He went down into
the sides of the Ship, that is, to one of the sides thereof: and here, The
thieves railed upon him, that is, one of the Thieves railed upon him. Or

Thirdly, it may be answered thus, that at the Matthew, but afterward one of
them was miraculously converted, and the other alone mocked him; and of this
time speaks St. Luke.

How does it appear that this thiefes repentance

First, It is evident, that it was true, and unfeigned viz.

I. By his repreving his fellows continued blasphemy.

II. By his acknowledging that Gods hand was just against them both, because of
form evil.

III. By defending the cause of JESUS, and boldly avouching that he was
Innocent, when none of his Disciples durst speak.

Secondly, it is clear, That his repentance was viz.

I. By his believing that JESUS was the King of Heaven.

II. By the gift of holy prayer, bursting then from his believing heart, in
these words, Lord remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom.

III. By Christ's promise unto him, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

VERSE. 45. Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the Land unto
the ninth hour.
. 1. And there was darkness, that is, the

What is the Eclipse of the Sun, or the cause

The cause of it is, Moon between the Sun and the Earth.

Why did this Eclipse continue so long, or why

First, the Sun was so long hid, as ashamed of Jews in crucifying the Lord
of glory, and defiling their hands with innocent blood.

Secondly, the Sun was long darkened, because

Thirdly, to show the long darkness and blindness Jews, for this foul
offense.

Whether was this darkness at the death of

No but extraordinary, and miraculous, Aut Deus natura patitur, aut astra et
elementa montiuntur, aut machina mundi peribit.

What miraculous and extraordinary things

First, the natural Eclipse of the Sun never happens conjunction of the
Sun and Moon; which was not at the time of this Eclipse, the Moon being in
the full.



East toward the West, did not pass by the Sun, and set in the West before
it; but coming to the place, and term of the Sun, went along with it, for
the space of three hours, and then returned unto the East again.



Sun begins always at the West, that is, that part of the Sun which
looks toward the West is always (in natural Eclipses) first darkened,
because the Sun is more swif in his motion, then the Moon is in hers, and so
overtaketh her; but here, although the Moon were in opposition to the Sun,
and distant from it, the breadth of heaven, yet it overtooke (by a miraculous
swiftness) the Sun, and so darkened first that part thereof, which looks
toward the East.

Sun that part thereof is first discovered and seen, which was first covered
and obscured; but in this Eclipse, that part of the Sun which looks toward
the East, was first covered, and last discovered. Jf the studious Reader would
see these things illustrated, and more then these expressed and handled
concerning this unnatural and miraculous Eclipse. Let him read Aquin. 3. p. 9.
44. Art. 2. ad 2. et Dionys. in praefata Epist. et Chrysostom. et Hier. s. and
Chemnit harm. fine addit. Gerard fol. 189. b. calce.

Over all the Land.]



Tenebrae factae sunt supra universam regionem: And there was darkness over
all the Region, or Land; which by our best Hebruicians is interpreted
generally, of the Land of the Jews; and their reason is this because if this
darkness had occupied the whole Earth, then without doubt the Historians of
other Nations would have recorded and mentioned it. ( Syll^ge vocum exotic.
P^ge 18^.)

Jews but in Egypt, and in Athens, as testifies Dionysius, and diverse other
Historians (s^ith Carthusian upon this place) do testify that it was in other
Lands.

Jews, because on the other side, I conceive them to limit it too much: And
therefore J think, that it was over all that Horizon, and all those Regions
which were (in a manner) of the same Altitude, and Latitude, and unto which the
Sun gives light, and is seen at once.

VERSE. 46, 47. And about the ninth hour,
. 1. My God, my God.]

How can CHRIST have a God,

First, Christ according to his humane nature, and Behold I go unto my God,
and your God, unto my Father, and your Father, CHRIST as man had God for his
Father, upon whose power he did depend, and into whose hands he committed his
Spirit, and according to his humane nature, he calls his Father, his God.

Secondly, Christ according to his divine nature,

. 2. Why have thou forsaken me.]

What was the cause that moved Christ thus to

First, negatively, the cause was not any impatiency,

Secondly, affirmatively, the cause was an apprehension

Thirdly, Christ complained, because of Gods delay, Vrsin.

Whether did Christ truly complain upon the

First, we answer hereunto, That our blessed Savior My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? which words were uttered in truth, and not in color or show:
Athanas. ad Apollinar.
as Athanasius says [(...)] All things were done naturally and in truth, not
in opinion or show: And therefore Christ did feel himself in his soul
forsaken of God, that is, left comfortless of Gods Spirit. If the Reader would
see this opinion opposed and confirmed, let him read Dr. Willets synops. page
1142. sine, et 1433. et Cham. tom. 2. page 177.

Secondly, Fevardentius absolutely denies, that Fevardent Page 437. confut. ^.
(b)

I. We answer hereunto, If Christ had been totally and eternally forsaken, the
personal union must have been dissolvea: but upon this temporal dereliction
rejectio^, there follows not a personal dissolution.

II. As the body of Christ being without life, was still hypostatically united
to the God head, so was the soul of CHRIST, though for a time without feeling
^f his favor: the dereliction of the one does no more dissolve the
hypostaticall union, then the death of the other: If life went from the body,
and yet the Deity was not separated in the personal consociatio^, but only
suspended in operation: so the feeling of Gods favor which is the life of the
Soul, might be intermitted in CHRIST, and yet the divine Union not dissolved.

III. Augustine does well show how this may be, when he says [ Passio Christi
dulcis fuit divinitatis somnus, Lib. de essent divin.] That the passion of
Christ was the sweet sleep of his Divinity. Like as then in sleep the soul
is not departed, though the operation thereof be deferred: so in Christ's sleep
upon the Cross, the Godhead was not separated, though the working power
thereof were for a time sequestered.



God here we must understand God the Father, the first person of the blessed
Trinity, according to the vulgar and common rule, when God is compared with the
Son, or holy Ghost, then the Father is meant by this title God. Not that the
Father is more God then the Son, for in dignity all the three Persons are
equal, but they are distinguished in order only, and thus the Father is the
first person, the Son the second, and the holy Ghost the third.



Vide Muscul. s Page 603 a. qu. 2.


I. By disunion of Person. And II. By loss of grace. And III. By diminution,
and weakening of grace. And IV. By want of assurance of future deliverance, and
present support. And V. By denial of protection. And VI. By withdrawing of
solace, and destituting the forsaken of all comfort.


Fifthly, it is impious once to think, that Christ was forsaken any of the
four first ways: for the

Why is the prayer of CHRIST upon the Cross Hebrew by this our Evangelist?
Eli, Eli, Lamasabacthani?

First, the Evangelist does this, that we may perceive Jews used against
Christ, saying, He calls upon Elias, for in no other language the mock will
so appear. Weemse
But of this more by and by.

Secondly, this was done to show Gods anger against Jews; for it is a curse to
the Church, for Preachers to speak to the people the mysteries of their
salvation in an unknown tongue, 1 Cor. 14.21. And therefore CHRIST now speaks
in Hebrew which was once the Mother tongue of the Hebrews, but now is not,
neither was in Christ's time understood by any but those who were Scholars, as
J think.

The Papists say, that Calvin thought these

But Calvin is far from any such execrable and hellish blasphemy. Comment. in
27. Matthew) That there were some who charged him that he said, these words were
words of desperation, and that Christ despaired when he uttered them: but he
curses such hellish blasphemy, pronouncing, That howsoever his flesh
apprehended destroying evils, and inferior reasons showed no issue out of the
same, yet there was ever a most sure resolved persuasion resting in his heart,
that he should undoubtedly prevail against them, and overcome them. Dr. Field
of the Church, Lib. 5. Cap. 18.

The Jews urge this place to prove that Christ That he was forsaken of God.

First, St. Hierome answers hereunto, that ye ^rosse but also diverse others,
yea not these of set purpose (as though he had been forsaken of God indeed)
but only occasionally. The Father says (and the Jews will hardly prove the
contrary) that our blessed Savior when he hung upon the Cross sang the 22.
Psalm, from verse 1, to verse 29. And therefore by these words, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me; our Savior would not show, that he was
forsaken by God, but only that he repeated and uttered these words together
with the other verses of that 22 Psalm.

Pet. Galatinus (Lib. 8. Cap. 18. page 343.) answers, that Christ spoke these
words, that thereby he might draw the Jews to a serious consideration and
animadversion of his death and passion, which he underwent not for his own,
but for our sins.

Question 3.

They that stood there says, He calls for Elias:]

Eli, Eli, lamasabachthani, the people did not understand what he said, and
therefore some say, He calls for Elias. Ergo, the common sort must not read
the Scripture in a known tongue, Bellar. de verbo Dei lib. 2. cap. 15.

Hierome (upon this place) says, that these who say, he calls Elias, were
the Soldiers who were Romans and strangers; and therefore no wonder if they
did not understand the words of Christ. If this exposition be true (as is
acknowledged by diverse eminent Popish writers, which we shall name by and by)
then the meaning of the Argument is this; Those without the Church (that is,
Heathens) did not understand these words of Christ: Therefore those within the
church (that is, Christians) may not read the word or Christ in a language
which they understand. This is so absurd a Consequence, that I will forbear
the refutation thereof.

He calls for Elias, were the rude and ig^orant people who stood by, and
understood not Hebrew, but thought he had called Elias, whose name (as it
seemed to them) he pronounced in H^br^w. Now if this be the true sense of this
place, then the meaning of the Cardinals argument is this. There were some so
ignorant among the Jews and so ^ll read in the Scriptures, that they could not
understand Christ, when he uttered this sentence of the 22. Psalm in hebrew,
Eli, Eli, lamasabacthani: And therefore none must read the Scriptures in a
tongue which they understand, but they of the Clergy although they be as able
to read them in the Original tongues, and to understand them as they of the
Clergy are. This consequence being as absurd as the first, I pass it by.

Beza answers (upon this verse) that these who say, He calls for Elias, and
we will see whether Elias will come, were Jews and spoke not this through
ignorance of the Hebrew tongue, but out of propha^e wantonness, taking
occasion hereby (according to their old wont) to mock and deride CHRIST; as if
they would say. When he cannot free himself he calls upon Elias to help
him, and deliver him. Now there is a probability of truth in this, for
undoubtedly there were Jews standing by as well as Gentiles, and in
probability, some learned Jews (who understood the Hebrew tongue, and the
sense of the Hebrew text) as well as ignorant and unlearned. Now if this
exposition be true, then the meaning of the Jesuits Argument is this: some
understood these words of our Saviors, but profanely mocked, and wickedly
perverted them; therefore none hereafter (but the Clergy) must read the word of
God in a tongue which they understand. This Consequence all learned Papists
will blush at; and therefore I enlarge it not. Yea this answer does overthrow
the Antecedent of the Argument, which affirms that they who spoke these words,
He calls for Elias, understood not indeed what Christ spoke. And thus
whether the place speak of Gentiles or Jews, and that whether learned or
unlearned, yet it will not m^ke for their prohibition of reading the Scripture
in the vulgar tongue.

Fourthly, these words which were spoken by Eli, Eli, Lamasabacthani] were not
understood by those who stood about him. Therefore no Lay person must read the
Scripture in a tongue which is understood by him follows not. For

I. These words were spoken to God his Father, who understood well enough what
he said, and not unto the people. And

II. When CHRIST spoke unto the people, and teached them, he then spoke unto
them in a tongue which they understood; which is so evident from the Gospel
that no Papist dare justify or maintain the contrary. Yea upon the Cross,
when he spoke unto the Thief he spoke unto him in a language which he
understood. And

III. These who stood about CHRIST, and spoke these words were mockers,
persecuters, and enemies; and therefore it follows not, these understood not
what was said, therefore none must read the Scriptures. And

IV. These through affected or wilful ignorance (or at least for want of
teaching) understood not what CHRIST here said, therefore none by reading of
the Scriptures in a known tongue must learn what CHRIST says unto them,
follows not. And

V. It was not all that were about the Cross, or about CHRIST on the Cross,
that said these words, He calls for Elias, and therefore it follows not,
that none of the Laity, must read the Word in a known tongue, verse 47. it is
said, Some of them said, etc. not all of them said etc. Now a particularibus ad
universalia non valet consequentia. Some could not say Shiboleth, therefore
none must say Shiboleth, is an Argument which deserves a lash.

VI. It may be that these who mockingly said; He calls upon Elias, were
Scribes and Pharisees (and it is hard if I should affirm this for the Papists
to confute it) and then the Argument goes directly against the Clergy as he
frames it, viz. The Scribes and Pharisees understood not or perverted CHRIST'S
words; and therefore no Priests or Churchmen may read the Scripture, nor
understand it.

Jews, as appears by this their speech, He calls upon, or he prays unto
Elias; and therefore it is no novelty or such an erroneous opinion, as deserves
to be exploded out of the School of Christians. See Bp. Mort. app. Lib. 3.
Cap. 7.. 2. page 374.



Jews; and therefore may be held by the Christians is a very bad conclusion.
For themselves will not say, that all the opinions maintained and held by them,
either ought, or may lawfully be maintained by us.

Jews, before Christ's ascension is a very unadvised enterprise: for either

I. Before Christ's ascension the souls of the Saints were in heaven; and then
Limbus patrum falls to the ground. Or else

II. They were not in heaven, but in Limbo patrum; and then the Jews erred in
this opinion: for (according to the doctrine, and tenet of the Church of Rome)
the Saints were not to be prayed unto, until they were in heaven; because how
can they mediate and intercede for us unto God, who

First, are excluded out of the Lords glorious presence?

Secondly, who know not our wants, nor hear our prayers? Now the Papists say,
that the Saints in Heaven may be prayed unto because they stand before God, or
in his presence, and because they see all our wants in the face of God, as in a
glass; but not so when they were in Limbo patrum. And therefore J conclude, If
the Saints were in Heaven before Christ's ascension, then the Papists err, in
their opinion of Limbus Patrum, if the Saints before that time were not in
Heaven, then the Jews erred, in their opinion of the invocating of Saints, and
if the Jews erred herein, then this will prove but a lame Argument, the Jews
erroneously prayed unto the Saints, when they could neither hear nor help,
nor pray for them, and therefore Christians may maintain it now; yea if this
Argument be good, the Jews prayed unto the Saints in the time of the Old
Testament; and therefore Christians may in the time of the New; then so is also
this, The Jews believed that the Saints were then in Heaven, in the glorious
presence of God; and therefore Christians should believe so also, which is
contrary to the belief of the Papists. And thus by this Argument they have
entangled themselves in a Maze, and labyrinth, come out as they can.

Elias, were either

I. Gentiles who were Romans Soldiers; and of this opinion was St. Hierome
(says Salmeron) as being the common opinion; yo^ also their own Maldonate, and
Iansenius. Now if this be true, then the foresaid Argument is but heathenish [
viz. The Heathens thought that Christ prayed for help unto the Saints;
therefore Christians may be of the same beliefe] For the Heathens (we know)
did invocate many Gods. Or

II. These were Jews; now admit we that they were; then they must either have
been,

First, of the vulgar sort and rank, and then we may think, they erred, by
reason (which Maldonate notes) of their ignorance of Scriptures; and so the
Argument is unreasonable, which has no better patronage then Ignorance. Or

Secondly, they were of the literate, and learned Jews; and if so, then they
were spoken either

I. In earnest, now suppose this (though there is no proof of it, and that it
is denied by the Popish Doctors) yet does it not necessarily concern the
Invocation of Saints departed, but of the living; because some Jews held an
opinion (as Arias Montanus observes) that Elias yet living did sometimes
appear unto men: And so the argument is insufficient, concluding an Invocation
of the dead from the invocation of a person living. Or

II. These words were spoken by the learned Jews in scorn and contempt of
Christ (as by the confessions of our Adversaries, some Fathers have affirmed)
then is their argument being taken from mockery, apparently frivolous. And thus
is their probable Argument for Invocation of Saints, become by four necessary
suppositions, either Heathenish, or childish, or impertinent, or ridiculous,
(Bp. Mort. App. Lib. 3. Cap. 7.. 3. Page 375.)

VERSE. 48. And straightway one of them ran,
Why did they give this sharp,

For the answer hereof we must observe, Granum thuris in calice vini, A grain
of frankincense in a cup of wine ( Maimon in Sanhederim. Cap. 13.) And this
they did give to cause a giddiness in the condemned persons head, that thereby
he might be less sensible of the pain. St. Mark calls this C^p, Wine
mingled with myrrh, Mark. 15.23. This and thus the Jews were wont to do, but
the Soldiers here in mockery mingled Vinegar and Gall with it, verse 34. of
this Chapter: And afterward gave him a second cup in derision, when they took
a Sponge, and filled it with Vinegar, and put it on a Reed, in this verse, St.
Mark in the first Cup mentions the custom of the Jews, which in it self
had some show of compassion; for the ground of this custom was taken from
that, Proverb. 31.6. Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish. St.
Matthew here mentions only their wicked mixture, contrary to the received
custom, so that one Evangelist must expound the other. This first Cup was so
usually given before execution, that the word Calix, A cup, is sometimes in
Scripture put for death it self. Father if it may be, let this Cup pass from
me, verse 39. Chapter 26.

VERSE. 51, 52, 53. And beheld the veil of the Temple was rent in twain, from
the top to the bottom,
And the Rocks rent.]



Nahum. 1.6.



Corinth. 10.4. And therefore because the soul of CHRIST was loosed from his
body by death (accord^^g to that prediction, that he should be cut of from the
land of the living, Esa 53.8.) the Rocks

Fourthly, the Pharisees blaming Christ ( Luke 18.40.) because he suffered the
Children and his Disciples to salute him, with those acclamations, and
applauses, which were due unto the Messiah only, our Savior says, If these
should hold their peace, the stones would speak: Which was truly accomplished
at this time, for when the Disciples durst not speak, the stones did, by
renting in two, preaching Christ to be the true promised Messiah.

Jews, who were more obdurate and flinty then the very Rocks, for those rent,
at this horrible murder of the Lord of glory, but they neither relented at it,
nor repented them of it. Read Zach. 7.12. and Ierem. 5.3. and Es^. ^.10.

Jews, and reduced them unto nothing; but he rather desired to show the
mightiness of his power in the inanimate creatures, and the unspeakablenesse
of his mercy in yet offering salvation to so unworthy and wicked a generation.
In this place we read how the earth was shaken and moved, yea how it cleft and
gaped, but we read of none who were swallowed up therewith, the Rocks are rent,
but men are not torn in pieces, though harder and more obdurate then the
Rocks: the graves open that the dead may arise, not that the living may be
swallowed up for so great and horrible wickedness as they had committed.

Joel 2.1^. lest in the day of judgment for our impenitency and hardness of
heart, we be forced to cry and call to the Mountains to fall upon us, and to
the Hills to cover us from him which sits upon the Throne, Revel. 6.26.

And many which slept arose, and came out of the graves, and went into the
City, and appeared unto many.]

Many Papists, yea Popish writers hold,

First, we deny not but God is able to raise the

Secondly, to the place objected we answer, that

Thirdly, those who were raised did not forewarne viz. either to pray for them,
or to go on pilgrimage to some Saint, etc. which is the ordinary and usual
charge of the Popish Spirits. And therefore they have from this place but a bad
foundation to build their apparition of Spirits upon.

Fourthly, these in the text were raised up for these

I. To confirm Christ's Resurrection from death unto life.

II. To confirm our Resurrection by Christ, God the Father showing hereby unto
us, that Christ by his death had overcome, and destroyed death to the
faithful, and that at the last day their souls and bodies shall be knit
together and live with God and Christ for ever.

VERSE. 54. Now when the Centurion and those who were with him, watching Jesus,
saw the Earthquake, and those things which were done, they feared greatly,
saying, Truly this man was the Son of God.
We showed before how Fevardentius affirms, that Christ did not truly
complain that he was forsaken of his Father, verse 46. and we answered one of
his Arguments in that place. He now summons up the Centurion and watch against
us, arguing further thus from hence, This truly was the Son of God, and a
righteous man: and therefore he was far off from imagining that Christ was
forsaken of God, Fevardent, Page 474.

First, the Centurion being a Roman understood That he was forsaken.

Secondly, the Evangelist here plainly shows,

verse 47.) but as the soul of Christ being parted from his body, was
separated only from it (...), locally not hypostatically, Damasc. lib. 3. de
fid. Cap. 27. And as the soul ceased working in the body, and yet was not
divorced in the personal being from the body: so the filial union was not
dissolved, though the effectual feeling were for a while discontinued.

VERSE. 59, 60. And when JOSEPH had taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean
linen cloth, and laid it in his own new tomb, which he had hewed out in the
rock, and he rolled a great stone to the door of the Sepulcher, and departed.
For the understanding of these two verses, we must observe, That as often as
the Jews buried any, they were wont to role a great stone to the mouth of the
Cave: and now the cave or vault it self they termed from the act of burial,
Keber, which sig^ifieth a place of burial; or from its form, Magnara, a
den, or Cave. The several cells or receptacles in which the body was laid,
they called Cucim, graves, or tombs, and the stone they named Golel, a rolling
stone. These Caves or vaults the wealthier sorts would paint, garnish, and
beautify at the mouth or entrance of them: whence comes that phrase,
Sepulchra dealbata, painted tombs.

VERSE. 63. Sir we remember, that that seducer or deceiver said, while he was
yet alive, After,
These wicked Scribes and Pharisees call Christ a Seducer, and Deceiver,

First, it is evident thus, If we look upon Moral

Secondly, if we look upon divine things, he

Thirdly, it is clear from his Miracles, for they

Fourthly, it is manifest, because he seduced us not Eusebius. lib. 3. de
demonstr. evang. Cap. 4, 5.

CHAP. XXVIII.
VERSE. 1. In the end of the Sabbath, as it began to dawne, toward the first
day of the week, came MARY Magdalene, and the other MARY to see the Sepulcher.
In the end of the Sabbath, as it began to dawne.]

The words in the original here are, (...); That is, And in the evening of the
Sabbaths, which begins to shine upon one of the Sabbaths. Or as Syrus reads it.
And in the evening in the Sabbath, the light of which evening is the first
light in the week. From hence some doubts and demands may arise: viz.

Vespera the Evening?

Evening does denote and signify the whole time of the night: but it does not
so signify in this place.

Evening does properly signify the beginning of the night: but not so neither
in this verse.

Evening signifies that part of the night which preceeds the morning; and thus
it signifies in this place.

Sabbath, because in this verse mention is made of a double Sabbath? In the
Evening of the Sabbath which shines before one of the Sabbaths.

Exodus 20. And thus it is taken in the former part of the verse, (...), in the
end of the Sabbath.

Secondly, both in the Syrian and Hebrew tongue Sabbath does often signify the
Week, and the days of the week are denominated thus in their order, the
first day of the Sabbath, and the second day of the Sabbath, etc. And thus the
whole week takes her denomination from the Sabbath, Ob eximiam dignitatem, for
the dignity and excellency thereof. In this sense Sabbath is taken in the next
words of this verse, (...), upon one of the Sabbaths, that is, upon one of the
weeke-dayes. And in this sense the Pharisee says, Luke 18. That he fasteth
twice in the Sabbath, that is, twice in the week.

How does St. Matthew say, that these women in the Evening of the Sabbath,
seeing some of the other Evangelists say, That they came betimes in the
morning, or as soon as it was light in the first day of the week?

First, some answer hereunto probably, that St. Matthew respects here their
intention and desire, not their action and deed: and therefore says, they came
in the Evening of the Sabbath, not because they took their journey at the
beginning of the night, nor before midnight; but because then they began to
prepare themselves for their journey, and passed away the whole night without
sleep, waiting for the break of day, Carthus. s. page 230. b.

Secondly, others answer, that there is a threefold morning; viz.

I. When there is more darkness then light; and this morning belongs to the
night going before.

II. When there is a like darkness and light; and this stands as a midst
betwixt both the day and the night. II. When there is more light then
darkness; and this morning belongs to the day following. This may be
confirmed out of Scripture thus; St. Matthew in this verse says, (...), etc,
Serum Sabbathi, etc. The Jews Sabbath being ended, it began to dawne to the
first day of the week; Now the first part of these words has relation to the
first morning, in which there is more darkness then light; and the latter
part has relation to the third morning, in which there is more light then
darkness. The first morning St. Mark calls it, (...), The Jews Sabbath
being ended: St. Luke calls it, (...), upon the first day of the Week when
there was great darkness as yet. St. Mark calls the third morning (...),
early in the morning, the first day of the week, when there was more light
then darkness, and St. John explaineth this, (...), While as yet there was
some darkness. When the women rose to go to the Sepulcher, it was the first
morning being very dark: When they were going to it, it was betwixt light and
darkness; and this was the second morning; but when they were at the
Sepulcher, Christ was risen, and that was the third morning. Weemese. exercit.
divine upon prec. 4. lib. 1. page 202.

Our Divines say, that in the Jnterpretation of Scriptures an Expositor must
carefully consider both the time, when the thing to be interpreted was spoken
and whereof it speaks, and also the persons whereunto it has relation. And
the necessity of this rule may be seen by this verse and history; as for
example,

First, observe here, that the Jews had a twofold day; to wit,

I. A natural day, containing day and night, and consisting of 24. hours. And

II. An artificial day, beginning at Sunrising, and ending at Sunset: Of
this St. John spakes. 11.9. Are there not twelve hours in the day? Now their
Natural day was twofold; to wit,

First, Civil, a working day which was destined for civil businesses and
works: and this began at Sunne-rising, and continued till the next Sunrising.
And

Secondly, Sacred, a holy day, or a Festival, destined for holy exercises: and
this is twofold; viz.

I. An ordinary Festival, or Holy Day, and this began at Evening or Sunset,
and continued until the next Sun set. And

II. An extraordinary Holy Day; and that is either

First, the Passover, which by the institution of the Lord began at the
Evening, or, first part of the night, and continued until that time of the
second morning when Christ arose again from the dead.

Secondly, the Sabbath, and seventh day, which begins after midnight, when
it is dawning toward the day, that is, when the day is ascending upwards.
Therefore our Evangelist says here, When it began to dawne toward the first
day of the week, in the original it is (...) from (...), which signifies to
wax toward the light, although it be not light; and neither signifies.

I. Habhdil, Candela separationis, the candle of separation, with which the
Jews used to make a distinction betwixt the Sabbath, and the day following. Nor

II. The light of the stars, as some would have it. Nor

III. The rising of the morning star. But

IV. That time only, when the Sabbath begins to be kept, and dawneth
toward it.

Secondly, in the translating of Scripture, we must take heed, what sort of
people the phrase has relation unto; as for example, Mark 16.2. it is said,
(...), in the end of the Sabbath; where we must observe, that this speech has
relation to the form of the Greeks, and not of the Hebrews: For the Jewish
Sabbath began in (...) in the evening, and the Greeks, in (...) in the
morning. Wherefore St. Mark has relation to the Greeks, and not to the
Jews, and therefore (...) should be translated Serum Sabbathi, the last part
of the Sabbath, according to the Jews, when the Sabbath was ended; but
according to the Greeks, in the beginning of the Sabbath; for their day began
in (...) in the morning, Acts 28.23. (...), a mane ad vesperam, from the
morning to the evening. Weemse Christian. synag. page 71.

. 2. There came Mary Magdalene, and the

How does St. Matthew say, there were more Mary Magdalene, at Christ's first
apparition, both in this verse, and the 9. seeing St. Mark says, Chap. 16.9.
There was only Mary Magdalene?

First, some say, that Mary Magdalene was the first who came to the Sepulcher,
and saw CHRIST John. 20.30, etc. And afterward returning from the Sepulcher
with the Angels message, together with the other women, she saw him again, as
St. Matthew seems to mean.

Secondly, some say, that St. Matthew uses here Synechdoche, which is usual
with the Evangelists; extending yt to diverse which is proper only unto one.

3dly, others answer, that St. Mark restraines that unto one Mary, which was
common to her companions, ye chief of all, or, unto who^ Christ more purposely
appeared. Pareus. s.

VERSE. 2. And behold there was a great earthquake,
If the studious Reader would see what application may be made of this
Earthquake, let him read Che^. harm. part. 2. Gerard. page 248. b. And if he
would see how hence Bellar. would prove, that the body of Christ does not
occupy any place, but that he may be at once entirely (in regard of his
humanity) in many places r I eferre him to Chamier. tom. 2. de corp. Christi.
lib. 6. Cap. 7. page 211. a.. 22, 23.

VERSE. 6. He is not here; for he is risen, as he said,
He is not here, for he is risen.]

Rome, whether it imply a contradiction for on body to be whole and entire at
the same time in many places?

Eucharist. Bell. de Sacram. Euchar. lib. 3. Cap. 4.

Hebr. 3.17. Therefore neither can his body, being a true humane body, as ours
are, be in many places at once; neither can it choose but occupy that room and
place where it is. The Angel said, He is risen, he is not here; but it had
been no good argument, to say, he is risen, and gone to another place and
therefore he is here, if so be the body of CHRIST might be in many places at
once. The Scripture then has defined it, that Christ's body is in one certain
place. Wherefore to say, that Christ has a true natural body, and yet
retains not the natural properties of a body, or, that he has, and has not
a true natural body, is to speak contradictions. Jf the Reader would see this
Answer of ours impugned, and the oppositions answered, Let him read Dr. Willet.
synops. controv. general. 10. de Euchar. quc. 1. page 611. etc. Amos. Bellarm.
enervat. tom. 3. page 135.

The Angel by telling the women here that Christ was risen again from the
dead, does give occasion unto us to consider a little of the Resurrection of
Christ's body. Our Questions here abouts shall be these





First, Vivification, which was the conjunction of the body and soul of Christ
together again, by the power of God, John. 2.19. and 10.18. And is therefore
attributed to the Father, Romans. 6.4. and 8.11. and Acts. 2.24. although as it
is opus ad extra, it is common to all the three persons of the blessed Trinity.
And

Secondly, a going out of the Sepulcher; for Christ being restored again unto
life, and all obstacles which might hinder his Resurrection being removed
again by an Almighty power, he came gloriously out of the grave or tomb
wherein he was laid, Matthew. 18, 2.



John. 17.1. and Romans, 1.4. And

Psalm. 16.10. Matthew. 12.39. and 17.13. and Acts. 4.24. And

John. 11.25. And

Romans. 6.10.23. And

Fifthly, he rose again for the discharging and executing of his Offices,
because part of them were principally to be performed after death, Read. Psalm.
110.4, and 45.7, and Esa. 97. Luke 1.33. and Romans 8.34. And

Sixthly, that it might certainly and evidently

Seventhly, the last cause of Christ's Resurrection Romans. 4.25.

What were the fruits of Christ's Resurrection?

First, the fruit of Christ's Resurrection which

Secondly, the fruits of Christ's Resurrection respecting

I. An effectual application of his righteousness and satisfaction performed
for us, Acts. 13. and Romans 4.25. and 1 Cor. 1^, 18. And

II. Our regeneration and sanctification by the holy Spirit, Romans 6, 4, 5.
Colos. 3.1. and 1 Pet. 1.3. And

III. A demonstration, and obsignation of our Resurrection unto life eternal,
Romans 8.11. and 1 Cor. 15.13. and Revel. 1.5. And

IV. Consolation against all affliction, yea death it self, Job. 19.25. and 2 Timothy 2.8. And

V. A certainty of the defense, and full glorification of the Church, John.
14.3.

Why does the Lord now adays rather use the

First, because our infirmity and weakness cannot verse. 5.

Secondly, the Lord does this for our greater

Thirdly, this is done, because the Lord would Romans 10.6.

Fourthly, the Lord has appointed that Christ

Fifthly, this was done also, that people might

Sixthly, if Christ, and the Gospel should be the women] And therefore the
Lord will rather use the Ministry of men then of Angels.

VERSE. 7, 8. And go quickly and tell his Disciples, that he is risen from the
dead. And behold he goes before you into Galilee, there shall ye see him,
behold I have told you. And they departed quickly from the Sepulcher with fear
and great joy, and did run to bring his Disciples word.
He goes before you into Galilee.]





Jerusalem, where they now were?

Jerusalem; and therefore he will have them go to the place from whence they
came. And

Jerusalem, because that was the more safe place. And thus CHRIST had respect
to the infirmity and weakness of his Disciples, until they were armed with
strength and courage from on high.

John. 21. we read that they were fishing, which was their old vocation.

VERSE. 9. And as they went to tell his Disciples, JESUS met them, saying, All
hail, And they came, and held him by the feet, and worshipped him.
met them, saying, All hail.]



I am vero mulieres nihil celare possunt, and women can keep no secrets, but
tell all they know. This ridiculous reason is given by Discip. de temp. sermon.
de Pasch. But

Cor. 1.27, 28, 29. Now these women both in regard of the infirmity of their
sex, and for their countries sake Galilee, were held in contempt, John ^.46.
But the Lord extols them, by first manifesting unto them the Resurrection of
his Son, which is one of the principal Articles of our faith; yea sends
them, to reveal it to the Apostles, Vt sic fierent Apostolorum Apostolae, that
so they might be made the Apostles of the Apostles, as the Ancients spoke.

Thirdly, women by nature being weaker, without Peter a part, viz. because as
he sinned most hainously so he sorrowed most h^avily; and therefore for his
particular consolation, his Savior appears to him alone.

Fourthly, this was done, that God by this

Fifthly, death came into the world by a woman, viz. Evah; and therefore Christ
would have his Resurrection (by which righteousness and life, is repaired and
renewed unto us) to be first declared and showed forth by women. As in the fall
of the first man these three things concurred, to wit, The Devil persuading,
the women showing, the man eating, and corrupting of humane nature. So in the
Resurrection of Christ also (by which mankind is repaired) there concurred,
Christ rising, and redeeming humane nature, The Angel showing the
Resurrection, and the women carrying the good tidings unto others.

Sixthly, these women with an earnest desire of Chem. harm. part. 2. Gerard.
page 255. b.

. 2. And they held him by the feet.]

Why does our Savior permit his feet to be held and touched by these women,
John. says Chap. 27. That he would not suffer Mary Magdalene to touch him, but
forbad her saying, Touch me not, and gives this reason, For I am not yet
ascended unto my Father?

First, some say, that our Savior forbad her to of spices, and ointments for
the ^mbalming of the body of JESUS, as though his body could hvae putrified and
corrupted, and asthough it should not have been raised up to life the third
day, Carthus. s. page 231. b.


Secondly, others answer, that when Mary now Parens. s. p. 900. a.
. And this seems to be the truest answer.

I. From the next verse, where our Savior again gives them the charge which
was given them by the Angel, See verse. 7. and 10. And

II. From the reason given John. 20.17. Touch me not, for I am not as yet
ascended unto my Father: which words although they be diversely interpreted,
have notwithstanding this plain, and simple meaning, Why do thou prolong the
time in holding and kissing my feet. Let them now go, for I am not about
presently to ascend unto my Father, but I will before my Ascension tarry with
you a certain time; when both those and the rest, may both see and touch me,
Now therefore forebare, and go tell my Disciples etc.

And they worshipped him.]



Cyrill speaks, de recta fide ad Theod. lib. 1. Col. 693.) yet in regard of
the union thereof Cum (...) with the substantial word which is to be adored,
the flesh is coadored with one adoration: because neither in faith, nor in
vocation, can the flesh be separated from the Deity. Jndeed the proper cause of
adoration is (...) the Divinity which is in the body, and with the body of
Christ, and which (...) is only adorabilis. And therefore as the purple robe,
or, Crown of the King separated from the body, or head of the King, are not to
be worshipped; but being on the head or body of the King, the King with his
Crown and robe on are worshipped: So also (...) the divinity of Christ with
his flesh. The like Question unto this is handled, by Epiphanius in Anchorato,
page 367. and by Augustine de verb. Dom. sermon. 58. and Chemnit. harm. Part. 2.
Gerard. page 342. a. medio.

VERSE. 10. Go bid my brethren go into Galilee, and there they shall see me.


Mark says that Christ first appeared unto Mary Magdalene only, near unto
the Sepulcher; and this St. John also mentions, 20.16.

Mary together with some other women; as our Evangelist here has it, verse. 9,

Emau^ and talked with them, Mark 16.12, and Luke 24.13.

Fourthly, he appeared to Peter alone, Luke 24.34, and 1 Cor. 15.5.

Fifthly, he appeared to the ten Apostles, when Thomas being Luke 24, 26. John.
^0.19. And all these five Apparitions I conceive have been upon the day that
he arose from death unto life.

Sixthly, he appeared to the Apostles, being Thomas was with them. And this was
8. days after the Resurrection. And these 6. Apparitions were in Judea.

Seventhly, he appeared unto the Disciples in a Matthew. 28.16. Whence it seems
to me clear and evident, That the Disciples did not go presently after they
had received the command, into Galilee, but some 8. days after. Yea this is
the Apparition (I conceive) which St. Paul speaks of, 1 Cor. 15.6. where he
says, That CHRIST was seen of above 500 brethren at once; who either followed
the Apostles out of Judea, or flocked unto them when they were on the
Mountain, out of Galilee.

Eighthly, he was seen again by seven of his Tiberias, John 21.1. etc.

Ninthly, he appeared to James alone, 1 Corinthians.

Tenthly, he was seen again by all the Apostles Galilee to Jerusalem. And
this is mentioned both by Matthew, Mark, Luk^, and Paul, 1 Corinthians. 15. Now all
these ten Apparitions were in the Earth.

Eleventhly, there were two Apparitions of viz.

I. He was seen of St. Stephen, the first who suffered for him, after his
Ascension, Act. 7.55. And

II. He was seen of St. Paul as he went to Damascus, Act. 9.3. and 22.6. and
1 Cor. 15.8.

Twelfthly, there shall be another Apparition Mayer upon this Verse, Page 331,
332.

VERSE. 13. Say ye,
How may this be proved to be a lie, verse 15. That his Disciples stole him
away by night?

First how can it be imagined that the Disciples Chap. 26.63, 64. And how can
the armed Soldiers be terrified or affrighted by unarmed Apostles.

Secondly, the Sepulcher wherein Christ was

Thirdly, if the Disciples would have adventured to have stolen the body of
CHRIST, they would viz, on the foregoing night, when they might have done it
with more safety, and less danger.





That his Disciples came and stole him away.





VERSE. 18. And JESUS came, and spoke unto them, saying, All power is given unto
me in heaven and in earth.
All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth.]



God the Father, or, the whole blessed Trinity; for where this is ascribed to
the Father, Chap. 11.17. Yea who can give all manner of power to the humanity
of CHRIST, but the only true God?



All power is given to ^e^ etc.

Secondly, again in general, it is not only a terrene but also a Celestial
power. All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth,

Thirdly, more particularly, a threefold power

I. Of Dominion, for he rules over all, and al power and dominion is
subordinate unto him. Now this Dominion is twofold; to wit,

First, General, over all in general, he being the King of Kings.

Secondly, Particular, over all his children; and theferore he will protect and
defend them.

II. Of Disp n ^tion, and thus he is the Lord and Master overall, Matthew. 11.27.
John. 3, 30. He is the Head of his Church, and all the senses external and
internal lie in the head; he is the fountain of all grace, from whom is
derived unto us whatsoever is good.

III. Of Judgment, and that both of this world, and also of the last day; for
he shall judge all men and all matters. And thus unto him is given a power of
Dominion whereby he rules over all; a power of Dispensation, whereby he
distributes, imparts, bestows, and gives what he will, unto whom he will; and
a power of Judgment, whereby he punishes and rewards whom he pleases here,
and whereby he will acqui^te and condemn whom he will, at the last day. And
therefore most truly is it said by him: All power is given to me both in heaven
and in earth.

Some object this place for the Vbiquity of Christ, Christ says, all power is
given to me; now this power was not given to his Deity, for that is equal with
God; and therefore it must be given of necessity to his humanity. If then
Christ's humanity have all power, it is omnipotent, and so can be every where.

There are two things which I will distinguish (for the better understanding of
this Objection) herein: viz. that Christ's humanity is every where (to which we
give the two first answers) and that it is Omnipotent, to which we give the
third.

First, in general we must distinguish here between Gretians call (...)
Potentia, and that which they call (...) Potestas.

(...) signifies that power which we call authority, and which is grounded
upon law; and such is the power of Kings over subjects, Parents, over children,
Husbands over wives, and Masters over servants.

(...) is properly a faculty, or ability to do any thing, and consists in
force, power, and strength, and such is the power, and puissance of most mighty
Kings.

Now there is a great difference between these two, neither is one a necessary
consequent of the other; as for example, we have many Kings and Monarchs who
have (...), and are of power to subdue their neighbors; and yet have not (...)
any legal power over them; and on the contrary many have (...) legal
authority, who have not (...) power or poetency to repress rebellious
subjects; that is, they have right, but they want might.

Secondly, the word here used is not (...), but word signifies not an ability
to do all things, but authority to rule all things: so as when CHRIST says,
All power is given to me, he means all that Authority, rule, and Dominion,
which was given to him after his Resurrection over all things both Celestial
and Terrestrial, as to the King of Heaven and Earth, so that by virtue of this
power he might send his Disciples now to the Gentiles, which before went only
to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And he says not, all power is
given to my humanity, but to me; even a power of ruling, judging, condemning,
absolving, and in brief of doing all things, which may work for the glory of
his Father, and the good of his Church. But this power does not prove his
Humanity either to be of an infinite nature, for every where: for although his
Divinity be of an omnipotent, and infinite nature, and consequently every
where, yet his Humanity being created, is of a finite nature, yea a finite
creature; and therefore cannot really be every where. To conclude, as it is
impossible for a finite creature to be really every where; so this ubiquity
cannot so be given to Christ's infinite Humanity, as in its own essence,
properly, and really, it should be every where.

to let the Cup pass away from him: and being in the like case upon the Cross
he continued his prayer unto his Father: Now would the humanity have prayed to
God, if it had been Omnipotent?

That all power is given to him in heaven and in earth, which power is given to
his humanity not to his Deity; and therefore his humanity is Omnipotent, for
where all power is, there is omnipotency.

omnis potentia, but (...), sed omnis potestas, is given unto me: speaking of
that authority which was given to him after his Resurrection.

to my humanity, but to me, that is, to my person: the which power was
therefore said to be given to him because whilst he was in the form of a
servant, he emptied himself of all glory, and after his Resurrection it was
again restored unto him, and he declared to be the Son of God, being
glorified of his Father, with that glory which he had before with him; as John.
17.2.

(All power is given unto me) speaks of his humanity; what then? must it
needs follow, that his humanity is omnipotent? nothing less: but that it has
as much power given to it, as possibly can be given to, or received of any
creature; for the humanity of Christ is the most potent of all creatures, but
not an omnipotent creature: and for this cause our Savior says here, Omnis,
that is, in omnia potestas, all power, or, a power over all, not summa
potestas, a supreme or omnipotent power.

Fourthly, the humanity of Christ is omnipotent, not in it self, but in the
Word, as the Word suffered not in it self, but in the flesh.

The Papists say (as Virgill says of Caesar, Divisum imperium cum Jove Caesar
habet) that Christ has divided his Kingdom and power with the Virgin Mary.
Now against this we produce hence this short Argument. Our blessed Savior
says here, All power is given to me in heaven and earth; The power then, and
Kingdom is not divided with Mary, but rests wholly in Christ.

Some Romanists enlarge the jurisdiction of the Heathens. Christ says, Unto me
is given all power in heaven and earth; therefore, says ( Careus. lib. 2. de
potestate. Romans pontif. Cap. 9.) the Pope has authority over Infidels.

First, all power was given to Christ; therefore

Secondly, all power was given to Christ; therefore

Thirdly, Bellarmine answers hereunto ( Bell. 5. de. Romans pontif. Cap. 5.) that
this power belonging unto Christ is so great, as that it is not communicable to
any mortal man.

Fourthly, Barclaius (de potest. Papae. Cap. 3.) such

Fifthly, Bellarmine says ( lib. 5. de Romans pontif. 2. initio) there is
Scripture to confute it; for 1 Cor. 5. Chap. the Apostles says, What have we
to do with them who are without? meaning Infidels, who (says he) are not
subject unto the judgment of the Pope; nor unto the authority of the Church
until they be baptized.

VERSE. 19.20. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost; teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo, I am with you
always, even unto the end of the world. Amen.
. 1. Go ye therefore.]

Jn these two verses, the chief parts of the Apostles function, are thus to be
discerned. As

First, their legacy which is immediately given them of God, unto all nations,
and not restrained within any limits. And

Secondly, the publication of that doctrine which they received of the Lord. And

Thirdly* the administration of those Sacraments, which were instituted by God.
And

Fourthly, the protestation of that especial aid, which although generally it
concern the whole Church, yet particularly it respects the Apostles
themselves, Dr. Saravia. of Ministers. page 11.

. 2. And teach.]

Dr. Carier in his last letter [which is answered by our Dr. Hakewell, the
Church of Rome] does lay down this proposition; That our Savior commanded not
his Apostles, to write his Religion but to teach it, as in this verse, Ite
praedicate, Go and teach.

Bellarmine, and Canus were alive, they would blush at the impudency of their
Carier for this unheard of assertion.

Go and teach, therefore they must not write follows not, for a man may teach
as well by his pen as by his tongue, by writing as speaking. Yea doctrine
delivered by writing, as it is conveyed more purely and certainly without
mixture, arising from humane frailty and corruption; so it spreads farther, and
lasts longer, and if it degenerate, is more easily reformed. That is worthy to
be marked, which St. Luke has in the Preface of his Gospel to that noble
Theophilus, viz. that although he confesses, that he had been instructed in
the Doctrine of Religion, yet he thought it meet to write unto him, from point
to point, that he might have the certainty of those things: So that though he
had indifferent good knowledge before, yet writing the story was the means to
beget certainty: according to that of the Prophet David, This shall be written
for the generation to come.



I. By the Lords own practice, who wrote the Decalogue once and again in
Tables of Stone. And

II. By the Lords own Precept, he in express terms commanding his Servants
the Prophets to do the same. Read Exodus 17.14. Esa. 8.1. Ierem. 30.2, Ezech.
37.16. Habak. 2.2. And

III. By the necessity of writing; for before the Law was written, what
universal Apostasies there were from the true worship of God, the Flood is a
sufficient testimony of; and after the Law was lost, though the Priesthood
continued, what general swarvings there were both of Prince and people, as
well in manners as religion, appears 2 Chronicles. 34. What forbids us then to
think that our Savior in commanding his Apostles to teach all Nations, should
not by virtue of that command, as well give them in charge to publish their
Doctrine by writing, as to deliver it by word of mouth? Read besides Revel.
1.11.19. and Chap. 2. and 3. and there we shall see, that Christ commands John
to write what he saw.

All Nations.]

Go teach all Nations: Therefore the Church is free from error, and the
Doctrine thereof is in all things infallible.

the Catholic Church. Now we grant that their teaching was infallible, and all
men were bound to hear it; for they taught that which afterward they writ in
the Scripture: yet they so taught, and with such commission, that the people
are commended which examined their teaching by the Scriptures, Acts 17.11.

Secondly, we grant, that the Pastors of the White Page 74.

. 4. Baptizing them.]

The Anabaptists (who are therefore called Catabaptists)

First, the Proposition is false, That Christ's commands first, and afterward
are not in the Text.

Secondly, our Savior in this place prescribes an Adulti, men of years, and
not Infants; who were first instructed and afterward baptized, as under the
Law the Proselites who were of age, were first instructed and afterward
circumcised. But the Infants of the Jews were circumcised before they were
instructed, as we shall see by and by.

Thirdly, although Preaching in this place be Mark 1.4. Baptism is put before
preaching. Indeed J know that John Baptist first preached, and then baptized.

Fourthly, if the order of words be to be urged, Anabaptist will affirm it.

Fifthly, the word here used [(...), teach]

Sixthly, it is most certainly true, that our blessed Ephesians. 5.26. and a
sealing of the promises of the Gospel; and therefore can nor ought to be
without the word; as Augustine says, Toll verbum ex baptismo, et quid erit
aqua nisi aqua? Take the word viz. of Institution from Baptism, and then the
water is but bare water, and the washing therewith, but a vulgar lotion.

Acts 2.39.) and unto the Church of Christ ( Isa. 49.20, 21.) and unto the
Kingdom of God, Matthew. 19.14. And therefore this part of the doctrine of the
Gospel is to be sealed by baptism unto Infants.

Anabaptists yet instance, and urge, That Baptism ought not only to be the
laver of water in the word, but also those who are baptized ought first to be
instructed.

Abraham, and afterward he is circumcised, Genes. 17.11.23. and doubtless
Abraham himself did teach Ismael, and his household, before he circumcised
them, as appears by the Lords testimony of him, Genes. 18.19. yea both these
were commanded in the Old Testament, viz. to teach their children, Deuteronomy.
4.6.12. and to circumcise them, Genes. 17.11.23. and In adultis, in those of
years of understanding, teaching went before circumcision, Genes. 17. but
Infants, little ones, or babes are commanded to be circumcised on the 8. day,
Genes. 17.12. and to be taught when they can ask and demand, What is meant by
these testimonies, Deuteronomy. 6.20.21. And thus circumcision in Infants was before
instruction, and this followed afterward when they were capable thereof. From
hence we answer to the Objection, that those of years of discretion, are first
to be taught, and then to be baptized, but the Infants of Christians, first to
be baptized, and afterward to be taught.

verse. Therefore Laymen, and women, in baptizing go beyond the commission of
CHRIST.

Bellarmine answers hereunto, That when Christ gave this Commission, there
were many present besides the Apostles.

verse 17. Unless the Cardinal will say, that he made all the rest [ viz.
those 500. whom St. Paul speaks of, 1 Cor. 15.] Apostles also, for he sends
them to whom he directs his speech, into all the world, Mark 16.14.

Rome, concerning the number of the Sacraments; we affirming that there are but
only two, and confirming it from hence. Christ only commanded these two
Sacraments [Baptisme and the Lords Supper] to be used for ever in his Church;
instituting and commanding Baptism in this place, and the Lords Supper, Chap.
26. Jndeed Christ used many other Ceremonies himself, as lifting up of hands,
the tempering of clay and spittle; And his Apostles used imposition of hands,
and anointing with Oil: But Christ has not laid his Commandment upon these
Ceremonies, injoyning us perpetually to use them, as he has charged us with
these two, Baptism, and the Eucharist.

It being questioned between us and the Church Rome, whether the Sacraments be
of equal dignity, and excellency, Council T^i^ sess. 7. Can 3. and Bell. de
sacram. Lib. 2. cap. 2^.
they pronounce an Anathema against him, who denies, That Baptism excels
all the five Sacraments, and the Eucharist Baptism. We willingly acknowledge
that Baptism excels their five forged, and fained Sacraments [ viz.
Confirmation, Penance, Matrimony, Orders, and Extreme Unction.] But that the
Lords Supper should be preferred before Baptism, as the more worthy, and
excellent Sacrament, we find not in the word of God. Yea that both of them are
of like dignity in themselves, and to be had equally and indifferently in most
high account by us, we prove from this verse and other grounds; to wit.

First, they are both commanded and instituted by the same authority of our
Lord JESUS CHRIST as Baptism here, and the Lords Supper, Luke 22.19. neither
is one by the first institution advanced above the other.

Secondly, there is the same matter, and substance of both Sacraments; viz.
CHRIST JESUS with all his benefits; for as Baptism is said to save us by the
Resurrection of Christ, 1 Peter 3.21. so the Cup, and bread in the Eucharist,
are a Communion of the body and blood of Christ, 1 Corinthians. 10.16.

Thirdly, there is one and the same end of both these Sacraments, which is the
increase and strengthening of our Faith in the promises of God: as Romans 6.5. and
1 Cor. 11.26. Therefore they are both of equal dignity and worthiness.

If the Reader would see how these words are urged first by Chamier against
that Popish practice of muttering and mumbling over the Child when it is to be
baptized; and then secondly how they are enforced by Bellarmine for the proof
thereof, let him read Chamier. tom. 4. de Sacram. Lib. 1. Cap. 16. page 35.. 9,
10, 11, and Cap. 18. page 40.. 12. etc. ad. 19.

Why were the Sacraments instituted, or for

First, one use or end of them is, to be public Jews, Turks, and Infidels,
and by which further we may profess our Faith in Christ, and the true Religion
of CHRIST; this is plain from Romans 4. Where the Apostle calls Circumcision,
and that which succeeds unto it, viz. Baptism; the seal of the righteousness
of Faith: that is, a seal whereby righteousness is assigned in us by God, and
by which all men may know that we are sealed in and by Christ unto
righteousness and eternal life. For there is a double use of a seal to wit,

I. To make him unto whom the writing or promise in writing is sealed, to be
more and more sure and certain of the will of him who has sealed the writing
unto him. When the King or some great Potentate shall promise some office, or
place, or preferment unto a favorite or friend, he will hope that he shall
enjoy it, because he has a promise of it; but if the promise be written, yea
under hand and seal, then he fears not the performance of it. Thus the Lord
confirms and makes sure unto us all the promises of the word, by the seals of
the Sacrament, that we might be the more certain of his love and good will
toward us, and more confidently expect the accomplishment of all his promises,
which are written in the word, and signed, and sealed in the Sacraments.

II. Another use of a seal is, that others thereby may perceive and know the
benefits and favors which are conferred upon him unto whom the covenant is
sealed, by him who has sealed it. And for this cause the Lord also has
instituted the Sacraments, that others by the sight* knowledge, and
contemplation thereof may know both the great love that God has borne us, in
giving his dearly beloved Son to dye for us, and also the great benefits and
mercies that ^re sealed unto us by the Sacraments, in and through CHRIST.

Corinthians 10. and 12. Chapters. Or that we might be incorporated and
engrafted into Christ, and grow up in one wi h him. And that thereby we might
be made partakers of the fruit of his passion, viz. of Redemption, remission of
sins, regeneration, and life eternal; for all the things are gained by
CHRIST.





Acts 22.16. In this definition we have these three things observable, viz.

First, the author of Baptism, namely, Christ. And

Secondly, the external part of Baptism, namely, a washing with water. And

Thirdly, the internal signification of Baptism, namely, a washing of our
souls from the guilt and stain of sin, by the blood of CHRIST; but of this
more in the sequent question.

What is signified by this Sacrament of Baptism?

The washing away of our sins by Christ's blood, 1 John 1.7. More particularly
observe,

First, water signifies the blood of Christ, John. 13.8.

Secondly, the dipping of the party to be baptized, or the washing of it with
water, does signify mortification, and a dying unto sin: And the remission
of our sins, and our restitution, or restoring unto the love of God.

What do we gain by Baptism, or what are

First, thereby we gain admission into the body Corinth. 12.13. that is, into
the Church of the saved, and the society of the faithful, Hebr. 12.22. etc.
and 1 John 1.3. And hence Baptism

I. Is a note, or badge of a Christian.

II. Gives us Communion with Christ, and his members.

III. Gives us a right unto all the promises of the word.

Secondly, by Baptism we gain remission and Acts 2.38.

Thirdly, Regeneration, John 3.5. For

I. By Baptism we dye unto sin, Romans 6.3. Colos. 2.12.

II. In Baptism we are quickened and sanctified by the holy Spirit, 1
Corinthians 6.11. Titus 3.5.

Fourthly, by Baptism we gain eternal life Titus 3.5. and 1 Peter 3.21.

What order is to be observed in the administration

First, the person to be baptized must be taught:

I. The knowledge of the Gospel, and salvation by Christ.

II. That the admission into the Church, and body of Christ is by the sacrament
of Baptism: that so they may be persuaded to learn and to be baptized: as in
this verse, and Acts 2.38.

Secondly, the person being thus taught and instructed Mark 16.16. Acts 10.47.
But these two Answers are to be understood of those who are of years of
discretion, and not of Infants.

Who ought to be, or may be Baptized?

Those who are baptized, are either,

I. Men of ripe years or years of discretion; Now these Adulti do either

First, not profess the Faith of Christ; or are without the Church of Christ;
and these are not to be baptized. Or

Secondly, do profess the Religion of Christ, and desire to be baptized; and
these (as was said before) are to be admitted. Or

II. Infants; now these are either.

Jews, Turks, and Heathens, who are without the Church: and these are not to
be baptized. Or

Secondly, they are the Children of those who are wiihin the Church* and these
are to be baptized.



verse, and Mark 16.16. For as we must pray if we would be blessed, because
God has comman^ed it, Matthew. 7.7. and as we must eat, if we would live,
because according to Gods own ordinance that is the means to preserve life:
so we must be baptized, because God has ordained, that by that door, we
should enter into the Arc, the Church.



I. God did precisely command, that Circumcision (to which Baptism answers
now) should be on the eighth day, before which time without doubt many dyed,
and yet it were absurd peremtorily to set down, that they were damned.

II. Jf Circumcision had been absolutely necessarily unto salvation then Moses
and Aaron would not have omitted it, for 40 years in the Desert.

III. This Doctrine of the absolute necessity of Baptism, was unknown to the
ancient Fathers; and primitive Church; who therefore did oftentimes forbear
baptism (although we approve not of this their fact) till a little before
death. Hence Constantine the great was not baptized until a little before his
death: and Valentinian, by reason of his delay, was not at all baptized, whom
notwithstanding Ambrose pronounces to be in heaven. And Bernard in his 37. and
77. Epistle affirms, that not every privation or want of Baptism, but only
the contempt, and palpable neglect of it is damnable.

IV. The Papists themselves confess, that the Baptism of the Spirit
(Baptismas flaminis) and Martyrdom (Baptismas sanguinis) are sufficient
without the Baptism of water, (that is) where or when it cannot be had unto
salvation.

V. CHRIST himself saved the Thief upon the Cross without Baptism ( Luke
23.43.) And therefore it is not so absolutely necessary that without it none
can be saved.



Romans 6.6. and 1 Cor. 6.19. and Acts 3.26. and 1 Peter 4.6.

Romans 6.4. and 7.6. and 2 Corinthians. 5.17. Galath. 6.15. Ephesians. 4.22.23. and 4.1.
and 1 Peter 2.9. and 1 John 2.6.

In the name of the Father, etc.

In this form, wherein the Apostles must baptize those who are instructed, our
Savior [by nominating of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost] does plainly
insinuate, and teach unto his Apostles the profound mystery of the Trinity, and
Unity. For these three names, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, do express the
Trinity of divine persons; and this phrase, In nomine, non in nominibus, in the
name, in the singular number, and not in the names in the plural, does
evidently show, the Unity in Trinity, or that these three ever blessed persons,
have but one essence, and nature. Pet. Galat. Lib. 2. Cap. 12. page 63. medio.

. 6. And of the Son.]

From these words we may draw this plain Argument against the Arrians,

But we are baptized as well in the name of the Son, as of the Father, and
holy Spirit, in this verse. Therefore the Son is as well God in nature and
essence, as the Father and holy Spirit are; and consequently, he is (...), of
the same nature and substance with the Father.

. 7. And of the holy Ghost.]

Deuterius an Arrian Bishop being at Bizantium as he was about to baptize one
Barbas after his blasphemous manner, saying, J baptize thee in the name of the
Father, through the Son, and in the holy Ghost [which form of words is
contrary to the prescript rule of Christ, who in this place commanded his
Apostles to baptize all Nations, In the name of the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost] the water suddenly vanished, so that he could not then be baptized:
Wherefore Barbas all amazed fled to a Church of purer Religion, and there was
entertained into the Church by baptism. Socrates in his Ecclesiastical
History [ Lib. 7. Cap. 17.] reports the like History of a Jew, who had been
oftentimes baptized and came to ^aulus a Novation Bishop, to receive the
Sacrament again; but the water vanished* and his villainy being detected, he
was banished the Church.

Because I have spoken diverse things, in diverse places before, of the Father,
and the Son; here therefore thus briefly pass them over: speaking something
more largely of the holy Spirit, because hitherto I have treated of that divine
person more sparingly.

How many things are requisite to be known

Two; namely,

First, Nomen, his name: He is called 1. Spirit. Then 2. Holy.

Secondly, his nature, wherein two things are observable, viz.

I. Veritas, the truth thereof; wherein two things are included; to wit,

First, that he is God with God.

Secondly, that he is a distinct person, from the Father, and the Son.

II. Priprietas, the properties thereof; namely, that

First, he proceeds from the Father, and the Son.

Secondly, that he is equal to the Father, and the Son.

Thirdly, what his operations and works are.

What is meant by this word Spirit?

First this word Spirit is taken either First, literally; and that two manner
of ways; to wit, either First, sometimes for the air, and wind. Secondly,
sometimes for the blast or breath of the Lungs. Or II. Spirit is taken for an
invisible incorporeall essence; which is twofold namely, either First,
created; as Satan, specters, the reasonable soul of man, and the good Angels.
Secondly, uncreated; and thus God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy
Ghost, are called Spirits. Secondly, figuratively; and thus it is taken, either
I. Spiritually, and thus First, the power, and Deity of Christ is sometimes
called Spirit. And Secondly, sometimes the operations, motions, and gifts of
the holy spirit, are called Spirit, etc. Thirdly, sometimes the regenerate part
of man, and the spiritual life of the regenerate, and internal motions, and
revelations, are called Spirit.


Spirit is taken literally, for an essence, incorporeall, incomprehensible, and
uncreated; and this essence is called a Spirit, for these causes; to wit,

I. Because he is incorporeall: A sight (says Christ) has not flesh, and
bones: And thus Angels, and humane souls are incorporeall also; but they
differ from this holy Spirit thus; they are not infinite and incomprehensible
essences, as he is. And

II. Because he inspires, and breathes into us the breath of spiritual life:
and thus the Father, and the Son also, does give spiritual life of grace,
But it is by the Spirit. And

III. Because Spiratur, he proceeds from the Father and from the Son.

Spirit, which is an incorporeall, incomprehensible, and uncreated essence,
called Sanctus, holy?

The blessed Spirit of God is not only called Sanctus, holy, essentially
because he is holy, but in his nature and essence also Causally, because he
makes holy; being the immediate temper of this impression of holiness in the
Creatures.

From this name of holy Spirit, we may conclude, that this blessed person is
true God.

holy Spirit signifies no other thing, then that spirit of regeneration which
is infused in man by God; and so is, as it were a creature. This they would
confirm from these two reasons; namely

Spirit is said to pray for us, Romans 8.26. Now it is the spirit in us, which
prays for us, and consequently this holy Spirit is not God. To this J answer

Spirit is said to pray, because he makes us to pray; and so the work it self
seems to come wholly, and altogether from the blessed Spirit And.

Spirit also is said to cry Abba Father, Gal. 4.6. not that he cries, but that
we cry by him, Romans 8.15.

Secondly, they say, the holy Spirit knows not no man knows the Son, but
the Father, Matthew. 11.27. To this we answer

I. That our Savior there excludes not the

II. That indeed none knows the Son of

III. It is evidently false, that the Spirit knows

First, the Spirit discernes all things, 1 Cor. 2.15. And

Secondly, the Spirit teaches us the knowledge of the Son, yea all things,
John, 14. And

Thirdly, he is called the Spirit of the Son.

Some again grant, that the Spirit is God, but not that he is a ^istinct
person from God, but (...) Patris, the virtue, and power, and operation of the
Father: and they would ground this upon those words, The power of the most high
[That is, the holy Spirit] shall overshadow thee, Luke. 1.35.

First, it is not necessary that the place should be

I. That the blessed Virgin might understand the immediate worker of this great
work; namely, God the holy Ghost; and hence he says, The holy Ghost shall
come upon thee. And

II. That she might understand the primary Author of this great work, and the
true Parent of the child to be borne; to wit, God the Father; and hence he
says, The power of the most high shall overshadow thee.

Secondly, although it were thus understood, John, 1.1. And yet that takes not
away the distinction of the person; so, the Spirit may be the power of the
Father (he proceeding partly from the Father) and yet a distinct person from
him, as follows by and by.

How does it appear that the holy Spirit is God?

First, he created the world; and therefore he is Genesis 1, 2. Job. 33.4. And

Secondly, we are baptized in his name, in this verse; and therefore he is God:
for we are baptized only unto God. And

Thirdly, the Apostles were taught of God; but Luke, 12, 12. yea which teaches
all things, John, 14.26.

Fourthly, we must pray only unto God, but in he is God, 2 Corinthians. 13, 13.

Harding, and Bellar. say, That it cannot be proved out of Scripture, that the
holy Ghost is God; we will produce some clear testimonies, where he is called
God. As

I. That which the holy Spirit speaks, Acts, 28.25, Jehovah himself speaks,
Esa. 6.8. Therefore the holy Spirit is Jehovah.

II. Our bodies are called the Temples of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19. and the
Spirit dwells in us, 1 Cor. 3.16. But our hearts are the Temples of God, 1
Cor. 3, 16. and 2 Cor. 6.16. and God dwells in us, 2 Cor. 6.18.

III. Ananias lied against the holy Ghost, Acts. 5.3. but he lied not against
men, but God, verse, 4. And therefore the holy Spirit is God, thus Augustine
disputed, contr. Petil. 3.48.

IV. The Father, the world, and the holy Spirit are one, John, 5.7.



This is my welbeloved Son, etc. Luke. 3.22. Where there was the Father
speaking from heaven, the Son baptized upon earth, and the holy Ghost
descending from heaven to earth. Therefore the holy Spirit is a person
subsisting by himself, and distinct from the rest.

Ioh. 14.16. and he was sent from the Father, in the same place, and from the
Son, Ioh. 16.7. and therefore he differs from them both, John, 14.26.

Ioh. 15.26. and the Spirit of the Son, Gal. 4.6. Therefore he is neither the
Person of the Father, nor of the Son.

Matthew. 28.19. and 2 Cor. 13.13, and 1 John, 5.7.

Luke 1.35. And therefore is not a distinct person.





viz, that he is the same with the Father] does rather follow, that he is God,
and a distinct person; for none can be God, but he who is the same with God;
and none can be the same with God, but only a person of the Trinity. For these
three are one, 1 John 5.7. Deus Trinnus. I conclude with the saying of the
Father, Dici potest, non scriptum est aperte Spiritum sanctum esse Deum, at
ejus deitas in sacris literis testata est, nisi quis valde sit insulsus, and
alienus a Spiritu sancto. Greg. Naz. de Spirit. sanct.





First, the Father sends the Spirit of his Son, Gal. 4.6. John, 14.26. And

Secondly, the Son sends the Spirit of the Father, John. 15.26. and 16.7.

How is the blessed Spirit coequall with the Father?

The holy Ghost is inferior to the Father in order, but equal in power.

Against this it may be objected,

First, it follows not, for the Son was sent John. 3.16. and yet he is
equal to the Father in power, in regard of his Deity: for he was not sent by
compulsion, but came willingly, John, 10.11. And so does also the holy Spirit.
And therefore there is no rule, or dominion amongst the persons of the blessed
Trinity one over another, but are all equal in power.

Secondly, the equality of the holy Spirit with Symbol. Athanas.

What and how many are the operations, and

They are either Temporal, or Spiritual,

First, there are some Temporal operations, and works of the holy Spirit; as

I. Creation; Read. Genesis 1.2. and Job. 33.4 And

II. Fitting men for some particular function; as Exodus 31.3. Judge. 6.34. and 1 Samuel 11.6. and 16.13. And

III. He gives knowledge, literature, and learning: and therefore we must not
only confess, that that learning which is conferred miraculously upon some
comes from him, as, Acts 2. and 10. but also that that learning which is got by
our study instrumentally, comes principally from him, because he gives
eye salve, Revel. 3.18. and enables us to understand. And

IV. Prophecy is a gift given by the Spirit, 1 Cor. 13.1. Now all these are
Temporal.

Secondly, there are Spiritual operations and works of the holy Spirit; and
these are either

I. Common, or II. Proper.

First, the Common spiritual operations of the holy Spirit; are these, viz.

I. The moderation of the affections; as Genesis 20.6. Hest. 5.10. And

II. The reverent and willing hearing of the word: the Spirit makes men to
endure the word of exhortation patiently; as we may see in Herod, Mark. 6.20.
And therefore when we willingly, or patiently permit our selves to be reproved,
we must confess it to be the work of the Spirit, because naturally we love to
be flattered, but not to be reprehended. And

III. Jllumination is a spiritual work of the holy Ghost; now this is either

First, Cognitionis, a light of Knowledge, as Hebr. 6. and 10. and 2 Peter.
2.22. And this is Common. Or

Secondly, Obedientiae, a light of obedience; now this is twofold; viz, either

I. In aliquibus, in some things, as Herod did; and this also is common. Or

II. In nova vita, in a new life; and this is proper to the godly, And

IV. Joy, in hearing, or, other holy duties, Matthew. 13.20. as did Herod,
Mark. 6.20. Now there is a double joy; namely

First, a joy arising from novelty: and thus many rejoice when the Gospel is
first preached unto them, who slight it afterward: Therefore this joy is but
deceivable, and common. And

Secondly, a joy arising from a true taste of divine grace: and this is proper
to the Godly.

Secondly, there are proper operations of the holy Spirit: These are laid down
in John, 14.23. where we have

I. The presence of the holy Spirit in the godly, the effect of whose presence,
is Regeneration.

II. The inhabitation of the holy Spirit in the Regenerate, the effect whereof
is Gubernation. But these remain to be considered of, in that place John,
14.23. Whereof afterward by the assistance of God. I rather omit them here,
because something has been spoken, Chap. 12.18.

I am with you unto the end of the world.]



Galatinus, lib. 3. Cap. 29. page 127. lin. ult.

Carthusian. s. page 233. b. medio.) says, That CHRIST is present with his
Church, by a Sacramental presence.





Behold I am with you unto the worlds end; and John, 14.15, etc. The Paraclet
shall abide with you for ever. Now if this Church be thus to extend itself to
all nations, and to the ends of the world; then whether is it the same which at
this day is called, The Catholic Church upon earth?



Nunquam enim deficiet fides in toto etc. Faith shall never wholly fail, but
unto the end of the world Christian Religion in aliquibus perseverabit, says
Carthusian (Matthew. page 233. b. fine.) that is, shall persevere, and abide in
some place or other, amongst some persons or other: he will not say, That it
shall always abide at Rome.

The Catholic Church. But

Catholic is divers^ly taken; namely,

I. Sometimes for the whole Kingdom of Christ, or for those who shall be
saved, and are ordained unto eternal life, Acts, 2.47. and 13.48. and Hebr.
12.22. Now the Church thus taken is partly militant on earth, and partly
triumphant in heaven; and of this we say not, Video Ecclesiam Catholicam, I see
the Catholic Church, but Credo ecclesiam Catholicam, I believe the Catholic
Church; because (according to St. Augustine, Fides non est vides.

II. Sometimes the Catholic Church is taken for the whole number of the
faithful, that profess Christ, in any one age, upon earth: being one flock
under one great Bishop, Christ the chief shepherd; 1 Peter 2.25. and 5.4.
although governed upon earth, by diverse subordinate Pastors under him. And of
these also may the said Article of our Creed be understood.

III. All particular Nations, or societies of people, joined together (in the
faith) under one spiritual government, may (as similare parts use) have the
name of the whole; and be called Catholic Churches. Notwithstanding it is more
proper to call such an one A Catholic Church indefinitely, then Completively,
The Catholic Church.

Fifthly, an Heretical sect may (like the devil, Cor. 11. showing as an
Angel of light) call themselves, Catholics though they be nothing less (
Revel. 2.9.) but even the Synagogue of Satan. Therefore the name Catholic, in
the Question propounded, must be understood in the second sense mentioned in ye
former Answer; viz. for all Christians upon earth, and not for any particular
society. Jf any particular company call themselves by that name, they are never
the more truly Catholic for being so called, then those Heretics were truly
pure, spiritual, and Apostolic, that were called, and known to the world by
those names, Cathari, Pneumatici, and Apostolici.

Some Papists have objected this place to prove

That unto which CHRIST has promised his presence for ever to the worlds end,
is free from error, and the doctrine thereof, in all things, is infallible.

But such is the Church, to which Christ has promised his presence.

Therefore the Church is free from error, and the doctrine thereof, is in all
things infallible.

First, the meaning of this place is, That howsoever Lansenius [Concord. Evang.
Cap. 149.] expounds the place. Yea this must needs be granted to be all that is
here meant, and that

I. Because Christ is not absent from his people every time they fall into an
error, but remains with them still for all that, either forgiving it, or
reforming it. And

II. Because notwithstanding this promise, yet afterward, Peter one to whom
the promise was made, erred against the truth of the Gospel, Galath. 2.11. and
was therefore by St. Paul rebuked, and resisted to his face: which thing could
not have fallen out, if this Promise had exempted the Church from all error.
And

III. If this promise privilege the whole Church from error because it is
made to it, then consequently it priviledgeth the particular Churches, Past^^s
and believers therein, because it is made to them likewise: but experience
shows that these latter may err; and therefore the meaning must be as
aforesaid.

IV. It is granted even by the Papists themselves, that the Pope may err (See
Mr. White the way to the true Church, Page 194, 416.) which could not be if
these words of our Saviors meant the Church of Rome, and that infallible
judgment which the Jesuit speaks of who propounds this Objection. And thus
we deny not, but constantly believe, that Christ always was, is, and shall be
with his Church to the end of the World.

To conclude this work; Seeing God has here promised to be present, by his
grace and gracious providence and protection, with his Church and children,
unto the end of the world; and has hitherto for many years given us cause to
say; That there is no Nation or Church in the world unto whom he has been
more gracious then unto ours, given us such pious and prudent Princes, as have
ruled us in peace, and led us in the paths of Religion, courageously
supporting, and constantly professing and maintaining the truth of Christ,
notwithstanding all the power, policy, and subtlety of Antichrist, and all her
instruments and adhaerents: Let us therefore both fervently pray for the
continuance of these unspeakable mercies, and also heartily praise this great,
gracious, and good God, for the long continuance of them hitherto unto us; and
let us always laud his Name, and sing praises unto his Majesty, saying, Holy,
holy, holy, Lord GOD of Hosts, Heaven and Earth are full of thy glory; Glory be
to thee oh Lord most High. AMEN.

FINIS.
The Epilogue.
COurteous and kind Reader, J have here sent thee the first Evangelist to
peruse, and J have the Second perfectly finished, but much more succinctly, and
compendiously handled then this; because the larger J am upon this, the less I
have to treat upon in the rest, this Work not being like a Snow ball rolled up
and down, which grows greater and greater, but (like one) lying in the Sun,
which grows less and less.

Now although (as I said) the next Evangelist be perfected, yet until I hear
how St. Matthew is received, and welcomed by thee, I will not send St. Mark
unto thee. For as PHYDIAS said concerning his first Portraiture; If it be
liked, I will draw more besides this, if loathed (...) one but this; so say I
concerning this my first Brat (who must either credit, or discredit his
Father.) If thou think it not worth receiving or reading, but reject it
loathingly, then I have done; but if thou accept and entertain it lovingly,
then I have but begun. Thy pleasure, and liking will be my Pains, and thy
dislike my Ease; and therefore I will neither commend nor discommend what J
have writ, but commend thee unto the Lords gracious Protection, and this Book
to thy acceptance: Resting,

To be employed to thy good if thou please. R. W.

A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATTERS CONTAINED IN THIS MISCELLANIE.
For the understanding whereof, let the Reader take notice, that this BOOK is
divided into two Parts, or Tomes; The first beginning CHAPTER, I. and contains
528 Pages; The second beginning CHAP. X. and contains 395 Pages. Now Pt. 1. f.
1. or 8, etc. signifies Part first, and Folio first, or 8, etc. And Pt. 2. f.
1. 10, etc. signifies Part 2. folio 1. 10, etc Besides, let the Reader note,
that a, signifies the first Colume, and b, the Second.
A.
ABility. All Power and ability in Man unto good, comes from God. Part 2. fol.
1. a. b. To which of Christ's Apostles he gave Power, and what power he gave
them. Pt. 2. f. 1, b. Absence. See Presence. Abuse. The best, and most lawful
things may be abused. Part 1. fol. 243. b. Account. Diverse necessary questions
concerning our Spiritual account and reckoning with God. Pt. 2. fol. 328, 329,
330. Actions. Works. Diverse profitable questions, concerning the definition,
division, necessity, and nature of Works in general, and good works in
particular. Pt. 1. f. 72, a, b. and 154. a, b. and 158, b. and 177. b, etc.
179. a. b. 266, b. 270. b, etc. 341. b. 425. b, etc. 427. a. and 471, a. and
50^, b. 506, a. Pt. 2. f. 16, b. and 129, a. Diverse questions concerning the
merit, reward, examination and regulating of good Works. Pt. 1. f. 98, b. etc.
158, a, b. 258, b. 259, 260. 266. 269, b. 270. 403, b. 426, b. 428, b. and Pt.
2. f. 46, b. 73, a. Who are enemies unto good Works. pt. 1. f. 161. b. 259, a.
273, a, b. Unbelievers cannot perform good Works. Pt. 1. fol. 262, a. Whether
the Works of the Righteous be perfect. Pt. 1. fol. 330, 331. Questions
concerning Supererogatory Works. Pt. 1. f. 188, a. and pt. 2. f. 235, a. 337,
b. Adiaphorall things. Ceremonies. The Ceremonies of our Church used in
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, are lawful. Pt. 1. f. 67, b. and pt. 2. f.
354. b. 355. Circumstances may make indifferent, and lawful things, unlawful;
and how? pt. 1. fol. 98, a, b. Lawful and Adiaphorall things are to be
regulated according to a three fold rule. Pt. 1. f. 98, a. Diverse questions
concerning Offenses given and taken by Ceremonies, and Adiaphorall things. Pt.
2. fol. 207, 208, etc. and pt. 1. f. 496. a, b. Admonition. Advice. Counsel.
Who hide their Counsels; and how it may lawfully be done. Pt. 1. fol. 32. a, b.
We must Admonish, Counsel, and advise our Brethren: how? and why? Pt. 1. f.
153. a, b. and pt. 2. fol. 19. a, b. Questions concerning Evangelicall Counsels
unto Perfection. Pt. 1. f. 186, a. 226, a. 262, b. and pt. 2. fol. 243, b. 286,
b. etc. Adoption. The nature, marks, and signs of adoption. Pt. 1. f. 113, a.
487, 488. Adversity. Affliction. Diverse questions concerning the Causes, end,
utility, removal, reward, and benefits of Affliction; and our duty in
affliction. Pt. 1. fol. 50, b. 112, b. 142, a. 169, a, b. 303, a, b. 314, a, b.
362. and 439, b. and 448, a. and pt. 2. f. 58, 59. and 159. and pt. 1. fol.
489. The Lord afflicts his Church, and why? pt. 1. fol. 78, a. Unlawful means
are never to be used in Affliction, and misery; and why? pt. 1. fol. 99, b.
100, a. Advice. See Admonition. Adultery. Fornication, adultery, and
uncleanness must be avoided, and why? pt. 1. fol. 216, a, b. and 227, b. etc.
Diverse questions concerning the division, effects, punishments, and remedies,
of adultery, fornication, and uncleanness. pt. 1. fol. 216, etc. to fol. 223.
Affections. A right use of the affections helps us in Gods service. pt. 1.
fol. 41, b. Affliction. See, Adversity. Agreement. Unity. Concord. Questions
concerning our Union with Christ. pt. 2. fol. 278, a, b. The Unity, and Union
of the Church, and faithful, is manifold. pt. 2. f. 8, a. 40, a. How brotherly
Unity, and Concord, are to be continued. pt. 1. fol. 321, b. etc. Christ loves
Amity, and unity amongst brethren. pt. 1. fol. 120. Allegories. Figures. It is
lawful to use Allegories and Figures, in preaching. pt. 1. f. 120, b. Rules
observeable in the Allegorizing of any Scripture. pt. 1. fol. 43, a. Alms.
Charity. Diverse questions concerning the division, necessity, impediments, and
remedies thereof; and rules to be observed in the distribution of alms, pt. 1.
f. 153. 155, 156, 157, 158, 160, b. 248, b. 268, 269. Who are enemies to
Almsdeeds, and works of charity. pt. 1. fol. 150, b. 151, a, b. 267, a.
Whether Almsdeeds be meritorius. pt. 1. fol. 160, a. and 267, a. Ambition.
Ambition is often the cause of arrogance, and arrogant presumption. pt. 1. fol.
46, a, b. Amen. What is meant by this word Amen. part 1. fol. 321, b. Amity.
Love. Diverse questions concerning Love in general, and the definition, and
division thereof, and of our Love unto God. pt. 1. f. 133, b. 252, b. 334, b.
335. and pt. 2. f. 54, b, etc. 286, 287, 288. Diverse questions concerning the
Love of our brethren. Pt. 1. fol. 120, a. 159, b. 252, b. and pt. 2. f. 56, b.
57, a. 135, b. 288, b. 289, a. Concerning the Love of our enemies; See Enemies.
How Love is the fulfilling of the Law. pt. 1. f. 405, a. and pt. 2. f. 289, a,
b. Whether Love be a meritorious work or not. pt. 1. folio 254. a.
Anabaptists. Famalists. Separatists. The Conventicles of Anabaptists and
Familists are not warrantable. pt. 1. fol. 125, b. 126, a. Separatists are
unpleasing unto God. pt. 2. folio 8, a, b. The faithful must be separated from
the world, and how? Pt. 1. f. 175, b. Angels. Diverse questions concerning the
evil Angels. pt. 1. f* ^7, a. 140, b. 346. ^. Questions concerning tutelary
Angels. part 2. fol. 214, b. Anger. Diverse questions concerning the nature,
original, causes, effects, degrees, kinds, and punishments of anger; and the
remedies against it. pt. 1. fol. 44, 45. 105. 108. Christians must not be angry
and why? pt. 1. fol. 197. a. And what commendable anger i^* Pt. 1. fol. 198, b,
etc. and pt. 2. fol. 297, b, etc. Whether anger be a ^eniall, or mortal sin.
pt. 1. fol. 196, 197, b. Anguish. Grief. Mourning. Diverse questions concerning
godly Mourners* and mourning, and the comforts and blessedness which belong
unto such Mourners. Pt. 1. folio 142, 143, 144, 145. There are diverse sorts of
Mourners. pt. 1. fol. 143, a, b, and 509, a. The outward expressions of sorrow
are diverse. pt. 2. fol. 8^, b. Answers. All our Answers must be gentle, and to
the matter, and why? Pt. 1. fol. 114, a. Antichrist. Who is Antichrist. pt. 1.
folio 19. Whether he be one particular man. pt. 1. folio 17, b. and pt 2. fol.
315. b. Whether Antichrist be yet come. pt. 2. fol. 312, a. 313, a, b.
Antiquity. When, and how far Antiquity is to be believed. pt. 1. fol. 189, b.
190, a, b, etc. 194, b. Antiquity is a good proof in controversies. pt. 2.
fol. 233, a. Apostasy. Backsliding. The causes why so many are in danger to
fall back, and why so many do fall back from Christ, and Religion. pt. 1. fol.
132, b. and 506, a. and pt. 2. fol. 28, a. 69, a, b. Those who forsake, and
fall from Religion, shall be forsaken. pt. 2. f. 6, a. Apostles. Disciples.
Diverse questions concerning the 12 Apostles and Disciples of Christ. pt. 1.
fol. 134, 135. 140, a. 171, 172. 467, a. 495, a. and pt. 2. fol. 1, a, b. 2, a,
b. 12, a. 27, b. 387, b. Ministers must be Disciples before Apostles; and why?
pt. 2. fol. 1, a. How Apostles and Disciples differ. pt. 2. fol. 2. We should
all labor to be the Disciples of Christ, why, and how? pt. 2. folio 104.
Apparel. Garments. Diverse questions concerning the necessity and use of
apparel. pt. 1. folio 346. Appetite. Belly. How the desires of the Belly, and
our natural appetites are evil. pt. 1. fol. 96, a. Armor. Weapons. What a
Christian man's Weapons are against his spiritual enemies, pt. 1. fol. 62, a.
Arrogance. The nature, and causes of Arrogance. Pt. 1. fol. 46. Ashes. A
manifold use of Ashes. pt. 2. fol. 85, a. Assemblyes. Diverse sorts of
Assemblyes. pt. 2. fol. 221, b. Assurance. See Faith. Avarice. See
Covetousness. Austerity. Although an Austere life be commeadable, yet it is
not approved of by carnal men. pt. 2. fol. 70, a. 77. b.
B.
BAbes. Infants. There are three sorts of Babes. Pt. 2. f. 94, b. Whether there
be such a thing as Limbus Infantum. pt. 2. fol. 332, a. 335, b. 336, a.
Backbiting. Calumny. Detraction. etc. How these two, to revile, and to speak
evil off, differ. pt. 1. fol. 168, b. We must not Calumniate or deprave any,
and the causes of Calumny, and remedies against it. pt. 2. folio 77, b. 121, b.
Backsliding. See Apostasy. Banquets. See Feasts. Baptism. Questions concerning
the Baptizing of Infants. part 1. fol. 66, b. and Pt. 2. fol. 237, b. 238, a,
b. 388, b. 389, a. Diverse questions concerning the nature, necessity,
Ceremonies, sorts, excellency, utility, and abuse of Baptism. Pt. 1. fol. 70.
75, b. 79, a. 80, a. and pt. 2. fol. 390, 391. Diverse questions concerning
Christ's Baptism and John's. pt. 1. fol. 68, a. 73, 74. 79, a. 80, a, b. Whether
Ministers in Baptism give grace to those whom they Baptize. part 1. folio 68,
b. What Analogy there is between Baptism and the Lords Supper. Pt. 2. folio
279, b. Beggars. Beggars permitted contrary to the Law, and why? Pt. 2. folio
266, a. Believers. Faithful. How the Faithful are saved from their sins,
and from what sins they are saved. Pt. 1. folio 19, a. Wherein the Faithful
should be like Angels. pt. 2. fol. 285, b. And wherein their felicity consists.
pt. 1. fol. 487, a, b. Belief. See Faith. Belly. See Appetite. Beelzebub. What
Beelzebub signifies. Pt. 2. fol. 33, b. Bethlehem. Diverse questions concerning
Bethlehem. Pt. 1. f. 23, a. 31, b. 32, a. Bigamy. Digamy. Poligamy. All these
both now are, and heretofore were unlawful. Pt. 1. fol. 231. 233, b. 260, a.
Birds. What we may learn of, or from Birds. Pt. 1. fol. 344, b. 345, a.
Blasphemy. Diverse necessary and profitable questions, concerning Blasphemy, or
the sin against the holy Ghost. pt. 1. fol. 312, a, b. and pt. 2. fol. 123,
124, 125. Blessedness. Diverse questions concerning the number of the
Beatitudes, and the nature of true Blessedness, and what it is, and wherein it
consists, and from whence i^ proceeds, and the way thereunto. pt. 1. folio 127,
a. and 136, 137, 138. 160, b. 161, a. 158, a, b. 416, b. and pt. 2. folio 32,
b. 97, b. 180, b. Blessings. Diverse questions concerning, temporal, and
corporal blessings. pt. 1. folio, 128, 129. 142. 527, b. 525, b. Blindness.
Darkness. Ignorance. All men by nature, without Christ are ignorant, blind,
and dark. pt. 1. fol. 116. and pt. 2. folio 33. 64, a. The causes of
Spiritual blindness, and the remedies against it, pt. 2. fol. 89, 90. 92.
265, 266, a. and pt. 1. fol. 518, b. Whether Ignorance or knowledge be better.
pt. 2. fol. 146, a. Body. There is a fourefold Body. pt. 2. folio 102, b, etc.
Bounty. See Alms. Bread. What is meant by this word Bread in the Lords prayer.
pt. 1. fol. 306, a. 308, a. Brethren. Brothers. Ministers are Brethren. Pt. 1.
folio 119, b. All Christians are Brethren. Part 1. folio 205, a. Christ loves
amity, and unity amongst Brethren. pt. 1. folio 120. Burial. Sepulchers.
Christians Burial must be performed unto the dead and why? Pt. 1. folio 154,
b. and 155, a. 470, a. The Jewish customs at Burials. pt. 2. fol. 381, a. and
pt. 1. folio 508, b. and 509, a. Burdens. How many sorts of burdens there
are, and how they are to be borne. pt. 2. fol. 99, b. 100.
C.
CAlamity. See Adversity. Calling. Vocation. Function. Diverse questions
concerning external Callings. pt. 1. fol. 123, b. and fol. 362, 363. 486, a.
and pt. 2. folio 55, b. Diverse questions concerning God and Christ's calling and
recalling of us. pt. 1. folio 132, b. 446, a. 468, a, b. 494, b. 500, b. 501,
a. pt. 2. folio 256, 257. 260, 261. Things are called three manner of ^ayes.
pt. 1. fol. 168, a. Calumny. See Backbiting. Captivity. Why the Lord permitted
the Jews to be kept captive under the Romans. pt. 1. fol. 23. By nature we
are Satan's captives. part 1. fol. 477. Care. Whom God cares for most. part 2.
folio 36, a. Diverse questions concerning worldly Care. pt. 1. fol. 328, a. 341,
b. 342, b. 343, a. 349, b. 350, a. 361. Casting off. To cast out. To Reject.
Diverse questions concerning Gods rejecting of man, and man's casting off God.
pt. 1. fol. 459, a, b. pt. 2. fol. 280, b. 281. 292, a. Centurion. What a
Centurion was. pt. 1. fol. 447, a. 451, b. 454. Ceremonies. See Adiaphorall
things. Charity. See Alms. Charms. See Magi. or Magic. Chastity. Wherein
the felicity of those who are pure, and chaste, consists. pt. 1. fol. 221, a.
Children. Diverse questions concerning the signification of this word Child, and
of childrens duty toward their Parents. pt. 1. folio 122, b. 123, a. and pt.
2. fol. 52, b. 53, a. 54. 158. 159. 206, b, etc. 237, a. 242, b. 294, b. Diverse
questions concerning the felicity, safety, nature, number, and marks of Gods
children; and the way and means thereunto. pt. 1. fol. 35, a. 51, a. 83. 127.
167, b. 254, b. 255, a. 437, a. 487, etc. and pt. 2. folio 58. b. 59, a. 88, b.
89, a. 156, b. Our chiefest care and labor should be to be made Gods Sons.
pt. 1. folio 254, b. None can rejoice in God but Sons. pt. ^. fol. 88, b. 89,
a. Christ. Controverted questions concerning the Deity and Humanity of Christ.
pt. 1. fol. 16, 17, a. 21. 78, b. 83. pt. 1. folio 467, b. 507, a. and pt. ^.
fol. 88, a. 197, a. 238, b. 239. 262, a. 316. 326, b. 376, b. 377. and 391, b.
Whether Christ be every where in regard of his Humanity. pt. 2. folio 215, b.
290. 356. and 386, b. 387, a. Diverse questions concerning the temptations of
Christ. pt. 1. fol. 84, 85, 86, 87. 95, 96, 97. 112, 113, b. Questions
concerning the c^nception, nativity, birth, Baptism, Flight, Education, life,
humility, and time of Christ's being upon earth. pt. 1. folio 17, a. 20, b. 23,
a. 32, a. 37. 40. 49, a. 52, 53, a. 54, b. 78, b. 79, 80. 115, etc. 123, b.
124, a. and pt. 2. folio 107, a. 134, b. 263, b. Questions concerning the
works, and actions of Christ, as he was our Physician, Savior, King, Doctor,
Mediator, Shepherd, and Cornerstone. Pt. 1. fol. 19, a. 20, a. 120, b. 101,
b. 113, b, etc. 187, b* and pt. 1. folio 488, b. pt. 2. fol. 32 b. 104, b, etc.
106. 122, b, etc. 154, a. 263, b, etc. 277. 373, a. Diverse questions concerning
Christ's Miracles, miraculous cures, and works, and virtue, and power. pt. 1.
fol. 128, b. 129, 130, b. 131, a. 132, a. and pt. 1. folio 466, b. and 489, a.
499, b, etc. 507, a. pt. 2. folio 63, 64. 81. 119, a. 132, a. 386. and pt. 1.
fol. 513, b. 516, a. 518, a. 523, b. 524, a. Questions concerning the
manifestation of Christ. pt. 1. fol. 23, a. 54, a. 78, b. Questions directing
us how to come unto Christ. pt. 1. fol. 24, b. 25, a. 49, a. 55. 63, b. 78, b.
85. 135. 443, a. 468, a. 473, b. 488, b. 497, b. and pt. 2. f. 119, b. 194, a.
Diverse necessary questions concerning the arraignment, examination,
accusations, opposition, persecution, passion, and death of Christ. Pt. 1.
folio 49, b. 84, a. 88, b. and pt. 2. f. 131, a. 132. 261, b. 298. 337, a. 358,
b. 361, 362. 370, b. 372. 374. 376. 377. 379. b. 380, b. Questions concerning
Christ's love unto us. pt. 1. folio 51. 495, b. and pt. 2. folio 78, a. 244, b.
308, b. Questions concerning the joy, felicity, benefits, and comfort we have
by Christ. pt. 1. folio 116, b. 117. and pt 2. fol. 32, b. 55, b. 56, a. 97, b.
100, b, etc. 102. Why Christ fasted. pt. 1. folio 89. What gesture he used in
prayer. pt. 2. folio 154, a. Questions concerning the speeches of Christ. pt.
2. folio 277. 306, a. and pt. 1. folio 492, a. Questions concerning the
preaching of Christ. Pt. 1. folio 118. 124 125, 126, 341. 346. Christ was
neither temporal King nor Beggar. pt. 1. folio 25, b. 139, b. 468, b.
Questions concerning Christ's coming. pt. 2. folio 3^2. 314, a. 319, b. 321,
322, etc. 325. 327, b. 331, b. and pt. 1. folio 500, b. Questions concerning
Christ's subjection unto the Law. pt. 1. folio 180 184. 193, 194. The
Geanealogie of Christ. See Genealogy. Whether Adoration were rightly given to
the Humane body of Christ. pt. 2. folio 385, a. How many ways the name Christ
is taken in Scripture, part 2. folio 309, a. He is the Head, Husband, and
Foundation of the Church. See Church. Diverse apparitions of Christ after his
Resurrection. pt. 2. folio 384, a. 385. Christ was no seducer. pt. 2. fol. 381.
Christ sees the secrets of the inward man. pt. 1. folio 467, a. How Christ is
our Father, and Brother. pt. 1. folio 487, a. Christians. They must be
Nazarites, and wherein, and lights, and a holy City unto God, and why? pt. 1.
fol. 53. 171, b. 242, a. The difference between Christ, and all Christians.
pt. 1. fol. 132, a. The sins of Christians are worse then the sins of
Heathens; and why? pt. 2. folio 83, b. 84, a. The happiness of Christians both
here, and hereafter. pt. 1. folio 456, 457. Church. Questions concerning the
authority of the Church, and how far she is to be believed. part 1. folio 30,
b. and pt. 2. folio 218, 219, 220. 292, 293. Questions concerning, the nature,
notes, universality, infallibility, continuance, purity, visibility,
excellency, members, afflictions, portion, Foundation, and Head of the Church.
pt. 1. fol. 35, b. 76, a. 77, a. 78, a. 102. 172, b. 173. 175. b. 276, a. ^05,
b. 422, a. 440. 459, a. and Pt. 2. folio 8, a. 142, etc. 145, a. 181, b. 182,
183, 184. 186, b. 187. 188, a. 218. 222. 256. 260, a. 296, b. 325, a. 388, a.
394. The Church of Christ is like unto a Field, a City, a House, a Ship, and
the Kingdom of Heaven; and wherein? Pt. 1. fol. 77, etc. 173, a. 174, b, etc.
and folio 458, b. and pt. 2. folio 73. 154. 169, b. 170, a. Questions
concerning disobedient Churches, and the enemies of the true Church. pt. 1.
folio 297, 298. and Pt. 2. f. 6, a, b. 7, a. 277, a. 291. Questions concerning
separation from the Church. pt. 2. folio 8. 143, a. Objections for
Church-treasure, answered. pt. 1. fol. 188, a. and pt. 2. folio 326, a. That
Church which is lead by blind, or blemished Teachers is miserable. pt. 2. fol.
167, a. At whom the Church began. Pt. 2. folio 306, b, etc. The happiness of
those within the Church, and their duty in regard of those who are without.
Part 1. folio 30, b. a. and pt. 2. fol. 198, b. 199. 394. Circumspection.
Wariness. Watches. Watchfulness. The night was anciently divided into four.
Watches. and the life of man into three. Pt. 2. fol. 155, a. 305, b. We must
beware of others, and why? pt. 1. fol. 421, b. Circumstances. See Adiaphorall
things. City. We should be a holy City unto God. pt. 1. fol. 242, a. Cleansing.
Purging. Washing. Diverse questions concerning spiritual Washing, purging and
cleansing. pt. 1. fol. 77, 78, a. 129, b. 326, b. and pt. 2. fol, 67, b, etc.
301, 302, 303. etc. There were amongst the Jews diverse sorts of washings. pt.
2. folio 373, b. Collections. Conclusions false Collections, and Conclusions
often drawn from true propositions. pt. 1. fol. 97, b. 103. Collegies.
Schools. There were Collegies, and Schools of learning under the Law. pt. 2.
fol. 78, b. Comfort, Consolation. Diverse comfortable questions, concerning the
sweet comforts, and consolations which are given to the godly. pt. 1. f. 143,
144, 145, and pt. 2. f. 98. 100. b. 101, a. 102. Commandments. Law. Questions
concerning the differences between the Law, and Gospel. pt. 1. fol. 55, a.
183. and Pt. 2. fol. 241, a. Profitable questions concerning the impossibility,
obedience, excellency, co^tents, abrogation, destruction, division,
consummation, exposition, scope, end and use of the Law pt. 1. fol. 80. b. 181,
182, 183, 184, b. 185, a. 192. 215. 301. 404, 405, 406. 500, b. and pt. 2. f.
75. 179. b. 241, b. 242, a. 287, a. 299. b. Humane Laws are often opposite to
divine. Pt. 1. fol. 248, b. and pt. 2. fol. 27, a. Christ was no enemy unto the
Law. pt. 1. fol. 180. 193, 194. 404, b. Diverse errors concerning the Law. pt.
1. folio 181, 182. The Preaching of the Law is never acceptable to sinners,
although it be necessary. Pt. 2. fol. 76, b. 77, a. 78. a, b. Commet. Star.
Diverse questions concerning the Star, or Commet, which was seen by the
Wisemen. part. 1. folio 24, b. 26, b. 27. 34, b. There are diverse sorts of
Stars, and commets. part 2. folio 24, b. 25. a. 27. a. Common wealth. The
means whereby a Common wealth may flourish. Pt. 2. fol. 87. a. Company.
Companions. Society. There are diverse sorts of societies, and associates. Pt.
1. fol. 51, b. and Pt. 2. fol. 18. Questions concerning society with wicked
men. pt. 2. fol. 17, 18, 19. and Pt. 1. f. 481, a. 49^, b. 496, a. What is
required of those who keep company, and converse with Saints. pt. 2. folio
329, b. Compunction. Contrition. Humiliation. Godly Sorrow. Contrition is a
part of repentance, and belongs unto the Law. pt. 1. f. 118, b. and Pt. 2. fol.
275, b. 365. Without humiliation, and compunction, no comfort, and consolation.
pt. 2. folio 98. The division of humiliation, and the means thereunto. pt. 2.
fol. 275, b. 365. and pt. 1. fol. 494, b. Conclusions. See Collections.
Concord. See Agreement. Concupiscence. Many necessary and profitable questions,
concerning the internal concupiscence of the heart. pt. 1. fol. 87, b. 101, b,
etc. 222, 223, b, etc. Condemnation. Punishment. All wicked men shall be
punished, and condemned at the last; and why? pt. 1. f. 409, b. 410, a. 428, a.
429. Condition. Estate. Our estate and condition is often happy, when it seems
miserable. pt. 1. fol. 35, b. Confession. Diverse questions concerning the
kinds, properties, and necessity of Confession. pt. 1. folio 58, b. 59, a. 69.
and 493, b. Controverted questions concerning Auricular confession. pt. 1. fol.
68, b. 69, 489, b. 490. Confidence. See Faith. Conscience. Diverse questions
concerning the division of Conscience in general; and the nature of an evil
conscience, and the necessity of a good. pt. 1. f. 29, a. and pt. 2. f. 16, b.
277, b. 302, b. 350, b. 365, a. 366. Consistory. Sanhedrim. Questions
concerning the Jewish Consistory, Sanhedrim and Judgment so^ts pt. 1 f. 195.
and pt. 2. f. 27, b. 187, b. Consolation See Comfort. Co^stancy, Inconstancy,
Perseverance. Perseverance in obedience is hard. pt. 1. folio 61, b. Means, or
helpe^ unto perseverance pt. 1. f. 133. Inconstancy becomes no Christians. pt.
2. f. 69. b, etc. Consultation. Deliberation. who offend in their
Consultations. Pt. 1. folio 15, b. How Deliberation, and d^lay differ, pt. 1.
folio 15, b. 6^, b. Deliberation requisite in wrighty actions, pt. 1. folio 15,
b. and 60, b. Contempt. Contemners. Despisers. To Despise. Diverse questions
concerning the contempt of the Word, and Preachers thereof. Pt. 1. fol. 119, a.
and 441, a. and 450, b. Pt. 2. f. 50, b, etc. 86, b. 87, a. 90. 300, b.
Contentation. Christians must be contented, and why? and the rules observeable
thereunto. pt. 1. fol. 11 b. and 35, b. Contention. Dissentio^. Discord.
Strife. Iarres. Dissension hinders religion, part 2. fol. 40, a. The causes of
domestical Contentions and jarres, and the remedies against them. pt. 2. fol.
50, 51. Who are sowers of Discord and strife. pt. 1. fol. 168, b. Contrition
See Compunction. Conventicles. The Conventicles of Separatists unlawful. pt.
1. f. 125, b. 126, a. 523, a, b. Conversation. Life. Diverse questions
concerning our temptations after the purpose, and endeavor of a new Life. pt.
1. fol. 84, b. 85, b. Profitable questions concerning the purging, and
regulating of our Lives, and conversations. Pt. 1. fol. ^5. 416, 417. and Pt.
2. folio 16. b. 17. 135. 166. Diverse questions concerning the kinds of Life,
and the nature of Life in general, and of a Christians Life and Spiritual
life, in particular. pt. 1. fol. 304, 305. 417, 418. 472, 473. and 492. b. etc.
and pt. 2. folio 50, a. An austere life is commendable, and why? pt. 2. fol. 7,
a. See Austerity. The Life of the wicked is shortened. pt. 1. fol. 430, a.
Conversion. Repentance. Penance. What Repentance John Baptist preached. Pt. 1.
fol. 55, b. Objections for popish Penance, answered. pt. 1. fol. 55, b. 56,
etc. Diverse questions concerning the kinds, parts, properties, means, method,
necessity, and signification of Repentance, and the felicity of the truly
penitent. pt. 1. fol. 57. 60. 204, a. 313, b. 4^7. 512, b. 520, a. and pt. 2.
fol. ^^. 82, 83. a. 84, b. 85, 86, a. 87. a. ^75, 276, a. 302, b. etc. 362, b.
Questions concerning false Repentance. pt. 2. fol. 364, b* The ^^^^dest ^ay, be
converted. pt. 2. fol. (...), b, (...). Altho^g^ (...) can do nothing in the
work of Conversion, yet he is inexp^ repe^^ (...) 2. f. 274. Corb^n. that
(...) sig^ified by the (...). pt. 2. f^l. 59* ^. (...) 298, ^ Corn. Who are
Corn, and who are chafe. pt. 1. folio 78, a. Corruption. How manifold
Corruption is. pt. 1. folio 427, a. Covetousness. Avarice. World. Worldlings
and Temporal things. Diverse questions concerning Covetousness, and the love
and service of the World. pt. 1. folio 333. b. 334. 338. 481, a. and pt. 2. f.
363. Diverse questions concerning the nature, and wickedness of this present
world. pt. 1. fol. 122, a. 408, a. and pt. 2. folio 40, b. The difference
between the Worldling, Hypocrite, and godly man. pt. 1. folio 226, a. The
difference between Temporal, or worldly things, and heavenly, pt. 1. folio
329, b. Council. Synod. Diverse questions concerning the infallibility, power,
and calling of lawful Councels. Part 1. fol. 30, a. and pt. 2. fol. 218, a.
221, b. 222, b. What the Jewish Councels were. pt. 2. folio 27, a. Council.
See Admonition. Craft Deceit. Double dealing. Fraud. Christians must be free
from all Fraud, false dealing, and the like, and why? pt. 1. folio ^61, a.
Creatures. What we may learn from the Creatures. pt. 1. folio 344. Crosses.
See Adversity. Cruelty. Questions concerning the fruits, effects, nature, and
kinds of Cruelty. Pt. 1. folio 43, b. 44, a. and 45, b. 479, b. etc. Customs.
Questions concerning the Customs of Nations, and the kinds of Customs. Pt. 1.
folio 261, etc.
D.
DAnger. Distress. Peril. Trouble. Questions concerning the dangers, and
troubles of the Apostles and faithful; and the remedies against them, and
deliverance from them. Pt. 1. f. 31, a. 35, a. 50, b. and pt. 2. fol. 27, b.
Whether danger may be feared, and how? pt. ^. fol. 41, b. and f. 362, a.
Darkness See Blindness. Day. How the Day of old was divided. Pt. 2. fol. 257,
a. and 382, a. Deafness Diverse Questions concerning the kind and causes of
deafness, and the remedies against it. Pt. ^. folio 6^, 69. Death. Questions
concerning the division, des^^^ ^^^^ctation, (...), and welco^^^ng of Death.
pt. ^. fol. 61. 70, a. 196, b. 320, a. and pt. 1. folio 510, a, b. Questions
concerning sudden Death, and the uncertainty of the hour of Death. pt. 1.
folio 328, b, etc. 430. and pt. 2. folio 320, a. Questions concerning our
Spiritual Death, and deliverance therefrom, Pt. 2. folio 70. The dead have no
benefit by the indulgences of the Church. Pt. 2. folio 326, a. and pt. 1. folio
512, b. Living men appear to be dead, and that many ways. Pt. 1. fol. 509, b.
Debts. Questions concerning the kinds of Debts, and what debts we must forgive
our brethren, and why? pt. 1. fol. 309, b. and pt. 2. fol. 223, b. 224, a.
Decrees. Although Gods Decrees be sure, yet means must be used. pt. 1. folio
51, a. Delay. Procrastination. How deliberation and delay differ. pt. 1. fol.
15, b. 60, b. Whether it be good or not, to protract our obedience. pt. 1.
folio. 85, a. Deliberation. See Consultation. Deliverance. What is meant by
this word Deliver. Matthew. 10.17. They will deliver you. part 2. folio 27, a.
Denial* Self-denial. Questions concerning Denial in general, and the kinds
thereof, and Self-denial in particular. Pt. 2. folio 47, 48, 49, b. 194.
Diverse profitable questions concerning the denial of Christ. Pt. 2. folio 48,
49. Dereliction. Forsaking. Questions how Christ was forsaken, and how many
sorts of dereliction there are. pt. 1. folio 377. Derision See Scoffers.
Desert. Merit. Controverted questions concerning the Merit of works. pt. 1
folio 158. 160, a. 169. 254, a. 258. 525, a. and pt. 2. folio 197, b. 239, b.
240. 253, a. 258, b. 334. Christ's Merits man (...) ^pplied unto us, but the
merits of the Saints c^nn^t. pt. 1. folio 187, ^. 188, a. Desire. Unclean
desires, a branch of the seventh C^^^andement. pt. 1. folio 222. Holy Desires
(...) of be^^^^ly knowledge. p^* ^. folio ^39, b. etc. Des^^^ation. ^^^stions
co^c^rning the kinds and (...) of D^^peration, and (...) it. part 2. folio
(...)* ^68. D^sp^ers. (...) Detestation. Hatred. Some Hate others for Religion,
and who they are? pt. 2. fol. 52, a. We must Hate none, and why? pt. 1. fol.
251, b. 252, a. Detraction. See Backbiting. Devil. Satan. Diverse questions
concerning the name, nature, deceit, enmity, punishment, strength, weapons, and
temptations of Satan, and the remedies against him, and them. pt. 1. fol. 97.
100, b. 102, b. 104, a. 131, b. 318. 478, 479, 480, 481, 482. 520, b. and pt.
2. fol. 33, b. 120, a. 141, a. 367, a. and pt. 1. fol. 521, a. Questions
concerning the Devils knowledge, and tempting of Christ. pt. 1. fol. 96. 102.
and pt. 2. fol. 169, a. When, and how God makes use of Satan. Pt. 1. fol. 97,
a. Sin comes from Satan. Pt. 2. f. 2, a. A man may have power over Satan,
and yet not be saved. Pt. 1. f. 435. Diet. How many sorts of Diet there are.
Pt. 2. fol. 76, a, b. Diffidence. Distrust. The Devil tempts us to Distrust
God, and how? pt. 1. fol. 96. b. Digamy. See Bigamy Disciples. See Apostles,
and Servants. Discord. See Contention. Diseases. Sicknesses. Diverse questions
concerning the Sicknesses, and Diseases which were healed by Christ. Pt. 1.
fol. 129, b. 130, 131, 132. Pt. 2. fol. 11, b. How Sicknesses and Diseases
differ. Pt. 1. fol. 129, a. Questions concerning Gods end in afflicting with
sickness, and our bearing of it. Pt. 1. fol. 131, 132. The Sick are to be
visited, and why? Pt. 2. fol. ^33, a. Dishonor. Honor. How many ways God is
Dishonored. Pt. 1. fol. 295, 296. Although Honor be good, yet it is
perilous, and very much abused. pt. 2. fol. 304, b. 330, a. To Dispossess.
Possession. Fruition. Whether any now adays be Possessed or not. Pt. 2. fol.
119, b. 120, a. pt. 1. fol. 476, b. 477, a, b. etc. 480. Whether Satan
dispossess Satan. Pt. 2. fol. 121, b, etc. How many ways unclean Spirits
are Dispossessed. Pt. 1. fol. 100, b. and fol. 465, b. and Pt. 2. fol. 20^, b.
We never perfectly Enjoy God or Christ, till we come to heaven. Pt. 1. fol.
345. Dissension. See Contention. Dissimulation. There is a lawful, as well as
an unlawful Dissimulation. Pt. 1. fol. 33. Distress. See Danger. Distrust.
See Diffidence. Devil. See Devil. Divorce. Separation. Diverse questistions
concerning Divorces. Pt. 1. fol. 228, 229, 230, 231, 232. and Pt. 2. fol. 231,
232, 233. Doctrine. The fruits of true and false Doctrine. Pt. 1. f. 422, b.
423, a. Dove. Questions, why the holy Ghost descended in the likeness of a
Dove; and what the nature, and properties of Doves are; and why they must be
imitated; and wherein, and whether in all things or not? Pt. 1. f. 82. and pt,
2. f. 23, b. 24, b. 25, 26, a. Dreams. Diverse questions concerning the kinds
and causes of Dreams pt. 1. fol. 16, b. 37, a. and pt. 2. f. 370, b. 371, a.
Duels are the most devilish cruelty pt. 1. fol. 46, a. Dumb. All men by
nature, are spiritually Dumb. pt. 2. fol. 121, a. Dwell. Whether, and how it
is lawful to dwell amongst Infidels. pt. 1. fol. 51, b.
E.
EArth. Field. Ground. Questions concerning the signification, and sorts of
Earth. Pt. 1. fol. 77. 146, 147. Eclypse. Diverse questions concerning the
Eclipse at Christ's suffering. pt. 2. fol. 375, b. etc. Education. There is a
threefold good Education. pt. 1. fol. 49. Egypt. A description of Egypt, and
the Egyptians, and why Joseph fled thither. pt. 1. f. 40, b. 41, b. Election.
Not all, but a few only are Elected unto life. pt. 2. fol. 261, 262, b. The
Elect cannot perish, and why? pt. 2. fol. 314, a. Elias. How John was Elias:
and whether Elias be yet come? pt. 2. fol. 151. and 201, a. Emmanuel. The
derivation of this Name, and to whom it was given. pt. 1. fol. 21. Enemies.
Diverse questions concerning the Enemies of Christ, and his Church. pt. 1. fol.
33, b. 34, a. 49. b, etc. 297, 298. and pt. 2. fol. 7, a. 26, b. Questions
concerning the Spiritual enemies of mankind, and the defense against them. pt.
1. f. 61, b. 62, a. Diverse questions concerning the love of our Enemies. pt. 1.
f. 252, 253, 255. Enjoyment. See Dispossess. Equivocation. Questions and
examples of Equivocation. pt. 1. f. 188, a. 233. and 509, a. pt. 2. f. 16, a.
Eremite. Hermit. Whether John Baptist was an Hermit. pt. 1. f. 64, b. Errors.
Heresies. Whence it is that Errors in Religion often spring from the Pastors of
the Church. pt. 1. fol. 211, b. etc. How people may be preserved from Error.
pt. 1. fol. 211, b, etc. How Error may be founded upon Scripture. pt. 1. fol.
213. Errors creep secretly into the Church. pt. 2. fol. 143, b. etc. Estate.
See Condition. Esteem. To Prefer. Christ is to be esteemed and Preferred
before all other things, and why? Pt. 2. fol. 55, b. 56, a. Eucharist. Or the
Lords Supper. Controverted questions concerning the Eucharist. pt. 1. fol. 114.
and pt. 2. fol. 270. b. 279, b. 38 Questions, with 11 Objections, concerning
the Lords Supper. pt. 2. fol. 339, b, etc. to 356, b. Diverse other questions
concerning the worthy, and unworthy coming, unto the Table of the Lord, and
the end of this Sacrament. pt. 2. fol. 279, 280. 307, a. and pt. 1. fol. 457,
a. 501, b. (...). What (...) signifies. pt. 1. fol. 83. The (...), and goodwill
of God, is the first and principal cause of all he does. pt. 2. fol. 94, b.
etc. Evening. What is meant by Evening, pt. 2. fol. 381, a. Evil. How manifold
Evil is. pt. 1. f. 245, b. 246, a. How we must pray against Evil. pt. 1. fol.
317, b. Eunuchs. How many sorts of Eunuchs there are. pt. 2. fol. 236, a.
Exaction. There is a double exaction. pt. 1. fol. 69, a. Examination. What we
must examine, and what we must not examine in our selves, and how we must
examine our selves. pt. 1. fol. 57, b, etc. 98, b. etc. 133, a. 439, a. and pt.
2. 328, b. 329, 330. Example. We must give good Example unto our brethren, and
why? pt. 1. fol. 177. Excommunication. Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. And the
power of the Keys. Diverse questions concerning the power, and use of the
Keys. pt. 2. fol. 191, 192. 221, a. and pt. 1. fol. 492, a, b. Exorcists. See
Magi. Magic. Experience. Faith is increased by the experience of Gods mercy.
pt. 1. f. 343. Eye, Diverse properties of the Eye. pt. 2. fol. 65.
F.
FAith. Belief. Assurance. Confidence. Diverse questions both utile, and
useful, concerning the nature, nourishing, act, object, kinds, marks,
benefits, and approbation of true justifying Faith. pt. 1. fol. 133, b. 343.
436. 445. 515, a.b. and fol. 514, b. pt. 2. fol. 60, b. 173. 180. a. 201, b.
203. 272, b. 349, a. Diverse questions concerning weak, and strong Faith, and
the nature, notes, and kinds of Assurance, and Confidence. pt. 1. fol. 348,
349. 433, b. and 452, 453. 570. and pt. 2. fol. 117, b. 118. 156, a. 173, b.
326, b. and pt. 1. fol. 474, 475, 476. Faith cannot be separated from works,
and Love. pt. 1. fol. 76, b. and pt. 2. fol. 149. A man may Believe more then
is promised; and how? pt. 1. fol. 110, b. etc. How Christ requires Faith of us,
before he works it in us. pt. 2. fol. 119, a. Wherein our Faith and Adams
differ. pt. 2. fol. 156, a. Faithful. See Believers. Fame. Reputation.
Questions concerning the sorts of Fame, and Reputation; and how they may be,
sought for; and why Christians should be so careful of their name, fame, and
credit? pt. 1. fol. 13. and pt. 2. fol. 17. Familists. See Anabaptists. Fan.
What is meant by the Fan in Christ's hand. Pt. 1. fol. 77, a. Fasting. Why
Christ fasted. pt. 1. fol. 89. Whether a choice of meats upon Fasting days be
a matter of Religion. Pt. 1. fol. 65, a. and Pt. 2. fol. 163. 167, b. Questions
concerning the sorts of Fasts in general, and wherein the true and false Fast
consist; and the nature, definition, ends, reasons, and benefits of Fasting.
pt. 1. fol. 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95. and 322, b. 323, 324. 326. and fol.
502, b. Pt. 2. fol. 163, 164, 165. 203, b. Fate. What Stoicall Fate is. Pt. 1.
fol. 466, a. Fathers. Parents. The duty of Parents toward their Children; and
the danger of the neglect of their duty. pt. 1. fol. 21, a. 123, a. and 511, b.
512, a. and Pt. 2. 53, b. 54. 61. Some are good Parents and evil persons. Pt.
2. fol. 402. Why the Lord is called our Father. Pt. 1. fol. 179, b. 290. and
Pt. 2. fol. 181, a. The happiness of those who have God to their Father. pt.
1. fol. 292, b. Why the ancient Fathers of former times, are not fit
Foundations to build our Faith upon. pt. 1. fol. 190, 191. 194, b. The Papists
easily reject many Fathers at once, when they speak not on their side. pt. 2.
fol. 234. Fear. How danger may be feared. pt. 1. fol. 41, b. and 474. Feasts.
Diverse questions concerning Feasts. pt. 1. fol. 456, 457. Felicity. See
Blessedness. Fever. The nature of a Fever. pt. 1. fol. 461, 462, 463. Figures
See Allegories. Fire. There is a threefold Fire. pt. 1. fol. 78, a. Fishes.
Fishers. Questions concerning the signification of this word Fisher; and what
things are observeable in Fishers; and wherein Ministers resemble them. pt. 1.
fol. 120, 121. Flax. What is meant by Flax. pt. 2. fol. 117, b. Flight.
Questions concerning Joseph's fleeing with Christ into Egypt. pt. 1. fol. 37.
40, 41. 49. When, and how Flight is lawful in the time of persecution, and
danger. pt. 1. fol. 115, a. pt. 2. fol. 28, b. 29, 30, 31, 32. Floor. What is
meant by the Barn Floor. pt. 1. fol. 76, b. To Follow Christ. Diverse
questions concerning our following of Christ. pt. 2. fol. 55, a. and pt. 1.
fol. 468, 469, b. 440, b. 441, a. Fool. Folly. How it is lawful to call one
Fool. pt. 1. fol. 200, b. and pt. 2. fol. 297, b, etc. Forgiveness.
Remission. Reconciliation. Diverse profitable questions concerning our
Reconciliation unto God, and his gracious forgiving of us. pt. 1. fol. 82, a.
310, a. 312, b. 313, b. 314, a. 489, b. and pt. 2. fol. 223, b. 225. Diverse
questions concerning our forgiving one another; and Reconciliation one unto
another. pt. 1. fol. 205, 206, 207, 208, 209. 321, b. 322, a. and pt. 2. fol.
223, b. 224, 225, a. Questions concerning the power of the Church in pardoning
of sinners. Pt. 1. fol. 492, a.b. Forsaking. See Dereliction. Forswearing.
Swearing. Perjury. Oaths. Diverse useful questions concerning Swearing, and
Oaths. Pt. 1. fol. 236, 237, 238, 239, 240, 241, 242, 243, 244. and pt. 2.
fol. 152. 273. 297, a. 299, a. Diverse profitable questions concerning Perjury.
Pt. 1. folio 232. 233. Foundation. Three things required in a sure Foundation.
Pt. 1. fol. 440, a. Free Will* Objections for Free will answered. Pt. 1. fol.
329, b. and pt. 2. 128. Fruit. God requires Fruit of us, and why? Pt. 1. fol.
426, b. a. 428, b. Questions concerning the sorts of Fruit; and who are
fruitless in the Church; and our duty toward these who are Fruitful. Pt. 1.
fol. 423, 424, 425, b. Fruition. See Dispossess. Function. See Calling.
Funerals. See Burial.
G.
GAlilee. Why Christ returned into Galilee, and what things are observeable in
Galilee. Pt. 1. fol. 50. b. 51. Garments. See Apparel. Genealogies.
Differences concerning Christ's Genealogy reconciled; and diverse questions
concerning Genealogies answered. Pt. 1. fol. 7, 8, 9. 12. Gentiles, Heathens,
Infidels, Unbelievers. Questions concerning the Apostles preaching unto the
Gentiles, and of salvation offered unto them thereby. Pt. 2. fol. 5. 9, a. How
it is lawful to inhabit amongst Infidels and Heathens. Pt. 1. fol. 51, b.
Whether Unbeleevers may perform good works. Pt. 1. fol. 262, a. Ghost. See
Spirit. Gifts. Diverse necessary, and profitable questions, concerning the
corporal, external, and spiritual Gifts, which are given us by God. Pt. 1.
fol. 399, a. 437, a. and pt. 2. fol. 12, b. 13, a. 328, 329, 330. Glory. Why,
and how, we must seek the Glory of our God in all things. pt. 1. fol. 178, b.
179, a. 294, b. 295. Whether there shall be any degrees of Glory in heaven. pt.
1. fol. 329. a. and pt. 2. fol. 136. b. 146, b. 253, b. 259, a. Questions
concerning Vainglory. Pt. 1. fol. 467, b. God. Controverted questions
concerning the attributes of God, as his immutability, invisibility,
omnisciencie, power, subsistence, goodness, bounty, and long suffering. pt. 1.
fol. 83, b. 101, b. 128, b. 129, a. 164, b. 165, a. 241, b. 320. 321, a. 452,
a. 527, a. and pt. 2. fol. 1. 12. 33, a. 96, b. 214, 215. 246. 277, a. 280, a.
290, b. 295, b. 327. 359, a. There is a God, although wicked men have
Atheistical thoughts of him. pt. 1. fol. 300, b. and pt. 2. fol. 33. And in
what Books God is read. pt. 1. fol. 344. a. We must not demand a reason of
Gods actions. Pt. 2. fol. 95, a. 96, a. Where God dwells; and how manifold his
habitation is. pt. 1. fol. 241, b. 293, 294, a. God loves man better then the
other creatures. part. 1. folio 347, b. 348. Godly. Godliness. Piety. Pious.
Holy. Holiness. Holy things. Purity. Sanctity. Holy men are often in danger to
be abused by the wicked, unto wickedness. Part. 1. folio 32, b. 33, a. The way
of Holiness is a strait way: why, and how? Pt. 1. floio 413. The difference
between a Holy carnal, and hypocritical man. pt. 1. fol. 226, a. Diverse
necessary questions concerning the kinds, necessity, means, measure, seat, and
end, or reward of Purity and Sanctity; as also who are enemies thereunto. pt.
1. folio 161, 162, 163, a. 176, b. 177, a. 416, b. and part. 2. folio 276. Holy
things are not rashly to be communicated unto any. Part 2. fol. 170. What is
meant by this word Hallowed. pt. 1. folio 294, b. Gold. Silver. Money. How many
sorts of Money there are. part 2. folio 14, b. Good. Goodness. Good things.
Diverse questions concerning the Author of all good things in man; and why he
gives good things unto man; and how good things are abused by man. Pt. 1. folio
243, b, etc. 399. and pt. 2. fol. 12. Good in man is the exemplar of God. pt.
1. fol. 403, a. How manifold Goodness is. Pt. 1. fol. 425. Gospel. Diverse
excellent questions concerning the Author, nature, name, Penmen, Preachers,
power, dignity, excellency, and efficacy of the Gospel. pt. 1. folio 3, 4, b
55, a. 62, b. 63, a. 126, b. 141. and Pt. 2. folio 83. 207, b. 208, a. 311, b.
Questions concerning the receivers, embracers, enjoyers, and heirs of the
Gospel. pt. 2. fol. 66, b. 141, a and pt. 2. fol. 20, b. 21, a. 84, a, 88, a.
Questions concerning the hiding, revealing, and enlargment of the Gospel. Pt.
2. folio 87, b, 88, 90, a. 181, a. In what Language St. Matthew writ this
Gospel. Pt. 1. folio 5. Wherein the Law and Gospel differ. Pt. 1. folio 55,
a. 183. 427, b. Grace. Profitable questions concerning the necessity,
excellency, measure, and means of Grace; and the labor and pains which must
be taken for the procuring thereof. Pt. 1. folio 271, b. 400, 401. and pt. 2.
folio 276. What Graces are given unto us, for the obtaining of heaven. Pt. 1.
fol. 81, a. How Grace is ordinarily wrought in great sinners. Pt. 2. folio 274,
b. 275, a. How and wherein Grace resembles Wine. Part 1. folio 504, 505. Grace
is given undeservedly on our part. pt. 1. folio 514, b. Gratis. Freely. How and
what the Apostles did receive Gratis; and how, and what they must give Gratis.
Pt. 2. folio 12, b. 13. Grief. See Anguish. Ground. See Field.
H.
Hairs. Many notable things in these words, Your hairs are numbered. Pt. 2.
folio 36, b. Happiness. See Blessedness. Hardening. Hardness of heart
Obduration. How God hardens the heart; and whom he hardens; and the causes of
Obduration, and the remedies against it, and the misery of those who are
hardened. pt. 2. folio 89, b. 90, 91, 92. 141, a. and pt. 1. folio 459, b. 460,
a. Hatred. See Detestation. Hearers. Hearing. Diverse questions concerning the
sorts of Hearers; and unprofitable Hearers; and the signs, and duties of good
Hearers. Pt. 1. folio 70, b. 75, b, etc. 127, a. 166, b. 178, b. 437, 438, a.
441, a. 524, b. and pt. 2. folio 10, b. 84, b. 87, a. 104, b. 138, b, etc. 147,
148, 149, b. 162, a. 300, b. Diverse questions concerning our unwillingnesse to
Hear, and the necessity, impediments, and benefits of hearing; and the fruits
we must show of our hearing. pt. 2. folio 57, b. 68, 69. 138. 142, a. 147, b.
161, b. Heart. Why the Heart is the seat of all true purity. pt. 1. fol. 163,
a. Who serve God but not with the heart. pt. 1. fol. 163, b. The lust of the
Heart is sin. pt. 1. folio, 223, b. Heathens. See Gentiles. Heaven. Diverse
profitable questions concerning Heaven; viz. whether there be a Heaven; and the
joys thereof; and the way and means thereunto: and the difficulty of coming
thither, and who come unto Heaven. pt. 1. folio 141. 265. 300. 304, b. 305.
341, b. fine, etc. 351, 352, 353, 354, 355. 412, 413, 414, a. and pt. 2. folio
135, a. 116. 195, b. 196. 252, 253, 254, 255. Why, and how the Heavens were
opened, when Christ was baptized. pt. 1. folio 81, a. What graces are given
unto (...) for the obtaining of Heaven. part 1. folio 81, a. God is perfectly
obeyed in Heaven. pt. 1. fol. 304, a. Heavenly things by far, are ^^re
excellent then earthly. Part 1. fol* 329, b. Hell. Diverse questions concerning
the meaning of this word Hell; and of the torments thereof; and what the
Scripture expresses, and what it conceales concerning Hell. pt. 1. folio 202,
a. 430, b. 431, a. 432. 481, b. 482. and part 2. fol. 35, b. 214, a. 281, b.
Help. Succor. We should help one another unto Christ. part 2. folio 119, b.
Heremite. See Eremite. Heresy. See Error. Herod. Diverse questions concerning
the time wherein Herod lived; and his fear, fraud, folly, idleness, life, and
death. pt. 1. folio 23. 28, b. 32, a. 33, a. 46, a. 48, b. Whether Herod did
well or not, in consulting with the high Priests, and Scribes. part 1. fol. 30,
b. Why the Lord suffered Herod to know where Christ was borne. part 1. folio
31, a. Three Herod's mentioned in Scripture. pt. 1. fol. 150. What the sins of
Herod were which John reproved. pt. 2. fol. 152, a. Whether Herod was
originally accessory to the death of John, part 2. folio 153, a. Jerusalem.
Jerusalem. What prodigious signs preceded the destruction of Jerusalem. Pt. 2.
fol. 309, b. Hill. Mount. Mountain. Why Christ went up to the Mount to preach.
part 1. fol. 134. What the Hill is upon which the Church is built. Pt. 1. fol.
174. Diverse questions concerning Mountains. Pt. 2. fol. 175, b. 176.
Holiness. See Godliness. Honesty. Honesty and honest dealing between man and
man is commendable. pt. 1. folio 405, b. Honor. See Dishonor. Hospitality.
How many sorts of Hospitality there is, and why Christians must be given
thereunto. Pt. 1. folio 154, b. and part 2. folio 56, b. 333, b. Hour. What,
and how manifold an hour of old was. pt. 2. f. 257, a. Humiliation. See
Contrition. Humility. Diverse questions concerning the degrees, fruits, benefit,
and kinds of Humility, and why we must be humble, and whether all humility be
good or not. Pt. 1. fol. 74, b. 75. 141, 142, a. 466, a, and 493, ^. and part
2. f. 107. Hunger. Thirst. There is a threefold Hunger, and Thirst. Pt. 1.
folio 147, 148, 149. Hypocrites. Hypocrisy. Questions concerning the marks,
and reward of Hypocrites; and the kinds of hypocrisy, and why it must be
avoided. Pt. 1. fol. 33, b. 34, a. 71, b. 226, a. 341, b. and pt. 2. folio 136.
179, b. 244, a. 295, a. What things are common to the Hypocrite, and the
sincere professor, Pt. 2. folio 135, b. 324.
I.
IArres. See Contention. Idolatry. Idols. Idolatry provokes the Lord to cast
off National Churches. part 2. folio 6. Jerusalem. See Jerusalem. Jesus. Of
the derivation, and signification of the name JESUS. part 1. folio 17. Jews.
Diverse questions concerning the misery and impiety of the Jews. Pt. 1. folio
29, a. 54, b. and 459, a, b. pt. 2. fol. 132, b, etc. 374, b. 375, a. Seven
Sects amongst the Jews. part 1. folio 30. What was required of the Jews in
regard of the Messiah, part 2. folio 74, a. The Church of the Jews shall
flourish again. Pt. 2. folio 271, a. Ignorance. See Blindness. Illumination.
Light. Sight. Looks. Questions concerning the excellency, and notes of divine
Illumination. Pt. 1. fol. 24, b. 25. and part 2. folio 66, a. Diverse profitable
questions concerning Spiritual Light, viz. Who is the Light of the world? Part
1. fol. 116, b. 117. 171. How Light differs from Salt, pt. 1. folio 171, a.
What Light signifies. part 1. fol. 171. 170, a. and part 2. fol. 65, a. The
original, and causes of true Light, and means thereunto. pt. 1. folio 171, b.
172, a. and Pt. 2. fol. 65, a. 66, a. Wherein Light is resembled to an eye, Pt.
2. folio 65. And who must let their light be seen. pt. 1. folio 176, b. 177,
a. How many things hinder Sight. Part 1. fol. 452, a. Lascivious looks are
sin; and what looks are to be avoided. pt. 1. fol. 221, 222. Image. How man
is made after the Image of God. pt. 1. fol. 403, a. Imitation. How manifold
Imitation is. Pt. 2. fol. 105, b. Examples worthy of Imitation; and wherein we
must imitate God and Christ. pt. 1. folio 264. 469, b. and folio 455, a, b. pt.
2. fol. 106. 152, b. 172. 196. Impossible. Possible. What things are said to be
Impossible. pt. 1. folio 340. and pt. 2. fol. 246. Enchantments. See Magi.
Magic. Inconstancy. See Constancy. Infants. See Babes. Infidels. See
Gentiles. Injures. Wrongs. What is required both of those who do, and suffer
wrong. See Reconciliation. Intention. A good intention will not justify an
evil action. pt. 1. folio 79, b. 99, a. Interpretation. Who must interpret
Scripture; and what Rules are observeable in the Interpretation thereof. pt. 1.
folio 30, a. 211, a. 213, 214, a. 226, b. 251, and pt. 2. fol. 235, b.
Interrogations. Questions. Why questions are asked, or Interrogations. pt. 1.
fol. 70, b. 71, a. John. What John signifies. part 1. folio 55, a. Diverse
questions both Speculative and practical concerning John Baptist. pt. 1. fol.
54, b. 55. 64, b. 66, b. 79, b. 80, a. and pt. 2. fol. 60. 70, b. 71, b. 72.
151. Jonas. What kind of Fish it was which swallowed Jonas. part 2. fol. 131,
b, etc. Wherein Jonas was a type of Christ. pt. 2. fol. 131. 177, b. Joram. How
Joram was Ozias his father. pt. 1. fol. 9. Joseph, Diverse questions concerning
Joseph the husband of Mary. pt. 1. fol. 14, b. 15, a. 40, b. 41. 50, b. Joy.
Rejoicing. Those who enjoy Christ truly, have true joy, and wherein the joy of
the faithful consists. pt. 1. folio 117, b. 127. and pt. 2. fol. 296, b. 297,
a. Isaac. Wherein he was a type of Christ, part 1. fol. 9. Israel. Israelites..
How many ways the word Israel is taken. pt. 2. folio 7, b. 8, a. and part 1.
fol. 454, a. Why the Apostles were sent to preach to the Israelites. pt. 2.
fol. 8, b. and 9, a. Judas. Diverse questions concerning the office, life,
covetousness, treachery, and death of Judas. part 2. folio 339, a. 361, 362,
363. Judges. Judgment. To Judge. Questions concerning the office, and duty of
civil Judges, and judgment. pt. 1. fol. 149, a. 393, a, and pt. 2. folio 327,
b. 373, b. Questions concerning the judging of our selves. Pt. 1. fol, 200, a.
236, a. and part 2. fol. 295. Questions concerning the judging of our brethren,
and their actions. pt. 1. folio 200, a. 391, 392, 393. 424, b. 425. 497, a.
522, a, b. Useful, and Vtile questions concerning the last judgment, and the
judgment presently after death; and the Judge of the whole world; and the
horror of the wicked at the day of Judgment. part 1. folio 210, a. 428, a.
434. and pt. folio 48, b. 252. 295, b. 309, a. 314, a. 320, b. 321, 322, 323,
a. 328, a. 335. Many deride Gods judgments, and who they are; and the effect of
their derision. pt. 2. fol. 323, b, etc. Jurisdiction. See Excommunication.
Justice. Just men. Righteousness. Righteous men. How we must fulfill all
righteousness, and how, and why we must hunger after righteousness; and whom
we must exceed in Righteousness; and how manifold Rightrousnesse is; and what
it signifies, and the happiness of the Righteous, and examples, and the duty
of Righteous men. Pt. 1. f. 14, b. 15, a. 80. 148, b. 149, a. 189. 328, b. 355,
356, 357, 358, 359. An opinion of selfe-Righteousnesse keeps us from Christ.
Pt. 1. folio 497, b. 501, a, b. Justification. What Justification is; who
justifies, and whether Justification be of works or not. pt. 1. fol. 310, b.
312, b. pt. 2. fol. 130, b. 313. 334, a.
K.
Keys. See Excommunication. Kingdom. King. Diverse questions concerning the
Kingdom of Heaven, and Christ; that is, both the Kingdom of grace, and glory;
and what Kingdom signifies. pt. 1. fol. 62, b, etc. 127, a. 141, a, b. 297.
299. 300. and 354. pt. 2. folio 73, 74, a. 206. 296. God is the King of all the
world; and where his Kingdom is. pt. 1. folio 301, a, 320, b. Kisses. Kissing.
There are many sorts of Kisses. pt. 1. folio 261. Knowledge. Questions
concerning the Lords knowledge, and the kinds thereof, and our knowledge of God
and the sorts, and signs thereof. pt. 2. folio 97, a. 137, b. 139, b, etc.
326, b. and pt. 1. fol. 518, a. None can know God, except he reveal himself
unto them. pt. 2. folio 96, b. 97, a.
L.
Labor. Who are meant by Laborers; and how manifold labor is, and what we
must labor principally for; and what labor shall be refreshed. pt. 2. f. 98,
b. 99, a. 100, b. 103, a. and pt. 1. fol. 492, b. 493. Lame. We are naturally
lame. pt. 2. folio 66, b. Laughing. Two sorts of Laughers at Christ. pt. 1.
folio 511, a. Law. See Commandments. Learning. Scholars. Figures, and humane
learning necessary, and useful. pt. 1. folio 48, b. Two things required in
Scholars, and those who learn. pt. 2. folio 93, a. We must be Christ's
Scholars. part 2. folio 104. Lending. To Lend. Diverse questions concerning
Lending pt. 1. folio 248, b. 249, a. Lent. Whether the institution thereof be
Apostolical. pt. 1. folio 502, b. Leprosy. Diverse questions concerning the
nature of the Leprosy. pt. 2. folio 11 b. 66, b. 67. a. and pt. 1. folio 441,
b. 442. Liberality. See Alms. Liberty. How manifold liberty is. Pt. 1. folio
185. pt. 2. fol. 206, a. How Christians are freed from the Law. pt, 2. folio
75. Men have not a lawless liberty to use their own as they please. pt. 2.
folio 260, b. Life. See Conversation. Light. See Illumination. Lilly. Wherein
the Lillies excelled Solomon. pt. 1. folio 347. Limbus. Concerning Limbus
Infantum. See Infants concerning Limbus patrium. See pt. 1. folio 457, b.
Locusts. What the Locusts were. pt. 1. folio 65. b. 66, a. Looks. See
Illumination. Love. See Amity. Lunatique What Lunacy is, and what is
figuratively meant thereby. pt. 1. folio 131, b.
M.
MAgi. Magic. Wiseme^. Charms. Enchantments. Exorcisme. Diverse questions
concerning the Wisemen who came unto Christ. pt. 1. folio 23, b. 24. 26. 28.
34, 35, 36, 37. 39. How many sorts of Magic there are. Pt. 1. folio 23, b. 24,
a. What Wisemen God likes, and disliketh. pt. 1. fol. 24, a. pt. 2. folio 92,
a. Charms. and Spells not lawful. pt. 1. folio 100, b. The Original of
Exorcists. pt. 2. folio 122, b. Magistrates. Diverse questions both concerning
the duty of Magistrates, and peoples duty to Magistrates. pt. 1. fol. 45, b.
144, b. 147, a. and pt. 2. folio 284, a. and 372, a. Magistrates lawful
amongst Christians. pt. 2. folio 205, a. Excommunication freeth not subjects
from obedience to Magistrates. pt. 2. folio 283, b. Maids. Virgins. Maids are
warily and charity to be educated, and kept, and why? pt. 1. folio 21, a.
Malice An example of most inhumane malice. pt. 2. fol. 35, b. Mammon. What is
meant by Mammon. pt. 1. folio 337, b. 338, a. Man. Men. How many ways God made
or produced Man. pt. 1. folio 73, a. What is meant by this word Men. Mat.
10.17. Beware of men, p. 2. f. 26 Man in many things is now like unto the brute
creatures, in some things worse, in some better, yea in some better then the
Angels. pt. 1. folio 398, ^99. 345, b. 346, a. 422, b. and pt. 2. folio 26.
264, b, etc. Mary. Diverse questions concerning the Virgin Mary. pt. 1. fol. ^.
12, b. 13, b, 14, a. 19, b. 21, b. 22. 40, a. and pt. 2. f. 72, a. 134. 150, b.
Marriages. Questions concerning Marriages, and the duty of married persons and
the Jewish rites in marriage. pt. 1. f. 146, b. and pt. 2. f. 231, b. 234, a.
and pt. 1. fol. 502, a. Questions concerning our spiritual marriage with
Christ. pt. 2. folio 278. 279, a. Mass. Protestants may not go to mass,
because it is unlawful, and Mass an idol. pt. 1. fol. 204, b. and pt. 2.
folio 212, a. Masters. The duty of Masters toward their servants. pt. 1. folio
146, b. 448, b. and pt. 1. folio 61. Matthew. What St. Matthew was. pt. 1. folio
4. Maxims. Principles. Two sorts of, principles. pt. 1. fol. 403, a, b.
Means. Diverse questions concerning the use both of lawful, and indirect
Means. pt. 1. f. 51, a. 99, b. 100, a. 303, b. 466. 516, a, b. God works by
diverse and sundry means. pt. 1, folio 101, b. Those who are deprived of the
outward means of grace, are sometimes better then those who enjoy the means.
pt. 1. fol. 455, a. Meditation. Diverse profitable, necessary, useful, and
seasonable Meditations concerning new obedience (pt. 1. fol. 85, a) and the
obtaining of reconciliation with God. (pt. 1. f. 82.) and in the time of
affliction, and temptation (pt. 4. f. 86, a and 145, b. and of a threefold
life. (pt. 1. fol. 304, 305.) and of the hatred of sin. (pt. 1. fol. 58, a.)
and of the last Judgment (pt. 2. fol. 49, b. ^^7, b.) and against last. (pt.
1. fol. 224, 225.) and of the Attributes of God. (pt. 1. fol. 241, b.) and
before prayer, (Pt. 1. fol. 445, a. and of hels torments. (Pt. 2. folio 314,
a.) and of heavens joys. pt. 1 folio 456, b. Meekness. Questions concerning
the nature, degrees, and excellency of Meekness; and the felicity of meek
men. Pt. 1. f. 146, 147. Mercy. Merciful. Diverse and sundry questions
concerning Mercy; viz, What mercy is; how manifold it is; why we must be
mercifully and to whom; and wherein, and the measure of true mercy, and the
felicity and blessedness of the m^^^^full. pt. 1. f. 149, 150, 151, 152, 153,
155. 158, 159. 160. 514, a. b. and pt. 2. fol. 114. 332, b. The way unto
Temporal, sp^^^tuall, and eternal ^^^tion. pt. ^. f. (...). Whether the
works of mercy be meritorious. pt. 2. folio 333, a. Merits. See Deserts.
Ministers. Ministry. Preachers. Teachers. Questions concerning the duty of
people in regard of their Preachers. pt. 1. folio 30, b. and pt. 2. folio 13.
72, b. 292, 293, etc. Questions concerning the properties, and qualities of
Preachers, what they should be, and what they should not be. pt. 1. f. 79, b.
121. 166, 170, 171, 172. 327, a. 527, b. 528, a. and pt. 2. folio 1. 144. 145,
282, a. Questions concerning the duty of Ministers, what they should do. pt.
1. folio 71. 80, a. 119, b. 122, a. 124, a, 178, b. 234, 235. and 489, a. 491,
b. 527, 528. and pt. 2. s. 9, b. 11. 15, b. 38, a. 67. 69, b. 149, b. 153, b.
300. 333, b. Questions concerning the vocation, efficacy, power, disposition,
necessity, and nature of the Ministry. pt. 1. f. 54, b. 118, b. 119, a. 123, b.
525, a. and pt. 2. folio 1, b. 8, b. Questions concerning false Teachers, and
those who are taught by them. pt. 1. f. 424. and pt. 2. f. 153, b. 167, a. What
we may judge of those Ministers who give over Preaching. p. 1. f. 126, b.
Faithful Ministers shall be comforted in a faithful discharging of their
places. Part 1. folio 144, a. There are degrees of eminency, and dignity in the
Ministry. pt. 2. f. 2. 263, a. Whether Ministers may lawfully flee Persecution.
Pt. 2. folio 29, 30, 31. Directions for young Preachers, Pt. 2. folio 34, b.
35, a. Three sorts of Teachers. pt. 1. f. 186, b. Ministers may lawfully marry.
Pt. 1. f. 460, b, etc. and pt. 2. folio 236, b. Ministers are not exempted from
paying of Tribute. pt. 2. folio 205, 206, b. The sending of Ministers is
manifold. Pt. 1. folio 527. b. Miracles. Diverse questions needful to be
known, both concerning Miracles in general, and Christ's Miracles in
particular. pt. 1. folio 20, a. 127, b. 431, b. 436. 441, b. and Pt. 2. folio
13. b. 14, a. 62, b. 12^, a. 176, 177, a. Misery. See Adversity. Money. See
Gold. Monks. Objections for Monastical (...) answered. pt. 1. folio 54, a.
(...) 2. folio 52 b. and 16^, b. Wherein (...) Monks of old, and the present
Popish Monks, differ, pt. 2. folio 1 6^ b, etc. Mo^^lity. M^^^ll men. The duty
of ^o Moral hone^^ (...). Pt. 2. folio ^49, b. 350. How the works of Moral
and Spiritual men differ. Pt. 2. fol. 350, a. Morning. There are three
mornings. pt. 2. fol. 382. a. Mortification. No participation of Christ without
mortification. Pt. 1. folio 49, a. Mount. See Hill. Mourning. See Anguish.
Mouth. Tongue. What is meant by opening the mouth. pt. 1. f. 135. b. Diverse
questions concerning the excellency, nature, use, and abuse of the Tongue. pt.
1. fol. 200, b. 201. 521. and pt, 2. fol. 120, b. 121, a. Multitude. The most
men walk in the ways of Sin, and run unto destruction; and therefore
Multitude is no true note of the Church. pt. 1. fol. 410, 411. Murmuring. How
many ways men murmr against God. pt. 2. f. 259 Murder. Diverse questions
concerning Murder in general; and self-murder in particular. Pt. 1. f. 191
b. 192. 419, 420. and pt. 2. f. 364, a. 366. Music. Diverse questions
concerning music, and the lawfulness thereof. Pt. 1. fol. 508, a, b.
N.
NAmes. Names are to be imposed prudently, and with discretion; and how many
sort of Names there are; and what is meant by this Name. Pt. 1. fol. 18. 294,
b. Name. Necessary questions concerning the Natural and carnal man's
blindness, ignorance, impiety, impotency, pollution, sickness, deafness,
deadness, carelessness, miserable estate and captivity, barrenness in good
works, properties, and the names given unto him. Pt. 1. fol. 346, b. 347, a.
398, b. 399, 407. 411, b. 412, a. 418, 426, b. 427, a. 429, b. 470, 471, 472,
473 498, b. 499, a, b. and pt. 2. folio 26, b. 33. 63, b, etc. 68, b. 69. 119
a. 120, b. 202, 265. Questions concerning the marks, and signs of Natural
and carnal men. pt. 1. fol. 407, b. Questions concerning the power of Natural
and carnal men; what they may do in Moral or Religious works. pt. 1. folio
235, 260. Nazareth. Nazarite. Questions conning Nazareth; and how Christ was a
Nazarite, and how we should be; and how many sort of Nazarites there are. pt.
1. fol. 52, 53. Necessity. There is a threefold necessity. pt. 1. folio. 100,
a. Nei^^bour. How we must regulate our actions in regard of our neighbors. pt.
1. fol. 403, b. Whether all neighbors must be loved alike. pt. 2. folio 243,
a. Nets. Why the Apostles mended their Nets. pt. 1. folio 123, a. New.
Newness. Renovation. After we have purposed to lead new lives, our
temptations, and trials will be multiplied, and increased, and whence this
comes; and why God permits it. pt. 1. folio 84, b. 85. How we must put on
Christ by newness of life; and how many things are to be renewed in us. pt. 1.
folio 85. and pt. 2. folio 73, a. Night. The Night anciently divided into four
parts. pt. 2. fol. 155, a. Ninivites. What (...) was between the Ninivites and
the Jews. pt. 2. folio 132, b, etc.
O.
Oaths. See Forswearing. Obedience. Diverse questions concerning new, true, and
sincere obedience, both to the first and second Table. pt. 1. fol. 39, b. 59,
b. 60. 80, b. 85, a. 135, a. 162, b. 163, a, 309, b. 310, a. and pt. 2. f. 276.
287, a. Examples of admirable and singular obedience, and what promises are
made to those who are obedient. pt. 1. fol. 39, a, b. 41, a, b. 127. Questions
concerning hypocritical obedience. pt. 1. fol. 163, b. 164, a. Obduration. See
Hardness of heart. Offenses. Scandals. Diverse profitable questions concerning
Offenses, and Scandals, both given and taken. pt. 2. folio 207, 208, 209, 210,
211. Ointment. Oil. Three sorts of Ointments, and a double use of Oil,
amongst the Jews. pt. 1. fol. 523, b, etc. and pt. 2. folio 338, a. (...). How
many significations it has. pt. 2. fol. 37, b. Opinion. Why we must not adhere
too much to our own opinions. pt. 1. folio 407, b. Opposition. Opposes. Diverse
questions concerning the Opp^^^ers, and Opposing of Christ, ^^^gion, and the
righteous. pt. 1. fol. 49. b, etc. 113, a. and pt. 2. fol. 7, a. Oil. See
Ointment.
P.
PAinting. What we may think of painting of the face, and of those who use it.
Pt. 1. fol. 142, b. Palsy. Questions concerning the nature of the palsy. pt.
1. fol. 448, b. 449, 450. Papists. (...) seek (...) own honor (...) then
(...) honor of Christ; (...) touch (...) contrary to the word of God (...)
folio 80, a. and pt. ^. folio (...). The fruit of Popish doctrine. pt. 1. folio
422, b, etc. Parables. Why, and how Christ spoke in Parables. pt. 2. f. 135, a.
145, a. Parents. See Fathers. Paschall Lamb. Passover. Diverse questions
concerning the Jewish Passover. pt. 2. folio 279, b. 336, a. 338. Paths.
Ways. Wherein paths and ways differ. pt. 1. fol. 64. Questions concerning the
meaning of this word Way; and the two W yes wherein men walk; and what way
leads unto heaven. pt. 1. fol. 407, b. 408, a. 412, 413, b. 414, a. 420, b,
etc. and pt. 2. folio 5, a. Patience. We must be always patient under Gods
hand. pt. 1. folio 303, a. and in injuries, and why? and how many sorts of
patience there are. pt. 1. folio 485. Peace. Peacemakers. Diverse questions
concerning Peacemakers; and Peacemaking. pt. 1. folio 165, b. 167, 168.
Questions concerning. Civil peace with men; and how manifold Peace is. pt. 1.
folio 165, a. 206, b. and pt. 2. folio 20, b. 21, a. 51, a. Questions
concerning Spiritual peace with God. Pt. 1. f. 166, a, b, 460. Pearls.
Wherein the word of God is like unto a pearl. pt. 1. f^l. 397, a. Penance. See
Conversion. Penny. What the Roman, and Jewish penny was. pt. 2. fol. 282, b.
Perfection. Diverse necessary questions concerning perfection. pt. 1. fol. 161,
26^, b. 263, ^64. 330, 331. 470, a. Peril. See Danger. Perjury. See
Forswearing. Persecution Questions concerning persecution, and the remedies
against it. pt. 2. fol. 27, b, etc. to 32, b. and 310, a. Perseverance. See
Constancy. Person. What is meant by this word Person. pt. 2. fol. 257, a. 282,
b. Peter. Diverse questions concerning Peter's Names, and the signification of
them, and when he was first called Peter; and what faults were in him; and
whether he were at Rome, and whether he was the Prince and Primate of the
Apostles. pt. 2. folio 2, b. 3, 4. 181, b. 182. 186. 188. 193, b. 204, b. 306,
b. Pharisees. Scribes. Sadduces. Questions concerning the Pharisees, Scribes,
and Sadduces in general. pt. 1. fol. 70, 71. and 172. 188, 189. 267, b. 490,
b. and pt. 2. folio 128, b. Particular questions both concerning the Pharisees.
( pt. 2. fol. 178, etc. 243. 291. 293.) and Sadduces. pt. ^. f. 125, b. 284, b.
Phylact^ries. What these Phylacteries were. Pt. 2. folio 294, a. Physician.
Physic. Three things required in a good Physician. pt. 1. fol. 488. and 499,
a. The use of Physic, and Physicians is lawful. pt. 1. folio 498, a. Piety.
See Holiness. Pilate. Diverse questions concerning Pilate. pt. 2. folio 371, b.
Please. With whom God is well pleased. Pt. 1. fol. 84, b. Poligamy. See Bygamy.
Poor men. Poverty. Questions concerning pious poor persons. pt. 1. folio 11,
a. 123, a. 138. 140, b. 144. b. 148. 468. 494, b. Questions concerning poverty
in spirit. pt. 1. f. 137, a. 139. 140, a. Questions concerning poverty in
estate. pt. 1. fol. 139, 140. Questions concerning the Vow of poverty. Pt. 1.
folio 139. and pt. 2. fol. 244, b, etc. Questions concerning Christ's poverty.
pt. 1. fol. 139, b. 468, b. Pope. Controverted questions concerning the Pope;
viz. whether he have Regal and Sacerdotall power. (pt. 1. f. 25, b. pt. 2. f.
188. 263, a.) Whether he be the Prince, and primate of all the Clergy (pt. 2.
f. 3, 4. 181, b. 182, etc. 186, a. 188, b. 193, b.) Whether he have power
either over the whole world, or over all Churches. (pt. 2. f. 185, b. 282, b.
387, b.) Whether he be the head of the Church. (pt. 2. f. 181, 182, 183, 184.
186, b.) Whether he may err (pt. 2. f. 184, 185. 199, b.) Whether the chief
authority of expounding Scripture belong unto him. (pt. 2. fol. 189, b. 292,
293.) Whether he can dispense with oaths; and sell pardons, and be above
Councels. pt. 2. f. 192, b. 216, b, etc. The Popes pride shows him to be
Antichrist. pt. 2. fol. 15, b. 263, a. Possession. See Dispossess. Possible.
See Impossible. Poverty. See Poor. Power. See Ability. Practice Why knowledge
and practice must be joined together. pt. 1. folio 176. 438, a. Praise. The
praise of men is not to be sought, and why? pt. 1. fol. 341. Prayer. Questions
concerning public and private prayers. pt. 1. fol. 125. 272, b. 273, b. 274,
275, a. Questions concerning the definition, nature, necessity, efficacy,
utility, impediments, quantity, time, place, and posture in prayer, and to whom
we must pray. Pt. 1. fol. 272, a. 276, b. 277, 278. 292, b, etc. 316, b. 317,
318, b. 321, a. 401, b. 433. 443, b. 446, a. 450, 451. 460. 474, a. 517, a.
525, b. 526, 527. and pt. 2. f. 171. 266, b, etc. 268, a. 271, b. 272, a. 273,
a. 296. How must we pray perseverantly, fervently, humbly, submissively, and
with meditation. pt. 1. f. 401. 443. 44, b. 445, a. 514, a. and pt, 2. folio
266, b. 268, b. Men may be known what they are, by their prayers. pt. 1. fol.
226, a. Prayers not understood are not pleasing unto God. pt. 2. fol. 271, a.
What things are contrary to true prayer. pt. 1. fol. 272, a. 273, a. 276.
Whether prayer be meritorious. pt. 1. folio 275, b. 277, a. Whom God has
promised to hear when they pray. pt. 1. f. 293, a. 433, a. Questions
concerning the Lords prayer. pt. 1. f. 280, 289, 290. 318, b. 319. Diverse
questions concerning praying for temporal things. pt. 1. f. 306, b. 307, 308,
309. and pt. 2. f. 359, a. Why Christ heard Satan's prayer, and granted his
request. pt. 1. fol. 484. Preaching. See Ministers. Preaching Teaching. To
Teach. Questions concerning those who are called to preach. pt. 1. folio 4.
Questions concerning the excellency, dignity, necessity, utility, definition,
end, power, universality, effects, and perpetuity of Preaching. pt. 1. f. 63,
a. 66, b. 70. 118, b. 119, b. 124, b. 126, b. 127, b, etc. and f. 524, b. and
pt. 2. f. 9, b. 10, a. 11, a. 51. b. 59, b. 62, a. 84, b. 170, b. 273, b. 352,
etc. Questions concerning those who enjoy the preaching of the word. pt. 2.
fol. 8, b. 88, a. How preaching and teaching differ. pt. 1. fol. 1^4. and pt.
2. folio 11, a. Why the word was not preached unto the Gentiles. pt. 2. folio
5, a. Who hinder the preaching of the word. pt. 2. folio 10, b. 11, a. How
Christ teaches us. p. 2. f. 32, b. 138 Why the preaching of the word must not
be promoted by worldly pomp. pt. 1. folio 172, b. Why the word is preached to
wicked men, yea all men? pt. 1. f. 396. b. 523. Precepts. See Commandments.
Predestination. The decree of Predestination depends upon the will of God. part
2. folio 95. Prefer. See Esteem. Preparation. We must prepare to meet
Christ, and how? pt. 1. folio 63, b, etc. and Pt. 2. folio 325, b. Preparation
is necessary unto every good duty. (pt. 1. folio 57.) And where in this
preparation consists. (pt. 1. fol. 63, b, etc. 64, b. and pt. 2. folio 73, a.)
And by whom it is wrought. pt. 1. folio 64, a. Presence. Absence. Diverse
questions concerning the utility and excellency of the presence of God, and
Christ. Pt. 1. fol. 327, a. 486, b. and 491, a. and 502, b, etc. and pt. 2.
folio 33, a. and 222, b. 223, a. Questions concerning the causes, and evil
consequents of Christ's Absence. pt. 1. fol. 502, b, etc. Presumption. The
causes of presumption against God. pt. 1. fol. 46. The Devil tempts us unto
Presumption. Pt. 1. fol. 103, b. Pride. What, and how manifold Religious pride
is. pt. 1. fol. 141, b. Pride was the first sin. part 1. fol. 140, b. Priest.
The office, and nature of the High Priest. pt. 1. fol. 30. Principles. See
Maxims. Procession. Popish Procession on Palm Sunday, not warranted by
Scripture. Pt. 2. folio 207, b. Procraftination. See Delay. Profession.
Professors. Diverse necessary, and profitable questions concerning the
necessity, manner, impediments, helps, effects, and reward, of a sincere
profession of Religion. pt. 1. folio 125, b. 520, b. and pt. 2. fol. 28 b. 34,
a. 38, 39, 40. 44, 45, 46. 179, a. Questions concerning outward Professors, and
outward profession only. pt. 1. folio 432, b. and pt. 2. fol. 41, 42, 43. 46,
a. 69, a. Questions concerning those who dare not in dangerous times publicly
profess Religion. pt. 2. folio 38. 40, b. 41, a. What things are common to the
hypocritical, and sincere professor. pt. 2. folio 135, b. Promises. Questions
concerning man's promises to man (pt. 1. folio 37, 38, 39.) And man's promises to
God. (pt. 1. fol. 59.) And Gods promises to man, pt. 1. folio 46, b, etc. 110,
a, b, etc. 127. Profane men. Profaneness. Wicked men. Wickedness. Questions
concerning the nature, iniquity, end, punishment, and duty of profane, and
wicked persons. pt. 1. fol. 33, a. 46, a. 398. 429, b. 430, a. and pt. 2. fol.
349, b. How wicked men have right to temporal blessings. pt. 1. folio 258, a.
Prophets. Prophesying Diverse questions concerning Prophesies, or prophesying.
pt. 1. fol. 42, b. 43. and part 2. fol. 63. 75. Questions concerning Prophets.
pt. 1. fol. 183, a. and 423, b. 424, a. and Pt. 2. fol. 56, a. 62, a. 70, b.
75, b. 290, a. Questions concerning false, and evil Prophets. pt. 1. folio
422. 427, b. 435, a. and pt. 2. fol. 310. Propositions. See Conclusions.
Prosperity. In outward things prosperity is very dangerous. pt. 1. folio 142,
b. Protection. The Lord will protect his Children. pt. 1. folio 35, a. Wherein
we may read the protection of God. Pt. 1. folio 344, a. Protestants.
Protestants may be taken two manner of ways. pt. 1. folio 69. Providence.
Diverse questions concerning the Providence of God; viz. what it is; and who
err about it, and what we are to believe concerning it; and wherein we may
read the providence of God; and who tempt his providence; and what the nature
of his general, and particular providence is: pt. 1. folio 257. 302, a. 303,
344, a. 347, b. 357, 358, 359. 466, a. 486, a. and pt. 2. folio 35, b. 36, 37,
a. Objections against the providence of God, answered. pt. 1. folio 406, b. and
pt. 2. folio 261, a. Those things which proceed from second causes are ordained
by the providence of God unto higher ends. pt. 1. folio 115, b. 484, b, etc.
Christ by his providence orders the temptations of his children. pt. 1. folio
112, b. Provision. God will provide for his Children. pt. 1. folio 51, a. and
pt. 2. folio 14. b. 37, a. What is meant by this word provide, Matthew. 10.9
Provide neither Gold, etc. pt. 2. folio 14. Prudence. Wisdom The difference
between Wisdom, and Prudence. pt. 2. folio 91, a. The difference between
natural, and spiritual Wisdom. pt. 2. f. 93, b. What those must consider
who are endued with natural wisdom. pt. 2. folio 329, b. Diverse questions
concerning Wisdom in general, and good Wisdom in particular. pt. 1. fol.
438. and pt. 2. folio 23, 91. 93, a. Why carnal Wisdom so frequently
opposes the Law of God. pt. 1. folio 181, b. 340, a. and pt. 2. folio 91, b.
92, b. 93, a. Publicanes. Concerning the lawfulness of the Publicanes calling;
and why they were so odious, and infamous. pt. 1. folio 260, b. 494, a.
Punishment. See Condemnation. Purity. See Godliness. Purging. See Cleansing.
Purgatory. Controverted questions concerning Purgatory. pt. 1. folio 75, b. 76,
a. 202, b. 210, b. twice. and pt. 2. folio 126, 127, 128, 129, b.
Q.
QUestions. See Interrogations. Queen. What (...) was between the Queen of
the South, and the Jews. pt. 2. fol. 133.
R.
RAchell. Who Rachel that wept was. part 1. folio 48, b. Raine-Water. The
nature of Water, and Rain. Part 1. fol. 256. Ramah. Where Ramah was. pt. 1.
fol. 48, b. Reading To Read. How the Scriptures are to be read. Pt. 2. folio
75, a. Reason. Wherein, and how Reason is opposite to Religion. pt. 1. folio
340. Rebellion. It is not lawful by Rebellion to avoid Persecution. pt. 2.
folio 28, a. 310, a. Reckoning. See Account. Reconciliation. See Forgiveness.
Redemption. Diverse questions concerning Redemption. Pt. 2. folio 263, b, etc.
Reed. What our Savior meant by a Reed shaken with the wind. pt. 2. folio 69,
a. Refreshing. Rest. What Rest imports, who may rest. pt. 2. folio 100, b. 102,
b, etc. Who shall be Refreshed by Christ, and and who shall not. Pt. 2. fol.
102, b. 103, a. Regeneration. Diverse necessary, and profitable questions
concerning the definition, necessity, means, marks, and impediments of
Regeneration. pt. 1. fol. 113, a. 412, b. 425, 426, a. and pt. 2. folio 93.
247, 248, 249, 250, 251. Relics of sin in the Regenerate. pt. 1. fol. 467,
Rejecting. See Casting off. Rejoicing. See Joy. Relapsing. See Apostasy.
Religion. Questions concerning the Impediments of Religion, and the remedies
against those impediments. Pt. 1. fol. 34. and pt. 2. fol. 45, b. 52, a. 227,
a. 267. Questions concerning the true Religion. Pt. 1. folio 35, b. 125. b. and
pt. 2. fol. 40, b. 46, a. 52, a, b. Those who forsake Religion shall be
forsaken by the Lord. pt. 2. fol. 6, a. Religion is not contrary to reason, pt.
1. folio 339, etc. It is an excellent thing to be a Religious man. Pt. 2. fol.
198, b. 199. Questions concerning the false Religion. pt. 1. folio 272, b. 273,
a. and pt. 2. folio 177, b. 178, 179. Remission. See Forgiveness Renovation.
See New, or Newness of life. Repentance. See Conversion. Repititions.
Questions concerning the use, and utility of Repitition in preaching. Pt. 1.
fol. 349, b. and pt. 2. folio 213, b. Reprehension. Reproof. Questions
concerning Reprehension; viz. why, and how Sinners must be reproved, and who
must reprove, and who must be reproved; and the marks and notes of holy
reproof. pt. 1. fol. 71. 267. 394, b. 397, b. 398, a. and 491, b. and pt. 2.
300. Reputation. See Fame. Resistance. To Resist. What is meant by this word
Resist. pt. 1. f. 245, b, etc. Rest. See Refreshing. Resurrection. The
Resurrection of the body proved. pt. 2. fol. 285, a. 286, a. Questions
concerning the Resurrection of Christ. pt. 2. folio 383. Revelation. Diverse
questions concerning the kinds of Revelation; and the Revelation of Christ, his
word, and truth unto us. Pt. 2. fol. 81. 93, b. 94, a. 137, a. 181, a. Revenge.
Vengeance. We must not revenge injuries, pt. 1. fol. 246, a. Revile. See
Backbiting. Reward. The true Reward of the righteous is after this life, and
why? and the Objections to the contrary answered. pt. 1. fol. 142, a. 169. and
pt. 2. fol. 258, b. Riches. Rich men. Diverse questions concerning the lawful
using, unlawful abusing, and loving, and laying up of riches, and adhering
unto them. Pt. 1. fol. 327, b. 328. 336, 337, 360, b. and pt. 2. fol. 330. Why
rich men are not so happy as the poor. Pt. 1. fol. 138, b. Righteousness. See
Justice. Rock. Who is the true Rock. pt. 1. folio 440. What was signified by
the rending of the Rocks at Christ's suffering. pt. 2. folio 380, a. Rome. The
Church of Rome is fallen from the true Religion. Pt. 2. f. 6.
S.
SAbbath. or Lords day. Diverse profitable and necessary questions concerning
the Sabbath. pt. 2. fol. 113. 115, 116. 381. Sacrament. Questions concerning
the institution, and administration of the Sacraments. pt. 1. fol. 79, b. and
pt. 2. fol. 34. 389, b. 390, a. Sacrifice. Diverse questions concerning the
Sacrifices of Christians. pt. 1. fol. 36. 204, b. 207, a. and 324, b. and pt.
2. flo. 298. Sadduces. See Pharisees. Saints. Controverted questions concerning
the intercession, invocation, and adoration of the Saints. pt. 1. fol. 129, b.
130. 132, b. 174. 290, b. 291, 292. 447. and pt. 2. fol. 56, a. 214, b. 285, b.
323, a. 379. Against the canonizing of Saints. pt. 2. fol. 262, b. The Saints
in heaven know one another. pt. 2. folio 200, a. Whether there be any overplus
of the Saints sufferings, and satisfactions, which belong unto the
Church-treasure. pt. 1. folio 188, a. and pt. 2. fol. 44, a. Solomon. Whether
Solomon was saved, or not. pt. 2. folio 324, b, etc. Wherein the Lillyes
excelled Solomon. pt. 2. fol. 347, a. Salt. Diverse questions unworthy
observation concerning good and unsavory Salt. pt. 1. fol. 170, 171.
Salvation. Questions concerning the necessity, certainty, cause, conditions,
way and means unto salvation, and the number that shall be saved. pt. 1. fol.
186, b. 416, b, etc. 420, b. 455, b. and pt. 2. fol. 97. b. 100, b. 1^5, b.
etc. 311. Diverse err concerning salvation. pt. 1. fol. 421. Outward profession
of Religion alone is insufficient unto salvation: but zealous profession shall
be rewarded with glory, pt. 1. fol. 41. 43, a. Salutation. What the salutations
of the Jews were. pt. 2. fol. 20, a. Samaria. Samaritanes. Why the Apostles
were forbidden to preach unto the Samaritanes. Pt. 2. folio 5, b. 6, 7. What
Samaria, and the Samaritanes were; and why the Samaritanes were so odious unto
the Jews. pt. 2. fol. 5, b. 6, b. 7. Sampson. Wherein Sampson was a type of
Christ. pt. 1. fol. 52, b. Sanctity. See Godliness. Sanhedrim. See Consistory.
Satan. See Devil. Satisfaction. Diverse questions concerning Satisfaction both
unto God, and man. pt. 1. fol. 71, b. 72, a. 205. 314. 445, b. 490, b. and pt.
2. fol. 258, a. 366, a. Whether one man by his overplus of obedience may
satisfy for another. pt. 1. folio 65, a. and pt. 2. folio 325, b. Scandals.
See Offenses. Schools. See Collegies. Scholars. See Learning. Slander. See
Backbiting. Scoffers. Beriders. Questions concerning the punishment of
Scoffers. pt. 1. fol. 510, b, etc. Scribes. See Pharisees. Scripture, Speech.
Word. Word of God. Diverse singular questions concerning the definition, nature,
marks, division, necessity, writing, reading, translation, use, abuse,
excellency, contents, exposition, power, certainty, infallibility, utility,
perspicuity, purity, and Author of the sacred Scriptures, and word of God. pt.
1. fol. 1, 2, 3, 4. 29, b. 30, a. 46, b, etc. 100, b. 101, a. 103, a. 104, b,
etc. 105, 106, 107, a. 175, a. 245, a. 331, b. 347, a. 396, b. 397, a. 399, a.
492, a. 500, b. 512, b. and pt. 2. folio 34, b. 46, a. 94, a. 137, 138. 149, b.
285, a. 312, b. 388, a. Who are enemies to the word of God. pt. 1. folio 100,
b. How many ways the Scripture speaks, and how we may understand what it
speaks. pt. 1. folio 213, 214, etc. How the word is a seed. pt. 2. fol. 141,
b. 142, a. All are not happy who enjoy the word. Part 1. folio 446. Three sorts
of wicked words, and speeches. pt. 2. folio 329, a. All our words are observed
by God, and what words he observes. pt. 1. folio 350. 521. Scrip. What is meant
by Scrip. pt. 2. folio 15. Secrets. What is meant by this word Secret; and who
reveal secrets; and what is required of us in regard of secrets. pt. 2. fol.
146, b. Security. Diverse questions concerning the nature division, and causes
of security, and remedies against it. Pt. 2. fol. 317, 318, 319. Seed. What is
meant by feed, and how many things are observeable therein. pt. 2. fol. 141, ^.
142, a. Seek. What Seeking imports; and how many seekers there are. pt. 1.
folio 350, b. 399, b. Why many who seek Christ find him not and how we must
seek. pt. 2 f. 171, b. and Pt. 1. fol. 525, a. Self-denial. See Denial.
Separatists. See Anabapti^ Sepulchers. See Burial. Serpent. The nature of
Serpents; and wherein they may be imitated, and wherein not. pt. 2. f. 21, b.
22, 23. Servants. Service. Diverse profitable questions concerning the service,
and servants of God and Christ. pt. 1. fol. 320, b. 332, 333. 338. 469, a. and
pt. 2. f. 55. 103, b. The duty of faithful servants. pt. 1. folio 469, a. and
pt. 2. fol. 330, b. Sheep. Why, and wherein, we should be like Sheep. pt. 2.
folio 169. 357, b. Shekel. There was a double Shekel. pt 2. folio 365, b.
Sicknesses. See Diseases. Shoes. What Shoes the Apostles must not provide.
pt. 1. folio 15. Sight. See Illumination. Silver. See Gold. Simony. Against
Simony in Patrons of livings. pt. ^ folio 13, a. Simplicity. How many sorts of
Simplicity there are, and wherein good Simplicity does consist. pt. 2 folio 23,
b. 24, a. Sincerity. Wherein sincerity consists, and what things are common to
the hypocrite, and sincere Professor. pt. 1. fol. 163, a. and pt. 2. folio 135,
b. Sin. Sinners. Questions concerning the nature, author, defense, hatred,
pollution, power, evil, easiness, strength, and punishment of sin; and
remedies against sin, and impediments hindering us from turning from sin.
pt. 1. folio 58, a. 100, b. 103, a. 113, b. 394, b. 395, 396. 409, a. 410. 467,
b. 468, b. 489. and pt. 2. fol. 2. a. 66, b. 212, 213. 301, b, etc. and pt. 1.
folio 520, b. Questions concerning our freedom, and ascension from sin. Pt.
1. fol. 19, a. 59, b. 129, b. 410, a. and pt. 2. folio 45, b. 67, b, etc.
Questions concerning the distinction of great, and small; venial and mortal
sins, Pt. 1. folio 185, b. 196. 200, a. 310, b. 311, 312. and pt. 2. folio
83, b. 84, a. 129, ^, etc. 274, a. 299, b. The Devil makes all sin to seem
beautiful unto us. pt. 1. folio 103, b, etc. The first sin of all was Pride.
pt. 1. folio 140, b. How our sins are to be borne. pt. 2. folio 100. Whence
it is that men more clearly see other men's sins, then their own. pt. 1.
folio 393, 394. Sin is often committed in the performance of good works. pt.
1. f. 394. a. How many sorts of Sins there are, Pt. 1. fol. 408, b. Why we
must resist the least, and first beginnings of Sin. pt. 1. fol. 342. Sin is
like unto a Fever, and to the Palsy, and Leprosy. See Fever, Leprosy,
Palsy. Why Christ is said to have come of Sinners, or sinful Progenitors. pt.
1. fol. 9, a. Questions concerning the sorts, and punishments of sinners; and
how grace is ordinarily wrought in great sinners; and the comfort of penitent
sinners. pt. 1. fol. 58, b. 356, a. 409, 410, a. 480, 481, b. 487, a. and pt.
2. fol. 101. 213, b. 220, b. 274. 281. Relics of sin in the best. Pt. 1.
fol. 467. Sitting. To Sit. What is meant by sitting. pt. 1. fol. 116, b. Why
Christ sat, when he Preached. Pt. 1. f. 134, b. Sleeping. To Sleep. How many
ways men are said to sleep, Pt. 2. fol. 143, b. 144, a. Society. See Company.
Sons. See Children. Sorrow. See Compunction. Soldiers. War. Warfare.
Whence it is that a Christians life is a Warfare. pt. 2. folio 50. How manifold
our Spiritual Warfare is; and who are Christian Soldiers. pt. 2. folio 50.
When Wars are lawful. pt. 1. folio 246, a. Soul Wherein the soul excels
the body. pt. 1. folio 342, b. Diverse and sundry errors, and erroneous
opinions concerning the soul. pt. 2. folio 125, b. 151. 179, b. 180, a. 198,
a. 254. 258, a. 380, b. Specters. See Spirits. Speech. See Scripture. Spirit
Holy Ghost. Spirits. Specters. Spiritual things. Questions concerning the
names, titles, Deity, Offices, person, operations, comforts, and consolations
of the holy Spirit. Pt. 1. folio 81, b. 82. 144. and part 2. folio 96, b. 116,
b. 117. 138. 291, 292, 293. Questions concerning spiritual things. pt. 1.
folio 254, a. 271, b. 343, a. 401, a. Why men naturally abhor Spirits, and
Specters. pt. 2. folio 155. What is meant by this word Spirit. pt. 1. folio
138, b. 139. and pt. 2. folio 392, a. What is our duty in regard of the motions
of the Spirit in our hearts. pt. 2. folio 305, a. 329, a, b. How the works of
spiritual and moral men differ. pt. 2. folio 350, b. Staff What staves the
Apostles must not have. pt. 2. folio 15. Star re. See Comet. Stones. How God
raised up children of stones unto Abraham. pt. 1. folio 73, a. What is meant by
these words, Command these stones to be made bread. pt. 1. folio 96, b. Strife.
See Contention. Subjects. We must be the Subjects of Christ; and perform the
duty of subjects. Pt. 2. folio 103, b. 296, 297. Subordination. Why it is evil
to suborne others. pt. 2. folio 372, b. Subsidies. Taxes. Tribute. These are to
be paid to Princes. pt. 1. folio 248, a. Succor. See Help. Sun. Questions
concerning the Sun. pt. 1. folio 256, a. 257, a. 258, a. Superiors. The duty
of all superiors. pt. 2. folio 119, b. Supper of the Lord. See Eucharist.
Suspicion. The division, and prohibition of suspicion. pt. 1. folio 424, b. and
pt. 2. folio 121, b. Suits in Law. Questions, Cautions, and Rules, concerning
going to Law. pt. 1. folio 45, b. 246, 247. Swearing. See Forswearing. Sword.
What is meant by Sword, Matthew 10.34. I came to send a Sword. pt. 2. folio 50,
a. Synagogues. What the Jewish Synagogues were, and why Christ preached in
them. Part 1. folio 124, b. 125, 126. 522, b. 523, a. Synod. See Council.
Syria. Diverse questions concerning Syria. pt. 1. folio 130, b.
T.
TAbernacles. What the Tabernacles were made of, wherein the people remained in
the Feast of Tabernacles. pt. 2. folio 270, a. Taxes. See Subsidies. Teaching
See Preaching. Temple. Concerning the excessive cost of beautifying Churches.
pt. 2. folio 160, a. Temporal things. See Covetousness. Temptation. To Tempt.
Questions concerning Christ's being tempted. pt. 1. folio 35, b. 86, 87. 95, b.
Questions concerning the significations of this word, Temptation, and which
temptations are the strongest. Pt. 1. folio 86, b. 96, a. 102, b. 108, a. 315,
b. When we are most sharply tempted, and how, we may be ^est supported under
temptation. pt. 1. folio 84, b. 85, a. 86, a. Questions concerning those who
are tempted of Satan; and those who are not tempted; and the author, and sorts
of temptation, and remedies against it. pt. 1. folio 86, a. 88, 89, a. 110, b.
112, b. 113, b. 315, 316, b. 317. Questions concerning Gods tempting of Man,
and man's tempting of God, and man's tempting of man. pt. 1. folio 88, b. 108,
109, 110, 111, 112. 315, b. 316. and pt. 2. folio 329, a. Questions whether
temptation may be without sin; and how Christ's temptations, and ours differ.
pt. 1. folio 86, 87. Testament. Why the second Volume of holy writ is called a
Testament, and why the New Testament. pt. 1. folio 5, b. Thankesgiving. Why we
give thanks before and after meat. pt. 1. folio 307, a. Thieves. Questions
concerning thieves in general, and the good Thief in particular. pt. 1. folio
328, b. and pt. 2. folio 375. Theology. Humane learning necessary unto
Theology. pt. 1. fol. 48. b. Things. All things depend upon God. pt. 1. folio
101, b. Things are called three manner of ways. pt. 1. folio 168, a. Thirst.
See Hunger. Thoughts. How many sorts of thoughts there are pt. 2. folio 168.
And the evil of evil thoughts. pt. 1. folio 490, b. 491, a. Threatenings. Why,
and how all the threatenings of God shall be accomplished. pt. 1. folio 46. b,
etc. Tongue. See Mouth. Touching. Touching was always of great esteem. pt. 1.
folio 516, b. Traditions. Diverse questions concerning humane Traditions pt. 1.
folio 11, a. 42, a. 103, a. and pt. 2. f. 1. ^7. Translation. The word may
lawfully ^ translated into the vulgar (...) mother tongue. pt. 2. folio 34. b.
The Vulgar Translation, is not the truest. pt. 1. folio 483, b. Transmigration.
Questions concerning the Transmigration of the soul, and the absurdity of that
tenet. pt. 2. folio 151. 179, b, etc. Transubstantiation. Controverted
questions concerning Transubstantiation. pt. 2. folio 155, a. 195, 245, b, etc.
338, a. 342, etc. 357, b. 383, a. Trees. Diverse sort of Trees in general, and
of evil Trees in particular. pt. 1. folio 428. Tribute. See Subsidies.
Trinity. The Trinity may not be painted. pt. 1. folio 81. The Trinity in Unity
proved. pt. 2. folio 391, a. Trouble. See Danger. Truth. We must enquire after
Truth at the Ministers hands. pt. 1. folio 30, b. The whole Truth must be
taught, and why? pt. 1. folio 234, 235, a. The Truth must be maintained even
unto death. Pt. 2. folio 297. How manifold Truth is. pt. 2. folio 282. Tire.
Who the Tyrians were. pt. 2. folio 83, a.
V.
VEngeance. See Revenge. Viper. The nature of the Viper. pt. 1. folio 70, b.
and pt. 2. folio 128, b. Virgina. See Maids. Vision of God. Or beatificall
Vision. Diverse questions concerning this beautificall Vision. pt. 1. folio 164,
165. Visitation. Why the sick are to be visited. pt. 2. folio 333. Ulcers.
Three sorts of Ulcers. pt. 1. folio 505, b. Unbeleevers. See Gentiles.
Uncleanness. See Adultery. Unity. See Agreement. Unworty. Worthy.
Unworthiness. Worthiness. How many sorts of Unworthy persons there are; and
why we must not converse with such. pt. 2. folio 17. Diverse questions
concerning Worthiness, viz. How manifold it is; what is meant by this word
worthy, and who are worthy; and why we must live worthily, and wherein true,
worthiness consists. pt. 1. folio 72, b. and Pt. 2 folio 16. 20. Vocation. See
Calling. Vows. Questions concerning Vows, viz. How many sorts of Vows there
are, and what a Vow is, and whether single life be to be vowed. See Monks. and
pt. 1. folio 234. 399, a. and pt. 2. folio 234, 236. Usury. Diverse questions
concerning Usury. pt. 1. folio 21^. 249. 250. and pt. 2. folio 331, a.
W.
VVArinesse. See Circumspection. War. Warfare. See Soldiers. Washing. See
Cleansing. Watches. Watchfulness. See Circumspection. Water. See Rain. Ways.
See Paths. Weapons. See Armor. Wickedness. See Profaneness. Will. Diverse
necessary questions concerning the will of God, and the will of man. pt. 1. f.
301, 302. 303 519, a, b. and pt. 2. folio 359, 360. Wilderness. Why John
preached in the Wilderness. pt. 1. folio 55, b. Wine. The nature, kinds, and
use of Wine, and wherein it is like unto Grace. pt. 1. fol. 503, b. 504, 505.
Wisdom. See Prudence. Wisemen. See Magi. Word See Scripture. Works. See
Actions. World. See Covetousness. Worship. Images are not to be worshipped.
pt. 1. folio 114, b. God only is to be worshipped. pt. 1. folio 114, b. Why
the public worship of God is not to be neglected. pt. 1. folio 125, a. All
Religions in the world enjoine some worship, and have some public places for
worship. pt. 1. folio 125, a. Religious worship is not to be left for some
circumstances which are amiss. pt. 1. folio 126, b. Religious worship is not
pleasing unto God, except it be accompanied with faith, and love. pt. 2. folio
114, b. 115, a. Worrhinesse. See Unworthy. Wounds. Three sorts of wounds. pt.
1. folio 505, b. Wrongs. See Injuries.
Y.
YOke, Diverse necessary and profitable questions concerning the sorts and kinds
of Yokes in general and of Christ's Yoke in particular, pt. 2. f. 104. 107,
108, etc. to f. 13. Youth. We must serve God in our youth pt. 2. folio 305, b,
etc.
Z.
Zeal. Diverse questions concerning good Zeal, both in regard of God, and our
brethren, and our selves. pt. 1. f. 149, a. and pt. 2, fol. 74. 301, b.
The end of the Table.
CHRISTIAN READER, although I hope thou shall meet with no willing Errors, yet
thou (...) J am sure (...) with so^e unwilling Errataes, especially in the Nine
first (...) of the second Part. Now the faults which J first light upon, and
met withal, both in those sheets, and the (...) of the Book, and which were
committed by the oversight of the Printers, J entreat thee thus to amend.

In the first Part or Time, thou read thus:
FOl. 7, b. Second. Fol. 14. a. For the avoiding of Fornication; which are,
etc. Fol. 14, b.. 2. Place, Fol. 15, b. Either by thinking amiss, and such,
etc. (...), b. (...). Fol. 25, b. Historical sense, Fol. 33, a.. 2. Venit.
Fol. 45, a. Consolations, Fol. 52, a. Of strong men, etc. Fol. 59, a. Religion.
Fol. 70, b.. 2. A whole sentence is left out, to wit: Fol. 75, a. Depth of
obedience, Fol. 76, ^. True Christ, Fol. 136, (...) Teach ye Prophets. Fol.
139, a. (...) Fol. 139, b. Does necessarily, Fol. 200, b. And from unbridled
Fol. 208, b. Recilia^ion, Fol. 226. (...) Fol. ibid. (...) Fol. 245, a. Inform
Fol. 279. (...) Fol. 392, b. May judge light, Fol. 39^. b. Can be (...) Fol.
(...) Fol 419, a Thro^ Fol. 42^, ^. Canonically* Fol. 4^4, ^. Nor distant from
Part, 2. Fol. 256 b. Thou read, These Mr. Warne^, and no (...); where these
Wo^d^ and V^^^^ (...) left ^^r.

(...), in his (...) (...)

^

In stead whereof, thou should read thus: Two. For the avoiding of
Fornication, or for Procreation, which are, etc. Phrase. Either by thinking, or
doing amiss, and such, etc. (...) Allegorical sense. Venite. Consultations.
Be strong men, etc. Resolution. * The two former preheminences we allow of, but
the last we dislike, disclaim, and detest, neither Baptism (...)
Circumcision having any such power in themselves. Dept of Obedience. True
Church. Teach the people. Or, (...). Does not necessarily. And not from
unbridled, etc. Reconciliation. (...). (...). Enforce. Panis. May judge, Or
light, etc. Cannot be produced. With one white. Throad. Coun^^ll. Not a span
distant from^


In the 2d. Part or T^me, thou read thus:
Fol. 4, b. Peter is called here (...) First, absolutely, and none are are
called the second, or third; therefore First does not denote, etc. Fol. ^, a.
Prerogation Fol. 10, a. And after manners Fol. 14. a. How to esteem Fol. 14.
b. (...) Fol. 15, a. I^vitut bacillo Fol. 15, b. The love of ye word Fol. 15,
b. Will ye rituall pomp Fol. 16, a. Relation Fol. 16, b. Enquiring Fol. 17.
Inter^^^le Fol. 19, ^. Ac^rbi Fol. 2^, b. M^din Fol. 21, b. Repose Fol. 21, b
And rather the loss, Fol. (...) Fol. 22, a. Intimate Fol. 25, a. Stirrs to be
fruitful Fol. 29, a. Loat Fol. 25, b. Pressed upon. Fol. 26, a. The Serpent is
on the earth, and by innocence fly to the Heavens. Fol. 28, b. Fourthly, in
these, Fol. 26. a. M^rlocrats Fol. 36. b. Sub ratione bona Fol. (...). Provide
in part Fol. 4^, ^. F^ints Fol ^6. b. Serpere Fol. 6^, a. Worthy wisdom Fol.
84. a. General ^otions Fol. 92. a. Smell Fol. 1^^, ^. First, in so doing (...)
himself of (...) Fol. (...). Praesulti^^^. Fol. ^56. b. In the end, six Li^^s
are (...) life (...), which I have (...) of the Enem^^ (...) the (...) Part, or
To^^. Fol 27^. ^. Christ (...). Fol 17^ b. And (...) to Christ. Fol. (...) To
Christ's (...) Humanity Fol. 29 (...). A Sight has not (...).
In stead whereof, thou should read thus: Peter is called here (...),
First, absolutely, and none are called the second or 3. ergo: First signifies
Primacy, or precedence. Answ. 1. First, because Peter is called First, and none
are called second or third, ergo First does not denote a Primacy, or
precedence, but etc. Prerogatives. And after diverse manners. How to procure.
(...). Iunitens bacillo. The love of the world. With the rituall pomp.
Relative. Requiring. Intrepide. Acerbe. Media. Expose. And rather to suffer the
loss, etc Rab^^s. Imitate. Strive to be fruitful. Goat. Preyed upon. The
Serpent is on the earth, the Dove in the air, so we by wisdom should dwell
on the earth, and by innocence fly to the Heavens. Fourthly, certain it is,
(...). Ma^^^^^. Sub ratione boni. Provide, impart. Feigne^. Sper^^^. Wouldly
wi^^dome. General motions. Swell For in so doing a man (...) himself of the
(...) of good (...). Pres^li^^s. (...) And (...) To Christ ^^ni^ (...). (...)


FINIS.

