The office and duty in fightyng for our country. Set forth with diverse
strong arguments gathered out of the holy scripture proving that the
affection to the native country should much more rule in us christians then
in the Turks and infidels, who were therein so fervent, as by the hystoriis
does appear. 1545.

To the right honorable and my syngular good ldrde and master, sir Anthony
Sentleger knight, of the most honorable order of the garter, one of the
gentlemen of the kings hyghnes most honorable privy chamber, and lord
deputy of Irelande.
BEING so many ways bound unto your lordeshyp, for the most gracious,
bounty and munifycence, which in the time of my grievous calamity you have
unto me exte^ded. I thought it should be noted in me a point of much
ingratitude, to be so long absent from my country without having to you
therefore due officious thanks. wherefore I have devised to present your honor
with this my poor lucubracio^. That ye same may be an example of my assiduous
study, and desire to accomplysh the duetye, wherewith your lordeshyppe have me
so often bound. The mat ter may be as well conferred to the fervent affection,
which always I have borne to my country, and to the grefe of my propre
exyle, as also wholly attribued to the most godly purpose of our most drad
soueraygne lord the kings majesty, in setting forth his loyal subjects*
against our enemies.

In the one respect I take it to be a gift needful for me to give.

And in the other (for this present time) somewhat apt for your wise dome to
receive. That the same being perused, corrected, and set forth by your honor
may have creadite with all men, the more vertuouslye to do their most bounden
deutie, even in fighting for their country, as the sapient Cato does counsel.
In my most humble manner besechynge your honorable lordeshyppe to note therein
not my temerious audacite and rudenes, but my willing heart to do my duty
for my part and to swade other, in yt I may to do the like. I have constrained
this little work to more brefnes then I ought, leuyng out the examples and
historyes, whereof your lordeshyppe is so well fulcome, that I feared the
readinge of them should be to you somewhat tedyous: notwithstanding I know
right well the rehearsal of them should add to my work no little coulloure
of perswasyon: which thing I eftesones beseech your wisdom to accept
accordynglye, besechynge almighty god to send you most heartily well to fare.

Your most humble and obedient servant Edward walshe.

This oracion was pronounced by Edward walshe, at several times unto his
fellows militynge at the seige of Boloingn^.
OFTEN times considering with my self most heartily beloved friends? the high
and most virtuous re specte, which the famous romayn Preceptu^ Catonis.
Cato had to the common well, when he so earnestlye among other his moral
precepts did teach Propositio.
that we should fight for our cou^trye. I thought it might be neither
Beneuolentiam consiliat a sua et auditorium persona.
inconvenient nor yet incomly but very commendable and necessary for us that I
should bestow this small layser, in declaryng un to you some arguments and
persuasions tochinge our most boun den duty to our native and natural
countreye. That ones hearing the same, as we that have read and perused
thystoryes of the noble feats of them that attained immortal glory in that
behalf as thereby encoraged, you also with semblable alacrity and Scopus.
towardnes may vertuouslye advance your selves to follow the wholesome
doctrine of ye Sapient Cato. And notwithstanding that after I reuolued this
attemp tate in my mind and with inward contemplacion beheld every way how I
might best begin, and begone, proceed and so condinglye perform it
according the due expectacion that you might have of me, interprysynge the
same, I found it to be a burden heuier then I might well sustain seeing right
well yt if I should take thoccasions A difficultate rei attentiores facit.
to write, that the matter freely offers to my hand: no volume could comprehend
the same, and scantly the hole entreual of my life should thereunto suffice: yet
as the manner is of other recent writers taking this sudden occasion as well
of Ansa.
my propre exile, as of the most god lie quarrels of our most drad sovereign
lord king Henrye the eight, who most tenderly desires the wealth of his
loyal subjects and paynefully stodyeth for the same: the trompe whereof
sounds through out all the regions of the earth, and shall be doubtless forever
a miroure to all such as shall hereafter desire to govern in a common well, I
can no less do then express unto you, such simple reasons, as have at this
present concurred in my memory touching our said most bounden deutye and
office to our native countreye, which I have gathered together partelye of
the sayenges of famous auctours and partly of the experience that I daily se
in men of noble Ingene and virtuous educacyon. Consiliarios regios sibi
co^siliat, dum circa re^p: se adeo solicitum predicat.


Trusting that thereby, the zele that nature has in me kendled toward my
countreye, may apere in me not only inextynguyble, but also always vygylante
and cyrcumspecte for the good and commodytye of the same. For if any of us,
having received offycyous pleasure at our friends hands, will not only
remember Sillogismos.
the same with rendrynge due thanks, but also even show aparant tokens of
our good wylles to regratifye it with like office, why then, consideringe that
by the exemple of our fathers we ought to be always thankful for our
nutricion. Should we not accumulate and heap our thanks and officious duties
to our natyue country, by whose aid most prin cipally we were not only
produced and nouryshed, but also preser Hiis malis infantes obnoxii sunt maxim.
ued when we could neither speak nor go nor yet of our selves euite ye peril
of fire water iron or such like dangerous thing, whereby we might peryshe in
our infancy. By her benefit, we first learned A beneficiis.
to go on the grunnde, and in amia ble manner to frame our babyshe tongues, to
speak our mother tongue or contrye language. By her benefit the strong, the
weke, the poor, the rich, the noble, and thinferiour persons live together
and are served together in their vocacion with y^ necessaryes of their body.
In our country we first did behold the most beautyfull bryghtnes of the
son, which the everlasting god has so disposed to the use of man, that
being common to al yt nations of the earth, it extends beams and light, as
though the same were propre to each countreye: wherein the work manshyp of god
appears to be equal unto us his sapience, exceadinge the judgment of man.
Out of her womb did ebullulate and Baptizamur in pa tria.
spring the water wherewith the most heavenly ceremony through which we are
called christians was in us performed. By her benefit the rude feldis of our
understand dyng, ready to grow with all kind of unclean things, were sowed with
ye divine precepts of y^ gospel without the instructions whereof we should be
as thinfideles that do not know god, who can therefore repende condign office
or thank though we did study paynfully for the same. And as the famous
Lucianus in opusculo de patrie encomio.
auctor Lucian says, there is nothing in this world, so honorable, or so
godly, whereof the goodness of the native country is not in some respect a
maistres, and an occasion. Nether can we name the commodity, the pleasure, the
quality, the honor or any other good thing whereof the natyue country is
not to be thanked. Ye though our country were in deed so baraign, as that she
should need the fruytes of other realms and A contratii obiectione.
so rude of tongue, ye in treatinge of weyghtie matters we should need the aid
of estraunge languages: yet rests in her as in ye original and principal a
great occasion of thanks and immortal praises. Moreover let us considre the
very instruct of nature that works Natura.
universally in all men, who was ever so unnatural, ye though he ex celled many
in authority and power in the strange contreye, to be delired with the
pleasant and volup tuos contemplacion of the compass and riches of great
cities, ye costly building of edificis, or any like blandiment, that he would
totally forget his native country? Peradventure in the comparison or weyinge
together of the goodness of countrayes or famous cities, men will have sometime
consyderacio^ and respect to their amplitude, elegance, plentifulnes and
riches. But now at all ye nature has rightly educed, will chose for him felfe
a more mete place to dwell in, then his natyue conntreye: preferryng the same
we all her faults, to al ye copious and rych places of ye world. Thus do the
legitimate and true children. Thus do the fathers also that be honest, good,
and ryghtuous. A child certis having any respect of humanity will not prefer
in honor any mortal creature to his father, nor the father Mutuum parentum and
filiorum officium.
embrace with more fatherly affection any yonglynge before his na turall
child, if then we owe due honor, to our fathers as by the Honora patrem et
matrem.
very commandment of god we are bound, how great study and industry is
requisite of us to forse that no wrake or evil may come to our native
country, wherein our fathers are preserved and kept, how can it be said, that
we do due honor to our fathers, if sufferynge a permcyous myscheyf to grow
against our common well that successively may destroy the same: we spare our
bodies or goods to take it away, and to establyshe a certain order therein
accordinglye: if we be bound to Locus a fortiore.
our fathers, we be much more bound to our lynnage, and so per quensequently
to our country, where they are conserved. You may behold the aged man, who
all his life time has lived sump tuouslye, reiectynge all manner the commodite
ease and pleasour that he has in the strange countreye how he wissheth most
instantlye in his native country even to repose his body as it were on the
breast of his natural mother: yea nature works with such fearce in men that
while they suspecte them selves to be deprehended in an vnked country thinking
there to be buried and turned to ye dust they can not but evermore desire to
depart. And the more we have seen men come to the opinion of wisdom and to
the number of years, the more subjects they seemed to be to this affection
that you have herd here rehearsed. ye any aliant or stranger, that like a
bastard or spurious vilipendeth the name of his native country, estemynge
exile a small matter, and like a glotten reposinge his felici tie in the
stinkynge and bestly vo luptuousnes of the body, and the vile pleasours of ye
same, yeldinge his industrye to satisfye concupiscence, without study charge
or co^sideracion of the well of his coun trey, is in no wise to be prosecuted
with thargument of a gentle and regratifieng heart. Moreover the goddis (as
poets do feign) do delight in their native conntrey, Who, as Lucyan says,
beholdynge the whole possessions of Lucianus
men with the compass of the earth and occean: and knowing them selves, as they
write to be owners thereof: yet every of them prefers with more inward
affection his native country then any other place of the world without
respect. Whose opinion I have here to you rehearsed, to the end only that the
affection, which is borne from the beginnigne to the native country, may
appear to you thereby. But let us have our recourse to the holy scripture,
which is far from the faynige of poets, and considre we that is said of our
sa uiour Jesus christ the very owner and redemer of the world, whereof the
holy prophet Micheas Miche. 5.
enspired with the spirit of god re kenynge with him self the honor due of
all men to their native country says these words following which the holy
euangelyste Mathewe Mathei. 2
reherseth in his second chapter. Thou bethleem says he, of the land of
Judah, art not the lest among the princis of Judah: for out the shall there
come unto me ye captain that shall rule my people Israel: if the holy prophet
of god did note such respect in our A fortiore
sauyoure Jesus Christ which doutles in that he was man, was in him as well
assyduous as ferueut. The scripture testyfyeth the Luce 19. Io. 11.
same by that he so tenderlye did weep for the dissolation of Jerusalem, and
sundreye other exemples which at this present I neade not to rehearse. What
inhumayne, yea rather what bestly instyncte should rule in us if we should have
no affectyon of love risynge in our hearts to our native country, whose
fathers and whole generation and progeny is earthy and of the earth and, who as
you have hard receive so many officious commodities by her only been fite. In
this place by occasion of ye matter whereof I treat, I am cau sed to remember
ye most detestable vilenie of Delapole, Path, Garrot Delapole Path. Garrot
and such others as with like madness not only have forsaken ye sweet vicisitude
and offices of their native country. But also with most execrable and ungodly
ingnominie have wrought most falsely and traiterous ly against ye same. How be
it lest I should seem i^ their vituperie which no tunge can condingly utter to
digress from my purposed matter, I leave to them for a perpetual torment to
their hearts the same which the makers of the laws have ordained to punish
grievous offenders, even exile. And for an everlasting exemple of their
contumely the, most excellent benefits which they have received of their
said natyue country, to be co^trepeysed in the sight of all the world with
their abominable in gratitude and unthankfulness. Lettynge you to wit that
who so ever offends in ye like trespass, not only breketh the bound of al
humanity and gratitude, falls from the high degree of liberty, renegeth for
ever to run in the race of honor, but also transgresses ye high institution
and providence of god wherwithby inexplicable prescie^ce he has ordained, and
constitued each man to live under ye powers of the earth as it is written in
diverse (...) et 17 (...) To. 13 Sapien. 6
places of the holy euangelye we can not be thereof ingnoraunt: not under such
powers as we our selves shall chose or desire, either through our blind
affections or otherwise: for he by the wounderful depte of his wisdom and his
in uestigable ways of for knoweledge, before we came to ye world, has
ordained provided and appointed for us, expressly that we ought in that behalf
to observe and follow: in showing our duty to our native country without we
should after the manner of gyau^tes, as says the Proverb fight against Cum diis
pugnare.
god, and work against his be hestes. It may be well apperceaued by this high
prouydence of god yt among al tra^sitory things we are principally bound to
our native countreye, And also that it Epilogus primi capi it is.
may not lie in us to change yt god has appointed the same being even the
very first gift ye we receive of our creator, by this also the words of the
romayne orator Tully, apere to be true where he says that our birth is the
possession of our native countreye. It can not be expressed unto your sightes
by more viuely coullour of rethoricke, how much com moditie and office accrueth
unto us that be the germayne Citizens of our native contreye. Then if it might
be depinged before you, how intolerable calamity and unquietness is to them
that be banished and expelled from the same, who being totally descruciate by
the grefe of their perigrinacion, cesse and to affirm that among all the good
things of the world the natyue country is the best. And miserably
complaining their unfortunate and wretched life, for that they inhabit not
their natyue countreye, they esteem them selves for that cause only, most in
fortunat though in all other things, they have their hearts desire of all the
riches and pleasours of the world. And how they that for a while, as
estraungiers and aliantes Alienigene.
have leaded their lives having attained no little sple^dour and glory,
either by riches and possessions, dignite and honor, notable fame of
excellent lerninge and Ingene or renown of divine virtue, striuen together who
may first come to their natine country as though no where elsthey might with
praise excersyce their said goods to the contentation of their minds: ye the
more I have seen men auctorised and taken as mete tachiewe greater attemptates
the more they seemed to accelerate, to their natyue country to the end they
might co^uerte their industrye to the behofe thereof. So as truly I am made of
the opynion that the whole study and labor that men take to attain knowledge
or to heap to gether treasours is pretended to Nihill no^ tenetur patrie.
the end either they might with the same do profitte in exercisinge liberality
in time of neade or else in doing some laudable thing where of high commodite
might grow to the common well, you may be Notat tria viria quibus ho mines
detinentur a (...).
sure I mean not here these gross merchants these sarcastical pre stes and
possessioners of great anuyties nor such others, whose judgments touch
nether heaven nor earth, but is carried with such auydyous desire to hepe and to
keep as has no manner end.

These without doubt repose their Luce. 16.
whole felicite in the wicked Mam mon without further purpose the^ to se the
same locked up as ye high treasour of their hearts. The very Etnickes that
never received the faith and consolacion of the word of god nor herd the
manifold re Luc. ^* ^6
proches yt Christ lays against the rych for their abuses (were not Ma. 6*
so blind but they would for their countries sake bestow not only their
goods but also their bodies as by exemples I will somewhat Secundu^.
declare. I mean not also these studientes that study a great perte of their
youth with great diligence and pains to the end they might under coullour of
the law or the word of god, work things for their private ease, and
commodity: a great number of such birds buylden their nestes in the
branches and under the shadow of good doing, which daily invent new craftis
of dissimulacion. These study and watch always to increase and augme^t their
voluptuous ease, and amplify their possessions and lyuelode, not regarding
thanxious thoughts and study that they are bound to take for the common well
and pre seruacion of the church of God. Soch have not received reuelaci on of
the respect that our savior Jesus christ had to ye common well Ma. 17.
when he paid the penny found in the fisshes belly, and when he aun Ma. 22.
Luce. 20.
swered the pharisees touching yt tribute due to Caesar, neither consi dre they
the study and circumspection Petrus. Barnabas. Paulus. Passim in actibus
Apostolorum et epistolis.
which the appostles, Peter, Barnabas, and Paul had to the common well, in
preachinge the gos pell, observing always the circumstances that made for the
com mon well: which things and many other necssarie instructions for our
christian sotietie, while they stu die the contencious and inutile ru les of
Duns, Thomas and such Johannes Dunt Thoma^ de aquine
others, and while they stick in de fuse and insoluble questions of divinity,
are declared unto us with great and heavenly discrecion by ye very Etnickis as
Plato, Socrates, Aristotle, Plato. Socrate* Aristoteles. Tullius* Lato.
Plutarchus. Seneca.
Tully, Cato, Seneca, Plutharch and al other famous auctors yt ever hitherto
did write. I would o god yt such were thindustry and good will of our prestes and
studien tes yt are allowed to sit at home to preach ye gospel and ministre yt
law, peradventure, in such heavenly judgment Spu^s paracletus namque di ci^ur
spu^^ dorodoti^
they had ye help of ye spirit of god, whose gracis are further extended then
we can interpret or defyne. Neither do I mean such Tertium Demosth nes.
as are reproved by Demosthenes that sometime were militynge in Greece for the
only love of money and profit, without the inward study that they should
have to do the honor of their country who for that they trusted in the
corrupt minds of their captains to be by the^ reaceaued again to favor
when they would for money. Went about when any danger came upon them, every
man to save him self without any respect to the shame that they thereby
disserued. Wherefore the said Demosthenes extolleth with high praise, the order
taken for soche in the common well of Democratia: where Resp. De^ocratica
such offenders could never again be received to favor. And where many
excellent honest and rightous istitucio^s were set forth very necessary for
each man that is beneuolent or studious for the good of his country to observe
and follow, which for your sakes I trust shortly to se transphrased into our
mother tongue, notwithstanding that in this exemple of the cowarde greeks I can
in no wise meue you. Whose deades be manifest enough thanks be to god in
declarynge your willing hearts, to do the profitte and honor of our natyue
country.

Of these defectus that you have herd, I might set forth domestical exemples,
wherewith my words mygh be opened even to your own eyes, but made odious and
grievous unto some men's hearts. But because it is necessary for him Locus
comunis d^ auditoru^ beneuole^tia:
that would exhort the people, to al lure them with sweet and pleasant
instructions, to acquire favor at their hands, for without that nothing is
to the^ acceptable, I will not so manifestly set forth ye faults which
(without my speech) shall be with such as I have said, confro^ ted more and more
to their perpetual vitupery, and contempt, and to the immortal glory, and
vnspea kable renowine of ye noble hearts that be of such humayne, and offi
cious ingene, as knows their bo dies and goods to be even the ve ry
possessiou of the common well of their native country. And the^ Marcus Tulius.
selves as Tully says to have been borne to the use thereof. Sythens therefore
the noble orator Demo Demosthe nes.
sthenes not only cou^teth him self unable to dilate ye noble virtue and y^
honor of such, who as I have said, ar given to ye common well but also
affirms ye whole vigor of rethoricke to be thereto insufficie^t: I were
worthy to be redargued of much arroga^cy if I should attempt to make unto you a
diffinicio^ there of. He doubts not to call such men the very soul of their
countreye, Anima patrie.
because of their magnificence and nobylitie of heart, showing the same by an
example of Greece, how when such Citizens were decessed and passed out of the
world the whole dignity and noble authority of Greece, was taken away and
fordone. He Lux patrie.
calls them also the light of their countreye, meanings that as the light
being taken away from our use, the rest of our life should be unto us
tedyous: even so the said noble cytizens being departed the spendour and glory
of Greece, was turned unto miserable darkness, and so the commons brought to
right great ruin and decay. By which exemples it is plainly aparant how
much difference is betwixt them that take pains in the common well of their
country as you do. And them that lie lurkynge at A contratiorum comparatione*
home like unprofitable ye rather unnatural and bestlye people, ye will not
look to render mutual office and thank to so many and spontayne pleasours,
that their native country mynystreth unto Uirtutis consummatio for ^^^udo.
them. And because that this that you have herd is the vyue fountain of
honor and the very office of fortitude, which of all ver tues is the
consummate perfection. I will exhort, that we, who the for knowledge of god has
destinied to be of the noble church and congregation of England and Irelande:
lack no courage to advance our selves defendinge the worthy fame which our
fathers before us so long time have defended and preserved. And regarding the
great and noble magnanimity of the very Ethnickis, let no defecte or slakenes
be in us to per Exempla magnanimitatis quorunda^ Et nicoru^
form so noble and worthy an inter prise. The Erectheans knowing yt their
prince Erecthea did put to death his own daughters called Hiacyntidas for his
countries sake, thought it should be indecent for them, saying their prince
being immortal and doing so much for their country, to esteem more their
mortal bodies then immortal ho nour. The Agidians also knoweynge Agide.
that their prince Ageus did first establyshe laws and institucio^s in the
common well, whereby he attained immortal praise, were animated rather to
despise their mortal bodies then to be lyuers in Greece, after that the honor
by him gotten should be in their default lost. The Leontians knowing Agide.
how the daughters of their prince Leon offered them selves a sacrifice for
their country, thought it should be an argument of much vilenie in them if
they should be counted inferiors in fortitude, and magnanimity to women. The
Aca A camantide.
mantians also remembrynge the verse of Homer, how the immortal prince Acamans
did sail into Troy for the saluegarde of his mother thought it should be
requisite in them to bestow their mortal carcaise for their country the same
being the conseruatrice of all their parents and progeny from the first of
them to the last. The Cecropians also considering Cecropide
how their prince Cecrope was ta ken to be pertely a man and pertlye a dragon
for none other cause then that in ingene and judgment he resembled a man, and
in vigout a draggon, in thaffaires of the common well. And likewise Thantio
Anthiochi de*
chians forgetting not that their prince Anthiochus was son unto Hercules
determined in their hearts either to lead a life worthy the nobility of their
princes, or else to dye with the honor to them left. With diverse, ye
innumerable others as well Greeks and Romans as of other common weles the
exemples whereof to be showed our present leysar does inhibite. If then such
magnanimity Epilogos cum argumento.
did reign in the hearts of the very infidels, which in deed ye law of
nature gives in yeldyng their persons to so many ieoperdies for their
countries, how much more should the like desire be eue^ inflamed in our
hearts who have (...) nature.
above the law of nature the glad tidings of health, the gospel of our
savior Jesus Christ, who ex Ler diuina.
emptyng not the law of nature, from his holy rules: has further promised us
that our bodies shall be raised again with greater per fection ye with
incorruptible glory, These. iiii
the hope whereof only certis is no small joy and solace to our hearts, and
an efficax remedy to put away from us thanxious and formidelous thoughts yt
might rise in us of our flesh, which we have above thinfydeles, and Etnickis
that want hope. If we should seem to stay and spare our wretched bodies from
so noble an interprise what may thinfideles, as saint John^ Chrysostom says
Chrisostomus.
lay to our charge? what will they not cast in our teth? These be they thatso
constantly affirm that there shall be a resurrection of the deed: fair words
but their deades draw not after that line, with their words: they affirm that
there shall be a resurrection of the dead, but they despair in their hertes. Let
not us therefore frustrate the Hortatur ad stabilitatem.
hope that our savior Jesus christ has given to us for the recomforte of our
hearts, as says saint Paul: lest we should lament and morn like them that
want hope. And if thinfideles remenbrynge the magnanimite of their princes were
so animated: How much more should we be even enflamed beholdynge the princely
clemency fortitude and magnanimity of our liege and naturell king Hen rye the
eight by the grace of god king of England France and Irelande defendour of
the faith in earth under god of ye churches of England Irelande ye supreme
head, and of his noble progenitors which no volume can co^prehe^de, were the
same by any orator explicable. ye why should we not be even determined like
men to fight for life and death, rather the^ living to se that princely
dignity, that euangelical governance defaced, which the very providence of
god has given to us not to the end we should permit the same to be by our
enemies forfrushed and brought to naught, but that we should ver tuouslye
stand in the defense and mayntenaunce thereof in all fideli tie troth and
singlenes of mind As the law of nature, the bond ^erotatio
of love wherewith our native cou^ treye has bound us, the exemple of the
princely dexterity of our no ble king and his highness noble progenitors. And
also the very word of god in so many places does incite and persuade us to
do And finally lest we should be inferi ours to thinfideles whose magna nimitie
I have here to your part ly declared, I most te^derly exhort you even with
the words of saint Paul: let each of us possess his body in all holiness and
honor not in sustayninge dishonor as though we knew not god ye as though we
had no hope, or knew not these things that you have herd of the officious
and plentiful goodness of our native countreye. Which I doubt not has efficace
strength and energie to change the very cowarde heart to be hardy bold and
coragious in following the precepte of the sapiente Cato, even to fight for the
natyue country. And not with standing that by the rehearsal un to you of
histories of noble men this proposicion should have the strong collection of
arguments, for our small laysar, let this that I have said be un to you for
this time sufficient.

Finis.
Imprynted at London in Aldersgate street by Johannes Herford.

At the costs and charges of Robert Toye dwelling in Paul's church yard, at
the sign of the Bell.

Anno dn^i. 1545.


