The Inventors premeditation upon this Emblematicall Frontispice of the
subsequent pious MEDITATIONS.
MY Heart a matter good indite,
By good Examples Cloud by Day,
By Faiths shining Lamp led by Night,
With Zeals wings soar up the steep way
To Light inaccessible, which
To Fill, and not be Filled, is rich.
Leaving the Earth and TITLES below,
Where black Heart buried, yet not dead,
Some Posthume rays does now bestow,
Whiles it lies sleeping in Deaths bed.
An Adamantine heart GOD leaves,
But takes that which Contrition cleaves.
Let each sound heart take in good part
This, thus reflected, Broken heart.
RESOLVED MEDITATIONS andMeditated REsolutions. Written by A. W. Enlarged. 1634
LONDON Printed for Walter Hammond



Loquela Emblematici Frontispicij, in obsequtum Inventoris, and piam Authoris
memoriam suggesta.
ACcensus radijs, zeloque agitante levatus
In coelum geminis, flamma ocyus, evolat, alis
Igne rapax Animus; mundique nitentia tangit
Lumina, Nub^genis, variata, and nixa, Columnis,
Sursum contendens, summaeque, Volumina Legis
Secum adamanda, verenda, Dieque ac Nocte revolvit.
Haec alto ensu: Mundo, TITVLISque relictis.
Non illum, DVX SOLIS, amatique arbiter Ortus
Despicit, afflictum: cum men's divulsafatiscit,
Cordaque dividuo perrumpit Malleus ictu.
Si silices gest at, solidoque Adamante rigescens
Effugit insultus, and faevi verbera motus;
LVNAE LVX, illum non respicit, alma rigorem.
Hic, fractum COR, Lector, habes, penetrale serenae
Mentis, and innocuae; per quod, post funera paucos
Nunc spargit radios animi vigor ultimus, ardor
Verus, and instanti, duplicata potentia morte.
Colli at hos, rapiatque in concava pectora Candor
Lucidus ingenij; deducetque aethere flammas,
Concipietque novos aeterni luminis ignes.
GVLIEL. HAYDOCK.

Spare-Minutes; OR, RESOLVED MEDITATIONS AND PREMEDITATED RESOLVTIONS.

Written by A. W.

-- Ego cur acquirere pauca
Si possim invidear?
The second Edition corrected and enlarged.

LONDON, Printed by R. B. for Walter Hammond, and are to be sold by Michael
Spark, in Green Arbor, 1634.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, My much Honored Friend, Sr, William Dodington
Knight, all health and happiness.
Right Worshipful,
I Will not make an over -- large gate to my little City: A short Epistle best
suites with so small a volume, and both fitly resemble your knowledge of me,
and mine acquaintance with you, short, and small. But a mite freely given,
makes a poor widow liberal: and in this Present, poor, like my habilities,
is a thankfulness, infinite, like your deservings. To speak much, might be
thought flattery; to say nothing would be known ingratiude: I must therefore
be short, I may not be silent. The happy fortune of my tongue has encouraged
my pen: and I humbly crave in the one, what I favorably found in the other,
a courteous acceptance. Which if you please to add to your former favors, and
my happiness, I shall have just cause to rest

Your Worships truly devoted ARTHVR WARVVICK.

RESOLVED MEDITATIONS AND Premeditated resolutions.
IT is the over curious ambition of many, to be best or to be none: if they may
not do so well as they would, they will not do so well as they may. I will
do my best to do the best, and what I want in power, supply in will. Thus
whils I pay in part, I shall not be a debtor for all. He owes most that pays
nothing.

PRide is the greatest enemy to reason, and discretion the greatest opposite to
pride. For whiles wisdom makes art the ape of nature, pride makes nature the
ape of art. The Wiseman shapes his apparel to his body, the proud man shapes
his body by this apparel. It Is no marvel than, if he know not himself, when
he is not to day, like him he was yesterday: and less marvel, if good men
will not know him, when he forgets himself, and all goodness. I should
fear, whilst I thus change my shape, least my maker should change his
opinion: and finding me not like him he made me, reject me, as none of his
making. I would any day put off the old cause of my apparel, but not every day
put on new fashioned apparel. I see great reason, to be ashamed of my pride,
but no reason, to be proud of my shame.

THe reason that many men want their desires, is, because their desires want
reason. He may do what he will, that will do but what he may.

I Should marvel that the Covetous man can still be poor, when the rich man
is still covetous, but that I see, a poor man can be content, when the
contented man is only rich: the one wanting in his store, whiles the other is
stored in his wants. I see then, we are not rich or poor, by what we
possess, but by what we desire. For he is not rich that has much, but he
that has enough: nor he poor that has but little, but he that wants more.
If GOD then make me rich by store, I will not impoverish my self by
covetousness: but if he make me poor by want, I will enrich my self by
content.

Hypocrisy desires to seem good rather than to be so: honesty desires to be
good rather than seem so. The worldlings purchase reputation by the sale of
desert, wisemen buy desert, with the hazard of reputation. I would do much to
hear well, more to deserve well, and rather loose opinion then merit. It shall
more joy me, that I know my self what I am, than it shall grieve me to hear
what others report me. I had rather deserve well without praise, than do ill
with commendation.

A Coward in the field is like the Wisemans fool: his heart is at his mouth,
and he does not know what he does profess: but a Coward in his faith, is
like a fool in his wisdom; his mouth is in his heart, and he dares not
profess what he does know. I had rather not know the good I should do, than
not do the good I know. It is better to be beaten with few stripes, than with
many.

EAch true Christian is a right traveller: his life his walk, CHRIST his way,
and Heaven his home. His walk painful, his way perfect, his home pleasing. I
will not loyter, least I come short of home: I will not wander, least I come
wide of home, but be content to travel hard, and be sure walk right, so
shall my safe way find its end at home, and my painful walk make my home
welcome.

AS is a wound to the body; so is a sinful body to the soul: the body
endangered till the wound be cured, the soul not sound till the bodies sin
be healed, and the wound of neither can be cured without dressing, nor dressed
without smarting. Now as the smart of the wound, is recompensed by the cure of
the body: so is the punishment of the body sweetened by the health of the soul.
Let my wound smart by dressing, rather than my body die; Let my body smart by
correction, rather than my soul perish.

IT is some hope of goodness not to grow worse: It is a part of badnesse not
to grow better. I will take heed of quenching the spark, and strive to kindle
a fire. If I have the goodness. I should, it is not too much, why should I
make it less? If I keep the goodness I have it is not enough: Why do I not
make it more? He never was so good as he should be, that does not strive to
be better than he is: He never will be better than he is, that does not fear
to be worse than he was.

HEalth may be enjoyed; sickness must be endured: one body is the object of
both, one GOD the Author of both. If then he give me health, I will
thankfully enjoy it, and not think it too good, since it is his mercy that
bestows it: if he fend sickness, I will patiently endure it, and not think
it too great, since it is my sin that deserves it. If in health; I will
strive to preserve it by praising of him: if in sickness; I will strive to
remove it, by praying to him. He shall be my GOD in sickness and in health,
and my trust shall be in him in health and in sickness. So in my health.

I shall not need to fear sickness, nor in any sickness despair of health.

IT is the usual plea of poverty to blame misfortune, when the ill-finished
cause of complaint is a work of their own forging. I will either make my
fortunes good, or be content they are no worse. If they are not so good, as I
would they should have been, they are not so bad, as I know they might have
been. What though I am not so happy as I desire? It Is well I am not so
wretched as I deserve.

THere is nothing to be gotten by the worlds love, nothing to be loft (but its
love) by its hate, Why then should I seek that love that cannot profit me, or
fear that malice that cannot hurt me? If I should love it, for loving me,
GOD would hate me, for loving it, If I loath it for hating me, it cannot hurt
me for loathing it. Let it then hate me, and I will forgive it, but if it
love me, I will never requite it. For since its love is hurtful, and its hate
harmless, I will contemn its hate, and hate its love.

AS there is a folly in wit, so there is a wisdom in ignorance. I would not
be ignorant in a necessary knowledge, nor wise above wis^dome. If I know
enough I am wise enough, If I seek more I am foolish.

ITs no marvel that man has lost his rule over the creature, when he would
not be ruled by the will of the Creator. Why should they fear man, when man
would not obey GOD? I could wish no creature had power to hurt me, I am glad
so many creatures are ordained to help me. If GOD allow enough to serve me, I
will not expect that all should fear me.

NO affliction (for the time) seems joyous, all time in affliction seems
tedious. I will compare my miseries on earth with my joys in heaven, and the
length of my miseries, with its eternity, so shall my journey seem short; and
my burden easy.

THere is nothing more certain than death, nothing more uncertain than the
time of dying. I will therefore be prepared for that at all times, which may
come at any time, must come at one time or another. I shall not hasten my death
by being still ready, but sweeten it. It makes me not die the sooner, but be
the better.

THe commendation of a bad thing, is his shortness, of a good thing its
continuance: it were happy for the damned, if their torments knew end, it is
happier for the Saints that their joys are eternal. If man, that is borne of
a woman, be full of misery, it is well that he has but a short time to live;
if his life be a walk of pain, its a blessing, that his days are but a
spanne-long. Happy miseries that end in joy: happy joys that know no end:
happy end that dissolves to eternity.

HAd I not more confidence in the truth of my Savior, than in the traditions
of men, poverty might stagger my faith, and bring my thoughts into a perplexed
Purgatory. Wherein are the poor blessed, if pardon shall be purchased only
by expense? Or how is it hard for a rich man to enter into heaven, if money may
buy out the past, present and future sins of himself, his deceased and
succeeding progeny? If Heaven be thus fold, what benefit has my poverty, by
the price already paid? I find no happiness in Room on earth, It Is
happiness for me to have Room in heaven.

THere is no estate of life so happy in this world, as to yield a Christian
the perfection of content: and yet there is no estate of life so wretched in
this world, but a Christian must be content with it. Though I can have nothing
here that may give me true content, yet I will learn to be truly contented
here with what I have What care I though I have not much (If I have enough) I
have as much as I desire. If I have as much as I want, I have as much as the
most, if I have as much as I desire.

IT is the greatest of all sins always to continue in sin. For where the
custom of sinning waxes greater, the conscience for sin grows the less:
it is easier to quench a spark, then a fire; I had rather break the
Cockatrices egg, then kill the Serpent. O daughter of Babylon, happy shall he
be that takes thy children whilst they are young and dasheth them against
the stones.

NAture bids me love my self and hate all that hurt me, Reason bids me love
my friends and hate those that envy me, Religion bids me love all and hate
none. Nature shows care, Reason wit, Religion love. Nature may induce me,
Reason persuade me, but Religion shall rule me. I will hearken to Nature in
much, to Reason in more, to Religion in all. Nature shall make me careful of
my self, but hateful to none; Reason shall make me wise for my self but
harmless to all; Religion shall make me loving to all, but not careless of
my self. I may hear the former, I will hearken only to the later. I
subscribe to some things in all, to all things in Religion.

ABundance is a trouble, want a misery, honor a burden, baseness a scorn,
advancements dangerous, disgrace odious. Only a Competent estate yields the
quiet of content. I will not climb, least I fall, nor lie in the ground, least
I am trod on. I am safest whiles my legs bear me. A competent heat is most
helthfull for my body, I would desire neither to freeze nor to burn.

A Large promise without performance is like a false fire to a great Piece,
which discharges a good expectation with a bad report. I will fore-thinke what
I will promise, that I may promise but what I will do. Thus whilst my words
are led by my thoughts, and followed by my actions, I shall be careful in my
promises, and just in their performance. I had rather do and not promise, than
promise and not do.

THE good-meaner has two tongues, the Hypocrite a double tongue. The good man's
heart speaks without his tongue, the Hypocrites tongue without his heart. The
good man has oftentimes GOD in his heart, when in his mouth there is no GOD
mentioned: the Hypocrite has GOD often in his mouth, when the fool has said
in his heart there is no GOD. I may soonest hear the tongue, but safest the
heart, the tongue speaks lowdest, but the heart truest.

THe speech of the tongue is best known to men: GOD best understands the
language of the heart: the heart without the tongue may pierce the ears of
heaven, the tongue without the heart speaks an unknown language. No marvel
then if the desires of the poor are heard, when the prayers of the wicked are
unregarded. I had rather speak three words in a speech that God knows, then
pray three hours in a language he understands not.

MEditation is the womb of our actions, Action the midwife of our Meditations.
A good and perfect conception, if it want strength for the birth, perishes in
the womb of the mind, and, if it may be said to be borne, it must be said to
be stillborne: a bad and imperfect conception, if it has the happiness of a
birth, yet the mind is but delivered of a burden of imperfections, in the
perfection of deformity, which may beg with the criple at the gate of the
Temple, or perishes through its imperfections. If I meditate what is good to be
done, and do not the good I have meditated, I loose my labor, and make cursed
my knowledge. If I do the thing that is good, and intend not that good that I
do, it is a good action, but not well done. Others may enjoy some benefit, I
deserve no commendations. Resolution without action is a sloathfull folly,
Action without resolution is a foolish rashness. First know what is good to be
done, then do that good being known. If forecast be not better than labor,
labor is not good without forecast. I would not have my actions done without
knowledge, nor against it.

IT is the folly of affection not to comprehend my erring friend, for fear of
his anger: it is the abstract of folly, to be angry with my friend, for my
errors reprehension. I were not a friend, if I should see my friend out of the
way, and not advise him: I were unworthy to have a friend, if he should advise
me (being out of the way) and I be angry with him. Rather let me have my
friends anger than deserve it; rather let the righteous smite me friendly by
reproof, than the precious oil of flattery, or connivence, break my head.
It is a folly to fly illwill, by giving a just cause of hatred. I think him a
truer friend that deserves my love, than he that desires it.

WHen Children meet with primroses, nuts, or apples in their way, I see those
pleasures are oftimes occasions to make them loyter in their errands, so that
they are sure to have their Parents displeasure, and oftimes their late retunre
finds a barred entrance to their home, whereas those who meet with dangers in
the way, make haste in their journey, and their speed makes them welcomed,
with commendation. Nature has sent me abroad into the world, and I am every
day traveling homeward: If I meet with store of miseries in my way,
discretion shall teach me a religious haste in my journey: And if I meet with
pleasures, they shall pleasure me only by putting me in mind of my
pleasures at home, which shall teach me to scorn these, as worse than trifles.
I will never more reckon a troublesome life, a curse, but a blessing. A
pleasant journey is dear bought with the loss of home.

When I see the fisher bait his hook, I think on Satan's subtle malice, who
sugars over his poisoned hooks with seeming. pleasures. Thus Eves apple was
canded with divine knowledge, ye shall be as Gods knowing good and evil.
When I see the fish fast hanged, I think upon the covetous Worldling, who
leapes at the profit without considering the danger. Thus Achan takes the gold
and the garment and never considers that his life must answer it. If Satan be
such a fisher of men, its good to look before we leap. Honey may be eaten,
so that we take heed of the sting: I will honestly enjoy my delights, but not
buy them with danger.

I See, when I have but a short journey to travel, I am quickly at home, soon
out of the pain of my travel, soon into the possession of my rest. If my
life be but my walk, and heaven my home, why should I desire a long journey?
Indeed knowing my home so pleasant, I would not be weary with a long walk,
but yet the shorter my journey, the sooner my rest.

I Cannot see two sawyers work at the pit, but they put me in mind of the
Pharisee and the Publican: the one casts his eye upward, whiles his actions
tend to the pit infernal: the other standing with a dejected Countenance,
whiles his hands and heart move upward. It Is not a shame to make show of our
profession, so we truly profess what we make show of: But of the two, I had
rather be good, and not seem so, than seem good, and not be so. The
Publican went home to his house rather justified then the Pharisee.

WHen I think on the Eagles carrying up of the shellfish into the air, only
to the end he may break him by his fall, it puts me in mind of the
divellish costly courtesies, who out of the bounty of his subtilty, is still
ready to advance us to destruction. Thus more then once he dealt with my
Redeemer, no sooner had he raised him to the top of an high pinnacle, but
straight follows, cast thy self down; and having placed him on an high
mountain, let him fall down and he shall be largely rewarded with his own.
If advancement be so dangerous, I will take heed of being ambitious. Any estate
shall give me content: I am high enough if I can stand upright.

WHen I see leaves drop from their trees, in the beginning of Autumn, just
such think I, is the friendship of the world. Whiles the sap of maintenance
lasts, my friends swarm in abundance, but in the winter of my need, they leave
me naked. He is an happy man that has a true friend at his need: but he is
more truly happy that has no need of his friend.

I Should wonder, that the unsatiable desires of ambition can find no degree
of content, but that I see they seek a perfection of honor on earth, when the
fullness of glory is only in heaven. The honor on earth is full of degrees,
but no degree admits a perfection: Whereas the glory of heaven admits of
degrees, but each degree affoords a fulness. Here, one may be lower then
another in honor, and yet the highest want a glory: There, though one Star
differs from another in glory, yet in the fulness of glory they all shine as
Stars. Here, the greatest may want, there the least has enough: Here, all
the earth may not be enough for one; There, one heaven is enough for all. LORD
let me rather be least there, without honor here, then the greatest here,
without glory there. I had rather be a dorekeeper in that house, then a ruler
in these tents.

WHen I see the heavenly sun buried under earth in the evening of the day, and
in the morning to find a resurrection to his glory, Why (think I) may not the
sons of heaven, buried in the earth, in the evening of their days, expect
the morning of their glorious Resurrection? Each night is but the pastdayes
funeral, and the morning his Resurrection: Why then should our funeral sleep
be other then our sleep at night? Why should we not as well awake to our
Resurrection, as in the morning? I see night is rather an intermission of day,
then a deprivation, and death rather borrowes our life of us then robbs us of
it. Since then the glory of the sun finds a Resurrection, why should not the
sons of glory? Since a dead man may live again, I will not so much look for
an end of my life, as wait for the coming of my change.

I See, that candle yields me small benefit at day, which at night much steeds
me: and I know, the cause is not because the candles light was less at day,
but because the days light is less in the evening. As my friends love to me,
so mine to my friend may be at all times alike; but we best see it, when we
most need it: and that, not because our love is then greater, but our want.
Though then I welcome a courtesy according to my want, yet I will value a
courtesy according to its worth. That my fortunes need not my friends
courtesy, is my happiness: should my happiness slight my friends courtesy,
'twere my folly.

I See that candle makes small show in the day which at night yields a glorious
luster, not because the candle has then more light, but because the air has
then more darkness. How prejudicial then is that ambition, which makes me
seem less then I am, by presuming to make me greater then I should be. They
whose glory shines as the sparks amongst stubble, loose their light, if
compared to the Son of glory. I will not seat my self higher then my place,
least I should be disgraced to an humility, but if I place my self lower then
my seat, I may be advanced to the honor of, friend sit up higher. I had rather
be exalted by my humility, then be brought low by my exaltation.

I See that candle which is as a sun in the darkness, is but as a
darkness in the sun; the candle not more lightning the nights darkness,
then the sun darkning the candles light. I will take heed then of contention,
especially with great ones. As I may be too strong for the weaker; so I must
be too weak for the stronger. I cannot so easily vanquish mine inferiors, but
my superiors may as easily conquer me: I will do much to be at peace with
all men, but suffer much ere I contend with a mighty man.

I See when I follow my shadow it flies me, When I fly my shadow it follows
me: I know pleasures are but shadows, which hold no longer then the sunshine
of my fortunes. Least then my pleasures should forsake me, I will forsake
them. Pleasure most flies me when I most follow it.

IT is not good to speak evil of all whom we know bad: it is worse to judge
evil of any, who may prove good. To speak ill upon knowledge, shows a want
of charity: to speak ill upon suspicion shows a want of honesty. I will not
speak so bad as I know of many: I will not speak worse then I know of any. To
know evil by others, and not speak it, is sometimes discretion: to speak
evil by others, and not know it, is always dishonesty. He may be evil
himself who speaks good of others upon knowledge, but he can never be good
himself, who speaks evil of others upon suspicion.

A Bad great one is a great bad one. For the greatness of an evil man, makes
the man's evil the greater. It is the unhappie privilege of authority, not so
much to act, as teach wickedness, and by a liberal cruelty, to make the
offenders sin not more his own then others. Each fault in a leader is not so
much a crime, as a rule for error: And their vices are made, (if not warrants,
yet) presidents for evil. To sin by prescription, is as usual as damnable:
and men run poast in their journey, when they go to the devil with authority.
When then the vices of the rulers of others, are made the rules for vices to
others, the offenses of all great ones must needs be the greatest of all
offenses. Either then let me be great in goodness, or else it were good for
me to be without greatness. My own sins are a burden too heavy for me,
why then should I lade my self with others offenses.

To speak all that is true, is the property of fools: to speak more then is
true, is the folly of -- too many. He that spends all that is his own, is an
unthrifty prodigal: He that spends more then is his own, is a dishonest
unthrift. I may sometimes know what I will not utter, I must never utter what I
do not know. I should be loath to have my tongue so large as my heart, I
would scorn to have my heart less then my tongue. For if to speak all that I
know, shows too much folly, to speak more then I know shows too little
honesty.

IT is the ambitious folly of too many, to imitate rather greatness then
goodness. They will sooner follow the example of their Lord, then the precepts
of their GOD. I will always honor greatness, I will only imitate goodness:
and rather do good without a pattern, then commit evil in imitation. It Is
better to be saved without a president, then to be damned by example.

THere is no security in evil society, where the good are often made worse,
the bad seldom better. For it is the peevish industry of wickedness, to
find, or make a fellow. It Is like, they will be birds of a feather, that use
to flock together. For such commonly does their conversation make us, as they
are with whom we use to converse. I cannot be certain, not to meet with
evil company, but I will be careful, not to keep with evil company. I
would willingly sort my self with such, as should either teach, or learn
goodness: and if my companion cannot make me better, nor I him good, I will
rather leave him ill, then he shall make me worse.

TO teach goodness is the greatest praise, to learn goodness, the greatest
profit. Though he be wisest that can teach, yet he that does learn is wiser.
I will not therefore be unwilling to teach, nor ashamed to learn. I cannot be
so ignorant, but I may learn somewhat, nor so wise but I may teach more, I
will therefore teach what I know, and learn what I know not. Though it be a
greater praise to teach, then to learn, yet it is a lesser shame to learn
then to be ignorant.

AS there is a misery in want, so there is a danger in excess. I would
therefore desire neither more, nor less, then enough. I may as well die of a
surfeit, as of hunger.

IT is the apish nature of many, to follow rather example then precepts: but it
would be the safest course of all, to learn rather by precept then example.
For there is many a good Divine that cannot learn his own teaching. It is
easier to say this do, then to do it. When therefore. I see good doctrine
with an evil life, I may pity the one, but I will practice only the other.
The good sayings belong to all, the evil actions only to their authors.

THere are two things necessary for a traveller, to bring him to the end of his
journey: a knowledge of his way, a perseverance in his walk. If he walk in a
wrong way, the faster he goes the further he is from home: if he sit still in a
right way, he may know his home, but never come to it: Discreet stays make
speedy journeyes. I will first then know my way, ere I begin my walk: the
knowledge of my way is a good part of my journey. He that faints in the
execution loses the glory of the action. I will therefore not only know my
way, but also go on in my way: I had rather my journey should want a
beginning, then come to an untimely end. If heaven be my home, and CHRIST my
way, I will learn to know my way, ere I haste to travel to my home. He that
runs hastily in a way he knows not, may come speedily to an home he loves
not. If CHRIST be my way, and heaven my home, I will rather endure my painful
walk, then want my perfect rest. I more esteem my home then my journey; my
actions shall be led by knowledge, my knowledge be followed by my actiions.
Ignorance is a bad mother to devotion, and idleness a bad steward to to
knowledge.

I Cannot but wonder at the folly of those hearts, who are like to kill
themselves with the fear of dying, making the news of an ensuing mischief, a
worse mischief then that they have news of: whereas the foreknowledge of an
approaching evil, is a benefit of no small good. For if it cannot teach us to
prevent it by providence, it may show us, how to sustain it by patience. I may
grieve with the smart of an evil, as soon as I feel it: But I will not smart
with the grief of an evil as soon as I hear of it. My evil when it comes
may make my grief too great, why then should my grief before it comes make my
evil greater?

AS I see in the body, so I know in the soul, they are often most desperately
sick, who are least sensible of their disease: whereas he that fears each
light wound* for mortal, seeks a timely cure, and is healed. I will not
reckon it my happiness, that I have many sores, but since I have them, I am
glad they greeve me. I know the cure is not the more dangerous, because my
wounds are more grievous; I should be more sick if I plained less.

IT is one, not of the least evils; not to avoid the appearance of evil,
which often makes the innocent justly punished with undeserved suspicion. I would
desire to be thought good, but yet I had rather be so. It is no small
happiness to be free from suspicion, but a greater to be void of offense. I
would willingly be neither evil nor suspected: but of the two I had rather be
suspected and not deserve it, then deserve evil and not be suspected.

I Know but one way to heaven, I have but one Mediator in heaven, even one
Christ: and yet I hear of more Ways, more Mediators. Are there then more
Christ's? Are the Lords ways as your ways that we must go to the King of
heaven as unto a King on earth? Or if we must, yet if my King bid me come
shall I send an other? If he bid me come unto him, shall I go unto another? If
he bid me ask for peace only in the name of the Prince of peace, why should I
mention the Lady Mary? If I shall be heard only in the name of his son, why
should I use the name of his servants? Were it a want of manners, or a want of
obedience to come when I am bid? Is another better, or am I too good to go in
mine own errands to the Almighty? Because the son was worse used then the
servants on earth, shall the servants therefore be sooner heard then the Son
in heaven? There are still unjust Husbandmen in the Lords vineyard, who not
only abuse the servants, but kill again the Son, and rob him of his due
inheritance. When the LORD therefore of the Vineyard comes, what will he do
to these Husbandmen? I do not envy your glory ye Saints of GOD, yet I will
not attribute the glory of my GOD to his Saints. How shall my GOD glorify me,
if I should give his glory to another?

TO be without passion is worse then a beast, to be without reason, is to be
less then a man. Since I can be without neither, I am blessed, in that I have
both. For, if it be not against reason to be passionate, I will not be
passionate against reason. I will both greeve and joy, if I have reason for it,
but not joy nor grieve above reason. I will so joy at my good as not to take
evil by my joy: so grieve at any evil as not to increase my evil by my
grief. For it is not a folly to have passion, but to want reason. I would be
neither senseless, nor beastly.

IT is the folly of wit in some, to take pains to trim their labors in
obscurity. It is the ignorance of learning in others, to labor to divest their
pain by bluntness; the one thinking he never speaks wisely, till he goes
beyond his own, and all men's understandings: the other thinking he never
speaks plainly, till he dive beneath the shallowest apprehension. I as
little affect curiosity in the one, as I care for the affectation of baldness
in the other. I would not have the pearl of heavens kingdom so curiously set
in gold, as that the art of the workman should hide the beauty of the jewel:
nor yet so slightly valued, as to be set in lead: or so beastly used as to be
slubbered with dirt. I know the pearl (how ever placed) still retains its
virtue, yet I had rather have it set in gold, then seek it in a dunghill. Neat
apparel is an ornament to the body, but a disgrace, if either proud or
slovenly.

I See corruption so largely rewarded, that I doubt not, but I should thrive in
the world, could I but get a dispensation of my conscience for the liberty of
trading. A little flattery would get me a great deal of favor, and I could
buy a world of this worlds love, with the sale of this little trifle Honesty.
Were this world my home, I might perhaps be trading: but alas, these
merchandise yield less then nothing in heaven. I would willingly be at quiet
with the world, but rather at peace with my conscience. The love of men is
good, whiles it lasts, the love of GOD is better being everlasting. Let me
then trade for those heavenly merchandise: if I find these other in my way,
they are a great deal more then I look for, and (within little) more then I
care for.

AS faith is the evidence of things not seen: so things that are seen are the
perfecting of faith. I believe a tree will be green, when I see him leavelesse
in winter: I know he is green when I see him flourishing in summer. It was a
fault in Thomas not to believe till he did see. It were a madness in him not
to believe when he did see. Belief may sometime exceed reason, not oppose it,
and faith be often above sense not against it. Thus whiles faith does assure
me that I eat CHRIST effectually, sense must assure me that I taste bread
really. For though I oftentimes see not those things that I believe, yet I must
still believe those things that I see.

THere is none so innocent as not to be evil spoken of, none so wicked as to
want all commendation. There are too many who condemn the just, and not a few
who justify the wicked. I often hear both envy and flattery speaking
falsehoods of my self, to my self, and may not the like tongues perform the
liketaskes, of others to others? I will know Others by what they do
themselves, but not learn my self by what I hear of others. I will be
careful of mine own actions, not credulous of others relations.

THe Cross is but a sign of CHRIST crucified, CHRIST crucified the substance
of this Cross. The sign without the substance is as nothing, the substance
without the sign is all things. I hate not the sign, though I adore but the
substance. I will not blaspheme the Cross of CHRIST, I will not worship but
CHRIST crucified. I will take up my Cross, I will love my Cross, I will bear
my Cross, I will embrace my Cross, yet not adore my Cross. All knees shall
bend in reverence to his name, mine never bow in idolatry to his image.

IT is the nature of man to be proud, when man by nature has nothing to be
proud of. He more adorneth the Creature, then he adoreth the Creator* and
makes, not only his belly his God, but his body. I am ashamed of their glory,
whose glory is their shame. If nature will needs have me to be proud of
something, I will be proud only of this, that I am proud of nothing.

AS the Giver of all things, so each receiver loves a cheerful giver. For a
bargain is valued by the worth of the thing bought, but a gift by the mind of
the party giving: which made the widows mite of more worth, then the riches of
superfluity. I see then, he gives not best that gives most, but he gives most,
that gives best. If then I cannot give bountifully, yet I will give freely, and
what I want in my hand, supply by my heart. He gives well that gives willingly.

I See at a feast, that others seed heartily on that dish which perhaps would
not suite with my appetite, whilst I make as good a meal on those cates, that
perhaps their palats could not relish. I will not therefore think I do well
because my actions please not others, nor be confident that my actions are
good, because my doings please my self: but be more careful to provide what
is good at a feast, then what is delightful: and more study to express what is
honest in my actions, then what is pleasing. So, if sick stomachs cannot
relish my sound meats, the fault shall light on their ill appetites: and if
unseasoned judgments like not my honest intentions, the fault shall fall on
their ill relished apprehensions. It would please me well to have praise when
I deserve it; but joy me more to deserve praise when I have it.

FINIS.
Spare-Minutes; OR, RESOLVED MEDITATIONS AND PREMEDITATED RESOLVTIONS. The
Second part.

Written by ARTHVR WARVVICK.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Walter Hammond, and are to be sold by Michael
Spark, in Green Arbor. 1634.

TO THE VIRTUOUS and Religious Gentlewoman my much esteemed friend Mistrisse
ANNE ASHTON, be health and happiness here and hereafter.
Worthy Mistrisse,
THE acknowledgement of your favors shall be my meanest thanks and to thank
you for those favors, must be my best acknowledgement. I can do no more, I
will do no less, Nor have I any better means to show my own living
gratefullnesse, then by coupling it with my dead Sons thankfulness, and by
receiving his, to enliven my own, and to testify both to posterity, by this
small memorial. Neither is it unsuitable that his study should yield some
matter of thankfulness after his death, who in his life time studied to be
thankful to you his most deserving friend. Which gave me (his sad father) a
fit hint to dedicate these his last Meditations to your self, to whose name
and worth, he meditated and intended, to raise a fairer Monument, had he
lived. This prevented, what remains, but that this remnant cloathe his
thankfulness as far as it can, and supply the necessitated defect of his
uneffected purpose. These collected out of loose papers, seem to be wrought
in some sudaine temperate heat of his honest fantasy, and hammered on the
anvill of objected occaseons, and being forged roughly into these shapes, were
cast a cooling into the next paper that came to hand: and so wanting filing,
and polishing, must crave pardon for their ruder form. They assume their
greatest worth and value from your courteous acceptance, and account it their
chiefest happiness, if, for them, you love his memory while you live, who
endeavored to make your memory outlive your self. This if you deigne to do
you shall much comfort the sadness of

Your assured and devoted friend Arthur Warwick.

RESOLVED Meditations AND PREMEDITATED Resolutions.
The Second part.
WHen one ascends from the ground to an higher room, I observe with what
contempt he insults and tramples on the stairs by which he rises, and how he
first and most darteth that step by which he first stepped from the dirt. Which
puts me in mind of the practice of the aspiring ambitious, who, to get up
to their wished height of honor, bedurt with scorn, and neglect those by
whose shoulders they were first mounted, and exal^ed I hate that ambition which
inforceth ingratitude; which, being the basest of vices, cannot but foil, and
disgrace a man graced with such honors. I am not preferred with honor, if
debased with ingratitude.

HE that will not be persuaded to leap down from an high chamber at once,
comes willingly down by the stayres: and yet the declining degrees of his
winding descent make it not less downward to him, but less perceived of him.
His leap might have brought him down sooner, it could not have brought him
down lower. As I am then fearful to act great sins, so I will be careful
to avoid small sins. He that contemn's a small fault commits a great one. I
see many drops make a shower: and what difference is it, whether I be wet
either in the rain, or in the river, if both be to the skin? There is small
benefit in the choice, whither we go down to Hell by degrees or at once.

THE gentle and harmless sheep being conscious of their own innocence, how
patiently, how quietly, do they receive the knife, either on the altar, or in
the shambles? How silently and undaunted do they meet death and give it
entrance with small resistance? When the filthy loathsome and harmefull swine
roar horribly at the first handling, and with an hideous crying reluctance,
are haled, and held to the slaughter. This seems some cause to me, why wicked
men (conscious of their filthy lives, and nature) so tremble at the
remembrances, startle at the name, and with horror roar at the approach of
death: when the godly quietly uncloathe themselves of their lives, and make
small difference twixt a natural nights short sleep, and the long sleep of
nature. I will pray not to come to an untimely violent death, I will not
violently resist death at the time when it comes. I will expect and wait my
change with patience, embrace it with cherfulness, and never fear it as a
total privation.

IT is no small fault to be bad, and seem so: it is a greater fault to seem
good, and not be so: The cloak of dissimulation is a maine part of the garment
spotted with the flesh. A vice thus covered is worse then a naked offense.
There is no devil to the Hypocrite.

WHen I see the Larkers day-net spread out in a fair morning, and himself
whirling his artificial motion, and observe how by the reflecting luster of
the sun on the wheeling instrument, not only the merry lark, and fearful
Pigeon are dazeled, and drawn with admiration; but stowter birds of pray, the
swift Merlin, and towering Hobbie are enticed to stoop, and gazing on the
outward form loose themselves. Me thinks I see the devils nightnets of
enticing harlots fully paraleld, spread out for us in the vigor of our youth;
which with rolling eyes draw on the lustfullnesse of affection, and betray the
wantonness of the heart, and wit^ their alluring glances often make to stoop
within danger of their fatal nets, not only the simple and careless, but
others also, men otherwise wary and wife: who coming within the pull of the
net lie at the mercy of that merciless fowler, to their certain destruction.
Hence I resolve when I see such glasses, to shun such motions, as assured
that those glasses have nets adjoining; those nets a fowler attending; that
fowler a death prepared for me, then which I cannot die a worse. I may by
chance, I must by necessity, at sometime come within their view: I will at no
time come within their danger. I cannot well live in this world, and not see
them at all, I cannot live well in this world, nor at all in the better world,
if I be caught in their fatal nets.

THere be that make it their glory to feed high, and fare deliciously every
day, and to maintain their bodies elementary, search the elements, the earth,
sea, and air, to maintain the fire of their appetites. They that thus make
their bellies their Gods do make their glory their shame. I distaste a sordid
diet as unwholesome, I care not to taste and feed on variety of delicates as
unhealthfull. Nature contented with a few things is cloyed, and quelled with
over many: and digestion her cook employed in the concoction of so much
variety at once, leaves the stomach too foul a kitchen for health to abide
in. Since then so to feed may the sooner end my life, and the end of my life is
not so to feed, I will be taught by Grace not to live to eat, but eat to live;
and maintain health by a competent diet, not surfeit with excess.

HE that too much admires the glory of a Princes Court, and drawn up thither
(by his ambition) thinks high places to be the highest happiness; let him
view the foggie mists, the moist vapors, and light exhalations drawn up from
the earth by the attractive power of the glorious sunne-beames: which when they
are at highest, either spend themselves there in portending meteors, to others
terror and their own consumption; and either by resolution are turned into
rain, or cong^lation unto hayle or snow, which sink lower into the earth at
their fall, then they were at their assending. For my part, I may admire such a
glowing coal. I will not with the Satyr kiss it. As I think it not the least
and last praise to please Princes; so, I know, it is not the least danger of
times to to live with them, procul a Jove procul a fulmine. He presumes too
much of his own brightness that thinks to shine clear near the sun;
where if his light be his own it must be obscured by comparison: if borrowed
from the sun, then is it not his, but an others glory. A candle in the nights
obscurity shows brighter then a torch at noonday. And Caesar thought it a
greater glory to be the first man in some obscure town, then the second man in
Rome the head city of the world.

IT is a common custom (but a lewd one) of them that are common lewd ones, by
custom, to wound the fame, and taint the reputation of their neighbors with
slanders; and having no less impotency in their tongues then impurity in their
hearts, form both opinions and censures according to the mould of evil in
themselves. And this they do, either with the Lapwing to divert, by their
false cries, the traveling stranger from finding the nest of their
filthiness, or with the curtold Fox in the fable, to endeavor to have all
foxes cut-tayld: or, with the fish Sepia, to darken with the pitchie ink of
aspersions, all the water of the neighborhood, that so themselves may escape
the net of Censure, justly cast to catch them. Or else, to have themselves
thought as good as any other, they will not have any thought good, that dwells
near them. I will therefore suspect him as scarce honest, who would (with a
slander) make me suspect an other as dishonest. I will not presently
disrespect him as dishonest, whom a lewd person dishonesteth with suspicion.
The devil is not more blacke-mouth' then a slanderer; nor a slanderer less
malicious then the devil.

WHen I see the sunnerising from the East in glory, like a giant ready for the
course, within an hours space obscured with mists, darkened with clouds, and
sometimes eclipsed with the Moons inferior body: and however, without these,
after noone declining, descending, setting, and buried under our horizon; I
seem to see an earthly king mounting his throne in glory, yet soon clouded
with cares, and fear of dangers: sometime darkened in honor by the malicious
envy of his subjects; sometimes eclipsed in his dominions by the interposition
of foreign powers; and however, without these, in a short time, descending
and setting at the evening of his life, and seldom passing the whole day
thereof in perfect continual glory. Then think I. O the odds of comfort in
that heavenly and these earhly kingdoms; O the comfort of this odds; There
each Saint is a glorious King; each King has his incorruptible Crown; each
Crown a boundless, fearelesse, endless kingdom. Let me strive for the
glory of such a kingdom only, which is a kingdom of such glory.

Felices anima quibus hae cognoscere sola,
Inque domos superum scandere, curafuit.
THE Laws in themselves are the scoales of justice, the wronged poore-mans
shelter, the pillars of the Commonwealth: but the abused practice makes those
scoales unequal, that poore-mans shelter a man's poor shelter for his wrongs.
The proof of this, appears with the Iuries at the Assizes in their proofs:
when one may often discern perjury usher in the evidence to the jury, and
injury follow with the verdict. I admire with reverence the justice and
wisdom of the Laws: I deplore with compassion the abused practice of the
Laws, and resolve, rather to bear with patience an hayleshower of injuries,
then to seek shelter at such a thicker, where the brambles shall pluke off my
fleece, and do me more hurt by seratching, then the storm would have done by
hayling. I care not for that physic, where the remedy is worse then the
disease.

HOw cunningly does the Prince of darkness take on him the form of an Angel
of light? How often have seeming-saints prooved devils? even in those things
(lightly) most faulty, which they make a show of being most free from: Some
more proud of being thought plain, then a flaunting gallant in his new
fashion. Others refusing a deserved commendation, only with a desire to be
commended for refusing it: The one hating pride with a more proud hatred, the
other shunning praise with a greater vainglory. It is bad to have vices,
worse to dissemble them. Plato possessed his rich bed with less pride then
Diogenes trampled on it.

I Meet sometimes with men whose crazed brains seem soldered with
quicksilver; whose actions strains run only in odd crotchets; whose
judgments being hood-winkt with their own opinion, and passion, admit of
naught for reason, but what their unreasonable self-will dictates to them. And
then what they will do, they will do; and do it they will with that torrent
of violence, that overturnes all obstacles of counsel, which cross their
courses. From these I will learn not to make Will my coachman, unless Reason
run before to show the way: And if my action must pass by the waters of
uncertain danger, of all vessels I will not use the Whirry. As sloth seldom
brings actions to good birth: so hasty rashness always makes them abortive,
ere well formed.

AS in virtues, he that has one, has all: so in vices he that has one has
seldom one alone. He that will steal, must lie; and he that will steal, and
lie, will swear his lie; and so easily skrue himself up to perjury. He that
will be drunk, what will he not be, when he is drunk? and being slipped down
from the top of reasonable sense, where stops he from tumbling down into a
beastly sensuality? I will therefore give the water no passage no not a little,
least it make a breach, and that breach let in an inundation to drown the
sweet pastures of my soul. I see the devils claw is an enteringwedge, to let
in his foot; that foot, his whole body. I will be careful to set a Watch and
keep the door, that sin may have no admittance. I cannot be too careful,
so it be to the purpose; it cannot be to the purpose, if it be too little.

THat the voice of the common people is the voice of GOD, is the common voice
of the people; yet it is as full of falsehood, as commonnesse. For who sees not
that those blackemouth'd hownds, upon the mere seat of opinion, as freely
spend their mouths in hunting Counter, or like Actaeons dogs in chasing an
innocent man to death, as if they followed the chase of truth it self, in a
fresh sent. Who observes not that the voice of the people, yea of that people
that voiced themselves the people of GOD, did prosecute the GOD of all people,
with one common voice, he is worthy to die. I will not therefore ambitiously
beg their voices for my preferment; nor weigh my worth in that uneven
balance, in which a feather of opinion shall be momentenough to turn the
scales, and make a light piece go current, and a current piece seem light.

THere are a sort of men which are kind men to me, when they expect some
kindness from me: who have their hands down to the ground in their
salutations, when the ground of their salutations is to have a hand at me, in
some commodity. But their own ends once served, their kindness has its end
at once: And then it seems strange to me, how strange they will seem to grow
to me; as if the cause (their desire) being removed the effect (their
courtesy) must straight cease. I will not acknowledge such my friends, but
their own; and when ever I see such insinuating palpalation, I will bethink
me what the authors would have of me. And, with a thrifty discretion, rather
deny such their requests, then, in a prodigal kindness become their friend,
more then mine own.

I See a number of gallants every where, whose incomes come in yearly by set
numbers, but run out daily, sans number. I could pity the cases of such brave
men, but that I see them still in brave cases. And when I see them often foxed,
methinke the Proverb suits those suits, What is the fox but his case? I should
think them to be Eutrapelus his enemies, whom he clothed richly to make them
spend freely, and grow deboshed. I will do those men right, and wonder at
them, because they desire it. I will not wrong my self to envy at them,
because they deserve it not, nor to pity them, because they scorn it. I know
that gorgeous apparel is an ornament to grace the Court, for the glory of the
Kingdom, but it is no ornament useful in the Kingdom of Grace, nor needful
in the Kingdom of glory. A rich coat may be commendable in the Accidents of
armory only, but it is not the only substance of a commendable gentleman. I
will value the apparel, by the worthiness of the wearer; I will not value the
worthiness of the wearer, by the worth of his apparel. Adam was most
gallantly appareled, when he was innocently naked.

THe men of most credit in our time, are the usurers. For they credit most men:
And though their greatest study be security, yet is it usually their fortune
to be fullest of care. Time is precious to them: For they think a day broke to
them, is worth a broke-age from their creditor. Yet this they find by use,
that as they have much profit by putting out, so must they have much care to
get it in. For debtors are of Themistocles his mind, and take not so much care
how to repay all, as how they may not pay at all, their creditors, and make
this their first resolution, how they may make no resolution at all. I envy not
therefore the Usurers gains, but considering they (as Marchant-adventurers)
send abroad their estates in uncertain vessels, sometime into the bankrupt
rivers of prodigality, and unthriftinesse, sometimes into the seas of
casualities, and misfortunes, that many times their principal comes short
home, I think, with my self, Let them gain much by the adventure, that
adventure so much to gain. I will make this use of those uses, as to claim no
interest in their gains, nor to owe any thing to any man but love. If I lend
where need is, and receive my principal again, I will account that my
principal gain, and think my courtesy but a commanded charity.

IN gratitude is the character of an ill nature in our selves, a canker of
friendship with others, and the very poison that kills charity in the embrio,
being but newly conceived in the pregnant minds of good men, and causing an
abortion of liberality, ere it comes to its intended birth. For who will sow
those barren sands, where he knows he must not only not expect a good
harvest, but be sure to loose his seed and labor? Yet in these times what is
more common or more practiced then this ingratitude? For in receiving benefits,
who will not (with Euclio in Planutus) find a third hand to reach out to take
them? But in requiting, who is not more maimed then the statua's of Mercury,
which Alcibiades so mangled that he scarce left them a finger to point out the
way to travelers? It is ten to one, but we all desire to be cured of the
leprosies of our wants: yet scarce one of ten of us returns, to give thanks
for the cure. I will not think my self so enriched by receiving a courtesy,
as engaged to be thankful for it. I am not left a free man at my liberty, by
taking a man's free liberality: but I sell my freedom for his benefits. I can
not deserve to be gracious with my friend, if, with the Graces, I look not
with two faces back to require, as well as with one forward to receive.

I Will not much commend others to themselves, I will not at all commend my
self to others. So to praise any to their faces, is a kind of flattery: but
to praise my self to any is the height of folly. He that boasts his own
praises, speaks ill of himself, and much derogates from his true deserts. It
is worthy of blame to affect commendation.

Merrily and wittily said Plautus, that was one of the merry Wits of his time, I
would (said he) by my will have tale-bearers and tale-hearers punished the one
hanging by the tongue, the other by the ears. Were his will a law in force
with us, many a tatling gossip would have her vowells turned to mutes, and be
justly tonguetied that desires to be tied by the teeth at your table:
wherewith Theominus his tooth she gnaweth on the goodname of her neighbor:
And many a hungry Paret whose belly is his arts-master would cease to second
his ave to his Lord with depraving tales called news, and make his grace after
dinner the disgrace of some innocent: And most men would give them course
entertainment, that come to entertain their ears with discourse of defamative
reports. I will be silent and barren of discourse, when I chance to hear a
tale rather then go with-childe therewith, till an others ears be my midwife,
to deliver me of such a deformed monster. I may hear a tale of delight, and
perhaps smile at an innocent jest, I will not jest, not joy at a tale
disgracing an innocent person.

WHen I see a gallant ship well rigged, trimmed, tackled, manned and munition'd
with her top and top-gallant, and her spread sails proudly swelling with a
full gale in fair weather, putting out of the haven into the smooth maine, and
drawing the spectators eyes, with a well-wishing admiration, and shortly hear
of the same ship splitted against some dangerous rock, or wracked by some
disasterous tempest, or sunk by some leake sprung in her by some accident, me
seems I see the case of some Courtfavourite, who to day like Sejanus dazeleth
all men's eyes with the splendor of his glory, and with the proud and potent
beak of his powerful prosperity cutteth the waves and ploweth through the
prease of the vulgar, and scorneth to fear some remora at his keele below, or
any crosse-windes from above, and yet to morrow on some storms of unexpected
disfavour, springs a leake in his honor and sinks on the Syrtes of disgrace,
or dashed against the rocks of displeasure is splitted and wracked in the
Charibdis of infamy, and so concludes his voyage in misery and misfortune. I
will not therefore adventure with the greedy shepherd to change my sheep into
a ship of adventure, on the sight of a calm sea

Vt pelago suadente etiam retinacula solvas,
Multatamen latus tristia pontus habet.
I Will study to deserve my Princes favor, I will not desire to be a Princes
favorite. If I fall whence I am, I can raise my self, but to be cast down
thence were to be crushed with a desperate downe-fall. I prefer a mediocrity
though obscure yet safe, before a greater eminency with a far greater danger.

WHen a storm drives me to shelter me under a tree, I find that if the
storm be little, the tree defends me, but if the storm be great, the tree
not only not defends me, but powers on me that wet which itself had
received, and so makes the much wetter. Hence instructed, I resolve that if
improvidently I fall into some small danger of the laws, I will presume to
seek shelter under the arms of some potent friend, but if the tempest of my
trouble be too potent for my friend, I will rather bear all my self, then
involve my friend in the danger. It would be bad enough for me to be drencht
with or distressed by the storm of the laws anger only; It would be worse to
be drowned with the anger of my storming friend also. My conscience of my ill
deserving toward the laws would enforce a patience: my remembrance of my
well-deserving to my friend would make the just addition of his anger
intolerable.

COntent is the mark we all aim at, the chief good and top of felicity, to
which all men's actions strive to ascend: But it is solely proper to GODS
wisdom to ingrosse all true content into his own hand, that he may sell it
to saints by retaile, and enforce all men to buy it of him or want it. Hence is
it that a godly man in his mean estate, enjoyes more content in GOD, then a
King or Emperor in his earths glory and magnificence. I will then strive to
purchase me a patent of content from him that has the monopoly thereof: and
then, if I have little in estate, I shall have much in content, Godliness shall
be my great riches, whiles I am contented with what I have.

AS in the greater world for man, so in the little world of man, as in the
outward riches of the one, so in the inner treasures of the other, many
possess much and enjoy but little, many have much, and use but little, others
use much, and but little well. I shall not so much endeavor to have much
wherewithal to do, as to do much, with that little I have. It shall not so
much greeve me, that I am a poor treasurer, as joy me, if I have been a
good steward. I could wish I had more to use well, but more wish well to use
that I have. If he were so blamed that employed not one talent well, what
would become of me, if I had ten, and abused them?

POpular applause, and vulgar opinion may blow-up and mount upward the bubble
of vainglorious mind, till it burst in the air, and vanish: But a wise man
builds his glory on the strong foundation of virtue, without expecting or
respecting the slender props of vulgar opinion. I will not neglect what every
one thinks of me; For that were impudent dissoluteness. I will not make it my
common care, to hearken how I am cared for of the common sort, and be
over-sollicitous what every one speaks of me, For that were a toylesome
vanity. I may do well, and hear ill: And that is a Kingly happiness. I may
do ill, and hear well: and that is an hypocrites best felicity. My actions
shall make me harmony in my hearts inner chamber: I will not borrow the Voices
of the vulgar to sweeten my music.

THe rancor of malice is the true nature of the devil, and the soul possessed
therewith is his dearest darling. For where envy, hate, and revenge take up the
whole heart, there GOD has no room at all left to be in all his thoughts. I
may meet a mad man, and avoid him, I may move a choleric man, and pacific
him, I may cross a furious drunkerd, and shun him, but a malicious man is
more dangerous, implacable, and inevitable then they all. Malice omits no
occasion to do mischief: and if it miss thy body and substance, it
prosecutes thy shadow, Visam fera saevit in umbram. My soul come not thou into
their secrets, unto their assembly, mine-honour be not thou united. I must
not turn anger out of my nature, I must not turn my nature into anger, I must
give place to Wrath, but not a resting place, but a place to let it passe-by,
that I may let go displeasure. I may give entrance to anger on just cause, I
may not give it entertainment on any cause, till it sower with the leaven of
malice. I must be angry with sin, but I must be angry and sin not.

WHen I plant a choice flower in a fertile soil, I see nature presently to
thrust up with it, the stinging nettle, the stinking hemlocke, the drowzie
poppie, and many such noisome weeds, which will either choke my plant with
excluding the sun, or divert its nourishment to themselves: But if I weed out
these at first, my flower thrives to its goodness and glory. This is also my
case when I endeavor to plant grace in the fertile soil of a good wit. For
luxurious nature thrusts up with it, either stinging wrath, or stinking
wantonness, or drowzie sloth or some other vices, which robb my plant of its
desired flourishing. But these being first plucked up, the good wit produces in
its time, the fair flower of virtue. I will not therefore think the best
wits, as they are wits, fittest to make the best men, but as they are the best
purged best wits. The ground of their goodness is not the goodness of their
wits, but the good weeding and clensing it. I must first eschew the evil, ere
I can do good, supplant vices, ere I can implant virtue.

AS it is never to soon to be good: so is it never too late to amend. I will
therefore neither neglect the time present, nor despair of the time past. If I
had been sooner good, I might perhaps have been better. If I am longer bad, I
shall (I am sure) be worse. That I have stayed long time idle in the
marketplace deserves reprehension, but if I am late sent into the vineyard, I
have encouragement to work, I will give unto this last as unto thee.

WHEN I see the Husbandman well contented with the cold of frost and snow in
the Winter, because, though it chilleth the ground, yet it kills the
charlocke, though it check the wheat somewhat in growing, yet it choaketh the
weeds from growing at all: Why should I be moved at the winter of affliction?
Why vexed at the quaking fit of a quartane ague? Why offended at the cold
change of affection in my Summer-friends? If as they seem bitter to my mind
or body, they prove healthful to my bettered soul. If my wants kill my
wantonness, my poverty check my pride, my disrespected sleighting quell my
ambition and vainglory, and every weed of vice being thus choked by
afflictions winter, my soul may grow fruitful for heavens harvest, let my
winter be bitter, so that I be gathered with the good corn at reaping time
into the LORDS barn.

AS often as I hear the Robin-red-brest chaunt it as cheerfully in September,
the beginning of Winter, as in March the approach of the Summer, why should not
we (think I) give as cheerful entertainment to the hoare-frosty hayres of
our ages winter, as to the Primroses of our youths spring? Why not to the
declining sun in adversity, as (like Persians) to the rising sun of
prosperity? I am sent to the Ant, to learn industry; to the Dove, to learn
innocence; to the Serpent, to learn wisdom; And why not to this bird to
learn equanimity and patience; and to keep the same tenor of my minds
quietness, as well at the approach of calamities winter, as of the spring of
happiness? And, since the Romans constancy is so commended, who changed not
his countenance with his changed fortunes, Why should not I, with a Christian
resolution, hold a steady course in all weathers, and though I be forced with
crossewindes, to shift my sails, and catch at side-windes, yet skilfully to
steer, and keep on my course, by the Cape of good hope, till I arive at the
haven of eternal happiness?

THE same water which being liquid is penetrated with an horsehaire, will bear
the horse himself when it is hard frozen. I muse not then that those precepts
and threats of GODS judgments enter not into the hardened hearts of some old
men, frozen by the practice of sin, which pierce and penetrate deep into the
tender hearts and melting consciences of younger folks thawed with the warmth of
GODS fear. Hence see I the cause why the sword of the Word, so sharp, that it
serves in some to divide the joyntes and marrow, in others glaunceth or
reboundeth without dint or wound, from their cristall frozen and adamantine
hearts. I cannot promise my self to be free from sin, I were then no man:
but I will purpose in my self to be free from hardness of heart, by custom
and continuance in sin, I may err in my way, I will not persist and go on
in my errors, till I cannot return again into my way. I may stumble, I may
fall, but I will not lie still when I am fallen.

WHen I see two game-cocks at first sight, without premeditated malice fight
desperately and furiously, the one to maintain the injury offered, the other to
revenge the injury received by the first blow and to maintain this quarrel,
not only dye the pit with their blood, but die in the pit with their mutual
bloody wounds, me thinks I see the success of those duellers of our time;
which being ambitious of Achilles his praise, Pelidis juvenis cedere nescij,
desperately and furiously adventure their lives here, and endanger their souls
hereafter only for the vain terms of false honor. I will not say but that
being flesh and blood I may be careless of my flesh and blood to revenge
injurious indignities offered me: yet since as a tenant my soul must answer
her Landlord for reparations of the house she dwells in, and I have no warrant
of GOD or man for such revenge, I will not kill my own soul to kill an other
man's body. I will not pull the house of my body on my souls head in a fury,
that GOD may make them both fuel for the fury of hell fire.

WHen I view the heavens declaring the glory of GOD, and the firmament showing
his handy work, and consider that each little numbered star even of the sixth
magnitude, contains the earths dimension 18. times in bigness by Astronomers
conclusions, I easily descend to consider the great difference of earthly men's
glory, and that weight of glory affoorded the Saints in heaven. For what a
poor ambition is it to be the best man in a City? What Is a City to a Shire?
What a Shire to the whole Island? What this Island to the Continent of Europe?
What Europe to the whole Earth? What that Earth to a Star? What that Star
to Heaven? and that to the Heaven of Heavens? And so by a retrogradation how
little? How nothing is this poor glory. I find many which say, hoc nihil est
aliquid: I find in my self cause to say, hoc aliquid nihil est. If I needs
will be somebody by my ambition, I will be ambitious to be ranged with the
Saints in Heaven rather then ranked with the Kings on earth: since the least in
the Kingdom of Heaven is greater then they.

I Saw once a Ierfalcon let fly at an Heron, and observed with what clamor the
Heron entertained the sight and approach of the Hawke, and with what winding
shifts he strave to get above her, laboring even by bemuting his enemies
feathers to make her flaggwinged and so escape: but when at last they must
needs come to a necessitated encounter, resuming courage out of necessity he
turned face against her, and striking the Hawke thorough the gorge with his
bill fell down dead together with his dead enemy. This sight seemed to me
the event of a great suit in Law, where one trusting to his cases potency more
then his causes equity, endeavors to disinherit his stubborn neighbor by
colorable titles to his land. Here may you hear the clamorous obloquies of
the wronged and see the many turnings and winding Meanders in the Law sought
out to get above his adversary. And lastly when the issue must come to trial,
oftentimes in the grapple they both sink to beggary by the Law whiles lawfully
they seek to get above each other. Hence warned against potent enemies I will
always pray, LORD make me not a prey unto their teeth; and against an equal or
inferior I will not borrow the laws extreme right to do him extreme wrong:
nor fall to law with any body till I fall by law, to be no body. I will not
do that to have my will, which will undo my self of what I have, by my
wilfulness.

THe Psalmist does not slander the slanderers, when in a good description of
their bad natures, he says, their throat is an open sepulcher, etc. the
poison of Aspes is under their lips. For what more loathsome stench, and
noisome smells can a new opened sepulcher belch out, then these venomous open
throated slanderers? And well may their lipscontaine the poison of Aspes, of
which Lucan says, in nulla plus est serpente veneni, when a few words of
theirs shall (like a Witches spell) charm and strike dead a man's dearest
reputation. I will therefore endeavor to make my actions of that virtue, that
as an antidote of Mithridates his best confection, they may repel the worst
infection those serpents shall spit at me. And albeit I cannot be free from
their assaults (from which none is freed) yet I will not with Cleopatra set
those Aspes so near my heart that they may stop my vital spirits with their
poison. And since I must pass thorough this Africa of monsters and harmefull
beasts, I will carefully fear and shun the worst of tame beasts the
flatterer, and of wild beasts the slanderer.

MEditation is a busy search in the storehouse of fantasy for some Idea's of
matters, to be cast in the moulds of resolution into some forms of words or
actions; In which search when I have used my greatest diligence, I find this
in the conclusion, that to meditate on the Best is the best of Meditations: and
a resolution to make a good end is a good end of my resolutions.

A Meditation of the Authors found written before a Sermon of his for
Easter Day.
MY heart a matter good indites; O then
Lord make my tongue a ready writers pen:
That so assisted by thy graces art,
Thy grace unto the world I may impart:
So raise my thoughts, my willing mind so bless,
That I thy glorious rising may express.
And raised from death of sinful ignorance,
Thy selfe-advancing power may advance.
And if my simple willingness wants skill,
Thou made me willing; LORD accept my will,
An other written before a Sermon of his on the 51. Psalm, verse 1.
LORD guide my tongue, that covets to declare,
How great my sins, how good thy mercies are.
I both would show, and yet so great is either,
That whilst I both would show I can show neither.
They both are infinite, they both began
Ere I beginning had, or shape of man.
Where then shall I begin, with hope to show
How great both are, who both exceeding know?
Mercy still pardons, sin does still offend,
And being endless both, where shall I end?
Thou first and last, whose mercy heal my sin,
Show me to end, and teach me to begin.
The last thing the Author wrote a few days before his death.
A Bubble broke, its air loses,
By which loss the bubble's lost.
Each frost the fairest flower brooseth
Whose lives vanish with that frost.
Then wonder not we die, if life be such,
But rather wonder whence it is we live so much.
Tales long or short, whether offending
Or well pleasing have their end.
The glass runs, yet the set-time ending
Every atom does descend.
If life be such (as such life is it is sure)
When tales and times find ends why should life still endure?
This world is but a walk of pain
That has only end by death.
This life's a war in which we gain
Conquest by the loss of breath.
Who would not war-fare end and travells cease
To live at home in rest and rest at home in peace?
Nothing here but constant pains
Or unconstant pleasures be:
Worthless treasures, loosing gains,
Scantie store, chaynd liberty.
If life afford the best no better fate,
How welcome is that death, that betters that bad state?
What Is the earth when trimmest dressed
To that cristall spangled dwelling?
Yet the Saint in glory least
Is in glory far excelling.
Glorious Redeemer let this earth of mine
Thy glorious body see and in thy glory shine.
Often I see the darksome night
To a glorious day returning:
As often does sleep intombe my sight
Yet I wake again at morning.
Bright Sun return, when sleep has spent deaths night,
That these dimne eyes of mine may in thy light see light.
FINIS.

