Magnetica Magnalia


THE WONDERS OF THE LODESTONE. OR, The LODESTONE newly reduced into a Divine
and Moral Use.

BY SAMVEL WARD, of Ipswich. B.D.

If men be silent, Stones will show thy praise, And Iron, hearts of men to thee
will raise. LONDON, Printed by E. P. for PETER COLE, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the sign of the gl(...) and Lion in Cornehill, ^ver against the
Conduit. 1640.

To the most Excellent Majesty of the Royal CHARLES, etc.
O KING live for ever, and be graciously pleased to take in good part this
little Stone, and this little Book, which is an Interpreter of the Virtues
thereof. A Stone if your Majesty regards the price, to be less esteemed then
the meanest Gem. But if you respect its use and profit in the Art of
Navigation and Dyalling, yea and in Divinity it self; it is not to be counted
dear, though in comparison of the most precious Diamond. If the quantity of it
be considered, it scarce exceeds a little clodd of Earth: But if we consider
the respects it has to the Arctick and Antartick poles to the Tropic circles
and the Aequinoctiall, then it equals the Terrestrial* Globe, hereupon it was
deservedly called by the name Terrell^ as Gilbert the founder of this Magnetic
discipline has termed it; If we look upon its outward show and beauty, there
is no smoothnes, no brightness in it, as in Pearls, it has no splendor, no
transparency, as other precious stones: therefore by Claudian it is called
Decolor ill colored. And by Berchori^^ ferrugineus of the color of rusty Iron,
but if the inward force and virtue of it be considered, it does exceedingly
surpass the most precious stones, for which cause by ancient Grecians was
called (...) strong or as famous amongst stones, as (...) was amongst men, by
the latter Gretians it was termed (...), mirificus a stone that does wonders
for it is inrich'^ by nature wi^h wonderful and secret endowments* it
produces admirable effects, it cares the Gout, Cramp, and Head-^ch, if we give
credit to (...) bodeus and Pictorius, ^ho has made a Comment upon him, unto
which the same Author adds, that it makes such as possess it. Eloquent and
acceptab^e to Princes, O me s^lice^, s^vera diceret. O happy me if that he
speak the truth. By your Majesty's good leave, I dare promise this with good
assurance that if your Majesty alone were the possessor of it, it would easily
make you the Monarch of the whole world, for to them that pass the Seas, this
stone is another Neptune, and most faithful conductor to the havens, and to
them that travel by land another Mercury, a most certain guide in all
journyes, especially because it is the most powerful ruler of the Iron
generation, which easily subjects all other metals, and in that respect also,
it is the most excellent pattern and lively Emblem of your most admirable
Monarchical and mild Government, for this was always my constant and
undoub^^d opinion, this I always thought with the greatest Politicians and
Divines, and openly professed it before all men, that an hereditary Monarchy,
(such as this is, under which it was my happy lot to draw my vital breath, to
enjoy all sorts of blessings, and to live in all godly conversation and
tranquillity, is by many degrees the most profitable, and most praiseworthy of
all forms of Government, which are any where used, or that can be imagined;
unto this Monarchical Estate I have always wished well, as he knows who
searches my heart and reins. Furthermore it is approved by the consent of all
Writers, and by the Mottoes of many Emperors, that a Magnetic manner of
Governing is most safe, most acceptable, and most commodious, both for Princes
and Subjects, for as sugar, (according to the testimony of Fernelius) does the
very same things, and all in a better and sweeter manner then honey does, so a
Magnetic affection does effect more then flavish terror, and a filial love
of subjects, is better then servile fear. Behold how the Loadstone subdues to
it self all kind of Iron, which otherwise is scarce wrought upon, by files,
hammers, and fires, it is done, not by force of Arms, but by help of love. So
the Iron is held in a du^ifu^l subjection, being united together by the mutual
bonds of friendship; in like sort let the people see and consider with me how
the Iron dust, that confused multitude, grows t^gether in^o one body, under
the Loadstone, as it were their King, how it stands still with a kind of quaking
affrightment, and does cover it in the form of a shield, it does compass
about the Loadstone, after the manner of a Guard, it does yield sustenance and
service unto it, as the Bees do to their King or Master Be, which is without
a sting; a clear and illustrious Hierogliphicke, of Christ's Dominion over
those that are his, a ^ype whereof he long since exhibited in David unto whom
he gave a name derived from love, of whom that which is singular and rarely
befalls Princes, is recorded, that all which the King did, seemed good in the
eyes of all the people; the King of Kings gran^ that our people may universally
obey their King, the Magistrate* and Prelates, with such r^adinesse of will,
that they strive among themselves by mutual emulat^on, how one may go before,
and excel the other in performing the due Offices of subjects: the same
gracious God grant that your Majesty's Empire may be to your enemies and
adversaries adamantine, but Magnetic to your ^ubjects and friends, and that
your Majesty may be gr^ciously pleased to favor him, who if by Art or hap, he
had found that Stone, which they commonly call the Philosophers Stone, would
have presented it with the like inclination and alac^ity, as he does most
humbly and willingly present, and dedicate this Loadstone, together with this
short Commentary upon it, which indeed of right and de^ert is due unto your
Highness; for to whose service should he consecrate this dear Loadstone, but
^o his dearest Sovereign. This Load^tone, a Stone of great virtue, but to a
great and virtuous King, this Sea N^ptune or Guide; but to the Lord of the Seas
which compass so many Islands, this powerful and mild Ruler of Iron but to the
most Mightie^ and Clement King; so does he profess, who wished unto your
Majesty the cel^bration of a^ hundred birth-dayes in this world, and one
joyful never ending day in the world to come, which shall ever be the prayer
of him who is, of

Christ's Ministers the least, but Your Majesty's most loving faithful and
ob^dient subject* S. W.

A Preface to the Reader, wherein is contained the Scope and Argument of the
following Treatise.
Crollius, p. 77 Plane* it is.
THe Chemists do make equal in number, and assign those seven Metals that
are in the bowels of the earth, 1 Lead to Saturn,
to so many Planets that are in the Orbs of heaven; 2 Tin to Jupiter,
the Loadstone not regarding the most excellent of these, 3 Iron to^punc; Mars,
4 Gold to the Sun,
and universally neglecting other material substances, 5 Brass to Venus,
does draw only iron unto it, in whose friendship as it were, and serviceable
company to attend upon it, 6 Quick silver to Mercury,
it does much delight; such is the condition of Books, 7 Silver to the Moon,
of which though there be an innumerable company that abound everywhere, yet
every one has its Magneticke Genius, Clemens Alex. p. 176. Edit Grotii.
fitted to the disposition of the Reader, whereby it does allure unto it, the
eyes and hearts of many, and being allured, does in a manner bewitch them,
neither does every ones affection or fantasy draw him with less force* then
the Loadstone does Iron. If thou be a Philosopher, the wonders of the
Loadstone then which there is nothing found more pleasant or excellent in the
whole Theater of nature, will draw thee hither. If thou be a Christian,
Christ will draw thee hither, as also his graces engraven in a lively manner
upon the Loadstone by the finger of God, If thou be a Divine, many places of
Scripture seemingly repugnant, that are briefly illustrated, will draw thee
hither, as also those knotty School doubts, which are resolved by the way. If
thou be a Poet, this whole Book is a kind of Poem, If a Rhetorician, here
thou have a continued Allegory, and Philosophy besides, waiting upon Divinity,
yielding light unto it; one while as it becomes an humble handmaid, another
while as a modest Gentleman Usher, in which particular I have followed Dion,
not the Historian, but that Orator which was most dear unto Trajan, and for
his eloquence surnamed Chrysostom, or goldenmouth, I have also imitated, the
skill of Husbandmen, who graffe fruitful branches of a good kind, upon wild
plants, that of barren and bitter, they may become fruitful and sweet; Here
thou have a Chria, or an exercise of Rhethoricke most effectual to teach,
move, and delight, which had his name imposed, from the use and profit thereof.
Now this Chria, as Vosius Leopard, and others describe it) is not a painted or
feigned, but a lively Emblem, where either the person is resembled to the
thing, or somewhat is done and pla^'t before the eyes of the body, which may
more speedily penetrate the sharp sight of the mind, more strongly move the
affections, and more faithfully stick to the memory, which kind of cunning, or
artificial skill, the Prophets both of the Old and New Testament have often
used, whereby they might more deeply imprint, their Propecies in the eyes of
their Auditors. So Agabus held it not sufficient to foretell the bonds of Paul,
but he bound himself also with Paul's Girdle: nor did the Lord Jesus ^old it
sufficient, to be the ^^a^her and pattern of humility, but he placed also a
little Infant in the midst of the Apostles, in a most high place, whereby he
mig^t point out unto them, that he should be the greatest among them, which
endeavored to be the least; moreover at the last, he himself also being
clothed, after the fashion of a servant, did wash t^eir feet with ^ater, and
^^ped them with a linen cloth that he might herby leave this virtue, which is
necessary for all, though least acceptable, most chi^f^y recommended to all his
servants; for though the ears are rightly termed by Fabulists, the senses of
Minerva, or of wisdom, or instruction, yet do those things mo^e slowly
stir up the mind, which come to be known by the^r windings and turnings,
then those which do presently incur to it by the windows of the eyes;
where^ore in brief, thou art to be entreated at the very first, to procure
unto thy self a stone, which is of great virtue, or to go unto some one that
has such a stone in his possession, whereby thou may be both a diligent
spectator, and also a benevolent Reader. Unless thou be both, both of us shall
be frustrated of our ends, thou of thy profit and pleasure in reading, I of my
scope and labor in writing; for here are diverse experiments, of which if thou
be not an Eye witness, they shall not loose only all their grace, but also
thy belief, and their end. But if thou professest thy self among Critics,
such as are curious about matter, and manner of style, I would have th^e
consider, that one thing of Pliny, that it is not lawful to ga^nish a
Diamond. The Loadstone is of the like condition, not only for hardness, as
very scarcely admitting a pen of steel, as also for the innate virtue, which
refuses and disdaines all borrowed ornaments. To conclude, whosoever thou art,
whom either the noveltie or utility of the subject, shall draw hither, if thou
receive the least delight, or profit this shall be to him a sufficient reward
for his labor, who never presumed to expect for himself, or his meditations,
any better lot or luck, then happens to the Loadstone, that it should be of
great use, but of little esteem and reputation with many, nor did he for any
other respect, then somewhat to please thee, and much to profit thee, endeavor
according to his ability, at spare hours, to mingle Divine things with
Philosophical, Moral with Divine, and profitable with pleasant; And this he
was desirous to let thee understand, Who is,

Thine in the Lord Jesus, who is all Loadstone and the most excellent. S. W

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader
THe Scripture discommends that servant who hid his Talent and exercised it
not, aend indeed our time being but short, yet precious, must not be
negligently let slip, we are not only borne for our selves, every man must
labor to do some good to the Country and Commonwealth wherein he lives, We
must be accomptable for our times of leisure when we are freed from other more
serious affairs, Tam otii quam negotii ratio habenda est, Therefore in the
late long vacation I was willing to employ my self about the translation of
this following Discourse, which I thought fit and worthy to be presented to the
vi^wes of our English subjects, having already received a gracious approbation
from his Royal Majesty. And further I was induc't to undertake this work
that the divine ap^lications cont^ined therein might be known to all, as well
as to Scholars, the meaner sort having more need of sensible H^eroglyphiks,
and exemplary helps, to accomplish their salvations, then the wise and great
Rabbis, again, I had an aim herein, that ignorant Mariners who have only
gained a piece of the use of the Loadstone by a practical observation, that
they might s^yle in safety, might now by the knowledge of this book, when they
look on their Compass, find out a way by applying to their own hearts, the
admirable contemplations contained therein, to steer t^eir own souls to the
haven of heaven, as well as their ships to the harbor. Besides the Author,
whom I do highly honor for his integrity of life, and eminency of learning,
of whom I would speak more, but that I will not offend his humility and
modesty, I say the Author himself, who has a commanding power in me, did
request me to undertake this task, and I am glad, if my Pensill has in some
measure, taken out to the life so curious a Prototype, howsoever (Courtious and
Christian Reader) I have resolved to venture upon thy favorable acceptance,
and to desire thee to interpret this interpretation to the best, in hope of
which I remain,

Thine to my power, Harb. Grimeston.

THE WONDERS OF THE LODESTONE.
CHAP. I. Concerning the use of the Lodestone, unknown in former ages,
discovered in these latter times.
THe Learned and unlearned have seen the Lodestone, and took it into their
hands, many ages ago; yea as I may say, from the very beginning of the world,
the vulgar and meaner sort of people perceived not without amazement, the
Virtue which it has to draw Iron unto it, and lift it up. Arist. lib. 1. de
anima. Thales* Scaliger. Gil^e^tus. Flinius. Claudtanus. O^pheus.^ Lucretius.
The Philosophers disputed subtily about the form thereof, and vehemently
contended among themselves about this, whether it had a Soul or no: Both
Historians and Poets have proclaimed the mystical and wonderful nature, the
secret and hidden qualities thereof; yet mingling truth with falsehood, and
adding to their discourses diverse vain sigments of their own, so that of one
and the same stone, Ludovic. Vives in Augustinum de Civitate Dei.
through errors, they made two of a contrary nature; one they called Theamedes,
from the Southern point, another Man's from the Northern, but I pray to wha^
good end or purpose* when in the mean time they were utterly ignorant of its
turning toward the Pole: of its use in Navigation, and the Art of Dyalling,
they not so much as dreaming darkly of these things? Surely the Lord of Nature,
would have so many acute and Divine wits of Philosophers and Theologues, not to
find out, as yet, such an excellent invention, and so it lay hid altogether in
the secret bosom of natures Majesty, and that for five thousand years and
more, until at length after the exhibiting of Christ to the world in the year
of our Lord, one thousand three hundred or thereabouts. Almighty God of his
goodness taking compassion uopn Mankind, did make Mortal men happy,
declaring unto them by Goias Melphitanus, the most useful and beneficial
Instrument of the Mariners compass, by the help and benefit of which we do
now discover many remote lands, that were unknown heretofore, and so procure
all kinds of Merchants wares. Wherefore that which is commonly spoken of
Aristotle's Book of Physics, we may more justly apply to the Lodestone,
(...), that made public it was, and yet not made known, because that men did
not yet understand the secrets thereof. Look in what manner the Lord of the
world, to whom belongs the earth, Ps. 124.1.
and the fullnes thereof, did give the Lodestone unto the world; in the very
same manner did he give the world it self, and all worldly things, to such as
are great and worldly people: Heaven indeed he has reserved for himself, and
for his elect, both Angels and men, but the earth he has given to the children
of men in general* Concerning possessions and Titles, Lawyers plead in their
Courts, as Divines dispute in their Schools, concerning the right and Lordship
thereof, whether unregenerate persons, since Adams fall, have any right to
these earthly things; as also whether this Right be grounded upon Grace or
Nature; whether it holds good in Gods Law Court, or only in man's: Let these
controversies be at an end for me; Let the ungodly (if God so please) hold and
enjoy their large patrimonies; let worldlings keep to themselves their vain
worldly wealth, so that this be out of all doubt and question, that the
saving, and profitable use of such things pertaines only to them that are
good, in the eyes of the Lord, who by Christ, have recovered that, which was
lost and forfeited by sin. And this I suppose to have been the Apostles
meaning in that brief Epitome of our Magna Charta, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23.
the large charter of Christians, where he does accurately and particularly
rehearse, that ample and royal privilege of the faithful, excluding all
Infidels or unbelievers: All things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollo, or
Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come;
All, I say are yours, yours only, as touching the true spiritual and Heavenly
use of the same, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods: So then this good
blessing and gift of GOD, is proper only to those that are good, which gift
the royal Preacher does praise so much, Eccl. ^.19. and 2.24, 26,
and does also make opposite to it, vanity, disease, disquietnesse, vexation of
spirit, and that toylsome occupation of gathering and heaping up riches, which
he notes to be the portion of sinners, and imposed as a punishment upon them by
God, of which he does elsewhere complain: Wherefore is there a price in the
hand of a fool? Seeing he has no heart or mind that is to say, to receiv'e
any profit thereby, or to make any good use of it? Wherefore have wretched
Euclio's or Misers, the Usurie of much Money, and the right use but of little?

Wherefore is unmeasurable Wealth conferred on the Covetous, which are as greedy
as TANTALUS is said to have been, they being such sparing Distributers of it,
and do abstain from their Wealth, as if that it were sacred and forbidden to
be touched. So likewise, wherefore have the Prodigal, and wastfull spenders
of their Substance, such plentiful means, which they to the destruction of
their bodies and Souls, do abuse and consume in Gaming and Riotous living?
Wherefore have wicked men such excellent endowments enriching their minds,
quick understandings, steadfast memories, happy and fine wits, whereby they do
service to Satan and their own lusts? which S. Augustine did so lamentably
bewail in his Scholar Licentius, a learned and Noble young man. Wherefore has
God infused into their hearts the habits of graces, wherefore has he with a
Liberal hand, committed these heavenly talents unto their trust, if they shall
be wrapped up in Napkins, and being wrapped up be hid and perish, unless that over
and above, he shall add unto these another Grace, whereby they may stir up
these graces received; and set them forth to be seen of others, and exercise
themselves in them, to the glory of God the giver of all grace, and to the
profit of their friends and neighbors.

Vile latens virtus: quid enim submersa tenebris,
Proderit obscuro veluti sine remige puppis,
Vel Lyra, quae reticet, vel qui non tenditur arcus.
The virtue that lies hid is poor and vile,
In darkness drowned, what profits it the while?
A ship without a guide, to th'Sea that is sent,
A Herpe not sounding, or a bow unbent,
What profit these?
A. Gell. P^u^.
Man is like Iron, says one, if you use it, it will be bright; if you do not,
it will be rustie and corrupt, (...), it is not the having, but the using of
Books, is the means to get learning, says Plutarch, so may one say of riches.

Quo mihi divitias, queis non concedituruti? Horat.

Vel mihi da clavem, vel mihi toll seram. Anon.

What good have I, of goods not used I say?
Give me the Key, or take the Lock away.
CHAP. II. Concerning diverse uses of the Loadstone, and which is the most
excellent.
AS there is a manifold and multifarious use to ^e made of all things in
general, so of every thing in particular, and a great deal of profit that
comes thereby. Yet for the most part that is the least use to be esteemed of,
and to be reckoned in the last and lowest place, which is obvious to the eyes
of the behoulders, at the very first sight, is presently discovered, and does
as it were, of its own accord offer it self to be discerned.

The next and middlemost is that which is perceived by him that looks into
things more fully, who lays the object naked before his eyes, and uncovers
it, as if a man should unbarke a Tree.

The best and most excellent use which should be of highest esteem, is that
which is made manifest with labor, by him that does consideratively weigh all
businesses, and piercing through the very marrow of the matter, brings all
things to examination deliberately, yet frequently, when he has taken great
pains in his Study, after that he has beaten his Deske, and bitten his
nails, Pers.
as he says, after that he has powered forth his prayers to the God of heaven,
and has laboriously spent much time in searching the gold Mines of Nature.

Now that I may give light to what I have said by example; children and women,
even by the secret instinct of Nature, do use herbs for to smell to, and to
look upon. The Apothecaries by the help of Art, and experience, do use the
same for the nourishment of bodies, and for cure of diseases. Divines having
the, Spirit of God for their guide, and Christ for their Teacher, who described
Gods providence in a lively manner by the example of Lilies, I say, Divines
make use of them, to inform men's understandings, and to instruct them in
heavenly things; this very thing is more clearly seen in the holy Scripture,
whereof although there be but one sense, yet has it a threefold use; the first
is literal, which is apparent in the outside of the History, the second
Tropologicall, which serves for information of manners, the third, Anagogicall,
which does elevate, the mind to spiritual and heavenly things, but above all,
this is most clearly seen in the Loadstone, the less considerable use of it,
is known to common people of the meanest capacity: It was first found out by
one Nicander a Heardsman of Magnesia, Pline
when as he fed his Cattle, he observed that the point of his Pastoral staff,
and the Hobnailes of his shoes, did stick in a piece of ground where Loadstones
were, so that he could hardly get off, but that use is of great account and
more excellent, whilst by the help and direction thereof they understand to
motions and progress of stars, they measure the precious minutes of time,
they direct the course of ships, and arrive at the Havens, where they would be.
Further the use that is most excellent of all other is, that which (God
willing) I shall recommend in that which follows, to Christians, and
especially to Divines, unto whom it is given of God, for to know and perceive
the mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven, and this I trust I shall do, by
raising and stirring up their souls, to a more manifest knowledge of Christ,
and to a sweeter meditation of his Divine grace, through the pleasing
Contemplation of this marvelous Stone, and by an explication of the hidden
properties and operations of it, which I hope shall not be unacceptable: Surely
this is the principal and chiefest end of the creatures, that they should be
as ladders and wings, wherewith our sou'es going up, and flying above the
thickets and dung-hils of this world, may ascend up to heaven more easily, and
come with speed to God their Creator, and indeed God has engraven some
excellency, upon things, that are of the meanest esteem, some greatness on
things that are reputed least, and some visible footsteps, of his invisible
wisdom and power, on things that are supposed most obscure, he has imprinted
in the Loadstone, I dare boldly say, a lively representation of himself, a
remarkable demonstration of his power, a clear character of his grace. Pli^.
Nature has been no where more laborious, then in the Loadstone, said, that
undefatigable Searcher of the Nature of things, and most diligent discoverer of
Antiquity. Either he would have said, or else should have said besides, that
nature has been no where more miraculous and munificent, no where more
mystical and ingenious, ^o not in Pearls and precious stones in whose candor
and splendor, natures Dei^y lies hid, after a sort, which shines and
glistereth in the sutty color and blackenesse in this Stone. Many makes Idols
of those Gemmes, by loving them too much, and so they are Teachers of Vanities
and Lies, as the Prophet speaks; but this stone though dumb, is a master to
teach us, both verity and virtue, in many particulars.

CHAP. III. Of the benefit we have by the use of the Loadstone, that shows us
the North, and a comparison of it with Christ.
BEfore that the virtue of the Loadstone, (that shows the North) was revealed
unto Mariners, it cannot be spoken, with what uncertain wanderings men were
driven about, following doubtful conjectures; how they did indirectly floate
here and there, rather then sail the right way: indeed, when the weather was
fair, when either the Sun or stars gave their light, they crept about the
coasts of the earth, sometimes by the help of lights set in high places, for
their direction, sometimes by the help of Towers and Trees, not far from the
shore, yet not without incredible anxiety of mind and great danger of
shipwreck; but if the heavens were cloudy, if the stars and Sun were
withdrawn out of sight, and especially a tempest drawing on, they knew not
whether to tune themselves, or whither to go, with what joy then shall we
think that they were filled in every part, with what gladness may we suppose,
that they did triumph, when first this Magneticke Neptune became the guide of
their way, which showing unto them the path they should trace, through
quickesands and rocks, they might discern and distinguish, even in the
darkest night, and most cloudy sky, the several angles of the North, and the
South, the East and the West, and might most certainly judge in what coasts of
the world, in what Latitude, yea, and wanting but a litt^e, in what Longitude
of places they were, as also into what parts of the earth, and into what Ports
they directed the course of their shipping. Lastly by the Divine benefit of
this Mercury or Guide, it came to pass, that they not staying for the pleasant
gales of the Western wind, did fearelesly hoyse up their sails, and went
beyond the Pilars of Hercules, then those Hands, Continents, Nations and
Merchants wares, which lay hid, as altogether unknown, were discovered by us,
and often found out, and at length the whole Circumference of this terrestrial
Globe, was in our memory several times sailed about by Francis Drake, Thomas
Cavendish, and other noble spirits, which thing in former times, as it was
thought impossible, so it was never heard of; Before that the light of the
Gospel was revealed unto men, God suffered all people, in the Generations
past, Acts 14.16. Ephesians. 4.18.
to wander in their own ways, having their cogitations darkened and estranged
from the life of God, by reason of the ignorance and vanity of mind that was in
them, for Philosophy does but deceive the children and Scholars she brings up,
and vouchsafes to be their companion and guide of their way in prosperity
only, but vanishing as a blazing star or lightning, in the time of adversity
and perplexity, she forsakes them in the shadow of death, and leaves them
destitute of comfort; If it assuage their maladies at any time, it never cures
them. If it draw a skin perchance on their scarres, notwithstanding it heales
not within, Christ alone, who is the Light of the world, (the Way, the Life,
and the Truth,) delivers those that are his, from wandering and wavering, he
leads them into all truth, reveals unto them, the mysteries of salvation,
lays open the secrets of the old Testament, he alone replenisheth his servants
with joy and peace, that surpasses all understa^nding, when they are in
tribulations and imprisonmens, when they are tormented with fires and racks; he
alone brings immortality to light, wherewith he comforts his own people in the
point of death, he alone by the lightsome Lantern of his word, directs their
goings, and their feet in all his ways, to which they should have well done,
if they had taken heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until
the day dawne, 2 Pet. 1.
and the daystarre should arise in their hearts: 2 These. 2.
but because they received not the love of the Truth, that they might be saved,
therefore God sent them strong delusions, that they should believe lies, old
wives tales, and foolish dreams of Monks. And lastly, that taking rooten
Traditions, leaden Legends, for Oracles of faith, and the blind leading the
blind, they should fall again into the bottomless pit of errors, wherein the
whole world lay drowned, for some hundred; of years, until again it pleased
the Father of mercies, almost in the same passage of time, wherein he showed
the use of the Loadstone, to restore the light of his Gospel, to dispell the
mists of Popery, to discover the deceits of Antichrist, to reform his Church
upon earth, and in conclusion to kindle again the light of his Word, which we
do with all humble reverence, beseech him again, and again, to conserve
unextinguished until his glorious coming to Judgment.

CHAP. IIII. Of diverse names by which the Lodestone is called, and how that
every one of them may most conveniently be applied unto Christ.
(...).
-- Non sum,
Tam lapis, ut lapidi numen inesse putem.
Let all men know, I am not such a one,
As think there is a Godhead in a stone.
I Am not so senseless, as that I should ascribe Divine honor unto a Stone,
or think or speak of it more then it becoms me, or more then ought to be
spoken, much less that I should make an equal comparison between a vile
Stone and the Lord of life. Yet I see no impediment, but that I may liken the
one to the other in some respects: Especially, because the Lord himself does
not disdain to denominate himself a Cornerstone, and those that are his, the
living Stones of a Temple, Now that which happens to Heroical spirits, and men
that are famous for virtuous Acts, that they obtain diverse titles for
increase of honor; because of their diverse Dignities, and for their excellent
sayings and deeds, the like happens unto the Lodestone, because of its many
and notable virtues and wondrous effects, that so it might be honored and
adorned with diverse names, of which there is none, that may not be applied to
Christ by a kind of excellency, and more aptly, then to the Loadstone it self.
That name which is peculiar to the English and Dutch, was imposed upon it, by
reason of Leading, directing, and showing the way; neither can any one justly
doubt, but that this stone was termed a Loadstone, quasi Leadstone, which name
is agreeable to none more appositely then to Christ, who is the way, and guide
of the way; who is the Leadstarre that directs and leads his chosen to the
Haven of Heaven. Among names of the second Rank, it was also called Magnes,
because of the great force and virtue of it, and the name (...) Herculean,
because of the strength thereof, was famillar especially among the ancient
Grecians, Shether,
as also the name, (...) among the Hebrews, a Retinendo, because of its
retayning and holding of things. Job. 10.28.
Now Christ is the true and only Hercules, the Almighty which draws unto him
all things: He alone is so strong, that he overcomes that strong one the
Devil, He delivers his Servants by strong hand, and frees them from bondage;
Out of whose hands no man does pluck, or is able to pluck them. The name A
(...) or Aymant, which is usual among the Grecians or French may be put in the
third place. This Stone being so called from its invincible hardness, for it
scarce feels a Sa^e, Or File.
or suffers any diminution thereby. And as Christ is a Load stone to such as
disagree, and a cornerstone to such as be asunder or at variance; So to his
enemies or those that wrestle against him, He is an unconquerable Adamant (both
which we read in the Encomiums, or praises of Athanasius) I say he is an
unconquered Adamant: No force and assaults of enemies, no not the raging fury
of Satan, that roaring Lion and red Dragon, nor the gates of Hell can be able
to prevail against him. The last name is Siderites, which it has obtained
from the Iron its ownenaturall Brother, bred up together in the same Bowels of
their Mother Earth. For Iron is both an object, in drawing of which it
delights, and a Medium, a means or Instrument whose attendance in drawing,
it does as it were rejoice to have. In both respects, It is a wonder how
Artificially and to the Life it expresses and imitates Christ, who imbraceth
us poor mean men, with Brotherly love, neither does he refuse nor is ashamed
to call us Brethren. Now as I shall explain these several things one by one,
and something more at large; no man I suppose, will be so dainty, or so averse
from these pleasanter Studies, that they shallbe unto him, any occasion of
distaste or disdain. No man I think will be so Atheologicall or void of
Divinity, as to make the Lodestone a Stone of offense.

CHAP. V. Of the Load-stones elevating Virtue.
AS all other heavy things, so Iron of its own Nature goes downe-wards. This,
as the eldest Son of the Earth, and principal in her Love, tends with a
wonderful and vehement desire, to the Center thereof, as to his Mothers
bosom. So that without violence or Miracle, it never ascends to the Air, nor
mounts to places above. Yet not withstanding, such is the marvelous Virtue of
this wonder working Stone, that giving to the Iron but a light touch, and
having once affected it, with its love, It presently forsake its common Mother,
hastens to the Lodestone with a Swift violent course, and with all possible
endeavor, being ready to embrace it, in the most loving manner that may be.
But if it be detayn'd by force of hands or held back by a string that it
cannot touch it; then as it were most vehemently longing to come to it it moves
over against it, I have seen (neither did I see it without astonishment) a
needle raised up by the Loadstone hanging in the air; against its own nature,
lifting up the point thereof toward the Lodestone, that was placed above it.
I have seen the same needle being artificially placed upon a brazen Tablet, in
the surface of water, swimming over to the Loadstone without the^elpe of a
cork, from one side of a cauldron to another, and flying up to it. As I
seriously considered these Magneticke miracles, and wonderful works of God;
that came to my mind, which is recorded in sacred Scripture, about the Axe that
through negligence fell down to the bottom of the River, yet at the Prophets
command, came out of the deep, and swimmed up, Asalso that so Elisha forsaking
his Oxen, his Plough, his friends and all that he had, and following Elias
without any delay, as his Guide and companion, in a way to him as yet unknown,
As also that which is writ of Peter traveling on foot to his Lord on the waves
of the Sea. He that can hardly believe these histories, but leaves themto be
believed of Jews and others, let him now take notice of these things, which
upon experience, I speak of the Loadstone, let him give credence to me without
taking my oath, or at least believe his own eyes, Magna sui faciunt, per
Leviora fidem, Great works make Affidavit for themselves, by those that are
less. They are blessed, I do not deny, who having not seen, do believe; yet
notvvithstanding these sensible helps of Faith, are not altogether to be
despised, which after their manner and measure, do further and strengthen our
Faith. Now that some benefit may accrue unto* us by these things, we must know
that our souls ever since Adams fall are troubled with a vvonderfull
drovvsinesse and lumpishnesse the very Heathen Poet crying out, O curvae in
terras animae, and caelestium inanes, O souls of men bent to the earth, and
void ofheavenly things. Saint Bernard complaining, that our souls are become
carnal, and in some sort turned into flesh, S. Anselme, likening them to a
bird tied to a ponderous stone, Saint Austine, to a little Be, so drowned in
abounance of honey, that it can by no means, unwind or spread forth her wings:
indeed the huge w^ight of the body lies heavily upon them, the cares of the
world do press them down, the lusts of the flesh do ensnare them, the
allurements of pleasures entangle them, who shall ease us of this burden? who
shall take away these loades, that we may clime up the ladder of Jacob with
more speed and ease? Who shall give to us the wings of a Dove, that we may fly
up to heaven with have, ^and have our privileged habitationthere? Surely, he
alone who infused into the Loadstone such virtue; He alone who drew to him
Matthew from the Custom House, Zacheus from the Tree, Philip from his Chariot,
the Eunuch from the Court, that they might follow him by the odor of his
Ointments; He who in time to come, shall waken us, though dead in our graves,
by the sound of his Trumpet, that as Eagles to a dead body, so we may be
gathered to him. To conclude, He shall do it, unto whom no man can ever come,
but whom he shall draw, by his great virtue, exceeding that of the Loadstone^,
Whilst that by inspiring, He creates, and by creating inspires, or breaths
into the will a new power, life, and virtue.

CHAP. VI. Of the Lodestone communicating its Virtue, and Conveying it into
the Iron.
AMong the least flowers and precious Stones, there is none almost, which has
not received some excellent endowment from God, the bestower of all good
things; which notwithstanding it has received, with this limitation and
condition, to reserve it, and to have it inherent in it self alone, but can
very hardly communicate it, and transfuse it to other things of the same
nature. If you put. Mallows to Roses, they take none of the Rosy color, or
smell therefrom: If you put aflint or pumice stone to a Sapphire or Emerald,
they borrow no brightness thereby. The Loadstone only inricht by nature, with
a special privilege, triumphs in this, that it can endow the Iron, which is
placed by it, with its virtue and power to turn, and which you may more
admire, it so endowes an Iron ring with this virtue, that being next another,
it shall impart the same virtue to that, a second shall do it to a third, and
so forward in a long row, and as yet, which goes almost beyond all belief, it
does not only these things by apposition or the lightest touch, but also by
passing over to it, as it were by a certain Divine inspiration, only with
this difference, that in a quick passage, the Iron is possessed with Virtue, more
weakly, and slightly, and is endewed with a less power to turn, but if it
stay for some longer time, it receives a greater Virtue, even such as it may
draw more strongly, abide in it the longer, and be more hardly lost? therefore
this one, this only stone, among all other created things, is found worthy,
not only to shadow out, but also to represent to the life, the efficacy of the
grace of Christ, and of his holy Spirit: Though skill in Arts, and Sciences,
and Languages, is not attained unto without hard labor, and long expense of
time, yet Christ did in abundant manner, give his holy Spirit, and his manifold
gifts unto the Apostles, only by breathing upon them which they also
conveyed over to their Brethren, as Philip to Nathanael, Paul to Timothy, in
a continued course to the end of the World; and surely with less labor, not
only by imposition of hands, but also by the shadow of a Body, passing by, and
by the Handkerchiefes of the absent. Saul falling by the way into the company
of Prophets, was touched a little for a while, with a Prophetical Spirit, But
Elisha adhering diligently, and inseparably to the side of Elias, until his
ascent, was replenished with a more plentiful abundance of the Spirit, even to
a miracle? Those sudden prayers also, which we call Ejaculations, never
return from heaven unheard, but draw down from thence some small portion of
grace at the least: But if one with Moses, and Elias, should for many days
together watch, and continue, all night in fastings, and prayer, he should be
moistened, and refreshed with a more copious measure of grace, as it were with a
great shower.

CHAP. VII. Of the Loadstones attractive Virtue, and of Christ his dra^ing of
the Wisemen, Math. 2.
ADmirable truly is the Nature of some created things, Vide Boskhierum. conc. 6.
but the power of the creator is allwaies greater, especially in that Stone.

quem nomine Graii
Dixerunt Magneta, Aonius Palearius. Lib. 3.
Lapis mi^o attrahit usu,
Quocunque objicitur ferum, tactumque quod illo est*
Ducit, et hoc itidem veluti Magnesia Causes.
The Stone which Magnes Greeks do call,
A Stone most wondrous above all;
Which Iron draws, and that is much,
This Iron draws other with a touch,
As Loadstones do --
But is not Christ more to be admired then any Loadstone whatsoever? who can
deny it? for the Loadstone only draws unto it, one thing, and that placed
over against it: Now Christ draws all things, as well those that are far
distant, as those which are near at hand; things that have life, and things
without life; things endued with reason, and things void of reason; the
Lo^dstone only draws Iron; Amber draws strawes only unto it What does not
Christ draw, whom does he not draw unto himself? All things were made by him,
all things moving in a circle, or comp^sse, as streams to their fountains,
return unto him*: He is the Alpha, or the beginning producing: He is the
Omega, or the end, reducing all things to himself.

When I shall be lifted up from the Earth, I^. 12.
I will draw all things unto me; So said he long ago, speaking p^rtly of his
reproachful exaltation upon the Cross: p^rtly of his triumphant ascending to
heaven: when he was lifted up, and laid on the Cross: He drew the Thief that
was next unto ^i^, and hanging as it were in a Balance hard by him, a^though
he was heavy laden with a Talent and huge burden of sin.

Acts. 9.
He drew the Centurion at the same time, and some others who having scene so
many demonstrative Miracles at his death, did give Testimony of an admired
r^pentance, when they returned into the City, He drew to himself the Apostles,
that forsook him, and especial Peter, When h^ was exalted by his ascent into
the Heavens: what thing, or whom, that were capable, did he not draw to
himself? He drew Saul when he was cast down from his horse, speaking to him
from Heaven: presently after the Pentecost, He drew o^e while four thousand,
another while six thousand, At another time he drew some others that joined
themselves to the Apostles; And lastly having left Jerusalem he drew the whole
Western part of the World: Oh the wonderful power of the Cross: Oh
unspeakable glory of the Passion, in which there is, both the Tribunal of the
Lord, and the Judgment of the World, and the power of him that was Crucified
most evidently to be seen.

Thou Oh Lord, have drawn all things unto thee; and when thou did stretch
out thy hands all the day to a people not believing, but contradicting thee,
then the whole World besides, was sensible of thy praiseworthy Majesty.

Thou did, Oh Lord, draw all things unto thee; when in abomination of the
Jewish wickedness, the Elements unanimously pronounct one, and the same
sentence against them: when the lights of Heaven were darkened, when the day was
turned into night, when the Earth also was shaken with unusual quakings, and
when every Creature denied the use of it self, to the ungodly: Oh Lord thou
did draw all things unto thee, that what was covered in the Temple of
Judea, in shadowed significations, the devotion of all Nations in every place
might celebrate in a plenary, and plain Sacrament, for now the order of the
Levites is more glorious, and Sacred. The annoynting of Priests makes up one
Kingdom of every Nation.

As the wind Caecias, draws to it the Clouds; S^ Christ drew the people unto
him, Sometimes one Nation, sometimes another: For as this wind alone, which is
called Caeci^s, whereof Pliny writes, that it blo^es between the South, and
the East, contrary to the Nature of other Northern winds, drives not away, but
rather draws the Clouds unto it: So Christ from every quarter, and every way
does call, lead and draw all unto him, I will draw all things unto my self,
says he, and not only so, but every thing that comes unto m^e I will not cast
forth.

Our Savior was glorious indeed, by the conversion of so many, and by drawing
such a multitude of people unto him: but at this time, by his drawing of the
Wisemen, and their adoring of him, He is become more glorious then himself at
other times: Oh my good Jesus, draw me also unto thy self; Convert me, and I
shall be Converted, otherwise no man comes unto thee, unles thou, and the
Father draw him.

The drawing of the Wisemen is more excellent, then the rest, in regard of the
Situation, or place where Christ was, and of his age, when he drew them unto
him, and in respect of the Majesty, Dignity, and multitude of those that were
drawn. First this drawing of the Wisemen is more excellent in regard of the
Situation, or place where Christ was, for indeed upon the Cross he drew but
one, one that was near him, one that hanged by him, one almost fastened to his
side, sixth together with him: But now in his very Cradle, He drew the Wisemen,
and in them whole Nations, dwelling almost in the extreme parts of the East;
He drew them by one Star, as it were with some trifle, to play withal, as if
they had been enticed to come, as Children are, by those things wherein they
delight.

After his ascension into heaven, what wonder, that from the Throne of his
glory, and the Right Hand of his Father, he drew so many, and draws to this
day: But now, that he should draw from the Stable; how full of astonishment is
it?

Secondly this drawing of the Wisemen, is more excellent in respect of his Age:
At another time, when he was come to Maturity, and convenient age; He drew to
him Fishermen: But now being but an Infant, and as it were, but of one day upon
the Earth: He drew unto him Priests, Philosophers, and Kings: This was foretold
long ago; Esaias 8, 4.
that before the Child should know his Father, or Mother, the riches of
Damascus, and the spoil of Samaria, should be taken away before the King of
Assyria.

As when Hercules being in his Cradle killed (as they say) two Serpents, he was
paradventure, a more glorious Conqueror then he was, when being come to riper
years, he vanquished in the Nemaean Forest, a Lion of huge bigness: Or when
in Erimanthus a Mountain of Arcadia, he took a live, a terrible Boar, that
wasted that Border: So Christ was more illustrious, when he drew to him Kings
to adore him at his Cradle, where he was yet a little Child, Then when raining
in Heaven, He drew first such as Paul, and afterward such as Constantine was.

Thirdly this drawing of the Wisemen is more excellent in respect of his
Majesty; He drew other persons when he had showed many Miracles, and was still
adding to the number of them, as the Earthquake, the Rending of Rocks,
Darkness throughout the whole World etc. Now He has done a most wondrous
work, being but an Infant, very tender, and not able to endure any hardiness,
crying as yet in his Cradle, and should not have been known, unless the
Angels had made him manifest to the Sheepheards; the Starr to the Gentiles,
and his crying to Strangers behold here those Peers, and great Kings of
Persia, which otherwise would not confess themselves to be men, are
constrained to stand before him in a Stable, as it were in a Court: They are
forced to appear as upon a day appointed, by the Summons of a Star as it were
an Apparitor, that they should as it were plead their cause, and become
Suppliants in a black mourning habit: He draws, he constraines them, whether
they will or no: O Loadstone, O thou that drawest, I confess thou art at this
day truly to be admired.

Fourthly, The drawing of the Wisemen was more excellent in respect of their
dignity that were drawn, at another time he drew but one Thief, or a
murderer, the Centurion and some few others: Then after that, the common people
promiscuously, But now he draws persons of the highest quality, Philosophers
and Kings of the East, they were none of the lowest rank, they were at least
the Ambassadors of Kings, or Kings in their Ambassadors, if so be we believe
not that they were Kings in their own persons.

Fifthly, the drawing of the Wisemen was more excellent in respect of the
multitude that was drawn together with them; at other times he drew but a few,
one, or two this day, tomorow a thousand. But now out of his very Cradle he
drew three Kingdoms together of the Chaldaeans, Arabians, and Sabaeans.

Nam totus componitur Orbis.
Regis ad exemplum --
For the whole world is ordered,
As by the Ruler it is led.
The common people with equal paces for the most part follow their Kings,
Whether they be converted, averted, or perverted: what manner of Child think
ye, shall this be? Assuredly, Assuredly, there is more then Solomon here. They
came indeed from Sheba to Solomon, and brought him gifts, but when he was
something aged, and such a one as was well spoken of, for the Fame of his
Wisdom. But it was a woman, that came, although a Queen (and one of the
Sibills in the opinion of some) yet a woman. But now when Christ was but a
Little Child; lying hid in a Stable, and compassed about with Straw, in the
midst of two beasts, very Famous men Kings and Chief Rulers of sacred things,
and Philosophers came with have, from the furthest parts of the East; as it is
probable, that they might know him.

This Child is not only greater then Solomon, but now he is greater then
himself: That is, greater in Glory being but a Child, then when he was come to
man's estate, a Child he was and took our infirmities upon him, not through any
weakness in him or necessity, but only according to his own pleasure and
voluntary dispensation; For he did all things both in Heaven and Earth
whatsoever he would, Psalm,
and whenever he pleased.

So then, O Lord thou haste drawn all things unto thee; The whole East with
the Kings thereof. Yea all Nations ^in these three men, Hom. 7 in Math.
whom Saint Chrysostom calls the Progenitous of the Church, whom we also (not
amiss as I suppose) do term the first fruits of the Gentiles, or the seed,
or the first branches and flowers of the Church among the heathen.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Load-stones attractive Virtue, compared with the power of
Ministers and Preachers in converting Souls unto Christ.
IF a free choice in asking whatsoever he pleased were granted to any
Christian, especially, to a Minister of Gods word; as it was granted heretofore
unto Solomon when he had offered a Thousand burnt offerings in Gibeon. What
think you, ought to be principal and chiefest of his desires, but that he
should receive from God a large portion of that attractive and Load-stone-like
Virtue: which in times past he imparted to Peter and Paul, and to the rest of
the Apostles, whom he made Fishers of men, by whose help he drew to him the
world, and converted it. For what can be more acceptable to an Emperor then
that he should save many Citizens, and bring many enemies into Captivity? What
is more acceptable to a Fisherman, then that he should draw from the Sea to
the shore, and include in his Net, a great Multitude of Fishes. There is a
common report and opinion, which is strongly maintained amonst the Vulgar,
concerning the Fatt of an Osprey, that there is such virtue in it, that all the
Fishes in a Poole will Swim to it, and turn their bellies upwards: And, as
it were half a sleep, will suffer themselves to be easily taken and handled:
which if it were true, how diligently would Fishers inquire for it, and at how,
great a price would they purchase it? But Christ is not only able, but also
uses to furnish his Ministers with that power, and to endue them with that
drawing virtue, whereby they may bring back to him his wandering Sheep, that
they may gain straying Souls, and save themselves and those that hear them.
That they may keep the Flock committed unto them in the Faith and Sheep-fould
of Christ. Which gift, to whomsoever it is granted, what greater thing should
they desire for themselves, Or, what may they better emulate in others.
or what may they better envy others?

CHAP. IX. Concerning the Load-stones neglecting of Silver and Gold, but
uniting Iron unto it self, compared with Christ passing by the Angels, as not
regarding them, but electing men.
GOld and Silver, what are they else, but the Monarchs of this Sublunary world,
commanding the rest of all the Mettalls after the fashion of King and Queen,
whose companions and Peers, are those Stones which are called precious? Brass
and Tynne are of an inferior Rank, as it were of the order of Knighthood.
But Lead and Iron are the mere vulgar sort. With that an unreasonable love of
Gold and Silver do men burn? And how much are precious stones esteemed with
Princes and great ones? Gemmes and Pears, in what honor and estimation are
they held? For they have their Splendor as the rest of the Metals, whereby
they may allure the eyes of beholders and bewitch their minds. Iron, in the
mean time, because it has noe bright Color, and is of little estimation, is
disregarded by all in comparison of all other Metalls, and is every where sold
for little, it is trodden in every place almost under feet, and has but the
lowest place and rank, amongst all those Metalls all which notwithstanding, the
Load-sto^e altogether despising and counting as nothing, the other Metals
which are so bright and excellent in their own nature, has made choice of the
Iron above them all; which it draws unto it with a violent and greedy
affection, which it imbraceth with a strait bond of love, whose company and
union it only desires, of whose friendship and neighborhood, it is
wondrously glad, of whose fellow-ship and service it does perpetually make use,
and as counting it an honor, would be termed by the name of Siderites which is
derived from the Iron.

You which admire this excellent sympathy, cast your eyes, upon the love of
God toward man, and upon our Election: the Angels that fell likewise, if they
be compared to us poor men, what wonderfully glorious creatures are they, what
noble Spirits, whose knowledge how many degrees goes it beyond our blindness?
whose power, ^ow fa^re does it exceed our weakness? whose honor and dignity,
how much does it surpass our obscurity and meannes: But Christ our Lord, did
not take on him the nature of th^se, but passing by them, as they lay in the
Lake of sulphur and prison of hell, He elected us poor worms, even dust
and ashes, H^e loved us vvretched creatures. He was made o^ a woman, bone of
our bone, flesh of our flesh, He carried up the human^ nature above the
Cherubins and Seraphins, and made it to sit in the heavenly places, to be
adored of Angels and Archangels. He has adopted us, and made us the sons of
God, that we should be ^eires, yea coheires with him. He has made us
partakers of the Divine Nature, of grace and glory. Who would not here cry
out with Saint Chrysostom (...) etc. Behold the love of our Lord toward
mankind, do not think this to be a thing of small moment or value, it being
indeed a thing to be wondered at, and full of astonish, And I taking this often
into my consideration, do^ conceive and imagine great m^tters, as touching
mankind. Do you also my brethren, see your calling, how that not many wise
and mighty according to the flesh, 1 Cor. 1.26.
not many sprung of illustrious Progeny, but God has chosen the base and
foolish things of the world, that he might confound the wise.

CHAP. X. Of the Loadstones indifferency, and of a Christians not respecting of
persons.
BEhold ^urther the indifferency and the not respecting of persons, which may
be seen both in the L^adstone, and every true Christian; for the Loadstone
does acknowledge and draw Iron unto it, as well when it is shut up in a
wooden chest, as in a golden casket, in a leaden sheath as in a silken
scabberd. It is the Iron only which it respects, it regards not the ornament,
and clothing of Iron, whatsoever it be. It is the Iron that it seeks, that it
imbraceth, not the golden trappings or gilding with which it is covered about,
wherefore brethren, let us be ashamed to have the Faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Lord of glory, with respect of persons, so that if one come into
your company, having a gold ring, or gorgeous attire, and there come in a poor
man in vile ^ayment, and ye have respect to him that wears the gay clothing,
and shall say to him, sit thou here in a good place, and say to the poor,
stand thou there, or sit here under my footstool, are ye not become Judges
that determine perversely? are ye not partial in your selves? are ye not become
Judges of evil thoughts, and make a wrongful difference? Has not God chosen
the poor of this world, that they might be rich in faith and heirs of the
Kingdom, which he has promised to them that love him? wherefore, beholding
rather, and considering this difference, and not respecting of persons, both in
the Lord, and in the Lodestone, be sure to follow both, and prefer before
the worldly wise and wealthy, such Christians as are counted ignoble, idiots,
poor, and such as are despised of the great ones of this world, choose them
only for your companions, your friends and yoke fellows in the Lord, love
them, and hold friendship with them upon earth with whom ye are to live
everlastingly in heaven, for this is wel-pleasing and acceptable to the Lord
our God, with whom there is neither male nor female, neither Barbarian nor
Grecian, but a new creature in Christ, is all in all.

CHAP. XI. That the Loadstone, draws a great^ and heavier weight then Jet.
HE that once saw a Loadstone with admiration drawing to it, not only small
remnants and pieces of iron, but also taking up easily, and lifting up from the
ground a great and weighty burden thereof; as for example, an Anchour weighing
twenty pounds: with what, contempt will he behold Jet or Amber drawing strawes
unto them, or little motes, and that after they have been heated by much
rubbing; As great, yea a far greater difference, is to be seen between the
souls of wise men and fools, of holy and carnal men, whereof these only
care for, and meditate upon these things which are of great moment, that
pertain to the Kingdom of God, and their everlasting salvation; but these
seek after the vanities and trisles of this world. Surely there is no less
difference between them, then there is between Merchants that buy wares of
great value, and tri^^e-selling Pedlers, which carry about gewgawes, Pinnes,
and Rattles, for children to play withal. Then there is between Spiders that
catch Flies, and Eagles that pursue after Hares and Heron, then there is
between fowlers that shoot at Pigeons, and children that follow after
Butterflies.

CHAP. XII. Of that cleanness which the Loadstone and the Spirit of Christ
require in their object^.
HOwever the Loadstone has a desire and inclination to iron, yet will it not
draw it, unless it be clean and pollished, and it wonderfully loves and
affects cleanness, but hates and loathes filthiness very much, vvhereupon it
comes to pass, that if you do apply it, to the rusty side of an Anchour, or
that which is besprinkled with dust, either it will not at all put forth and
exercise upon it the virtue thereof, or very unwillingly and weakly, but if
you apply the same Loadstone to a clean and well polished side, it will
greedily draw it with all the power it has, and will strongly lift it up, most
like in this, to the Dove-like holy Spirit, which dwells only in pure hearts,
and clean roofes, abstaines and flies from them, that are unclean and foul.
The Royal Prophet knew this to his great loss and grief, who after he had
polluted his body with adultery, his soul with murder, and both with blood,
obtained not the return and reentry of that Spirit, before that he had
cleansed and purged them both with tears and repentance.

Chap. 13. Of the Irons first motions to the Loadstone, as also of the slownes
of men's souls in their first coming to Christ, and their readiness to follow
him afterward.
THere is a great and manifest difference between the first motions of the
Iron to the Magnetic Poles, and all the latter that arise from the first. For
at the first touching and drawing, the Iron is rather a Patient than an Agent;
the Iron indeed is drawn, being untoucht, but approaches softly and slowly,
unwillingly, as it were by violence. Before the contract, either no friendship
at all passes between the Iron and the Loadstone, no respective verticity, or
pronenesse to turn to the Poles, or it is so weak, and as it were so soundly
asleep, that it can scarce be perceived by the senses; which being once
stirred up and awakened by the Loadstones, coupling with it, and breathing upon
it, runs of its own accord, and very speedily, at the command, and as it were
at the least call of the Loadstone. A greater and more manifest difference
there is, between those Arts and motions which go before, and accompany our
conversion, and those which follow it, as the fruits and effects thereof; for
in those precedent Arts, our will behaves it self in an hostile and passive
manner: all familiarity with God is not only laid asleep in us, but also quite
dead; neither were we only estranged from him, but also altogether averse, and
his enemies, hateful, and hating God; but in these slips and sins which are
committed after our conversion, some like things happens to us, as does to the
dust of Iron, long burnt in the fire, or defiled with filth, or corrupted with
rust; for the clammy inward moisture of the Iron is corrupted by these, and the
strength of it diminished, which as in a sick body is with more difficulty
raised up by the Loadstone; such Iron is hardly drawn by it, neither can it be
done in such a distance, nor with such a speedy pace: Now the very same thing
happens to Apostata's, those that sin unto death, and against the holy Ghost,
as to the same Iron dust strongly and vehemently burnt in a close Furnace of
reverberation, where the flame is beaten back, and so is turned into Crocus
Martis, as some call it, or calcined in red powder, whose inclination to turn,
is renewed by no power of the Loadstone, nor can be revoked by any
Enchantments, as being wholly and utterly deformed; So it is impossible that
those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were
made partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the
powers of the world to come, if they shall fall away, to renew them again to
repentance.

Chap. 14. Of the Irons slow motion to the Loadstone, when it is far off, and
the speed it makes when it approaches toward it.
Iron in the adverse part of a vessel removed somewhat far from the Loadstone,
turns to it more slowly, and goes toward it with a softer motion, but by how
much the nearer it approaches, by so much the more it hastens its pace, and
flies to it more speedily; for the virtue increases more and more, and so
their coming together is hastened: No otherwise was the condition of those
Fathers who lived before the Deluge, and after, about the time of Moses, who
saw before hand the coming of Christ in the flesh, which was to be many ages
after; for they desired his coming in a more lukewarm and languishing manner:
but such as lived some few years before his Nativity, as Zacharias and Simeon,
and saw the same, as it were, now ready to rise; They were carried toward him
with the whole bent of their affections, as it were with full Sails: The same
fervent mind, and ardent desire should be in us, who are fallen upon the ends
of the world, toward his second coming to Judgment, which is now at the
doors: The same mind should be in Christians well stricken in age, whose
salvation and glory is nearer than when they were newly converted and believed
at first; no otherwise than as the stream and violence of Rivolets is much
more swift near the Ocean, than hard by the Fountain; it is now time (says
aged Zanchius to Sturmius, another decrepite old man) that we should hasten
from earth unto Christ, to the Starry sky, knowing that we shall be there very
shortly with the Lord.

Chap. 15. Of Needles not returning to the Loadstone, and of souls not
returning to Christ, without trembling, after departure from either of them.
IF you place a Loadstone in a round wooden vessel, as a Mariner in a boat,
so that it may freely float here and there at pleasure upon the surface of the
water in a tunnell, or any large vessel, it will forthwith oftentimes turn it
self round about together with the vessel, nor will it rest, until it has
looked just toward both the Celestial Poles; from which, if you remove it with
force of hands, it will whirle about, as in a circle, with reiterated turnings,
nor will it put an end to this trembling motion, until it has found again
the same Poles; the like you may see in a Needle touched with the Loadstone,
which if you shake off from the polar points, will fly about unquietly through
the several corners of the Compass, and of the world; nor will it stand
toward the Poles without some kind of trembling before. God has put the same
condition upon our souls, after that by sinning we have broken away from him,
then as Exiles with Cain we wander up and down, here and there, we are tossed
with troublesome removals in the land of Nod, that is to say, of disquietnesse;
we pass away our time unprofitably, we build, we pluck down; we are
inconstant, like sick men, we tumble in our beds on every side; or, as
Solomon, we vex our spirits with innumerable vanities, not knowing whither to
turn our selves, until at length being perfectly taught, by the Dove-like
spirit, we return to the Arkof Noah, that is to say, of rest, we cast our
selves down trembling, with the Jailer, at the feet of our Ministers, and
learn the song of David? Why do thou cast down thy self, why do thou
trouble thy self, my poor, wandering, wretch^d soul? why do thou murmur?
why art thou so disquieted within me? put thy trust in God, cast thy burden
upon thy Savior, take his light burden upon thy shoulders, and thou shall
find everlasting rest: Per motus varios, and per discrimina mill,
Tendimus in requiem, quo men's lassata quiescat,
Hanc solam praestat Christus, pax unica nobis,
Sola quies alibi, nullam sperare quietem,
Pax alibi bellmm est, pacem te poscimus omnes
Omnem qui captum superas, and mentis acumen.
Through diverse troubles, and through dangers, we
Do aim at rest, where souls at quiet be;
Our only peace, our Christ gives only this,
It Is quietness to seek no other bliss,
Else peace is war, we seek for peace, and it,
Which passes all capacity and wit.


Chap. 16. Concerning the thickness of a Medium interposed, or a substance
placed in the midst between the Object and the Loadstone; not hindering the
drawing of it.
OF all the Loadstones miraculous operations, there is none that makes the eyes
of the beholders more astonished, than that the virtue thereof penetrates and
passes through thick boords, vessels of clay, marble, and other metals; so that
there is nothing so thick or solid, no not gold, which goes beyond other
metals in thickness; nor walls, nor Brick-chimneyes (believe me that have
experience of it) nor the body of the fattest man: There is nothing, I say, the
interposition whereof may so fence the way, and stop the efficacy, and hinder
the virtue of this stone, that it shall not move a piece of Iron, or the Needle
of the Compasle, and drive it where it pleases, and draw it from whence it
lists: neither can plates of brass, silver, or tin, though very thick,
hinder and retard, or make slow the attraction of it; That is beyond belief,
Aug. de Ci^^t. Dei, lib. 21. c. 4.
says St. Austine, which I have learnt of my br^ther and fellow Bishop,
Severus Milevita^us, concerning this stone; for he related, that he himself
saw Bathanarius, a Count of Africa, when this Bishop feasted with him, bringing
forth the same stone, placing it under silver, and putting Iron upon the
Silver; then as he moved his hand, wherein he held the stone, under these
presently the Iron was moved from above, the Silver being in the midst, and
suffering nothing; beneath, the stone was speedily drawn by the man; above,
the Iron was drawn by the Stone; I have declared, says he, that which I heard
from him, whom I believed, as if I had seen it my self. Do thou also, O
Reader, if thou please, believe me without taking an oath, who have seen
often before sufficient witnesses; yea, now as I write these things, do see a
Loadstone with these eyes of mine; which, under a table six inches thick, on
the other side of a Brickwall, does speedily turn here and there the Needle of
a Compass upon a table, as also in a little vessel of water, which when I see
with mine eyes, and consider with my mind, I do altogether cease to wonder,
that no perils were so terrible, no kind of torment so cruel; no, not prisons,
fire, or wracks, which could separate the Saints and the faithful from the
love of Christ, or hinder them any way, that they should not follow the Lamb
whithersoever he went, nor cause that they should forsake the profession of
his Name, or defense of his faith; neither do these things a little increase
and corroborate, or strengthen our faith about the Article of the resurrection,
nor do they suffer us so much as to doubt a little, whether the Monuments and
Sepulchers, whether the depth of sea and land may be an impediment to them that
are dead in the faith of Christ, that they may not hear the voice of Christ,
and the noise of the Angelical Trumpet, that they may not rise again to life,
and be speedily gathered together as Eagles are to the Carkase: And this is the
end and scope which that holy Father p^opounded to himself in relating these
wondrous t^ings, that by sense he might inform the understanding, and so by a
visible mir^cle, make the Article of the resurrection to be credible.

Chap. 17. Of the wonderful concatenation or chaining together of Rings touched
by the Loadstone, as also of the spiritual and admirable concatenation or
conjunction of Christians.
LIke to this, and no less wonderful is that which S. Augustine in the same
place confesses, that when he saw it at first, he was afraid very much; I saw,
says he an Iron Ring drawn by the Loadstone, and hanged up, then as having
given its own virtue to the Iron which it had drawn and communicated force
unto, the same Ring was put to another Ring, and so hanged that, and as the
first Ring did stick fast to the stone, so the second Ring did cleave to that
former Ring; a third was added in the same manner, and so likewise a fourth, I
do testify that I saw twelve of them chained together in this order; now the
circles being mutually joined together, there did hang as it were, a chain of
Rings, not inwardly inwrapt within one another, but fastened one to another
outwardly: Who would not be abashed at such virtue, which was not only inherent
in the stone, but past through so many things that were hanged, and tied them
together with invisible bonds; Gregory Nazianzen, who in his life time deserved
to be called among all, by the name of Divine, had a contemplation on the like
Chain, with the like admiration, but with a deeper m^dic^tion, for so he began
that Oration, of his which he uttered before the men of Consta^inople, when he
came first to his Archbishopricke; I cannot, says he, but wonder what comes
into your mind, as touching my Sermons, for what cause you are ^o taken with
our ill pronounced and small low voice, having nothing amiable in it, yet you
seem to be affected toward me, in that sort as the Iron is toward the
Loadstone, for you do both depend upon me, and also adhere one to another by
mutual connection, and all of you depend upon God, from whom and to whom are
all things. O wonderful chain! to be never sufficiently praised, which is
fastened together with most firm bonds, which the spirit of God joins, which
is made not with hand of Art, but by Gods own finger, more refined than golden
chains, more firm than Adamantine, more precious than those of gems. Dion.
(...).
An Orator, both of an excellent spirit and speech, has enumerated, or rather
excogitated, three allegorical chains, wherewith all the common friendship
that is in the world is joined together: One of pleasure, which he made of
roses, violets, and pleasant flowers, as if it were a garland provided for
Bacchus his feasts: Another of profit, which he composed of silver and
gold-rings: A third of honor, which he framed of gems and precious stones, all
of them but vile chains, and easily broken. The friendships that are joined
together with these, what are they but bricas glass, or Potters ware, if they
be compared to this spiritual, indivisible, undefiled, immortal chain. Here
is no filthy glue of lust, no sordid cement of avarice, no tempering together
of ambition, nor of other ill humors and vices. Only this is that (...), the
bo^d of perfection, which kep those first Apostles and Christians of that truly
golden age in unity among themselves, when all believers abiding in the same
place, had all things common, they sold their possessions and substance, and
imparted to every one as he had need, continuing daily in the Temple with one
accord, breaking bread from house to house, eating their meat with gladness,
and singleness of heart, praising God, and giving thanks before all the
people. Doubtless, this Loadstone like chain of charity purchased them
favor among the Gentiles, and daily drew brethren, Tertull. in Apoluget.
and adjoined new Converts unto them: which agreement of theirs, the very
Pagans beholding, cried out, See how the Christians love one another, see how
they are ready to dye one for another. This is that celestial and spiritual
bond of charity, which so straightly bound that Royal and Noble couple of
friends, I mean David and Jonathan, whereof the one loved the* other to the
death, with a love greater than that of Women, he loved him more than himself,
nay, more than his ^ereditary Kingdom: The life of those two, no age among the
Ethnicks ever knew; no Philosophy ever bred the like, in comparison of whose
friendship, that of Scipio and Laelius, of Pylades and Oresies, and other
couples of the like condition; what does it deserve to be termed but a shadowy
carcass, and counterfeit semblance of a true and vehement love.

Chap. 18. That the Loadstone and our Savior Christ, effect more by an
Instrument, than by their own immediate virtue.
THe Loadstone, as it is an exceeding mavelous, so is it in a special
manner, a mystical Stone, no less famous for secret ways of working, than
for mighty works; that though it be the fountain and principal seat of
attractive and elevating virtue, yet does it, as it were, on set purpose,
transfer all the honor of it upon the Iron; for this very Stone being
destitute of company, and by it self, draws little or nothing; but armed with
Iron, will lift up a huge weight of Iron. I my self have seen a Loadstone,
which being unarmed, would scarce take up s^aven Ounces, but covered or capt
with Iron (as the rud^ of speech use to say) it lif^^d up strongly and easily,
two and twenty pounds, r^sembling God in this, who is natures principal
workman, and the first mover of all things, who although he be the Father of
light, yet he illuminates this visible world by the Sun, himself being
invisible in the heavens, and (which is our blindness and madness) not
worshipped and praised of many. He does also redeem, save and judge men, by
the Son of man; he does delegate or commit unto him a power to supply his
room, both in heaven and earth, whose Godhead and Majesty lay hid in the
veil of his flesh, as a light in a dark Lantern; insomuch that he was not
made manifest, but to his own people, and but to few of them, and that by
miracles; who now also hiding himself in the Heavens, using the Minist^ry of
men, as the Loadstone the help of Iron, calls, draws, and converts men unto him
by a fit Instrument of the same kind, taking his Ministers into fellowship of
honor with him; He that receives you, says he, receives me; nay, he passe^
hover, and commits a more ample power to them: He that believes in me, shall
do greater works than I have done. We do not read of Christ, that he
converted so many as a hundred at one Sermon; But it is expressed of Peter,
Act. 2. That he converted three thousand; which love of his toward man, does,
in a manner, surpass all his miracles. As it is the greatest Art of Arts, and
Artists to conceal their Art and skill, so it is the principal praise and
virtue of a good man, to derive praise unto others, himself being concealed;
Neither is there any thing, wherein men may come nearer to God, than this. Let
men admire and praise in Ioah, some one thing, some another, among all his
honorable Arts: I never thought that heroical or noble demonstration or proof
of his virtue to be the principal, that he both would and could transfer upon
the head of David the glory and Crown of a Victory, purchased by his own
valor; for the rest of his deeds, he overcame others, in this, himself; which
was far more honorable, than if he had triumphed a hundred ^imes over Rabba
and the Ammonites.

Chap. 19. That the Loadstone draws ten times more weight, by two points or
Caps, than by so many several points by themselves.
NOw will I put you in mind by the way, and that not unseasonably, that the
Loadstone does transfuse the force and virtue thereof into the Medium, or
Instrument, that it imparts but a small portion of it, to one Cap or polar
point by it self; but a large and ample virtue to two joined together. Of
which when I took experiment, and made trial in a strong stone, and applied
the iron to one of the points, it took up two or three pounds, and that very
hardly. But when I had applied the iron to both together, it lifted up two and
twenty pounds without any difficulty: so that the saying of Solomon is not
only true, Eccles. 4 9.
Two are better than one; for it they lie together, they sooner have heat; if
they fall, the one will lift up his fellow: But also that common saying
understood of them that have least knowledge, That forces united will become
the stronger. For who does not see and acknowledge, that forces by such union
are twice the stronger; but that they should be ten times stronger, this is
both rare and singular, and to be seen only in these experiments of the
Loadstone: That it is no wonder (as Origin observes on the first of Genesis)
that God made most things double, and joined them together by two and two; as
when it is recorded in the sacred Histories, That God created together the
Heaven and the Earth, the Sun and the Moon, the Man and the Woman; and that
Christ sent his Disciples, not one by one, but two and two: That as one foot,
or one hand helps another, so they should yield to one another mutual help,
that their forces and purposes being joined together, they might courageously
and prosperously draw living stones unto Christ, and build upon him.

Chap. 20. That those Instruments are more prevalent, and can do more, which
stick closely; than those which stick loosely, to Christ, or the Loadstone.
I Do not think it fit to pass over in silence the great difference, that is
between that armor and furniture, which is tied negligently to the Magnetic
poles or points of the Loadstone, and that which is tied to the same more fitly
and closely. For if there be but the least gap or space between them, it is
endued with much less virtue, and draws the burden more unsuccessively,
weakly, and sluggishly; neither will it lift up half that weight, which it
would most easily lift up, if it were united and joined together exactly,
without the least cleft between it, and that which is tied to it. Now this
reason is wont to be assigned by Divines, why the manhood of Christ is so
anointed and replenisht with the oil of the Spirit, above all mean and
measure, because it is hypostatically and corporally united with the Deity, in
such sort, and with such a strict bond, that it cannot be conceived, or
expressed by men. Again, it is rendered for a reason, why those Saints did
prevail more with God, who did walk uncessantly with him, as Enoch; who
unseparably cleaved unto God, as Elisha did to Elias, from whose side he would
not depart, no, not for the least distance: As also why amson wrought so many
miracles, while he kept unbroaken the Seal of the Covenant, and his union
with G^d, which being once violated, and lost by shaving of his hair, he
became weak, as other mortal men, and was made a prey to his enemies. Lastly,
it is assigned for a reason, why the chiefest good of a Christian is affirmed
to consist in this, namely, with David to cleave to his God, (...), that is, To
be inseparably joined to God, and to rest upon the Lord with a firm purpose of
heart.

Chap. 21. That the Loadstone is better armed with polished Iron than with
bright Gold, and so are Sermons of Divines better furnished with testimonies of
Scripture and solid strength of reasons than with Rhetorical flowers.
MOreover it is not unworthy of our consideration, that as in the object, so
likewise in the Medium or Instrument; the Load Stone does not so much require
resplendency as comeliness, not so much gaudy brightness, as cleanlynesse,
for it does not love to be armed with Gold or Silver, but only with Iron, yet
not such as is drossy or rusty, but cleansed and polished; which kind of
Armor, the Apostle, by his own example, both prescribes and commends unto
Preachers, Namely, such as does not consist in excellency of words, but in
demonstration of the Spirit and of power, for we are not the Sons or Scholars
of Orators, but of Fishermen, as that great Divine said to Libanius the
Rhetorician; Neither must we fight with Carnal reasons against Heretic, but
with strong Arguments to the subversion of Towers and strong holds, and to the
throwing down of every height that lifts it self up against the knowledge of
God. Wherefore we do not so much arm or furnish our Sermons and writings with
Poetical or Philosophical subtilties, as with the Oracles of Scripture, and
unresistable strength of reasons, being mindful, that the Walls of Jericho were
blown down and demolisht, Not with Golden or Silver Trumpets, but with Trumpets
of Horn and Rams Horns; which things are not spoken by me, as if the Gospel
did affect sluttishnesse and stammering, much less Barbarismes and
Solaecismes, But that comeliness and clearness of speech, which Lactantius
both commanded to be used, and followed himself: that the Silverlike or pure
Candor of words should include the Golden Apples of Scripture: that sweetness
of speaking should accompany soundness and wholesomenesse of matter: that the
clothing and trimming of a Theological speech, should not be youthful, but
elderly; Not gaudy, but grave and Matron-like; Not painted and effeminate, or
wanton and foolish; but natural, Masculine, perfect and wise; Our Lord drew
more to him, being armed with his Cross, than it may be, he should have done
with his Scepter; More with his Crown of Thorns, than if he had been adorned
with a Crown of Gold.

Chap. 22. That all the praise of drawing is due to the Loadstone, not to the
Iron, and the praise of good works to Christ, not to men.
IN that cruel war, of accursed memory, which was heretofore between the
Church and the Pelagians, it was wont to be often and very much questioned, To
whom the Faith whereby we do believe in God, and the good works which we do
to his Glory, should be imputed; of whom they ought to be most truly
predicated and declared to proceed; whether they were to be ascribed wholly,
to divine Grace, or to our free will, or partly to the one, and partly to the
other, an equal division being made between both; for if these things be true
(says Pelagius) which you do declare, concerning the self power and liberty
of our will, that it is altogether dead and of no efficacy, it follows, That
it is not the man that believes, but God, That it is not the man which shows
mercy and is liberal, That it is not he that bestows Alms, but God; and
therefore surely there is not the least portion of praise or reward due thereby
unto man, or to be expected by man. But all things are wholly to be ascribed to
God, by whose sufficiency and assistance, all things which we seem to do are
effected: And this is that strong Argument of which they bragged that no man
could answer it; they labou^ed also as much as they could, to do St. Hierome
and St. Augustine a spite, and to bring them into hatred, among those that
were ignorant; which is plainly all one, as if some body should stir up and
cherrish such a contention as this, touching the Loadstone and Iron, To which
of these two the power of drawing and lifting up things should be ascribed,
Whether we should say properly, that the Iron or the Loadstone does draw: Now
if the power to give sentence should be in the Eyes or outward senses, all
th^^^ praise should happen to the Iron, for if you put any weight upon the
Loadstone it falls, but if upon the Iron wherewith it is armed, it is lifted
and held up that it cannot fall, and an ignorant Rustic, being admitted to
see, cries out, behold the Loadstone is sluggish, draws little or nothing, it
is the Iron which does lift up and draw to it; But on the other side, if the
Judgment of this cause be commit^ed to understanding and reason, all the
praise of this power to draw, shall be restored and given to the Loadstone; For
a Philosopher and learned Arbitrator concludes, That the Iron does nothing
here, by its own particular powers, but by those of the Loadstone, by the
abilities that proceed from the same. And a man being overcome by the same
reason will confess, that we being wrought upon by God, do perform all those
things by divine assistance, which we do fulfill as we should, And that all the
praise and Glory, of faith and good works, is to be acknowledged as due unto
God; Wherefore this Gordian knot which otherwise seems unpossible to be
loosed, is easily cut asunder, by this strong sword, unless a man had rather
draw still up and down the same Saw of Contention, and lengthen the Cord of
strife without end; for I pray, what if one, before men of understanding,
should show a Loadstone armed or harnessed with an Iron Helmet, dravving to
it a huge burden, would not all of them cast their eyes upon the Loadstone,
and would not they be amazed and declare the virtue of it? on the contrary,
would they not be silent, and not so much as mutter a little about the virtue
of the Iron? Surely they would, and that not unjustly, for if the Iron were a
living Creature, endued with reason and speech, it would most willingly
break out into commendation of the Loadstone, and most gladly profess openly,
That it could do nothing by its own natural power, That the ability which
it has is from another; That it is but a power and virtue communicated by the
Loadstone, and infused into it no otherwise, than as the Moon must
acknovvledge, that she does not shine by her own, but by the beams of the
Sun; or a woman, that she is ennobled by the dignity of her husband. Hence
it was, that the Apostles, when they had healed a lame man before the door of
the Temple, did so much refuse all popular applause, saying; Ye men of Israel,
why marvel ye at this? or, Why look ye so earnestly on us, as though by our
own power and holiness we had made this man to walk? The God of Abraham, of
Isaac, and of Jacob; the God of our fathers has glorified his Son Jesus. Nor
did St Paul deal in this case less warily and prudently: 1 Cor 3.
Not I (says he) but Christ was mighty in me, by whose grace I am, what I
am: who is Paul? who is Apollo? who is Cephas? but Instruments and Ministers of
God, by whom ye believed? Even as the Lord gave to every man, I have planted,
Apollo watered, but God gave the increase. He that planteth is nothing, the
vineyard is Salomons. He let out the vineyard to vine-dressers, and keepers; a
thousand shekels or pieces of silver belong to Solomon; two hundred to those
that keep the fruit.

Chap. 23. That the Iron, though unworthy in it self, is ennobled by
conjunction with the Loadstone, and that we wretched men are ennobled by our
spiritual union with Christ.
THere are every where veins of Iron in exceeding great plenty, shops of
Iron are open almost in eve^ie village and Countrey-towne; it serves for
exceeding many uses of men; but such as are common, and of small estimation
among many, diverse kinds of Instruments are made of it, but such as are
ordinary, as Horse-shooes, Keys, Locks, Nails, Sawes, Mattocks, Plow-shares,
to say nothing of Warlike Slings, Guns, Bullets, and such instruments as are so
pestilent unto men, all the honor and dignity of the Iron arises and accrewes
to it, from the Loadstone, which assuredly confers more Nobleness upon the
Iron, than that Egyptian King, did upon gold when he made of his Chamber pots,
Graven Images for the gods, which he constrained his Noblemen to worship; for
Iron being stirred up by the Loadstone, it can hardly be expressed, how many and
what great Commodities it brings unto men. So that your Alchymists are vain in
this, when they dream that nature would perfect all other Metalls, by changing
them into Gold; for who does not perceive, that we owe more to those Needles
used in Navigation and the Art of Dialling, than to all the gold and precious
Stones, that are any where to be found? as by whose help and benefit we
procure all these, and other wares of all sorts; So that it should not seem
strange unto us, that the Iron does so much desire, go about, or seek for to
compass this honorable match with the Loadstone, that having seen it, as it
were, it flies to it with speedy pace, as that by whose complying, and
communicating with it, it becomes so full of wonders and strength. Now to make
some use of this; who is so blockish and dull, that beholding and deeply
considering these things, does not with a sorrowful remembrance, call to mind
that former wretched estate and condition in which we were borne, as that in
which we were vessels of wrath and dishonor, Slaves of the world, of Satan, of
our own filthy lust* whose god was their belly, whose glory their shame, and
whose end was damnation? who is so hard and flinty hearted, who can so moderate
himself, as to abstain from tears, when he calls to mind how unserviceable
he is in performing all duties which are due both to God and man? how unapt for
any thing, unless it be to consume and devour Gods good creatures, the fruits
of the earth, to employ good hours amiss to fulfill the lusts of the flesh,
to treasure up wrath against the day of wrath? Who is so frozen and Icy cold,
that when seriously, though overlate, he thinks upon, and weighes these things
with himself that is not enflamed and wholly burns with desire of that
heavenly Wedlock with Christ, whereby he may obtain t^is favor not only to
be c^lled, but also to be the Son of God, Cohei^e with Christ, a Citizen and
free Denizon of Heaven? What soul is so brutish and so base, that it had
rather vvallovv, as yet in flesh and blood, than by the inspiration of Gods
holy Spirit, to be raised and lifted up, and be made quick and fit to undergo
Spiritual and Angelical duties, whereby it may save both it self, and also
others, and perform those good works by which it may attain everlasting
Salvation and the Kingdom of heaven? Who is so deaf and disobedient, that
will not open his Immortal Gates, through which the King of Life and Glory
may enter in, by whose entering in, and dwelling with him, he may be
encouraged and strengthened to accomplish all Duties?

Chap. 24. A Comparison between the Loadstone and other precious Stones, in
respect of virtue and beauty.
GOld has a Sun-like shining; The Silver a Moonlight brightness; Brass and
Copper have a sightly yellovvish color; Tin and Lead have a clearness, like
that of Quicksilver; Pearls have their Candor and lightsome smoothness, the
Diamond has a sparkling and shining clear color, as also other precious
stones have a color that is most pleasing and lightsome, wherewith they draw
unto them, and bewitch the eyes of the beholders; But the aspect of the
Loadstone, is like that of rusty Iron, bluish, sad, pale and dark, which
notwithstanding the Lord of Nature has enricht and endowed with a mavelous
inward virtue: in the mean while for other Stones, he would have their outward
beauty to serve their turns, besides which, he bestowed nothing upon them,
whereby they might procure estimation and honor with men; and surely this
order is most excellent* this ordinance most just, which in distributing his
Gifts, he has prescribed to himself to be constantly observed, not
conferring upon any, either all his gifts, or many of them, in a superaboundant
manner; but he imparteth se^^rall endowments to sever^ll things, so that every
one of them may have some thing singular, wherein they may be em^^^nt without
either injury or envy of the rest, you may discern a notable proof and
pattern of this ordering of things, as in stones, so likewise in men; for in
both of them it is rare to find a conjunction and concord of outward beauty and
inward virtue; It is not altogether usual to have beauty and strength inherent
in one and the same party: It is difficult to find a man that excels in
strength of body and prudence of mind; Now beauty and splendor is such an
endowment, as does not lie hid, but is forth with outwardly manifest, and
presents it self to the eyes of the beholders; but prudence and strength do
not disclose and declare themselves without many Arts and exercises: you shall
meet with many in Histories, that surpassed in beauty, yet were not famous for
any excellent Art, for beauty does effeminate the possessors of it, persuades
them to be idle, and to take their pleasure, as not wanting any other glory.
Tertull. de resur.
On the contrary, Christ our Lord was a man of sorrows, acquainted with
gri^fe, by reason of his sufferings, there was no beauty or bravery in him, that
we should desire him, he was a worm and no man, one who the people made no
account of: But as touching the fullness of his Spirit, he was above the Sons
of men, upon whom rested the spirit of wisdom and counsel, in whom were all
the treasures of wisdom, who by the smell of his good ointments, did provoke
and draw men to come unto him; whose good examples let us always follow; If we
have beauty, let us not much regard it, if we have it not, let us not be sorry
for it, nor envy others that have it; let us rather rejoice for our inward
virtues and good works; Let us cloathe our selves with the silk of honesty,
with the fine cloth of Sanctity, with the Purple of Chastity, being so
adorned, and trimly set forth, we shall have God for our Paramour, holy people
for our Imitators or followers, Tertull. de cultu faeminarum.
The Angels for our Spectators and praisers.

Chap. 25. That God uses to be more admired in little Loadstones, and weak
Christians, than in great ones.
THere is as much difference between Loadstone and Loadstone, as there is
between man and man. Among those of humane race, the first difference is in
vigor, in which respect some are male, some are female: The second difference
is in greatness, in which respect some are Giants, some Dwarffs: So likewise
there are some stones, great in quantity, but weak in strength; such as
scarcely, and very hardly lift up a weight that is but equal to themselves:
Some again are small and little, not exceeding the quantity of a Filberd, that
lift up their weight threescore times, nay, an hundred times multiplied. God
uses to be of greater power in small, than in great things. It is said there
is greater life in Emmets than in Elephants, in Dwarffs than in Giants. If
there were some great Loadstone, that could lift up its own weight fifty
times multiplied; there were some danger lest it should be adored as an Idol:
Among poor people that have but slender possessions, and small abilities, you
may see many that ^xcel, and are very famous for godliness and holiness of
life, that if any such should be met withal among the Nobles, among the
learned and mighty of this world, he should be counted a rare wonder; and it
were to be feared, lest the common people should imagine him to have some
Deity within him, and so worship him, as if he were some half God. Further,
there are manifest tokens, by which the stronger and more lively stones are
differenced from the weak and sluggish. First, that they do finish their task
with more expedition, that they tu^ne more speedily towa^ds the Poles, that
they draw more strongly, and more hardly let go. Secondly, that they lift
heavier burdens with more ease, that they can hold up more nails and rings.
Thirdly, that they have a larger sphere of activitie; That they can extend
their virtue to an object more remote and and distant; There are likewise just
as many signs, whereby noble and heroical Christians are discerned from those
that are lukewarm and vulgar. They are more quick spirited and nimble to
perform good works, they go not about holy duties, groaning and lamenting,
with an ill will, like those kine that drew the Ark, which lowed on the way as
they went. Secondly, they can endure the cross more courageously, and bear
those temptations that are more grievous than ordinary, like Samson, who
without much ado took up the brazen gates on his shoulders. Lastly, they do
endevor to win and draw, not one, or two, or a few; but many souls unto
Christ: for so it is mentioned of Barnabas, that he was a good man, and that
many were converted unto God by his means.

Chap. 26. All the Circles are found in the least Loadstone, although not in
the same largen^sse; and all the habits, though not the same degrees of graces
in the least Christians.
THough a Loadstone, which is strong, does surpass a weak one in virtue, by
many degrees, yet all of them, both strong and weak, do agree in this; That
the two polar points, and so many Tropicall Circles, and one Aequinoctiall are
seen in each of them, as they are seen in the Globe of Heaven and Earth. So if
you cut some great Loadinto a thousand pieces, there will be none of them so
small; but that you may find in it all the forenamed Mathematical Circles; So
likewise, there is not any Christian of so little faith, of so small stature in
Christianity, but that he has received from the fullness of Christ, grace
for grace, although all of them have not the same measure, and degree of
several graces; yet they have the same number, the same seed-plot of all
virtues, no otherwise than as the several members and lineaments of the
parents, may be clearly seen in an infant but one day old.

Chap. 27. One Loadstone helps another, that is conveniently, or fitly placed
by it; but hurts it, if otherwise: the like happens in the familiar
entercourses, both good and bad, that men have one with another.
IF you gather a thousand flints into an heap, one flint will neither receive
damage, or profit by another: The case is far otherwise with Loadstones, of
which, if you place one by another, or if you cast many of them confusedly into
one heap, the one must needs draw either some loss and impediment, or some
virtue or benefit from that which is next unto it; for if they do accord in
respect of the Magnetic rules, and meet in terms or points convenient, for
each ones natures; so that the Southern point of the one, be disposed toward
the Northern point of the other, the weak shall be drawn, and cherished, and
strengthe^ed by the strong; But if it be placed in contrary, and inconvenient
terms, it shall be driven away, and much weakened. There happens in the
friendship and society of men, something that is like unto this; some good
does always befall to a man by means of a good neighbor, and some evil by
means of an ill neighbor; for wicked^communications corrupt good manners; but
good communications correct and confirm whatsoever is amiss: the wicked will
fasten upon us some vice or another; but the good and virtuous will infuse into
us some virtue; There was a little cloud in the form of a pillar, which was in
the midst between the Egyptians and the Israelites, as they traveled in the
wilderness; the hindermost thereof, which was dark and mistie, the Egyptians
followed after; but the foremost, which was lightsome and bright, the Israelites
beheld* Whatsoever thing we have in us, that is spotted and worthy of
dispraise, they which are the children of darkness do imitate that; but
whatsoever is excellent and praiseworthy, that they do follow, which are the
children of light, and led by the Spirit of God.

Wherefore we must not only take heed with whom we converse, but upon what
terms and conditions, with a great deal of care in the choice of our
friends, and diligent circumspectnesse; unless that we be willing to endure
thereby a dangerous corruption of manners.

Chap. 28. As the Poles of the Loadstone have their strength in diverse regions,
so good and bad men have their regiment or rule in diverse ages.
THere is as much difference between the Poles of the Loadstone, as is between
the right hand and the left; for they have a different power in different
regions of the earth: In the Northern parts of ^he world, there is a manifest
difference of the Northern point; for it lifts up a greater piece of Iron,
than the Southern Pole can do in the same parts.

In this world the flesh prevails against the spirit, the body does here
press down the soul: The sons of Belial dominere in this life, every one
has his place, his government assigned him by God.

Chap. 29. Christ does diligently purge his floor in that sort, as Goldsmiths
do their Tables.
GOldsmiths have an admirable cunning to cleanse their tables, upon which small
dust of Iron is every where mingled with golden dust, which fall from their
files and hammers, as they polish those things which they make: For they carry
about on the Table a Loadstone. of great virtue within a fingers distance,
which readily separates, without any damage, the small pieces of Iron from
those of gold; when passing by, and leaving the golden, it draws those of Iron
unto it. After the very same manner the Lord shall purge his floor in that
great day of judgment; for when two shall be together in one bed, one shall be
taken, and the other shall be left; when two shall be grinding in one mill, one
shall be taken, the other left; for the Lord knows those that are his, he
shall separate the Goats from the Sheep, and shall winnow the chafe from the
wheat. Neither ought it to seem more difficult, or wonderful unto us, That the
several members, and small parts of the deceased, should return again to
their bodies, than that several Bees in the hive do know their cells; that
several young Lambs in a flock do distinctly knew their own Dams, and that
several pieces of Iron should fly toward the Loadstone.

Chap. 30. The Loadstone, and Christ together, with their virtue, do impart
gravitie, or weight, to those persons and things that are drawn by them.
FUrther, we may be pleased to note by the way; That the Loadstone, together
with the virtues observed, does infuse and put a certain weightinesse into the
Iron: For that point of the Needle, which is touched and stirred up, does
plainly outweigh that which is untoucht, and is inclined toward the earth: So
likewise does Christ add gravitie to those virtues, wherewith he is pleased
to endow his Servants: and surely it is no less profitable and necessary to
the soul of man, than ballasting is to a ship. And although Gravitie is not
numbered by Philosophers among the virtues, yet it is the ornament and defense
of them all. Now a grave man is he which is steadfast in his purpose, is
firmly fixed upon his intent, as a statu^ or image upon the base thereof, and
without variation does always persist in the same mind; neither is he carried
away with every popular wind of applause, nor changed into new forms, by any
new doctrine or example; as other light vain men are used to be.

Chap. 31. The Loadstone, for love of the earth, turns aside from the poles of
heaven; as we also being moved by the authority of men, do often times turn
aside from the truth of God.
WHeresoever the Loadstone does enjoy a free and natural motion, there it
looks straight toward both the Poles, the North^rn and Southern, and departs
not a whit from the Meridian; but it happens in many places, both of land and
sea, that it turns aside, and goes out of the way, toward some point of the
Horizon which is near to the true Meridian, and departs from the Poles point
toward the East and West, which is distant by some degrees. This irregularite
is by the Mariners called Variation, it arises, and is caused by large, high,
and strong Continents of the land, unto which the Loadstone enclines, whilst
that it turns it self to the eminent parts of its mother, the Earth: and
forsakes the Celestial Poles, for love of them, which Variation breeds a
troublesome uncertaintie among the Mariners: Not unlike to that which befalls the
Pastors and Christian flock, in discussing and determining Divinity
controversies; in which as long as they observe the rule of the Scripture, and
are not moved from the unmovable foundation, and infallible Canon of the
Prophets and Apostles, so long do they retain verity* and unity, and peace in
the Church; but as soon as they are divided, and earnestly bend their minds
to maintain particular factions, and do join themselves to that company, or
Sect of learned men, which excel (as they suppose) in authority and knowledge,
and attribute more to their judgments and opinions, than to the undoubted
Oracles of God. Hereupon grow so many schisms, so many here^ies, and so many
more than civil wars in the Church. Against which mischiefs, no better remedy
can be thought upon, or desired, than that they should admit the voice of
Christ, that speaks in the Scripture; for the true and living rule, both of
faith and life of manners and doctrine, and for the Supreme J^dge of all
doubts: Then they walking according to this rule, there shall be peace in the
Israel of God.

Chap. 32. Men are deceived in the estimation of Stones, and other things,
while they est^eme of them not according to their use, but according to their
outward appearance.
IF those things be true which the Roman Ce^^our supposed concerning the
valuation of things: That whatsoever is not profitable for mankind, is too
dear, though you pay but the least piece of money for it; That whatsoever is
unserviceable, is of no worth, and that which is of no use, is of no
estimation; Then surely shall they be guilty of the greatest vanity, that are
unequal prizers of things, who with the loss of their patrimonies and large
possessions, do purchase to themselves Gemms and precious Stone^, which bring
them no substantial advantage, and can profit them nothing, unless it be for
superfluous splendor, and outward adorning, whereby no benefit comes, either
to body or soul; when in the mean while, they make no great account of the
Loadstone, and suppose it worth little, though it be remarkable for so many
virtues, and ordained by nature for so many uses, and serviceable for so many
necessary occasions of men: Now if we believe Raimundus, it belongs unto God
alone, who cannot increase within, who wants no inward augmentation and
accomplishment, to seek an estimation of himself in men's hearts; a name and
praise by their tongues; and finally that honor and glory which is outward.
But that man who only wants inward perfection and the increase of real good
things, the more he seeks that honor which is placed in the breast of others,
the more he pursues after vanity, emptiness, unprofitablenesse, and is by so
much more wretched and poor; more remote from solid perfection and bliss;
which things if they be examined according to the rule of truth, peradventure
they may seem too harsh and to savor of Cynicall and Stoicall rigor* for it
is lawful and allowed unto men by God himself, to se^ke in a moderate way,
those things that pertain unto outward ornament; yet profusely to spend such
huge sums of money, for to procure them, to put upon them such an excess of
price, beyond all measure, despising and contemning those things that are of
greater use, and enricht with more indowments: I do not see but that it is
extreme folly, if I may not say madness.

Chap. 33. Of that Emulation and desire to excel one another, which is among
Loadstones and likewise among Christians.
THere is not any where such manifest concord or discord, no such vehement and
irreconciliable envying, either in vegetative or sensitive, nor scarcely in
things endued with reason, as there is among Loadstones; they do so greedily
desire the polar point, and go about to enjoy it wholly every one to it self,
after the fashion of Rivalls, that for the obtaining thereof, they do express
either wonderful friendship or hatred among themselves; for if you hang two
long pieces of Iron, and sharp pointed over the Poles of the earth or
Loadstone, they forthwith concur and accord in their lowest points, but in
their highest points, they avoid and drive one another away: On the contrary,
if they be short and blunt, they will turn one from the other in their lowest
points, and as it were mutually kiss and embrace one another in the highest.
So likewise in humane things, the least gain is such an Apple of contention,
or occasion of strife among the covetous, that because of this, one mean man
is ready to hate another: A common whore is an occasion of contention among the
lascivious; That these wretched Miscreants do mutually wound and ^ab one
another: Principality and favor of Princes, is an occasion of contention among
the ambitious, for which Courtiers do strive by treacheries and poisoning one
of another: In the mean time true Christians spend all their love of honor,
love of pleasure, and love of money another way that they may enjoy Christ,
serve him and please him. Peter and John having received news of Christ's
Resurrection, contended among themselves, and ran forte together, but the
beloved Disciple out ran Peter, and came before him unto the Sepulcher, and
modestly concealing his name, he did write the History of this holy Emulation:
The like fit of contention wa^ between Paul and Barnabas, and it may be for
the like cause, (...), Such contention is profitable for mortal men. Jacob,
that he might take away from Esau the blessing and birthright, supplanted him
by his own craft and his mothers help.

Chap. 34. The contrary points of the Loadstone st^ive among themselves, and
mutually ^xpelone another from their subjects; So it is likewise between the
flesh and the Spirit.
IF one whet a Knife on the Northern point of a Loadstone, it receives
hereupon the virtue of the Loadstone, whereby it both draws and lifts up Iron:
But if he shall apply the same to the contrary and Southern point, the Knife
will be deprived of the virtue which it had before, it will be subject to a
whirling or turning round, that it can neither draw nor lift up Iron. The like
happens to them who do imitate the vices of those whose manners they do
admire; and to those who have attentively heard a Sermon, and fervently poured
forth their prayers at Church, they conceiving good motions and intentions upon
this occasion, do intend to change their former course of life, and turn to a
better; yet falling into the fellowship of ungodly persons by going into some
Stews or Tavern, they return by and by, as dogs to their vomit, or as Swine
to their wallowing in the mire; as if one after the taking of wholesome meat,
should immediately drink poison, or eat Hemlock, or some other poisonous herb;
or having washed himself in a Bath, should tumble himself into the dirt, the
end of such people, is worse than their beginning, having begun in the spirit,
and ended in the flesh; for the devil, that envious one, takes from them the
wholesome seed of the Word, which had never taken deep root in them, and so
poures into them his deadly poison, whereby he makes them unapt, and reprobate
to every good work.

Chap. 35. As the Needle is between two Loadstones, So is one that wavers
between two opinions.
AS it is a thing familiarly used among those goers about which do use the art
of J^gling, and present merry plays and sights to the people for money, to
place in a Cauldron an Iron Needle, between two Loadstones which they carry
hid in their hands, that it runs here and there uncertainly waving between
both, one while following the stone which draws it unto it at first, another
while that stone which draws it back, but comes at neither of them, and
cleaves to neither: So does the devil show the like sports, the like
spectacles unto the world, when he turns those men like a Windmill, with every
wind of Doctrine, whom the Apostle calls (...), double minded unstable men,
termed by S'. Cyprian, a^cipites palpato^es, hypocritical dangerous
Flatterers and Cheaters of the times, constant only in their inconstancy; such
as Ecibolius was in times past, and of late, the Archbishop of Spalato, with
others, whose names I spare: Such men as hang between heaven and earth,
halting between God and Baal one while serving God, another while Mammon; one
while embracing this present world, another while, that which is to come,
neither acceptable to God nor good men; whom Carpenter likens to a hungry dog
between two hares, or to one that runs up and down between two Feasts, one
while this way, another while that way, and so comes at neither of them, but
misseth them both.

Chap. 36. Effects of the same love in Christ and the Loadstone, contrary to
their fir^^ actions and demeaners.
THe Loadstone is wholly composed of humbleness and love, breathes out mere
love, void of all gall and bitterness; It was created for the use and benefit
of mankind, and brings no damage or detriment to any; If at any time it seems
to drive away Iron, and expel it, it does it not out of any pride, nor induced
by any hatred; but to this end only drives it away, that being better affected
and disposed in convenient terms or points, it may then recall it, and reduce
it to itself, by certain windings and turnings. So our Lord who is wholly and
only good, as transcendent in love and goodness, as he is in greatness, who
was borne for the salvation of mankind, drew all unto him, he cast not any away
that came unto him; He gave a Repulse indeed to the woman of Canaan, he chid
her, as if she had been but a dog, yet to no other end, but that she might
make supplication unto him mo^e earnestly, hasten to him more vehemently, and
cleave to him more closely; and with that mind does he rebuke those that are
his, that he may not punish them: he threatens that he may not smite them; he
judges them in this world, that he may not condemn them in the world to come.

Chap. 37. A regenerate soul, and a needle touched with the Loadstone, are of
the same condition; so likewise an unreg^nerate soul, and a needle of iron
untoucht.
A Needle which is altogether of ^ron, and not touched with the Loadstone, has
an equal aspect to all the parts of the world and rests equally in all, as
it falls out. If at any time it has an aspect toward the Poles, and does rest
toward them, it is only by casualtie, or mere chance, without any instinct of
nature, without any proper virtue. But being touched, and having once received
virtue from the Loadstone, then does it always only tend toward the Poles,
and turns not aside to any other place, unless it be overcome with love of
the earth, or constrained by external force of another: So likewise the
merely natural, and unregenerate soul, is always prone and e^clined to
wicked and sinful Arts. If peradventure at any time it performs any work
materially good, it does it not out of any set purpose, much less by habit,
but by haphazard, as they are wont to say, with a blind endeavor, as one that
wants both sight and skill, yet with his dart or javelin hits a Crow or a mark.
Now the same soul inspired, instructed, and wrought upon by God, does
constantly direct all its actions to the glory of God; according to the
precepts of virtue, and according to the Canon* or rule of Gods word; from
which scope or mark, if the regenerate man at any time err by infirmity, or
by force of some strong tentation, that comes to pass altogether besides his
intention, and against the design of his will. Hence it is, that the works of
carnal, and merely civil men, although outwardly glorious, and goodly to see
to, are little acceptable to God: But the works of holy men, though imperfect,
and besprinkled with spots, do not only find pardon, but also favor in Gods
sight, and that for Christ his sake, not for any merit of theirs; for God is
wont to weigh their works, not so much by their acts, as by their ends.

Chap. 38. Of the small estimation and scarceness of Loadstones and
Christians, and of their native places.
THere are now abundance of Loadstones in several places so that their too
much familiarity, or frequencie, has brought them into contempt among the
vulgar, with whom nothing is counted precious, but that which is scarce. There
is no Region almost, no Iron-mine, wherein Loadstones may not be found; that is
to say, common Loadstones of no note, of no virtue; there are few very
excellent, notable, and strong. In like sort there are abundance of men in
every place; but few noble, learned, and wise: Of Christians, in name and
title, there is no small store, and they are very cheap: But of such as are
truly faithful, and behave themselves as worthy of so great a title; there is
a great deal of scarsitie and dearth in all places. If any enquire of the
place and Region, where the best kind of Load-stones are bred? In times past
Magnesia did yield the most famous, from whence it is acknowledged their name
is derived: But now in that place, there are either none at all, or such as are
very barren in virtue; the ordinary sort are brought from E^be and Norway; but
the best and such as are of the strongest sort, are brought hither from Bengala
and China, and from those places that are more than usually hot: It is most
certain, that there is not any particular Nation or Land, that does
perpetually enjoy this privilege; but as it pleases the God of nature, he
does sometimes bless one Country, sometimes another with this condition. In
like manner at Antioch, in those ancient times, the first Christians obtained
both their name and Seat; but in Beraea were the most Noble: England is reputed
of late, a most plentiful Island, and most happy Mother of holy and learned
men, yet notwithstanding God has his freedom, to honor at his pleasure any
other Church with this renowned Praerogative.

Chap. 39. We do not search out the causes of hidden things to no purpose;
though we do it subtly, yet it is but unprofitably: Divines and Philosophers
may more easily, and more successefully find out the effects and use of the
same.
IF any one enquire a reason, why I have not as yet produced any opinion of
mine own, concerning the causes and reasons of the wonderful and secret
effects of the Loadstone; Let him know that this is the cause, For that it
seems to Boethius and others, not only very hard, but also ^ltogether
unpossible to assign a certain and determinate reason thereof; Nature would
have many things to be hid in the bosom and lap of her Majesty, which it would
not have the un^erstanding of man to attain to the knowledge thereof, and
which it has left rather to be admired, than to be searched out: Yet there
want not some who imagine, Clement:
that the affinity which it has with the Iron, is an evident and sufficient
reason of the Loadstones drawing of it; Plutarch:
Others affirm that certain incorporall and Spiritual evaporations and
issues that proceed out of the Loadstone, are the causes thereof; most do fly
to that common Sanctuary of Philosophe^s, Gallen:
holding that a secret quality, engendered naturally in the Loadstone, by the
spirit that wrought in the composing of stones, is the cause of it. We poor
mortals are not only pur blind as Owls, but as Moles, we are almost quite
blind in searching out the causes of things, we labor in vain in these
subtle disquisitions, and spend the strength of our wits to no end: How much
more uprofitably, and unprosperously* have the School men employed their
hours and endeavors* in searching out, and declaring the causes of Go^s
election, and man's vocation, whilst they excogitated that the reason hereof was
Gods foreseeing of men's says, or their works* or affirmed that any thing
else, out of G^d was the cause of thi^ divine decre^, and distinct^^n or
difference made between men. The mysteries of his Empire must be reserved and
left unto God, who will not suffer his servants, without punishment, to look so
curiously into the Ark of his secrets; the Bethshemites in times past suffered
for this pride and folly: Predestination is an incomprehensible impenetrable
depth, and bottomless pit: Some divine mysteries are unsearchable, and cannot
be found out, which if God had revealed unto us, peradventure he would have
forbidden them to be published and discovered: and surely, men might with
greater commendation and profit, employ the strength of their wits more
earnestly and intentively about those things which pertain to the practice and
use of humane life, and such as tend to the confirmation, and making sure of
our election and calling, than about these things: If a man happens to meet
with a fruitful tree, he neither digs up the earth that is about it, nor
uncovers the root; but looks upon the fruit with longing eyes, and plucks them
with greedy hands. And indeed it had turned less to the destruction of Adam
and his offspring, and more to their salvation, if he had eaten the fruit of
the Tree of life, and had not tasted at all of the fruit of the Tree of
knowledge.

Chap. 40. Of the slanders and abuse^, to which Loadstones, as also great men
and their affairs, are liable.
HItherto have I con^inued in rehearsing the various and ^xcellent uses of the
Loadstone, hereafter I will comprehend in few words, the abuses thereof, and
those fables also which passing to and fro through the mouths of men, have
gotten some belief among the credulous multitude; especially such as that is,
concerning Mahomets Iron Tomb, that hangs, as they say, in the Air, in a
Chapel sceiled with Loadstones, which they who travail as far as Mecha, do
constantly affirm to be false. This I conjecture to be sprung from another
fable, somewhat near of kin unto it, which Pliny relates of that
Master Builder Dinocrates, who began to cover with Loadstones the roof of
Arsinoe's Temple at Alexandria, that her Image or Picture might seem to hang
in the Air; in the mean time it fell out that the Artificer died, and Ptolomy
also, who commanded this to be made for his Sister. Of the same kind are those
fained tales of Serapion, that he could open doors and locks, that he could
stay Ships in the midst of their course, that he could extract nails out of
them, by the help of a Loadstone: Like unto this is that of Arnoldus de villa
nova, who affirmed that the devils might be put to flight by this means, and
that of Marbodaeus Gallus, who said it was the best Philter or Medic^ne to
procure love, and that wives are by it reconciled to their husbands, and
husbands reconciled to their wives; unto which his Commentator Pictorius, adds,
this for a Surplusage; that it makes the possessors of it very acceptable to
Princes* and eloquent; It is also an usual thing with Couseners of plain
Country people, and for Mountebancks, under pretense of the virtues and
effects thereof, to seek earnestly for credit and estimation to that plaster,
which in Latin is termed Armarium, and is commonly called the weapon salve,
having Sympathy with other things, and wrought upon by the Stars. Besides
Famianus Strada, a man excellent for penning any kind of discourse, has
feigned a notable couple of Tales, (and as I believe) to exercise his wit, and
practice his writing, which because they are brief and pleasant, or full of
mirth, I shall not think much to set them down here fully: The first is
according to the Pattern of Lucretius his Verse, and treats of a most expedite
nere way to write unto friends, without any Carrier, or sending of Letters, and
that only by the help of a Loadstone after this manner.

Magnesi genus est Lapidis mirabile, etc.
A Loadstone of strange kind there is,
to which if you apply
Some iron substance, instruments
to write, then by and by
They draw not only virtue thence,
and motion amain,
Unto the Northern Pole to turn,
and toward Charles his waine,
But also all, among themselves
in strange and wondrous sort,
Those instruments the Loadstone touched
you shall see them resort
Unto one place of motion;
yea, so that if by chance,
But one of them do move at Rome,
the other will advance
It self to this, and though far off,
will instantly remove,
And turn to it with speed, by League
and Natures secret love:
Well then, if thou would understand
of thy far-distant Mate,
To whom no letter can be sent,
then take a plain round plate,
That Is large and wide, then write therein
the A, B, C, letters all,
In order, as by children learned,
these place on brims withal
Of this round plate, and in the midst each way
set down the Iron Pen,
Which touched the Loadstone, that
It may be turned, and then
Touch any letter, which thou will:
by this example frame
Another table for thy friend,
in form the very same,
Having those outward brims alike,
and Iron Instrument
Touched by one Loadstone, which thy friend
that to depart is bent,
May carry with him; then you must
among your selves appoint
What time the Iron Pen shall move,
and at the Letters point
Things so composed, if thou desir'st
for to salute thy friend,
Which busied is far off from home,
in earths extremest end;
Then take the Table in thy hand,
the turning Iron touch,
Thou see the Letters on the brim,
disposed in order such,
As thou shall need them to frame words,
to them thy pen direct,
Sometimes to this, and sometimes that,
thy purpose to effect:
Until that often this Instrument,
thus turning all about,
Thou have in order all thy thoughts
discribed and set out.
It Is strange to be believed: thy friend
which is far off does see
The rolling Iron move with speed,
from all enforcement free:
Now here, now there, then he that knows
this feat is at a stay,
Observes the Guidance of the Pen, touched
and follows every way:
He reads the Letters that were
which being together brought,
He now perceives what needful is,
which by this means was wrought.
Besides the friend when that he sees
the Instrument to stand,
May touch the letters, and rescribe,
and answer out of hand,
As he shall think conve^ient.
O that this way to write
Were once in common use, that all
might letters thus endite;
A Letter then more speedily,
and safely to and fro,
Might pass without all fear of thieves,
and streams to overflow:
A Prince might then dispatch himself
his own affairs abroad;
We Scribes might part with inkie seas,
and change our black abode.
There is another Fable that follows after this, of a Loadstone called
Chrysos, which does not draw Iron, but Gold; and is framed according to the
language and mind of Ovid:

Forte mihi puero putei super ore sedenti, etc
WHen being a boy, I sat
upon the brink
Of a deep pit, my ring
did fall and sink:
Of it I had no hope,
but then I saw
My Sire let down a stone,
which gold could draw,
Upon a line; then straight
the ring arose
Out of the bottom, and
stuck very close
Unto the stone, as fish
unto a book:
My father spoke, when
wondering I did look;
Son, know this stone, the
fable is but short;
Deucalion and Pyrrha
in a sort,
Who comprehended all
of humane race,
That people might in earth
again have place,
Threw stones behind their backs,
upon command,
Which softened were, and
changed out of hand
To bones, and to the faces
of mankind;
Although among them, some
as yet we find,
As undigested statues,
having much
Of marble hardness, showing
they be such,
As from the stones have
their original:
This Offspring grew with care
distracted all,
As on the waters, fields,
and dens they fell,
Mounts that for mines of
ir'n, and gold excel,
The nature of the place
they did partake;
One bunts, another tils
the ground, some take
Their pleasure in the sea;
some others seek
For veins of ir'n and gold
in every creek;
And every where with pains
and panting breath,
They seek to find the cause
of sin and death.
Then mother Nature would
take from their sights
Those strong invitements
to all ill delights;
And to the inmost bowels
of the ground,
She drew, and moved them,
even to hell, that found
They sarcely could be, and
yet here descends
Their furious lust, which knew
no bounds, nor ends:
They search things hid, and do
unbowell all
Their mother, Earth; then
Nature did them call;
She said in wrath, What mean
ye for to do?
What further end have you,
where will you go?
Devoyd of metals all
the earth shall lie
And groan, before that you
can satisfy
Your appetite: she turning
does behold
Magnesia's fields, with shame
not to be told,
She sees them very earnest
at their work,
Searching those secrets, which
at last did lurk
In the now dug out world,
almost thereby,
Seeking out gains (their loss)
which therein lie:
She cried, O troop condemned,
o grovelling rout
Worthy of graves, which
you dug all about
Near hell, and so she shak'd
the earth with might,
Oppressed the men, and killed
them all out right:
Their limbs she mingled with
those clods of land,
Which they abused with
a wicked hand.
From the near Stygian caves,
a smoakie flame
Took hold of the earth and
members in the same.
These, thus confounded, into
stones were turned,
Their hue and color seem,
as if half burned:
Nor only this, but that
desire of gain,
Which troubled them alive,
does yet remain;
As when they gathered gold
and ir'n, by Fate
They were suppressed; so likewise
now of late,
Though senseless stones, they do
well know their prey,
And with a two- fol
avarice assay
To draw it to them, now
this stone draws gold,
The other ir'n: and so
the tale is told.
These wonders when I heard,
I laughed and said;
We all love gold so well,
I am afraid
That each man will be a
Magnesian stone:
My father pleased me,
his little one,
With fables such as these.
These and the like feigned Inventions, as all false rumors for the most part,
so have they some truth or some thing likely to be true; for their original
from whence they rise, and their foundation whereupon they rely; for
experience has taught me, that by the help of the Loadstone, and an
Instrument fitted for that purpose, it is possible that a friend may intimate
his mind to another friend, being in the next Chamber, and that through a wall
which is two foot broad in thickness, that he may thus impart to the other his
intent and purpose, and answer to those things which shall be propounded unto
him. This exploit was either never heard of before, or seemed altogether
incredible. But that a man should by this Sympatheticall Needle communicate in
speeches with his absent friend, as it were by an Epistle or Letter, his friend
being in parts of the world so far distant, and placed out of the Loadstones
Sphere of activity; It is a mere fable, and deceitful imposture.

But that which happens to the Loadstone, the same is fatal, and does* usually
befall great affai^^^ (...) all great men that are famous for their virtue,
they lie open to many abuses and slanders, and are debased thereby.

What has been extant in any place, or at any time, which Nature ordained for
excellent uses, that either the devils cunning, or men's Legerdemain, has
not perverted to most horrible abuses? What man was ever famous for works and
miracles, of whom Histories have declared any thing true and wonderful, upon
whom fabulous reports have not fastened many absurdities and falsehoods which
they added unto the truth?

What are the lives of Saints, and those golden Legends, as they call them, but
confused heaps of lies, feigned and written by men of brazen faces, and Leaden
brains, I am easily induced to believe, that, concerning Gregory, surnamed
Thaumaturgus, and other men, to be reverenced for the power they had to work
Miracles, their Cotempararies, and other approved Authors, have written many
things that were true; But that I should give credit to all things which the
Monks of following ages have added, I can never be persuaded; Therefore it
shall be a wise man's part, neither to deny belief unto those things that are
true, because of the mixture of things that are false; nor rashly to give
credence unto things that are false, for the sake of those things that are
true, but like a Sieve, to retain those things that are weighty and solid, and
to reject those things that are vain and light.

Chap. 41. There is no less power in Christ and the Load^^one to retain
things, than to draw them at first.
THe Loadstone does not only by Invincible provocations sweetly draw Iron unto
it, but strongly retains it by indissoluble bands when it is drawn, until it
be plucked away from it by violent hands; you may see Anchors in Goldsmiths
shops hanging by the Loadstone whole months and years together; and put the
case that a Loadstone of such great virtue might be had, that it could not be
violently wrought upon by outward force, it would follow hereupon, that the
Anchors should perpetually cleave to the Loadstone: Now just in the same manner
does Jesus the Corner Stone, the stone of our help, work in our wills, it is
by his grace that we are assisted in all things, and he causes that it may not
be refused though we know not after what manner, as Augustine often declares.
He does also pour into the hearts of his chosen, such love and fear, such
good acceptance of his favors, that they will never depart from him, and does
always take heed lest there should be in any of them any unbelieving heart, to
fall away from the living God. Hebr. 3.12.
There remains, we deny not in elect and regenerate, not only a power, but
also a pronenesse and inclination to become Apostata's, to fall away totally
and finally from God; 1 Thessalonians. 5.
but faithful is he which has called us, and preserves our whole Spirit and
Body, until his glorious Coming, by whom we are comprehended rather than
comprehend him: Having our foundation upon this Magnetic ^ock, no showers or
winds shall to our confusion, dash and shake us, no man shall snatch us out of
his hand; nothing, whether present or to come, shall separte us from his love.
Now unto him that is able to keep from falling those that are his, and so
present us faultlesse in his presence with exceeding great joy, be ascribed all
glory, strength, and power, for ever and ever. Amen.

A short Prayer according to the matter and manner of one of St. Bernards
devout rimes.
Magne Magnes, me dignare
Ad te totum inclinare, etc.

GReat Loadstone, do not thus decline,
Me wholly unto thee incline,
Make my whole heart, sweet Lord, to hye
It self most quickly to apply
To thee with a devoted mind.
This base filthy dog that barketh,
This poor wa^dring sheep that bleateth,
This much wearied heart that brayeth,
Thy slow Servant that delayeth,
Draw home and let him mercy find.
So draw that I may follow thee,
So turn me, that turned I may be,
Conjoyne thy self unto my heart,
Anoint it by thy Spirit, impart
To it compunction for sin.
Through inwards of this heart of mine,
Sinful and guilty, force divine
Let pass, and do not me confound;
But let my heart entire be bound,
With bonds of love, thy love to win.
Let my heart to thine be likened,
Let my heart to thine be joined,
Let my hardened heart be pierced, love.
Let my Iron heart be wounded,
With wounds, O God, of thy true
Make my power, my will, my knowledge,
Obedience to thee acknowledge;
Make my barren heart be hungry,
Eager^y and hotly thirsty
For thee, and for grace from above.
O Sharons Rose, thy leaves display,
Whose odor fragrant is always;
O make my nostrils smell this sent,
And to receive with content
Above all delight some sweetness.
Pleasant Manna, purest honey
Sweetest wine, even Nectar merely,
In which nothing is that is bitter,
Be thou to me ever deerer,
Than worldly vain delightfulness.
Behold, I approach unto thee,
If I dare offend, O spare me;
Behold, with willing mind I run,
Yet all unshame fastness I shun,
Reject me not I humbly pray.
Show thy self most kind unto me,
Me repel not, though unworthy,
Move all my heart unto thee still,
With holy love sill full my will,
That from thee I may never stray.
A Magnetic desire.
Achath Schaalthi One thing have I desired, Psalm. 27 4.
MAny, O Lord, ask many
things of thee,
Those many given, then many
ills they be,
Few me suffice, though few
ask thee few things,
One thing to m^ full sweet
contentment bri^gs:
This one I need, this one
will ever serve,
It Is more than all, and more
than I deserve;
Give me this one, I shall
have wealth at will;
I sought this one, I Will seek
it of thee still:
If that thou giv'st this one,
I Will thankful be,
Draw me to Christ, who has
redeemed me,
I may draw others, whom
he did redeem;
This one I do, than thousands
more esteem:
Give this, a thousand thanks
to the I Will give,
I Will pay my vows, as long
as I do live.
FINIS.
Imprimatur:

Tho. Wykes R.P.Ep. Land. Capell. domest.
April. 29. 1640.

