An hundred, threescore and fiftene Homelyes or Sermons, upon the Acts of the
Apostles, written by Saint Luke: made by Radulpe Gualthere Tigurine, and
translated out of Latin into our tongue, for the commodity of the English
reader.

JOHN. 1. Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world.

Seen and allowed, according to the Queens Majesty's Injunctions.

Anno Domini. 1572.

ECCLESIASTICVS.X. The glory of the rich, of the honorable, and of the poor,
is the fear of God.

In blasoning I have no skill:
But yet I say this of good will.
THE Poesy in the Garter set,
that closes in your Arms:
Will keep your friends, confound your foes,
and shield you from all harms.
Perfourmde (my Lord) for otherwise,
in Garters wryt alone,
And not in heart, what shameful fruits
it yeeldes, we see echeone.
If worthies erst, now woeful wightes,
had marked well the same:
They might have sit in honors seat
which now have lost their name.


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE and his very good Lord, Fraunces Earl of Bedforde,
Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, and one of the Lords of the
Queens Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel: Grace and peace from God the
Father, with all increase of temporal dignity and honor.
MY VERY GOOD LORD, sundry men have sundry meanings in dedycating their
studyes and traueyles to such men of honor as you are. Some seek their
friendship and good will, some augmentation of living, some authority to
commend and set forth their works and labors, some one thing, some an
other. And I have herein been led with none of these considerations. For
your honors benevolence and friendship, I long sithence well found and
proved, which gave me the best part of that exhibition, whereby I lived in
Italy three or four years together, and whereby also I live at this day the
better: I mean the experience and knowledge which I learned in that space. And
man's allowaunce or authority, the majesty of the matter that I offer unto
your honor needs not, which (for that it is the word of God almighty) is
so far from taking any authority of man, that rather man should have no
authority at all, if it were not, and especially men in authority such as you
are, of whom God says, Per me Reges regnant. etc. Otherwise in respect of
mine own simple handling thereof, I must plainelye confess, that it has
need of the meanest and simplest man's allowance that is. As for living I have
not hitherto greatly gaped after, as knowing I have more than either I ever
made great suite for, or can well deserve: my small sufficiency, and the great
charge of Ministry committed unto me, being well weighed. Mine only intent
in this simple labor of mine was, to show my self some manner of ways not
unmindful of your Lordshippes liberality so long agone bestowed upon me,
nor of that great humanitye which the same used about a nine years past, twice
in one Lent at the Court, being then at White Hall, toward so poor a man as
I, preventing my bashful nature and slackenesse of speech toward my
superiors, with such courteous affability, that among the manifold experiments
which I had eftsoons before seen in you, of a noble and gentle nature, I
judged this not one of the least. For true Nobility consists not so much in
the goods of fortune, gorgeous apparel, and proud and hauty looks and
behauior, as in courteous countenance, and other virtuous qualities of the
mind, the very true implementes and furniture of a right Courtier. And in
whom soever these qualities are to be found, he may truly be called Nobilis.
But peradventure your Honor will say, my gift is the less thankeworthy, the
longer your good deserts toward me, have been forgotten. Verilye, my good
Lord, it was always no less truly, than commonly said, of such exercises
and enterprises, as this of mine is, Sat cito si sat been. And to forget a
benefit or good turn, of all other vnkindenesses is the woorst. For unkind
he is that denies a good turn received. Unkind also he is that will not
acknowledge it: and further, he is unkind that does not requite it if he be
able: But of all other, he is most unkind that forgets it. And for proof
that I never forgot your honors good will and friendship, I could show you the
three books of Machiauelles discourses translated by me ^ut of Italian into
English, more than fourtene years past, which I thought to have presented
unto your Honor, but was stayed therefrom, partly because I heard the work
inueighed against at Paul's cross, as a treatise unworthy to come abroad into
men's hands, and partly for that I hoped still to have some other matter more
plausible and acceptable to give unto the same. Albeit to confess a truth, I
heard no such strong reasons alleged against the book, but they might (as I
thought) with ease enough have been answered, although the Inueigher was
himself a discourser. In deed I suspected mine own rude and unripe
translation, and therefore I was the easlier induced to suppress it. Therefore
with such men of Honor as you are, which (as Seneca says) use to keep no
calendar of the benefits that they bestow, and as Christ says, let not their
left hand know what their right does, but look for their reward in the world
to come: these few words I hope, or rather I am sure, may suffice for answer.
Albeit, I see not but as the same Seneca says also, beneficium reddidit, qui
libenter debet. And for my part I shall always gladlye confess, that I am
more bounden unto your Honor, than I am like at any time to make satisfaction
for. This book which I have here translated, shall for many skilles I trust,
be welcome unto your Honor. First, because it is the Acts of the Apostles,
which conteyne in them the infallible and undoubted words of life and
salvation, and a true history of those things which the Apostles did and
taught after Christ's ascension. Secondly, for the writers sake which was S.
Luke, whose praise is in the Gospel. Thirdlye, for his sake to whom Luke did
dedicate it, which was Theophylus, a noble manne and of authority, but (which
commendation far passes all other) a sincere lover and faithful setter
forth of Gods true religion and honor. I would make comparison between you, if
I spoke of your Honor to others and not to you, for so perhaps should I not
incur so much suspicion of flattery, as to praise you to your face. Last of
all, for his sake which by his learned commentaries upon diverse parts of the
scripture, has deserved so well of all unfeigned Christians, but specially in
these Homelyes of his, written upon the Acts, wherein he has both most
plainly and soundely opened the greatest mysteries, and controversies of these
days, most meet and necessary for every true Christian to know. Of whom I
will speak no further, least in pervsing the work, your Lordship may find,
how far his deserts shall pass all praise that I am able to give him: and
considering that the reverend Father in God the Bishop of Norwich now living,
has made certain learned Verses in Latin, which are printed in the forefront
of his book, in commendation of the same. Why your Lordship should accept it,
because it is by me translated, there is no cause. For I am, inutilis seruus,
and have done but my duty (if happily I have done so much) in respect either
of the service I owe unto our English Church in general, or to your Honor in
particular. And therefore being so many ways bound unto your Honor as I am, I
find no remedy, but to desire I may yet further be bound unto the same. And
this is as Tullie interprets the matter, I will speak it in his words,
animi ingenui, cui multum debeas eidem velle plurimum debere. Hereby therefore
shall your honor bind me the more unto you, if you accept and think well not
of the work for my sake, but contrary wise of me for the works sake, and for
my poor good wills sake, which find my self so estreighted with the
consideration of your merits toward me, and with the slender amends that I
am able to make again for the same, that I am driven to Aeschines shift,
sometime Scholar unto Socrates. He being of himself but a pore young man, and
not able worthily to recompense Socrates for the learning that he had gotten by
him, and perceiving diverse other of Socrates Scholars did gratify him with
sundry rich and sumptuous presents: Sir (says he) I have no meet or
worthy thing to present your worship with, and hereby most of all perceive I,
how poor I am, therefore I give unto you that only thing that I have, which is
my self. This I beseech you (says he) take in good part. Now surely (quoth
he) what else can this be, but a very great present and gift, unless perhaps
thou make little or no account of thy self. Thus trusting my poor present
shall be none otherwise received, at your honors hand, than was Aeschines at
Socrates. I most humbly commend me unto the same, beseeching almighty God
for Christ his sake, to give you a life wherein you may long defend and
maintain his honor and glory.

At Herne the xxj. of April. 1572. Your Honors most bounden, John Bridges
Vicare of Herne.

The Translatour to the Christian Reader.
Among the manyfolde and subtle policies that the new broched Divines (I
mean such as have crept out of the school of Thomas Aquinas, John Duns,
Occham, Dorbell, and such other Doctors) have devised for the maintenance and
upholding of their kingdom, there was never any one of more efficacy and
force for that purpose, than to have the people kept from reading the holy
Scriptures of God in their own proper tongue and language. And yet because
they should have other matter enough, to occupye their heads and eyes upon,
they invented a book called the golden Legende, the author whereof
undoubtedly had both a leaden mouth and an iron face, as Lodouicus Viues a
learned Spaniarde did very well perceive and testify. To this they joined
their Festival, and such like books, (or to use their own term more truly
than they do) bible babble, stuffed with most monstrous and impudent
forgeries, some of them so dishonest, that it would and did abhor many
christians ears to hear them. And to this end also they set up in every
Church and Chapel such blockishe and stony schoolemaisters, as could and did
teach nothing else but lightness and vanity, lies and errors. And to be
brief, whatsoever man's idle brain could devise, whatsoever any Monk or
Friars gross Minerua could forge or invent, though it were no better than
Amadis de Gaul, the four sons of Amon, the tales of Robin Hoode, and such
other like fables, yet were they thought very trim and gaye gear to occupy
the peoples ears withal. Yea, had they been more fabulous than these (if more
might have been) they should have been borne and suffered, rather than the holy
Scriptures in such a tongue as the people might have understood. For this
cause, whosoever in consideration that the people were thus led about in the
blind mases of man's inventions, would have translated any piece of
Scripture or other fruitful treatise into the English tongue, for their
utility and edification, he and all his wrytings were judged to be burned as
Heretical. For (say they) the lay people had books good enough for them set
open in every Church, meaning their carved and painted Puppetrie, and would
suffer them to read upon none other. Then also were hatched and maintained
such strange paradoxes and opinions as these: Ignorance is the mother of
devotion: The Scriptures make heretics: The Church cannot err: The lay folk
must not meddle with Scriptures: We will believe as our forefathers have done,
meaning those that lived not past three or four ages before, and such as had
been fed with like acornes and swill, as they had been used to, and had never
tasted one morsel of the sweet bread of Gods eternal and lively word. And
although these things be well enough known unto the learned, so that they
need no such slender remembrances as these of mine are, yet for the vnlearneds
sake, for whose cause I chiefly took pains to put this book in English, I
will show (by Gods help) both by Scriptures, apparaunt reasons, and ancient
Doctors, that these new Doctors in this doing wrought altogether against Gods
forbode. And yet would I have no man to look that I should fully show and
declare all the testimonies that might be brought for proof of any part of my
triple division. For so might I write not an advertisement for the unskillful,
but a work and treatise, which in quantity might match or exceed the
translation it self. As touching Scriptures, the new Doctors and we also
agree herein, that whatsoever is in either of the Testaments, the old or the
new, concerning good manners and holy conversation, it all serves
indifferentlye, for all times and ages. Therefore of consequence it must also
serve for us. But in the old Testament the fathers taught their children and
families the laws and rules of both the Tables, that is to say, their duties
as well unto God, as unto man. Ergo, we also must do the like. Moses received
the commandments to teach them to the people, which he faithfullye and
truly did, appoynting them to train and bring up their youth and posterity
in the same, not only making them to learn them by rote, like Dawes, Pyes,
and Popingayes, but opening and declaring unto them the sense and meaning
as well of their Feasts and holy days which God did institute, as of their
sacraments of Circumcision and Passover. These be his words: Harken o
Israel, the Lord our God is Lord only. Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. And these
words which I command thee this day shall be in thine heart. And thou shall
show them unto thy children, and shall talk of them when thou art at home in
thine house, and as thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and
when thou risest up, and thou shall bind them for a sign upon thine hand,
Deuteronomy. 6.
and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes, and thou shall write them
upon thy posts, and upon thy gates. And in ye same chapter it follows
further: And when thy son asks thee in time to come, saying: what means
these testimonies, ordinances, and laws, which the Lord God has commanded
you? Then shall thou say unto thy son: we were Pharaos bondmen in Egypt,
and the Lord brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand. And the Lord
showed signs and woonders great and evil upon Egypt, upon Pharao, and upon
all his household, before our eyes. And brought us out from thence to bring us
in, and to give us the land which he swear unto our fathers. etc. The holy
prophet David also speaking of the same commandment of God declared by the
mouth of Moses, says: Hear my law, o my people, enclyne your ears unto the
words of my mouth. I will open my mouth in a Parable, I will declare hard
sentences of old. Which we have heard and known, and such as our fathers
have told us. That we should not hide them from the children of the
generations to come, but to show the honor of the Lord, his mighty and
wonderful works that he has done. He made a covenant with Jacob, Psalm. 78.
and gave Israel a law, which he commanded our forefathers to teach their
children, that their posterity might know it, and the children that were yet
unborn. To the intent that when they came up, they might show their children
the same. Here may thou see, O good Reader, that the true Christians and
faithful among the Israelytes, as they were commanded, even so they taught
and instructed their families and children in the ways and works of the Lord.
So that of them it could not be verified as yet, that they had shut up the
kingdom of heaven from men, Math. 23.
neither ^ntring in themselves, neither suffering other that would, Math. 15.
neither that they were blind leaders o^ the blind. For those broodes of
Phariseyes, Saduceyes, and Essenes, They began in the days of Ioannes Hircanus
high Bishop of the Jews about an hundred and thirty years before Christ was
borne.
were not hatched till many hundred years after, which when Christ came, had
turned godliness into gain, and religion into rechelesnesse, as the like
swarms of religious (commonly called, but in deed most superstitious) did
amongst us, and yet do where they are still suffered. And because they fear
that the Lord in his zeal will whip such wicked merchants as they are, out of
his Church in all places, as it appears very well he does dailye, his name be
glorified therefore, this makes them to storm, fret and fume, and to take
counsel against the Lord, and against his anointed. This makes them stir
coals, and to play Rex, this causes them to imprison, to hang, to draw, to
drown, to burn, to cut men's tongues out, to gagge them that they shall not
speak, to banishe and proscribe, seeing they can no longer prescribe, but
verily all in vain, for as much as there is no wisdom, counsel, Prou. 21.
or devise that can prevail against the Lord. But let us return to the holy
prophet David, whose sayings and testimonies (because they have always been of
such worthy estimation in the Church of God) let us bring yet furthermore to
confyrme the truth of our assertion. In the.lxxxj. psalm he brings in God
thus speaking to the people of Israel: Hear o my people, and I assure thee o
Israel, if thou will hearken unto me, there shall no strange God. etc. If God
speak here to all the people in general, high and low, rich and poor one
with another, then of congruence belongs it to all people in general to
hearken and carry away what is said. But how shall they hear, if they have
not his word, mark his saying: If thou will harken. And it must be unto him
we must harken. For whosoever speaks not as he does, must not be heard,
though it were an Angel from heaven, as Paul says: Galat. 1.
yea, if Christ would come and preach any other Gospel, than he has already
preached, we ought not, as some of the old writers say, to hear him. How
much less then ought we to harken what these new Gospellers say, who speak
(...), Acts. 20.
contorted wrested and perverse things, altogether repugnant to Gods word and
saying. The prophets also in all their sermons and writings, cry unto the
people, audite verbum domini, hear the word of the Lord. Lo here is no
state, or degree, no age, or sex excluded, but all must hear. For populus and
turba, as is often read, in the old and new Testament comprehend promiscuam
multitudinem, the whole multitude one with another. Math. 15.
Therefore no sort is excepted from hearing. But me thinks I hear what one of
these new Divines replyeth: Sir (says he) when did we forbid any kind of
persons from hearing our Sermons? No in deed, but when men came to hear you,
they could not hear the word of the Lord, Math. 15.
but doctrines that were the precepts of men, wherewith Christ says, you
worship him in vain. It had been somewhat tolerable, to have forbidden men
the reading of the Scriptures, so that you had taught them nothing but the
scriptures, as you ought to have done. But to preach your own fantasies and
inventions, and to forbid men to search the scriptures, which Christ so
earnestly commands them to do, was too too presumpteous for a servant to
do against his Lords commandment. Howbeit, you say Christ and the Pope
have but one Consistorye, and therefore because he commands it, you think
you may safely do it. But S. Paul answers all these pretty objections at
once, saying: Be ye not the servants of men. 1. Cor. 7. Math. 16.
Howbeit, hereto you will say the Pope is not purus homo, a pure man. And that
I am sure all that know what he is, will easilye grant you. Surely, S. Paul
was so little offended that the Thessalonians searched the Scriptures, Acts.
17. 1. These. 12.
to see whether his preaching agreed therewith, yea or no, that he rather much
liked and commended them for their doing. But you in no point resemble Paul's
conditions, but in persecuting Christ his Church. The same David likewise in
his.xix. Psalm, has matter enough, though there were none other any where
else both to prove how necessary the word of God is for all men to know,
and also to answer the objections of all our new Divines. The law of the
Lord (says he) is an undefiled or perfect law converting the soul. The
testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple. He
calls the law perfyte, to answer those controllers which say the
Scriptures are not sufficient, and therefore have forged a sort of unwritten
verities, (so they call them) which they have matched in authority with the
Scriptures, and have commanded men pain of death to receive and believe them
before the Scriptures. He says, i^ con^erteth or turns the soul, that is to
say, it makes him that reads them a new man, a repentant person, a
faithful believer, and a godly liver, So far it is from perverting or
corrupting any godly student thereof. He calls it a sure and faithful
testimony of the Lord, whereas man's policies, councels and devises are
always uncertain, chaungeable and unsure. It gives wisdom unto the simple.
Why then should they be kept from it. Uerily this has been Gods practice in
all ages, as appears by all hystories, that he has revealed his word and
will to no kind of people sooner, than unto those that are simple, as may be
seen by those thanks that our Savior Christ gave to God his father in the
behalf of his Disciples being but simple Clerks, saying; I thank thee O God,
Math. 11. Luc. 10.
father of heaven and earth, for that thou have hidden these things (verilye
the understanding of his kingdom) from the wise, that is to say, the great
Doctors, in their own conceyte, and in the worlds judgment, and have
revealed them unto the simple, that is, to the unlearned and despised wightes
of this world. For so does Chrysostom expound the words: Rusticall people
and Ideotes (says he)* were illuminated, persons of small account in the
world, or in the knowledge of God, but not of obstinacy but ignorance. If
our new Divines would admit these sayings of Christ, and Chrysostom, they
should soon perceive how unchristianly they speak, and also how unlike the
old Doctors, while they rave and fare so foul with poor Artificers and
Craftesmen, whom it has pleased God in these days, so to enriche with his
spirit, that when they have been called before these our new Rabbines, they
have showed more true Divinity, than all the whole Sinagoge of them were able.
I report me to Eusebius Ecclesiastical hystory, and to our own, entitled the
Acts and Monumentes of the Church. But David goes on saying: The statutes of
the Lord are right, and rejoice the heart: the commandment of the Lord is
pure, and gives light to the eyes. The fear of the Lord is clean and
endures for ever: the judgments of the Lord are true and righteous
altogether. More to be desired are they than gold, yea, than much fine gold:
sweeter also than honey and the bony comb. Moreover, by them is thy servant
taught. What? I warraunt you, this old Divine David never meant that they
taught either heresy or error. In diverse other places of his Psalter, may be
seen the earnest exhortations that he makes to all the people, to hear the
word of God, as in the.xlix. Psalm, O hear ye this all ye people, ponder it
with your ears, all ye that dwell in the world. High and low, rich and
poor, one with another. What should they hear? even that that immediately
follows, how his mouth shall speak of wisdom, and his heart muse of
understanding. Here are none excluded from hearing what David shall say, but
such as dwell in Vtopia. The Divines therefore that will bar any dwellers in
this world from hearing or reading of David, must there go preach this
doctrine. Again, Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? even by ruling
himself after thy word. Again, Psalm. 119.
Thy word is a lantern to my feet, and a light unto my paths. Again: When
thy word goes forth, it gives light and understanding even unto the simple.
Again: Kings of the earth, and all people, Princes and all Judges of the
world, young men and maidens, old men and children, praise the name of the
Lord. Psalm. 148.
Here by an enumeration of al states and degrees, sexes and ages, may we see
that none are secluded from praising the Lord, which then is done most
acceptablye, when we sing praise unto him, as the same David says, with
understanding, Psalm. 47.
which understanding we can not have without his word. Infynite more places
there be in the Psalter to this effect, as the diligent Reader thereof shall
find, whereof this is one very notable, and therefore not to be omitted: Out
of the mouths of very babes and sucklings, have thou ordained strength, Psalm.
8. Math. 21.
that thou might still the enemy and the auenger. It is the more notable,
for that Christ alleges it in the.xxj. of Mathewe, against the Scribes and
Phariseyes, in defense of the people, which so thankefully welcomed and
received him into Jerusalem, in the same sense that it is here brought for. But
let us now come to the testimonies of the new Testament. Our Savior Christ
having to do with those Jews which of all other in the world at that time,
most gloried in the knowledge of God and his religion, because they had
Bishops, whose succession, they could show by order even from Aaron, and
therefore had antiquity enough, having Scribes, Phariseyes, Sadduceyes,
Essenes, Nobles, Communes, and all the world on their side: yet did he plainly
tell them that they erred, and were deceived, for that they understood not the
Scriptures. For to the Sadduceyes which allowed no part of the old Testament,
but the books of Moses, denying the resurrection, for that they imagined (if
there were any) men should know their wives, as they had before done in the
world, as appears by their captious and foolish demand, Christ answered:
ye err, not understanding the Scriptures and power of God. Math. 22. Marc.
12. Luc. 20.
Where we may plainly learn that ignorance in the Scripture is the cause of
error, contrary to these new Divines assertion, that say: Ignorance is the
mother of devotion. Whereas true devotion cannot be without the true
understanding of Gods will, and his will by no means ordinary can be
understood, but by his word. Therefore to avoid error, it is most meet
that people have the Scriptures to search and understand the will of God by.
Another time, having to do with the Phariseyes also (as these two sects of
men were the greatest assaylantes that Christ ever had, whereby we learn it is
no new practice that they most persecute Christ's Church, that challenge most
authority and learning in the same) he bade them for that they seemed to have
such exact knowledge in the word of God, and yet knew not that he was that
Messiah and Savior, that God had promised them, to search better in the
Scriptures, and they should find that the Scriptures in all places, John. 5.
did testifye and bear witness that he was the same. Whereby Christ plainly
gives us to understand that without the Scriptures we cannot truly know him.
These two places declare sufficiently how necessary the Scriptures are for
all that will know Christ. We will add two other testimonies to show how
profitable they are. S. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, says: Whatsoever
things have been written before time, Romans 15.
they have been written for our learning, that through patience and comfort of
the Scriptures, we might have hope. They are not written for Monks and Friars
only to pore upon, but for our learning, that is, for as many as profess
Christ, which thing being spoken by Paul of the old Testament (for as yet the
new was not written) how much more learning may we now receive, having the
writings of the Evangelists and Apostles joined all together? Likewise in his
second Epistle to Timothy the third Chapter, he says: All Scripture
inspired of God is profitable to teach, to reprove, to correct and amend in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, instructed unto all good
works. This epitheton or adjective, inspired of God, quite wypeth away all
unwritten verities, all man's gloses, and traditions, all feigned visions and
miracles, such as are to be found in Gregory the Popes dialogues, and
throughout the works of our new Divines. Since therefore the Scripture
teaches, reprooueth, corrects and amendeth, makes men perfect and furnished
with all good works, what thing then can there be devised in all the world of
more profit and utility? Had I not bound my self by a particion, to prove
by apparent reason also the truth of this assertion, I should need no further
to trouble either my self with more writing, or you with more reading. But
such promises as these we are bound to perform. First therefore this is one
reason very evident and plain, that seeing our Savior Christ (as Paul
says) would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the
truth: 1. Tim. 2.
and for that end did and suffered whatsoever he did and suffered, while he
lived here on earth: the mean whereby men should attain unto that truth and
salvation, which are Gods holy Scriptures, ought by no means to be kept from
them. The practice of our Savior, admitting all men to his sermons and
familiar communication, Publicanes, soldiers, artificers, Phariseys, harlots,
strayed sheep, and unrighteous persons, yea, keeping company most with such,
abundantly prove the same. And because the scriptures as teaching ye way to
come unto god best of all other things, are meetest for such straglers, and all
men by testimony of the same scripture, of their own nature and disposition
are such straglers, therefore ought all straglers, that is to say, all men to
have the law and the scriptures, whereby they may both see how they have
strayed out of the way, and how to return into the same again. The Mayor is
proved by Christ, Math. 22. John. 5. and by the old Doctors, as we shall see
when we come to the last part of our particion. The Minor God himself makes
Genes. 8. where he says: The imagination of man's heart is evil even from his
youth. The writings of the Prophets and Apostles, do inculcate and repeat
nothing more. The places are infinite, therefore I quote them not. The
commandment of Christ a little before his ascension bidding his Apostles to
go into all the world, and teach the gospel to all Nations, does further
prove it, as their practice also declared, teaching the same somewhile to
Tentmakers, somewhile to Tanners, somewhile to women that were Dyers,
otherwhiles to Soldiers, yea, at all times, to all states and degrees of
persons. And whereas Christ was borne, dyed and was buried, rose again, and
ascended into heaven for all men, and shall come again to receive all states
and degrees of men, for with God there is no respect of persons, Acts. 10.
Romans 2.
but in every Nation, he that fears him, and woorketh righteousness, is
accepted of him. What are we that we should withstand god, and keep this
knowledge from any kind of men? What means it moreover that Christ will
have his light to shine throughout his house, Math. 5. Mar. 4. Luc. 8.
that he will have his word preached on the house tops, that the light of
his gospel must not be put under a bushel? why does he many times conclude
his sermons thus generally: He that has ears to hear, let him bear? Why
does god cry unto the Prophets, Math. 19. Math. 11.13. Marc. 4. Esaias. 58.
bidding them to speak out, and exalt their voices like to a Trumpet, and to
tell his people their wickedness? Christ suffered all men, Tinkers, Taylers,
Carpenters, Cobblers, Masons, and Bricklayers, to hear his voice, and will
these Comptrollers bar them from reading his books? But I wot what a new
divine will say. In the primitive Church when the scriptures were extant for
all men to read, what a swarm of heretics bredde they which disturbed the
whole church? What heresy has there been at any time so absurd, but it has
had her color of maintenance out of the Scripture? Sir, by the way, I will
take it for granted, that you say the Scriptures were extaunt in the primitive
Church, for all men to read, as in deed they were. And so was it gods will
they should be, and for that cause did the holy ghost move the Evangelists
and the Apostles, to write the gospels and the Epistles in the Greek tongue,
which then was universally understood of most Nations, yet notwithstanding,
these heresies bredde (as you say) the primitive church never called the
scriptures in, ne yet forbade any kind of people the reading of them. You have
done both without all example of the primitive church, whereby may and do
appear your new proceedings. But now to answer question with question:
what heresy I pray you ever was there, but the same has been confuted by the
scriptures? Because some men have misvsed the scriptures, shall all men be
deprived of them? shall the Bees be kept from gathering honey of the sweet
flowers, because spiders make poison of them? shall all they that can use wine
and bread to cheer and strengthen man's heart, giving god thanks for them,
taste or assay none of them, because a great many abuse them to surfeiting and
drunkenness? Lay the fault where it is, in the men, not in the things that
they misuse. What fault is in the money that lies and rusteth in the cofer of
the covetous? what in the knife or sword that kills a body? Ptholomeus
Philadelphus thought himself very well occupied (as in deed he was) when he
caused ye books of Moses and the prophets to be translated into the Greek
tongue by threescore and ten learned men, called the seauentie Translators or
Interpreters, two hundredth threescore and seauentene years before Christ was
borne. An hundredth and four and twenty years after Christ's ascension, Aquila
a Jew, in the days of Adrian the Emperor, translated them again. After him
Theodotion in Commodus days. Then Symachus under Seuerus. Then was there an
other translation found at Jerusalem without any name, called the common
translation. After this again Origene took great pains to correct the
seauentie Translators, adding of his own where he thought they were not full,
and taking from them where he saw redundance and superfluity. All these no
doubt laboring to elucidate and make playner, as much as in them lay, the
former translations. Yea, S. Hierome after all this, was not afraid to
translate the whole Bible again, into the Latin tongue, which is perished. He
translated diverse other treatises also out of Greek into Latin, as Didimus
work touching the deity of the holy ghost. Epiphanius bishop of Cyprus
Epistle to John the Patriarch of Jerusalem, and diverse other such. And because
none shall say, what makes this for the translating of the Bible into other
more vulgar tongues, as into the English. etc. For they can well admit the
Hebrewe, Greek, and Latin tongues, and any other that the people understand
not, therefore S. Hierome translated the Bible into the Sclauonian tongue, that
is to say, into his own native country tongue. We have therefore antiquity
enough on our side for proof of our diverse translations. Neither did he ever
fear or make account of such inconveniences, as these new Divines pretend,
spring of such translations, or any thing regarded the sharp censure and
checks of diverse Comptrollers, that found fault with his doings, but held on
and continued to the end translating, writing, and endyting, sending his
books onewhile to virgins, one other while to married women, sometime to
widows, but ever to one kind of person or other, being still exercised and
occupied in such doings. And I marueyle why these men should be so offended,
that every Nation should have the scriptures in their own tongue, seeing in
some places of their writings they make the holy ghost the author of this
opinion and judgment. Does not Aeneas Syluius which was afterward Pope, and
called Pius secundus, tell us, that when about the year of our Lord.900. there
fell a great contention at Rome, whether the Hungarians should have their
service in their own tongue, yea, or no: that there was a voice heard from
heaven, saying: Let every thing that has breath, Psalm. 150.
praise the Lord, and every tongue give thanks unto his holy name? Whereupon
(says this Aeneas) the Council brake up, and the contention surceased. So
that by this storye, whosoever denies Gods people Gods service in their own
proper tongue, resist Gods ordinance and commandment. These men count it a
great absurdity, that a woman, a child, or an artificer, should talk of the
Gospel, or of the Scripture. And yet many times we may hear women, children,
and artificers, understand more of Gods holy mysteries, than a number of some
ruddy Rabbines, that notwithstanding look very high and lofty. Moses was not
of this mind and opinion. For when Iehosuah his servant would have had him to
forbid Heldad and Medad from prophesying, he answered, Numer. 11.
would God that all the Lords people could prophecy, and that he would
give his spirit unto them all. Christ commands little children to be
suffered to come unto him, and not to be forbidden. Marc. 10.
But who may not more justly think it a greater absurdity, to hear women,
children, and artificers patter their Pater noster in a tongue that they so
little understand, that Cardinal Ascanius Parot at Rome was as wise as they.
Yea, the Crow that saluted Augustus, could say his Aue Caesar, better than
they could their Aue Maria. And surely if the new Divines godly intention may
not in this case help at a pinch, they may also say and say truly, as an
other Crow did at another time, we have lost all our labor. So little does
God allow such godly intention. For he bids we should not be like Horse
and Mule, Psalm. 32.
in whom there is none understanding. Then seeing we have the Scriptures,
as well of the old Testament as the new, so full and whole on our side, seeing
Christ commands us to search the Scriptures, seeing S. Paul says, they are
written for our learning and instruction, seeing we have thexample of the
Primitive Church, permitting all men to have and read the Scriptures in all
tongues, seeing we have so many translations of the Scriptures, I mean of old
time, I speak not of those in the English tongue, in Ethelstanes days, and
in the Saxons tongue, ne yet of that gift of tongues given to the Apostles, to
the intent that all Nations might hear the great works of God in their own
language, seeing there is nothing in the Scriptures, either threatened or
promised, but it appertains to all men in all ages, nothing done by Christ of
old, but the same in one respect or other is dailye done. For Christ is newly
borne among us even at this day. There are Herodes that go about to murder
him in his Cradle even at this day. Math. 2. Luc. 2. Math. 14.15. Luc. 5.
He notwithstanding grows in favor with God and men even at this day? He
heals all manner of maladies, Leprouse, Demoniacks, Dumb, Blind, Deaf,
Dropsies, Palsies, bloody Fluxes at this day, so that we say, son of David
have mercy upon us, and Lord, if thou will, thou can make us whole. Yea, he
rayseth men from death to life again by the power of his word even at this
day? Math. 9.20. Math. 8. Luc. 5. Math. 21. Mar. 12. Luc. 20. Math. 26. Marc.
14. Luc. 22. John. 18. Math. 27. John. 6.
He teaches, threatens, promises, comfort even at this day. There are
Jews which will not suffer their vayled Moses to yield to his brightness in
these days? He has Scribes, Phariseys, and Sadduceyes, that lie in wait to
catch and entangle him in his talk even now a days also. He has more than
one Annas and Caiphas to buy, and more than one Iscarioth to sell him at this
day. Herod, Pylate, and their Crewes want not to mock, whip, and crucify
him, yea, to keep him down also in his grave, that he rise not again, even
at this day. And yet all this notwithstanding, he has still also at this day
his little flock that does and will depend upon him, saying: Lord, to whom
shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal life. Therefore whatsoever the
new Divines say to the contrary, let us still read the Scriptures, and stick
to that old Divinity. But because many men are led not so much either with
reason or testimonies of Scriptures, as with authority of Doctors, to fulfill
my promise, and somedeale to satisfye (if happily it may be) their preposterous
zeal and perverse judgment, I will show also that the best and soundest of
the old Doctors, have always been of this opinion, that all people at all
times ought to have the scriptures in their own tongue. And if any man as
delighting in a work of supererrogation, that is to say, for a man to do more
than he has bound himself to, or needs, shall require so much. I will also
by the old Doctors answer the objections of such as think the scriptures
ought not to be read of all men, because of the difficulty of them, and that
variety of translations cause and breed errors. And first we will begin with
the Doctors of the Latin Church, not for worthynesse either of life or
learning, that has been at any time in them, more than in the Greeks. For
verily the Greeks are able to show as many worthy writers of their Church, as
the Latins can by any means, if I say not more: but because perhaps some
Romanist or Latin man may hit upon this writing, which (if he be partially
affected toward the Latin Doctors) may first see what the opinion of the
Latin Church was in this point, by one of the most approouedst Doctors in the
same Church. S. Hierome upon these words of Paul to the Colossians, Colos. 3.
Let the word of Christ dwell plentifullye among you, says thus: By this
place it is declared, that even the lay people ought to have the word of
Christ among them, not only sufficiently, but also abundantly, and to teach
and admonish one another. Here besides that S. Hierome permits the lay
people to have the Scriptures, and that plenteously, he also suffers them to
teach and instruct one another, saying moreover that it is their duty so to
do. Chrysostom upon the same place and words, says even the same thing,
though in more large and ample manner: Harken (says he) all ye secular people,
that have charge of wife and children, how the Apostle commands you chiefly
to read the scriptures, and that not lightly and slenderly, but with great
diligence. And a little after that again: Lysten (says he) I pray you, all you
lay people, Buy you the Bible, which is the medicine of the soul: Or if you
will have nothing else, get you the new Testament, the Gospels and Acts of
the Apostles for your continual and diligent teachers. And by and by after he
adds: This (says he) is the cause of all evil, that the scriptures are not
understood. Homely upon the Epistle to the Colossians.
Note well I pray you how Chrysostom holds this as an undoubted and
infallible truth, that ignorance in the Scriptures is the cause of all evil.
Our Country man Beda called worshipful (as I suppose) because of his great
learning, and reverend life and demeanor, is of the very same judgment, as
appears by that he has written upon the first Epistle of S. Peter the
second Chapter. I might also here show how the said Beda for more than nine
hundredth years past, translated the Gospel of Saint John into the English
tongue, and how Constantine so greatly commended for his godliness, caused
infinite copies of the Bible to be written and sent abroad into all the parts
of his Empire, long before that. But return we to Chrysostom, who many times
chideth (as it were) with his hearers, for that they give no better heed to
his sermons, sometimes again, he prays and desires them, that they would
come oftener to them, and read and pervse the scriptures at home at their
houses, more diligently than they had used. Otherwhiles he answers the
objections they used to make for their excuse. But let us hear his own words.
Tell me (says he) I pray you, you that stand here present, which of you can
say one Psalm without the book, if it were required of you, or any other
piece of the scripture? And he by and by makes their objection and answer.
But (says he) this is your defense for all such faults: I am (say you) no
Monk, I have wife and children, and charge of household, verily this is it,
wherewith as it were with the plague, you ^arre and corrupt all things,
because you think the reading of scriptures belongs to Monks only, where
in deed it is much more necessary for you, than for them, for they that go
abroad in the world, and daily receive wound upon wound, have more need of
Gods medicine than other men, Wherefore it is a more grievous and heinous
fault, to think the law of God to be superfluous, than to be ignorant in it,
for these be words proceeding of a diuelishe cogitation. Hear thou not
Paul say, the scriptures are written for our correction? Thus much has
Chrysostom in his second Homely upon S. Matthew, and these words also to the
like effect in the same place following. This sect (says he) is the working of
the devils inspiration, that will not suffer us to look upon the treasure,
least we should attain to the riches thereof. Therefore he persuades men that
there is no profit ryseth by reading the holy Scriptures, because he would see
no practice follow of the hearing. Again, in his.xvij. Homely upon the
Epistle to the Hebrews, he brings other like objections, whereunto he also
answers: Thou will say (says he) I have not read it, this is no excuse,
but a fault. And in his.xxviii. Homely upon the Genesis, he earnestly erhorteth
and counsayleth all men to the hearing and reading of the scriptures. These be
his words: I pray you (says he) come hither oftener, and harken more
diligently to the reading of the holy Scripture, and not only when you come
hither, but at home also take the holy Bible in your hands, and receive with
great study the commodity therein contained. And a little after that again.
I pray you therefore (says he) let us not lose so great a commodity through
our negligence, but let us apply the reading of the holy scripture, even at
home also. Now if these new Divines, which have gone so long disguised under
the visar of antiquity, will yet farther replye and say, that the Scriptures
are to difficult for all men to understand, and that they are not sufficient to
discuss all controversies that may arise in the church, but that we must wait
for the Oire and determiner of counselles, or that diversity of translations
breed obscurity and errors among the people: we will hereto also make them
an answer, and that out of the doctors, that it may herein also appear, that
they do but pretend doctors, seeing they will not yield to the doctors, when
they hear them speak, and make so expressly against them. First touching
hardness and difficulty, wherewith they charge the scripture. Saint Augustine
in his second book of christian doctrine and six chapter, says thus: The
holy ghost has so honorably and wholesomely tempered and qualified the holy
Scriptures, that it has put hunger away by playner places, and lothsomnesse
by darker. And again in his third Epistle to Volusianus, he says: The manner
of speech, whereof the holy scripture consists all men may easily come unto,
although very few can pearce through it, uttering the playner things therein
contained, like a familiar friend without all color, to the heart as well of
the unlearned, as learned. And those things which it hydeth in mysteries, it
does not set out with haultie elocution, fraying the slow and unlearned mind
to come near it, like as the poor man comes unto the rich, but allureth
all men with lowliness of speech, feeding them not only with manifest truth,
but exercising them with secret, having the very same things in playner
places, that it has in harder. Cyrill in his seventh book against Julian
says: to the intent that the scriptures might be known to all men both small
and great, they are so commodiously set forth in familiar speech, that they
pass nones capacity. Saint Hierome upon the.xix. chapter of Esaias says. It is
the manner of the scriptures, after harder things, to set playner. Saint Austen
in his.83. book, and.69. question, affirms that circumstaunce of the
Scriptures, opens the sense and meaning. Tertullian in his book against
Praxeas proves, that the rather and selder places, must be expounded by the
mo, and o^tener. And Chrysostom among many places, has one very notable in
his first Homely upon Matthew, where he says: The Scriptures are easy to be
under standed, of the bondsman, of the Ploughman, of the wydowe, of the child,
and of him that seems to be very slender witted. Howbeit, though they will
after a sort let pass other scriptures as vncomptrolled, yet Paul's wrytings
and Epistles of all other seem very hard unto them, and that they would
seem to prove by Peter's words in the third Chapter of his second Epistle,
whereas God knows all other scriptures, even the easiest are alike hard to
such as Peter speaks of. For they be unlearned and unconstant and fickle
persons, which pervert and turn them to their own destruction. But will you
hear what Chrysostom answers to this objection, speaking of Paul's Epistle
to the Romans, in his Preface upon the same, that you may see there is none
so pieuishe an objection of these new Divines, but the same is answered by
some old Doctor or other, if they be well searched. Ignorance (says
Chrysostom) is not the cause hereof (he means that they understood not the
Epistle to the Romans) but that they will not continually have in their
hands the writings of this holy man. For that which we our selves know (if
peradventure we know ought at all) we know it not by the pregnancie and
goodness of our own wit, but for that we be so entirely affectioned to that
man, that we never cease reading of him. For they that love men, know more of
their doings than other men, as being more careful for their lou^rs than other
are. And thereupon concluding he says: Wherefore if you also can find in your
hearts, earnestly and diligently to bestow your labor in reading him, there
shall be nothing else required of you. For Christ's saying is true, Seek and
you shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you. And surely Chrysostom
spoke not this to Priests and religious men only, but to all his Church of
Constantinople, and universally to as many as should read his works. And he
says further in his.vij. homely to the Hebrews, in reproof of those that
used not to look upon ye scriptures: No man will take heed (says he) unto
the Scriptures. For if we would mark them, we should not only keep our
selves from error, but deliver other also that are deceived out of the same,
and pull them out of danger. Moreover, upon the second of Genesis the.xiij.
Chapter he says: Let us come to the scope and mark of the holy Scripture,
which expounds it self. And again: The holy Scripture expounds it self,
and suffers not the hearer to err. Tertullian also one of the first writers
next the Apostles, In his Apology toward the end.
in his Apology for the Christians, says: He that will harken to the
Scriptures, shall find God, and he that will study to understand them, shall
be enforced to believe them. These places of Doctors as well of the Latin
Church, as of the Greek, are sufficient enough to teach and persuade any
reasonable body, the judgment that the whole Church universal had, both as
touching the Scriptures to be had and read of all men, and also to prove the
facility and easiness of them to be understood, and so consequently mine
assertion, and how Catholikely our Church does, and like unto the Primitive
Church, in permitting all persons indifferently to have the Scriptures to look
and read in to their instruction and understanding. And if any of these new
Divines will not herewith be satisfied, but will yet urge custom, authority
of Predecessors, and such like weak instances, for their new Mumpsimus, rather
than they will yield to this old Sumpsimus: then let us answer them roundly
thus with the words of S. Hierome, upon the.ix. chap. of Jeremy, saying:
Neither must the error of our parents nor forefathers be followed, but the
authority of the scriptures, and the commandment of God teaching us. And
though they cry out never so much, they have the Scriptures, whereby to prove
their opinions, which God wot many a time they apply to their purpose as
handsomely as the devil did when he reasoned with Christ in the wilderness,
and as the old and new Heretics did and do, which (as they say, so we
likewise affirm) do accloy the Church in deed very much: then let us
answer them with Tertullian saying thus, in his book of the flesh or true
manhood that Christ took: Let all Heretics (says he) use his scriptures,
whose world they also use. This shall serve for a testimonye of their
condemnation, that they deck and furnishe their blasphemies with his examples.
And if they will have Councels to decyde and control all controversies,
whereof consist they, I pray you, not of men? What are men, such creatures as
cannot err? Then should they be no men. The best Doctors in the Church, have
erred in some part or other of their writings, or at least have thought they
might err. I report me else to their own sayings in their books, to be
found in every place, where they never arrogate to themselves any such proud
privilege and immunitie from erring, as the late lofty Prelates of Rome has
done, but with all lowlynesse submit their writings to the Scriptures, and to
those that shall see or perceive more in them than they have done, yea,
requiring men freely to find fault and correct, where they have not attained
to the truth. This would they never have done, if they had known or thought
they could not have erred. And what one of the Popes can we name in the Church
for this six hundred year or more, comparable either in life or learning with
any one of these old Doctors, which thus modestlye have written of themselves?
And shall we think better men than these Doctors have met in the Councels,
since their days? I say no more, but I would there had met so good. They
will yet say, Heresies have been always confuted in Councelles, and I say
Heresies have been always confirmed in Councels. Did not the Council at
Ariminum in Italy hold and conclude with the Arrianes? Did not the second
Council at Ephesus, hold with Entiches? Did not the Council at Chalcedon so
fowly err, that they would have given to Leo then Bishop of Rome, the title
of supremacy, and universal Bishop, which he refused, wherein surely he erred
not? But what they since have done, that by slaughter and murder, and other
such unjust means have usurped it, both heaven and earth knows? The Council
also gathered by Cyprian at Carthage, did grieuouslye err, enacting that they
that were baptized by Heretics, should be baptized again, before they would
receive them into their Church. And the Council at Constance, did most
abhominably consent in error to rob Gods people of the one half of Christ's
sacrament. What did the late Council at Trent, being fourteen years at the
least in travel, bring forth at length? Forsooth Horatius mountains in Italy
were great with child, and after their hard travel brought forth a Mouse.
What one error or abuse in their Church, of so many, as all the world now
sees, and they (although they be impudent enough) cannot deny, have they
reformed? Surely never might that worthy Bishop of Nazianzum his saying be
more truly spoken than of these Councels, If I must needs write the truth
(says he) I never saw any good end or conclusion of these Bishops Councels,
in his Epistle to Procopius the.xlij. Epist. And yet they shame not still to
say, the holy ghost is President of their Councels, and that he is shut in the
closet of the Popes breast. But I trow it is not that holy ghost that Christ
says, breaths where it will, for that it would not be so partially tied to
the Popes bosom, or that appeared upon Christ in likeness of a Dove. It is I
believe, that ghastly ghost the Owl, that sat so long in the Consistory on a
time over the Popes head, a meet holy ghost I assure you for such a
consistory and closet. Let us therefore leave them, and this president of
their Councels, and mark what seems good to Gods holy spirit, and to the
Evangelists and Apostles, and f^llowe the same, considering as S. Augustine
says in his second Epistle to S. Jerome, that no Scriptures are to be
allowed, but the undoubted Canonical. And in his first book and second
chapter against the Epistle of Parmenian, he judges it a rash and
presumptuous part to believe any, that proves not that he says by
scriptures. And in his third book and.vj. chapter against the letters of
Petilian, he hold^th any thing accursed, that is beside the law and the
Gospel. In his first book of christian doctrine, xxxvij. chap. he says: Our
faith staggereth, if it be not vpholden by scriptures. In his.166. Epistle, he
says both Christ and his Church is known by the scriptures. In his second
book of Christian doctrine and.vj. chap. he says the holy ghost has caused
the darker things in the scriptures, to be opened by playner. And Chrysostom
in his second exposition upon Mathewe, the.xxiiij. and.xxix. Homelies says,
The true Church can no way else be known, but only by the Scriptures,
because whatsoever things else in the Church, Heretics have as well as
Catholics. But now to that they say, diversity of translations in Scripture
breeds error, although the same be sufficiently enough confuted before, by
the example of the seauentie Translators or Interpreters, by those five or six
more that after Christ's time corrected them, by Origin, by Hierome, by the
Evangelists and Apostles, writing in the Greek tongue: yet we will allege
one or two places out of old Doctors for confirmation of the same. For
touching all objections that the adversaries can make, they are so fully
answered by the old Doctors, as partly you may have perceived, that it were
but vain further to travel therein. S. Augustine which is one of the four
Cardinal and principal Doctors, that our adversaries allow, who impugn this
opinion, says thus against them. They that have translated the Scriptures
(says he) out of the Hebrewe tongue into the Greek, may be numbered, but the
Latin interpreters by no means. For in the beginning of the faith, as soon as
one had gotten a Greek book into his hands, and seemed to have some
knowledge in both the tongues, he took upon him to interpret the same. Which
thing did more further than hinder understanding, so that the readers be not
negligent. For the pervsing of diverse books has often times opened the darker
sentences. The place is in his second book of Christian doctrine, and.xij.
chapter. And Nicholaus de Lyra one of our adversaries own Doctors, says in
his Preface upon the Genesis: that Diversity of expositors stirs up
attention: But to bring more testimonies in a matter so clear as day, is but
impertinent, seeing that both Gods law and man's allows the truth, though
testified but with two or three witnesses. Thus have thou gentle Reader my
promise made in the beginning, confirmed by authority of Scriptures, evident
reasons, and testimonies of ancient Doctors, though not in such abundant wise
as might be, yet in as large a sort as the law and rule of a Preface will
permit. Let us therefore address and prepare our selves diligently, not only
to read the Scriptures, but also to understand them, and not to understand
them only, and there to stay, (as I am afraid too many in these days make
that their only end of reading) but also to frame our selves to express our
understanding in our lives and conversation, least having the Gospel still in
our mouths, and showing nothing thereof in our manners, and yet protesting a
more sound and exact knowledge than others, we increase at length but our own
punishment and damnation, knowing that every one that says Lord, Lord, shall
not enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of the father
which is in heaven. Matthew. 7. Luc. 12.
And how the servant that knows his masters will and does it not, shall be
beaten with many stripes. Let us remember that the temple of Solomon, and the
writings of the laws and Prophets among the Jews, little profited them,
because they abused them, and would not lead a life aunswereable to such
blessings of God. God spared not that stock of the Jews of so many hundredth
years grows, Romans 11.
verily no more will he us, that are but Impes graft and set in the same
stock, if we do not better than we do, and they did. But again, if we live
a repentant life as we ought to do, and a thankful unto God for his
innumerable benefits, and specially for the light of his word now shining in
our Church of England, so ordering our works that they may shine before men,
and glorify our father which is in heaven: Math. 5.
then rage the world never so much by Gods permission against his little
flock, for their proof and trial, yet shall it never be able to take one of
them out of his hand, John. 10.
but that he will aid and assist us with the presence of his spirit, and rule
(as David says) in the middle among his enemies, Psalm. 110. Psalm. 2.
and bruise them with his iron rod, and break all them in pieces like a potters
vessel, that any manner of way without repentance molest and afflict his
dearly beloved spouse and Church. Let us not therefore fear any threats or
enterprises of this world, knowing that we shall overcome in him that has
already overcome the Devil and the world, 1. John. 4.
Greater (says S. John) (is the spirit) that is in you, than he that is in
the world. For there was never yet tyrant that rose against Gods Church, but
some shameful and horrible end followed him most commonly in this world. The
ecclesiastical story is full of examples, and of late God has showed some
notable in this case, both here in our country, and abroad, who list to mark
and consider them. True it is that christians have been made away and
murdered, upon very light and tryfling occasions, and are also at this day,
where tyrants do reign. For in Tertullians days, which lived about two
hundredth and nine years after Christ: If the river Tybris at Rome had flowed
up to the walls, if Nilus the river in Egypt had not watered their fields,
if there had been no rain, if there had been any earthquake, Apolog.
dearth or plague, by and by the people would cry to have the Christians
thrown to the Lions. And all this was to rid the country of them, and to
deface their belief and doctrine. But what followed hereof? Uerily nothing
less than they weened. For Tertullian told them plainly: Torment, rack,
condemn, and make us away, and your unjust dealing with us, is but a trial
of our innocence. Therefore God suffers us to suffer this at your hands. The
more exquisite your cruelty is toward us, the more it allureth to take our
parts. And whereas they call us Sectaries, as then they did the Christians,
let us rejoice in that we see our quarrel and theirs, our slanders and
theirs so like, and tell them as Tertullian tells Scapula the Romans
President: that this sect shall not fail or decay, but the more it seems to
be cut down, the more let them be assured, it is builded up. And considering
what they be that are our condemners. Let us also say: Such and such
consecrators of our condemnation we rejoice in. For as Tertullian said,
whosoever knows him (meaning Nero) must needs understand that of force it
must be some singular good thing that he would condemn: so may we as truly
say, of Boner, Storye, and such like, that have condemned our faithful
brethren and sisterne, that whosoever knew what they were, how they lived and
how they dyed, must needs know also that it could be none other than good
that they would condemn. And therefore let us say to them with Tertullian
for a short answer: when you condemn us, God pardons us. Wherefore let us
not fear them that can kill the body, but then can do no more, ne yet that,
but when God permits: but rather let us fear him, that can cast both body
and soul into the fire of hell, which is Jesus Christ our Savior, 2. Tim. 2.
Math. 24. Marc. 13.
knowing that he will crown all those that strive lawfully, and continue unto
the end: to him therefore with the father and the holy ghost, three persons
and one eternal majesty of godheade, all honor, power, and glory, be now and
ever, world without end. Amen.

To the Noble and honorable Consuls, and whole Senate of the famous Common
weal of Zurich, his very good Lords and Masters, Raufe Gualthere Tigurine,
wishes grace and peace from God the father, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
IT is an old custom, and confirmed by examples of holy Fathers that the
professors of good Arts and learning, use to dedicate the fruits of their
studyes, either to their friends, or to men of honor and authority, whereby
to procure either their favor and good will, or else to make them defenders of
their labors and pains. And whereas I have thought good (most honorable
Lords and fathers) to dedicate my labors upon the Acts of the Apostles
chiefly unto you: many and weighty causes have moved me thereunto. For
privately your liberality toward me, required the same, and publicly the
continual care that you have to profit your country, and religion in
general, enforced me to show mine allegiance and good heart, toward you, with
some duty of gratitude and thankfulness. Whereby that fervent desire that you
bear unto godliness might be set forth with the public testimony of our
Church, whose example now many years, diverse excellent states of commonweals,
have not been ashamed to ymitate. Howbeit, to tell you the plain truth, the
chief cause of this my dooyng was, for that I perceived the matter of this
book, and the consideration thereof appertayned unto you principally: For in
this book is contained, a most absolute pattern and form of Christ's
universal Church, which it behooves all such as are in authority and bear
rule, well to know and understand. For those men that say temporal
magistrates have nothing to do but with temporal matters, and would have
them utterly to abstain from entermedling in ecclesiastical affairs, are in
no wise to be regarded? which men seem to me to be of opinion, that they
would have commonweals exempt from Gods providence, without the which the
very Gentyles perceived they could not stand or be preserved. And who
knows not that sentence of the Godly and princely Prophet: Except the Lord
keep the city, the watcheman waketh but in vain. Which also exhorts kings
and Princes to suffer themselves to be instructed in the word of God, and to
kiss and reverence Jesus Christ the son of God. But to what end should
kings be taught the word, if there be no use of the same, in the administration
of the common weal? And how shall they kiss or reverence Christ, if they
neglect his Church, which he esteems dearer than the apple of his eye, yea,
than his life? And how can they neglect that body, whereof if they be not
members under Christ their head, they can not be saved? We must hearken rather
unto Esaias, who prophesying of Christ's Church, among other things says.
Kings and Queens shall be thy Nurrices. In which words, he seems not so
much to comfort the Church as to set forth the office and dignity of Kings
and Rulers, which chiefly appears in this, that God does vouchsafe to commit
unto them the care of his Church, which he has redeemed with the blood of his
son. In deed we must confess that God has herein no need of man's help, if
he would use his absolute and perelesse power. Neither deny we that many times
Churches are increased and defended rather by the power and unspeakable
council of God, than by the industry of man. But this comes not so to pass
because God disalloweth the care and duty of Magistrates, but that it might
appear how all praise and glory, is to be ascribed to him only, because no
man should think religion depended more upon the will of man, than upon Gods
providence. In the mean season such is the goodness of God, that he does
vouchsafe to take men to be his coadiutors and helpers, by their ministry to
regenerate his elect people through the word, and defends the same under
godly magistrates, against ye rage of this world, in the middle of present
dangers on every side, that they may live in peace and rest, as far forth as
is convenient for their faith and salvation. And that this is the will of God,
not only the scriptures testify, but the whole consent of all nations does
likewise prove ye same. Certes in that golden world of the Patriarchs, we read
that one man was both king and priest. But when God afterward under the law
would have these offices severed, yet ordained he a great conjunction and
amity between the kings and priests, least either the kings should reign
without religion, or the Priests by them not cared for, and regarded, might at
the pleasure of wicked men be misused. Whereunto also may be referred, how
God when he first gave his law unto the Jews, chose Moses and Aaron, which
were brothers german, and committed to the one the charge of the Tabernacle,
and Gods whole service, and to the other, the ordering of the common weal:
thereby teaching us that then both Churches and commonweals are in most
safetye, when brotherly concord and agreement is between both these
administrations. This thing all those judges and kings well perceived, which
are commended in the Scriptures for their well governing the common wealth.
Such as we read chiefly, Gedeon, Samuel, David, Iosaphat, Ezechias, and Josias
were, with whom, if a man would compare the residue that the holy ghost, has
noted as naught, he shall find this to be the cause as well of private, as
public calamity, that they have thought the word of GOD, and care of
religion, has either nothing belonged unto them, or else that they might
dallye and play with the same at their pleasure. And if we will read the
Hystoryes of the Gentyles, it shall appear they were woonderfullye deceived in
the knowledge of the true GOD, and that therefore they polluted the service of
God with horrible errors. And yet they firmelye held this as a general rule
and principle, that commonweals could not be happily governed without the
true worship of God, and knowledge of his will, which was the cause that they
greatly reverenced the Philosophers, as professors of rare and singular
wisdom, and in doubtful affairs asked counsel at the Gods, and in erecting
of Temples, Altars, and Images to them, spared no kind of lauishe, and cost.
Uerilye the people of Athens, whose City was compted as a public vniuers^tie
and school of wisdom, so thought the care of religion belonged unto them,
that among the articles of public oath ministered to their Citizens, this was
the chief. (...). That is to say, for the Temples and service of the Coddes, I
will fight both alone and in company. These men thought that whosoever were
desirous either of public peace or private thryft, ought to have a special
regard of Gods honor. Let no man therefore accuse me of temeritie, if I say,
that such are destitute of common sense, and blinder than the profane
Gentyles, which cry out, the care of the Church and religion, belongs not
to temporal Magistrates and rulers. And I think I shall not do much amiss,
if I say that such are to be avoided, as the public and open enemies of
mankind. For take away religion from man, and what shall remain wherein he shall
differ from the brute beasts* we see in them like motions of affections, as are
in wild beasts. And if they were not bridled with the feeling of religion, they
would burst out at every occasion, and the more they are armed with
authority, and with the sword, the more harm they would do. Therefore that
we offend not through the bold and preposterous wisdom of the flesh, it
shall be very profitable to have a true pattern and form of a Church for men,
to follow in their Councels, that desire either to mainteyne the Church, or
else to reform it being fallen in decay. This pattern the holy scriptures in
every place set out unto us, and while the law endured, it did set forth unto
us all the parts thereof under the figure of the Tabernacle, and in the time
of the Prophets, under the allegory of a spouse, a flock, a vineyarde, the
Temple and City of Jerusalem. A most absolute and evident pattern or President
of the Church, this book comprehends, and sets forth unto us, declaryng
that the same so grew and increased, as the Prophets once described it unto
us, because none shall say that we still had in our mouth such a Church, as
neither was ever upon the earth, or ever shall be, as wise men used sometimes
to say of Plato his common weal. For although we shall hereafter see the
accomplishment and full perfection of the church in heaven: yet does this book
set before us such a president thereof, that whosoever frame themselves
thereafter, shall be members of that heavenly and perfect church, and shall
also understand what way is best to take in preserving and reforming their
Churches, and shall be offended at no chances of adversity, nor yield to the
dreams of such as obtrude unto us a strange form of Church, saying, our
predecessors wanted many things, which holy fathers afterward ordained, and
were received and established by authority of general Councels. For where
this book conteyneth in it an History of about.xxvi^j. years, setting out
unto us the Acts done in the Church over all the world, besides the sermons
of the Apostles, their Counselles, their sayings and doyngs, as well public as
private, opened in a plain and sufficient narration or discourse: who will not
say but he is impudent, that will affirm there are diverse other things
necessary unto salvation, which we know the true Christian Church in the
Apostles time had not. Furthermore, what arrogancy were it to contend with
the Apostles, whom the son of God appointed to be the teachers of all the
world, and to be witnesses of his doings, as though we were able of our
selves to invent or devise a more absolute and perfect thing than they? It
shall also be very profitable, to mark the trade and order of this Primitive
Church, as out at a loupe, or creuise, and the chief points thereof, which
Luke says, sprang first of the word of God, after Christ was ascended into
heaven, and from thence had sent his holy spirit, through whose inspiration,
the Apostles began to preach the Gospel unto the world, and to bring
disciples or believers unto Christ. Whereupon we gather that they which
either will be members of Christ's Church their selves, or bring other to the
communion and fellowship thereof, must begin with the wholesome doctrine of
the word of God. For where by birth we are the children of wrath, we must
needs be regenerated from above, to become the children of God. The seed of
this regeneration is the eternal word of God, which being preached by the
ministry of man, but quickened in the minds of the hearers by the power of
the spirit, renueth the whole nature of man, so that his flesh being
mortified, he lives only unto GOD through Christ, who not long before being
estraunged from God, lived unto sin. And the Apostles taught but one uniform
doctrine of the word in all places, the which word Christ himself
distributed into his parts, when he first commanded repentance to be
preached in his name, and then next forgiveness of sins. And although the
Apostles had not always one kind of hearers, but such as seemed greatly to
differ, both in vocation, conversation, and nature: yet did not they think it
good, for this cause, to change or omit any thing in the doctrine of the
gospel, being wholly busted, to bring many men unto Christ, by duly and orderly
dealing of his word. And unto this doctrine of ye word, they joined ye use of
the sacraments, and those whom they perceived to believe, they took into the
society of the Church by baptism with all their family, and delivered to them
the sacrament of thanksgiving in such sort as Christ prescribed, the often
receiving whereof sealed to them the benefit of their redemption, and a
thankful commemoration of the Lords death is therein celebrated, and the
whole body of the Church is the more surely knitte together with the band of
love and charity. And by these means, within the space of eight and twenty
years, it is evident the whole world was brought unto the obeysaunce of
Christ, and that by the ministry of such as were neither of noble stock,
dignity in calling, nor of any estimation in learning. Therefore this was the
very working of God from above, wherein we have to reverence his power, and
to embrace his goodness, which so graciously provided for the world, living
oppressed under the tyranny of the devil. This book sets forth most
diligently the exercises of the Primitive Church. Great sinners and notorious
wicked men, such as not long before, had wickedly enterprysed to shed the blood
of the only begotten son of God, embraced the doctrine of the gospel. And
the same being brought to the consideration of their sins, openly confessed
them, and trusting in the only mercy of God through Christ, obtained favor
and forgiveness. From thenceforth forsaking their former sinfulness, and
taking a better way and trade of life, they forsook their company, by whom
before they were polluted. And to their Godly life, they joined prayers,
wherein they were fervently occupied, both in consideration of their own
infirmity, and by reason of daily perilles and incombraunces, as many examples
declare. And for that they would have neither doctrine nor the wholesome
frequenting of the Sacraments to cease, they had a special regard that there
might be Ministers, and Elders euerywhere appointed, whom they placed in every
City, and with great diligence kept in doing their duty. And at length least
the profession of Christ might seem to consist only in vain contemplation,
there sprang and grew among them such fervent love and liberality, that we
may in these days sooner wonder at the same, than follow it. For each Church
and congregation faithfully made provision for their poor, and those Churches
that were of best ability and riches, relieved the want and poverty of
others further of, sending to them such collections of money as they had made
and gathered for them. Well remembering undoubtedly our Savior Christ, which
being ready to leave the earth, appointed the poor in his place, promising to
accept whatsoever benefit bestowed upon them, as done unto his owneselfe. And
where being occupied in such Godly exercyses, all men ought to have made much
of them, and loved them: they yet found on every side most grievous enimyes.
The Jews, Scribes, and Phariseyes, and Philosophers of the Gentyles gainsayde
them, whereby they were enforced to have perpetual conflicts with those, that
had the chief commendation for wisdom, and learning, as well among the
Jews as the Gentyles. Moreover, even out of the Church it self arose false
brethren, who both through their lewd conversation hindered the growth of the
Church now springing, and offended very many with their crafty and
deceyueable enterpryses: such as Ananias was among the Jews, and Simon Magus
among the Samaritanes. And certain wicked persons given unto unlawful
sciences much troubled the Apostles, and the other godly. Bariesu, or Elymas
the Sorcerer in Cyprus, a maid possessed with a prophesying spirit at
Philippi, and certain exorcistes, or coniuring Jews, at Ephesus. And when the
devil perceived, he could nothing prevail by any of these instruments, he
began to stir up the Magistrates and Rulers, by them to keep under the
toward croppe of the true and healthful faith. And this thing the Jews first
began, to bring Christ's religion the more in suspicion, seeing that Nation
where it first sprang, received not the same. Herevppon the Apostles were
called before councelles at Jerusalem, were commanded to silence, were beaten
with rods, and so being further threatened, were let go again. At length
Stephen was stoned, the godly driven out of the City, and persecution raunged
in every place, neither were the Apostles themselves spared. For Herod beheaded
James, and thought for the Jews pleasure to have served Peter likewise, if God
had not after a myraculous sort, delivered him out of the present danger he
was in. And the Jews were not content themselves to reiecte Christ as none of
their king and savior, but also they would not have him to reign among the
Gentyles. Wherefore they moved and procured vprores against the Apostles in
all places, as appears by the ado that happened at Antioche, Iconium,
Lystrae, Corinth, Thessalonica, and many other places. And finally they brought
to pass, that the Apostles, and professors of the Christian faith, were
reported to be guyltie, not only in matters of religion, but also to have
^oldelye transgressed and broken the Romayne laws, and to have troubled and
distourbed the whole world. Whereupon the matter went so far, that the
Roman Emperors also, whose power at that time stretched over all the world,
drew their sword against the Christians. But among all these so great and
many dangers, and in so crafty and most cruel attempts of the enemies, there
appeared a marvelous constancy of the Apostles and other believers, whereby
they both truly and plainly protested their faith in Christ, and boldly
defended and mainteyned the doctrine of truth, and neither by flattrie or
threats, could be brought to forsake the standing, wherein God had placed
them. Therefore our faithful God did not fail them in so Godly a constancy,
but declared by many and evident tokens, that he had a care of his Church. For
being in bands and prison he delivered them out of the same, by the ministry
and service of Aungelles: he comfort them with joyful ^ightes and visions:
he armeth them with the spirit of constancy: he gives them a mouth and
tongue which none of the enemies was able to resist: he confirms the doctrine
and faith of his people with miracles: he effectually draws the minds of men
to believe them: and to be short, he causes the doctrine of the Gospel,
dispite of the world and Prince thereof, through fire and sword, luckily to
spread over the whole face of the earth. In these things is contained a
perfect and an absolute pattern of a Church, whereunto all things written any
where else in the scriptures touching the Church, may be referred. This
form or frame of a Church, it is evident, that you also (most honorable
Lords) have followed. For where GOD did vouchsafe about.xxxix. years past, to
illuminate our Country Heluetia, with the light of his word, and to call it
from the darkness of superstition into the brightness of his Gospel, you
thinking there was no longer lingering to be made, began advisedly and seriously
to consider how Christ's kingdom might be restored in your common weal.
Therefore you thought it good out of hand, to move the Bishops, and
specially him of Constantia, to whose charge your whole Country belonged, to
lay to their hands with you in abolishing of abuses and superstition, and to
take order for the reforming of the Church with your aids and assistaunce. But
while they forgetting their vocation and duties, made delays, you thought it
should be much to your shame and reproach, to see their negligence any longer
hinder the public salvation and glory of God, and therefore (for that you
would not want of your duties) you were the Capitaynes and beginners of so
godly an enterprice your selves: following the examples of Ezechias, Josias,
Constantine, and diverse others, which we read in times passed did the like
with great commendation, when the ministers and Bishops of the Church were
found slack in their office. For appoynting a public and general assembly
of all the Ministers both in your City, and whole territory, you willed them
to deliberate and confer among themselves out of the word of God, touching
the chief points and articles of faith and religion. And there were, that
earnestlye withstoode this your devise, saying the determination of this matter
belonged not to the judgment of one common weal or Prince, but to the
authority of an universal, and general council. Howbeit their authority
was of no such force with you, that it could make you look behind you, after
you had once set your hand unto the plough. And therefore your godly begun
enterprise did prosperouslye proceed. For in that disputation the truth had
the victory, and that in such sort, that the greatest part of them that came
to assault the same, yielded thereunto of their own accord, and thought their
greatest praise and glory to consist herein, that God had given them grace to
be so happily overcome, and to follow Christ's Chariot in triumph. From that
day forward you never ceased to devise and do all such things as you
perceived did appertain to the glory of Christ's kingdom. For you purged and
rydde your Churches of the dross and filthiness of Images and Aultares, and
cleared Christ's doctrine from the pernicious inventions of man's traditions,
enacting by public authority that none should either reduce and bring
again, the superstitions abolished, or else teach the flock of Christ any
thing disagreeable to the doctrine of the Gospel. The use and administration
of the Sacraments, you caused to be brought to the form and order first
instituted: you caused prayers as well public as private, to be duly ordered,
and whatsoever other duetyes of true faith, you caused to be exercysed
according to the prescription of Apostolyke doctrine: yea, you caused your
public laws, and discipline of manners to be reformed after the rule of the
gospel. And because no man should think you did these things either for
desire of private lucre, or for that you delited in novelties, you had a
special regard that others might have the whole fruit and avail of the
reformation, and your selves all the pain and labor in reforming. For you did
not like sweepestakes rape and reave the Church goods into your hands, nor put
any man either of nobility or of the Church from their right. For those which
were deceived and carried with the common sway of ignorance, you labored to
win by friendly and brotherly instruction, and did not discourteously cast them
of. Whereby it came to pass, that they which were best witted among them, did
afterward great good service to Christ and to his Church: and other whom
either age, or dullness of wit hindered, you suffered patiently to enjoy their
goods and revenues, because they should have no occasion either to make
complaint, or tumult. And whatsoever of those goods fell to your
administration, was appointed partlye for the building and mainteyning of
schools, and partly for the sustentation and relieuing of the poor. For you
used in liberal wise to mainteyne not only the professors of sciences and
tongues, but also certain students of the same, to the number of fourscore,
with continual stipende and exhibition: insomuch that the most part of them
which at this day preach Christ in your City, and Country, (which have in
them about an hundred and forty parishes) are bound and beholden to your
liberality, for the rowme and place that they now are in. And such was your
dexterity in handling all these matters, wisdom in taking counsel about
them, and modesty in executing them, that the thing which seemed impossible to
be done, was easily brought to pass: insomuch that within short space of time,
in a free nation, without any fear of public tumult or sedition, with great
approbation of the people, all these things that we have spoken of were both
taken in hand, and brought to an end. For although they which thought Popery
was gainefull, and therefore could not well brook the overthrow thereof,
attempted oftentimes many things: yet through the singular benefit of God,
their enterpryses were always in vain, and the tempests by them raised were
chased away by the wholesome breath of our heavenly father. Where according to
the precept of Christ, both the simplicity of Doves, and wisdom of
Serpents, appeared in your deuyses. For as often as your adversaries went
about either by flattery and fair promises, or by fearful menaces to
withdraw you from your purpose, or at least would have persuaded you to have
left all controversy in religion to the judgment of the Bishops and Clergy:
you still answered them both wisely and plainly after this sort: that you
could not, nor would not deny or reject such things, as you had learned out
of Gods word, were true, and that you were ready to render a reason of your
belief to any man that should demand it of you: yea that you would
willingly yield to any man that could convince you of error* by the holy
Scripture, and could teach you a better way of salvation than you held.
Diverse your aunsweres of like kind and tenor there are wherewith you stopped
the mouths of a great many, and wherein still may be read that saying of the
Apostles: Whether it be right before ^od to hearken unto you rather than God,
judge you. For we cannot choose but speak those things which we have both
seen and heard. Again, We ought rather to obey God than men. Therefore the
heavenly grace of the eternal God favored and prospered so godly enterprises:
whereby it came to pass, that your common weal has most happily escaped all
kind of tribulations, and at this day in the middle of the horrible and
dangerous styrres and troubles of all Christendom, does not only live in
peace her self, but also is a most safe sanctuary for forreyners and
strangers resorting to her from all places. Therefore great and weighty
causes as me thinks have moved me (most honorable and my especial good
Lords) to dedicate this my labor and traueyle unto you, wherein according to
the grace of God bestowed upon me, I have gone about to open and make plain
that book, which describes the first countenance and look of that Church
that is called the primitive Church, with the proceedings, increase, and whole
estate of the same, a president whereof, I see you have followed, with no less
industry and diligence, than good and happy success. Which president if they
shall follow which shall suceede you, in government of the common weal, they
shall both see how you have done nothing rashly, and on a head, and shall also
perceive themselves woonderfully pricked forward, to observe and keep with
all their power, that form and order of a reformed Church and Religion, that
they shall receive of you. And surely it shall be very profitable to meditate
oftentimes, by what means and beginnings, our ancestors devised such an
order and form both of Church and common weal. For in so doing they shall
neither regard slaunderers, which maliciously deprave things done well and
godlily, neither shall they be turned from the truth for any storms of
persecution, or threats of the world that may arise. It is also profitable
many times to talk of these things before the people, which as they are
led most commonly with things present: so do they easily forget things
passed and gone, and very seldom think of things to come. Therefore they
allow not the devises of the Magistrates, but when they see them joined either
with present profit, or clear of perilles and danger. For as soon as
danger once appears, they find fault and lack of wisdom and equity in
those, whose councels they ought faythfullye to set forward and obey. But if
they did understand, that their rulers had God for the author and guyder of
their drifts and devises, and that they did whatsoever they did, according to
their duty, then surely they would learn more religiously to judge of
their rulers, and more easilye to obey them, and would not so suddenly be
moved and turned at every rumor of danger arysing. Surely this was the
thing that I chiefly meant and intended, when I began openly to read this book
to the flock of Christ among you, and to publishe and set abroad that which I
had openly spoken and declared. For I saw that the state of this age waxing
every day worse and worse, was such, that it was most needful continually to
pervse the books of holy scripture, and to set before the people, the
examples of the primitive Church, contained in the same, that they should not
be deceived with the gloses of such as under a false color and pretense of
antiquity, burden us with new errors, and accuse those things of novelty,
which grave and godly men have restored unto us, out of the word of God.
Accept therefore, these my labors (mine honorable and good Lords) with such
favor, as you have many years borne unto the truth, and unto me, and many
other my fellows and coparteners, even from our childehoode. Continue your
good will unto the students of divinity: hold on your accustomed humanity
and gentleness toward the pilgrims and banished for Christ's sake, abide in
the mainteyning of your laws, and correcting of the peoples manners, in
enhaunceing virtuous exercises, and in bridling wickedness with justice. In
many places the horrible contempt of God reigns. Diverse do wickedly reject
the wholesome benefit of Gods word, and the knowledge of Christ. Charity in
most men waxes chill, and faith fails every day by little and little.
Iniquity abounds, and new croppes of naughtiness daily increase. God
therefore being angry* threatens us with punishment, and fears the world
with woonders, monsters, and horrible vprores of kingdoms. And yet will he
never fail them which abide and continue in promoting his glory, defend the
Church of his Christ, and according to the measure of their vocation,
persevere in doing their duty. He shall bless your labors, and govern your
councels by his spirit: he shall bless all your people, so that they shall of
their own accord, obey your wholesome laws, and most happilye enjoy the
gladsome benefit of evangelical peace. He shall bless your whole Church, so
that it shall go forward every day more and more in the doctrine of
godliness. To him who is the only Lord of Lords, the immortal and
everlasting God, be blessing, honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen. Given
at Zurich, in your famous and chief City of Heluetia: the first day of
August, in the year of our Lord. 1557.

Ioannes Parkhurstus Anglus Episcopus Nordouicensis.
Multa relucenti debent haec tempora Lucae,
Et debet Lucas multa Rodolphe tibi.
Lux Lucae luxit totum diffusa per orbem,
Lux Lucae lucet nunc mage luce tua.
Ergo tibi Lucae tantum qui luminis adfers,
Christus cum Luca, lucida regna dabit.
Eiusdem aliud ad Lectorem.
Quae (...) fuerint Apostolorum
Qui ritus veteres apudque Patres,
Et quot: discere Lector, est ne cordi?
Huc adsis, auido legantur ore
Haec quae scripta vides pererudita,
Sacris eruta scripta quaeque libris,
Aut e Patribus eruta Orthodoxis.
Quae multo peperit tibi labor
Gualtherus, pietate clarus atque
Doctrina, patriae decus, suaeque
Praefulgens, celebres habendus inter
Scriptores: potes id negare Liuor?
Lauds quid memorare pergo, plures?
Vino vendibili haud opus virente
Est suspensa hedera: Liber loquatur.
A Table of the chief words and things expounded in these Homelies and
Annotations.
A
A ante A.
AAron and his children chosen to be ministers. Page 67.
A ante B.
Abelles faith what it was. Page 853. Abnegation or denying of our self is the
beginning of Christianity. Page 367. Abraham is an example of the obedience of
faith. 295. Abraham pleased God without the ceremonialles. 293. Abraham is in
many dangers after he came into the land of promise. 297. Abraham's faith is
steadfast, although he be tried diverse ways. ibidem. Abraham's singular
faith is set forth. ibidem. Abraham what GOD did with him after he came
into the land of promise. ibidem. Abraham's faith in all adversities is
vpholden by Gods promise only. ibidem.
A ante C.
Acts of the Apostles instruct all states and degrees of men with examples.
Page 4. Acts of the Apostles commend the truth and Majesty of the
prophetical Oracles of vtility, necessity, dignity, and Majesty. 2 Acts
wherewith it begins the history. 1.
A ante D.
Adam was a christian. 852. Adams sin depryued us of life. Page 119.
Admiration of Gods works is necessary. 157 Admonitions out of Gods words are
needful daily. 583. Adversaries to Gods doctrine, who were in times passed.
4. Whereof we should take comfort in adversity. 807 How we should use the
promises of God in adversity. 809. We must confirm our faith in adversity.
ibidem.
A ante E.
The delivery out of Egypt, was a figure of our salvation in Christ. Page
298.314. Aeneas sick of the palsy is healed. Page 418. Acquitie in an Heathen
Captain. Psalm. 797. The Ethiopian is converted. 376. The Ethiopian is
described. 377. The Ethiopian teaches us that salvation, and all thing
thereunto belonging, comes of the mere grace of God. 389. The Aethiopians are
under ye kingdom of God, according to the Oracles of the Prophets. 376.
A ante F.
Afflictions remain for them that join them to the church. 325. Afflictions
what good they do unto the godly. 101. Afflictions ought to be an argument of
joy and comfort. 271. Afflictions are overcome with constaunt faith. 328
Affliction and adversity are not always tokens that God is angry. ibidem.
Afflictions of the godly and wicked are not all of one sort. 102. Which way
afflictions may be avoided. ibidem. God sees the afflictions of his people.
328. What the end of Gods afflictions is. 151. The causes of afflictions. 269.
The godly have warning of their afflictions. 744. The afflictions of the
godly must offend no man as strange. 263. The afflicted, God assisteth. 308.
We must do good to the afflicted. Page 809.
A ante G.
Agabus tells Paul he should be put in bands. 766. Agrippa and Bernice.
840. Agrippa is skillful in the Jews affairs. 847. Agrippa is a figure of
such as in this world choke the seed of Gods word with cares. 867.
A ante L.
Alexandria School. 697. Alms is a work of mercy. 427. What this word
alms conteyneth in it. 419.
A ante M.
Ambition is a pernicious thing. Page 24. Ambition in the Church, is most
pes^ilent. 370. and. 371. Ambrose his constancy. 358.
A ante N.
Anabaptists. 463. Anabaptists confuted, which think it unlawful to come in
our Churches or company. 241. Anabaptists are like to the Essenes. Page 803.
Anabaptists keep a perilous coil, while they rack things belonging to
strangers, and those of full age unto christians children, keeping them from
baptism. 385. Anabaptists are barbarous people, despysing the knowledge of
tongues, in a Mynister of the Church. 83. The Anabaptists confuse and
seditious, comminiti^ of goods is improued and confuted. 147. Anabaptists
dote in going about to condemn the baptism of infants. Page 367. The
Anabaptists error, which say it is not meet that a Christian should possess
any thing of his own. 143. The Anabaptists error in the disordred co^munity
of their goods. 225. The Anabaptists disorder saying it is unmeet for a
christian to were a weapon. 432. Anabaptists are reproved of obstinacy for
that they will yield no account of their faith before the magistrates. 829. The
Anabaptists temeritie forsaking such Churches as seem to have any
imperfection in them. 275 The Anabaptists madness will not suffer the
children of the christians to be received into the Church. Page 185. and 135.
Ananias and Sapphira tempted the spirit of the Lord. 236. Ananias and
Sapphiras consent in sin, deserved to be punished. 237. Ananias is a figure
of such as rob God of his honor. 230. Ananias is a figure of false
Christians. 229. Ananias lied unto the holy ghost. Page 221. Ananias is killed
by the word of of Gods judgment pronounced. Page 233. How great the sin of
Ananias was. 229. What the holy ghost judges of Ananias sin. 230. Ananias
punishment. 232. Ananias is called to ordeyne Paul an Apostle. 399. Ananias
fearfully finds delays against the express commandment of God. 401.
Ananias is encouraged of God. ibide^. Ananias calls Paul brother. 405
Ananias lays his hands upon Saul. ibidem. Ananias commended of Paul for
his godliness. 399. Ananias obedience. 404. Ananias boldness. 405. Ananias
description. 788. Ananias oration unto Paul. 789. Ananias called painted wall
of Paul. 800. An Angel of GOD is sent unto Paul. 878. Angel of God
calls Moses. 325. Angels Ministry. 494. and 495 Angels are servants and
keepers of the elect. 246. Angels appearings. 38. Angels have helped men in
visible wise. 36. Angels Ministry is an argument of Gods goodness. 428.
Angels ministry how^ excellent it is. 376. Antichrist sits in the Church
of God. 282. Antichrists spirit is in them that preach not Christ. 403.
Antioche Church refer their controversy to the Apostles. 588. Antioch Church
commended. 508. Antichristian Prelates pride. 256.
A ante P.
Apparitions of spirits or souls. 541. Apostleship whence it has authority.
71. The Apostles doctrine must be referred to the holy ghost. 20. The Apostles
story must be joined with the Gospel, and for what cause. 9. Apostles are
ordained of God. 58. The Apostles doctrine must be believed, because it is
inspired of God. 9. The dignity and authority of the Apostles doctrine. 8.
The sum of the Apostles doctrine. 407. Who must be appointed to the office of
an Apostle. 63. The profit that comes of the ordinance and calling of the
Apostles. 58. The profit of studying the Apostles. 711. The Apostles receive
commandments of Christ. 9. The Apostles after they had received the holy
ghost, spoke with strange and diverse languages. 82 The Apostles are accused of
sedition and seducing of the people. 633. The Apostles after their afflictions
return with more boldness to do their office. 579. The Apostles had their
authority of him that sent them. 71 Apostles whypped and cast in prison. 634.
The Apostles after their whypping praise God, and pray unto him. Page 636. How
the Apostles were chosen. 66 The Apostles are Christ's witnesses, and what the
duty of an Apostle is. 30. The Apostles preach to the people of Cyprus. 200.
The Apostles refuse to obey the counselles decree, and for what cause. 209.
and 210. The Apostles did all thing by the guyding and authority of the
spyrite. 620. The Apostles are set at liberty for fear of the people. 212.
The Apostles are the Preachers of Gods truth. 78. The Apostles teach in the
Sinagoge at Iconium. 560. The Apostles commend the Churches unto the Lord.
585. The Apostles preach the gospel constantly. 251. The Apostles being
delivered out of prison, are commanded to execute their office. 246. The
Apostles exhort us to perseueraunce. 581. The Apostles boldly wythstande the
Jews attempts. 550. The Apostles fly from Iconium, and preach in an other
place. 563. The Apostles rejoice in slanders and reproaches, and why. 270. The
Apostles by their gestures repel godly worship. 570. The Apostles return to
Jerusalem. 42. The Apostles what they do being gathered together at Jerusalem.
Page 47. The Apostles excommunicate incurable persons. 551. The Apostles
preach in the houses of the faithful. 272. The Apostles are called before the
Counsel. 197. The Apostles purge them self of disobedience, new doctrine and
sedition. 258. The Apostles go into Pisidia. 519. The Apostles continue in
prayers at Jerusalem, and in unanimity and perseueraunce. 47. The Apostles
remain at Jerusalem. 357. The Apostles did lead about no other men's wives.
45. The Apostles did thrust nothing into the church of their own authority.
569. The Apostles obey the angel. 248. The Apostles perceiving a grutch to
arise in the Primitive Church, consult for a redress in time. 276. The
Apostles acknowledge themselves to be but fellows. 90. The Apostles preach the
Gospel at Perga. 585. The Apostles have taught us fullye all things needful
to our salvation. 743. The Apostles depart from Philippi. Page 645. The
Apostles preach the word of God. 512. The Apostles are not to be inuocated
because of the miracles they wrought. 892. The Apostles are put in the common
Iayle. 244. What the Apostles were before they received the holy ghost, and
what after. 89. and 90. What manner of God the Apostles preached. 163. What the
Apostles did at Pisidia of Antioch. 519. The Apostles return to the Cities
from whence they were driven. Page 580. The Apostles refer all matters to the
church. 214. The Apostles are brought back again to the council. 252. Why
Christ chose rude and unlearned men to be his Apostles. 204. The Apostles
boldly withstand the seditious. 564. The Apostles give the holy ghost unto the
Samaritanes. 368. The Apostles appoint Elders in every church. 583. The
Apostles are Christ's sworn witnesses, and whereof they must bear witness.
786.63.123. The Apostles bear witness of Christ in Samaria, and preach the
word of God in all towns and villages. 375. The Apostles are despised persons
of none account. 44. The Apostles are beaten with rods. Page 267. The Apostles
ascribe all things to God as to the author of them. 9. The Apostles deeds
after Christ's ascension. 42. The Apostles acts were done by the holy ghost. 9.
The Apostles equality. 64. The Apostles authority in the church was equal.
70. The Apostles community. 143. The Apostles constancy. 209.257. and.
262.553. The Apostles boldness in defending the truth. 257.262. The Apostles
gross question touching the kingdom of Christ, the cause of their error, and
how manifold it was. 24.25. The Apostles state when the holy ghost was sent.
76. The Apostles saying, concerning the appointing of deacons. 277. The
Apostles doctrine was no new doctrine. 538. The Apostles office and doctrine is
the benefit of God. 9 The Apostles doctrine how it was accepted of the
world. 190. The Apostles and Ministers duty. 64. The Apostles faith and
trustynesse. Page 124. The Apostles enemies and authors of their persecution.
191. The Apostles contynuance in preaching. 272. The Apostles industry and
modesty. 368.758. The Apostles render a reason why they are sent. The
Apostles Sermons. 730. The Apostles slippes and falls, is no derogation to
their doctrine. Page 55. What the Apostles miracles were. Page 891.892. The
Apostles modesty. 758. The Apostles names, and why they are so often cyted.
44. The duty of the Apostles enjoined of God. 30.64.417.790. Why the Apostles
iourneys are so (...) described. 759. The Apostles set wholly at liberty. Page
642. The Apostles first work done in the Ministry. 49. The Apostles common
exercyses. Page 239. The Apostles state while they preached the gospel on
earth. 4. The Apostles testimony, touching Christ and his resurrection. 537.
The Apostles wives. 45. The Apostles threatened with death. Page 262. The
Apostles are not suffered to to preach, before they be well instructed. 80.
A ante Q.
Aquilas is Paul's host. 678.
A ante R.
Aristarchus. 870. The arguments used against the faithful of Christ. 772.
The armor wherewith Ministers must defend themselves against the world. 211.
The armor wherewyth Christ's kingdom is enlarged. 618.
A ante S.
Ascension of Christ makes not careless of salvation. 39. Ascension of Christ
is a comfortable thing. 36. Ascension of Christ is the end of the gospel. 7.
Ascension of Christ is no dispartion or vanishing away. 36. What ascension is.
33. Who ascended. 34. Whether Christ ascended. 35. The history of Christ's
ascentio^. 33. The story of the ascension is brief and plain, and why.
ibidem. Circumstaunces of Christ's ascentio^ into heaven. ibidem. The end of
Christ's ascension. ibide^. Christ's ascension confirms his victory against
Satan. 37. The manner and causes of Christ's ascension. 36. What things
followed after Christ's ascension. 42.43. Christ opened to us the gates of
heaven by his ascension. ibidem. Christ is proved to be the Messiah by his
ascension. 123. Astrology judicial, and the abuse thereof. 28. Astrologers
and Soothsayers of all sorts. 28.29. Assemblies at morning and evening. Page
498. Assemblies ecclesiastical, why they were ordained. 145.146. Assemblies of
the faithful ibidem. Assemblies ecclesiastical, why they are necessary. 241.
The order of assemblies ecclesiastical. 529. Wicked persons many times get
into the assemblies of the godly. 282.
A ante T.
Athens praised. 658.659. Athenienses superscription. ^65. Athenodorus counsel
given to ^^gustus. ^64.
A ante V.
Authors of the Apostles persecution. 191. Authors of sedition are the wicked,
not the faithful. 562. Authority of man of what avail it is in matters of
religion. 666. How true authority may be gotten. Page 148.149. Man's
authority gives no commendation unto Scripture. 2.
B.
B ante A.
BAckstarters, ye authors of schism and division. 589. Backstarters not to be
taken to soon into the ministry. 519. Backstarters shall be always in the
world. ibidem. Banishment is cause of ryfling of goods and poverty. 557.
Banished for their religion, must be comforted. ibid. and 891. Baptism
delivered to us by the Apostles, as Christ did institute it. 3 Baptism or the
fire of Christ. 707 Baptism an outward bond of the church. 366. Baptism of
John distinguished from Christ's baptism, according to the sign and thing that
is signed. Page 22. ^aptisme of John. 707. Baptism of John and of Christ, both
one. 22. Baptism is called the absolution, or assoyling from sins. 791.
Baptism what it seals. 366.367. Baptism how it washes us from sins.
132.133. How baptism is called the Fountain of regeneration. 305. Baptism a
seal of the promise of forgiveness of sins, in the name of Jesus christ.
23. Baptism is a sign of the purgation made by the blood of Jesus Christ.
133. The reason and dignity of baptism. Page 791. Baptism, must not be
neglected. Page 640. In baptism what water ought to be used. 387. To be
baptized in the name of Christ. Page 132. To be baptized into the forgiveness
of sins. 133. Barnabas commends Paul. 412. What manner of man Barnabas
was. 467. Barnabas called Jupiter by ye people of Lystra. 567. What Barsabas
signifies. 72.
B ante E.
Beggars properties of our age. 152. Beggars must not be suffered among the
people of God. 152. To begin well profits not, without contynuing to the
end. 549. Beginning of Paul's sermon. 524. Benefits of Christ toward the
inhabiters of Jerusalem. 50. Benefits of God are then profytably received,
when men acknowledge GOD to be the author of them. 155. The remembrance of
benefits received soon dies with Princes. Page 315. Berrhea lyghtened with
the gospel. Page 655. The church at Berrhea disturbed. Page 656.
B ante L.
Blasphemy is a denial of the faith. Page 856. Blasphemous and filthy talkers
are led with the evil spirit. 85. Who are said to be blessed and happy.
763. Blessedfulnesse is to be judged of holiness of place. 313. True
blessedness discrybed. 119.120. True blessedfulnesse is to be most like unto
God. 757. It is more blessed to give then to take. ibidem. To bless is to bid
farewell. 35. The heirs of bless. 187. The manner of Christ's blessing. 188.
Christ is the Mediator of bless. 47. Blessing what it comprehends in it.
ibidem.
B ante O.
The true mark of those that are borne again. 138. Books of the Bible belong
to all men. 326.
B ante R.
The utility of well bringing up of children. 615. Breaking of bread.
140.734. Brethren and kinsfolk of Christ. 48. Brethren at Rome their
kindness. Page 894.
B ante V.
Burials must be reverently used by christians. 359. Burdens and yokes are all
those things that are taught beside faith in Christ. 608.
B ante Y.
Bishops could always abide to be reprehended of other Bishops. Page 468.
Bishops of Rome make money of religion. 719. Bishops accuse Paul. 818. Bishops
of Rome may err. 198. Bishops counselles what they are. Page 240. Bishops of
Romes craft and tyranye in persecuting the truth. 191. Bishop of Rome his
incurable impiety. 350. Bishops which ought most to set forth Christ's
doctrine, greatest enemies thereof. 191.
C.
C ante A.
CAlamities of men directed to an end by God. Captivity of Babylon. 343. Care
of God for us. 832. God cares most for his people, when they are most
destitute of man's help. 349. Carnal men what they seek for in Christ. 26.
Causes of the calamities of this world. 101. Cause of all calamity is the not
believing, and gainesaying of the Gospel. 31. Causes of calamity are as well
in the godly, as the ungodly. 101. Causes of strife and contention. 550 Cause
of salvation is faith. 168. Causes of the euilles of these latter days.
ibidem. Causes why Saul was cast of. Page 528. Causes of afflictions are to
be diligently considered. 269.
C ante E.
Centurion is Paul's friend. 871. Centurion gentlye obeys Paul. Page 810.
Centurion and his soldiers faith. Page 882. Ceremonies that ye Apostles
taught are certain. 3. Ceremonies of the law are abolyshed. 76. Ceremonies in
religion, how far they are lawful. 349. Ceremonies of the old law, to
what end and use they were. 292. Certainetie and antiquity of christian
faith. 175.
C ante H.
Chanaan land a figure of our salvation, and of heaven. 294. Charity of the
Apostles toward their enemies. 561. Charity must be used, even toward the
unthankful. 355. Charity is the cognizaunce of Christ's children. 77.
Charity has her marks and tokens. ibidem. Charity and wisdoms examples.
Page 758. What the nature of charity is. 896. Charity is not suspitio^s. 769.
The property of charity. 756. Charity in Steven. 351. The effect of Gods
chastisement declared in Paul. 395. The chastisement of God requires
repentance. ibidem. The duty of those whom God chastises. 491. Chiliastes
error touching the dwelling on earth. 98. Gods children acknowledge his
judgments, and amend by others examples. Who be the children of God. 94. How
the children of GOD are known. 181. The children of Jacob grieuouslye offend.
308. Choice of meats. 434. and.435. Christian liberty must be mainteyned.
607. Christian faith does not derogate from humanity and civility. 293. The
beginning of the christian faith. Page 202. Christians now deny and betraye
Christ as the Jews did. 166. Christian people may sometime save themselves by
flying. 411. Who ought to be called Christians. Page 141. How christians be
ydolaters. 343. Christ's enemies. 100. The beginning and use of a christian
name. 490. Christians what they owe to their brethren, being in danger for the
testimony of Christ. 491. Christians must talk of the kingdom of God. 15.
Christians must increase, and go forward in faith. 476. What the marks and
weapons of christians are. 227. The duty of christians. 879.793. and 761. The
sacrifices of christians. ibidem. Christians may use the law for their
safegarde and succor. 838. Christians may possess things of their own.
143. Christians may seek aid of Magistrates. 812. Christians which way they
may get themselves favor and authority. 241. Christians must boldly defend
their cause. 500. Christ is rejected of the buylders. Page 202. What Christ's
last coming teaches us. 41. Why Christ's second coming is so long differred.
175. How Christ is the angel of the great counsel. 326. Christ instructed
his Apostles with commandments, before he left the earth. 8. Christ is taken
hold of by faith. 544 Christ is the head of apostolic doctrine. 679. Christ
comfort his Apostles, being in error of an earthly kingdom. 30. Christ
descrybed of the Prophets to be honorable. 2. Christ called a Mountain of
the Prophets. ibidem. Christ is the Savior of all Nations. 32. Christ being
preached, the kingdom of God is preached. 119.915. Christ by his divine power
and operation is every where. 40. Christ is very God. 106.448. Christ is the
Lord. 127. Christ is the name of God, and the Image of his father. 9 Christ is
a priest. 127. Christ is a man. 106. Christ is a man approved of God. Page
107. Christ is life, and they that believe in him have life. 12. Christ is the
life and the resurrection. 119. Christ is an universal savior. 127. Christ
dyed according to Gods appointment. 109 Christ was a very man of the stock of
the Jews. 178.448. Christ took his humane nature into heaven. 35. Christ
appertains to the Jews. Page 184. Christ is ascended into Heaven, the place
of the blessed. 35. Christ is ascended into that place, whyther our bodies must
also ascend. ibidem. Christ gives light to his people in the myddle of
darkness. 494. Christ was crucyfied, being innocent. 535. Christ shall judge
the quick and the dead. 457. Christ resembled to Moses. 179. Christ sees and
cares for his sheep on earth. 8. Christ is the peacemaker between God and
man. 448. Christ the Prince and chief of all Prophets. 333. Christ is ye
Physician for sins. 130. Christ overcame by death. 381. Christ preached by
Moses and the Prophets. 177. Christ is the Prince or chief of the Prophets.
333. Christ is a Prophet. 178. How Christ must be acknowledged and confessed.
649. How Christ must be preached. ibide^. How Christ performed the office of a
priest. 6 How Christ is a stumbling block to the Jews, and foolishness to the
Gentyles. 663. Christ rules in the myddle of his enimyes. 242. Christ is
declared a king by God his father. 2. Christ is a king and a priest. 37.452
How Christ fulfilled the office of a king. 6. Christ is a victorious king. 126
Christ aduaunceth us to salvation. Page 576. Christ is not every where in
body Page 34.35. Christ ought to dye but once. 540. If Christ be still on
earth, in his body, then his Godhead is absent. Page 39. Christ was
solemnly-declared to be our teacher. 58. Christ only is to be heard in the
Church. 19. Christ is the hope of Israel. 897. Christ our high Priest is
entered into the true sanctuary. 37. Christ is set over Sion, that is over the
Church of God. 11. Christ ascended above the heavens, how it is to be
understood. 35. Christ very God and man ascended, how it is to be
understood. 34. Christ being very God, receives the holy ghost in his
humanity. Page 124. Christ very God and man. 106. Christ being a conqueror
appears for us in heaven. 37. Christ the author of life and salvation. 851.
Christ is called just or righteous. Page 794. Christ is the anointed of God.
127 Christ's last act with his disciples. Page 34. Christ's descention into
hell. 117. Christ's coming visible and invisible after what sort. 41. Christ's
soul in hell, was subject to no torments. 118. The knowledge of Christ is
necessary to salvation. 542. The knowledge of Christ is revealed by God only.
791. Christ's talk with Paul. 793. Christ's study and care for his church.
8. Christ's divinity ascends not. Page 34.35. Christ's doctrine how it
ought to be considered. 3. Christ's departure from the earth. Page 33. Christ
and Moses compared together. 179. How we be made partakers of Christ and
salvation. 458. Christ's ensamples is set before us to follow. 113. Christ's
trustiness and loyalty toward God. ibidem. Christ's faith in his promise
toward his Apostles. 2. Christ's flying and avoiding. 324. Christ what he did
after his resurrection. 10. Christ's enymies in stryuing against God, fulfill
his devise. 218. Christ's enemies counselles must not be consented to. 579.
Christ's manhood is taken into eternal joy and glory. 119 Christ Jesus his
power. 367. The true knowledge of Jesus Christ. 105. Christ's merit can not
be vanquyshed by any sin of man. 130. Christ's whole service consists in
works and teaching. 6. Christ's ministry descrybed in few words. 259. The
abusers of Christ's name for vauntage shall be punished. 710. The indaungered
for Christ's name must not be forsaken. 826. Under the name of Christ, ye whole
gospel is contained. 361. Christ's obedience. 113. Christ's office. 188.
Christ's works and miracles what they were. 6.105. Christ's death and passion.
108. Christ's power in bringing down his enimyes. 785. Christ's promises are
inviolable. 4. Christ's kingdom is not of this world. ^^8. Christ's kingdom
belongs as well to all Nations, as to the Israelites. 25. What we ought to
seek for in the kingdom of Christ. 94. Christ's answer to the curyous
question of his Disciples, touching the carnal kingdom which they imagined.
27.28. Christ by his resurrection is proved to be God. 673. Christ's sacrifice
p^rgeth our sins. Page 455. Christ's spirit is the interpreteur of the law.
76. Christ's spirit what it works in men. 155. Christ's fervent desire of
men's salvation. 397. Christ's power is invincible. 350. and.351. Christ's
visible coming serves for our comfort and instruction. ibide^. Christ's last
company with his Apostles, why it is so diligently descrybed. 16. They that
follow Christ's bydding forsake the sea of Rome. 784.785 To Christ we owe faith
and obedience. 180. Christ fulfilleth whatsoever the prophets foreshewed of
him. 123. Christ and the devil have no fellowship together. 316.317. Church
meetings. 733. The Church of God is the house of God. 68. In the church is sure
fellowship and salvation. 413. Who are received into the church of Christ.
155.156. Every man must not be suffered to speak in the church.
C ante I.
Circumcision teaches us that the beginning of our generation is corrupt. 545.
Circumcision does not justify. 303. Circumcision was unprofitable to the
Jews, and why. 341. Circumcision spiritual what it is. Page 349. Circumcision
a sign or covenant of the Testament. 304. The confidence in circumcision
beaten down by Steven. 303.349. Cities of Jury, their unhappy estate. 18.
Civil or lawful defense permytted to christians. 896.
C ante O.
Comfort must be used toward the afflicted. 812. The commendation of Paul and
Barnabas. 607. Companying with the wicked must be avoided. 398. What company is
hurtful to christians. 406. Godly company is the delyght of true christian
people. ibidem. They that seek but their own commodity, of what spirit they
are. 751. The Community of the Apostles. Page 143. Community or liberality.
139. Communities cause efficient is the love of God. 146. Example of christian
Community. Page 143. The fountain and order of Community. 224.225.
Community of goods whether it be necessary. 143.144. The true trade of
community. ibide^. What community of goods was in the beginning of Christ's
religion. 226. Communion of the Lords supper how profitable it is. 140.
Commandments of God fulfilled what a blessing it purchases. Commandments
of God transgressed, procures infelicitie. Conclusion of Paul's sermon. 83^.
Concord of minds. 49. Concord and unanimity is to be had in the church. 223.
What concord is acceptable before God. 78. Concord and unity of minds most
necessary in setting forth the kingdom of God. 369. No condition or degree of
men neglected with God. 624. Confession of the Ethiopian. 386. Confession of
Christ and faith must go together. 85.86.240. Confession of the faith in
Christ. 133. Confession of the faith most beseems ministers. 824.825.
Confession of the faith is no indifferent thing. 86. To confess Christ boldly
is an effect of the holy ghost. 85. When confession of faith is requisite.
829.830. To confess Christ is a glorious thing. 765. Confession of a true
faith in Steven. 3^2. Confidence takes hold even of the godly. 101.
Confidence hypocritical. 232.233. The manners of those that are confident. 881.
The disciples minds confirmed by the Apostles. 580.581. The confirmation of
the Apostles oration, made to the people of Listra. 571. Congregations how
they may be edified. Conjunction of minds is the fountain of liberality.
143. Conscience in matters of religion, must be chiefly regarded. 801.
Consciences of men must not be snarled. 612. Conscience pricketh and molesteth
even the wicked. 251. The terrors of conscience. 129. The consent of the
wicked endures not long. 805. Consenting unto sin deserves punishment. 236.
Consent of the Synod at Jerusalem. 604. The consolation of Christ's last
coming. 41. Arguments of consolation. 684. Example of godly consolation.
ibide^. The power of Gods consolation appears in afflictions. 636. The effect
of the consolation of the holy spirit. 416. God confyrmeth his consolation by
deeds. 808. Consolation in adversity, whence it must be set. 809. Consolation
wherewyth GOD strengthens his people. 113. The manner of Gods consolations.
Page 807. Constancy. 740. Constancy and boldness in Paul. Page 689. An
example of christian constancy and boldness. 792.21.22. The heinous offense
of the counsel of Constaunce against the holy Martyr John Husse. 245. The
contempt of the ministers proceeds of the contempt of Gods word. 336.
Contempt of Gods word, is the beginning of all ungodliness. ibide^.
Contentions of the Jews with the Apostles. 550. Contention about justification
before the Apostles. 594. Conversion of Paul, why it is so dyligently
descrybed. 399. The history of Paul's conversion. Page 857. Conversion what
effect it brings. Page 625. Conversion has her beginning of God. 786.
Conversion consists in three points. Page 625. The manner of true conversion.
787. An example of true conversion. Page 375. The duetyes of those that are
converted. 787. Corinthe what manner of City it was. 677. Cornelius compared
with the soldiers of our days. 427. Cornelius obedience. 431. Cornelius
calling. 428. Corn thrown into the Sea. 885. Corporal absence of Christ
hinders not the faithful. 124. Corporal presence of Christ is none upon the
earth. 38. Corporal presence of Christ, wrongfullye maynteyned in the supper,
confuted by arguments. 38. No corporal presence of Christ upon earth after
his ascension. ibide^. No need of Christ's corporal presence upon earth. 8.
They that defend the corporal presence of Christ in the supper, deny the
verity of his body. 11. Correction in religion is necessary. Corruption of
our nature. 531. Man is subject to corruption. 541. Corpses why they were
washed in times passed. Counsel of the Priests and Scribes. Page 794. An
example of an antichristian counsel. 796. The counsels decree against the
Apostles. 206. Counsel gathered in the holy ghost. Page 598. A Pattern and
form of a lawful counsel. 250. Counselles of the Pope descrybed. Page 196.
Counsel called to wythstande the Apostles. 249. The question asked in the
Priests counsel. 198. What the Popes counsels are. 794. Ministers must not
be committed to antichristian counsels. 778.779 How Papists deal with the
faithful in their counsels. 598. Counsel how to make an unity between the
Jews and Gentiles. 601. Counsel of the elders discussed. 771. The end of
man's counsel is not happy. 771.772. The counselles of God are dangerous to
search. 555. The counselles of God can not be hindered by man's devise. 251.
The counsels of men against Christ are but vain. 204. The counsel of the
souldyours to kill the prisoners. 886. Covetousness pulls the mind from
God. 631. Covetousness commonly makes men the enemies of truth. 631.
Covetousness in Ministers is to be condemned. 756. Paul disswadeth from
covetousness by his own example. ibidem. Covetousness in the Church, is a
great evil. 804. Covetousness how hurtefull it is. Page 631.632. How
covetousness robs God of his honor. 370. Cowardly fear. 25.
C ante R.
Craft and subtlety in Steuens accusers. 289.291. Craft of the enemies of
truth. Craft of Satan. 588. Creple or lame man hears the gosple and
believes. 565. Creple from his mothers womb healed through the power of God.
Page 151. Creple miraculously healed. 566. Creples state most miserable. 565.
Cross must Christians bear after Christ's example. 206. The cross and
slanderous death is no token of Gods wrath. 490. The cross is not one of the
least notes of Christ's church. 415. The crosses standarde is the triumph of the
faithful. 253.254. The cross must not offend us. 647.
C ante V.
Curious and unprofitable questions. 27.28. Curiosity a great evil. 27.
Custom of GOD in punishing of sinners. 59. Custom must give place to y^ word
of God. 442.
D.
D ante A.
DAmascus delyuereth Paul out of danger. 411. Day of refreshing. 174. Day of
restitution. 175. What is the great day of the Lord. Page 97. Dauyd prophesied
of Christ, because he was a Prophet. 121. David reported to have fulfilled all
the will of God in what sense. Page 529. David's authority among ye Jews. Page
121. David's prophecy touching Christ's ascension declared. 125. David's
prophecy touching Christ's resurrection declared. 123. David's prophecy
concerning christ. Page 122. David praised. 529. David's sins reproved by the
word of God. 129. David's persecutions are figures of Christ's persecutions.
59.
D ante E.
In what state the dead are. 541. Deacons openly elected. 66. Deacons of the
Church did sometime Minister. 286. Deacons who ought to be, and what manner of
men. 278. Deacons upon what occasion they were ordained. 274. Deacons how
they were chosen at the beginning. 66.67. etc. Deacons of the church. 280.
Deacons instituted in the Primitive churches, have three commodities. Page 283.
Death is not the destruction of the flesh and body. 116.117. Death of Christ
was voluntary. Page 380. Death is a rest or quiet. 117. Death has no power
upon the soul. Page 116. Death is an entrance into the kingdom of heaven.
355.356. Death is a joyful thing. 116. Decins after he had shed the blood of
the Martyrs, dyed in a barbarous Country, with his Son, where his body could
not be found to be buried. 301. Decree of the Synod apostolic declared. 608.
Decree renewed for the not preaching of Christ. ibidem. Deceyuers use to
challenge godly honor. 570.571. Degrees of dignity among christians are not
abolished. 292. Delivery out of Egypt, cyted by Paul. 525. The delivered must
ascrybe the glory unto God. 496. The delivered out of one trouble, must
prepare them to an other. Page 810. The duty of the delivered out of danger
and trouble. 167. Death of the godly, expressed by this word sleeping. 355.
Death is but a sleep. 356. Death is a passage into heaven. ibide^. The causes
of Christ's death. 108. The effect of Christ's death. 111. Death of Christ is
included in his resurrection. 64. Death is to be considered. 541.746. Death and
the Devil conquered by Christ. 381. The rest after death is grounded upon
hope. 117.118. Death must not be procured. 638. Death of Christ must not offend
us. Page 535. Death must not offend us. 381. Dead Corpses must be decentlye
buried. 358. Dead men canonized deface the merit of Christ. 359. Devil what
he may do by Gods permission, but not of his own absolute power. 364.
Devils notable policy. 809.
D ante I.
Diana called Multiniamia, or the nourisher of all things. 722. Dianas Image
come down from heaven. 726. Difference between Saul and Dauyd. 529.
Difference of the old and new Testament. 95. Difference between Christ and
ministers. 22. Difference between the doctrine of John and Christ. 698.
Difference between the godly and ungodly. 494. Dignity of the Ministry of
the church. 623. Dignity of all men is one before God. 601. Dyligence of
Herod in watchyng Peter. 490. Dioclosian, Maximinian, and Galerius persecuting
the Church, are destroyed of God. 301. Disobedience laid to the Apostles
charge. 256. Disobedience reprehended. 878. Disobedience punished. 875.
Discipline in the Church, taught by the Apostles. 3. Discipline in the church
necessary. Page 150. Discipline at the Table. 883. Disciples of Christ,
comforted by angels. 41. Disciples after his ascension desire still his bodily
presence. 38. Disciples reprehended of the Angels. 38. Disciple what the name
teaches us. Page 419. Disciples at Jerusalem, afraid of Paul. 412.
Dissension workers. 588. Dissentio^s no cause why we should doubt of our
salvation. 588.589. Dissension in religion, must not offend us. 592.593.
Dissension between Paul and Barnabas. 612.
D ante O.
Doctrine of the Apostles. 139. Doctrine is tied to no place. 899. Doctrine
devised by the holy ghost, must be taught in the church. 20. Doctrine of
Christ may be learned out of the Prophets. 383. Doctrine of the gospel
succeeds most luckily among the enymies thereof. 553. Doctrine of faith is
not against good works. 640. Doctrine is the chief thing in the church. 280.
Doctrine of Paul accused. 773. Doctrine of Paul out of the scripture. 648.
Doctrine Apostolic which is true. Page 407. Doctrine of truth can never be so
wisely and modestly preached, but the world will seek to reprochit. 289.
Doctrine Apostolic has Christ her author. 8. Doctrine apostolic whence it
springs. 900. Doctrine of Christ whereto it serves. 7. Doctrine of Christ
beginning and end. 63. Doctrine is chiefly to be cared for in the Church.
139. Doctrine how Paul used it. 648. Doctrine taught of the Apostles is true.
3. Doctrine of Christ contemned, brings punishment. 547. Doctrines that
deface the merit of Christ are pernicious. 248. Doctors of the Church called
pillars. 345. Doctors who be. 508. Doctrine Apostolic disturbed by the
Professors. 407. Doctrine of Christ planteth not licentious life. 530. Doings
of m^n must be examined after the rule of Gods word. Domitian a persecutor of
ye Church, killed by his own men. 300.
D ante R.
Drunkenness whereof it begins, and what evil is in it. 92.
D ante V.
Duty of christian men in persecutitions. 491. Duty of them whom Christ
has lyghtened. 790. Duty both of Jews and Gentiles, is to seek the Lord.
601. Duty of christians what it is. 180. Duty of servants. 437. Dust
shaken of. 557.
E.
E ante D.
EDucation and good bringing up of children, how profitable it is. 617.
E ante F.
Effect of the Apostles sermon. 569. Effect of Gods promises. 846 Effect of
Peter's sermon. 129. Effect of the Apostles counsel. 137. Effect of the
Apostles doctrine. 561. Effect of persecution and banishement. 557. Effect of
Gods word in the elect, and their du^tie. 555.
E ante L.
Election or choosing is from everlasting. 554. Election gratuitie, or free,
the fountain of all goodness. 525. Electing of Ministers vnorderlye, what
hurt it does. 70. Election lawful, gets Ministers authority. ibidem.
Election lawful confirms Ministers in their office. ibidem. Electing
Ministers in the Church, asks heed and dyligence. 281. Election is not
hyndred through our sins. 681. Electing must be made openly in the sight of
the church. 66. Election and Predestination are certain. 687. Election what
the end and mark thereof is. 29. Election of Ministers must be used as in the
primitive church. 68. The elected be not free from common calamities. 420. The
elect acknowledge and receive the word of God. 548. The elect easilye know
the word of God. 555. The elect what their disposition is. Page 138. The elect
are chosen out of all sorts of men. 509. The elect God tries diverse ways and
delyuereth them when they look least for it. 805. Electing of Ministers in the
Primitive Church. 66. Eloquence a gift of the holy ghost Page 698. Elymas the
Sorcerer contendeth with Paul. 514. Elimas contention with Paul, how it
ended. 517. Enemies of the truth must be boldly reprehended. 516. Enemies of
the truth, what weapons they use. 833. Enemies of the truth what crafts they
use. 192.245. Enemies of the Apostles, who. 191. Enemies of Christ and his
gospel, who. ibidem. Enemies of Christ deprived of all help and dignity.
60.61. Christ's professed enemies must be fled. 136. Enemies of Christ how
they shall be punished. 59. Enemies of Christ are the persecutors of his
church. 393. Enemies of Paul set at debate among themselves by God. 805.
Enemies greatest to the truth, are Priests. 191.244. Enemies of the truth and
of the Ministers who. 244. and. 819. Enemies of the truth are given up into a
reprobate sense. 287 The attemptes of Christ's enemies are vain. 242 The
attemptes of the enemies of Christ. 218. Enemies of Christ fight against God,
and yet execute his counsel. Page 218.219. What end Christ's enemies have in
their enterprises. 262. Enemies of Christ conspired what their property is.
268 The enemies of Christ's enterprises are folish. 251. The enemies of
Christ's enterprises easily disappointed as appears by examples. 394 The
enemies of the Churches, enterprises are nothing but mere conceipte and
opinion. 856. The enemies of Christ destruction. Page 59. The crafts of the
enemies of the truth. 192.245. The enemies of the truths enterprises defeated,
and the godly defended Page 246. The enemies of the truths impudency.
833.834. The enemies of the truth how they must be dealt with. 199.
E ante P
Ephesus estate and condition. 704. Epicures. 26. Epicures opinions. 660.
Epicurious life shall reign toward the later times. 661.662. Epistle of
Captain Lysias, and the parts thereof. 814.
E ante R.
Errors manifest and known, must not be denied. 408. Error of the Apostles
what comoditie it has. 25.26. Error of a carnal kingdom imagined by the
Israelites, appears by scripture to be old. 27. Errors rooted are hard to
be pulled up. ibidem.
E ante S
Essenes sect what it was. 803.
E ante V
Evangelists sincere, how they may be discerned from false. ibidem. His
Baptism dilygenly described. Page 384.387 Eunuch complayneth not of Philips
departure. 387. Eunuche is zealous although ignorant in many things. 382.383.
E ante X
Examples special make no rule general. 143. Examples of Ancestors excuse
not errors. 673. Example of godly persons preserved by the Lord. 233.
Excecation and blyndenes of the wicked is incurable. 252. Execution or
accomplishing the message sent to the Church at Antioch. Page 610. Execution of
Laws is the life of them. 618. Examinacion of Ministers necessary to be had in
the church. 15 Example of a christian boldness. 90. Example of an effectuouse
power and working of the holy ghost. ibidem. Exercise of the Apostles. 611.
Exhortacions necessary to stir up the people. 521. Exorcistes or Coniurers in
ye church Page 712. Exorcistes of the Papists. 713. Externe, or outward
religion. 640.
F ante A
FAce of god what is meant by it. 120. To be gathered to ye fathers what it is.
541. Fathers always contemned Moses. Page 321.366. The vain braggers in
younger and later fathers. 164. Fathers never obedient to gods commandments.
343. Fathers in the beginning pleased god by faith only, without the law and
ceremonies. 292. Fathers which are to be followed in religion. 162. Affiaunce
in Fathers, beaten down by Steven. 350 Fathers examples, how they are to be
followed. 292. False Apostles make their hearers uncertain of salvation. 606.
False Prophets seek the friendship of great estates. 515. False teachers, must
be noted by name, and set out in their colors. Page 516.137. Faults
committed by other men, cannot excuse us. 519 False witnesses brought against
Steven. 287 False teachers and their society must be avoided. 137. False
Apostles are nicked. 606. False prophets seek nothing but how to turn men from
the faith. 137. Fame of those ye deserve well of men's salvation must be
defended. 607. Famine and persecucion use to come together. 487. Family well
instructed, how commodiouse it is. 431. Family brought up in the fear of God.
427. Faith of Christ no cause of calamities. 101.102. Faith must not be
dissembled. 385. Faith is the gift of God. 566. Faith belongs to the elect
only. 553. Faith is the mean whereby we take hold of salvation. 168. Faith
thinks not baptism in vain, or unprofitable. 384. Faith and religion must
not be judged according to the success it has in this world. 385. Faith
comes by hearing. 565. Faith in Christ is the thing of most auncientie. 896.
Faith only in Christ saved the Gentiles. 3. Faith diversely tried. 879 Faith
must not be judged according to the number of followers. 51. Faith is not idle.
419. Faith lets not, but that we must pray. 47. Faith of Paul. 823. True
faith believes as well the life of the body, as of the solue. 12. Faith of the
fathers is most ancient. Page 852. Faith overcomes the world. 142. Faith of
the old and new Testament both one. 597 Faith which way it is truly defended.
854 Faith must not be judged of according to the authority of men. 43. Faith
of what certainty and antiquity it is. 183. and. 122. The chief articles of
the Christian faith. 105.108.111. The whole sum of the Christian faith. 823.
Faith must be learned and confyrmed of Paul. 816. Faithes effect taught by the
example of the Apostles. 42. An example of Faith and charity. Page 679. Faith
and the Gospells fruits. 823. Faithes fruits. 169 Faithes frutte and
operation. 640. Faith how certain and of what authority it is. 122. Faythes
property. 138.889. A great argument of faith. 881. Faith to justify taught by
the Prophets. 459 Faythes nature. 138. Faithes dignity. 538 Faythes obedience,
strength and efficacy. 42.320. Faithes work patiently to suffer discipline.
529. Faith in Moses singular. 334 Faith will not lie hydden. 384 Faythes state
in this world. 853 Faythes force declared by the example of Abraham. 296.297.
Faith can not be separated from charity. 641. Faith gets salvation proved
by Steven. 296. Faith only is sufficient to man's salvation. 3. Faith of gods
people tried by him. Page 557. Faith and constancy of his people how god does
exercise. 623. Faith only whether it justifies men, or whether righteousness of
the law be necessary. 589 Faith takes hold of the forgiveness of sins. 458.
Faith takes hold of gods promises. 879. Faithful mind hears the word of
God willingly. 700.701. Faithful prayer of what power and efficacy it is. 637.
Faithful have god to revenge their cause. 489 Faithful are chosen in Christ,
thorough the mere ^auour of GOD. Page 29 Faithful what they abide in this
world. 800 Faithful sometime err. 462 Faithful what they seek in Christ.
Page 26.27 Faithful dye happily in every place and they dye not in misery,
that dye banished out of their Country. Page 313 Faythfulls exercises. 461
Faithful in little safety in this world Page 212 Faythfulls estate on earth.
299 Faythfulls persecutours, Christ's persecutours. 789 Faythfulls surest mark
is the faithful keeping of the Apostles doctrine. 139 Faithful in danger too
be laid wait for of their own household. Page 56 Faythfulls true mark, is
mutual love and agreement. 223 Faythfulls condition or property. Page 298
Faith of the Fathers of the old Testament, and ours proved all one. 597
Faithful are not destitute of gifts of the holy ghost. 134 Faithful have
the effect of gods holy Spirit among them indifferently. 96 Faithful what
they are called in Scripture. 148 Faythfulls small nombre must offend no man. 50
F ante E
Feasts instituted of God, and why. Page 75 Fear what it comprehends in it.
Page 4^6 Fear of the wicked is preposterous. Page 475 Fear the worste
Counselor that is. Page 401 Fear forbidden. 681 Felix what he was. 814 Felix
and D^usolla hear Paul. Page 828 Felix the husband of three queens. Page
815 Festus a president of such as the word of God with a profane mind. 865
Festus, cause that Paul is herd with attencion. 846 Festus bears Paul
wytnes that he is innocent. 842 Festus admits Paul's appeal though
unwillingly. 839 Festus oracion to Agrippa touching Paul. 841 Festus iniquity
and unrighteousness. Page 837
F ante L
Flesh of Christ taken up into Heaven, is a pledge that ours shall go thither
also. 36 Flesh and blood, in what sense it can not inherit the kingdom of
Heaven. 38
F ante R
Fruits of saint Paul's Doctrine. Page 649 Fruit of faith is Joy of the
conscience. 387 Fruit of Apostolic study. 618 Fruits of true godlynes. 147.148
F ante Y
Fylthy communicacion what a sin it is. 84 Fylthines or whoredom with
Idolles. 335
G ante A
GAlerius end a persecutour of the Church. 301 Gamalils counsel. 264
G ante E
Gentiles called. 424 Gentiles first called in Cornelius. Page 425 Generatione
how it is taken in the Scriptures. 381
G ante L
Glory of Christ what it is. 381 Glory gotten by au^cestrie but a vain thing.
307 Glory in tytles and successione, but a vanity. 606 Glorying in the
Gospel and word of God but vain oneles in deed we follow that is
prescribed thereby. 350 To glorify the word of God what it is. 555
G ante O
GOD of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and of the Fathers. 163 God the auctour and
fountain of all goodness. 575 God aduaunceth abject and despised persons to
honor. 330 GOD warns us of dangers and gives us Counsel in time. Page 872
God provides for his Church by his prophets. 483 God ^ustifieth us of favor,
through faith in Christ 594 God may be better known by his woorkemanshippe of
the world, then by Images. 671 God scatters the Counsels of his enemies,
and defends his servants. 246 God defends his servants in the myddle of
wolves. 142 God mixeth adversity with prosperity. 316 God punishes no
person, but first he conuicteth him of his sin, and makes him understand
the cause of his punishment. 236 God is not worshipped with sacrifyces. 667 God
must not be tempted. 236 GOD neglects not a man's state though he seem to
forgette him. Page 807 GOD has no respect of persons. Page 446 God can be
expressed by no Image. Page 672 God is the maker and governor of all things.
573 God of the Fathers. 826 God, in what sense he is the God of Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob. Page 327 God must be inuocated in Christ. Page 103 God helps his
people beyond all their expectacion. 316 God resists them that withstand
the Doctrine that he reuealeth. Page 805 God saves his people even in the pyt
of destruction. 527 God delivers the Apostles, calling upon him. 637 God
helps such as labor faithfully. 561 God comfort his people. 688 God
delyuereth his people being in danger. 860 God knows his servant, and
defends them in the mydle of the wicked, proved by Examples. Page 17 God
neglects not those that are his Page 873 God never forsakes his servants
in danger. 349 God has a rare of those that are his. Page 834 God tries the
faith and patience of his people. 297 God aydeth his servant when they are
afflicted. 308 Gods singular goodness toward men. 151 Gods knowledge where
it must be sought. 665 Gods counsel and usage letting his enemies many times
run so far, that it might seem they had their purpose. 392 Gods
counselles cannot be hindered. 266 God described of his Omnipotency. Page 320
God gives us whatsoever goodness is in us. 308 God alone is the auctour of
miracles. 161 GODS wonderful goodness. Page 495.561. Gods goodness toward
sinners that repent. 761 Gods singular goodness speakinge friendly to his
enemies. 790 Gods goodness taking Paul his cruel enemy^ into favor again.
Page 359 Gods judgments must not be to far waded in. 672 Gods usage in
punishing the wicked. 207 Gods proper woork is to save men. Page 319 Gods
wonderful power against the wicked. 212 Gods power in delyuering his people.
643 Gods power is invincible. 816 Gods power in defeating his enemies devises.
318 Gods providence how it ought to comfort us in dangers. 315 Gods providence
preserves the godly in danger. 557 Gods providence stretches to all aages.
315 Gods servants are not ignorant of the Lords will. 542 GOD can easily
deliver his people out of danger, and make their enemies their defendours.
Page 261 God must not be prescribed in any thing. 35 God must be let alone
with the success of all our doings. 583 How much we be bound to God. Page
904 God only must be worshipped and honored. 891 Gods for defendours and
patrones. Page 668 Gods can not be made by men. Page ibidem New Gods. 343
God Maozim. 666 God Remphan. 342 GOD'S right hand what it is. Page 35 Gods
right hand. 126 God deferreth his help, but takes it not utterly away. 497
Godhead of Christ abolisheth not his manhood. 39 Godhead and manhod of Christ,
and the use thereof. 107 Godlynes of the people of Berrhea. Page 657 Godlynes
commended. 613 Who are truly godly. 789 Godly morn at Paul's departure. Page
758 Godly and religious who be. 87.88 Godly men must defend and deliver
Ministers of the word. Page 411 Godly men are not bound by patience to yield
to the vngodlyes pleasure. 841 Godly live not without glory. Page 758 Godly
yield unto reason. 471 Godlyes estate, 493 Godly have imperfections. 101 Godly
are feared with the presence of Gods majesty. 426.427 Godlyes sayings. 269
God directs the tribulations of the godly to his glory. 841 God always
joins with them that take part with the godly in their dangers. 731 Godly
being circumuented with false judgments, may seek means to escape, so it
may be done without prejudice of the truth. 805 Goods of monasteries
whereunto they ought to serve. 372.373 Good can we none do, except we be
drawn of God. 320. Gospelles excellency of Doctrine Page 247 Gospels end in
Preaching. 674 Gospels course hindered by Simon Magus. 363 Gospel is called the
grace of God. Page 549 Gospel no cause of publyke miserye and calamity. 363
Gospel in what persons it brings forth worthy fruit. 88 Gospel first
preached to the Jews. Page 532 Gospel no cause of dissension or lycensiouse
living. 76 Gospel can not be Preached without contradiction. 661 Gospel
never Preached in vain. Page 649 Gospel teaches us our salvation perfitly. 7
Gospel how it is the kingdom of God. 870 Gospel can not be preached
without tribulation. 403 Gospel or preaching of Christ called the wonderful
works, of God, by the Apostles. 85.86 Gospel is called the word of life of
grace, of reconciliacion, and is beautified with diverse other names in the
Scriptures. etc. Page 247.248 Gospels course is most prosperous. Page 763
Gospels worthiness. 277 Gospel why it is evil spoken of Page 194 Gospelles
dygnitie and efficacy. etc. Page 461 Gospel is set forth in the myddle of
tribulacions. 553 Gospel is no new Doctrine. 852 Gospel how it ought to be
preached Page 408 Gospelles end and use. 860 Gospells end is the obedience of
faith. 297.298 Gospelles happy success. 283 Gospelles enemies rejected by
gods just judgment. 427 Gospells greatest praise what is. Page 367 Gospel
begins in John. 450 Gospel begins with the rebuking of sin. ^08
Gospel preached is a stombling stone unto men. 89 Gospel preached and
confirmed with miracles by the Apostles of Christ Page 149 Gospelles preaching
what it comprehends in it. 184 The right trade of the Gospel preaching. 900
Gospelles case or estate. 900.901 The sum of the gospel. 864 Gospel
witnessed by the holy ghost* and by the Apostles. 264 Gospel truly
described. 413 Gospel called a light and a sword, in what sense. 129
Gospelles use and effect. 79 Gospel must have threats mixed among. 546
Gospel despisers fall from grace. Page 336 Gospel gaynesaying how wicked a
thing it is. 31 Gospel teaches not liberty of the flesh. 78
G ante R
Grace is given us in Christ Jesus. Page 543 Grace of god is not tied to
Sacraments. 463 Grace of god to miserable sinners. Page 43 Grace of god and
merit of works, cannot stand together. 596 Grace or thanks gyuing is
taught. 895. Grace or thankesgyuing for gods bounty and liberality. Page
114. and 115 Gratitude or thankfulness. 653 Gratitude or kyndnes of Lydia to the
Apostles. 626 Gratitude or kyndnes of Christians. Page 205 Gratitude in the
people of Malta. Page 892 Gratitude or kyndnes in Pharao. Page 311 Greeks make
a muttering, because their Widows were not relieved with the Alms of the
Church. Page 275
H ante A
Hearts must be purified. 595 and.596 Hatred of gods word how far it
proceeds. 768 Hatred of truth is very bitter. 819 Who have the Lord before
their eyes. 113.114 Who have after the meaning of scripture.
H ante E
Hearers of Paul. 841.842 Hearers of diverse kinds. 548 Hearers of all
nations. 87 Hearers of Christ's doctrine who be meetest. 88 Hearers of Gods
word who. Page 378 Hebrews what they understand by this word Inferi or
hell. 117 Herisie beginners sin against the order of nature. 667 Heretic,
who is, and who is not. Page 823 Heretics how they must be confuted. Page 826
Henoches fayth-what it was. 853 Herordes Agrippa begins a persecution. 488
Herod desires to be worshippped as God. 505 Herod molesteth them that border
upon him. 503 Herod how he was affected at Gods miracle. ibidem Herod how
he persecuted the Church. 490 Herodes destruction. 505
H ante I
Jerusalem why it served to so godly a purpose being so wicked and near
destruction. 17 Jerusalem an ensample how true Gods promises be. 17
Hieeusalem in glory and power excelled all other cities. 16 Hierusalems sin
and destruction. Page ibidem At Jerusalem the Apostles received the holy
Ghost. ibidem At Jerusalem begins the preaching of the Gospel. ibidem
Histories of the Bible sett^ out the contemplacion of the invincible God. 1 The
end of the history of the Apostles. 919 History of the old and new
testament commended. 1
H ante O
Holy Ghost the author of prophecy. Page 484 Holy Ghost promised. 1 Holy
history has five uses or commodities 16 Honor is due to them that labor
earnestlye to set forth Gods glory. 757 They that will be honored as Gods,
what we may think of them Page 570 Hope must be reposed in God, and not in
men. 46 Hope of the promises made to the fathers consists in Christ. 848
Hospitalitye. 678.765.891 Hospitality has rewards. 891 House of God is the
Church or congregation. 122 House comprehends under it all sorts and degrees
of men. 127 Householders that are diligent are commended. 427.431
H ante V
Humanity or courtesy. 812.888 Humbleness and obedience in Paul to be
imitated. 395 Humility. 740 Humble and tractable mind in Paul. Page 395
Humility how much is understood by it. 378 Hunger and persecution go
together. Page 487
H ante Y
Hypocrites and land leapers are enemies to the truth. 650 Hypocritical
boldness set forth in Sapphira. 234 Hypocrisy declared to be a grievous
evil by the example of the Jews. Page 795.796 Hypocrites how they must be
esteemed. 228 Hypocrites are the slaves of Satan. Page 231 Hypocrites
arguments. 414 Hyppocrites conditions set forth in Ananias. 232.233
Hyppocrites properties. 797 Hypocrites tyranny reproved. 801 Hypocritical
confidence. 235
I ante A
Jacob went down into Aegipt. and why. 310 Jacob nourished through the
liberality of his son whom he mourned for so bitterly. ibidem James is
slain with the sword. Page 490 James subscribeth to Peter's opinion. 600
I ante C
Iconium. 559
I ante D
Idolatry offends both God and Godly. 338 Idols worship. 337 Idolatry
defendors. 100 Idolators joy. 338 Idolatries beginning and increase. Page 336
Idolatry among Christians how evil it is. 344 Idolatry popish described.
337 Idolatry unlawful and abominable. 602 Idolatry in the Israelites
plagued Page 341 Idolatry is of three kinds. 342 Idolatry in the Israelites
deepelye rooted. 339 Idolatry of men must not be wited to God. ibidem Idle and
riotous persons cause of much evil. 651
I ante E
Iereboam renewed the superstition of the Calves. 340 Jesus is given us of
mere favor. Page 530 Jesus is borne of the seed of David, according to the
promises Page ibidem Jesus called Christ, that is to say anointed. 451.127
Jesus Christ's name is hated of the wicked. 170 Jesus Christ his office.
330.331 Jews how grievously they offended in denying Christ. 164 Jews being
pricked in heart seek counsel at Peter and the other Apostles. 129 Jews
worship not God. 823 Jews bear witness of Paul's innocence. 896.897 Jews
desire to hear the Gospel. Page 898 Jews the children of the Prophets and of
the Testament. 178 179 Jews are Hypocrites. 795.796 Jews delivered out of
Egypt through favor, and not through works. 314 Jews moved with the
preachinge of Peter, and prycked in heart. Page 129 Jews Paul's enemies. 774
Jews incumerable malice and hatred. 798 Jews how they receive the preachinge
of Christ. 423 Jews weapons and sleyghtes against Christ. 551 Jews fresh
attempt against Paul. Page 832 Jews contention about the doctrine of the
Gospel. 903 Jews error touching Christ's kingdom. 24 Jews destruction 59
Jews importunate malice. 795 Jews unhappy estate. 843.681 Jews indignation
against Paul. Page 798 Jews miserable condition. 678 Jews what the name
signifies. Page 91 Jews priests in going about too hindre Christ's
kingedome set it forward. 219 Jews cruelty could not hindre Christ. 165.166
I ante G
Ignorance how it excuses. 170
I ante M
Image woorship what evil it has bred among Christians. 339 Images woorking
miracles. 726 Images condemned. 672 Images made of GOD, are lies. Page ibid.
I ante N
Inchauntments and magical why God permits them. 0 Incarnation of Christ,
and the consideration thereof. 178 Inconstantie and lightness in Commons. 288
Incredulity of the Jews was wilful. 901 Incredulity or unbelief what an
evil it is. 31 Incredulities punnishment. 902 Increase of gods church. 148
Industry or diligence of Paul. Page 610 Industry of Paul, Silas, and
Barnabas, in setting forth the kingdom of Christ. 610.611 Industry an example.
814 Ingratitude of the people ought to offend no man. 322 Ingratitude in
sinning against Christ laid to our charge. 323 Ingratitude punished. 902.875
Ingratefuls punishment. 323 Innocence of Christ, purges our sins. 535
Innocents must not be delivered at the pleasure of the enemies. Page 838
Insolency or pride of men that see the examples of Gods power every day, and
yet boldly hold on therein. 3^3 Intercession of saints overthrown Page 0
Integrity of the Prophets and Apostles commended. 794 Intencions of me^ must
not be thrust into the church. 20.21 Invocation must be made with affiaunce in
gods mercy. 102.103 Invocation is due to GOD only. Page 103 Inuocations
fruit. ibid. Inuocations order. 102 Invocation must be used in the beginning
and end of all our doings. Page 150
I ante O
Jobs faith touching the resurrection of our bodies. 14 John Mark withdraws
him self from the ministry of the gospel. Page 518 John Baptistes testimony
of christ. Page 531 Joy everlasting. 115 Joy of the godly what it is. 270
Joy of the ungodly, what it is. Page 115 Joy of the spirit. 641 Joy
eternalles cause efficient is the beholding of god. 120 Joy of the godly how
great it is. Page 125 Joseph saved of grace and favor. Page 307 Joseph a
figure of Christ. 308 Journey of Paul and Barnabas to preach. 511 Iosephes
love and trustiness. toward his master. 311 Iosephes history. 307 Ioses why
he was called Barnabas. 227 Ioses liberality. 226
I ante S
Isaac and Iacobes faith what it was. Page 853 Israelites accused of Idolatry
by the Prophets. 339 Israelites given up into a reprobate sense, by gods
just judgment. Page ibid. Israelites the peculiar people of god. Page 95
Israelles multiplication in Egypt, is to be ascribed to gods favor. Page 314
I ante V
Judas the Galilean. 265 Judas sins not alone in betraying Christ, but the
whole Nation with him. 59 Judas field. 56.57 Judas sorrows. 57 Judas horrible
death. ibid. Judas horrible end. 56 Judas offenses, what they are. 55 Judas
who they be that follow. Page 230 Judas punishements foreshewed by the
Prophets. 58 Judas posterities estate. 59 Judas first dignity. 55 Judgment
of god against ye Jews. Page 60 The last judgment. 457 The last judgment is
a time of refreshing and restitucion. 175 The latter Judgment. 674 Judgments
of god must be diligently marked. 156.157 Judgment and estimacion that men
have us in, must not provoke us to be proud. 72 Judgment given in haste for
favor of men, is an hurtful thing. 800 Judgments of god how they ought to be
used. 725 Judgment partial, is a pestilent thing. 838 In Judgment both
parts must be heard. 821 Judge must have two ears, one for the plaintiff, an
other for the defendant. 635 Judges must hear causes without delays. 842
Judges in the Council at Jerusalem are amazed, and wot not what to do. 203
Judges must follow the goodness and bountifulnes of god. 234.235 Judges what
their duty is. 851 Rash Judgments end. 645 Iuliane the Apostata forsakes
the faith. 301 Iuliane his last words. 218 Julius Maximinus, and his son,
raging against the Church, were destroyed of their soldiers, by ye just
judgment of god. 300.301 Justification of man through faith in Jesus Christ,
proved by notable examples in the Acts of the Apostles. 3 Justification of
faith taught by the Prophets. 459 Iustifications order. 463 Iustifications
reason. 595 Justification attributed to works is a grievous offense. 596
Justice and temperance are fruits of faith. 829 Justice of man can not stand
in the Judgment seat of god. 801 Justice comes not of merits of works,
but of faith as Steven teaches through out his oracion. 298
K ante Y
Kings that are proud and ambitiouse, ruled many times by their bondemen. 504
Kingdom of Christ eternal and invincible. 381 Kyngedome of Christ is not of
the earth. 24 Kingdom of Christ by preaching of the gospel spread in all
places. 3 Kingdom of Christ spread to the borders about Jury, and how it
mikht further be spread. 242 Kingdom of Christ what it is. 126 Kingdom of
Christ is spiritual. Page 30 Kyngedome of Christ enlarged by preaching.
ibidem Kingdom of god. 710 Kingdom of god by his appointement ^aryed to the
Gentyles. 509. and 510 Kingdom of god declared, and for what cause. 14 Kingdom
of god preached by Paul Page 916 Kingdom of god when it should be preached.
ibid. Kingdom of christ and of his word how they differ. 381 Kingdom of
Christ's beginning, success and increase in this world. Page 2 Kingdom of
Christ's power and majesty. 126 Kingdom of Christ's enlargement. Page 506
Kingdom of Christ is peaceable. Page 98 Kingdom of Christ bounded by the
Prophets. 32 Kingdom of God comprehends in it our salvation and redemption.
Page 13 Kingdom of the Jews conferred upon David. 528 Kingdom of Christ's
estate. 30 Of Gods Kingdom and heavenly glory, how we are made partakers.
286
L ante A
Laborers that are faithful must be helped. Page 579 Last days estate what it
shall be. 174 Last day searchers. 29 Last days fear and remembrance, what
it causes. 174.175 Last day Deriders and Iesters. Page 100 Later days
troublesome estate. 98 Laws ceremonial not necessary too salvation. 293
Lawful defense permitted to ye godly. 644 Law leads us by the hand unto
Christ. 75.76 Law cannot justify. 544 Law given for them that came after
also. 335 Law, wherein it is abrogated. Page 334 Law how it was published.
ibid. Law is a mirroure or glass. 544 Law shows us the true way to attain
unto life. 334 Law how it is called the lively word. ibid. Laws prevail
not, onles they be executed. 618 Law and ceremonies use and end. Page 292
Law in Christ is ended. 76 Law begone in the day of Pentecost. ibid. Law
can not truly be understood, but by the Spirit of Christ. Page ibid. Law
whereto it serves. 545 Laws public are profitable to be kept. 797 Laws
authority wherein it depends. ibid.
L ante E
Leuitie or gentleness of God excuses not our sin. 525 Leuitie or lightness in
religion must be avoided. 789 Le^ites or Priests offended with Christ. 227
Leuitie of commones, may be seen in the Samaritanes. 362.363
L ante I
Liberality to the poor commended. Page 144 Liberality in releeuing the
poor. Page 224 Liberality is a commendable thing. Page 760 Liberalities
examples. 154 Liberality of God. 155 Liberty and free speech in reprehending
of sins. 110 Liberty abused what hurt it procures to the people. 816
Liberty who can use best. 426 Liberty of Christ must be kept inviolable.
602 Libertines College, the greatest enemies of Steven. 286 Lights whereto
they served in the Church. 734 Light given us in Christ. 553 Light shyneth
where Peter is in prison. 494 Licinius Ualerianus, a persecutoure of Christ's
Church taken by Sapores, king of the Persians, is fain to serve for a
footeblocke for Sapores to get on horse back by. Page 301
L ante O
Long sufferance of God exemplified. Page 234 Looking in, what the word
conteyneth in it. 219 Lottery of two kinds. 71 Lot is a part or portion. 70
Lottes are in subjection to Gods providence. 72 Lottes which be lawful, and
which not. 71.72 Lotterye unlawful and who abuse lawful lottes. ibid. Lottes
are an ancient usage. 72 Lottes used in diuidinge of inheritance. ibidem
Lottes Matthias is choosen by. Page 71 Lottes lawful to use. 72
L ante V
Lucius septimus Seuerus, persecuting the Church, was killed in his flourishing
estate. 300 Lucre sought in religion is not allowed of God. 720 Luke inspired
of the holy ghost, writes ye story of the gospel diligently. Page 2 Luke wrate
of all things in what sense. 5.6.
L ante Y
Life of man like a Pylgrimage. Page 299 Life eternal. 119 Life eternal
estate, most happy. Page ibid. Life of man of what estate and condition it
is. 871 Lydia is an example of true conversion. 624 Lydia causes her housho^d
to be baptized. 626 Lydia how and after what manner she was converted. 625
Lystra dwellers how they were affected at Paul's miracle. 890
M ante A
MAgistrates must beware of brybes. Page 831 Magistrates offended at the
Apostles. 556 Magistrates by the sword must keep under blasphemers,
deceyuers, and false teachers. 233 Magistrates duty too enquire out matters
diligently. 848 Magistrates must be careful for the faith and for religion.
849 Magistrates wicked. 643 Magistrates must be diligent in the defense of
God. 816 Magistrates must do no evil for favor of men. 835 Magistrates must
not hasten judgment for men's favor. 828 Magistrates must not be defrauded of
their honor. 119 Magistrates duty. 32 Magistrate must aid the godly,
requiring it. 812 Magistrates opprssinge innocents, how they must be
punished. Page 801 Magistrates must be instructed with the power of the holy
ghost. Page 20 Magistrates how far they must be obeyed. 274 Magistrate
curteouse is a beautifying of his office. 816 Magistrates authority how it is
preserved. 801 Magistrates wicked their manners. Page 799 Magistrates must
hear causes with diligence. 821 Magistrates inferioure, must be simplye
obeyed without lookynge for further authority of Superio^r. 426 Majesty and
truth of Christ's Kingdom declared in the story of the Apostles. 2 Malta is
the place where ye Knights of Saint John's order keep their residence. 887
Malta people are an example of hospitality. ibidem Malta men an Example of
humanity. 888 Malta men take Paul for a god. Page 889 Malta men's kyndnes.
892 Man's end teaches us the woorshipping of one God. 671 Man's nature and
condition, as he is natural. 396 Manne going about to deceive us, under
pretense of Religion, how w^e must judge and esteem him. Page 229 Manne what
he owes unto God. Page 2^0 Manne how he must prepare himself to receive the
Holy Ghost. Page 77 Manne how he is called the vessel and instrument of God.
399 Man's enterprises we must not pass much upon, but study to please God
only. 818 Man's power is nothing against God. 875 Manne must have a regard
of his dignity. 481 Man's corruption may be known by the faultines in the
Saints. Page 26 Men of three sorts burning^ in hatred against the truth.
208 Man's infirmity set forth in the example of Ananias. 402 Man's
redemption figured. 566 Man's traditions can not save us. Page 353 Man's
counsel or deuyse can not quayle Christ's kingdom. 30 Man's traditions and
godly intentions are dangerous to be thrust into the Church. 21 Man's
origene and beginning teaches us to worship one God. Page 358 Manne for his
behoof may eat all meats created of God. 406 Man's natural dulnes. 437
Men of base degree and rascalles (called in this world) embrace and receive
the Gospel. 624 Men are all sinners. 543 Manne destitute of the knowledge of
God soon corrupted. 837 Maynteyners of free will confuted. Page 790
Maynteyners of Popish merits confuted. 428 Manaes a noble man and a Courtier.
509 Manasses a wicked Idolater. 340 Mary the moother of Christ committed to
the tuicion of John. Page 46 Mary the virgin mother of Christ. Page ibidem
Marriages with the wicked, prosper evil. 828 Maryners unbelief and falsehoode.
Page 880 Martyrs punishments must be weighed by Saint Steuens Example. 351
Matthew had a wife as appears by the house he kept. 45 Matthias chosen to be
an Apostle. Page 72 Matthie the Apostle his election. Page 66 Matthie chosen
into the rowme of Judas. 44 Matthias authority of vocation. 58
M ante E
Means ordained of God, must not be rashly neglected. 814 Mean and
indifferent things, when they cease to be indifferent. 616 Means lawfully
used. 882 Means unlawful must none be used to come by commodity. 870 Meats
choice or difference. 434 and 435 Mercy of God toward Sinners. Page 790 Mercy
in what sense it is used of S. Paul. 540 Merits of men how much is to be
attributed to them. 429
M ante I
Ministry of Christ comprehended in two words. 6 Ministers are not polluted
by marriage. 765 Ministers to be taken into ye church, what manner of men they
should be. 63 Ministry outward is profitable too be duly administered. 399
Ministry of the word to be profitable, proved by Examples. Page 400
Ministry Ecclesiastical commended. 429 Ministry Ecclesiasticalles parts.
Page 279 Ministry Ecclesiasticalles reason. Page 508 Ministeries dignity. 179
Minister of Christ's word, be he never so sclender and base, must not be
contempned. 397 Minister of the Church, must be apt and fit to teach. 63.64
Minister of the Church must have a sound and sure knowledge of Christ. 64
Ministers ought to be such as are like too persevere and contyneue. Page ibid.
Minister what things is requisite for him. ibid. Ministers are ordained of
GOD. Page 750 Ministers must be desirous of humility and agreement. 91
Ministers where they must preach Christ his name. 403 Ministers of the Church
are a benefit of God. 49 Ministers of Christ must be at unity. 147 Ministers
of the Church are Apostles. 70 Ministers of the Church must be admitted to
the oversight of ecclesiastical goods. ibid. Ministers of the Church must not
be money gatherers. 756 Ministers of the Church whether they may take stypend
and wages. Page 679 Ministers must further and procure the Salvation of all
men. Page 740 Ministers of the Gospel must obey Go^des commandments.
Page 19 Ministers must be lawfully elected. Page 66 Ministers must be referred
and leaft unto God. 68 Ministers of the Gospel are neither robbers of goods
honor, nor blasphemers. 727 Ministers what armor they must do on, against the
assaults of this world. 211 Ministers have need of Gods holy spirit. 19
Ministers duty consists chiefly in teaching. 64 Ministers unmeet must not
be^ ^^ken into the Church. (...) Ministers (...) till they (...) lawfully
called. 58 Ministers who be lawful, and who unlawful. 510 Ministers must
speak and not hold their peace. 683 Ministers must not over hastily forsake
the Church. 683 Ministers must do their duty, although they profit little.
746 Ministers how they are not culpable of other me^nes faults. Page 682
Ministers must fight but with scriptures. 703 Ministers must be from the crime
of sedition. 825 Ministers must have knowledge in Gods will, that will teach
other the same. 794 Ministers must have an earnest care to their churches. 150
Ministers must have a special care for their own Nation and Country, after
the Apostle Paul's ensample. 795 Ministers may sometimes secke to escape by
flying. 411 Ministers are not blameable for beating down superstition and
a^^iance in works. 896 Ministers must pray for the salvation of the people.
793 Ministers what they must teach. Page 794 Ministers how vehemently they
must rebuke those that deface the glory of God by seeking filthy lucre. 373
Ministers must not seditiously disturb every commonweals. Page 823
Ministers must be stout, and yet gentle to be spoken too. 405 Ministers
admonished of their duty by Paul's example. 402 Ministers are men, and
therefore subject to man's infirmity. 55 Ministers must reprove as well secret,
as manifest faults, committed against the truth. 230 Ministers faithful have
diverse and sundry chances following them as may be seen in Paul. 410.
Ministers at variaunce must not offend us. 612.613. Ministers in the Church
that have been couetouse what they have don Page 7^6 Ministers true praise what
it is. 474 Ministers described yt are false. ibide^. Ministers lawfully called
a behofefull thing. 753. Ministers of the church whence they have their
authority. 330. Ministers of the word must paint out false teachers in their
colors, and note them by their names. 136 Ministers must accuse notorious
wyckednes with bold speech. 109 Ministers faults must make no man (...) b^cke.
55. Ministers ought law^^lly to be called. 789 Ministers of the word must be
zealous. 375. Ministers how much we are bound unto them. 895 Ministers may
lawfully declare unto their churches, what the enemies entend against Christ
and his flock Page 215. Ministers have need of good bringing up. 14. Ministers
must boldly rebuke men. Page 204. Ministers must be innocent and harmeles.
838. Ministers must be kindly and thankfully used. 441. Minis^ers must not be
so cleued unto that if god take the^ away, we must think religion shall
quayle. 387. Ministers how they should be ordained. 282. Ministers must have a
regard who hears them. 678 Miracle of the Apostles. 239. Miracle of the lame
man healed. 565. Miracle of the tounges what it meant Page 80. Miracle of the red Sea. 332. Miracles of the Apostles were the works of Christ. 161
Miracles of Christ and the Apostles were perfect. 155. Miracles why Christ
wrought. 157. Miracles of Moses in Egypt. 517. New miracles must not be
devised. Page 563. Miracles of Moses in the wilderness Page 332. Miracles done
by Philip. 361. Miracles repugnant to gods word no miracles. 563 Miracles
which be true. 139. Miracles taught by the Apostles do serve for two ends the
cause efficient of them is Christ. 239. Miracles of Peter described. 417.
Miracles don by ye Apostles to what end they serve. ibidem. Miracles final
cause. 163. Miracles are of two kinds. 159 Miracles neglige^tly considered
what it has done. ibidem. Miracles, what men consider most in them. ibidem.
Miracle greatest that ever Paul did Page 917. Miracles end of the new
Testament. ibidem. Miracles what their use is. 161.162. Miracles confirmed the
preaching of the gospel. 151.
M ante N
Mnason host unto Paul. 767.
M ante O
Mocquers, dogs and hogs. 88. Modesty of Paul. 413. Modesty in the
Apostles. 158. Moloch the god of the Ammonites. Page 342. Moloch among the
Monks. 343. Monarchs and absolute Princes can syldome suffer free states.
503. Monks overthrown. 757. Monks succeed the Stoikes. 662. Moses taught
those things that he received of God. 330. Moses a perswader of amity and
concord. 323 Moses bears wytnes to Christ. Page 177. Moses saved and called
too dignity through the favor of God, proved by three arguments. 317. Moses
instructed in all manner sciences of the Egyptians. 318. Moses a law maker. 334
Moses an example of modesty and constant faith. 325. Moses a defendour of the
people of Israel. 312.317. Moses the prince and redemer of the people of Israel
in what sense. 330 Moses a figure of Christ. 323 Moses age and the cause that
moved him to take care for the afflicted people. 320. Moses authority among
the Jews Page 177. Moses compared with Christ. 324. Moses commended. 330.331
Moses dignity. 334 Moses an example of Christ, and a figure of our
redemption. 323. Moses faith. 853. Moses fled. 323. Moses red. 603 Moses
miracles. 331. Moses office, and how he discharged it. 330 Moses called, when,
by whom, and in what sort. 325 Moses despised of the fathers and not of
Steven. 319.320.
M ante V
Multitude makes not a religion good Page 574. Multitude murmuring and
grutching. Page 275. Murmuring of the Greeks against the Hebrews and why.
274.
M ante Y
Mysteries of Christ not unknown to the ancient fathers. 122. Mysteries of
god revealed by the prophets. 98
N ante A
NAme of God, what it is, and why he is so called. ^03. Narration of Paul's
sermon. 525. Nature gives place to the will of god Page 495. Natures divine and
humane in Christ and their difference. 105 Navigations of Paul long and
perilous. 760. Nazarites vow. 694.
N ante E
Nero, the first persecutour of the Church pursued with the vengeance of God.
300.
N ante I
Nicolaites what they were and who was their auctour. 281. Nicholas among the
deacons, what manner of man he was. 281. Nicholas example teaches what a care
men should have that seem to stand for fear of falling. 281.282
N ante O
Noah's says what it was. 853.
O ante B
Obedience of faith is the end of preaching the gospel. ^48 Obedience of
faith the mark of the gospel. 181. Obedience pleases and delights god. Page
524. Obedience the chief and principal effect of faith. 640 Obedience which
the godly desire to show unto God is the cause of persecutions. 862. Obedience
vncounterfeyt. 42. Obedience exemplifyed. ^48.431.
O ante C
Occasion of the contencion between the Jews and the Apostles. 550 Occasion
of the contencion between Paul and Elymas the sorcerer. 514.
O ante F
Offense must be avoided in things lawful. 608 Offense of the Cross put
away by Paul. 533.
O ante L
Old errors are hardly put away. Page 27. Old Testament contemners,
reproved. 77. Old Testament apperteyneth to us Page 325. Old Testament ought
not to be despised. 381.
O ante R
Oracle of God touching the bondage of the people of Israel in Egypt reherced.
^98. Oracle of God is true. 886 Oracles of the Prophets no defense for
Astrology. 319 Oracles touching the calamities of the later days. 98. Order
of the Apostles council. 598. Order in the Church must be observed. 510.49 The
ordained to eternal life bel^ue. Page 553 Order and points of doctrine
Evangelical. 852
O ante T
Oath that God joined too his promise concerning his son. 123
P ante A
Palsy a figure of man's corruption. 417 Pamphilia lightened with the Gospel.
518 Papists error confuted, denying salvation and fruition of God to Infantes
departed without baptism. page 136 Patience lets not, but that we may
defend the truth. 91 Patience of Christ in the agony of death. 380 Patient
waiting for Gods promises page 79 Patience necessary for the faithful. page
487 Patience how far it extends. page 801 Patience and obedience in
bearing the cross must be learned of Christ. page 380 Patience exemplyfied.
868 Patience in Paul. 800 Patiently must those things be borne that cannot be
altered. 838 Parts and argument of Paul's sermon. 523 Patriarchs dyed in
Egypt by Steuens affirmation. 312.313* Patriarchs saved through the mere grace
of God, by faith and not by the ceremonies of the Law. 313* Paul's success in
preaching. 917 Paul's effect of preaching. 408 Paul pulled away from the
people of Asia. 760 Paul pleads his cause without fear. 848 Paul escapes
the hands of his accusers. 826 Paul is called to be an Apostle. page 818
Paul appealeth to Caesar. 839 Paul exhorts to take meat. 883 Paul sent to
the Gentyles. 793 Paul called to the ministry of the word. 791 Paul
preaches the Gospel to Agrippa. 863 Paul bytten of an Adder. 888.889 Paul
is baptized. 791.405* Paul baptiseth* teaching us that the use of baptism is
not to be neglected. 406 Paul goes from Berrhe^. 657 Paul refreshed after
he had received meat. 406 Paul confuteth the Jews. 408 Paul comforted by
God. 483 Paul obeys God against the decrees of the priests. 859 Paul had
been three days in prayer when Ananias came to him. 400 Paul in danger among
those that despised God. 876 Paul brought to Rome by soldiers, among
malefactors. 870 Paul would not fly when he had very good opportunity. 871
Paul permitted to preach. 915 Paul in danger of his life. 776 Paul gives
counsel and comfort in woeful cases. 877 Paul appointed to preach Christ.
Page 402 Paul desirous to be joined too the Church at Jerusalem* 413 Paul an
elect or chosen instrument. Page 402 Paul confuted Elymas. 314 Paul is taken
going about to obey God. 863 Paul raised up by Christ, which had throwe^ him
down before. 858 Paul and Barnabas earnestly resist such as disturbed the
church. 590 Paul and Barnabas preach in the Synagoges. 512 Paul and Barnabas
how they began too preach to the Gentyles. Page 511 Paul what he did after
two years expired. 917 Paul brought before Felix. 816 Paul persecuted at
Jerusalem. 413 Paul is an example of humility. ^95 Paul is vnfearfull before
the Council. 799 Paul is kept in an hired house. 895 Paul in the entrye of
his ministerye joined him with the faythefull that professed Christ at
Damascus. 407 Paul to what end God called him. Page 796 Paul prayed in the
Temple. 793 Paul valiant in bearing the cross. Page 403 Paul being in
prison both preaches and writes. 915 Paul reproves the Jews of
stubbornness. 90^ Paul an example of Christian charity. 412 Paul preaches
to the Jews. 647 Paul preaches boldly. 735 Paul defends his Ministry
modestly and constantly. 866 Paul by a miracle became known to the people of
Malta. ^88 Paul shows a token of christian modesty while he can patiently
suffer re^ulse. 412 Paul sailed in an Idolatrouse ship. Page 892 Paul
commands to stay the Marin^s. 882 Paul takes on a Nazarites vow^. Page 770
Paul a^monished not to go to Jerusalem. 761 Paul offends not in ^ebuking
the Bishop. 800 Paul resists to be set at liberty in hucker mucker. 643
Paul answers them that suspected the story of his calling. 789 Paul
confirmed with the meeting of the Brethren. 895 Paul is a debtor to all men.
864 Paul lawfully ordained an Apostle by the ministrye of Ananias. 789 Paul
preaches at Philippi. 6^3 Paul preaches Jesus. 407 Paul took Christ's
part against his will. 856 Paul calls the chief of the Jews together. 896
Paul forbidden to preach in Asia. Page 619 Paul how he was converted. 789
Paul returns to Jerusalem. 792 Paul preaches the kingdom of god. Page 916
Paul sent to Ananias to be further instructed. 789 Paul restored to his
sight and baptized. 404 Paul defends him self by the Roman laws. 797
Paul accused of sedition, heresy, and polluting of the church. 820 Paul
excuses himself. 8^2 Paul goes to the Elders at Jerusalem. 769 Paul
professes he is a Phariseye. Page 802 Paul was a sower of tents. 756 Paul
a prisoner two whole years Page 915 Paul preaches a whole day together. 900
Paul desires aid of the Captain Page 810 Paul tried of God diverse ways.
Page 764 Paul comes to Jerusalem. 412 Paul brought out to preach in
chains. 845 Paul shakes of the Adder without any hurt. 889 Paul commanded
to be whipped. Page 796 Paul called into Macedonia. 621 Paul in danger of
his life. 776 Paul's departure out of Asia. 758 Paul's accusers are of great
power and might. 818 Paul's araynement before Festus the n^w President. 833
Paul's singular feruencie in the office committed unto him. 760 Paul's
companions. 870.397 Paul's commendacion. 815 Paul's state or condition. 398
Paul's confidence. 826 Paul's counsel despised. 871 Paul's constancy. 646
Paul's tyranny against the Church of Christ. 856 Paul's dignity. 878.879
Paul's trance. 793 Paul excused in forsaking ye Jews religion. 784 Paul and
Barnabas visit ye churches Page 613 Paul's doctrine and Companions. Page 6^7
Paul and Elymas the sorcerers first encounter. 514 Paul's family. 890 Paul's
fortitude. 844 Paul's enemies fall out among them selves. 850 Paul's notable
praise. 402 Paul's innocence. 842 Paul's taking up into paradise. 398 Paul's
navigations described. 870 Paul has scales fall from his eyes. Page 405 Paul's
office enjoined him of God described. 792 Paul's oration to Agrippa, and the
argument thereof. 848 Paul's oration is interrupted. 794 Paul taken into the
ministry. 402 Paul's first act after he was Apostle. 406 Paul's journey into
Arabia, amitted of Luke. 410 Paul's wisdom. 812 Paul's childhod and bringing
up. 849 Paul's journey to Rome. 894 Paul's authority in writing. 399 Paul's
passage into Macedonia 622 Paul's vocation to preach too the Gentyles proved
to be lawful. 793 Paul's very christian wife. 868 Paul what happened to him
before Felix the president. 816 Paul permitted to speak for himself. ibidem
Paul's chance at Damascus. 410 Paul sent to Anania by Christ, and to what
end. 399 Paul being humbled, is received of Christ. 396 Paul called Mercury
by the people of Lystra. 567 Paul eased of hatred by the Elders. Page 770
Paul accused by the Bishops and Jews. 835.818 Paul's points of his sermon
before Felix. 831
P ante E
Peace is restored to the Church. Page 415 Peace must not be sought with the
derogation of Christ's glory. 591 Peace how it may be procured to the Church.
416 Peace in the Church of what commodity it is. 416 Peace given of God, how
it was used of the godly. ibidem Pentecost day why it was appointed to send
the holy ghost on. 75 Pentecost feast when it was instituted, and what manner
of thing it was. ibidem Pentecost and the ceremonies thereof. Page ibidem
Peoples report must not be trusted to much. 577 People of Israel saved and
multiplied in Egypt, through the grace of God. 314 Persecution against ye
Apostles 562 Persecution vniuer^al in the Church at Jerusalem. 357 Persecution
rages when famine and dearth ryseth. 487 Persecution raised by ye Jews. 555
Persecution attends on Christ's ministers. 410 Persecutions auctors and
causes. 488 Persecution how far it raigeth. 562 Persecutions of the Apostles
what they teach us* 811 Persecutions in ye church were ten, and ye end of the
persecutors. 300.301 Persecutions of the primitive church why so diligently
written of Luke Page 219 Persecution being ended, the faithful rejoice. 558
Persecution reignyng, the faithful must call to mind the oracles of God. 217
Persecuted must not by and by forsake their standing. 360 Persecutors make men
blaspheme God. 857 When Persecutions rage, what the Christians must do. 216
Persecutors are brydled by the hand of God. 410 Persecutors of ye church who
be. 191 Persecutors of the faithful, persecutors of Christ. 789 Persecutors of
the truth who are always most like to be. 245 Persecutors of Christ and his
Church lively portraictured. 856.857 Persecutors of the church, if their
examples be well considered, we shall see that none of the^ have escaped ye
horrible vengeance of god. 300.301 Persecutors incurable impiety. 207
Persecutors punished. 394 Persecutors have their limits and bounds
prescribed. 358 Perseverance or continuance needful in religion. 549
Perseverance in prayer of what force it is. 47 Persons respect in judgment
is a great mischief. 837 Persons respect with God is their none. 446
Peruers^nes of men in seeking their salvation. 585 Petitions and desires of
them that believe. 220 Peter apprehended. 490 Peter lodged with Simon a Tanner.
423 Peter comforted by promises. 133 Peter will have gods benefyte set forth
and declared. 501 Peter rayseth up Dorcas. 422 Peter desirous to ioyn with ye
church again. 497 Peter waked by the Angel. ibid. Peter seeks his escape by
flying* 501 Peter married* 45 Peter prays fasting. 432 Peter what he did
after he was delivered. 496 Peter answers the offense yt might be taken out
of gods providence. 52 Peter quipped but with a light taun^ constantly
defends Christ and his Gospel. 91 Peter what he taught in the first sermon
he made. 127 Peter preaches that Jesus is the Savior. 200 Peter after he
received the holy ghost desired no supremacy emonge the Apostles, but to be
equal with them. 90 Peter is taught by a vision the vocation of the Gentyles.
431 Peter how he was received of the faithful. 499 Peter goes through all the
churches. Page 417 Peter's counsel given to the Jews in his first sermon after
he received the holy ghost. 130 Peter's judgment touching An^nias fact. 230
Pe^ters opinion touching justification. 594 Peter's counsel touching the way of
salvation. 130 Peter's quiet and security being in prison. 493 Peter's two
miracles described. 4^7 Peter's trance. 433 Peter's exhortacion to the Church to
place an other Apostle in Judas rowme. 62 Peter's expostulation with Simon
Magus. 371 Peter's playnes to the Priests and Scribes. 136 Peter's boldness in
rebuking sin. 108 Peter's manner of delivery. 494 Peter's modesty. 423 Peter's
poverty. 153 Peter's patrimony what it comprehends. ibidem Peter's supremacy
and prerogative in the Church, how the papists prove it. 51 Peter's
readiness and good will too pleasure and benefit all men. 153 Peter's demand
of Saphira. 234 Peter's answer in the council at Jerusalem, and the effect
thereof. 203
P ante H
Pharao his wisdom and kyndnes. Page 311 Phariseys error what it was. 849
Phariseys sect what it was. 803 Philip baptiseth the Ethiopiane, after he had
made confession of his Faith. 387 Philip the Evangelist. 764 Philip an ensample
of an Euangelike pastor. ibid. Philip appointed to teach the Eunuche. 378
Philip an ensample of christian stoutnes. 364 Philip the Apostle of Samaria.
361 Philips affability or courtesy. 383 Philips obedience. 376 Philips sermon
whereby he converted the Ethiopiane. 379 Philips daughters do prophecy 765
Philosophy whether it be necessary before the study of Divinity. 665 Phora,
what it signifies. 33 Phrygia and Galatia converted. Page 619
P ante I
Pilgrimage, superstitiouse. 665 Pilgrimage of the Apostles, how it was used.
619
P ante L
Please all men, can no man. 467
P ante O
Poor commended. 145 Poor cared for and considered by the Apostles. ibi.
Poor may have no cause of impacience ministered them by the godly. Page 274
Poor how they must be helped. Page 145 Poverty is not to be ashamed of. 153
Poverty is always puling and complaining. 274 Posterity of Christ is
everlasting. Page 381 Power of God is invincible. 539 Power of this world
nothing compared with Christ. 485 Power without fear of God, is a great
mischief. 207
P ante R
Praying loud, what it means. 216 Prayer stirred up by earnest meditacions.
400 Praying with diligence, profitable. Page 427 Prayer rightly used. 216
Prayers continual. 47 Prayers commended. 763 Prayers fervent. ibi. Prayers
offered to God in Christ, acceptable. 75 Prayers of the faithful are heard.
Page 221 Prayers of the godly are not vain. Page 500 Prayers joined to
imposition of the hands. 369 Public Prayers acceptable to God. Page 141
Prayers require solytarines and going aside. 426 Prayers without faith
unprofitable. Page 47 Prayers require sobriety. 433 Prayer a token of faith.
76 In praying what gestures should be used. 758 Prayers power and strength. 54
Praying in public commended. 758 Prayers are the wings whereby the church
flies unto God. 215 Prayers had their appointed hours in old time. 150
Praying must be instaunt and fervent. 400 Predestination certain. 687
Predestination searchers. 29 Preparation and watchinge for the coming of
Christ, things necessary. 7 Prerogatives without Christ, are vain. 189
Preaching of the Gospel wherewith it must begin. 108 How men ought to
preach. 916 What men ought to preach. 383 Preface to the Acts of the
Apostles expounded. 5 Presence of Christ upon earth, how it must be
understood. 43 Presidentes of commonweals, what virtues should be in them.
311 Priesthode of Christ confyrmed with an oath. 123 Priests ignorant in
Christ, and in the Scriptures. 534 Priests fulfilled the scriptures. 535
Priest auctours of the Apostles persecutions. 191 Priests enterprises hindered
not Christ. 536 Priests wicked, are shamed for ever. 63.64 Priests and
Scribes, an untoward generation. 136 Primitive church not void of faults. Page
274 Princes duties. 321 Princes studies. 377 Princes and Rulers called to bear
office, ought to hear Ecclesiastical causes. ibidem Private order of a
Christian life. Page 146 Prophets agree with the Apostles. Page 600 Prophets
for shewers of Christ. 350 Prophets bear witness to Christ. 182 Prophets
interpretat prophesies 610 Prophets foreshew things to come, but the end and
meaning of them, they often understand not. 762 Prophets who were. 508
Prophets gods servant* by whom he reuealeth his secret judgments. Page 99
Prophets office. 120 Prophets begu^ under Samuel. 182 Prophets testimonies
concerning Christ and his resurrection. 536 Prophesying what it comprehends
in it. 96 Prophesying what the word signifies. ibi. Prophecy how beneficial
and profitable it is. 185 Prophets sermons are holy Scriptures. 54.55
Proposition and sum of the Apostles oracio^ to ye people of Lystra. 571
Property of things lawful in Christian men. 143 Promise concerning ye holy
ghost. 13 Promises of the old testament extend to the Gentyles. 134 Promise of
the holy Ghost made by Christ to the Apostles, belongs to all men. 85
Promises of God made too David, touching his son. 93 Promises of God must be
received by faith. 879 Promises of God are not made frustrat by ye wickedness of
men. 17 Promises of God must be diligently thought on in adversity. 327
Promises of God are all ratified in Christ. 854 Promises of God must be
patiently waited for. 79 Promises of god unto the godly. 115 Promises of God
made first unto Adam. 852 Promises of God how they must be understood. 688
Promises of god are infallible. 870 Promises of God truliest performed when men
hope least in them. 79 Promises touching the resurrection of Christ. 12
Promises of the holy ghost often repeated and why. 73 Promises of the Gospel
belongs to every man. 184 Promises made to the Fathers why they be so often
repeated. 163 Promises of salvation belong to Infantes. 134 Promises of Christ
are true. 73 Promises of god certain and true. 328 Promises of God how they
must be used in adversity. 744 Promises of our salvation true, and
inviolable. 284 822 Promises of God to what use they serve. 134 Providence of
God. 437 Providence of God in governing the world wonderful. 889 Providence of
GOD must not be rashly abused. 807 Providence of God foreknowen and decreed.
110 Providence of God how it must be used in adversity. 882 Providence of
God excuses not sinners. 53 Providence of GOD no defense for wickedness. 59
Providence of God comfort sinners. 171 Providence teaches us the honor of
God. 670 Providence of God has all things subject to it. 573 Providence of
God exemplifyed in Judas the traitor. 56 Providence of God, too what use it
serves. 110 Pride the cause of evil, and beginning of sin. 374 Pride how
mightily God reuengeth it. 485 Prudencie must be used in the affairs of the
church. 604 Prudencie an example. 812 Public offices must be committed to
good and godly men. 311 Publius is a president of hospitality Page 891
P ante V
Punishment of contemning Gods Counsel. 875 Punishment of them that condemn
Christ. 182 Punishment of Idolatry and impiety. 343 Punishments of Christ's
enemies, what they are. 59 Punishment is not sent of god without warning. 674
Purification is by faith. 596 Purification, god is auctour. ibid. Pu^eolane
church. 893
Q ante V
Question made by the Apostles touching Christ's kingdom on earth. Page 24
Question of the priests in the council at Jerusalem. 198
R ante E.
REdemption in Christ, belongs to all men. 78 Redemption of man how it was
made. 455 Regard must be had more of the church the^ of private matters. 611
Reformation how it may truly be made. 3 Reformacion may have errors, and
whereof they spring. ibid. Refutacion of such objections as the people of
Lystra might have made against the Apostles. 573 Religion without knowledge of
god is nothing. 665 Religion stands not in outward ceremonies, but in faith,
whereby we take hold of the grace of god. 313 Religion corrupted must be
abolished and true planted. 572 Religion may be found in soldiers Page 432
Religion is not subject to councelles. Page 818 Religion must not be esteemed
after ye multitude and authority of men. ibi. Religion depends not on man's
Judgment. 47 Religion belongs to god alone. 767 Religion is certain and not
to be suspected of obscurity. 838 Religion must not be judged by the
success and falling out thereof. 268 Religion can not man rightly walk in
except he be guyded by the spirit of God. 339 Religion must the Magistrate
have care of. 690 Religions showing us any other salvation then in Christ, ar
al false. 202 Relics of Christ and of the faithful what they are. 422
Remission of sins is the benefyte of gods grace only. 303 Remission of
sins in the name of Christ. 458 Remission of sins is given us in Christ.
543 Repentance of the wicked. 642 Repentance must be urged by fear of the
latter day. 674 Repentance must be done as god appointed by his word, and not
after our brain. 788 Repentance after transgression, opens the way to
salvation. 131 Repentance what it is. ibid. Repentance whereof it consists
ibid. Repentance and forgyuenes of sin, preached in Christ's name seems a
thing intolerable to the world. Page 270 Repentance cause efficient in man,
what it is. 259 Repentance in her parts. 131 Repentance, how God gives it.
Page 472 Reprehensions without Christ's spirit, are cold. 680 Reprobates can not
hear the word of Christ. 548 Reprobates manners and conditions and how they
must be dealt with. Page 710 Resurrection of Christ, defended. Page 536
Resurrection of Christ is the foundation of faith and of doctrine Apostolic.
12 Resurrection of Christ a thing most approved. ibid. Resurrection of Christ
why it was so diligently confirmed. 11 Resurrection of christ the
accomplishment of our redemption. 65 Resurrection of Christ why it is confirmed
with so many and so sound arguments. 111 Resurrection declares the glory of
the children of God. 540 Resurrection of the dead ought not to be thought
incredible. 854 Resurrection of the dead is universal. 823 Resurrection
proves the certayntie and majesty of Christ's kingdom. Page 11 Resurrection
of al other articles most repeated of the Apostles. 223 Resurrection of Christ
diligently defended. 12 Resurrection of the body what ample fruit it has in
it. 118 Resurrection scoffers what we may judge of them. 13 Resurrection
scorners take away all faith, and the mysteries of men's salvation. 13.14
Resurrections use and meditacion. Page 14 Resurrection preached what it
comprehends in it. 65 Resurrection is certain. 117 Resurrection goes before
life everlasting. 118.119 Resurrection of Christ overcomes sin and death
and restores salvation unto man. 12 Resurrection proves Jesus to be the
Messiah. 1^3
R ante I
Rites of the primitive Church in choosing of Priests. 584 Rites and order of
the Lords Supper must not be altered. 140 Riches of the wicked are accursed.
Page ibid. Rich men's duty. 891
R ante O
Romayne church justly forsaken of Christian men. 797 Roman Church
woorshippers are unworthy to be accounted of the Church. 188 Romish Prelates
may lawfully be spoken against. 293 Romes destruction and misery. 60
Romanistes say, the church of Rome can not err. 281 Roman Antichrist must
be reprehended for the merchandise he uses in religion. 372 Roman brethren
go to meet Paul. Page 894 Romans diligence in administering of Justice. 870
Roman Bishops presumptuousnes reprehended. 335 Roman Bishops pride. 468
Roman Bishops Supremacy, ridiculous. 417
S ante A
Sabbath keepinge and breaking. Page 733.734 Sabbothes must be reuerentlye
kept. 521 Sabbothes how they should be observed and kept holy. 647 Sabbath
obseruances and coming to the church. 521 Sacramental speech. 304.791
Sacraments instituted of god, must not be contempned. 291 Sacraments are
^eales of Gods promises and benefits. 23 Sacramental words and mysteries
how they ought to be considered. Page 304.305 Sacrament despisers. 463
Sacrament despisers, are destitute of faith. 385 Sacraments and the gifts of
health are given us by invocation of gods name. 791 Sacraments have their
efficacy, not of the words of consecration, but because of Christ's
institution. 23 Sacraments truly used in ye church. Page 348.366 Sacraments
and doctrine must go together. 451 Sacraments have not grace tied o^ bound to
them. 366 Sacrifice of Christ pourgeth our sins. 455 Sacrifices of
Christians. 667 Sacrifices how they are called purging sins. 304.305
Sadduceyes doctrine and religion, what it was. 191.803 Salvation, the free gift
of God must be obtained by prayer. 102 Salvation depends upon the mere grace
and favor of God. 133 Salvation consists in invocation. Page 102 Salvation
in Christ only. 202 Salvation belongs to the Gentyls as well as the Jews.
423 Salvation hangs upon Gods providence. 585 Salvation in our selves. 578
Salvation and preservation both of men and commonweals depends on God. 529
Salvation by what order we may attain to it. 393 Salvation and redemption of
man confirmed with an oath. 123 Salvation and pardon for sinners. 170 To be a
disciple of Christ is the first step to salvation. 419 Salvation by Gods
commandment carried to the Gentiles. 508 Salvation more plainly declared in
the new testament, than in the old. Page 93 Salvation is given to men in none
other than in Christ. 897 Salvation by what means it is hindered and stopped.
181 Salvation of others we must rejoice in. 475 Samaria converted. 362
Samaritanes give ear to Christ and believe in him only. 393 Samaritanes
embrace the Gospel. Page 362 Samaritans obedience. 365 Saints and holy men
have need to be strengthened. 895 Saints trustiness in defending of Christ.
531 Saints are ignorant in many things Page 446 Saints how they allege
their innocence in private causes. 799 Saints how we must judge of them. Page
409 Saints are subject to mocions and affections. 613 Saints give all glory
unto Christ. Page 160 Saints worship whereof it sprung. Page 157 Saints of
all ages wherein they hoped. 823 Saints singular works must be ascrybed to
God as to the author of them. 613 Saints flightes what they are. 307 Saints
zeal and condition. 579 Saints slippes and falls prove our corruption. 25.26
Saints patience is no dastardlinesse Page 481 Saints labors are not in vain
Page 696 Saints estate in this world. 796 Saints virtue is to obey and
beeleue God. 113 Saints company how profitable it is. 879 Saints how much
we must attribute to them. 161 Saints are tried with fear. 684 Sapphira
makes an impotent and bold lie. 229 Sapphira ignorant of her husbands death
for a season and why. 232 Sapphiras wickedness reproved by Peter. ibidem.
Sapphira punished as was her husband. 237 Satan put men out of the way of
salvation. 576, 577 Satan can do nothing against man, but by gods permission.
410 Satan has his instruments every where. 576 Satan thrown out by the name
of Christ. 629 Satan what trains he uses to establishe his kingdom among
men. Page 627 Satan how he is said to fill the hearts of the ungodly. 230
Satan bears witness to the truth. Page 628.629. Satan's ^lightes must be
taken heed of. 577 Satan's effects in Hypocrites and in the wicked. 230 Satan's
property. 357 Satan's policy. 576 Saul receives a two fold answer of the
Lord. 395 Saul persecuting the faithful persecuteth Christ. 790 Saul an
example of a cruel tyrant. Page 390.359 Saul truly called a ravening wolf
Page 357 Saul set forth for a peculiar example of Gods goodness and grace.
Page 394.395 Saul authorized by the Priests to play the Tyrant. 390 Saul
when he was converted. 392 Saul how he was converted. ibide^. Saul a
president of tyranny. 390 Saules converting to Christ historised. 392 Saules
end and purpose. 391 Saul the persecutor described. 390 Saul the persecutors
punishment. Page 394 Saules salvation must be attributed to the grace of God
only. 395
S ante C
Schism beginners are the bishops of Rome. 194 Schools foundations. 49.84
Schools needful. 509 Sclaunders wherewith Ministers are charged. 467
Sclaunders must Christians put away and defend their good name. Page 91
Sclaunders may lawfullye be answered to. ibidem Sclaunder or offense. ibidem
Scripture is of it self of credyte and authority sufficyent. 867 Scripture is
enspired of God. 54 Scripture conteyneth al thing needful for us to believe
and observe. 7 Scripture of the old and new Testamentes pertayneth to all
them that love God. ibdem. Scripture must be expounded. 647 Scriptures
authority and certaynetye. 897 Scripture must be interpreted by conference of
places. 127 Scripture with what mind men must read it. 62 Scripture must be
elucidated with interpretations. 398 Scripture contains the knowledge of the
true God. 571
S ante E
Sects cause of discention among the Jews. 803 Security or carelessness must
be avoided. 269 Sedition described. 722 Sedition happily ended. 653 Sedition
ended with joy. 653 Sedicion soon appeased. 728 Sedition beginners who. 770
In sedicion what christians must do. Page 725 Seditious persons but few in
number may be authors of manifold euilles. 724 Sermons ought to begin and
end with prayers. 754 Seruers of tyrauntes turns what they may look for. 504
S ante H
Shipwrake described and the number of them that were in the ship. Page 885 A
true sheapeheardes example. 764 Shoes putting of what it means. Page 328
S ante L
Sleepiness or drowsinesse of churchmen. 733 Slothfulness of men in our
days. Page 272 Slothful men reprehended. 890 Sluggishnesse and idleness.
653
S ante I
Signs externe seal the interne and spiritual gifts of God. 304.305 Signs
visible of the presence of the holy ghost. 82 Signs that God shows must be
dilygently considered. 158 Signs externe are not sufficient to salvation. 305
Signs called after the names of the things that they signify. 80.290 Signs
have much likeness with the things that they signify. 80 Signs are
diverse. 159 Signs to what use they serve. 359 Signs must not have to much
attributed to them. 305 Sticking to signs is the beginning of ydolatrie. 158
Simon how he took Peter's expostulation. 374 Simon Magus believes and is
baptized. 367 Simon Magus an example of an hipocrite and a deceyuour. 268 Simon
Magus his sin. 370 Simons of our days. 371 Simplicity of the faith. 672
S ante O
Solomon for his wives sake that were aliauntes builded Temples. Page 340
Solomon's wish. 20 Sole or single life maintayners. 46 Souls of men under the
protection of God. 119
S ante P
Spirits appearing what we ought to judge of it. 762 Spirit of Christ author
of concord and holiness. 78 Spirit of Christ his efficacy how great it is
in men. 155 Spirit of Christ in whom it reigns. 90 Spirits of the
disseassed walk not. Page 500 Spirit signified by the blowing of the wind
and for what cause. 79 Spirit of Christ so delyuereth us from fear^ that we
dare boldelye confess Christ. 86 Spirit of God is from everlasting. Page 74
Spirit why it was promised to the Apostles. 19 Spirit teaches us to reason
of Gods doings, and to call upon him for help. 84 Spirit of God wrought in
the Apostles. 74 Spirit of God spoke by the Apostles. 8 Spirit of Christ
makes men bold in the confession of Christ. 85 Spirit of God alters and
enformeth tongues, and for what causes Page 84 Spirit is the promise of the
father. Page 18 Spirit when he was sent. 75 Spirit what day he was sent to
the Apostles. ibi. Spirit how he must be received. 77 Spirit how he is given
and to whom. Page 94 Spirit how he is sent. 78 Spirit in what scence it is
said to be sent to the Fathers. 18.19 Spirit often promised and wherefore. 74
Spirit where it was given. ibidem Spirit sent visibly and for what cause.
Page 78 Spirits effect in the Apostles, and their hearers. 82 Spirits
effects common to all believers. 96 Spirit how necessary and to what use in
men. 78 Spirits invincible power. 558 Spirits sending and Christ's ascension
joined together. 124 Spirits sending called by the name of baptism. 21
Spirit promised Christ confirms by an argument taken from baptism, and the
argument explicated. ib. Spirits operation and gifts. 77 Spirits effectuous
operation. 124 Spirits effects in these days why they be so rare. 258
Spirit promised serves for our comfort and instruction. 19 Spirits power can
not be comprehended nor hindered by any man. 80 Spirit how the Apostles are
said to have received. 74 Spirit must be received of men with great
preparation. 77 Spirit of Satan what it does in unclean persons. 85 Spirit
of the old and new testament is but one. 76
S ante T
Steven accused of impiety, and stubbornenesse, and upon what occasion. 288
Steven accused of blasphemye against God and his law. 292 Steven by slanders
and false witness brought in hatred with all the people. 287 Steven instructed
by the holy Ghost shows himself a fine disputer and abolde. ibid. Steven
ready to yield up his life, is comforted by a vision, and what that vision
teaches us. 334 Steven is without fear, though in danger of death. 290
Steven went not about to abrogate the law. 351 Steven proves that the
cerimoniall law is abrogated. ibid. Steven deserved the crown of martyrdom.
357 Steven what he did at his death. 355 Steven no dispiser of Moses. 321
Steven blasphemed not the Temple and holy place, nor the outward seruise. 345
Steven falls on sleep. 355 Steven set on by disputations. 287 Steven
oppressed and taken by sedition. ibid. Steeuen dies full of the holy ghost.
Page 334 Steuens enemies and their enterprises against him. 286 Steuens
description. 285 Steue^s enemies rage incurable. 354 Steuens example in
readiness to dye must be followed. 355 Steuens enemies how they took his
oration. 351 Steuens oration and answer made in the council of the Priests
with the argument narration and parts thereof. 292 Steven being stoned how the
faithful used him. 358 Steven being ready to dye comforted of God, and how
and in what manner. 352 Stipendes of the Ministers. 676 Stipend must not be
withholde^ from the Ministers. 756 Stipende why Paul exacted not. Page 756
Strangled and blood. 603 Stubbornenesse a thing peculiar to the wicked. 268
Studious we must be of charity. 618 Study to please the people cause of
persecution. 489 Studies and desires of the enemies of truth. 656 Study we must
to please God. 580 Star worship, a thing common to the Gentiles. 368 Stars
superstitiouslye observed. Page 342
S ante V
Supper of the Lord how it must be admynystred. 735 Supper of the Lord
called breaking of bread. 140 Supper of the Lord a sign and token of
Christ's death. 23 Supper of the Lord with the rightes and ceremonies must not
be altered. 140 Supper of the Lord taught us by the Apostles in what order and
form to be used. 3 Supremacy chalengers in the church confuted. 5^
Superscription of a letter sent from the Synod.
S ante W
Sword to keep under the wicked commended. 233 Sword must be drawn in
defense of relygion. ibid.
S ante Y
Synagoge fyt place for the Apostles to begin to preach in. 512 Syn^cdoche a
figure very much used in the scriptures. 761 Synod or convocation at Miletum
Page 738 Synodes and conuocations how commodious they are. ibid. Sin of
those that forsake true religion how grievous it is. 516 Sinners must be
remitted unto god Page 373 Sinners not punished but first they are warned. 642
Sinners God disdaineth not. 510 Sinners must be won rather than destroyed.
399 Sinners which way God uses to convert them. 787 Sin of ignorance how
it may be excused. 170 Sin against the holy Ghost. ibid. Sins of men must
not be rashlye judged of. 171 Sins be they never so many can not exceed
Christ's merit. 130 Sins cause of all evil. 104 Sins in preaching must be
reproved. 127 Sins are remitted of favor. Page 543 Sins although they be
heinous ought not to make us despair. Page 130 Sin how heinous it is
declared by the word of God. 790 Sin needful to be rebuked in the Church.
108.109 Sins forgyuen in the name of Christ. 458 Sins committed by thought
and cogitation. 373
T ante A
TAbernacle was a figure of heavenly things. 345 Tabernacle carried into the
land of the gentiles. 346 Tabernacle of witness what it was. Page ibid.
Tabernacles use among the Jews Page ibid. Tabernacle had no resting place a
long while. ibid. Tabernacle had not the honor of god tied unto it. 347
T ante E
Teachers office in the Church requires a deliget trial. 14 Teaching in the
Church how it must be ordered. 741 To teach which is the best way. Page 700
Temperaunce is a fruit of faith. 829 Temperaunce what effects ^he has. Page
148 Temple or church of God, who build it. 201 Temple has not worship tied
unto it. 345 Temples must not be profaned or defiled. 825 Temples by whom
they are defiled and abused. ibid. Templary religion is a vain thing Page 666
Temple or church comers in pompeous and proud array, what may be thought of
them. 844 Tertulous oracion. 819 Testament of God contains our salvation.
186 Testament of circumcision given to Abraham, what it is, and how to be
understood. 303 Testamente the old and the new are the law of of godly life.
54 Testament old and new how they consent. 95 Testimony of David touching
the resurrection of Christ. 113 Testimony of the xvj. Psalm proved. 121
Testimonies of the kingdom of Christ. 33
T ante H
Thabita raised again by Peter. 419 Theophilus who is. ^ Theudas what he was.
265 Threats of the world must not fear Christians. 213
T ante I
Timothey circumcised. 616 Timothey borne of a Jew and a Gentile. 617 Titles
and styles abused. 664 Titles wherefore they ought to serve. 5^3
T ante O
Tongue of the faithful of all nations is but one. 84 Tongue keeping a
necessary thing. Page 85 Tongues sitting upon the Apostles heads, were tokens
of the holy Ghost. 80 Tongues wherefore they serve. 82 Songue or speech of
Canaan. 85 Torments must not be used of magistrates without a good and just
cause. 815
T ante R
Traditions of man must not be thrust into the Church. 20 Traditions the
Apostles thrust none into the Church. 580 Traiane persecuting the Church felt
the wrath of God. 300 Tribulations of our own brethren must be thought to be
our own. 491 Tribulations end is most joyful. Page 587 Tribune delyuereth
Paul again out of the Jews hands. 463 Tribune kept from his purpose by
fear of law. 797 Tribunes readynes to succor Paul. Page 812 Troublers of the
Church. 589 Truth fought against by open force. Page 166 Truth of god
infallible. 538 Truth of gods promises. ibid. Truth of gods promises
invincible. Page 886 Truth must be preached openly. 520 Truth with what colors
it is assaulted. 193 Truth with what crimes it is charged. 633 Truth is not
defended with railing. Page 823 Truth of what effect. 846 Truth Evangelical,
what enemies it has. 191 Truth and gospel defendours compted seditiouse of the
wicked. 192. and 193 Truths enemies must not be trusted Page 834 Truth in what
case in this world. Page 853 Truth haters are paineful and hardy therein. 766
Truth hatred how much it is able to do. 809 Truth hatred whereto it brings
men at the length. 550 Truth hatred how far it proceeds. 810 Truth haters
who are most. 208
T ante V
Turks do not honor God. 823 Turkish Ambassadors saying against the
ydolatrye of christendom. 340
T ante Y
Tyranny of clargie over the Church Page 797 Tyrauntes can not do always what
they list. 213 Tyrauntes have miserably perished Page 506 Tyrauntes sleyghtes
set out in Pharao. 317 Tyrants properties set out in Saul. Page 390 Tyran
defenders are flatterers. 801 Tyrauntes state and condition. 213 Tire dwellers
bring Paul on his way. 762 Tire dwellers pray openly. 763 Tyrus visited by
Paul. 761
V ante A
VAlerius Aurilianus moving persecution against the church being first feared
with a thunder bolte falling at his feet, and yet not repenting, was not long
after killed of his own men, lying in wait for him. 301
W ante A
Wantonness in children must be rebuked. 766 Way to attain to salvation.
Page 393 Way of Christ. 694 Way of life made plain in Christ. Page 119 Ways
of men are blind in matters of relygyon. 575 Warfayring for money how it shall
be rewarded. 300
W ante E.
Weakness of man acknowledges not gods works. Wrake must not be yielded to
in outward things. Weakness of man has need of Gods tuition.
W ante H
Whoredom.
W ante I
Wickedness has her degrees. 682 Wicked meet in hell. 541 Wicked in
subjection to Gods commandment. 834 Wicked strive in vain against Christ.
536 Wicked keep a countenance of equitye. 351 Wicked though they be of
sundry opinions among themselves, yet they are soon agreede against Christ,
and the truth. 805 Wicked then rage most when their end draws nearest. 315
Wicked lay all disturbaunces and troubles to the godlyes charge. Page 562
Wickeds enterprises against Christ his kingdom are vain. 285.390 and.812
Wickeds minds unquiet. 834 Wickeds crafts what they are. 809 Wickeds
familiarity must be shunned. 441 Wyckeds enterprises turned upon the aucthors
heads by God. 398 Wickeds estate. 493 Wickeds agreement lasts not long. Page
805 Wickeds property. 115.253.354 Wicked in the Church must be confuted. 703
Wickeds fear is preposterous. 644 Wickeds words and sayings. 253 Wickeds
societye dangerous and hurtful. 311 Wickeds good success in a preamble of
destruction. 504 Wickeds companions shall be punished with the wicked. 397
Wicked amend not by Gods judgments. 499 Wicked are suffered of God till the
pit be dygged up for them. 785 Wicked what power GOD gives them over his
elect. 837 Wickeds number is the greater. 579 Witness how much it
comprehends in it. 693 Witness what his duty is. 30.31 Wisdom of
christians must be bounded. 28 Wisdoms first degree is to acknowledge the
corruption of nature, and how all ableness to do well comes of God. 27
W ante O
World cannot abide Christ, and his Gospel. 208 World rages against christ
in vain. Page 126 World how it receives the doctrine of the Apostles. 190
Worlds ingratitue toward the ministers. 825 Worlds troublesome estate
forshewed by the Prophets. 98 Worlds force a vain thing against God. 311
World what affection it bears to Gods word. 842 Works and doctrine must
join and go together. 9 Works that be good. 415 Works have none of the
faithful enemies to them. 420 Works of Christ commended. 106 Works of Christ
considered what they teach us. ibid. Works of Christ to what end they serve.
ibid. Works of God are needful to be considered of (...). 157 Works of
Gods majesty euidentlye seen in Christ. 86 Works righteousness overthrown
Page 545 Word of God is the father enlarged by the assaults of the enemies.
555 Word of God must be so preached that the hearers may perceive it
belongs to them. 533 Word of God preuayleth not with men led only with
human reason. 547 Word of God must be preached, not man's devise. 899 Word
of God can not be bound. 903 Word of God whereby it is hyndred. Page 138 Word
of God how it must be hard. Page 44.6 Word of God must be preached in the
Church only. 512 Word of God never preached without fruit. 561 Word of God
contemned is an heinous sin. 547 Word of Gods efficatie. 233 Word of God
preached is not vain. Page 138 Worthynesse of Gods word. 266 Word of GOD
must be believed though preached but by a man. 368 Words of the supper
uttered by a sacramental speech. 40 Worshippers of Christ being persecuted,
christ is persecuted. 397 Worshippers of Christ are taught of God. 50
Worshippers such as God riquireth. Page 916 Worship of one God. 667 Worshippers
of God truly how much he regards. 818 Worshipping of Creatures overthrown.
572 Worship is in vain if it be not done as God appoynteth. 342 Worshippings
papisticall are preposterous. 339.340 Worshipping of planetes and stars. Page
34^ Worshipping of ^oloch. ibid. Worshipping of images. 343
W ante R
Wrath is the worst counselor that is. 264
W ante Y
Will of God contained and learned in Christ only. 790.791 Wyshe of Paul. 868
Z ante E
Zeal preposterous in religion avails little unto salvation as may be seen
in the example of Paul. 400 Zeal fervent is needful in them that should set
forth Christ's kingdom. 549 Zeal of Godliness may not excuse things done
against godliness and true religion. 391 Zeal is necessary in the godly. 659
FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE PLACES OF SVCH Scriptures as are expounded in these Homelies
and Annotations.
Genesis 3. I will put enmity between thee and the woman. Page 650 3. Thy desire
shall be to thy husband, and he shall have the rule of thee. 236 4. Cain slew
Abell his Brother. Page 306 4. Who made me my brothers keeper? 235 12. Get
thee out of thy Nation, and from thy Fathers house. 294 15. Thy seed shall be
a stranger. Page 299 17. Every man child among you, shall be circumcised. 303
22. By my self have I sworn. 123 22. In thy seed shall all the Nations of the
earth be blessed. 163 and. 185 26. I will perform the oath which I swear to
Abraham thy father. page 123 37. The Patriarchs sold Joseph their Brother.
306 45. God sent me before you to prepare. etc. 310 46. Jacob goes down into
Egypt with all his family. ibid. 50. Jacob is buried in Canaan. 312
EXodi. 1. Pharao commands the men children to be cast away. 315 2. Moses
was borne when tyranny raged most. 316 2. Who made thee a Ruler over us? page
322 3 I am the God of thy Father, the God of Abraham. 327 3 And fortye years
after the Angel of the Lord appears too Moses in the desert of Sina, in a
bushe of fire. 326 19. Ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests and an holy
people. 95 22. Ye shall trouble no wydowe nor fatherles child. 329 32. Make
us Gods to go before us. 335
LEuitici. 20. Whosoever he be of the children of Israel or of the
strangers that gives of his children unto Moloch. 342 35. The murderer shall
be put to death. 350
NUmerorum. 1. How greatly the people of Israel was increased. 596 6. The
Nazarites. 694 12. If there be a Prophet of the Lords among you, I will be
known of him in a vision. 333
DEuterono. 7. The graven Images of their Gods shalt thou burn with fire,
and covet not the gold and silver that is on them. 602 15. There shall be no
beggar among you. 145.225 18. The Lord thy God will stir up unto thee a
Prophet among you, even of thy Brethren, like unto me, unto him shall ye
harken. page 177. etc. 32. Uengeance is mine, and I will reward. 304 28. Thou
shall build an house, and an other shall dwell therein. 58
IOsue. 10. Be not afraid of them. page 681
1. Samuel. 2. Them that woorship me, I will woorship. page 242.148 15. Has
the Lord as great pleasure in burnt sacrifices and offringes, as when the
voice of the Lord is obeyed? 529
SAmuel. 7. When thy days be fulfilled, thou shall sleep with thy Fathers, and
I will set up thy se^de after thee. 122 7. Who am I, O Lord God, and what is
my house* that thou have brought me to so great dignity and honor. 529 15.
Carry the Ark of God again into the City, if I shall. etc. 530 16. Suffer him
to curse. ibid. 24. I am in a wonderful straight: Let us fall now into the
hand of the Lord. Again, I have sinned, it is I that have done wickedly. But
these sheep, etc. 530
1. REgum. 8. The Heavens of Heavens is not able to conteyne thee, and how
should then this house do it that I have builded. 666
2. PAralipom. 14. Lord it is no hard thing with thee, to help with many, or
the^ that have no power. 885
NEhemias. 13. Of the Sabbath. page 736
ESaie. 2. In the latter days the Hill of the Lords house shall be prepared.
2 6. Hear in deed. etc. 340 10. If the number of the people of Israel ^cre
as the sand of the Sea. etc. 901 23. After the end of seventy years shall
the Lord visit Tire, and she shall convert unto her reward. 761 29. They
worship me in vain, teaching the doctrines of men. 342 30. Prophecy not.
etc. 222 33. Woe to thee that destroyest, for thou shall be destroyed. 306 40.
The word of our God endures for ever. 335 42. I am the Lord, this is my name,
and my glory will I give to none other. 571.1^0 42. Behold, this is my
servant upon whom I lea^e, mine elect in whom my Soul is pacified. Page 20^
48. The ungodly have no peace. 207 49. It is but a small thing, that thou art
my servant to set up the kindreds of Jacob. 32 49. Will a woman forget her
own infant. 48 52. O how beautiful are the feet of the Ambasador, that
brings the message from the mountain and proclaymeth peace. 447 53. Who has
given credence unto our preaching? 50.89 53. We have all gone a straye like
sheep, every one has turned his own way. 566 53. And in his mouth has
been found no guile. 350 53. This shall be his name, by which they shall call
him the Lord our righteousness. 459 55. Let the ungodly man forsake his own
ways, and the unrighteous his own Imaginations, and turn again unto the
Lord Page 132 55. The word that comes out of my mouth shall not turn
again void unto me, but shall accomplish my will, and prosper in the thing
whereto I send it. 138 55. Wherefore do you lay out any money for the thing
that feeds not. 589 58. Cry now as loud as thou can leave not of, lift up
thy voice like a trumpet. 205 58. Wherefore fast we, and thou see it not? 235
60. Every people and kingdom that serves not thee shall perish* 622 63.
Abraham knows us not* neither is Israel aquaynted with us. 541 64. God has
prepared such things for them that love him, as neither eye has seen, ear
heard, nor heart has understood. etc. Page 212 65. It shall be that or ever
they call, I will answer them. 685 66. Heaven is my seat, and the earth is
my footestole. 35.347.66^
Jeremy. 1. Behold, I put my words in thy mouth. 21 1. Be not abashed at
their countenaunces. 685 1. Behold this day do I make thee a strong fensed
Town. Page 750 2. My people has committed two euilles: They have forsaken me
the well of the water of life. etc. Page 589 4. O Israel, if thou will turn
thee, then turn thee unto me. 131 10. Ye shall not learn after the manner of
the Heathen, nor be afraid for the tokens of heaven. 343 12. How happens it
that the way of the ungodly is so prosperous. Page 504 17. Blessed is the man
that puts his trust in the Lord, and whose hope is in the Lord him self.
Page 353 23. Behold the time comes says the Lord, that I will raise up the
righteous branch of David. 6 23. I fulfill heaven and earth says the Lord.
35 23. The Lord our righteousenesse. Page 350 23. The word of GOD is fire.
Page 660 31. I will plant my Law in the inward parts of them, and write it in
their hearts. 96 31 Turn us, and we shall be turned. 786 48. Cursed be he
that does the work of the Lord fraudulently. 151
EZechielis. 3. The blood of them that perish, I will require at thy hands. 17
3. Thou shall hear the word at my mouth and give them warning from me. 21 3.
When I shall say unto the wicked, thou shall surely dye. 560 3. Thou son of
man, I have made thee a watch man. etc. 683
DAnielis. 2. Of the Mountain. Page 2
HOsee. 4. Idols rob men of their hearts. 338 13. Death where is thy stynge?
Page 111
IOelis. 2. And it shall come to pass toward the latter days, I will pour
out my spirit upon al flesh. Page 93. etc. 2. Turn you unto me with all your
hearts. 131
AMos. 2. Prophecy not. 222 3. You only have I known of all the families of
the earth. Page 99 3. There is no evil in a City, but the Lord is auctor of
it. 483 3. The Lord God has spoken, and who will not prophecy? 683 5. Have
you offered unto me Sacrifices and offerings forty years in the wilderness? 341
7. I was neither Prophet nor prophets son. 69 9. The place of Amos. 9. 600
MIchee. 4. The hill of ye Lords house. 2
ABacue. 2. If he differ or put of, yet wayght still. 79
Zachary. 2. Who so touches you, touches the apple of mine eye. Page 502 2.
The apple of mine eye. etc. 300 9. His dominion shall be from the one sea to the
other. 32 9. Behold thy King shall come unto thee even righteous, a Savior,
and lowly. 199 11. Woe to the Idol sheepeherd that leaves his flock. 517 3.
Arise O thou sword, upon my Shepherd, and upon the man that is my fellow.
106.107
MAlachie. 2. The Priests lips shall keep knowledge. 63 3. It is but vain
too serve God. 236
IObe. 5. He compasses the wise in their own craftynes. 204 19. I am sure
that my redeemer lives. etc. 13
ECclesiastic. 3. Many have been deceived through their own vain opinion. 28
35. The prayer of him that humbles himself, goes through ye clouds. Page 637
PSalm. 1. Blessed is the man that walks not. etc. 638 2. Of the kingdom of
Christ. Page 2 2. Ask of me, and I will give thee the Gentiles for thine
inheritance. 35.201 2. Thou shall bruise them with a rod of iron. 126 7. They
travel with mischief and bring forth ungodliness. 218 14. There is no God.
114 16. The words there are proved ought to be understood of Christ and
not of David. 113 22. My praise shall be of thee in the great congregation. 116
27. Tarrye thou the Lords leisure, be of good courage, and he shall comfort
thine heart. 79 27. When my father and my mother forsakes me, the Lord
takes me up. 308.520 34. Keep thy tongue from evil. 85 34. The angel of
the Lord campeth round about them that fear him. 548 34. The eyes of the
Lord are over the righteous. 497 37. I have seen the ungodly in great
prosperitye and flourishing like a green baye tree. 505 48. The City of the
great king. 18 50. Call upon me in the time of thy trouble: I will hear thee
and thou shall glorify me. 115.116 50. Think thou that I will eat bulls
flesh, and drink the blood of Goats. 545 51. wash me thoroughly from my^e
iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. 545 51. Renew in me a right spirit.
77 56. Thou ha^t numbered my flittinges, thou have put my tears in thy bottell.
328.745 58. They are as venomous as the poison of a Serpent, they be like the
deaf ^dder that stops her ears. 548 65. Blessed is the man whom thou
choosest. 525 68. Thou wentest up on high, thou have led captivity captive.
124 69. The zeal of thine house has even eaten me. 659 69. I will praise the
name of the Lord with a songue. 461 72. His domynion shall be from the one sea
to the other. 32 72. He shall deliver the poor when he cries, the afflicted.
etc. 321 and.453 76. In Iewrie is God known, his name is great in Israel.
91.95 80. Show the light of thy countenance and we shall be saved. 120 89. I
have sworn once by my holiness that I will not fail David. 24 89. My
covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lyppes.
298 94. He that made the eye shall he not see? 300 94. In the multitude of the
sorrows that I had in my heart, thy comfortes did refreshe my soul. 115 94.
The Lord sees it not, neither does the God of Jacob understand it. 253 104.
Thou that make the clouds thy charyot. 36 104. He waters the hills from
above: the earth is replenished with the fruit of thy works. Page 575. ^05.
Touch not mine anointed. 142 106. They turned their glory into the similitude
of a Calfe that eats hay. 337.574 107. Let them give thanks whom the Lord
has redeemed, and delivered out of the hand of the enemy. 496 110. The Lord
said unto my Lord: sit thou on my right hand. 266 and.119.33 110. Thou art a
priest for ever, after ye order of Melchisedech 37.168.122 110. Rule thou in
the myddle among thine enemies. 98 113. He lifts the simple out of the dust.
330 116. Right dear in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints.
Page 475 116. What reward shall I give unto the Lord for all the benefits
that he has done unto me. 461 118. The Lord is the strength of my life. 253
118. The same stone which the builders refused. 200 119. It is better to trust
in the Lord. Page 254 119. It is good for me that I have been in miserye. 101
121. I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills* from whence my help shall come.
353 123. Behold even as the eyes of servant look unto the hands of their
masters. etc. 113 132. I will not enter into the tabernacle of my house. 346
141. Set a watch O God before my mouth. 85 146. Put not your trust in Princes.
Page 317 147. He declares his word unto Jacob, his statutes and ordinances
unto Israel. 95 147. He covers the heaven with clouds, and prepares rain
for the earth. 575
1 Proverb. The beginning of knowledge is the fear of the Lord. 416 2. If
thou seek after wisdom as after gold thou shall find her. Page 88 6 The
Lord hates a false witness that brings up lies. 354 16. Lottes are cast
into the lap, but the ordering thereof stands in Lord. 72 25. He that
searches the majesty of of God, shall be deprived of the glory. 28
MAtthei. 1. Thou shall call his name Jesus: for he shall. etc. Page 168 3.
Repent. 130 3. And say not we have Abraham to our father. 350 3. This is my
beloved son, in whom I am well pleased. 202 and.449.103 5. Blessed are the
poor in heart: for they shall see God. 120 5. The City of the great King. 18
5. One jot or one title of the law shall not escape. 335 5. If thou bring
thy gift to the altar, and there remembrest. 48 5. You shall be perfect ever
as your father which is in heaven is perfect. 512 5. He makes his son to
arise. etc. Page 638 6. Where your treasure is there will be your heart also.
632 7. Seek and you shall find. 88 7. With what measure you meat it shall
be. etc. 301 7. Not every one that says unto me, Lord. 94 7. Depart fro me,
ye that work iniquity. 351 8. Follow me and let the dead burye the dead.
511 9. Thy faith has made thee safe. Page 168 10. A man's foes shall be them of
his own household. 56.563 10. Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will
I also confess before my father which is in heaven. 86 10. He that receives
you, receives me. 9.161 It is not you that speak, but the spirit of your
father that speaks in you. 9 10. Be you wise as Serpents. 657 10. Fear ye
not them which kill. etc. Page 685 10. If they persecute you in one City. etc.
^01 10. Go not into the way of the Gentiles. 533 10. He that loves father
or mother more than me. 591 10. It shall be given you in that same hour, what
to speak. 780 10. Come unto me all ye that labor sore and are laden. 7 11.
No man knows the father, but the son. 566 11. I thank thee O Father,
because thou have hid these things from the wise. 45.625 12. How can one
enter into a strong man's house and spoil. etc. 12. Out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaks. 85 13. The secrets of the kingdom of Heaven. 641 15.
Every planting which my heavenly father. etc. 342 15. It is not meet to throw
the Childrens bread unto dogs. 15. Nothing that goes in at the mouth etc.
608 15. In vain do they worship me, teaching doctrines, precepts of men.
589 16. The gates of hell shall not prevail against it. 298 17. This is my
beloved son in whom I am well pleased hear him. 449 18. Where two or three
are gathered together in my name. 20. Who so will be chief among you Let him
be your servant. 39.70 and.141 21. The kindome of God shall be taken from you.
etc. 683.552 22. I am the God of Abraham: and the God of Isaac. 327 22. Give
unto Caesar those things which are Cesars: and unto god those things that are
Gods. 211 23. All whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do. 56
23. Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets. 16 24. Hear is
Christ or there. 8 24. Ye shall hear of wars and rumoures of wars. 99 25.
The parable of the talentes. 308 25. Enter into the joy of thy Lord Page 119
25. I was harbourlesse and yet took me in. 557 27. If he be the king of
Israel, let him now come down from the cross. 269 28. I am with you until
the end of the world. 879.327.520 28 All power is given too me in Heaven and
in earth. 35 28. Teaching them to observe all things what soever I have
commanded you. 335
MArc. 8. who so ever shall be ashamed of me and of my words. etc. 591 10.
No man that forsakes house. etc. Page 891 16. Go ye into all the world and
preach* etc. 133.^10 16. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. 458
16. He that believes not, shall be dampened. 182 16. When the Lord had spoken
unto them, he was received into heaven. 33
LUc. 1. He has put down the mighty from their Seats, and exalted them of
low degree Page 330 6. Woe unto you that now laughe, for you shall wayle and
weep. Page 115 7. Thy sins are forgyuen thee. Page 181 9. Who so ever will
not receive you when you go out of that city. 549 9. No man that puts his
hand to the plough and looks back, is apt to the kingdom of God. Page
549.612 10. He that hears you, hears me, and he that despyseth you,
despyseth me. 592.608 10. Into whatsoever City you enter. 549 11. Happy are
they that hear the words of GOD and keep it. Page 351 12. Let your loins
be gyrte about and your lights brennyng. 8 12. Fear not little flock, for
it is your Fathers pleasure to give you a kingdom. 50 13. It can not be that
a Prophet perish any other where then at Jerusalem. 16 26. The children of
this world are wyser then the children of light. Page 192.657 17. As it
chanced in the days of Noe, so shall it be in the days of the son of man.
661 18. There was a Judge in a certain City. 499 21. I will give you a mouth
and wysedom against the which. etc. Page 175 22. Ye are they which have
abydden with me in my temptacions Page 171.557 22. I appoint unto you a
kingedome as my father has appointed unto me. 538 22. You be come forth as
unto a thief with swords and stanes. Page 491 23. To day thou shall be with
me in Paradise. 118. 23. Father forgive them, for they wot not what they do.
171 24. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things. etc. 27 24. That all
must be fulfilled which were written of me in the law of Moses and in the
prophets, and in the Psalms. 676 24. Handle me and see, for a spirit has
not flesh and bone as you see me have. 10 24. Repentance and remission of
sins must be preached in his name, among all nations. 133
Joan. 1. He came amongst his own. 309 1. In him was life. 538 1. No man
has seen God at any time, but the son. etc. 552 1. Behold the Lamb of
GOD. Page 544 2. Tho zeal of thine house has even eaten me. 659 3. He that
believes not the son, shall not see life. 182 3. So GOD loved the world.
etc. Page 184 3. The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the
sound thereof, but know not whence it comes and whether it goes Page
79.138.195 4. Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall
never be more a thirst. 7.665 4. The true worshippers shall worship the Father
in spirit and in the truth. 328 4. Ye worship you wot not what. Page 665 5.
The works that my Father has given me to finishe, bear witness of me. 7 5.
He that hears my word and believes in him that sent me* is escaped from
death unto life. Page 563 5. The hour shall come in ye which all that are in
the graves, shall hear his voice. 117 6. No man comes unto me except the
Father draw him. 135. and 586.620 6. This is the will of him that sent me,
that every one which sees the Son, and believes on him. 12 7. He that
believes on me* out of his belly shall flow ryuers of water of life. 19 7.
Does any of the Rulers believe on him? 45 8. Abraham saw my day and was glad.
122 8. He that is of God, hears the word of God. 181 10. If I do not the
works of my Father believe me not. 7 10 My sheep hear my voice. 181.320 No
man shall pluck them out of his hand. 196.353 10. I have other sheep also
which are not of this fold. 554 11. This infirmity is not unto death but for
the glory of God, that the son of God might be glorified thereby. 165 11. It
is expedient for us that one man dye for the people. 633 12. Where I am, there
shall also my minister be. 12 12. When I am lift up from the earth, I will
draw all men unto me. 2 13. Who so receives whom soever I send, receives
me. 9 By this shall all men know that you are my disciples, if you love one
another. 223 13. You ought also to wash one another feet. 328 14. I am the
way, the light and the truth. 538 14. No man comes unto the Father but by
me. 107 14. In my Fathers house are many dwelling places* 35 14. I will not
leave you comfortles. Page 308.327.520 14. I will come again and receive you
even unto my self. 12 24. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you an
other Comforter. ^9 15. Without me ye can do nothing. Page 110.270 15. If
they have kept my saying, they will keep yours also. 550 15. Now are you
clean thoroughe the words which I have spoken unto you. 596 16. Ye shall
leave me alone, and yet am I not alone. 308.520 16. Now ye have sorrow, but
I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice. 115. and 558 16. In the
world ye shall have tribulation. 98 17. I have glorified thee upon earth Page
113 17. Father I will that those which thou have given me, be with me where I
am. 12.36 17. This is life everlasting* that they might know thee. 542.552 18.
My kingedome is not of this world. 98 19. We have no king but Caesar. Page
179 19. It is finished. 118 20. These things are written, that you might
believe. 0
ROman. 1. Which was declared to be the Son of GOD with power. 540 2.
Whosoever has sinned without law, shall also perish without Law. 675 3.
What though some of them did not believe? 17 3. Therefore we hold that a man
is justified by faith. 595 3. All men have sinned and are destitute of the
glory of God, but are justified freely thorough his grace. 458.544 4. Not in
circumcision, but in uncircumcision. 294.297 5. That where sin abounded,
there might grace also reign. Page 512 7. The law is spiritual, but we be
carnal. 155 7. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body
of this death. 613 8. If God be with us, who can be against us. 13.298 8. You
have not received the spirit of bondage to fear any more. Page 85 8. Those
which he know before, those also did he predestinate. Page 554 8. The spirit
of adoption by whom we cry Abba father. 538 8. Neither death nor life can
separate us from the love of GOD. Page 328 9. It is not of the will or
industry of man, but of the mercy of God. Page 135 10. With the heart man
believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confesses unto salvation. Page
86 10. Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be safe. 665 10. How
shall they call on him, on whom they have not believed? Page 509.665 10. How
shall they believe without a Preacher? 509.665.49 10. How shall they preach
without they be sent? 49.510.58 10. Hearing comes by the word of God. 625
11. The gifts of God are without repentance. 29 11. For if God spared not the
natural branches. 547 11. O the deepenesse of the riches. etc. 29.111 12. He
that does mercifully, let him do it cheerfully. 147 12. In gyuing honor* go
one before an other. 293 12. Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with
them that weep. 491 13. Princes are not fearful to them that do well, but
to them that do evil. 321 14. I know and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus,
that there is nothing common of itself. 603 15. Whatsoever things have been
written before time were written for our learning. 3 16. The mysterye kept
secret since the world begone. 674
1. Corinthians. 1. We preach Christ crucified: unto the Jews a stumbling block,
and to the Gentyles foolishness. 664 1. But unto them which are called both of
the Jews and Gentiles we preach Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of
God. Page 538 2. The natural manne perceyueth not the things of the spirit
of God. 308.554 3. Paul fed the Corinthians with milk. 680 3. We are the
Ministers of God by whom you have believed. 566 4. disposers of the secrets of
God. Page 9 4. What have thou that thou have not received. 308.270 4. In Christ
Jesus through the Gospel have I begotten you. Page 509 6. Whoremongers and
adulterers shall not inherit the kingdom of God. 181 9. Woe unto me, if I
preach not the Gospel. 212 10. Ye cannot be pertakers of the Lords table.
602 10. God is faithful and will not suffer us to be tempted above our
strength. 578 11. There must be sects that they which are tried among you,
might be known. 590 13. Now we see in a glass even in a darcke speaking: but
then shall we see face to face. 175 14. The spirits of the Prophets are
subject to the Prophets. 70 15. This corruptible must put on incorruption. 541
15. O death where is thy sting. 23
^. COrinth. 1. All the promyses of God in him are yea* 537 1. As the
afflictions of Christ are plenteous in us. etc. 637 3. Of our selves we are
not sufficient to think. etc. 620.320* 5. We are messengers in the room of
Christ. 71 5. Every man shall receive according as he has done in body. Page
175.675 5. God has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin. Page
535 9. GOD loves a cherefull gyuer. Page 485
1. GAlath. 1. I marvel that you are so soon turned from Christ Page 589 1.
If an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel. 607 3. This only would I
learn of you, whether you received the spirit by the deeds of the Law. Page
184 3. Though it be but a man's Testament, yet if it be proved, no man. etc.
186 3. He says not, to the seeds, as of many: but to thy seed, as of one.
ibidem 3. The Law is our Schoolemayster unto Christ. 334 3. There is neither
bond nor free, neither Male nor Female. 293. and 656 4. Because you are
Sons, God has sent the spirit of his son. etc. Page 85 4. When the full
time was come, GOD sent his Son. etc. Page 448 5. If you byte and devour
one another. 146.^24 5. Would GOD they were cut off, which trouble you. 606 5.
I testify to every man which is circumcised. 589
EPhesi. 1. According as he had chosen us in him before the fou^dacions of
the world were laid. Page 294.525.202 1. Christ works all things in us. Page
201 1. God has made Christ sit on his right hand, in heavenly places. Page 36
4. Christ is ascended up above all heavens to fulfill all things. 38. and 51 4.
When he went up on hy^, he led captivity captive. 37 4. He gave some
Apostles, some Prophets. etc. 10 6. Watch with all instancie and supplication.
205
PHilipp. ^. In the name of Jesus every knee should bow. 309 2. God woorketh
in us both to will and to do of good will. 270. and ^54 3. Our conversation is
in heaven. Page 37 4. I can do all things thoroughe Christ. 169
COlos. 2. He has spoiled al principality and rule, and made a show of them
openly. 37 3. Filthy communication. 15
THessalon. 2. How they killed the Lord Jesus. 556 4. The Lord himself shall
descend from heaven in a showte, and in the voice of the Archangell. 35 5.
Rejoice ever: pray continually. 115 5. Examine all things, hold fast that
is good. 655
1. TImoth. 2. One Mediatoure. Page 107 2. God would have all men to come too
the knoweledge of the truth. 561.655 3. A Bishop must be the husband of one
wife. 765 4. Meats are Sanctified by the word of GOD and prayer. Page 147 5.
Be not partaker of other men's sins. 15 6. We brought nothing into this
world: and it is certain, we may carry naught away. etc. Page 299
2. TImoth. 2. To divide the word of Truth rightly and dulye. Page 680 3.
Apply thy reading. 15 3. Thou have perceived my Doctrine. 578.592 3. All
scripture is given by inspiration of God. 5^2 4. Be instant in season and out
of season. 351
HEbreor. 1. Angels are ministering spirits. 246 2. He took not on him the
Angels, but the seed of Abraham. 105.178 4. We have not an high Priest,
that can not be touched with the feelinge of our infirmities. Page 107 4. The
word of God is a two edged sword. 660 9. Christ came to be an high priest
of good things to come. 37 10. The blood of Oxen and Gotes can not ^^ke away
sins. 545 11. Faith is the ground of things that are hope^ for. 295 11.
Without ^^ith it is impossible to please God. 47.341.665 11. By faith Moses
when he was great, refused to be called the S^nne of Pharaos Daughter. Page
320 13. Forget not to do good and to distribute. 139 13. Remember the^ that
are in bonds even as if you were bound with them. 491
James. 4^ The friendship of this world, is enimitie with GOD. Page 26
1. (...)* Christ was ord^yned before the world was made. Page 109 4. The
time is come, that judgment must begin at the house of God* 269 5. God
resists the proud. 506
2. PE^r. 3. Where is the promise of his coming? 66^
1. Joan. 2. Let the same abide in you, which you heard from the beginning.
129.588 3. Now are we the sons of God and yet it does not appear what we
shall be. 540 4. Greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the world.
353 4. Here in is love, not that we loved God. 531
APocaly. 3. The Epistle to those of Laodicca. 660 14. Blessed are the dead
which dye in the Lord. 313 20. The Sea shall give up her dead which are in
her. 313 21. There shall be new Heavens and a new earth. 175 22. Woorship God.
260
FINIS
The first chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The first Homely.
IN the former treatise (dear THEOPHILUS) we have spoken of all that JESUS
began to do, and teach, until the day, in which he was taken up, after that
he through the holy Ghost, had given commandments unto the Apostles whom he
had chosen.
GReat is the praise of History, The comme^dation of the holy History, or
Scripture.
though but profane, for that the wysest men have called her the witness of
times, the light of truth, the life of remembrance, the Maystresse of life, and
the Messenger of Antiquity: yet certain it is, that these titles may be
applied to no History more deservedly, and truly, than to the History
contained in the Books of the old and new Testament, which the holy Ghost
has delivered unto the Church. For this History brings us, an exact, and an
infallible account of the times, from the first beginning of the world, unto
the birth of Jesus Christ, which account, with other writers is found
uncertain, and deceytfull. This History, is not only the light, but also the
touchstone, whereby the writings, and credit of all other Hystoriographers,
ought to be tried. This History conserueth us the memory of things done in
very deed, and which in very deed appertain to our ^aluation. And those
things which lie hidden, in the ^ecrete closets, of reverend antiquity, she
most truly reports unto us, and maystresse of life, she only, and none
other ought to be called. For she lays before us the examples, not only of
vices and virtues, and the chaungeable occurrences of the world, by the which
we may learn how to ^rame this present life, but taking her flight yet higher,
she gives precepts of eternal salvation of the soul, she reuealeth the
holy will of God, she lays before us presidents of Gods promises, and
threats, she describes the judgment of God against the disobedient, and
declares his protection and tuition, wherewith he defends those that
worship him. And to conclude, she sets before us, to behold as in a
glass, all the nature and property of God, that every man may see, what an
one he vouchsafes (...) be ^o us, and what manner of ones he requires us
again, to be toward him. Which things unless we imprint in our minds, we
traueyle in all other hystories but in vain, which may delight us with vain
joy, but are not able to inflame our minds, with the love of true virtue, and
holy religion.

But amongst the volumes of holy Scripture, The comme^datio^ and argument of
the Acts of the Apostles.
that make mention and report of things done: I think there is none extant,
the reading and knowledge whereof, is either more profitable, or necessary,
than this, which is entitled, the Acts of the Apostles. For to say nothing of
Luke, the Author hereof, whose praise is in the Gospel, which was present
almost at all the things done (for the holy scripture inspired of God, needs
not the authority or praise of man) such is the dignity and majesty of the
things comprised in this Book, that if the same be not able to allure and
move any man, to esteem and love the work: in vain shall thou go about, by
humane reason, to persuade him. Amongst the which things, we will entreat
presently, of those, which contain the argument and sum of the whole
narration or discourse.

The Kingdom of christ, is this world.
And first of all, Luke descrybeth the beginning, proceeding, and success, of
that kingdom, which Christ has in this world: whereof appears in the
Prophets, many things foreshewed and told. For David testifies, that Christ
is declared a King by God his Father, Psalm. 2. and. 27.
whose inheritance (says he) are all the Nations of the earth, and who also
shall rule the Islandes. Zachary prophecieth, Zachar. 9.
that the bounds of his kingdom should stretch from sea to sea. Daniel. 2.
In Daniel, it is called the Mountain, that should fill the world, whereunto
all the things are to be referred, written in other Prophets, by these
words: Esaye. 2. Mich. 4.
In the latter days it will be, that the hill where the house of the Lord is
builded, shall be the chief among hills, and exalted above all little hills.

I pass over diverse things for prolixitie, which might be alleged to this
purpose. But if thou would search these things, in the History of Jesus
Christ, written by the Euaungelistes, thou should find little or nothing,
answerable to such honorable Oracles. For they describe Christ to be lowly,
poor, and subject to the injuries, and reproaches of every man, and who after
an infinite sort of calamities, abode most shameful death on the cross.
Further, they show the borders of his kingdom, to have been very narrow and
strait: for that the mysteries of the same, were understood but of very few.
But if thou will pervse this Book, by and by whatsoever the Prophets, have
prophesied of the same, shall appear to be most true: For he that seemed
despised, and a man of no estimation, by his glorious ascension into heaven,
has triumphed over the Devil and all his enemies, sits on the right hand
of his father, from thence sends the holy Ghost, before promised to his
Apostles: wherewith they being inflamed, begin to preach Christ, and not
content within the borders of Jury, are dispersed among the Gentiles, and
amongst them, by the plain, and simple preaching of the Gospel, spredde the
kingdom of Christ, both far and near, so that Christ stretches his
kingdom from sea to sea: and the Islandes of the sea begin to acknowledge
him to be their King, and by the ministerye of the Apostles, it comes to
pass, that all nations and people, flock unto this Mountain, exalted above
all Mountains, yea, reigning in heaven, which thing, Christ a few days before
his death, prophesied should come to pass, in these words: When I shall be
lift up from the earth, John. 12.
I will draw all people unto me. And this is so evident an argument, of the
kingdom of Christ, and of his power, that there can be none more evident. For
no Prince, were he never so mighty, could so quickly change, the fashion of
the whole world, as the Apostles in few years did, being but abiects and
contemned persons, and by the spirit of Christ woorking in them, graffed in the
hearts of men, a new, and before that time, unknown desire of faith, and
christian religion. Except therefore this Book were extant, the truth of the
kingdom of Christ, and the majesty thereof should appear, either none at all,
or at leastwise, might seem obscure and uncertain.

Beside this, The form of the Church primitive, and rule of reformation
thereafter.
there is one other thing very profitable and necessary to be known, that is
to say, what manner of countinaunce, the Primative Church had, which was founded
by the Apostles, according to the which, the Church in all ages ought to be
reformed, when any errors or abuses shall happen. Touching which thing, as all
men dispute thereof in these days, so shall a man find very few, which will
take the straight way, opened by the Apostles, to amend the same. Whereby it
comes to pass, that we put new errors in the place of old, and drive away
old superstitions with new, as pieuish and noisome as the old. Whereas if we
would observe the things written by Luke, we should have a certain and an
infallible rule, as well of doctrine, as ceremonies, which the Apostles left
unto the church. They taught one Jesus Christ, to be the only Auctor of our
salvation, and, that men which by nature are sinners, and in danger of
damnation, are by no other means justified and saved, than by faith in Jesus
Christ. Yea, this book abounds with most notable examples, wherewith the
principal and chief article of our christian faith (as I said ear while) is
warranted and confirmed, against all the cauillations of Sophisters and
Phariseis. For, what other did ever the Apostles require, of the unclean
Gentiles, and strangers, from the common weal of the people of God, but to
leave their old superstition, and to believe in Christ? Did they not preach
salvation and forgiveness of sins to them, turning from their open
ydolatrie? Did they not most stoutely stand against those blind Bayardes,
which would burden the Gentiles with the woorks of the law? as though Christ
had not been of power to save, but those which prepared themselves to him by
the deeds of the Law? Wherefore, if the faith in Jesus Christ, was once
sufficient for the Gentiles, and they not to be charged with the works and
ceremonies of the law, published by God: I pray you what shall let, why the
same faith and belief shall not suffice us in these days? Or shall we say that
the traditions of men, are more profitable and necessary to the attaynement of
Justification and salvation, than they which God once ordained, to remain till
the time of correction? As touching ceremonies, and outward rytes, the
Apostles thought it unlawful to charge the Churches with any thing, upon their
private authority. Baptism, the order whereof, they received of Christ the
Lord, they have most sincerely delivered. The use and manner of the Lords
Supper, as Christ did institute it, they thought good to retain. In other
matters of the Church, this was their chief care, to have a Discipline,
wherewith Christ would the naughtye disposed to be kept under, and that the
poor should be honestly provided for, whose case and condition, the Lord did
vouchsafe so earnestlye to commend unto us. The things which besides these
now a days, under the name of the Apostles, and Canons of the Apostles are
obtruded, we can not acknowledge for Apostolyke: neither can any good man
blame us therefore, forasmuch as Luke makes no mention of them, whose
diligence and labor, the holy Ghost thought good to use, in writing the
Sermons and Acts of the Apostles. Surely, I will never think, the holy Ghost
either so unwise, as to take a negligent writer of so high matters, or else so
forgetful, as to let pass any of those things, the knowledge and observation
whereof, was so necessary in his Church. I would speak of every thing more at
large, but that they recourse in the treatise of the History, where they will
be more commodiously handled. Let it suffice for this time to have showed the
great utility of this book, in that it ministers to us, a true and an
infallible rule of reforming the Church, which except they observe, which will
be called and counted reformers, they may well rejoice in their reformations in
ye judgment of the flesh, but they shall never give us Churches, that any
man, but meanly trained in the holy Scriptures, shall acknowledge in all
points, for sincere, and true Apostolic Churches.

Howbeit, this book shows us not only a form and pattern of the Church of
Christ, The condition, or state of the Church in this world.
but also it plainly teaches us, what the state and condition of the Church
is here in earth, which to know is both profitable and necessary, as well for
doctrine and information, as also for the comfort that thereby comes unto us.
For we shall see the Apostles in every part of the world, find it true that
Christ foreshewed, touching their Cross and afflictions. For God would not so
work by them, as that the things both supersticiously, and wickedly
maintained, in the world, till that day, should yield of their own
accord, to their preaching: but he would invre them with labors and
contentions. And in every place there were found, that would withstand their
doctrine, and those not of the rascal and common sort, but they, which for
their learning and godliness, the world woondered at: such as were the
Scribes and Priests amongst the Jews, and the Philosophers of the Gentyles.
Neither was the matter decyded with words. For so great was the authority of
the enemies of the truth, that the Magistrates took their parts: so that they
were feign to plead their cause before them, and to contrary their
commandments with hazard of their life. Thus being banished their native
Country, they felt the smart of exyle, they were in peril by sea and land,
they lay bound in Prisons, every man hated them, and rayled upon them: and
finallye, they ended their charge of preaching the Gospel, with their death
and bloudsheading. These things if we consider, we shall perceive, what we
have to hope for now a days, neither shall we be offended, either with the
authority or power of men, striving against the Gospel, with such rage and
fury as they did. And on the other side, the loyalty and truth of Christ
shall marvelously comfort us, whom the Apostles found so true in his
promyses. For he promised the aid of his holy Spirit, present counsel in
adversity, and his safeguard and defense against all men. All which he so
performed, that they having the upper hand, despite of the world, and Prince
thereof, obtained their purpose, and were able with good success, to perform
their vocation. Let no man therefore fear the threats of tyraunts in these
days, let no man be afraid of Satan's enterpryses, let no man be abashed at
the storms and tempests of this world. For Christ lives still, and the
truth of his promyses is infallible, which as they once were made to his
Apostles, even so they are continued to all men, which believe in Christ,
according to their doctrine. And surely, John. 17.
if there were no other utility of this book but this one, there is no man
but sees, how necessary the knowledge thereof is, in these days: where we see
every where such horrible attemptes, against the Church of Christ, and such
unhappy disturbances and troubles in the same.

Yet besides all these, the examples, whereof this History is full, brings
us no small fruit of learning and godliness. Examples for men of all degrees
and conditions.
For in this stage, as it were of the Church, may we see the Apostles, and
Apostolic persons, by whose example all the ministers of Christ's Church, may
learn, with what trust and prudencie they ought to handle Christ's cause, with
what constancy and truth they may defend the same, with what purity of
manners they should lead others, and with what courage and patience, they
should vanquish all adversity. Here are set forth Magistrates, both good and
bad, by whose counsel and doings, they that be in office may take a president
of their government. Here want examples neither of rich nor poor. Here have
men of whom they may learn, and here are remembered the notable deeds of
certain women, of whom all womanhood may take an example to live by. To be
brief, there is no degree or state, either of the laytie or spirituality, but
this book instructs it with many and peculyer presidents. And although it be
but little, which I have spoken in commendation thereof, yet I suppose it
appears thereby, that God meant to enriche his Church with a singular jewel
and treasure, when it liked him by the mynisterie of Luke, to have the story
of the Apostles, and primitive Church, to be written. It behooves us to
acknowledge his goodness, and to follow the diligence of the holy Ghost, in
searching for the things comprysed in this holy writing, which Luke begins
with these words: In the former treatise (dear THEOPHILUS) we have spoken of
all that JESUS began to do, and teach. etc.

Before he enters into the discourse of the Acts of the Apostles, he
rehearses the things that Christ did with his Apostles, a little before his
Ascension. He uses a little short and plain Preface, in the which as it were,
by rehearsal of things done before, he continues and joins this book,
with his first, entitled the Gospel of Jesus Christ written by Luke, and
therwithal shows what he purposes in this his other book. For the sense of
his words seems to be this. In the first book, I spoke of all those
things, which Jesus Christ the Son of God, did here on earth for our sakes:
but now in this, I am purposed to discourse of the things, which he would have
done by the mynistery of the Apostles, after his departure in body out of the
world. And he does dedicate his book to one Theophilus, Who Theophilus is.
whom most men do think to have been some special friend of Lukes, and
singular in the faith. In deed the addition which he puts to his name in
the Preface of his Gospel, calling him (...) (that is) most noble, or
excellent, is used chiefly to great men in authority. And afterward we
shall hear how he attributes the same to Festus and Foelix, presidents of
Jury. He was therefore some godly man of authority, such as God uses always
to appoint in his Church, to succor and aid the same, being in strife and
contention. And yet no man may hereof gather, that the same book appertains
not as well to us all. But rather let all men endeavor to show themselves to be
Theophili, that is to say, lovers of God, and think that Luke speaks no
less unto them, than to this ancient Theophilus. And truly, as many as
believe in Christ, being reconciled by him unto God, love him, with all their
heart and powers. But touching this opinion, it mattereth not much, since it is
plain enough, that all the doctrine both of the old and new Testament,
appertains chiefly to all them that love God, so that thereout they may have
both learning and comfort. Romans 15.
It shall be profitable to examine these few words of the Euaungelist
somewhat more diligently.

And first is to be considered, how he professes to write of all the things.
How Luke is to be understood, saying he has written of all things.
For Luke may seem to repugne with John, which about the end of the Gospel
written by him, says: There be also many other things which JESUS did, which
if they should be written every one, I suppose that all the world could not
contain the Books that should be written. But these places may be easily
reconciled. For Luke says not, he has written every thing perticularly, but
he testifies, that he has spoken of all things necessary to be known for the
attaynement of our salvation, and which may instruct us with sufficient
knowledge of Jesus Christ. For albeit the Euaungelistes rehearse not all the
doings and sayings of Christ, yet is Christ nevertheless to be believed,
neither was it needful they should declare all things. For it is evident that
Christ, which is the self truth, gainesayth not him self in any place, but
he observes one end in all his sayings. It is manifest that all his doings
tend to one mark and purpose. Wherefore, though the Apostles had let pass
none of them all: yet should we have known none other Christ, nor learned any
other faith than that we have learned, by the writings extant. This does John
witness, when he says: Many other signs truly did JESUS in the presence of
his Disciples, which are not written in this Book. These are written that ye
might believe, John. 20.
that JESUS is Christ, the Son of GOD, and that in believing, ye might have
life thorough his name.

JOHN witnesses that we attain unto life through belief in Christ. And
forasmuch as this belief may fully be learned and perceived by the things
written of Christ: I think no man, but he that is past shame, can deny, but
that all things concerning the perfect doctrine of our salvation and Christian
faith, is comprehended in the writings of the Euaungelistes. Therefore Luke in
these words reprooueth the impudent arrogancye of the Sophisters of these
days, who being tried and convict to have thrust many things into the Church,
without authority of holy Scripture, would feign slip away with this slye
shift, saying: that all the things necessary for us to believe and observe,
are not contained in the Scripture. Which if we grant, then must we
confess, that either the Apostles and Prophets, have not taught us the faith
in Christ perfectly, or that this faith is not sufficient to salvation: neither
of which is tolerable for Christian ears.

All Christ's ministry consists in works, and doctrine.
Furthermore, Luke comprehends all Christ's office and ministry here on
earth, in two words, that is to say, in Works, and Doctrine. We will not
here speak of the duty of a teacher, of whom, it is well said, that he
should teach the people with good example. For the Euaungelist means not in
this place, to describe the properties of a teacher: but to propose and set
forth such things, as are to be considered of Christ. And he gives Works
the first place, whereby he means not miracles only, but whatsoever things
else, he did for our salvation, as King and Priest. For the Scripture
teaches us in every place, Psalm. 2. and.110.
that he is given to us a King, and a Priest, but chieflye David. So as he was
King, he gave us Laws of life everlasting, and made his expedition, as it
were, into this world, to fight against Satan, the common enemy of mankind,
overcame him, and set us at liberty, which were tied fast in the chains of
our sin. Furthermore, of his liberality, more than royal, he abundantly
enriched all that believe in him, with the treasures of the kingdom of Heaven.
Moreover, by his Priesthood, he taught us, he prayed for us, and for all them
which hanged him on the Cross, and he offered his body and blood, which he
took of us to be a sufficient sacrifice, and acceptable to God for our sins:
Hereunto served the miracles, by the which he thought to bring men to the
obedience of faith, and to teach the simple thereby how to know him. The other
place he assigns for Doctrine, wherein the reason of all the things done by
Christ, is declared. In the mean season, we must not think Luke in vain, to
have joined Works, and Doctrine together, comprehending in these two words,
all that concerns Christ. For he teaches, that in the consideration of
Christ, these two must needs be joined together. For except we consider his
doctrine with his works, they shall no more avail us, to the knowledge of
salvation, than the things done by any other, living a thousand and five
hundred years past and more. But if we consider his doctrine, we shall
understand that all these things, were wrought for our sakes, that salvation
might happen to us, through the benefit of Christ our Redeemer. Also, the
consideration of his works, shall bring credit and authority to his
doctrine, forasmuch as they bear, most manifest witness of his divine power,
and Godhead, as Christ him self teaches, saying: John. 5.
the works which the Father has given me to finishe, the same works that
I do, bear witness of me, that the Father has sent me. And again: If I
do not the works of my Father, believe me not, John. 10.
but if I do them, and if you believe not me, believe the works, that ye
may know and believe that the Father is in me, and I in him. With these
words, are the counterfeit Christians of this world impeached, who believe
all the works of Christ, and furnished with an Hystoricall faith, use to
praise all the things, that ever he did or suffered: but when it comes to the
point to believe in one Christ, and the salvation obtained by his only merit:
then as though they had forgotten their former faith, they turn an other way,
and seek infinite means besides Christ, to attain to salvation by. These men
do as they, which being allured with the testimonye of common report, of
friendship, or familiarity, greatly extol the Science of Physic: but when
they fall sick, refuse to use the same, thereby plainly declaring, that they
distrust, both the Art and knowledge of Physic. Even so, that which these
men, confess of Christ with their mouth, they deny in deed. The cause of
this hurtful wavering, is none other but this, for that they consider Christ's
bare works, whereby they are moved, somewhat to marueyle at them, but that
marueyle endures not, forasmuch as it wants the proppe of doctrine, and is
ignorant of the end of them. Whereas if they would hear Christ's teaching,
they should perceive, that these miracles were wrought and described, to the
intent, that in him only, we should repose all hope of our salvation. For
this is his saying: I am the way, the light, and the truth. John 4.
No man comes to the Father, but through me. Whosoever drinks of this
elementall water, drawn by his own strength, shall thirst again. John. 4.
But whosoever shall drink of the water, that I shall give him, shall never be
more a thirst. Math. 11.
Come unto me, all ye that labor, and are laden, and I shall refreshe you.

Furthermore, it is to be considered that Luke makes Christ's ascension, The
ascentio^ of Christ, is the end of the Gospel.
the very end and bound of the story of the Gospel. For he says that he
has spoken in the first Book, of all the things, that Christ both did and
said, until the same day, that he was taken up into Heaven, after he had
given commandments to his Apostles, whom he had chosen. Hereby we gather,
that Christ by his glorious ascension into Heaven, has performed all the
points of our redemption and salvation. For we have showed before, that in
the Gospel is perfectly contained the things, which concern our salvation.
Because therefore the Ascension of Christ is placed last, it is certain, that
it was the last end of all the things, necessary to our salvation. This if
we hold, it shall appear as clear as may be, that we henceforth need no
more bodily presence of Christ in the earth. For what should he do in earth,
which long since has faithfully and fully performed the things, he had here
to do. We have need of the Spirit, the Grace, the Merit, the Doctrine, the
Counsel, and protection of Christ, which he never withholdeth from his, and
after this sort as he promised, He is with them until the end of the world.
Math. 28. Math. 24.
He him self also forbids us to believe them, which shall say, he is any
where corporallye present. But because we have a more commodious place, to
speak of these things a little after, where the History of the Ascension is
handled, let these few words suffice for this present.

The care and study of Christ, for his Church.
This is now to be observed, that Christ would not leave the earth, before he
had given commandments to his Apostles. For I understand not this place of
that one commandment, where he badde they should not depart from Jerusalem,
till they had received the promised holy Ghost, but Luke seems to speak
universally, of all the things, which Christ meant to admonish his Apostles
of, and chiefly those which concerned the office of their Apostleship, of the
which a little after follows more to be said. This is very comfortable, that
Christ although absent in his body, cease not yet to care and provide for his
Church. For here he fulfilleth the duty of a good and faithful Householder,
which going into the country, commits the charge of his family, to his
trusty friends, and in the mean season, tells each of his household, what
they shall do, while he is absent. Even so Christ ascending into Heaven,
commended the care of his Church to his Apostles, whom he testifies in the
Gospel, to take as his friends. He instructs them with commandments,
least they through rashness or unfaithfulness should offend. The Parables in
the.xxiiij. and.xxv. of Matthew, make for the exposition of this place. Let no
man therefore think that he is in such danger of Tyraunts, and deceyuers,
that he is left destitute of the aid of Christ, and so lies open to their
pleasure, and cruelty: For he that has redeemed his sheep with the price of
his own blood, and gave such charge of them, to his Apostles going out of this
world, he undoubtedly beholds them still, and will not suffer any of them,
to be taken out of his hand. In the mean while this also serves for our
purpose, John. 10.
that he that gave commandments, when he went forth, declares thereby
plainly, that he will one day come again. Let us therefore prepare our selves
against his coming, being always mindful of the words of Christ, where he
says: Luke. 12.
Let your loins be gyrded about, and your lights brennyng, and ye your
selves like unto men, that wait for their Lord, when he will return from the
weddyng: that when he comes and knocks, they may open unto him immediately:
happy are those s^ruaunts, whom the Lord, when he comes shall find wakyng,
etc.

The author^^ie of the Apostles, and of their Doctrine.
But before we end our Sermon, some things remain to be discussed, which
commend unto us the dignity and authority of the Apostles doctrine. The first
is, that he says they were chosen of Christ: He speaks of a special choice
and election, whereby they were taken not only into the number of them that
should be saved, but were also appointed for such an end and use, that they
should be Preachers of the grace conferred by Christ, and as Paul says,
Stewardes of the mysteries of God. Furthermore he says, they received
commandments of Christ. 1. Cor. 11.
For as Princes make for their Ambassadors letters of commission, which we
call instructions, in the which not only is contained the remembrance of
things, they have to do, but also the credit and authority they be put in:
even so Jesus Christ, would instruct his Ambassadors with commandments,
that it might appear what they had to do. But because many consider Christ,
but as he were man only, and perceive nothing in the Apostles, passing the
condition of common persons: therefore Luke adds, that these
commandments, were given by the holy Ghost. If we would lay all these
things together: it should appear, that they were no humane, but divine
affairs, that were committed to the Apostles. It shall appear also, that
their doctrine is to be referred to Christ, as to the Auctor thereof. For they
are Christ's messengers, as Paul says: 2. Cor. 5.
And they are commended with the testimony of Christ, saying: He that
receives whom so ever I send, receives me. Again, John. 13.
He that receives you, receives me, and he that receives me, Math. 10.
receives him that sent me. It is our parts therefore (Brethren) to judge
well of the office and doctrine of the Apostles, and thankefully to acknowledge
the unspeakable benefit of God, given us by their preaching, and to embrace
it with true faith. For so shall it come to pass, that we being borne again,
of the immortal seed of his divine Word, shall lead a life worthy the
children of God, and being delivered, out of the horrible tempests of this
world, shall live for ever in Heaven with the Son of God, Jesus Christ, our
only Lord and Savior: to whom all praise, honor, glory and power, are dew
for ever. Amen.

The second Homely.
TO whom also, he showed himself alive after his passion, and that by many
tokens, appearing unto them forty days, and speaking of the kingdom of God.
While Luke, The Acts of the Apostles, are to be continued and joined to the
Gospel.
in writing the Acts of the Apostles, goes about to join that discourse
with the story of the Gospel, as I told you yesterday: he does it not at
al-aduentures, but admonished and instructed by the holy Ghost, who means
thereby, to teach us some excellent point of learning. For hereby it
appears, that the story of the Apostles, should by no means be severed from
the story of the Gospel, and that whatsoever the Apostles did in setting forth
the Gospel, and kingdom of Jesus Christ, is as well to be referred to Christ
as the Auctor of it, as the things he did in his own person, while he was
here on earth. For it is plain that the Apostles did nothing of their own
head and power, but were moved and inspired thereto, as Christ's chosen
instruments, by his holy spirit. This thing the words of Christ teach us,
saying: It is not you that speak, but the spyrit of my Father that speaks in
you. Math. 10.
And in an other place, he promises his holy spirit, to instruct them with
all truth, and to give them counsel what to do. John 14.
Whereunto Paul had a respect saying unto the Corinthians: 2. Cor. 13.
Seek you experience of Christ that speaks in me? The knowledge hereof is
not in vain, because it serves both for our learning and consolation. For by
these testimonies we are taught, that we may safely believe the doctrine and
writings of the Apostles, not only because they are the Ambassadors of Jesus
Christ (for we see that Ambassadors sometime do their message falsely) but
also for that they be instructed with his spirit, and as he inspyreth and
directs them, do their office. It is no small consolation, that we know
Christ has a care of his Church. For he that departing from us in his body,
left us Apostles, by whose mynistery, his Church might be gathered together,
he distributing the gifts of his holy spyrite in all Ages, gives unto his
Church, some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, Ephe. 4.
some Shepheardes, and Teachers, to the edifiyng of the Saints, to the work
and mynistration, even to the edifiyng of the body of Christ, etc. But because
Luke in yesterdaies Sermon, made mention of Christ's Ascension into Heaven, he
takes occasion thereby, to entreat of the last thing that Christ did, a
little before his Ascension, because it serves well to the purpose of his
discourse or story. And in this place he speaks of two things, whereof Christ
entreated with his Disciples. The one is a diligent proof of his Resurrection:
the other an instruction, touching the Kingdom of God. Of both which, we will
speak as much, as the Lord shall put in our minds.

And touching the proof of his Resurrection, he uses but few words, but
they very pithie. The proof of Christ's resurrection.
For the same Jesus, says he, which before he suffered, did and taught many
things upon the earth, the very same after he had suffered and was dead, showed
himself alive again to his Disciples, even the very self same person and none
other, neither in any other body, but even in the self same, in the which he
suffered. Neither showed he himself to them as it were by chance, but proved
by many arguments and infallible demo^strations, that he was truly risen
again, in the very same body wherein he lived, while he was here upon the
earth. And here Luke speaks of those things, which he more largely in the
Gospel, describes that Christ did after his Resurrection. And amongst those
things first are his apparitions, as when he appeared to Mary Magdalene in the
Garden by the Sepulcher, John. 20.
like a gardener, where she knew him. And a little while after, meetyng other
women also, coming from the grave, Math. 28.
he saluteth them, and bids them show his brethren, and namely Peter,
Marc. 16.
how he was risen again. Again, he falls in company with two Disciples
going to Emaus, and after a long communication, being set at the table, Luke.
24.
declares and opens himself to them. And after diverse like appearings, 1.
Cor. 15.
at length he showed him self, to more then five hundred brethren at once, as
Paul witnesses. But because the eyes are many times beguiled, and the devils
legierdemaines are too well known, whereby he many times with false
apparitions, deceives the unwary: the Lord therefore suffered himself not
only to be seen, but also to be felt and handled. For, fearyng least they
might be deceived, with some ghost or illusion of Satan: Behold (says he) my
hands and my feet, Luke. 24.
how it is I my self. Handle me, and see: for a Ghost or spyrite, has not
flesh and bones, as you see me have. Therefore Christ rising from death
again, took not only a semblaunte and show of his former body, but the
very same substance, members, flesh, and blood. And for a more certain
proof thereof, not only suffered him self to be handled, but for avoiding of
all scruple and doubt, called for meat, and did eat in the sight of his
Disciples. Not to the end we should think, that bodies glorified, had need
to be refreshed with meat and drink, after the resurrection, (for where they
are quite free from all corruption, they have no need at all of generation)
but for that he would declare to all men, that he still did retain all the
parts of a natural and perfect body: For the glorifying or clarifying of the
body, takes away neither the substance, nor parts of the body, but it takes
away the corruption and affections rising in the body, by reason of sin, and
according to the saying of Paul, that that was corruptible and mortal, it
makes to rise again incorruptible, immortal, glorious, 1. Cor. 15.
and a celestial body. The circumstance of time, makes also for the proof of
Christ's Resurrection. For he did not these things for one or two days,
amongst his Disciples, but he was conuersaunt with them still forty days
together, and every day showed such proofs of his Resurrection.

These things were the more largely and diligently to be entreated of, A body
glorified, is not every where.
(beloved in Christ) because there have been in all Ages, which have gone
about, either to call Christ's resurrection into doubt, or else somewayes to
blemyshe and extinguishe the truth of his body raised again. Neither want we
in these days, which affirm that Christ's body, by reason of the glorifiyng
thereof, is so altered and changed, that it now can not be contained in any
one place, but is present in every place: And, other ground of their opinion
have they none, but because they would maintain Christ's bodily presence in
the Supper. Neither perceive they through their contention, that while they
defend his bodily presence, they deny the verity of his body, and so by
themselves, overthrow that which they fight for, as for life and death. For if
Christ be corporally present in the Supper, either his body must be contained
in a place, or else it is there none otherwise, but as it is in every place.
And how can it be, that that which is contained in one certain place, can be
at once in many places together? Therefore Augustine understood these things
much better, who perceived well that space of place could so little be
separated from bodies, that if we took space away, then were they no more to
be called bodies. Take away (says he) space or limitation of place from
bodies, and the bodies shall be no where, and forasmuch as they shall be no
where, In his Epistle to Dardanus.
there shall be nothing. Take away from bodies, qualities, and properties of
bodies, and there shall be no where for them to be in, and therefore of
necessity, they can have no being at all. The same Augustine answers them
marvelous well, that in this case fly to Christ's godhead, and omnipotency,
where he says: We must beware that we so defend not the godhead of the man,
In the same Epistle.
that we take away the truth of his body. But of these things we shall
speak more otherwheres. Now let us come to declare what causes moved Christ,
so many ways to prove the resurrection of this body.

The first me thinks was the Majesty and certaintye of the kingdom of
Christ, which was necessary by his resurrection to be proved. Christ's
Resurrection proves his Kingdom.
For where it was manifest that Jesus Christ was dead and buried (which the
Jews also confess) unless it should appear as manifest, that he was for a
truth risen again from death, all ye testimonies of his kingdom should have
been taken as frivolous and vain. For who would believe that he was appointed
to be king over Mount Sion, that is to say, over the Church of God, whom he was
sure to have been dead, and wist not whether he were risen again from death
yea or no? who would believe that he sits at the right hand of the father,
and uses his enemies as his footestoole, whom he knew not whether he were
alive or no? Except therefore the resurrection of Jesus Christ, were most
certain to us, we could neither acknowledge him for our King, nor yet look
for any aid or help in his kingdom. And it is no doubt but the Apostles
overcame all the threats of the world through this affiaunce, and fulfilled
their course and mynistery with such constancy, for that they acknowledged
him, to be the conqueror of death, and were fully certified, that he which made
them mynisters of his Gospel, reigned in Heaven.

The second cause of so diligent a proof, I think was the doctrine and office
of the Apostles, Christ's resurrection proves the truth of the Apostles
doctrine.
the certayntie whereof, was needful to be strongly defended, against the
judgment of the world. Now what more effectuous and strong proof hereof
could be found, than the glorious, and evident resurrection of Christ, whom
they preached, who was well known to all men? whereas if they had preached
some obscure and unknown person to men, they might worthily have been,
suspected. But now who can doubt of their doctrine, which preach and teach
him, who by his mighty resurrection, has vanquished the power of death, and
having conquered all his adversaries, has obtained an everlasting kingdom in
Heaven? This thing considered shall easily persuade us, to believe, that Jesus
Christ spoke by his spirit, in the Apostles, and to embrace with all our
hearts, the things that they have taught us.

The Resurrection of Christ, is the stay of our salvation.
Thirdly, it behooued Christ's resurrection to be well testified, because in it
consists all the strength and force of our redemption, and saluatioin. For,
we read that he promises us in his Gospel oftentimes, resurrect^on, and
life everlasting. He that hears my word, and believes in him that sent
me, John. 5.
has life everlasting, and shall not come into judgment, but has passed from
death unto life. This is the will of him that sent me, that every one which
sees the Son, and believes in him, has life everlasting, and I shall raise
him up again in the last day. John. 6.
And in an other place he says: I am the resurrection and the life: he that
believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live, and every one that
lives, John. 11.
and believes in me, shall not dye for ever. What needs many words? There
is none other cause of our belief in Christ, but for that God promises us,
every where in him, the life both of body and soul. But who would believe, to
find life in him, which was not able to restore him self to life again?
Therefore, least we being offended at Christ's death, should doubt in his
promises, he was revived again, the third day after his death, and being
raised again in his true body, declared that he had power and authority, to
raise again our bodies likewise. For he that being truly dead and buried,
touching his manhood, could raise himself again, shall he not now much more
being alive, and in his kingdom, be able to restore our bodies, from death to
life again? Hereunto belong other promises of Christ, prouyng his
resurrection. For he says: Where I am, there shall my mynister be. John. 12.
And in an other place: I will come again, and take you to my self, John. 14.
that where I am, there may you be also. Again: Father, those that thou have
given to me, John. 17.
I will that where I am they shall be with me, that they may see my glory. And
what else could these fair promises declare unto us, but death, unless Christ
being risen again from death, lived now in Heaven? For thus we must of
necessity conclude: where Christ is, there must also his ministers be, which
believe in him: but Christ being dead and buried, remained in death. Ergo, his
ministers also remain in death. Now, Christ's resurrection does most
stronglye confute, this so desperate an argument, and teaches us, to reason
against the threats of death, and terror of Hell on this sort. Where Christ
is, there must also his mynisters be. But Christ is risen from death, ascended
into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the father. Ergo, The
mynisters of Christ shall rise from death, and shall with Christ their king
reign in Heaven for ever. Which things if the faithful deeply consider in
their minds, they shall straight way, being boldened with this confidence, be
able to triumph over death, and all their enemies, and say with Paul the
Apostle: Death, where is thy stinge? Hell, 1. Cor. 15. Romans 8.
where is thy victory? If God be with us, who can be against us? For they are
fully persuaded, that neither death, nor life, can separate them from the love
of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Besides this, death which is the
reward and punishment of sin, could by no other means be conquered, but by
his resurrection. For as long as death held them that were departed this
life, her power and strength could never seem subdued. And it behooued that
death should be subdued, to set mankind at liberty, and to deliver him from
sin. For who could be certain of remission of his sins, and reconciliation
with God the father, as long as death reigned, which God in his wrath appointed
for the punishment of sin. It was therefore necessary that Jesus Christ
should take away the yoke of sin, and rise again from death, that it might
appear how death was subdued, and that sin, the sting of death, was taken
away, and salvation restored to mankind again. Therefore, it was not without
a cause, that Christ thought it good, to have the truth of his Resurrection
with so evident arguments to be confirmed. This is the chief cause that the
ancient Prophets moved with the spirit of Christ, prophesied the same
as well otherwheres, as in the Psalm. xvj. and in Esaias. liij. is to be seen.
Surely we learn that this was the chief hope, and greatest article of
confession and belief, whereby the true Catholics and woorshippers of God,
were always known and tried, as may appear by thexample of Job. For, when he
was accused by his importunate friends, of breach of faith and religion, he
proved him self, this way only to be faultlesse, for that he firmly
believed the root and foundation of religion. I know (says he) that my
redeemer lives, Job. 19.
and that I shall rise out of the earth in the last day, and shall be covered
again with my skin, and shall see God in my flesh, and I my self shall
behold him not with other, but with the same eyes. This hope is laid up for
me in my bosom*

This place teaches us, what we should judge of those mockers, Against the
scoffers at the Resurrection.
which Hystories mention to have been in all Ages, and the Apostles foreshewed
should reign in the later age. And now a days we may every where here the
profane and wicked voices of such, 2. Peter. 3.
as think themselves jolly companions, and pleasantly conceyted, when they can
with scurrilitie, scoff and deride that, which we hold and believe of the
last coming of Christ, and of the resurrection of the body. But they can by
no argument more evidently, prove themselves void of all religion, than by
this. For in this Article, all the points of our belief and religion so
agree, that who so denies this, takes away at once, all the belief and
mysteries of man's salvation. We gather this sense out of Paul's words, which
writing against such among the Corinthians, as denied the resurrection, amongst
other things, says: If Christ be preached how that he rose from the dead, how
say some among you, that there is no resurrection of the dead? If there be no
rising again of the dead, then is Christ not risen again. If Christ be not
risen again, then our preaching is in vain, and your faith is also in vain,
and you remain in your sins. Therefore they that are fallen a sleep in
Christ, are perished. If in this life only we believe on Christ, 1. Cor. 15.
then are we of all men most miserable. etc. Therefore such wicked scoffers
must be put away from us, and have no place permitted to them, in well ordered
commonweals. For what will they leave vnassayde, which will go about so
boldly, to overthrow the foundation of our health, and as it were, with one
blow, cut of the head of all faith and religion, as much as in them lies?

Let us learn to have a right thought, and cogitation of the resurrection,
that the same may serve both to govern our life, The meditation and use of the
Resurrection.
and to comfort us. For this is a most effectual preservative, against the
intisements of flesh and the world, oftentimes to call to remembrance, and set
before our eyes, the show and counterfaite of the last judgment, set out to us
in the scripture. Again, there can happen no greater comfort to man, than
while he is in this body, to think of the joys of heaven, which he shall
enjoy in the resurrection of the dead. Notwithstanding he is now depressed with
infinite greefes, cares, and sorrows. Uerily Paul exhorts the Christians,
one to comfort an other, with such things as are written in Scripture touching
this article. 1. These. 4.


What the kingdom of God is.
It remains, that we speak of that other thing which Christ treated of with his
disciples, at his last being amongst them. He spoke, says Luke, of the
kingdom of God. It is the common usage in scripture, to call the affairs of
our redemption and salvation, by the name of the kingdom of God, or of heaven,
because the end and scope thereof is, that as long as we live here, we should
be governed with the spyrite of God, and being taken out of this life, should
live and reign with God in Heaven. What things so ever therefore pertayne to
the mysteries hereof, Christ has diligently and in order expounded them. The
beginning hereof springs of us. For before all things it behooves us, to
know, in what kingdom we are borne and live, before Christ has illuminated
us. For except we were borne sinners, and by reason of sin, were in danger
of the Devil and Hell, we should need no restoryng to the kingdom of God.
But because our state is so miserable, it was needful the Son of God should
be given, which taking our sins upon him, should pourge them, with the
sacrifice of his body and blood, upon the Altar of the Cross, and through the
operation of his holy spirit, should regenerate us to be the sons of God, by
the immortal seed of his word, which regeneration brings forth the
mortification of the old man, and conversion of the whole life, and causes
them which before were led with the suggestions and corrupt affections of
Satan, to be brought to the obedience of faith, and to depend all together
upon God and his word. And this is that kingdom of God, which he has
restored unto us through his son, and for whose increase we pray as Christ
has commanded us, saying: Let thy kingdom come. And truly it was needful
that the mysteries of this kingdom, should diligently be declared to the
Apostles, because that being deceived with the common error of the Jews, they
imagined a worldly kingdom in Christ, wherein they hoped for honors, Mat.
18.20.
riches, victories, and peace in the world, as their often striuings for the
supremacy, Luke. 22.
abundantly declare.

The Ministers have need to be well instructed before they preach.
Furthermore, we ought earnestly to observe thexample of Christ, which would
with such diligence and traueyle, teach and instruct his Apostles, appointed
to the preaching of the Gospel, and mynistery of his Church: And yet we read
that they were conversant with him whole three years, were at his sermons, saw
all his miracles, and at length were sent abroad to preach. The Lord therefore
would admonish us, that the office of teaching in the Church, is not
unadvisedly to be taken upon us, neither that it ought to be committed to any
person, without a diligent trial. For if things of price, the custody whereof
is difficult and dangerous, are not committed to every man, neither does any
man that is wise, rashly take charge of them: how much more care and study
ought to be in this thing, where the charge of Christ's Church, and the souls
which the Son of God has redeemed with his own blood, is taken in hand? Is
there any more precious thing to be found than these? How great and perilous a
charge the oversight of them is, none can be ignorant of, which knows the
infirmity of our flesh, the entisements of ye world, and the subtle sleightes
of our common enemy. And it is the voice of God, which once being spoken to
Ezechiel, appertains to all the mynisters of the Church: I will require the
blood of those that perish, at thy hand. Ezech. 3.33.
This thing should they often remember, which being studious of Divinity,
mean at any time, to take this charge upon them, that they may the more
earnestly apply the study of holy scripture, that they labor continually in
searching the mysteries of the kingdom of God, least being deceived through
ignorance, they commit perhaps some error, in their office. Paul well
remembering the great danger in this case, earnestly urges Tymothe, 2. Timo. 3.
who he confesses had even of a child learned the scriptures, busily to apply
his reading. They also which in the Church have authority, to choose and
ordeyne ministers, 1. Timo. 4.
ought well to remember the same, least they disorder the Church, by admitting
such as be unmeet, which thing they must diligently take heed of. For it is
no small error yt herein is committed, because they are both Auctors of
disorder in the Church, and also partakers of other men's faults, as Paul
plainly declares. 1. Timo. 5.
Would to God they would well consider this thing, which think the ministry
of the Church, to be a sanctuary for poverty, and enter into the same, for
their private lucre and bellyes sake, or without any mature advise and
deliberation, but drunken with blind affections, thrust unfit persons into the
Church, and sometimes known naughty packes, and despisers of all good
discipline.

Last of all, we learn by the example of Christ, what, and what manner
communications, Christians ought to use, that is to say, godly, The talk of
Christians ought to be of the kingdom of God.
and such as make for correction, and amendment of manners. For Christ talks
of the kingdom of God, with his Apostles. Let us after his ensample common and
reason oftentimes, of the kingdom of God, and of our salvation obtained by
Christ. Let us diligently do away the corruption of our nature, and let us
endeavor that other may see and perceive the same. Let us have our mind on
Christ's benefits, and often and willingly, set forth the same: let us remember
the benefit, whereby he has bound us all unto him: let us avoid filthy
communication, which corrupts good manners, remembryng Paul's saying: which
numbreth dishonest talk among the things, for the which the wrath of God,
comes upon the children of disobedience. Colos. 3.
And let us always be mindful of that saying of Christ, which affirms, we
shall give an account, Math. 12.
in the day of judgment, for every idle word. God grant that we abidyng in
the meditation of his kingdom, may learn to despise things earthly, love
things that be heavenly, may die in the flesh, and live in the spyrite, that
hereafter we may live and reign in Heaven, with Jesus Christ, to whom be
blessyng, honor, glory, and power, for ever. Amen.

The third Homely.
AND gathered them together, and commanded them that they should not depart
from Jerusalem, but to wait for the promise of the Father, whereof (says he)
you have heard of me. For John truly baptized with water* but you shall be
baptized with the holy Ghost, after these few days.
The Argument and use of this present place.
Because Christ chose his Apostles to the end that through their mynisterye, the
doctrine of salvation should be sown amongst all nations: It was needful
that first they should be well instructed, in all the things that belonged to
their office: wherein as Christ who was most desirous of our salvation
intermitted nothing: so S. Luke sets forth very diligently, his last
conversation and doyngs with his Apostles, partly for that we might perceive,
the endeavor and good will of Christ toward us, and partly to declare what
things are chiefly necessary, in the mynisters of his word. And first of all,
he proves the verity of his Resurrection by many arguments, six weeks
together. For whereas this is the ground of our salvation, whosoever well
understands and knows not the same, he shall nothing prevail in preaching
the Gospel. Secondly, he expounds and opens the mysteries of the kingdom
of God, both because he would put out of their mind, the opinion conceived by
common error of the earthly kingdom of Christ, and also because they should
perceive after what order and sort they ought to handle the business of our
belief and salvation, by preaching of the Gospel. And unto these two adhereth
a third point, that is to say, the promise of the holy Ghost, which he both
now repeateth, and confirms the truth thereof by grave testimony, least by
his sudden departure from the earth, they should be all amazed, and
admonishes them also of the place when and where they should wait for the
same. This is a notable place, serving much both to our instruction, and
consolation.

The Gospel is begun, to be preached at Jerusalem.
First, of the place he admonishes them, commaundyng them that they depart not
from Jerusalem, but to wait there for the promise of the Father. Here the
City of Jerusalem is appointed, to the singularest affairs and purposes,
that ever happened in the world. And as the son of God, by the sacrifice of
his body and blood, in this City restored mankind again to his salvation: so
in the same place, he would first have his Apostles illuminated with his holy
spyrite, and begin the preaching of the Gospel. And here is that thing that
would make us to marueyle, if we consider the state and condition of the
City. For this is that City, upon which Christ pronounced such terrible and
horrible things should fall. Against this City is spoken that, that is in
the.xxiij. chapter of Mathewe. Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the
Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee: how often would I have
gathered thy children together, as the Hen gathers her chyckens under her
wings, and thou would not? And while he was in Galyley, being told how
Herod laid wait for him, he answered it could not be that a Prophet
should dye in any other place than at Jerusalem: Luke. 13.
not only hereby declaring how sinful the City was, Mat. 23.24.
but also many times denouncing the overthrow and destruction of the same.
Luke. 19.
What shall we think then was the cause, that moved Christ to appoint so
wicked a City, and so near her destruction, to so holy an use and business?
Surely, none other than the infallible truth of God, whose promises cannot
fail. It was once prophesied by the Prophets, that the preaching of salvation
should spring from thence. In the latter days (says the Prophets) the hill
where the house of the Lord is builded, Esaias. 2.
shall be the chief among hills, and exalted above all little hills. And all
Nations shall prease unto it, and the multitude of people shall go, speaking
thus one to another: up, let us go to the hill of the Lord, Mich. 4.
and to the house of the God of Jacob, that he may show us his way, and that we
may walk in his paths. For the law shall come out of Syon, and the word of
the Lord from Jerusalem. Where it seems me good, not to pretermit that
whereof Suetonius, though an heathen Auctor, and enimye to the Christians,
makes mention in the life of Vespasian, saying: See Cornelius Tacitus also,
concerning the same opinion in his xxi. book.
that there was an old and common opinion in the East country, affirming that
it was their destenie, which should come from Jury, to be conquerors of all
the world. Which Oracle, he as an Ethnicke and Gentile, understands of
Vespasian, who by reason of his valiantness* and courage, showed in the
wars with the Jews, made an entrye thereby for himself and his children, to
climb unto the Empire. We may more truly expound the same of the Apostles,
which being borne in Jury, began to preach the Gospel in the City of
Jerusalem, afterward filled all Jury with their preaching, and at length
dispersing themselves out of Jury into all nations, subdued and brought all
the world to the obedience of Christ. Now because Christ was not ignorant,
that these things were decreed by God his father, therefore he bade them they
should not depart from Jerusalem.

In the mean season, the consideration of these things, The wickedness of the
multitude, does not frustrate Gods promises.
serves much both for our consolation and instruction. For hereby it
appears that the promises of God, through the wickedness and impiety of a
few persons, cannot be frustrated and made vain. What (says Paul) though
some believed not? Shall their unbelief make the promise of God of none
effect? God forefende. Nay let God be true, and all men liars. Roma. 3.
This ought deeply to be laid up in our memory, because we see it comes
often to pass, that while we consider the great want of belief, and
wickedness in man, we utterly despair, as though the wickedness of other
should be our loss and hinderance, which is a most grievous temptation, and as
it accuses God, either of to much severity, or of unrighteousness: so it
hinders and stops us most in the race of godliness. For who would hold
on in goodness, that were once persuaded in his mind, that he must perish
with the multitude of the ungodly? Here therefore it is necessary that we be
armed against such temptations. And stronger armor we cannot put on us, 2.
Tim. 2.
than if we think that God knows his, be the multitude of the wicked never
so great. And in the Prophet he confesses he bears to us such affection as
mothers use to bear unto the children borne of their own bodies. Esaias. 49.
And because he is the just judge of the earth, Genes. 18.
he will not destroy the godly with the ungodly, as Abraham the father of the
faithful well considered. Again, because he is most wise and omnipotent, he
can easily discern between the godly and ungodly, and can punish the one as
they have deserved, and with favor defend the other. Hereunto is to be
referred that fan which John the Baptist attributes to Christ, wherewith he
shall purge his floor, Math. 3.
and separate the chafe from the corn. Hereof we have in every place
examples. The Lord knew Loath in the midst of Sodom. He had a care of the
Patriarchs living among the Chananites, although by Gods appointment they were
ordained to be destroyed. So in this place he knows his Apostles, and
whosoever in Jerusalem are of the number of his elect. Neither does the
corruption and wickedness of other, more in number and authority than they,
prejudice or hinder them. After the same sort, will he know us in these days
for his people, and will save us, so that we will depart from iniquity, and in
our life express Christianity.

The dignity or prerogative of auncestry, does nothing avail the wicked.
It makes for amendment of life, that we learn by the example of the
Hierosolimytes, that no glory, authority, or prerogative of auncestrye can
defend them against the judgment of God, which continue in their wickedness
and unthankfulness to God. For if ever there were any Cities notable, for
power and glory, Jerusalem will in that point easily have the superiority.
For to omit, that for the space of four hundred three score and seauentene
years, there was among the people of God, the seat of the kingdom and
Priesthood, that the kingdom stretched to the river Euphrates, that it
brought forth most valiant kings, most holy Priests, and most divine Prophets:
this one thing far passes all the glory of the world, that God did
vouchsafe to make it a president, and a pattern of the Church of Jesus Christ.
For this cause is she adorned with such praises in the Prophets, and in the
Psalms. Therefore is Christ said to reygne in Syon. Psalm. 2. Psalm. 48. Math.
5.
Therefore the Scriptures call her the City of the great King. Besides this
glory, the Apostles receive in her the holy ghost, and with good success do
there begin the helthfull preaching of the Gospel. But could all this glory,
deliver her from the hand of God, being angrye with her, and from imminent
destruction, when she had forgotten the benefits of God and his
commandments, and followed not the virtues of her forefathers, nor showed
her self thankful and obedient to God? Nay, but where they chose rather to
follow the multitude of such fathers, as brake both Gods laws and man's, and
shed the blood of the Prophets: neither the godliness of David, which first
builded there his palace and temple, neither the wisdom of Solomon, neither
the integrity of Iosaphat, neither the valiantness of Ezechias, neither the
zeal of Josias, neither the sermons of the Prophets, which rang in every place
of her, neither the miracles done by Christ and his Apostles in her, neither
the Gospel begone there to be preached, could let but that within forty
years she was utterly destroyed, and being raced and laid even with the
ground, has scarce any mark or monument there left of so famous and noble a
City. And that we say happened to Jerusalem, Math. 11.
both Capernaum that peculiar City of Christ, and Corozain and Bethsaida,
notable by reason of the Apostles dwelling there, felt even the same. Let them
cease therefore to glory in the virtues of their forefathers, and in the old
benefits of God, that cease not with unthankfulness and disobedience, to
provoke the wrath of God. For unless the hearers of the word of God, be
aunswereable to Gods benefits, they shall have the same lot and portion, with
the unhappy Cities of Jury.

The holy ghost is the promise of the father.
Furthermore, to return to the purpose of Christ, let us see what ye Apostles
have to do in the city of Jerusalem. He bids them to wait there for the
promise of his father, by the which he means ye holy ghost, which he calls
the promise of the father, both for that he is truly promised and given of the
father only, and also for that he had promised sundry times by the Prophets,
that in the coming of the Messiah, he would plentifully pour forth his spirit
upon men, as Peter afterward declares out of Joel. In the mean season he
puts them likewise in remembrance of his promises, which appear every where
in the Gospel. John. 7.
If any man believe in me (says he) as the Scripture says, rivers shall run
out of him, of the water of life. Which words are to be understood of the
holy ghost, whom they that believed in Christ should receive, as the
Evangelist there teaches. And in another place he says: I will pray unto my
father, John. 14.
and he shall give you another comforter, which shall abide with you for ever,
even the spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive. Again. That
comforter, which is the holy ghost, whom the father shall send in my name, he
shall teach you all things, and shall put you in remembrance of all things,
which I have said unto you. And again. John. 15.
When the comforter shall come, which I will send you from my father, the
spirit of truth, which proceeds from the father, he shall bear witness of
me. And a little way after. When he comes, which is the spirit of truth,
John. 16.
he shall bring you into all truth. Because therefore the father once promised
by his Prophets this spirit to the worshippers of his son Jesus Christ, and
Christ has obtained us the same, according as he is our Mediator and
intercessour, therefore it is well called the promise of the father.

Here is to be considered, that Jesus Christ suffers not his Apostles, Let the
Ministers of the Gospel, ob^y the commandment of God.
appointed long before to the office of preaching, and a great while by him
faithfully instructed, to leap sodeinly into the ministry, but requiring
obedience of them, commands them to wait for the spirit, promised of his
father. We are taught by this example of Christ, that obedience to Christ's
commau^dements, is chiefly required in the ministers of his word. For it is
very meet, that they, which should bring other to the obedience of faith, 2.
Cor. 10. Roma. 1.
which is the end of the preaching of the Gospel, should first be obedient to
the same themselves, and that they should do nothing, without the appointment
and commandment of their Captain. For so shall they not only by their
doctrine, but also by their own example, persuade their hearers the better to
obedience.

Moreover, this place admonishes us, The Ministeres of the Gospel, have need
of the holy ghost.
that it is not enough for Ministers of the word, to be furnished with
knowledge and learning, except they have also the gift of the holy ghost. For
where no man comes unto Christ without he be drawn by his father, they that
have the governance of the Church, shall in vain teach and admonish men,
unless the holy ghost work with their study and industry. Paul the Apostle
well perceived this matter, which calls the Church the tillage of God, and
confesses that neither he that planteth, neither he that watreth is any thing,
1. Cor. 3.
but ascribes all the glory and success of this matter to God only, which
alone can give increase. Therefore the Ministers have need to be prepared by
the holy ghost, least while they undertake such a charge without his guyding,
they procure displeasure and loss, not only to themselves, but also to the
whole Church. Neither shall he ever be meet for this room, which feels not
the effectuous motions of the holy spirit within his heart. Hereof proceed
those preparations of the Prophets, which we read in Scripture, such as Esaias,
Hieremie, Ezechiel and other had before they preached, which seems to be the
cause that Paul forbade that young Students should not be chosen to the
ministry of the Church, because such for the most part cannot be very sure of
the operation of the holy ghost, and his present aid. But that we speak of
the ministers of the word, is to be referred to all men, which are appointed
to great charges and offices in the common weal. In which number Magistrates
are not last to be placed, who being the expositors and interpreters of Gods
judgments, are in scripture called Gods. For what can they either well foresee
or judge, unless through the power of the holy ghost the affections be bridled
that would carye them awry? Or what safetye can there be of public weals
which are not led with the spirit of God, but with fleshly wisdom. Whereas
it is manifest that all good success and felicity depends of God? Solomon
the wysest of all men, well marked this thing, who having choice given him of
God, to ask those things that are in greatest price amongst men, despising
all other, craved of God the spirit of wisdom, and of that true wisdom,
which he describes in his book of Proverbs, whose beginning and root is the
fear of the Lord. And would to God they would often remember this, that are
Rulers in the Church and in the common weal. For the same would both kindle
in them an ardent desire to prayer and godliness, and would make them more
listen to the word of God, whereupon could not but ensue, a true and perfect
safety of the people committed to their charge.

The doctrine of the Apost^es proceeds from the holy ghost.
But before we depart from this place, two things remain to be discussed, which
may profitably be gathered of the promise of the holy ghost, made to the
Apostles. For first it hereby appears that the holy ghost was ye auctor of the
Apostles doctrine, and therefore the same ought to be esteemed as proceeding
from God, and not from man. For where they took upon them to preach, after
they had received the holy ghost, which according to Christ's promise taught
them all truth, surely all their teaching must be referred to the same spirit.
So we must hold the dignity and authortie thereof as great as Christ makes
it, which sending forth his Disciples to preach, Luke. 10.
says: He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you, despises
me. With the which argument Paul seems to be encouraged to say: If an Angel
from heaven teach you any other Gospel beside that which we have preached,
Galath. 1.
let him be accursed. For how great soever the majesty and the glory of Angels
is, yet if the same be compared with the holy ghost by whom they were created,
it is of no value. We have therefore in this place what to answer to them,
which hearing us reject and condemn the traditions of men, cry out, that the
Apostles were men likewise, and think hereby to prove, that either the
Apostles doctrine, must likewise be rejected, or else some place is left in the
church for man's traditions. And in deed we are not ignorant that the Apostles
were men. But because they spoke not as men, nor in their teaching declared not
the cogitations of men, but according as the holy ghost inspired their hearts,
showed the mysteries of salvation, and of the kingdom of heaven: therefore
their opinions by no means must be reckoned amongst the traditions of men.

We must teach nothing but that the holy ghost prescribes.
Secondly, this place teaches us, that nothing ought to be taught and preached
in the Church, but that that is delivered by the holy ghost. For the Church is
the house of God, in which the only voice of the goodman of the house is to be
heard, and according to his prescript, all things ought to be ordered. And as
the Bryde obeys the only voice of the Brydegrome, and is not judged chaste,
if she give ear to the entysements or promises of shameless suitors: so where
the son of God has espoused to himself the congregation of the faithful,
washed with his own blood, and has made us partakers of all his goods, (whch
is the proper end of marriage) we may not follow any other voice than that
whereby Christ the Bridegroom calls us unto him. Further, for that Christ
has made us the sheep of his pasture, and has redeemed us with the loss of
his own blood, John. 10.
it behooves us to follow his voice, and not to harken to the voice of any
stranger or hyreling. Neither is their opinion to be received, which think it
an error worthy of pardon to change and alter somewhat in the doctrine of
faith and salvation, so that in all things God only might be worshipped. For
to grant that such have a zeal of God, yet because they want the knowledge of
the truth, they can no more please God than did the Jews in time past, which
being inflamed with the zeal of God, went about to establishe their own
righteousness, and rejected that righteousness which God offreth us in his
son to be embraced by faith. And surely, if our zeal had been sufficient in
so weighty a matter, it had been but vain for the Apostles to have looked for
the sending of the holy ghost: why did they not therefore step forth to
preach, and according to the godly intent of their mind, teach the people
what they thought belonged to the honor of God, and glory of Christ? But
Christ's commandment stopped them, Math. 10. and 28.
who as he elsewhere appointed them to preach the things he taught them, so
without the conduct of the holy ghost, he will they shall not take upon them
to preach, least that being beguiled with the counsel of man's wisdom, or
seduced by corrupt affections of the flesh, they should swerve from the right
way. And we read that the old Prophets were bound by the same commandment
also, 1. Pet. 1.
in whom the Apostle plainly testifies that the spirit of Christ did
speak. It is said to Hieremie: Jeremy. 1.
Behold I have put my words in thy mouth. And God says to Ezechiel: Ezech.
3.33.
Thou shall hear words from my mouth, and shall warn them from me.
Therefore it is a wicked and monstrous temeritie of some men, which think they
have authority to coin new articles of the faith, and to thrust into the
Church traditions invented by man's brain. And who I pray you would think
him a faithful friend of the Bridegroomes which would not fear to entice
and inuegle the Bryde to his lure and purpose? Let them therefore which teach
in the Church, receive all their doctrine at the mouth of God. He speaks unto
us in the Scriptures by his holy spirit. Let them therefore read them, and
they shall not err.

But let us return to Christ's words, from whence we digressed. The
confirmation of Christ's promise by an argument taken from baptism.
For he going about to render a cause of his commandment, says: Of whom, you
have heard of me. For John truly baptized with water, but you shall be
baptized with the holy ghost, after not many days. These words have a
confirmation of promise, and consolation very necessary. For as there were
diverse other things which might make the Apostles careful in the consideration
of their office: so there was no little cause to fear them, least some
incommoditie might arise of the stay and tariaunce of the holy ghost. Therefore
to take away all fear, he repeateth his promises, not in the same words,
that are in the Evangelists, but with such as might bring to their remembrance
John the Baptistes saying touching this matter, which was very needful to be
done, by reason of the great authority, that John had amongst all men. Neither
ought it to seem an absurd thing, that Jesus Christ which otherwheres
receives no testimonye of man, John. 5.
would prove his promise by an argument taken from the authority of John and
his baptism. For this is the guise and manner of God to accommodate himself to
our capacity, and for that he would have it appear that John spoke by the
holy ghost. This therefore seems to me to be the meaning of Christ's words. If
you remember with your selves, both the things which I have sundry times
promised you, and which you have heard of John my forerunner: you can no longer
doubt of the sending of the holy ghost. For when he baptized those that came
to him in Iordane, he gathered the people not to himself, but to me, whom he
truly confessed, to be more excellent than himself, and showed them what I
would give them that believed in me, even the holy ghost, which is the spirit
of adoption and earnest of salvation, and kindled in the believing people, a
great desire of my kingdom. The water of baptism was a figure of this
benefit, which afterward I should bestow upon them. Which seeing ye have
received of John, not without the inspiration of God, doubt not of the things
which he has promised you. For as John has discharged his duty toward you,
and has received you being sprinkled with water, into the fellowship of my
body, which is the Church: even so will I not fail, truly to accomplish that
that belongs to my charge, that is, to pour out my spirit most abundantly
upon you, the sign whereof, you have already received. This sense (I say)
seems of all other most agreeable to Christ's purpose. Neither meant Christ
here to make a difference between his and John's outward baptism. For it is
plain that John's baptism and Christ's was all one, forasmuch as Christ would
be baptized of him. He rather makes a difference between the sign, and the
thing signified by the sign, and between his and John's office. He calls the
sending of the holy ghost, by the name of baptism, by an allusion, and because
of the proportion that is perceived to be between the outward signs, and the
things signified. But we have in these words two things most worthy to be
considered.

We must make a difference between the ministers and Christ.
First, that we ought to make a difference between the Ministers and Christ,
whose Ministers they are, least we attribute to them that, that belongs only
to Christ. John baptiseth with water, but Christ gives the holy ghost. So the
Minister is occupied about outward things while he preaches the word,
admonishes, exhorts, rebukes, comfort, prays for the congregation, and
ministers the sacraments. But they themselves be subject to Christ, which
according to his good will, quickneth the seed of the word in them by his holy
spirit, works holy motions, cheereth them with comfort, and to conclude,
reformeth and frames them after the image of God, neither mattereth it that
all these things sometimes be attributed to the Ministers, and that Paul
says, he had begotten the Corinthians in Christ, and that he traueyleth again
with the Galathians. For where God having no need of us does vouchsafe to use
men as his coadiutors, because he would have the Ministry by him ordained, in
the more authority, therefore uses he to adorn it with such titles. For the
which cause the same Paul says unto the Corinthians, whom he perceived too
much addicted to the Ministers: What is Paul, what is Apollo, but Ministers by
whom you have believed, and as the Lord has given to every man? I have
planted, Apollo has watered, but it is God that gives the increase. So neither
is he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters, but God which gives
the increase. If these things be observed, both we shall worthily esteem of
the Ministry, and give all the glory of our salvation to Christ, for the
which, his spirit every where in the Scriptures so earnestly labors.

Secondarily, it is very worthy the consideration, The sacraments seal or
confirm the promises of God.
that Christ takes an argument from baptism, to prove to his Apostles the
truth of his promise. We are taught hereby that the Sacraments do so seal
the promises and benefits of God, that we need no whit to doubt of the same.
For, God mocketh us not with vain shows and promises, but whatsoever he
promises in word, and seals with sacraments, the same he uses to
perform in deed. He promises us by the preaching of the gospel
forgiveness of sins, in the name of Jesus Christ, and the spirit of
adoption, whereby we are made the children of God. He adds as a seal to his
promise, baptism, where we being visibly washed, are received into the
outward society of the Church, or children of God. Therefore whosoever
believes the promise of the Gospel, he is so certain of the forgiveness of
his sins, of his adoption, and the possession of the heavenly inheritance, as
he is certain he is washed with baptism. By a like reason are we taught in
the Gospel, that the flesh and blood of Christ were given and offered on the
altar of the cross, for the life of the world, that the sins of the world
should be purged with the sacrifice of the immaculate lamb: Christ has joined
to this promise his supper, the remembrance of his death, in stead of a seal
thereof. Therefore whosoever believes the Gospel, is as certain that Christ's
body and blood was offered for his sins, and is as surely fed with the
merit of Christ's body and blood, unto life everlasting, as he is sure that
he receives part of the bread and wine at the Lords table, according to
Christ's institution. And after this sort the sacraments are said to seal the
righteousness of faith, and to confirm and feed our faith: not that the
outward elements conceive any secret virtue or power, by the words of
consecration, for that efficacy and power must be attributed to all that holy
business, by reason of Christ's institution: which institution if thou take
away, alter, or break, thou prophanest and ouerthrowest the sacrament utterly.
Therefore our minds must be lift up, that the thing we testifye by outward
action, we may perform by faith, which only apprehends Christ, and the
benefits which he has bestowed on us, and gathers us into the number of
those which shall reign with him in heaven, to whom be blessing, honor,
glory, and power for ever. Amen.

The fourth Homely.
WHEN they therefore were come together, they asked of him, saying: Lord, will thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel? And he said unto
them. It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the father has
put in his own power. But ye shall receive power after that the holy ghost is
come upon you. And you shall be witnesses unto me, not only in Jerusalem, but
also in Jury, and in Samarie, and even unto the worlds end.
The Argument and use of this place.
AFter Luke with great diligence has declared how our savior Jesus Christ
instructed his Apostles, who^ he would have to be teachers of all the world,
with all those things, the knowledge and use whereof was necessary in the
ministration of their office: at length he comes to the hystory of the
glorious ascension of Christ. But first he declares the last talk that Christ
had with his Disciples, wherein he comfort them, and reasons with them
more fullye, and at large, touching their office, which they hitherto seemed
not very well to understand. And the Disciples gave the occasion to Christ to
discourse hereof, while they utter their gross ignorance of Christ's kingdom,
with a very foolish and an absurd question. And because this place contains
much knowledge of things very necessary, no man ought to be weary of the study
or time, that is to be spent in the consideration of every part thereof. First,
we will see the Disciples question, and then how Christ answered the same.

The cause of the Apostles error.
The question they propounde in few words, but such as argue great ignorance
and rudeness: Lord (say they) will thou at this time restore again the
kingdom to Israel? They ask of an earthly and carnal kingdom, such as the
common people amongst the Jews, misunderstanding the Prophets sayings,
thought would now come forth. For the Lord had said to David: 2. Sam. 7.
When thy days be fulfilled, thou shall sleep with thy fathers, and I will
set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy body, and will
stablishe his kingdom. And thine house, and thy kingdom shall endure without
end after thee, and thy seat shall be stablished for ever. Again: I have
sworn once by my holiness that I will not fail David. Psalm. 89.
His seed shall endure for ever, and his seat is like as the Sun before me.
He shall stand fast for evermore as the Moon, and as the faithful witness
in heaven. And again: Behold the time comes (says the Lord) that I will
raise up the righteous branch of David, Jeremy. 23.
which king shall bear rule, and shall prosper with wisdom, and shall set up
equity and righteousness again in the earth. In this time shall Judah be
saved, and Israel shall dwell without fear. etc. I omit diverse other things to
this purpose, which are every where to be seen in the Prophets and in the
Psalms. Now because the Disciples understood these things according to the
letter, they believed that some earthly king should rise of David's posterity,
which should deliver the people of Jury from the tyranny of the Romans, and
restore to them their ancient liberty, and should set up a kingdom
flourishing in victory, and triumph, such as was in David and Salomons days.
With which error, the Jews being blinded yet till this day, despise Jesus
Christ the true son of David, and look vainelye for such a Messiah, as we
have already declared unto you. The same error, because it had infected the
minds of the Disciples also, makes them to propounde so pieuish a question,
both out of time and place, giving us a notable lesson, what happens to such
as being negligentlye occupied in scriptures, stick in the very bark, and
endeavor not earnestly to come to the pith and kirnell.

The Apostles error is ma^ifold.
But let us examine all the circumstaunces, that you may see almost as many
errors in this question, as there be words. First, it is a notable error that
they enquire of an earthly kingdom, where as Christ so often had admonished
them of bearing the cross. They heard him say: If any man will follow me,
let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me. Math. 16.
Behold I send you forth as sheep among Woolues. For they shall deliver you
up to the counsayles, and shall scourge you in their synagoges. And you shall
be brought to the head rulers and kings for my sake, in witness to them,
Math. 10.
and to the Gentyles. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute
you. They shall excommunicate you. Yea, the time shall come, Ioh. 15.16.
that whosoever kylleth you, will think that he does God service. Again: Luke
21.
Possess ye your souls by patience. These I say, and many such like they
had heard of Christ, yet forgetting them all, they dreamed of a worldly
kingdom, in which they hoped likewise they should be Lords. This thing
proves that they were both ambicious, and had a cowardly fear, where through
they abhorred adversity, and present affliction, and desired to bear rule in
the kingdom, before they like good soldiers had fought for the kingdom.

Further, they are in this to be reprehended, that enquiring after the kingdom
of Christ, they make mention of Israel only, nothing careful for the health
of other nations. But the old Testament teaches us, that Christ the savior
shall not bear rule in Israel only, but also in all the world. For to him it is
said. I have set my king upon my holy hill of Syon. Ask of me, and I shall
give thee the heathen for thine enheritance, Psalm. 2.
and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Of him are also to
be understood the things read in the Psalm. 72. His dominion shall be from
the one sea to the other, and from the flood unto the worlds end. They that
dwell in the wilderness shall kneel before him: his enemies shall lycke the
dust. The kings of Tharsis and of the Isles shall give presents: the kings of
Araby and Saba shall bring gifts. All Kings shall fall down before him: all
nations shall do him service. etc. Is not then the blindness of the
Disciples notable, that enquire only but of the kingdom of Israel? For thus
they derogate much from Christ, whose kingdom they drive into such straightes:
and are very injurious to other nations, whose salvation they ought to have
held full dear.

To this if we add the beginning of all this evil, and see what moved them
to ask this question, we shall yet perceive in them a very great fault, which
Christ not long after finds in them, that is to say, curiosity, which no
man without great offense to Godwarde can follow, neither can any man satisfy
it without great hazard of his soul health. For they enquire not only of the
restoring of the kingdom, but they would also know the very time when the
kingdom, which they doubted not but would come, should be restored. But how
many other things were there, the ensearching whereof, had been for them both
more profitable and necessary? Why rather ask they no questions touching their
office, and forasmuch as they think Christ should reign on the earth like a
Prince, why ask they not how they should behave themselves in their charge,
in the kingdom? Why do they not cheerfully offer their industrye, care,
study, labor, and traueyle, to the setting forth of his kingdom? But this is
the property of curiosity, that being very careful about the things which
belong not unto us, we easily neglect the things, wherein consists the chief
weight of our duty.

We are thus diligent and prolixe, The falls of holy men do prove our
corruption.
in finding out the error of the Apostles, not for that we delight with
contempt, to deprave or defame them, whose labor and loyalty afterward
shined very bright, in the setting forth of the kingdom of salvation, and to
whom they owe immortal thanks, whosoever through their doctrine have
attained to know Christ. But our meaning is, that men should learn to know
the inclination of our corrupt nature and flesh, which is the first step up
to wholesome and true wisdom. And to that end, the Scripture uses oftentimes
to remember, the horrible falls of most holy men, that in them might appear,
how easy it is for us to fall into sin and damnation, unless we were
holden up, by the faithful and continual care, and leading of Gods holy
spirit. For what shall he hope more of himself which beholds the adultery
and cruel murder of David, a man after Gods own mind, the multitude of
Wives that Solomon the wisest of all kings had, being to much wedded to his
Wives, the foul fall of Peter, and here the great error of all the Apostles
gathered together? we must needs confess, that we are not able of our selves,
so much as to think one good thought, much less to do well, but that all our
sufficiency to do well comes of God, 2. Corin. 3. Philip. 2.
who works in us both the will and the deed, according to his good will.

Furthermore, it appears by this example of the Apostles, with what mind
they embrace Christ and his doctrine, What carnal folk seek in Christ.
which are not led by his holy spirit. For as these men little minding
Christ's heavenly kingdom, look after an earthly kingdom, and in the same
conceive great hope of riches, power, glory, and pleasures: so you shall see
diverse likewise affected in these days, when the merit of Christ, and the
liberty gotten us by him is preached, which looking only upon the goods of
the world, seek under the pretext of Christ, honors, riches, outward peace,
and such like: in the mean while little regarding the heavenly and everlasting
goods, which Christ has purchased us through the merit of his bloudshedding.
To say nothing in the mean season of those filthy hogs of Epicures herd,
who professing a Christian faith, do yet nothing else but follow licentious
sinfulness, casting aside all discipline and care ofholy life. Surely, even
they which in these days go for the best men, under the fair pretense of
peace and concord, swerve many times from the simplicity of faith, and both
say and do many things, for favor and pleasure of men, which are most
contrary to Christ's commandments. As though the friendship of this world,
might stand with the true worship of Christ, and were not rather as James
says, Jacob. 4.
enmity before God. This is the strong poison of faith and religion, which
though it lie hid many times under a fair show and color, yet at the
length it bursteth forth with the horrible loss of salvation, and offense of a
great many, for of this root spring these tymetakers, which are to soon ripe,
whom the Lord in Matthew likeneth to the stony ground. For as this ground
receives in deed the seed, and causes it soon to spring, but cannot bring
it to rypenesse for lack of moisture, to defend it against the parching heat
of the sun: so these men when they perceive any hope of private commodity by
the Gospel, they will seem marvelous favorers of the same, they will have
Christ still in their mouth, and will crake that they are ready to fight with
any man in the defense of Christ's glory. But if that hope deceive them, and
otherwise than they hoped, the cross come, and banishment, poverty and
danger on every side appear: then as though they had espide a Snake, they
leap back, and laying away all their faith, and counterfeiting of faith, they
spare not to say they were wickedly deceived, and so degenerate into open
enemies of the truth, being a little before stout defenders of the same. Least
therefore the like might happen in us, it behooves us to have a right opinion
of Christ and his doctrine. Let us seek in him heavenly goods, which serve to
eternal salvation. As long as we live here, let us look for the cross and
all kind of afflictions. So shall it come to pass, that neither we shall be
deceived of our hope in heaven, neither be offended with the cross and
tribulations, which we so long before prepared our selves patiently to suffer.

Yet is there one other utility of the Apostles error. To abolishe old
errors is a difficult thing.
Their example teaches us, how difficult and laborious a thing it is, to pull
out of men's minds old grown errors, wherein their selves have lived, and
been confirmed, by open example of others. For as was declared a little before,
this error of the Jews, touching the earthly kingdom of their Messiah, was
an old and common error, in taking away of the which Jesus Christ traueyled
more, than almost in any one thing else. For as often as the Apostles, deceived
by this error, strove for the supremacy, so often Christ admonishes them of
humility, and shows them that his kingdom is of a far other fashion. See
the.xviij. and.xx. of Matthew, and Luke the.xxij. Neither fell it out to reason
of this matter so few times as one, after his resurrection. For where this
erroneous opinion, gave occasion of offense, to the two Disciples going to
Emaus, and they lamented that he was crucified and dead, whom they hoped
should have been the Redeemer of Israel, Christ answered: Luc. 24.
O ye fools and slow of heart to believe all the things that are written in
the Prophets. Was it not needful that Christ should suffer all these things,
and so enter into his glory? Furthermore, Luke said before, that Christ was
conversant fourtye days with his Disciples, and reasoned with them concerning
the kingdom of God, and all the mysteries of his kingdom. Whence comes it
therefore, that an opinion so often and so strongly confuted, should again be
revived? Surely, of none other cause, than of the disposition of our corrupt
nature, which as it easily drinks in error, so it always holds fast the
same. And as the Ethnicke Poet says: Drive Nature forth with a forke, yet will
she return again? So the Israelites in times paste, used to the Idolatry of
the Egyptians, fell to the worshipping of a calfe: notwithstanding, they had
heard the terrible majesty of God, renounceing and forbidding all use of
Images, not many days before. Hereof came that long retained superstition of
hill aultars, in the books of Kings, which the most godly kings could not
wholly abolish. And would God there were not examples in these days, that
plainly prove that we say to be true. This consideration therefore serves
partly for us to learn, how needful it is in all reformations, clean to
root and rippe up all things, whatsoever have never so small occasion of
error, and partly to cause us to be the less o^fended with them, which
continually fight against old superstitions, knowing by the example of all
ages, that there can in this matter be no diligence to much, nor no endeavor or
labor to superfluous.

Now seems it time to declare what Christ answered. Christ rejects the
curious question of his Disciples.
And his answer contains two points. First, he rejects the Apostles
demand, as pieuish and unworthy the answering. Secondly, he opens more
clearly the manner of his kingdom, and in such sort, that he both comfort
the fearful Apostles, and declares after what sort in his kingdom they must
minister their office. To the first point these words appertain: It belongs
not to you to know the times and seasons, the which the father has reserved in
his own power. And in the beginning he says nothing against their false
opinion of his kingdom, both for that other times he had spoken much of the
same, and the coming of the holy ghost was at hand, which should teach them
all truth. His words sound as though he should say thus much. I have many
times entreated of my kingdom, and hitherto, as I perceive, I have profited
nothing. But admit that I should set up such a kingdom amongst the people of
Israel, as you dream, yet is your curiosity to be reprehended, that would
know the very time, whereof you never heard me say any thing, and which it
had becommed you in patience and hope to have looked for, and not through
unprofitable and bold temeritie, to have prevented the time that God would
reveal.

The bounds of Christian wisdom.
These words of Christ are diligently to be observed. For with them he bridleth
the bold curiosity of man's wit, and appoynteth us certain bounds of
Christian wisdom, which it is unlawful for us to pass or go beyond. For
where the Disciples are reprehended, for that they would over curiously enquire
for such things as God had reserved to his own power only: it appears
sufficiently that hereby we are prescribed how far our wisdom must extend,
that we should continually be occupied in the searching and consideration of
those things that God has vouchsafed to reveal to us in his Scriptures, and
not to know those things which he has reserved to himself alone. And what
things he would have hid from us, and unknown, to leave them to his power,
wisdom, and judgment, unto that day, in the which we shall not know in
part, but shall face to face behold the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven.
1. Corin. 13.
The same the wise man admonishes, whose words would to God were written in
the hearts of many curious persons. Seek not (says he) after the things that
be above thee, and search not foolishly for the things far above thy
strength. Ecclesias. 3.
Study the things commanded thee of God, and be not curious in many of his
works. For it is not needful for thee to see with thine eyes the things that
are secret. Make not to much search in superfluous things, and be not curious
in many of his works. For many things are showed unto thee already, which be
above the capacity of men. The meddling with such has beguiled many a man, and
tangled their wits in vanity. Whereunto is to be referred the saying of
Solomon: He that searches the majesty shall be deprived of the glory. Prou.
25.


Here therefore are confuted and condemned by this sentence of Christ, all the
soothsaying Arts of Mathematicals, All Astrologers and Soothsaiers confuted.
amongst which Judicial Astrology bears the bell. For Christ forbids to
enquire after the times and seasons, that is, what ought to be done at every
time, and what time is appointed for every thing. And herein is the chief use
of Astrology, to foreshewe the success of every thing in his time. For when
they know the hour of ones nativity, by and by they look upon the Horoscope
or ascendent and figure of heaven, and so pronounce of the course of his whole
life. And not content with the things belonging to the body, and goods of
fortune, they take upon them to judge of the soul also, as though the virtues
and vices of man, and so by consequent eternal salvation, depended upon the
Planets. After like sort they write Prognostications of the things that shall
happen every year. In which (as if they were Oracles of Apollo) they reason of
wars, of sicknesses, of dearth and scarcity of things, and what vices and
naughtynesse shall reign all the year following. And what do these men else,
but that that was reprehended in the Disciples, which yet went not about to
learn such things by any Art forbidden of God, but to know it at Christ's
mouth, whom God has made unto us wisdom. Neither let them object the example
of the Prophets, whose prophecies are extant of things that were to come, and
who did sometimes appoint the times of things afterward to follow, as is
plain that Hieremie and Daniel chiefly did. For these men uttered that thing
for the instruction and comfort of man, which they received by Gods holy
spirit. And God oftentimes uses to foreshewe things to come by his Prophets
for man's health sake. But he has in no place taught us soothsaying Arts,
whereby man's industry can try out things to come, but he has condemned
them, and shut out the students of them from his kingdom and people, as is to
see in Deuteronomy. 18. and Mich. 5. Chapter.

There is also condemned in this place the curiosity of such as going farther,
dare search for the latter day and end of Christ's coming, Searchers for the
latter day.
which Christ has so appointed in his fathers power only, that he says, it
is unknown to the Angels, and to himself as he is man. Marc. 13.
Whatsoever things is meet for us to know, they are abundantly declared in the
scripture. We are admonished of the signs that go before that day, not that
we should dispute of the very time of his coming, but that being awaked from
the sleep of sin, we should lift up our heads, Luc. 21.
that the day of our redemption approaching, we might be found faithful and
diligent servants.

In like manner me thinks they are here reprehended, Waders in Predestination.
which wade to far in the secrets of Gods eternal predestination and
providence, while they search what number is of the elect, and call to account
of man's reason the judgments of God, whereby he chooses or refuses men,
which, as they far pass man's reach and capacity: so can they not without
great danger be sought out. But the things in this matter which serve both for
our comfort and instruction, God has vouchsafed to reveal. For it is plain
that the faithful are elected from everlasting in Christ Jesus only, through
the mere favor of God, without respect of our works or merits. It is plain
that this election is firm and stable, whereof God (as Paul says) cannot
repent him. Romans 11.
It is plain that faith is the infallible sign of this election, whereby we
apprehende Jesus Christ, and in him righteousness and salvation. It is plain
that the end and mark of our election, is to live holy and blameless in this
life, that when we be taken from this life, we may live in heaven with Jesus
Christ. These things God has revealed: Ephesians. 1.
and with these we ought to be content. In the things which can not be attained
too, nor perceived by man's reason, it becomes us with Paul to marueyle with
godly confession of our ignorance, and to cry out: O the depth of the riches,
and of the wisdom of God: how unsearchable be his judgments, Romans 11.
and his ways vnfindeable, for who has known the mind of the Lord, or who
has been a counsel with him, or who has first given to him, and it shall be
given to him again. For of him, and by him, and in him. etc. Now let us see
the other part of Christ's answer, wherein he repeateth such things of his
kingdom, as serve for this present purpose. He so handles this matter (as I
said before) that he both marvelously comfort the Disciples, and
admonishes them of their duty. For he says: You shall receive power, when
the holy ghost shall come upon you, and you shall be witnesses to me, not only
in Jerusalem, but in all Jury and Samarie, and unto the worlds end.

First, he repeateth the promise of the holy ghost, wherewith he comfort the
Disciples, The kingdom of Christ is spiritual.
and describes the state of his kingdom. I would not (says he) have you
abashed, where you hear, you are appointed to the setting forth of my kingdom
among the Gentyles. For this thing will not be compassed by man's strength,
which I perceive in you to be very small, and little regarded. Here needs
heavenly and divine strength from above, which I have often promised you shall
not want, and now again I promise you the same. For the holy ghost shall come
upon you, which shall give you courage and strength, that shall make you able
to fulfill your office. We are here admonished that Christ's kingdom (as he
confessed before Pylate) is not of this world or earthly, John. 18.
but spiritual, neither consists in the power, Roma. 14.
honor, glory, triumphs, riches, and pleasures of this world: but in
righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy ghost. Whereupon we gather further,
that it is not set forth and defended with carnal weapons, and strength of
Princes of this world, but with preaching of the word, wherewith the spirit
of God works effectuously in the hearts of men. This teaches the words of
Paul, where he says: Though we walk in the flesh, yet war we not after
the flesh. 2. Corin. 10.
For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty in God, to cast
down strong holds, wherewith we overthrow counsayles, and every high thing
that exalts it self, against the knowledge of God, and bring into captivity,
all imagination to the obedience of Christ. etc. Therefore they labor in vain
which go about by man's counsel, leagues, fight, favor, and amity of Princes,
and such like means to set up the kingdom of God. For Christ's kingdom is in
the minds of men, which by no man's strength can be forced, but with the power
and operation of the holy ghost. It becomes both Kings and Princes to be the
nurses and maintayners of the Church, as Esaias says, but they shall never with
outward power and strength set forth the kingdom of Christ. And the examples
of all ages plainly teach us, that whatsoever man went about, by his counsel
and strength that way to bring it to pass, never happily succeeded.

The office of the Apostles is to bear witness of Christ.
Moreover, he expressly teaches, what the Apostles have to do, in their
office in this kingdom: You shall be my witnesses, says he. This shall be
your kingdom, your office, your dignity, to bear witness of my doctrine,
life, miracles, passion, death, burial, resurrection from death, and ascension
into heaven, and briefly of all the things, which I have done and suffered for
man's salvation. Neither shall you expound the history of things by me done
only, but declare the end and use of them, that all nations may acknowledge
me their only teacher, savior, and redeemer. Christ thought good in this
place to use this word witness, as also in John the.xv. to admonish as well
the Apostles, as the hearers of their duty. For the Apostles and their
successors, learn by the duty of a witness, how to preach the Gospel of
Jesus Christ. In a witness the love of truth is chiefly required, Prouer. 6.
and a lying witness God hates. Again, it is the part of a witness to
speak nothing but that he knows, which he has so certainly seen and heard,
that he doubts nothing of the truth of them. Further, he must have no corrupt
affections, least of hatred, fear, or favor, he put to, hyde or conceal any
thing, but plainly confess the thing he knows. Such witnesses, we read that
the Apostles were. For whatsoever they heard Christ teach, or saw him do,
they truly preached it, neither feared they the threats of their enemies, as
appears in all hystories. Neither confirmed they their witness of Christ
with words only, but with their life, with death, and with their blood. It
becomes the Ministers of the word to imitate their truth and constancy, who
if for favor of man, or fear of danger they change, or at least dissemble
any thing in the quarrel of Christ, they pollute themselves with an horrible
crime, and are in danger of Christ's sentence: Whosoever is ashamed of me in
this naughty and adulterous world, Marc. 8.
him will I also be ashamed of, when I come wirh the holy angels in the glory
of my father.

Again, How wicked a thing it is not to believe the Gospel.
the hearers of the Apostles and Apostolical doctrine are here admonished,
what an heinous offense it is, not to believe the holy gospel, or to gainesay
it. For it is not a simple preaching of Christ, or an hystoricall and bare
narration, but a testimony which the Apostles, as sworn witnesses, brought
into the world by the very son of God, gave not only before the common
people, but also before the Bishops, and Priests, Kings, and their
Counsel. But he that in the law, gives no credit to sworn witnesses, and
openly denies their testimony, brings himself in danger of life. What
shall we say then of those* which fear not to speak against the Apostles,
being Christ's witnesses? For they accuse not only the Apostles of lying, but
also Christ himself, as much as in them lies, yea, they would cause God the
father to be suspected, as though he would bring forth false witnesses, and
obtain his sons cause with suborned witnesses. This saw that beloved
Disciple of Christ, when he says: If we receive the witness of men, the
witness of God is greater. 1. Joan. 5.
For this is the witness of God which he bare of his son. He that believes
the son of God, has the witness in himself. He that believes not God,
makes him a liar, because he believes not the witness that God bears of
his son. etc. These things if we consider (brethren) we shall find the
chief cause of the evils of these days. For where we take it for a jest and
pastime, to call in question and doubt the things written by the Apostles of
Jesus Christ, yea many wickedly deny them, and persecute that testimony of
Jesus Christ with fire and sword: it can not be but God must be angry with the
world, and therefore it flows with all kind of evil. For John the Baptist
says: The father loves the son, and has given all things into his hands.
He that believes the son, John. 3.
has life everlasting. He that believes not the son, shall not see life,
but the wrath of God remains upon him.

Last of all, Christ describes the bounds of his kingdom, The bounds of
Christ's kingdom.
which they thought extended not beyond Jury. For where he says, the Apostles
should be his witnesses to the end of the world, he plainly declares that his
kingdom stretches to all nations of the world. He manifestly and by name
rehearses certain places, and that not without a cause. For where the City
of Jerusalem, by reason of their great and horrible offense, committed against
the son of God, seemed unworthy the wholesome testimonye of the grace of the
Gospel: it behooued to name her also, that they might know how the beginning
of preaching the Gospel should be there, where iniquity most abounded.
Again, where the Jews of an old and ingenerate hatred, could not brook the
Samaritanes, therefore he makes express mention of Samaria, least the
Apostles, following the common opinion of the Jews, should think they ought not
to come at them. Now how needful it was, to comprehend all other Nations,
within the bounds of Christ's kingdom, the example of Peter sufficiently
proves, who when the country of Samaria had received Christ, abstayned from
companying with other Nations, until he was instructed by a vision from
heaven. Acts. 10.


Howbeit, Christ appoints none other limits of his kingdom in this place,
than the holy ghost long before had described by the Prophets. For it is
known what is contained in the Psalms, Psalm. 2. and.72.
whereof I made mention before. Moreover, Zachary speaking of Christ in the
ninth Chapter. His kingdom shall reach from sea to sea, and from the river
unto the worlds end. But that saying is most evident of all other, that Esaias
has in the.xlix. Chapter: It is but a small thing that thou art my servant to
set up the kinredes of Jacob, and to restore the destruction of Israel: for I
have made thee the light of the Gentyles, that thou may be my health unto the
end of the world. There are diverse other testimonies as is to be seen every
where of them that read the Prophets. Christ is the indifferent savior of all
Nations.
This is full of all comfort, that we see Jesus Christ is the common Savior of
all Nations, in whom as Paul and Peter says, there is neither Jew nor
Gentyle, Barbarous, nor Scythian, bond nor free, Galat. 3. Coloss. 3. Acts.
10.
man nor woman, but in every nation, he that fears him and works
righteousness, is accepted of him. They also are here admonished of their
office and duty, whom Christ has appointed to be Preachers of the Gospel,
that they seek not the salvation of one nation only, but that as much as in
them is, they sow the knowledge of Christ Jesus, and of salvation, as well by
teaching, as writing (as we read the Apostles did) thorowout the whole world.
And it belongs to all men, to embrace Christ's goodness, which so liberally
offreth unto al, the salvation purchased by his blood. Let us receive therefore
with thankful minds this kingdom of salvation, that hereafter we may reign
with Christ in heaven: to whom be blessing, honor, glory and power for ever.
Amen.

The fifth Homely.
AND when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was taken up on
high, and a Cloud received him up out of their sightes. And while they looked
steadfastly up toward heaven as he went, behold two men stood by them in
white apparel, which also said: ye men of Galiley, why stand you gasing up
into heaven? This same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so
come, even as you have seen him go into heaven.
The Argument and use of this place.
Because LVKE moved by the holy ghost purposes to entreat of the Acts of the
Apostles, he begins very aptly to tell of those things, which our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, now being ready to leave the earth, did with the
Apostles. For thereby it may evidently be gathered, that the Apostles did
nothing of their private authority, or unadvisedly, but that they were
executors of the things enjoined them by Christ, and therefore their doctrine
was not to be taken for man's doctrine, but to be acknowledged and received as
Christ's. Now at length follows Christ's departure from earth into heaven,
which Luke describes with great diligence, and we ought to consider the same
with as much earnestness: because in the description thereof, two notable
articles of our Christian faith are comprehended, in the which, the chief hope
of all Christians is grounded. That is to say, Christ's ascension into heaven,
and his return, which shall be in the end of the world, when he shall come
in the clouds, to judge both the quick and the dead. It shall behooue us to
consider every thing in such order as Luke describes it.

In this place he briefly dispatcheth the hystory of Christ's ascension. The
history of Christ's ascension.
For when he had thus said (says he) he was taken up on high, they looking
on, and a cloud received him out of their sight. The cause of this brevity
may seem to be, both for that afterward he reports the sayings of the
Angels, which more expressly declare all the matter, and also for that
himself about the end of his Gospel, had more at large set forth the same.
For there he says: Jesus led his Disciples forth into Bethany, and lifting
up his hands on high, he blessed them. And it chanced, that as he blessed
them, he was taken from them, and carried into heaven. To the which, let us
join the things that are written in this wise: Mar. 16.
The Lord after he had talked with them was taken up into heaven, and is set
down on the right hand of God. The sum of all is, that Jesus Christ, which
hitherto lived on the earth, has taken his body out of this world, and has
placed it on the right hand of God his father, according to the saying of
David: The Lord said unto my Lord, Psalm. 110.
sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footestoole.
Although, such is the playnesse of this History, that it is put even in the
same words almost, in the articles of our Christian faith, or Apostles Creed,
wherein our forefathers would all things should be so plain that it should be
perceived and understood of very children: yet let us discuss diligently
every circumstaunce thereof for their sakes, which in these days dare
extenuate the same, while of his ascension they make but a disparition or
vanishing out of sight, and leave us nothing, but a vain and bare fantasy or
imagination thereof, which men are gone so far, that they appoint a local,
and substantial presence of Christ's body, in the bread of the Lord. But
being led and bewitched with the desire of contention, they mark not how they
leave him no place in the supper, while they deny that his body can be
contained in any place. Let us therefore see what is properly to be understood
by his ascension: next, who ascended, then after what manner, and into what
place he ascended. And unto these afterward we will adioyne, the cause why he
ascended, and what commodity and profit comes to us by his ascension.

They properly are said to ascend, What ascension is.
which go from a lower place unto an higher. Wherefore ascension is a moving or
carrying (the Greeks call it (...)) from one place to another, and that from a
place beneath, unto a place upward. And that even here, there is such a motion
or moving, none (but he that is most contentious) can deny. For this is it
that Luke means in the beginning of this book, where he speaks of Christ's
ascension, saying (...), that is, he went up or ascended, and in this place
(...), that is, he was taken up. Both which words signify a taking or carrying
away from a lower place unto an higher. Neither admit we their cauillation,
where they expound these words, the cloud that conveyed him out of their
sight, thereby feyning their disparition or vanishing out of sight. For even
there it is said of the cloud (...), that is, it carried him or took up on
high: that in the mean season I say nothing, how Christ must needs be in a
place while he was in the cloud, using it as an instrument whereby to ascend.
Beside that, the Apostles beheld him with their eyes, as he went, and sought
him not looking this way and that, as one conueying himself inuisibly away.
For, (...), that is, as he went (mark the locution, whereby is evidently
declared a moving from a place to a place) the Apostles beheld him looking up
into heaven. But what needed they to lift up their eyes to heaven, if the Lord
were not carried into heaven? Why did they not rather look hither and thither
for him into the air, as after one that sodeinly vanished away? And the
Angels afterward reprehend not the Apostles, for that they vainelye supposed
he was gone up into the element, but they rather confess it to be true, and
plainly entreat of his coming back again. Ascension therefore is a moving
from a lower place to an higher, whereby Christ was carried up into heaven.
For unless we confess this, the holy ghost must be accused, who without
cause, in rehearsal of a plain history, which all men ought to know, would
of purpose beguile us with needelesse words.

Who ascended.
It follows next to see who is ascended. But the story is of Christ Jesus,
which being raised from the dead, proved the verity of his body forty
days together, by many arguments. But when the Scriptures speak of Christ,
the distinction of natures, whereof he consists as the Scripture teach us,
must be very well observed. For he which from everlasting is very God, of the
same majesty and glory with the father, yea of one substance with him: he in
the time appointed (as Paul says) was made man of a woman, that is, took
upon him manhood, or the nature of man. Wherefore in one and the self person
of Christ, are joined two natures, to say, the divine and the humane. And yet
by reason of the unity of person, the natures be neither confounded nor
changed, but the property of each nature remains whole and distinct. And by
unity of person it comes to pass, that that which is proper to one nature
only, is attributed to whole Christ, and Christ is said to have done or
suffered that, which is peculiar to one nature only, which thing, the fathers
used to call the communion or comixtion or likeness of properties of speech.
It appertains to the divine nature, that Christ is said to be from
everlasting, and before Abraham was borne: who notwithstanding, after his
humane nature was borne afterward in a time appointed. And the son of God
is said to have suffered and dyed, where his divinity can neither suffer nor
die. And yet it is truly said. For he that was truly the son of God,
wherein he was able to die, dyed. According to the same reason, the son of
man was said to be in heaven, when he was upon the earth, because the same
touching his godheade pierced the heavens also, although according to his body,
he was in the earth, and there commoned with Nicodemus. Which things if we
observe in this place, it shall appear, that Jesus Christ took his humane
nature, which he received of the virgins body, into heaven. For it can not be
understood of his divine nature, whereof it is said: I fill heaven and earth
Again: Heaven is my throne, Hiere. 23. Esaias. 66.
and the earth is my footestoole. And whereas the Godhead is not moved from
place to place, but is infinite and immeasurable, ascension by no means
agrees therewith. And yet we truly say that God ascended, because Christ who
is very God, ascended in his manhood. And yet we divide not Christ into
parts, or deny the unity of person, as did one Nestorius, but we make a
difference between the natures of Christ, and their properties: as he
deuideth not man, that makes a distinction between the actions of the soul,
and of the body, which are known to be much different. And here that saying
of Austen is to be well marked, Ad Dardanu^.
where he forbids us to take every thing in God to be every where as God.
And Christ meant not to prove the presence of his Godheade, by the extending of
his body into all places, but by the operation of his holy spirit.

But the Scriptures show also the place into which he ascended. Into what
place Christ ascended.
And Luke says, that he was taken up on high. And the Angels afterward call
it heaven, that it might appear unto us, to what place he went. And Mark more
expressly signifying the place in heaven, writes, that he is set down on the
right hand of the Father. We know what a great many hold and affirm of
the heavens, which by them understand the kingdom and presence of God. We
know also that the right hand of God, may be taken for the fellowship of the
divine majesty and kingdom, into the which, we confess that Christ is truly
taken, according as he says: All power is given to me in heaven and in earth.
Math. 28.
But we say there is here a certain place assigned, into the which, we one
day shall be received, to reign with Christ for ever. And this sense we draw
out of Christ's own words, speaking of his departure. In my fathers house be
many mansions, or dwellings, which if it were otherwise I would have told
you. John. 14.
I go to prepare you a place. And if I go to prepare you a place, I will come
again and take you unto my self, that where I am, there may you be also.
Could he more plainly and expressly declare a certain place? Paul in the
heavenly place and dwelling of the Saints shows us Christ, saying: Philip. 3.
Our conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for a Savior, even the
Lord Jesus Christ. Does he not here appoint the same place unto Christ, into
the which our bodies shall once be received? To this is to be joined, the
describing of the manner and order of the resurrection to come, where he says:
The Lord himself shall come down from heaven, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
with the noise and voice of an Archaungell, and trumpe of God, and the dead
in Christ shall first arise, and then we that be on live which shall remain,
shall be taken with them in the Clouds to meet the Lord, and so shall we
always be with him. He says that Christ the Lord shall come, yea descend
from heaven, and that it might appear of what heaven he means, he says,
that we shall be taken in the Clouds to meet Christ in the air. Therefore all
these things are to be understood of some higher place in heaven, where both
Christ sits and reigns in his body, and into the which, all the elect
shall hereafter be translated.

Howbeit, Luke is most diligent in describing the manner of his ascension. The
manner and order of Christ's ascension.
Where first he says, that holding up his hands into heaven, he blessed the
Apostles, that is, bade them farewell, and after the common manner of men
departing one from another, commended them to the tuition and protection of God
almighty. Afterward they looking upon him, he was taken up into heaven. Which
one thing conuinceth them of vanity, and error, which say Christ vanished
away inuisibly. For if they herein say true, how was he taken up on high, the
Disciples looking upon him? Or would he therefore seem to ascend, because he
would have us believe he were still conversant on the earth. Hereunto is to be
added the ministerye or service of the Cloud, which as it conveyed him from
the earth as in a chariot: even so it carried him higher than man's sight could
reach to, and took him out of sight. He used the Cloud as a chariot,
according to yt saying of the Psalm, which make the Clouds thy Charet.
Psalm. 104.
For the Cloud was both a token of heaven, into the which he should ascend,
and also bare plain witness of his heavenly and divine majesty. Whereunto
also is to be referred the appearing of the Angels, which he would not only
have witnesses, but also ministers of his ascension. For it was meet that he
which used the service of Angels in his conception, nativity, temptation,
death, and resurrection, should now likewise use the same ministers, when he
would declare the greatest point of his majesty. And it served for our
profit, because we might know the majesty of our savior, and that although he
were absent in body, yet that he would easily protect and defend us, by his
holy spirit and ministry of Angels, whose power has long since been
proved by many examples to be infinite and invincible.

The causes and commodities of Christ's ascension.
And although these be great tokens of Christ's divine majesty and power: yet
may we receive more comfort of the causes, moving Christ to ascend into
heaven. For by them appears the great utility that comes to us. And first,
it was requisite so to be, because of our redemption, and salvation, He opens
us the gates of heaven.
which otherwise could not be accomplished. For whereas by reason of sin,
the gates of heaven were shut up, and such is the corruption of our nature,
that Paul says flesh and blood, (that is, man led with corrupt and carnal
affections) cannot inherit the kingdom of God: it was necessary that the
heavens should be opened again by Christ, that we might take him for our
savior and Redeemer. This did Christ most commodiously, by bringing his flesh
which he took of the Uirgin into heaven. For who perceyueth not there is a
way made for our flesh into heaven, when he hears that Christ's flesh in
all points like unto ours (sin only excepted) is resident in heaven? To say
nothing in the mean season of the permutation and change here made. For as
Christ graffeth his spirit in our hearts, to the end it should be to us in
this life the earnest and pledge of our eternal salvation: so again he carried
into heaven our flesh, which he took of the virgin Marie, that we might be
certified, as it were by this pledge, that we one day should in our bodies
inherit the kingdom of heaven. Whereunto Paul having respect, writes: God
which is rich in mercy, through the great love wherewith he loved us, even
when we were dead by reason of sin, Ephesians. 2.
has quickened us together with Christ (for by Grace are you saved) and has
also raised us up again, and has also made us sit with him in heaven. And
Paul speaks not these things in vain, but has Christ the warranter and
Auctor of his saying, whose Testament as it were these words following are:
John. 17.
Father I will that where I am, these also whom thou have given me, may be
with me. Wherefore that strong and invincible trust through the consideration
of his ascension, ought to be in every man's mind, that Tertullian speaks
of: Be out of care, or be of good cheer, flesh and blood: you have gotten
both heaven, and the kingdom of God in Christ.

Furthermore, by Christ's ascension into heaven, The conf^rmeth Christ's
victory.
as by a publyke triumph, we are certifyed of the victory that he has gotten
of the Devil. For as the Princes of this world when they have vanquyshed
their enemies, return home again with triumph, wherein the Captains of the
enemies are led Captives, and their ensigns displayed, all which, declare the
victory to be verily gotten: so the son of God after he had made war
against the Devil, the Prince of this world, and had utterly subdued him,
would after this solemn pomp, in the sight of his friends, go again into
heaven, that we might be assured the Devils power was vanquished, and that we
were delivered from his tyranny. And to this end Paul seems to allege that
saying of the.lxviij. Psalm. When he was gone up on high, Ephesians. 4.
he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. And in another place
he writes: He made an open show of rule and power, Coloss. 2.
and triumphed over them in his own person. Therefore as often as the power of
Satan, sin, and death, shall make us afraid, so often let us fly to
Christ's ascension, wherein he has given us an evident sign, of victory
gotten of them, and has sealed the affairs of our redemption, as it were with
public and solemn triumph.

Thirdly, Christ appears an intercessor for us, in heaven.
the reason of Priesthood required that Christ should enter into heaven,
whereunto David witnesses he was assigned, saying: The Lord has sworn and
will not repent him: Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedech. But the high Priest was wont, once every year to enter into
the holy place that was within the veyle, Psalm. 110. Leuit. 16.
and that not without blood, which because it was a figure of things, it
behooued Christ should enter once for all into that very Sanctuary, to say,
into heaven, with his true body and blood which he took of us, that he might
there appear before God for our sins, and appease the wrath of God. Hitherto
appertains it that Paul says: Christ is not entered into a sanctuarye made
with hands, but into heaven it self, that he might appear now before God for
us. Again: Christ being an high Priest of good things to come, came by a
greater and a more perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands: that is to say,
Hebrews. 9.
not of this building, neither by the blood of Goats and Calves, but by his
own blood he entered in once into the holy place, and found eternal
redemption. Of the which, we gather that Christ after he had performed the
things he came to do on earth, entered into heaven, to accomplish that which
remained there to be done, that is, to place himself there, a Mediator,
intercessour, and advocate for us. Whereunto all those things are to be
referred that are written in the Scripture, touching the office of an
Intercessor and advocate. And here is no small fruit of Christ's ascension.
For as often as the conscience of our sins troubles us, and that we think
heaven is shut a against us by reason of our sin: so often we may fly to the
consideration o^ the ascension, as to a most safe sanctuarye, and be assured
that he is in heaven which makes intercession for us, who by reason of his
merit, covers our uncleanness, and reconcileth us unto God. John the Apostle
teaches us the same in these words. Little children, 1. John. 2.
I write these things unto you, to the end you should not sin: But if any
man sin, we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the righteous. And
Paul says: Who shall be able to charge the elect of God with sin? It is God
that justifies, who is it that condemns? Roma. 8.
It is Christ that is dead, yea rather that is risen again, who is also on
the right hand of God, and makes intercession for us.

The apparitions of the Angels.
Moreover, because the Apostles as yet perceived not these things, and therefore
being astonished with Christ's sodeyne departure looked wishely up into heaven,
and missed his bodily presence which they were wont to have: it behooued they
should be more fully instructed. Therefore Angels clothed in white garments
appeared to them, which spoke to them on this wise: You men of Galiley, why
stand you looking up into heaven? The same JESUS which is taken from you up
into heaven, Acts. 1.
shall so come, even as you have seen him go into heaven. There is in these
words first a reprehension, and then a singular comfort and consolation. We
therefore will speak of each of them, as much as this place shall require. The
beginning of their saying seems to have in it some reprehension: You men of
Galiley (say they) why stand you looking up into heaven? Here the Angels
accuse not only the deed of the Disciples, but also the affection and
ignorance of their minds. For the Apostles therefore lift up their eyes into
heaven, because they saw Christ was taken up in the Cloud. And the Angels
deny it not, but rather confess that it so was. They were worthy of
reprehension, that being so often admonished of Christ's departure, and
instructed so often with promises that they should have the holy ghost, would
yet desire to have Christ's bodily presence, and seek him both with mind and
sight, and after a sort wait, that he should come down again unto them. This
therefore the Angels reprehende, as if they should say, what ignorance and
grossness of heart is this of yours? why marueyle you still at Christ's
departure? Heard you not before how he must thus depart? Has he not promised
you the holy ghost to be your comforter and tutor? why therefore wait you not
for him, and let pass this bodily presence, until the day he shall come in
the glory of the father, to judge the quick and the dead, as you may remember
he told you before this?

Against the corporal presence of Christ, on the earth.
And if we confer the words of the Angels, with the things spoken a little
before, in the storye of the Ascension, it shall appear as clear as day, that
there ought no such bodilye presence of Christ Jesus to be established on the
earth from henceforth, as they feyne, which say that the body of Christ, which
was borne of the virgin Marie, which honge on the cross, which was buried, is
eaten in the supper corporally, and substantially, and really handled with the
hands of the faithful. They see that the hystory of the ascension, makes
against this gross opinion, and therefore they make of it a disparition or
vanishing away, as before I said. Further, they abuse the places of the
Scripture. First, they allege the words of Paul, Christ is ascended above
Ephesians. 4.
Whereupon they gather that the condition of his body being changed, is spread
over all places, as well supernall as infernal, and so he fills all things
with his body. Then flying to his divinity, Gordius knot, while they say: such
is the conjunction of the natures, that it can not be sundred by death, how
Math. 18.
Where two or three be gathered in my name, there am I in the midst of them.
Again: Math. 28.
I am with you until the end of the world. They join to these the words of
the supper, and cry out till they This is my body, which they make also words
of promise, as though Christ by them, had promised a real and substantial
presence of his body. But the answer is easy to all these.

As touching the place of Paul, we will not dispute of the heavens after the
manner of the Philosophers. The.iii^. to the Ephesians.
We know that Aristotle appoynteth no place without the compass and circle of
the heavens. But it is not lawful to rest upon the authorite of an heathen
man, when matter of faith is in question. Paul speaks of the heavens that be
above us, and because they be accounted among the parts of the world, and shall
melt in the fire of the last day, he says, that Christ is ascended above them,
to testify that he is now out of the circuit of this corruptible world, and
taken into that place, which from everlasting was appointed for the elect, and
is subject to no decay or destruction. Therefore the more they urge that Christ
is ascended above all heavens, thereby it appears the more, he is gone forth
of the world. Paul adds: to fulfill all things, which they expound of
Christ's body, because they will show themselves gross and foolish enough.
For who sees not a foolish and more than childish consequence herein? Christ
has carried his body above the heavens, and all the parts of the world
visible. Ergo, the body of Christ fills all the world corporally and
substantially. And this is their manner of reasoning. But Paul in this place
speaks of the Prophecies of the old law, or (as some other say) of the
power and majesty of Christ. Other expound it of the spiritual grace and
gifts, which Christ after he had received all power, shed upon men, as Joel
before prophesied. But whether of these it is, here is appointed no corporal
presence of Christ upon earth. Christ had fulfilled all the things prophesied
before, Luke. 24.
of his incarnation, passion, death and resurrection. Now remained his
ascension, whereof there were prophecies, and where through the business of
our salvation (as we before declared) should be perfited and ended. He
therefore ascended, that herein nothing should be left unfulfilled. And if
any man will have it understood rather of the majesty and power of Christ,
which he declares by the bestowing of his heavenly gifts, I will not contend
with him. For thereto the sentence comes, because Christ having consummate
and finished our salvation in his manhood, says, Math. 28.
he has received all power in heaven and in earth. And then he said he
would send his holy spirit, when he went from this world unto his father.
Yea, he said: John. 14.
It is expedient for you that I go: for if I go not, that comforter will not
come unto you.

It is no less pieuishe where they reason from Christ's divinity to his
humanity. Christ's Godheade drowneth not his manhood, neither caryeth it
through every thing.
We confess surely that these two natures are joined together in Christ, and
that Christ's person by reason of them ought not to be divided, and we say not
that they be disioyned or severed by reason of his death. But that which no
godly man will deny was done in his death, that here also is to be observed.
In his death the distinction of the natures and properties remained whole and
safe. For his humane nature suffered death, which the divine could not. His
humane nature suffered the cross and diverse dolours, which cannot happen to the
divine nature. And he, which as he was very man, dyed upon the cross, and
being dead was buried: the same as very God, shook the earth, took the
light from the sun, and wrought effectually in the minds of men, and showed
most evident tokens of his godheade. If the same be here considered, this
matter shall be easily perceived. For Christ touching his divine nature is
every where, and has his operation every where. The same concerning his humane
nature, is contained in a certain place of heaven, which is the eternal
dwelling of all those that be blessed. And for all this we separate not the
divinity from the humanity, when we say it fills all places, and is every
where present. In his Epistle to Dardanus.
But we follow the rule of Augustine, who says: We must beware that we do not
so defend or affirm the divinity of his manhood, that we take away the
verity of his body. etc.

The places of Mathewe.18. and.28.
By these also we are taught, in what sense Christ's promises are to be taken,
where he says, he will be present with us unto the end of the world. For we
expound them of the presence and power of his Godheade. For Christ is present
with those that be his, by his divine power, and by operation of his holy
spirit, whereby he rules, guides, keeps safe, and defends them. He is
with them by his grace and merit, that they fall not into the snares of Sin
and Satan, but stand fast in the favor and friendship of God the father. As
touching his bodily presence, by other his words, where he does inculcate
diverse times, that he must go out of the world, and that he can tarry no longer
in the world, Joan. 14.16.
we learn that in these words he speaks nothing concerning the same. And if
it like them to expound these former promises of the presence of his body,
then where he says in another place he shall no longer tarry in the world, that
must needs be understood of his godly presence. For without we reconcyle
these places so diverse in themselves, by making a difference of his natures,
and enterchaunge of properties of speech, we shall be in much perplexity and
uncertain. What shall these men therefore get, but while they contend about
his bodilye presence, bereue themselves of his spirit and divine protection,
and as Terence the Poet says, with reason become mad? Neither admit we here
their cold and shameless refuge, whereby they would creep away, under the
invisible conversation of Christ's body here on earth. For Christ speaks not
of the manner and quality of the thing, but of the thing it self, and denies
that he tarieth any longer in the world. But with what reason should he so
say, if he tarried in the world inuisibly? And in the.xxiiij. of Matthew, he
bids us not to believe them which should say, toward the end of the
world, he is here or there, in the Closet, Spence, or Buttry.

The words of the supper.
Of these things now may be easily gathered, how the words of the supper are
to be understood. We know that Christ reached bread to his Disciples and
said: This is my body. But we say, it is a sacramental kind of speech,
whereby (as is commonly seen) the name of the thing signified, is attributed
to the sign. After which sort, Circumcision was called the covenant, and the
Easter feast the Passover. Neither observe we this in this matter without
cause, for so the verity of Christ's body enforces us, whereof we have already
spoken. And Christ himself in the Gospel of S. John willing to take the
gross opinion of his flesh from his Disciples, sends them to his ascension,
that there they might learn, how his body could not substantially and really
be eaten, but that they must understand a spiritual eating, which was by faith.
Look the.vj. of John. I pass over many other things that might be said,
because I would not be to long in words. It is our part to hold fast the
plain hystory of the ascension, and with our hearts lifted up by faith, to
seek Christ in heaven, that we may be fed everlastingly, with the virtue and
merit of his flesh and blood.

But let us return to the Angels, A comfort of the last coming of Christ.
whose words have in them a marvelous comfort. For as they blame the gross
opinion of the Disciples, desiring the bodily presence of Christ: so they
comfort them with the promise of his last coming. This same Jesus (say they)
which is taken up from you, shall so come as you have seen him go hence. The
Angels promise a visible coming of Christ. And any coming invisible, beside
that, which is by his holy spirit, the Scripture knows not. That is a
visible coming, which we profess in the articles of our faith, in which he
shall come, to judge the quick and the dead. Many things are said in the
scripture touching this coming, as we may see in Daniel. 7. and.12. And Christ
diligently describes the same. Math. 24.25. and. John. 5. He would also the
Apostles should be admonished hereof in this place, because the remembrance
thereof, serves much both for our instruction and comfort. For if, according
to the saying of the son of Syrach, the remembrance of death bridleth the
desire of sin. How much more shall it be restrained, if we consider in our
mind the image and counterfaite of the last judgment, where we all shall
stand before the judgment seat of Christ, to receive every one of us, 2.
Corin. 5. Romans 14.
according as he has done in this body, whether it be good or bad. What shall
it then profit a man, to have gained all the world, if he shall lose his
soul. Again, Math. 16.
there comes to us by remembering of that day, marvelous consolation. For
he that shall come to be a revenger of all evil, and a punisher of the
wicked, shall appear the Redeemer of his people, whom he shall make partakers
of his kingdom and table, glorifying them both in body and soul. Wherefore
speaking of the signs, that shall go before the latter day, he says: When
these things begin to come to pass, lift up your heads, Luke. 21.
for your redemption draws near. And Job speaking of Christ coming to the
judgment, says: I know that my Redeemer lives. etc. It behooued therefore,
Job. 19.
that the Apostles should be admonished hereof, that being boldened with this
hope, they might pass and overcome, the present dangers, and grievous
troubles that were to come. In the mean time let us think, that it is our
duty often to think upon the same, whereby we may both repress the naughtye
desires of the flesh, and have a good courage in the midst of dangers and
distress, and so happily finishing the race of this life, may live for ever
with Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom be blessing, honor, glory and power for
ever. Amen.

The sixth Homely.
THEN returned they unto Jerusalem, from the mount that is called Oliuete,
which is from Jerusalem a Sabbath days journey. And when they were come in,
they went up into a Parlour, where abode both Peter and James, and John and
Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Barthilmewe and Mathewe, James the son of
Alphaeus, and Simon Zelotes, and Judas the brother of James. These all
continued with one accord in prayer and supplication, with the women, and Mary
the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren.
The argument and use of this place.
ALthough our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, has taken his body from earth
into heaven by his glorious ascension: yet may we not think that he therefore
has cast aside the care of our salvation. For it cannot be that that good
shepeheard can forget them, whom he did vouchsafe to redeem with the price of
his blood. This appears as well by many other arguments, as specially by
this that happened in his ascension, as we saw erewhile. For while the
Apostles, abashed with his sodeyne departure, stood looking up into heaven,
not knowing what to do: he sends his Angels by whose ministerye, they are
not only instructed concerning his ascension, but also they hear a marvelous
comfort touching his coming again. Which comfort we see was effectuous, by
that which fell out thereof. For Luke goes on with his history, and shows
what the Apostles did after Christ was taken from them, we will speak of each
of these things in order, to the end the more learning, instruction, and
consolation may come unto us thereby.

The Apostles return to Jerusalem
First of all, they return again into the City. For after they had
worshipped, as Luke says: they returned again to Jerusalem, and being
gathered together in the upper storye of the house, which was appointed them to
be in, Luke. 24.
they waited for the spirit promised of God the father, and Jesus Christ. It
was from Mount Oliuete whence Christ ascended into heaven, into the City a
Sabbath days journey, which after the authority of Hierome, is counted a two
miles.

An example of the obedience of faith.
Here in these things we have a singular example of the obedience of faith,
which it becomes us well to follow. For the Apostles go again into the
City, not of their own head and counsel, but as the Lord commanded them,
which (as we perceived in the beginning of this book) charged them not to
depart from Jerusalem, nor to separate themselves one from another, before
they had received from heaven the holy ghost. And yet there were diverse
things, that might have persuaded them the contrary. Amongst which, the fear
of present danger and hostile entrappinges of the Jews, seems not to be
either lightest or least. And who could think to be safe in such a City, as
had been used to slaye the Prophets, and whose hands were yet embrued, with
the blood of the son of God. Again, the small commodiousnesse and
vnhandsomnesse of the place, might have turned the minds of diverse away. For
in one house, yea in a piece of one house, (as may be gathered by yt that
follows) about an hundred and twenty persons dwelled together, which could
not be without great trouble, as any wise man may understand. Beside yet a
more grievous temptation, cloked with the pretext of faith and religion, that
is to say, that they knew the holy ghost, for whose cause they should tarry
in the City, John. 3.
was tied to no one place, but (as Christ says) breaths wheresoever it will.
So that they might think it not only in vain, but also a foolishness to
wait in such a dangerous place, for the sending of the holy ghost, which
might as well be given them in another place as there. And surely it is like
that diverse such thoughts arose in them, seeing there is no man ignorant how
many things they that be in fear use to cast in their minds. But they
overcome all these things with the faith only that they gave to Christ's
words, and despising all as well peril, as counsel of man's reason, they
purpose to obey the commandments of Christ. Neither wants that holy
obedience a most happy success. For they be both safe in that bloody City,
and they also, not many days after receive the holy ghost, as Christ had
promised. Of this example we ought to make a general law and rule, that is to
say, that we must walk in the vocation of God, and in whatsoever his
commandments obediently, and that we suffer not our selves, for any reasons
that the flesh can make, to be pulled from our duty. For whereas our God is
holy, and a most loving father to mankind, he commands nothing but that
which is both holy, and healthful for us. For all his judgments are
righteousness and truth, and as Paul says, this is the purpose and end of
Gods will, that all men should be saved. And because he is omnipotent, 1.
Timoth. 2
he defends and maintayneth them that walk in his vocation, and keep his
commandments, and suffers no hurt to happen unto them. The holy worshippers
of God are sometimes tempted, because it is necessary their faith should be
exercised and tried. But because God is faithful, he suffers them not to be
tempted above their strength, 1. Corin. 10.
but in their temptation makes a way that they may bear it. There are
infinite examples hereof beside this* that we have in hand. Abraham is called
out of his native country, and is commanded to go into a strange country,
which he knows not, inhabited with wicked dwellers. But because he obeys
Gods calling, all thing succeeds luckily, and he is increased and instored
there, not only with riches, but also has the friendship of the mightiest in
the country. His posterity dwell there also, and because they walk in Gods
vocation, they live in safety amongst them, whom the destruction of the City
of Sichem, might seem with just desire of revenge to arm against them. But
God is their faithful protector, which caused this saying to sound in the
minds and ears of the Chananites. Touch not mine anointed, and do my
Prophets no harm. Let all men of what state or degree soever they be, Psalm.
105.
apply the consideration of these things unto themselves, and let them
remember that there is a most large blessing, and an infallible promise of Gods
help, joined to the commandments of God, which undoubtedly they shall
enjoy, that will endeavor to obey them. See touching this blessing, Deuter. 28.
and Leuit. 26. But chiefly we must take heed, that we admit not the counsel
of man's wit in the things, which we see expressly by Gods word bidden or
forbidden. For this is a most present plague, which caste^h aside all endeavor
of obedience, and makes all our life to be hateful before God. For there is
no commandment of God so holy, so easy, so healthful, wherein our flesh
will not find some difficulty, and danger, yea, and some color of
unrighteousness and iniquity. Obedience of faith is required, which as Paul
says, does captiuate all man's understanding, 2. Cor. 10.
beats down all the counsel of man's reason, and brings whole man to the
obedience of God and his word. Hereunto is to be referred that, that God
prescribes in the law by these words. Thou shall not seek after thine own
heart, Numer. 15.
or thine own eyes, after the which, you use to go a whoo^ing, but you shall
remember rather, and do all my commandments, and be holy unto your God. And
again: Ye shall add nothing to my word which I have commanded you, Deuteronomy.
4.12.
nor take nothing therefrom. And if any man require examples of them which
have evil thriued by breaking of Gods commandment, he shall find both
otherwheres, and in the hystory of Saul, diverse. See. 1. Samuel. 13. and. 15.
But let us haste to the reast.

The names of the Apostles.
In the second place, Luke rehearses the names of the Apostles, and that not
without a great purpose. For besides that they, whom Jesus Christ appoynteth to
be the teachers of all the world, ought well to be known, least naughtye
deceyuers might challenge to them, the office and authority of the same: it was
necessary that we might know surely how they after their foul forsaking of
Christ, were restored again to their former place and dignity. For all men
know how shamefully they yielded, when Christ was taken by the soldiers, and
by the high Priests servant. For then they all fled and left him. And Peter
which presumed so much of his own strength, committed the grieuouser offense
because he three times denied him. Therefore men might doubt, not without some
cause, whether the Lord had taken such as they were into his favor again, and
whether such cowardly slydebacks might be believed. Therefore to put all doubt
out of our minds, and that we should not think their foul fall at the
first, should prejudice the truth of their doctrine: the holy ghost would
have them again by name to be rehearsed ( Judas only excepted) that were
appointed before Christ's death, to preach the Gospel unto all the world.
And if you confer the nameroll of this place with the things written, Math.
10. Marc. 3. and Luke. 6. you shall find no manner of difference or disagreeing.

An example of the goodness of God.
Now this is a singular example of the goodness of God, which not only would
forgive so dishonest a forsaking of him, but also would restore such as they,
to their former office and dignity. Here truly as Paul says, Grace abounded
where trespass abounded. Roma. 5. John. 21.
For Peter which had three times denied Christ, hears Christ three times
again say unto him, feed my sheep. Hereof let them take comfort whose
consciences are grieved with sin; that they despair not, either because of
the heynousnesse or multitude of their sins. Zach. 1. Ezech. 16.
Turn unto me (says the Lord) and I will turn unto you. As sure as I live,
I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he return and live.

This also is worthy the considering, that in this nameroll, the names of none,
The Apostles are men despised, and of no reputation.
but such as were the most vylest, and contemned persons in the judgment of
the world are rehearsed. For first he reckeneth Peter, James, John and
Andrewe, who before that time we read were rascal fishers. Here is also
numbered Matthew the Publicane, a defamed person, by reason of his former trade
of living. As touching the nobility, riches, or honors of the other, there is
nothing any where mentioned. But the son of God which has power over the
minds of men, might have brought to his obedience the sons of the Princes,
and high Priests, to have spread abroad the Gospel by the ministry of those,
who were of authority and power in the world, but it pleased him to choose
base and despised persons, both for that we should know that God despises
none in the world, be he never so vile and contemned, and also for that we
should learn to judge of matters of faith and religion, not according to man's
authority, but after the knowledge of the truth and word of God. For a most
grievous and perilous error are they in, which when they should pronounce of
matters of the faith, turn their eyes to the authority of men: as though
faith and religion depended of the judgment of men, and not rather of the
only word of God. Tertullian a most ancient writer derideth the Romans,
because they consecrated or allowed their Gods, after the appointment of the
Senators, and would admit none for Gods, but such as lyked the Senate. And so
do they in these days, which pronounce of faith and doctrine according to the
renoume and authority of men, which kind of people, are daily euerywhere
seen. And for this cause our faith and religion is chieflye condemned of our
adversaries, because it has few Emperors and Kings, few Popes, Cardinals and
Bishops, that follow it. But how fowlye these men are deceived, the example
of the Jews declares, whom we read to have stumbled at the same stone. For
when they perceived the doctrine of Christ somewhat lyked their ministers, by
and by they begin to oppress them with the authority of men, saying: Are
ye also deceived? John. 7.
do any of the Princes believe in him, or of the Phariseyes? But this people
that know not the law are accursed. Let us therefore consider the counsel of
God which (as Paul says) uses to choose the foolish, contemned and vile
things, 1. Corin. 1.
and of no reputation in the world, to confound all wisdom, power, and
authority of the world. And thus does he not without cause. For hereby it
appears that we ought to glory or rejoice in nothing, but in God alone. Let
others object unto us Emperors, Kings, Bishops, Cardinals, Councels and
Uniuersities, Doctors in Scarlot, and our Masters illuminate, and whatsoever
else in the world is glorious, by pretense of wisdom and holiness, and on
the other side, let them scorn and mock the miserable and despised state of
them in this world, which have professed the Gospel, and we will answer
with Jesus Christ our savior and doctor: We thank thee, O father, Lord of
heaven and earth, Math. 11.
because thou have hidden these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed
them to the little ones, even so father, was it thy good will and pleasure.

But Luke writes that there were women also in the company of ye Apostles, The
Wives of the Apostles.
which some think were they only that came with Christ when he came last out
of Galiley to Jerusalem. But as I will not deny but some of yt number might
abide with the Apostles: so I think this place may be very well understood
of the Apostles Wives. For the Gospel plainly expresses that Peter had a
wife. And if we affirm the same of Mathewe, we do it not in vain, seeing it
plainly appears he both had a dwelling of his own, and also kept a family
and household. And Paul manifestlye testifyeth, that the Apostles led about
their Wives when they preached the Gospel. 1. Corin. 9.
Although I am not ignorant how the maintayners of unchaste singleness,
expound that place of certain faithful women that followed the Apostles. But
the pieuish men perceive not what injury they do unto the Apostles, while
they thus say. For what excuse is left for the Apostles, if they leave their
own Wives, and carry about other men's. God defend therefore that we should
think such absurdity, pieuishnesse and dishonestie in the most holy Legates
and Ambassadors of Jesus Christ. I surely believe that the Apostles Wives came
from Galiley with their husbands the Apostles, for whom it was not lawful to
depart from the City, until this present day. For where they were ordained
to take part with the Apostles, of all their traueyles and dangers, it was
requisite, that they should be prepared and strengthened, with some special
gift of the holy ghost. They that contend and affirm that single life, is of
necessity to be enioined unto persons ecclesiastical, are more foolish than
whom we need much to confute, in so great light of the Gospel, considering as
it is plain unto all men: that wedlock is honorable in all persons, Hebrews.
13.
and the bed undefiled.

Marie the Uirgin, mother of Christ
Amongst these women also was the holy Uirgin, the mother of Jesus Christ, and
certain brethren of Christ's, whom according to the custom of the Hebrew
tongue, we understand to have been his kinsmen. Christ a little before his
death, had committed the tuition of her to John the belooued Disciple, which
took the charge of her upon him, and most faithfully kept her. And here is the
last place, that the Scriptures make any more mention of her. Nicephorus
writes that she dyed in the days of Claudius the Emperor, when she had lived
fifty and nine years. Eusebius in his Chronicles says, she was assumpted or
taken up into heaven, but he confesses this to be an uncertain doctrine or
tradition, because he adds: as some write it was revealed unto them. In the
days afterward sprang up certain Monks, who were not ashamed to feign a
whole story of her Assumption, whereof the old writers knew nothing, as
appears by Epiphanius, writing against the heretics called
Antidicomarianitae: If some seem to have erred, let them seek the steps of
the Scripture, and they shall find neither the death of Mary, neither whether
she died or died not, neither whether she were buried or not buried. And a
little way after: I say not that she remained still on live, neither affirm I
that she dyed. For the Scripture passes the mind of man, and leaves the
matter in suspense, because of that precious and most excellent vessel, least
any man might suspect any carnal things of her. To the which I add that it
seems incredible, the holy ghost would have so marvelous an Assumption
concealed, if there had been any, seeing he caused the translation of Enoch and
Ely, so diligently to be written. The things that after Christ's ascension
happened to her, he would should utterly be forgotten, least they might give
any occasion of superstition, which he knew would grow about the worshipping
of her. And surely it is marueyle the holy ghost, would have the things that
concerned his mother, to be kept in silence, and the doings and doctrine of the
Apostles, to be written with such diligence. But we are hereby admonished, yt
we should not be so occupied, about the supersticious worshipping of them that
had been men, as about the doctrine of the Apostles. In the mean season it
shall profit us, to mark how Christ Jesus, appointed to his beloved mother
and dear kinsfolk, so weak a succor and safegarde. For if we consider the
Apostles after the judgment of the world, they had no power, no riches, no
authority, no armor, whereby to defend that most holy vessel, of the grace
and glory of God, against the assaults of the world. Why therefore does he not
rather commend her, to the trust of some mighty Prince, whose mind and will
he might easily incline, to take the charge of her? But he that has men's hearts
in his rule, needs no fleshlye succors for the defense of his beloved.
Therefore the charge that John had of her, was sufficient for the blessed
Uirgin. Let us also learn to put all our trust, not in man's help, but in the
protection of the most highest, neither let us be discouraged, if being
forsaken of great personages, we have none to favor us but only such as are
strengthlesse, and whose selves have need of Patrones and defenders, and are
subject to all men's injuries. For it behooves us to say with David: The Lord
is my light and my salvation, whom then shall I fear? The Lord is the
strength of my life, Psalm. 27. and. 118.
of whom then shall I be afraid? The Lord is on my side, I will not fear
what man does unto me.

Last of all, the Evangelist declares what the Apostles did, What the Apostles
being gathered together did.
while the sending of the holy ghost was deferred. For if we number the days,
we shall find it ten days after Christ's ascension, before the holy ghost
was given. For Christ was forty days still conversant with his Disciples,
and proved the verity of his resurrection, by many arguments. And the
fiftye day after the feast of Passover, Luke in the second Chapter
following, says, the holy ghost was sent. In the mean season, they abode with
one consent in prayers and supplication. And although the argument or matter of
the prayers which they made, be not expressed: yet of the circumstances it may
easily be gathered what they prayed. For what else should they pray for, which
knew their own weakness, and saw such a burden laid on their shoulders,
then that God would hasten the sending of his holy spirit, and vouchsafe to
defend them from falling? For they had learned by their first sliding back,
how vain and of no value man's strength is in Gods affairs, except we be
vpholden by the present aid of his divine grace.

Let us here observe how Luke says, Faith is no let why we should not pray.
they were continually occupied in prayer and supplication, which otherwise
were furnished with most large promises, and were endued with great faith. For
if we read in John what Christ did with his Disciples a little before his
death, we shall see the holy ghost so often promised, that it was almost
tedious. And being risen from death again, he put them diverse times in
remembrance of the same. And that they believed the promises of Christ, it
appears plainly by their return into the City. For unless they had
believed that Christ would be as good as his promise, they would never have
gone back again into so bloody a City, and where such danger was.
Therefore, faith is no let why we should not persevere and abide continually in
prayers and good works. I know there are diverse, that cavil about the things
spoken of faith, which only justifies and saves, as though it made prayer
unprofitable, and extinguished, or at least, much hindered good works. But
these men so far swerve from the truth, that there is no more effectuous
provocation to good works, than that that springs in our minds of faith.
Nay, if we be not furnished with faith, we can neither pray profitablye, nor
be fervent in good works. For, Romans 10.
how shall they call upon him in whom they believe not? says Paul. And how
shall God accept our prayers, except we conceive sure confidence of his good
will toward us? Last of all, where as we naturally abhor from good works,
it cannot be, that we should give our selves wholly thereunto, unless we be
sure, that they please God the father, for Jesus Christ's sake. To say
nothing, Hebrews. 11. Roma. 14.
how it is impossible to please God without faith, and how, whatsoever is not
of faith is sin.

The Apostles and they that be with them, In prayers must be vnanimitye and
perseverance.
join two things to their prayers, without the which, our prayer is of no
force or avail before God, that is to say, unanimity and perseverance.
Unanimitie or agreement is needful, because we be the children of one
father, as we profess in the Lords prayer, saying: Our father which art in
heaven. etc. But what father is so retchlesse and careless, to suffer his
children to be at discord among themselves. And the law of nature teaches us,
that they that be one man's children, and of one inheritance, should love and
agree together. But as many as by faith are grafted in Christ, are borne of the
same seed, to say, the incorruptible and immortal seed of Gods word, to be
the children of God, and heirs of his kingdom in heaven: yea, to say more,
they are made members of one body, and acknowledge one head, and are quickened
with one, and the same spirit. Is it possible therefore that such, can be
void of love* and concord among themselves? Do they not through hatred and
enmity, separate themselves from the body of Christ, and commit horrible
hypocrisy, while they dare like true children of GOD, at common prayer,
appear in the sight of GOD? Therefore in our prayers ought that thing chieflye
to have place, that Christ requires of them, which come to do sacrifice,
saying: If thou offer thy gift at the aultare, and there remember that thy
brother has ought against thee: leave there thy gift before the aultare, Math.
5.
and go and be reconcyled unto thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.
For if we must take heed, that our brother have no cause of hatred against us,
how much more must we beware, that we swell not in hatred against our brother.
We must have no less consideration of perseuering or continuance in prayer,
forasmuch as God many times, deferreth long the help he promises us, and
almost seems to have no care at all of us: which thing caused the holiest men
to burst forth into these sayings: Psalm. 13. Habac. 1.
How long will thou forget me, O Lord, for ever? How long will thou hyde thy
face from me? how long shall I cry and thou will not hear? But in such
cogitations we must remember, that God cannot forget us, nor cease to care for
such, as he has vouchsafed to redeem, with the blood of his son. For he
says in the Prophet. Can the mother forget her young Infant so, that she will
not have pity, upon the babe of her own body? but admit they be forgetful,
Esaye. 49.
yet will not I forget thee. Behold, I have graven thee in both my hands. And
David says: Thou tellest my flittings and put my tears in thy bott^ll.
Are not these things noted in thy book? Psalm. 56.
Therefore when God deferreth the help we look for, he does it for this only
cause, to try our faith and patience, and yet (as I said before) he suffers
us not to be tempted above our strength. Wherefore, even then must we chiefly,
bend all the force of our faith, and call for his help, praying continually.
And of what force this perseverance or importunity is before God, Luke. 11.
and. 18.
Jesus Christ has taught us in very fit parables: therefore let us diligently
do, that the Apostles did while they waited for the holy ghost. For we also
have need of the holy ghost, to bridle the desires of the flesh, and to
strengthen us in hope and faith. Let us make our selves ready to receive him
with obedience, unanimity, and perseverance in prayer, that being quickened
and illuminate with him in this present world, we may lead a life acceptable
to his divine Majesty, and at length live in heaven with Jesus Christ our
Savior: to whom be blessing, honor, glory and power for ever. Amen.

The seventh Homely.
IN those days Peter stood up in the mids of the Disciples, and said: (the
number of names that were together, were about an hundred and twenty) ye men
and brethren, this Scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the holy
ghost through the mouth of David spoke before of Judas, which was guide to them
that took Jesus. For he was numbered with us, and had obtained fellowship in
this ministration. And the same has now possessed a plot of ground with the
reward of iniquity, and when he was hanged, he burst a sunder in the
midst, and all his bowels gushed out. And it is known to all the inhabiters
of Jerusalem: insomuch that the same field is called in their mother tongue
Acheldama, that is to say, the bloody field.
SAint LVKE hitherto, has declared what the Apostles did in their own private
case, after Christ departed from the earth, attributing to them true obedience,
unity of minds, and continuance in prayer. And these verily are wholesome
exercises, wherewith we must prepare our selves duly to receive the holy
ghost, who enters not into a froward soul, and whom the world cannot
receive, but contemns and derideth such cogitations and studies. Now in this
place he begins to declare what the Apostles first did, how they settled
themselves to the public ministry of the Church, which was committed unto
them. And this was the substitution of Matthye, in the place of Judas the
traitor and reprobate. For where Christ would have the Apostles to be twelve
in number, whom he ordained to be Judges of the twelve Trybes of Israel, it
was requisite the same number should be fulfilled, least the falshoode of Judas
should any way hinder the ordinance of Christ.

In the mean season the example of the Apostles admonishes us, The chief
care in the Church, must be for fit Ministers.
that the chief care of the Church ought to be in providing to have fit and
meet ministers. For, how shall they believe in him (says Paul) of whom they
have not heard? how shall they hear without a Preacher, how shall they
preach except they be sent? And the same Apostle in another place, says, Romans
10.
that himself, Apollo and Cephas were the ministers of God, by whom the
Corinthians believed. For although it belong only to God, to give faith, 1.
Cor. 3.
and he works the same in the minds of men, by the virtue of his holy
spirit, for which cause the worshippers of Christ are called by the Prophet,
the taught of God, Esaye. 54.
yet for our sakes he witteth safe to use the outward ministry of the word,
the use and dignity whereof must be defended and retained in the Church. Which
thing is the cause, why the Prophets account fit teachers, among the chief
benefits of God, and Christ teaches his Apostles to pray unto God, to send
worthy and faithful workmen into his vineyarde. Math. 9.
And Paul in another place shows the majesty, and great care of Christ for
his Church, by this one argument, chiefly that he sends from high, gifts of
his holy spirit, and gives some Apostles, some Prophets, Ephesians. 4.
some Euaungelists, some Pastors and teachers, to the increase of the Saints,
in the work of administration, and to the building up of his body. They
ought well to remember this, that take upon them in these days authority
over the Church of Christ, whether they be Bishops or secular Magistrates, that
they fail not in this most necessary point, to see to the Church, but that
they order every thing in such sort, that they may leave to their posterity,
presidents of sound and true doctrine. Whereunto chiefly belongs the
appointing of schools, and bringing up of youth, which the Prophets in the
old Testament had a great care of, and after that, the Christian Emperors
likewise. Which things whosoever either through negligence, or wasting of the
Church goods consume, they ought to be taken for the greatest enemies of the
Church, and shall one day buy such their heinous offenses full dear at
Christ's hand. But to address us to the declaration of this present place
Luke with great diligence rehearses this history, declaring how the chief
use thereof is for us to learn by example of the Apostles, what to observe and
follow in choosing and appoynting ministers of the Church.

The small company of the Church primitive.
He begins with the description of the Church that was at that time. In those
days (says he) when they being gathered together with one accord: looked for
the coming of the holy ghost: Peter stood up in the midst of the Disciples,
and proposed a matter which indifferently appertained to them all. The number
of them that believed, when they were rehearsed by name, was about an hundred
and twenty. Here both the small number of believers in the Primitive Church,
and Peter the Apostle, are diligently to be considered.

The small number of believers, must offend no man.
For touching the number of them that professed Christ, I think there is no
man, but marueyleth that there was no more found in so famous and populous a
City, that professed and followed Christ. For what had Christ left vnassayde
in that City? For to omit the teaching, aduertisements and exhortation of the
Prophets, if a man consider but the things done in that City, from the time
that Christ came among them, he shall perceive an incredible hardness of heart
and frowardness in that nation. John the Baptist went before Christ, and by
reason of the plainness of his doctrine, and straightness of his life, had
been able to have moved any kind of men. But how smally he profited, the
proof very well declared. Then by and by upon, followed Christ, who to his
doctrine (which he framed and prepaced all manner of ways to win them with)
added miracles of such force and efficacy, that they were able to make the
very enemies to confess the truth. John. 3.
Uerily Nicodemus confessed, that no man but he that was sent of God could do
such things as they saw him do every day. And many openly said: John. 7.
Shall Christ when he comes, work more miracles than this man has done? I
let pass the signs and woonders which partlye went before Christ's death, and
partly followed, which were able to mollify the hearts of the most cruel
soldiers. And yet after all these things, there are no more but six score
persons reckened among all that believed, by Lukes testimony, who was a most
faithful and true witness. In this appears the great power of Jesus Christ,
which of this small remnant, as the Prophets before times told, was able to
multiply and increase his Church, that in few years it was spread over all
the world. We may learn also the untowardness of man's nature, and
acknowledge almost an incurable naughtiness in him, and not to be offended,
though we see but few in these days that believe the doctrine of the Gospel.
For this did Esaias long ago foresee, and therefore minding to preach of the
redemption that should be made by Christ, cries out: who has believed our
preaching, and to whom is the arm of the Lord declared? Isaye. 53.
And Christ speaking to his flock, says: fear not little flock, Luke. 12.
for it has pleased my father to give you a kingdom. And himself speaking of
the last times, declares that such shall be the fashion and condition of the
world, Luke. 18.
when he comes that he shall find no faith, or truth upon the earth.

Therefore great is the error of those which judge of faith and doctrine, We
must not judge of faith according to the multitude of folowers.
according to the multitude or fewness of them that follow it, which is a
common thing now a days. For such was the state of the Church even in the
very beginning, that the smallest number embraced the doctrine of truth. Noah
only with his family in that ancient world followed a diverse faith and
religion from the residue of the people, all the world besides being fallen to
superstition and Idolatry. But neither the paucitie of his household was able
to bereave him of salvation, nor the multitude of his adversaries to condemn
him: yea, where all the world beside perished, he was saved, and has God both
to allow and defend his faith. The same we may say of Loath living among the
Sodomites. Besides this, Elias only sets himself as well against all the
Priests of Baal, as against king Achab, and al his Courtyers, in the quarrel of
faith and religion. 3. Reg. 18.
And Micheas alone encountreth with three hundred false Prophets, 3. Reg. 22.
whom the king favored and maintained. Therefore it is meet that we regard
rather the very doctrine of truth, which coming from the mouth of God, is
contained in the holy Scripture, than the authority of men. Forasmuch as all
men are liars, Roma. 3.
and God alone true in his saying.

It is profitable also to consider what Peter does, Against the desyrers of
supremacy, in the Church.
who rising up amongst the Disciples, proposes this thing to be entreated of,
openly amongst them all. Herehence the Bishops of Rome seek the defense of
their supremacy, or rather tyranny, as also of other places that seem to
attribute any prerogative of superiority to Peter. They seem to me to do as
men, which are in danger, in deep gulfes and ryuers. For as they use to catch
hold of every thing that comes next to their hand: so these men snatch at
every thing, whereby to defend the dignity of their supremacy, so battred
now and shaken, that it threatens the catholyke and universal ruin thereof.
By this means they challenge to Peter the keys of the kingdom of heaven,
which yet were given to all the Apostles at once, as is evident to be seen in
John the.xx. Chapter. So they contend that the charge of Christ's flock is
committed to Peter only, as to the chief, and consider not what injury they
do to the residue of the Apostles, as though Christ had made them feeders of
swyne and Asses, and not of his sheep. After like manner, where they now hear
how Peter speaks first in the congregation, by and by they make him Christ's
Uicar, the head of the Church and the chief of the Apostles. And going
farther, they take all this honor to themselves, as to the lawful and ordinary
successors of Peter. But how vain and frivolous these things are, the matter
it self declares. For Peter prescribes nothing of his own head, as any
ruler of the Church, or Lord over the other Apostles, but being in the midst
of the Disciples, as his equals and fellows, proposes a matter of great
weight, to be entreated of indifferently amongst them all. In the which
treaty, he leaves to every man free liberty, according as God should put in
their hearts by his spirit to say or to do. And that he speaks first, was
done by the special instinct of the holy ghost, which by this means would
make the example of grace that Christ showed in Peter, being received again
into favor after his foul fall, more evident and manifest. Furthermore, in
that the other patiently hear him speak, it is a token of unanimity, which
Luke before attributed to them, and is not done so much for superiorities sake,
as for order, without which, nothing in the Church or common weal can continue
in safety. Wherefore Paul commands all things in the Church to be done
comely and in order. 1. Cor. 14.
As touching the state of the Apostles, he makes them all fellows and equals,
and where in one place he calls himself the least of the Apostles, having
respect to the unworthiness of his former life, the same speaking of the
ministry, fears not to match himself with Peter, saying: He that was mighty
in Peter in the Apostleship over the Circumcision, Gala. 2.
the same was also mighty in me among the Gentyles. And meaning to root out
from among the Corinthians, the sects of them that held of Paul, Peter, and
Apollo, 1. Cor. 3.
he says: What is Paul, what is Apollo, but ministers by whom you have
believed, even as the Lord gave every man grace? Peter himself acknowledges
the same, who within a little after, speaking of Judas, witnesses that he had
received a part in the ecclesiastical ministry. And if Judas had a part
therein, what ignorance shall it be, to ascribe and pull the whole unto Peter?
Unless perhaps we will say that Peter for favor flattered the wicked
traitor, and would transfer to the child of perdicion, that which belonged
only unto himself. But whereto use we so many words, Math. 18. and. 20.
Luke. 22. John. 13.
seeing it is plain that Jesus Christ, diverse times rebuked with great
severity, the ambicious desire of supremacy, that was among his Apostles. It
is known what is written of this matter. And Peter earnestly admonishes the
pastors of the Church, to beware that they take upon them no Lordship over the
Church, 1. Peter. 5.
which is called Christ's patrimonye and the lot of his enheritance. For whom
shall we think to be of such great authority, to be worthy to have rule and
dominion over that precious flock, that is redeemed with the blood of Christ?
And if no man must bear rule over the Lords flock, like as Princes of this
world use to do, how much more absurd shall it be for them, which have but
one manner of charge in feeding the flock, to arrogate any Lordshippe or rule
unto themselves. Therefore what else do the Bishops of Rome by their so greedye
desire of supremacy, but forget the precepts of Christ, and bewraye
themselves to be nothing less, than Peter's lawful and true successors? But
let them pass, and come we to Peter's Oration. And that consists of two parts.

The Argument of Peter's Oration.
First, he pulls that stumbling block out of the way, which might trouble
the minds of the more simple and unlearned sort. For when they saw that Jesus
Christ was betrayed by Judas, and afterward perished himself most miserablye
both body and soul: it was an easy matter for them, either to doubt whether
Christ knew all things, or else to suspect all the sort of the Apostles
together with their doctrine. Therefore Peter does not without a cause answer
this great inconvenience, in the beginning of his Oration. On the other side,
he exhorts the Disciples that they will appoint some other in Judas room,
least his falling from the faith, might any thing prejudice Christ's
institution.

Peter puts offenses away by the providence of God.
The first part he begins with the testimony of holy scripture, wherein he
plainly utters the everlasting purpose of Gods providence: which is a most
strong reason to put away offenses, that is, to believe that nothing comes
to pass by chance, but by the decree and will of God. Wherefore he says: ye
men and brethren, it behooued this Scripture should be fulfilled, which the
holy ghost spoke before by the mouth of David, touching Judas, which was guide
to them that took Jesus. The sense of which words, seems me to be this: I
would not (O brethren) have any of you to be offended, at the cruel deed of
Judas, and his horrible end, as though these things happened by hazard, or
that the son of God, betrapped by a wicked man, had not been able to have
escaped his crafts and deceytes: I would not also that any should so take these
matters, as though the falshoode of so wicked a man should derogate any thing
from our order and holy function, which we are in, by Christ's appointment. For
it seemed good unto God, that these things should so come to pass, whose
counsel and purpose it was, that his belooued son should be betrayed by
one of his entire Disciples. And he would not have us ignorant hereof. For it
is known what is read in the Psalm. 41. which Christ himself repeated in his
last supper, saying: He that eat bread with me, has laid great wait for
me. John. 13.
Now I tell you before it come to pass, that when it is done you may believe
that I am he. Wherefore cast your eyes upon Gods providence, reverence his
goodness and truth, and let not the things offend you, that are done by his
determination and just permission.

Yet let no man so understand these things, The prouydence of God excuses no
sinner.
as though Peter went about to excuse Judas heinous offense, and to lay all
the fault thereof in God. For that is not the meaning of the divine providence
which governs all thing, that we should make God the Author of our sin,
because whatsoever men do that is naught, they do it not to fulfill Gods
purpose, but to satisfy the cogitations and desires of their own wicked will.
It is plain in deed that it was Gods determination, that his son Jesus
Christ should be betrayed, through the craft of his Disciple, and should come
into the hands of his enemies, and being condemned to death, should be nailed
to the cross where he should purge the sin of the world by the Sacrifice
of his body. But if a man consider Judas, the worker of this treason, he in so
mischievous a deed, had nothing less before his eyes than Gods purpose, and
the redemption of mankind, but being blinded and wounded with covetousness,
first polluteth himself with theft (as John says) and afterward with treason.
The same reason is to be made of Annas, John. 12.
Cayphas, Pylate, and all those other whom the Gospel testifies to have been
seekers and executioners of Christ's death. The books of the holy Scripture are
full of examples of the like kind, whereby we are advertised how grievously
men sin, in committing those things which God in deed will have done, but
yet they do them, being moved thereto through ye blind and inordinate
affections of corrupt nature. I pray you who is so dull headed to think that
Joseph came into Egypt without the special counsel of Gods providence,
whereas we read that God advertised Abraham himself long before, of the going
down of his posterity into Egypt? who likewise acknowledges not the
marvelous wisdom of God in all this business, which governs al things
most prudently and profitably? Shall we therefore excuse Joseph's brethren, which
being moved with envy, sold away their brother, that deserved better of
them? yea, we will expound all this business by Iosephes own words: ye
thought evil against me, but God turned it to good, to bring to pass as it is
this day, Gene. 50.
and to save much people alive. Yea, we have daily experience of like
occurrences and examples. For who will say the thief kills the wayfaring
man, without the providence of God, Psalm. 90. Math. 10.
considering we know that the days of our life, and the hears of our head
are numbered before God? But because the murderer commits such an heinous
offense, being moved with wicked affection, therefore is he in all the fault,
and shall justly be punished for the same. Let no man therefore seek excuse for
his wickedness in Gods providence, nor make God the Author of his sin, but by
the consideration hereof, let us seek comfort whereby to arm and strengthen
our selves, against the horrible chances of this life. And that Peter had a
respect hereto, it is evident, by his words, wherein follow other things to be
considered.

Of what force, prayers be.
And first, we are taught by a notable example, of what efficacye and strength
godly prayers be. For Luke showed us above, that the Apostles continued with
one consent in prayers, whereby what was brought to pass, is now perceived. For
Peter, which a little before was ignorant of the right manner of Christ's
kingdom, and among the reast had put forth a foolish question, touching the
very time of restoring the same: by and by begins to preach of the
Scriptures which he alleges most aptly, and expounds most syncerely. Jacob.
1.
So true it is that the Apostle says: If any of you lack wisdom, let him
ask of him that gives, that is of God, and it shall be given him.

We must appoint nothing in ye Church, without scripture.
Further, we are taught by the example of Peter, that nothing ought to be
appointed in the Church, without the authority of the Scripture. For as in
well ordered commonweals, there are certain laws, yea, rather an authentike
Code of laws, from the which, no man of his own head, has authority to
take anything, or to put to any thing, or else to appoint any thing in the
common weal, beside the prescript thereof: even so Christ has delivered to
his Church the books of the old and new Testament, wherein are contained the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, and the laws of eternal life. Therefore
out of them must be taken all counsel, and the Arguments of all the sermons
that are to be made in the congregation. Neither is there any man of such room
and ordering, that must think he has power, to ordain or appoint any thing,
contrary to the same. This book in the beginning was delivered to the Kings,
not to thend they should think they had jurisdiction over ye same, Deuter. 17.
but for that they should draw forth of the same good laws, whereby to rule
the people well. And the Prophets were bound by this commandment, Ezech.
3.33.
to take their sermons from Gods mouth. Which thing we can interpret to be
none other but the Scriptures, because by these, as by a certain mouth, God
reuealeth unto us the mysteries of his will. And Christ himself oftentimes
preaches forth of the scriptures, and disdayneth not to turn the holy
books, and to expound certain places of them unto the people. An example
whereof, he showed in the school at Nazareth. Luke. 4.
Therefore Peter following the example of his master, takes the beginning of
his sermon out of the Scriptures, whom would God they would imitate, which
highly glorying, in the succession of Peter, dare yet thrust into the Church,
diverse things repugnaunt to the Scriptures, only upon man's authority.

The holy Ghost, the Auctour of scripture.
Furthermore, Peter adourneth the scriptures with an excellent praise, where he
says, the holy ghost is Author of them, which would utter these things by the
mouth of David. The same he confesses in another place, where he says, 1.
Peter. 1. 2. Peter. 1.
that the Prophets were inspired with the spirit of Christ, and prophesied by
the instinct of the same spirit. And Paul means the same, where he says,
the Scripture is inspired of God. 2. Timo. 3.
The uses of these places be, that we acknowledging the dignity and authority
of the Scriptures, might take whatsoever is said in the same to be the word
of God, and that we should not think it lawful for us by any means, to
gainesay his commandments.

The Apostle goes forth with the first part of his Oration, The dignity that
Judas had at the first.
and declares diligently the dignity of Judas, which he had as well as the
other Apostles, before he fell. For he says: which was numbered with us, and
had obtained fellowship in this ministration. For some man might think Judas
was in deed accounted amongst the Apostles, but for none other cause but to
make up the number, being otherwise a vain man and of no estimation. But Peter
answers this objection, saying, he was not only of the number of the
Apostles, but had obtained fellowship in the administration. The Evangelists
bear witness of the same, accounting him with them which Christ sent forth
to preach while he was here on earth, Math. 10. Mark. 3. Luke 6.9. etc.
and which had power given them to work miracles, and which returned to
Christ, and told him the good success they had in the time of their Embassage.
And so little is Judas separated from the number of them in any place, that
even then the Evangelists say he was of their number, Mark. 14.
when they tell of that heinous deed which he committed in betraying of Christ.

And what shall we say is the cause, We must not be offended at the faults,
of the ministers of the word.
that so often mention is made of this matter both before, and is now again
by Peter repeated? Would the holy ghost either flatter wicked Judas, or stayne
the order of the Apostles with this blot? No. Yea, he teaches us another thing
both most worthy and necessary to be marked, that is, that we should take no
offense at the faults of excellent men, and that because of their falls we
should not rashly condemn all other of their vocation, which many use
foolishlye to do in the faults of those of the ministry. For, when they see
some great fall in such as before they woondred at, by reason of their sincere
doctrine, joined with wisdom and constancy, not contented to be offended at
their vices only, they open their mouth against the whole order of the
ministerye, crying out that they are all dissemblers, and knaves: and going yet
farther, fear not to call their doctrine in question and doubt. Therefore
Jesus Christ foreseeing that the ministers of his word were men, and might
sometimes grievously fall, by reason of humane fragilitie, least any man being
offended at their vices, should utterly condemn the doctrine of the Gospel,
he would forwarne them by certain faults of the Apostles, and chiefly by ye
horrible fall of Judas. For if the Apostles had been clear of al faults, we
should not without a cause in these days doubt of their doctrine, whom we see
oftentimes grievously to fall. But forasmuch as neither the crime of ambicion,
which Christ many times reprehended in them, nor the foul fall of Peter
denying his master, nor the heinous offense of Judas betraying him, derogateth
any whit from the doctrine of the Gospel: he is surely very foolish, which
is so offended at the vices of the ministers, that for the vices sake, he will
accuse the doctrine of truth, of falshoode. Yea, there is no vocation of men,
but has both good and badde in it. And if nothing were wanting in the order of
the Apostles by Judas fall (for it is supplied by Matthias succeeding) how much
less by his fall shall any thing be derogated from the Apostles doctrine.
Neither say I this, for that I would open any gappe to Ministers to live ever
the more lycentiously. For we know that the greater their offense is, the
more grievous shall their punishment be. But we give counsel to the weak,
that they throw not away the wholesome doctrine of the truth to their great
danger, with the naughty life of the Ministers, whereof Christ gave us a
warning, speaking of the Jewish Scribes in this wise. The Scribes and Phariseys
sit in the chair of Moses. All things therefore that they command you to
observe, that observe and do: Math. 23.
but do not ye after their works, for they say and do not.

The faithful are betrayed by them of their own household.
Moreover, the consideration of these things put away an other stumbling block.
For this is the common case of the faithful of Christ, and of all the Church,
to be most in danger of their own acquaintance. Godly Abell was slain by
his own brother of father and mother. Joseph was sold by his own brethren.
And Moses finds his brethren the Israelites, (for whose sake he forsook the
riches and pleasures of Egypt,) more unkind almost than the Egyptians. Psalm.
55.41. etc. Math. 10.
David also complayneth most of their lying in wait, which sometimes were of
his most familiarest friends. And we daily find that saying of Christ true:
A man's enemies be they of his own house. And these things offend many a man,
being grieved that their own friends minds be estraunged from them, and then
begin they wrongfully to deny many things of the doctrine by them preached,
supposing it to be the chief cause of such discention and division. To speak
nothing in the mean season of them, which think the conditions of the godly,
to be so hard and sharp that a man cannot long continue friendship with them.
And this one example answers all these men, where we are taught how the
son of God, the singular pattern of all myldenesse and humility, was
betrayed of his own familiar and domestical Disciple. Why therefore shall we
promise our selves any thing of man's property and condition? Or shall we
think it unmeet to be in the same state, that the son of God was in for our
sake?

The horrible end of Judas
But let us return to Peter, who as he has set forth the former dignity that
Judas had, and his heinous offense: so he lively paynteth out his horrible
end, and as it were, sets it before our eyes to look upon and behold, not
thereby to satisfy his mind, as one burning in hatred with the remembrance
of so wretched a man, but for that he would kindle in all men's minds a
certain fear of God, and a desire of true godliness, by making mention of so
horrible an example. And it was to a good purpose to make mention hereof,
seeing they consulted about choosing a new Apostle: to the end they should be
brought to a diligent consideration of their office, and to a fervent desire of
accomplishing the same. Therefore he says: And he truly possessed a plot of
ground with the reward of iniquity, and when he was hanged, burst a sunder
in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out. And it is known unto all the
inhabiters of Jerusalem: in so much that the same field is called in their
mother tongue, Acheldama, that is to say, the bloody field. It behooves to
consider all these things in such order as they fell out. For as the
Evangelists write, when Judas saw Christ delivered unto Pylate, being
stricken with repentance of his wicked fact, he returns to the Priests,
confesses his offense, and renders back the money which was the reward of
his wicked treason. But being mocked of them disdainefullye, and rejected, he
hurleth the money down in the temple, and getting him from thence, throtleth
himself with an halter. The Priests because they could neither with
honestye, let the money lie scattered in the Church, nor durst put it among the
treasure of the Church, knowing it to be the price of blood, they buy with it
a Potters field to burye strangers in, hereby meaning clean to wype out the
wickedness, whereof they were not long before autors. Howbeit, by this means
they purchase to themselves, the perpetual shame of so wicked an act, while
by Gods providence it comes to pass, that the field called after the name
of the money, that was the price of blood, bears perpetual witness of their
wicked offense. This field Peter says, Judas himself took possession of,
both because it was bought with his money, and for that the greatest part of so
slanderous a memory belonged unto Judas. Furthermore, in these things let us
mark first in Judas, the sorrows of a boiling conscience, which is plain,
were most cruel and more intolerable than the pains of hell, because they
were able not only to make him set naught by his money, but also being
otherwise a most covetous caytife, made him hate the same, and brought him to
the confession of his fault, which Christ at his supper advertised him of in
vain, and made him weary of this present life. Add hereunto his horrible kind
of death. He knitteth the halter about his own neck: he is his own hangman,
and dispatcheth himself out of life. And for a more aggrauation of his cruel
death, he brast a sunder in the midst, and all his intralles gushed out. For
he well deserved to have his intralles poured forth, which feared not to sell
Christ the only Author of true life for filthye lucre. And yet the rigor of
Gods judgment here ended not, but the remembrance of so heinous an offense
endures for ever. So it comes to pass that the unhappy child of perdicion
neither enjoys his life long, nor yet the money which he held dearer than
his life. Let them set the eyes of their mind upon this glass, whosoever use
for filthy lucre sake, and for private gain to betraye Christ, to deny the
truth, and shamefullye to mock the Church of Christ. Let whosoever lives by
blood, well weye these things, and such as think it a most worthy
commendation, to be enriched by wages for their warring, and testify their
wealth by gorgeous building, by trimming their sarmes, by costly household
stuff, by brave apparel, and sumptuousness in all their doings. For what do
these else, but openly bewraye themselves to be bloudthirsty, and leave after
them the monuments of a life led in cruelty? But whereas some points
pertaining to this matter, remain to be spoken in the things that follow. Let
the unhappy end of Judas, warn us to mortify and slaughter our sins with
the sincere fear of God, that we may embrace Jesus Christ with sure faith: to
whom be blessing, honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The eight Homely.
FOR, it is written in the book of Psalms: His habitation be void, and no
man be dwelling therein. And his Byshopricke let another take. Wherefore of
these men, which have companied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus, had
all his conversation among us, beginning at the baptism of John, unto that
same day that he was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a witness
with us of his resurrection.
Because our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, would have his Apostles witnesses
of our redemption, which he has purchased unto us by his merit: it shall not
be superfluous to consider the more diligently, the things that are said of
their calling and ordering. For except we well know these things, their
authority shall be of no such weight with us, as it ought to be. Which thing,
is the chief cause that their vocation, whom Jesus Christ chose while he was
here on earth, is written with such diligence by the Apostles, that no man can
doubt but they were ordained by God. But because the authority of Matthie
should not seem the less, which after Christ's ascension succeeded in the
place of Judas, and was numbered with the College of the Apostles: Luke
therefore so describes his election, that it may appear he was no less
appointed to the administration of this office, by Christ, than ye other
Apostles. For he neither ran of his own head, nor Peter which propounded this
matter to the congregation to be consulted of, does any thing of his private
authority, but falling to prayer with the residue of the Church, leaves all the matter to the ordering of God, as in the next Homely shall be declared. By
which example we learn that Ministers must wait till they be lawfully
called, Let Ministers wait till they be orderly called.
neither that any man must be permitted, either to thrust himself or any
other, into the Ministry over hastily and unadvisedly. For in the Prophet,
they are grievously reprehended which run of their own head, Hiere. 23.
Roma. 10.
not being lawfully called of the Lord. And Paul says: How shall they preach
except they be sent? Yet Paul was not ignorant that there were many that
preached, Galat. 2.
not sent of the Lord, whom in some place he calls false brethren* which
crept in being not lawfully ordained, but he affirms that such can not
discharge their office duly: yea, Christ himself took not upon him the
office of teaching, before he was solemnly declared by God the Father,
Hebrews. 5.
to be the teacher of all the world, whereof the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews makes mention. Which order, if it be not observed, neither can the
people take them for Gods Ministers, of whose calling they are uncertain,
neither can the Ministers use themselves in their office with such credit and
constancye as becomes them. For with what weapons shall they arm themselves
against the threats of the world, the attemptes of tyrants, and perils on
every side, which knowing in their conscience how unjustly they have usurped,
can conceive in their minds no hope of Gods aid or assistaunce?

Prophecies of Judas punishment.
But let us return to Peter, who in the beginning of his Oration, as we said
yesterday, takes away the offense, that might rise of Judas fall, by referring
or sending them to ye decree of Gods providence, which the holy ghost many
years past (and gone) revealed to us by David. And because he had made mention
of the holy scripture, now he brings forth certain testimonies of the same.
And omitting the testimonies wherein Judas transgression (which before was
sufficiently declared) was prophesied, he rehearses only those that are
extant of his horrible punishment. And he joins two testimonies together,
whereof the first is taken out of.lxix. Psalm, and the other out of the Cix.
Psalm. It is written (says he) in the book of Psalms: let his habitation be
void, and no man dwelling therein, and let another take his Bishopric. And it
makes no matter that in all those Psalms David speaks of his enemies. For
where in the persecution which he suffered under Saul the tyrant, he bare the
figure of Jesus Christ: whatsoever things are spoken of his enemies, are to be
referred to Christ's enemies, and specially to Judas, which was as it were of
all other the standarde bearer.

But before we speak of his punishments, The prouydence of God does not
warrant wickedness.
this is not to be passed over, that the holy ghost would not only prophecy
of the treason that Judas committed, but also of his horrible punishment. For
where Judas betrayed Christ, being provoked with couetousenesse, and not for
that he would further the redemption of mankind, according to Gods ordinance,
his transgression can be excused by no means, but deserves grievous
punishments. And this is the trade of all the wicked, which if we observe, it
shall easily appear, that Gods providence defends them not, nor that our
sins ought to be laid to Gods charge: forasmuch as men sin of their own
voluntary accord, who unless they be borne again, of the effectual power of
Gods spirit and grace, can of themselves do nothing else but sin. Yet
because it is evident that all things are ordered by his providence, sins may
not be exempt or taken from his governance, unless we will deny the
omnipotency of God, and attribute unto man, power to do any thing against the
will of God. The providence of God stays not in the sin of man, but going
further, prescribes due pains for sins, and appoints diverse executours of
the same pains, according to his own pleasure. Therefore let us acknowledge
God for no author of our sins, but rather an aduenger, and by the
consideration of his providence, we shall by and by perceive, that all his
judgments are righteousness and truth.

But let us see the pains, The punishments of Christ's enemies.
wherewith God in times passed both punished Judas treason, and also uses to
revenge the wickedness of all his enemies. These are both many and sundry,
whereof David makes large mention in the places above rehearsed. But Peter in
this place is contented with two, which are both evidently perceived in Judas,
and comprehend in them almost all other. The first is expressed in these
words: Let his habitation be void, and no man dwelling therein. Here he
threatens them with destruction, Destruction.
and that they shall be driven out of their own houses and dwellings. These
things seem to agree with that curse of Moses: Thou shall build an house,
and another shall dwell therein. For where he says: Deuter. 28.
Let no man be dwelling therein: it appears it is to be understood of the
posterity of the wicked, which deserve with their fathers to be driven out of
their dwellings, and to be scattered abroad. And this is a most grievous
punishment, if a man well weygh it. For it comprehends all the adversity,
that a man can suffer either in body or goods. For war, and whatsoever
mischaunces war brings with it, goes before destruction. After that
comes poverty, famine, labor, care, thought, shame, and a continual
intercourse of calamities, which is not finished, but with consumption and
pining away, and many times leaves behind it a shameful memory of
wickedness. All which things, no man can doubt but happened to Judas. For
although it may seem he escaped the long and tedious calamities of this life,
by speedy hanging of himself: yet his posterity could not escape the judgment
of God. And what calamity they suffered, may easily be gathered by the
universal destruction of the Iewishe nation. For Judas alone is not in all the
blame, that Christ was betrayed and crucified, but the whole Nation also with
him, the chief heads whereof, hired Judas to take so wicked an enterprise in
hand, and with their whole consent allowed the counsel of those heads before
Pylate the President, Math. 27.
crying: Crucify him, crucify him, his blood be upon us and upon our
children. And the justice of God ceased not long, but required the innocent
blood of his son at their hands. And that that Christ many times threatened
them, not long after came to pass. For Christ thus threatened them. Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto
thee. How often would I have gathered thy children together, as the Hen
gathers her chickens, and thou would not? Math. 23.
Behold thy house is left unto thee desolate. And again: There shall not be
left here one stone standing upon another, Math. 24.
which shall not be destroyed. In another place also he declares, and that
with tears, the destruction of the unhappy City, saying: The days shall come
upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a bank about thee, and compass thee
round, and keep thee in on every side, and make thee even with the ground,
and thy children which are in thee, Luke. 19.
and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another, because thou have not
known the time of thy visitation. If a man would compare the history and
state of the Jews at this day, being scattered over all the world, with these
sayings: he should see those things most truly fulfilled, which the Lord
before prophesied. Rome many times spoiled and ryfled.
The same judgment of God felt the City of Rome likewise in times passed. For
where after the subversion of the Jews, she drew the sword against the Church
of Christ, and all to embrued her self with the blood of the Saints. God at
length requited her. For within an hundred thirty and nine years space, Rome
taken seven times within.139. years.
she was taken seven times, and came into the hands of barbarous nations.
First the Visigothes, having Marychus to their Captain, took the City and
ryfled it, the year of our Lord, four hundred and twelve. Then four and
fourtye years after, the Vandali, under the conduct of Genserichus took her,
and in the ryfling of her, spared no kind of outrage that the most covetous
enimye uses in the spoil of a City. After them, followed a people called
Heruli, which having one Odacre to their general, entered and took her, the
year of our Lord. CCCC.lxxj. At which thing, Theodoricus king of the Eastern
Goths, having indignation, took her likewise. And when Bellisarius about a
fiftye years after, had recovered her again, within twelve years after that,
Totylas an Eastern Gothe got her by treason, spoiled and set fire on her,
disarmed her of her holds, and rased even to the ground, more than the third
part of her, and set fire on the Capitole, with many other publyke and private
buildings. And so returning from Rome, suffered not one man or woman to remain
alive in her, insomuche that the same City, which was sometimes, Lady
Maystresse of the world, was left clean destitute of any man dwelling in
her. And although Bellisarius, the year following repaired the same again:
yet being called back to Byzantium, he was feign to leave the City to Totylas
to be taken and sacked again. Infinite examples of this sort might be showed,
which testify, that most certain destruction hangs over the heads of the
enemies of Christ and his Church.

No dignitye, or other pre-eminence ca^ deliver us from Gods judgment.
The other kind of punishment is: And his Byshoprick let another take. By the
which words he declares that such kind of men by no manner dignities, or
other excellent privileges that they enjoy, can escape the imminent judgment
of God. For whatsoever excellent and singular gifts they have obtained through
the goodness of God, be taken from them and given unto other: as Judas hereof
is a most manifest example: He was called to be an Apostle, and therewithal
was (as it had been) the steward of Christ. Therefore great was his dignity,
and such as passed the dignity both of king and Emperor. Hereunto is to be
added his continual conversation with Christ, and that he saw and heard many
things with the other Apostles, which many Prophets and righteous men (although
they greatly desired the same) could neither see nor hear. But all these
could not help this unhappy body, which deserved through his falshoode to be
bereeued of them all. For he departs this world with an horrible end, and
the dignity of his Apostleship is cast upon Matthie. The like judgment of God
is seen in Saul, who was so bold as to persecute David, bearing a figure of
Christ. For as soon as he had once purposed that thing in his mind, the good
spirit of God was taken from him, and the evil spirit of Satan entered in
his place, wherewith he was continually haunted, until that both he killed
himself, and left the kingdom to David, to possess. Hereto is the sentence
of Christ to be applied: To every one that has, shall be given, Math. 25.
and from him that has not, shall be taken even that he has. For, they by
Christ's judgment are said to have, which being endued with the gifts of God,
acknowledge them in themselves, and use them with all their power, to the
glory of God, and the salvation of many. And God of his liberality and
bounty increases his gifts every day in them, and makes them more and more
to appear. But they which neglect them, as though they had received none at
Gods hand, and applying their own business, have no regard to that that
appertains to the glory of God, they are at length so punished for their
negligence and contempt, that they are deprived of all their graces, they
become unfortunate, despised, and utterly shamed. For that sentence shall
remain for ever, neither shall it be broken with any force of the world,
which God speaks among other things to Hely the Priest, in his wrath, showing
him how he should be punished: I will honor those that honor me, and they
that despise me, shall come to shame. 1. Samuel. 2
And in another place he threateneth extreme ignominy and shame to the wicked,
which regard not the glory of God: I will (says he) send a curse upon you:
Deuter. 28.
and will curse your blessings: yea, curse them will I, if you do not take
heed. Behold, I shall corrupt your seed, and cast dunge in your faces,
Malach. 2.
even the dunge of your solemn feasts. I would we did often consider these
things in these days, and then would we not marueyle how all they have lost
their authority and estimation in the Church and common weal, which ought to
be reverenced. The Bishops complain of this misfortune, and can not tell where
the authority of the Church is become. But they should cease to complain and
marueyle, if they would remember the counterfeyting of true doctrine, their
buying and selling of holy things, the corruption of manners, the
covetousness, and pride, and many such other like, brought into the Church by
their means, whereby they have abundantly declared themselves to be rather
the successors of Judas, than of Peter. The teachers of the Gospel also
complain of the contempt of their office and ministry, saying, that the
authority of ecclesiastical disciplyne, is utterly extinguished. And it is no
marueyle, considering that in their number also, a man may see very many of
small ability to set forth Gods glory, and other some, under the fair
color of Euangelike doctrine, given to covetousness, fraunching and feeding,
to pamper their bodies, and to satisfy their lust. Therefore the dignity and
authority due to the Ministry, is of right taken from them. Whosoever
therefore will keep and maintain, the degree and authority wherein God has
set him, let him principally have a care to set forth the glory of God, let
him urge that, and, in despyte of the world study with all his power to
advance the same, and not swerve one nails breadth from his vocation and duty.

Peter exhorts to appoint another in Judas room.
Now let us come to the other part of Peter's Oration, wherein he exhorts the
congregation to choose another in the room of Judas. Where he deduceth his
arguments aptly out of the Oracles of the Scripture aforesaid. For he seems
thus to say: because the holy ghost (long time since) prophesied that Judas
should betraye Christ, and after his horrible end of life, should leave his
Bishopric and Apostleshippe to another: we must seek one to succeed him out
of the number of them, which have continued with us, and have seen all the
things, that Christ did while he was here on earth. And Peter's argument is
very worthy to be considered: which being made in few words, is this in
effect: Another must have Judas Byshopricke according to the Oracle of the holy
ghost: Ergo, it is our parts to provide a worthy and meet successor in his
place. And at the first sight this seems to be an absurd consequence. For,
be it that another must have Judas Bisshopricke, shall it therefore follow that
the Apostles and they that were gathered with them, must choose him, that
should have his Bishopric? But all this countenance of absurdity quickly
vanishes away, if we consider the office that the Apostles sustain by reason
of Christ's office. For Christ being ready to leave the world, Math. 24.
commended the cure of his Church to them, and they were of the number of
them, which should give meat to the Lords family, as we read Math. 24.
Therefore, where it is chiefly requisite for conservation of the Church, that
there be worthy and fit Ministers appointed: Peter not without a cause,
gathers, that it appertayned to them to ordain a new Apostle, because there
was a manifest Oracle of the holy ghost apparaunt, touching the placing of
another in Judas room.

How we should read ye scriptures.
We are taught by Peter's example, how we should be occupied in reading of holy
Scripture. For here must we always have our vocation before our eyes, that
whatsoever belongs thereto we should think spoken to us. Roma. 15. 2. Timo.
3.
For the Scriptures are given of God for our learning, as Paul witnesses.
Therefore great is their error, which read the holy books with no more heed,
than if they were profane writers, having their minds as they read, occupied
with other cogitations, as though the reading of scripture, were appointed but
for delight, or to pass the time away. Let us therefore well mark, what
commandments and examples belong to our vocation, that we may continue in
the same, and declare our industrye toward GOD. For in thus doing, a minister
of the word shall think, whatsoever things are spoken by the Prophets or
Apostles, touching the administration of the same word, to be said unto him.
And they that be Magistrates, let them think whatsoever is said in the
Scriptures, touching ye duty of Officers, with examples of ancient
Magistrates, whether they be good or badde, to be spoken unto them. The same
shall private men also do, of what state or condition so ever they be. So
shall it come to pass that with a certain godly delight and pleasure of
mind, they shall receive incredible profit by reading of the Scriptures.

Let us examine the words of Peter, wherein two things most appertayning to
this present purpose, are handled. First, he teaches what manner of person
should be chosen to the room of an Apostle. Then he defines the office or
duty of an Apostle. And of these two he so disputes, that they may serve to
the institution of all Ministers, of the word, and of the congregation.

To the first part appertains this saying: What manner of men should be chosen
into the ministry.
Wherefore of these men which have companied with us, all the time that the
Lord JESUS had all his conversation among us, beginning at the baptism of
John, until that same day that he was taken up from us, must one be ordained.
etc. Peter requires here two things of great weight. The first is a sure and
sound knowledge of Jesus Christ, and of all the things he did, while he was
amongst his Disciples. For using an Hebrewe phrase by two contraries, that is
to say, of going in, and coming out, he includes all things that ever Christ
did. Yet least any man should take occasion hereof, over curiouslye to inquire
after every thing, he compasses this knowledge within certain bounds, that
is to say, the baptism of John, and the glorious ascension of Christ into
heaven. For before Christ was baptized of John, Luke. 2. Mark. 6.
he led a private life in Nazareth of Galiley, behauing himself obediently to
his Parents, and exercising the Carpenters craft, as may be gathered. But the
things that concerned our redemption, and belonged to the office of the
Messiah, he then went about when he had been baptized of John, and was
authorized by the visible annoynting of the holy Ghost, Math. 3.
and by the testimonye of the father which was heard from heaven. For which
cause, the Evangelists contented with the describing of his incarnation,
touching his nonage and childehoode, have written very little. For the holy
ghost meant hereby to bridle the foolish curiosity of man's wit, which not many
years ago vttred and set forth it self by no simple writers I warrant you:
who have compyled us the life and whole chyldehoode of Christ, to the great
mockery and open scorn of the Christian profession. Howbeit, Peter thinks
the knowledge of these things sufficient and enough which Christ did, after he
was so solemnlye admitted and put in office. And this knowledge was necessary,
because Christ ordained his Apostles to be faithful witnesses of his doings.
Secondly, he requires a certain and evident sign of perseverance and
continuance. For he would have none chosen out of that number, which were yet
but nouices and newly entered into Christ's religion, but such as began to
follow Christ, from the beginning of his conversation amongst men, and so
continued with him, being neither feared with danger of persecution, nor
offended with the cross and his ^launderous death. And these things should
now a days be observed, in choosing and ordering of Ministers, if they had any
care of the Church, which challenge greatest authority over ye same. For it is
plain that the chief duty of the Minister stands in teaching, as God says
by the Prophet: In the Priests lips should be the sure knowledge, that men
may seek the law at his mouth. Malach. 2.
For he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts. But how shall he teach who is
unlearned and rude him self? Surely, Paul in a Bishop requires this thing
chieflye, that he be able to teach, and that not only the plain doctrine of
truth, to the more tractable sort of men, but also that he be able to refell
and convince such as shall gainesay and contrary the same, 1. Timo. 3. Titus. 1.
whereof there is always a great multitude. Therefore in a Minister of the
word, the knowledge of Christ and his mysteries is necessary, with all the
things that concern the articles of the Christian faith, and the duty of the
faithful. There is required of him diligent reading of the Scripture, wherein
he ought to be well exercised. He has need of the knowledge of the tongues,
that in reading the Scriptures he depend not upon the sense of others, and be
constrained to look with other men's eyes, and to go with other men's feet.
Furthermore, it is meet he be furnished with the Arts of speaking, that he
may perceive what to propounde, in what place, and after what sort and order.
All which, are of such weight, that Paul not without a cause exhorted Timothy,
to continue on still in reading, who yet he confesses of a child had learned
the Scriptures. Moreover, whereas infinite dangers hang over the function of
Ministers, boldness of mind is requisite, least being overcome with fear of
peril, he draw back or stick in the midst of his course. But this shall
chiefly be perceived by perseverance or continuance, whereof no doubt he had
given manifest tokens. The same has Paul observed likewise, where he shows
us that a Bishop should not be a young scholar or Nouice, 1. Timo. 3.
least being puffed up with sudden dignity, he commit some thing dishonest or
uncomely, and give occasion to the adversary to reprove him. Yea, and Christ
himself at his last supper commends his Apostles, whom it is plain, Luke.
22.
were subject to many faults and infirmities, chiefly for this cause, that
they abode with him in all his temptations.

The office of Apostles and Ministers of the word.
But let us see Peter's last words, where he defines the office or duty of an
Apostle. Let one be appointed (says he) which may be a witness of his
resurrection. First, he will have a partner or fellow joined with the eleven,
not a servant whom the reast at their pleasure might command. For he knew
that equality was needful to be amongst Christ's Ministers. Then he calls
him a witness, which name Christ called them by a little before he went from
hence. And the often repeticion and diligent consideration of this name, is not
a little profitable. For hereby, the worthynesse of the Christian faith, and
certaintye of the doctrine evangelical may be perceived, because Christ had
not only preachers of the things he did, ^ut also sworn witnesses, which
wrate and delivered to us the faith in him. Last of all, he shows whereof he
should bear witness: namely, of his resurrection. Which is not so to be
understood, as though the Apostles should preach of nothing else but Christ's
resurrection, but he thought hereby to express the chief article, wherein all the other be contained: yea, which plainly teaches whereto all the other are
to be referred. For verilye the preaching of his death, is of necessity
included and joined to the resurrection. For how shall he teach that Christ is
risen from death, which first teaches not that he died. But if any man will
teach that Christ dyed, he must first speak of that nature of Christ, in the
which he was able to dye. He must teach therefore that the son of God, which
is of one euerlastingnesse and substance with the father, at ye time appointed,
took man's nature in the virgins womb, in the which, after many and diverse
troubles of this life, at length he suffered bitter death upon the altar of the
Cross. Therefore he that will be a Preacher and witness of the resurrection
of Jesus Christ, must omit none of the things that went before the same. But
there is another cause also, why Peter would make mention of the resurrection.
For this is the end and accomplishment of our redemption, as Paul shows at
large in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, the.xv. Chapter. For sin is
the sting and power of death, whereunto all men were subject. But that death is
overcome and vanquished, the resurrection of Christ does manifestly declare.
Wherefore sin also, by means whereof death had power over us, by the merit
of the same Christ, must needs be taken away. And if the guylt of sin be
taken away, and death spoiled and unarmed, then who sees not how the Serpents
head is all to crushed, and the tyranny of the Devil utterly subdued? In
deed he rages yet, and makes an horrible adooe, but Christian minds are not
afraid of his terrors. For how should he be able to hurt us, who having the
darts of sin and death taken from him, is all naked and of no force? But
this Christ has taken away, while he purged the sins of the world, upon
the aultare of the Cross, and by his glorious resurrection has killed the
force of death. Therefore, sith Peter will have him, which must be taken into
the number of the Apostles, to be a witness of Christ's resurrection, he
appoynteth him the same office that the residue had, to whom it was said: Go
ye into all the world, Mark. 16.
and preach the kingdom of God unto all creatures. Whosoever believes and is
baptized, shall be saved. In the mean season, they that in these days, will
be called and taken for successors of the Apostles, are admonished of their
duty. For although no man can require of them, to be such witnesses as saw
Christ's resurrection, yet their office is, truly and boldly to bear witness
of Christ, and of all those things that he as well did, as suffered for us: that
all men may understand, how the redemption and salvation of mankind, is
contained in Christ only. For whosoever will be taken for Apostolykes, being
puffed up only with the bare name thereof, and neither can nor will preach:
they are not the right successors of the Apostles, but foolish Pastors, such
as are described in Zachary, the.xj. Chapter. And on them, that sentence of
Paul may truly be spoken: Woe unto me, if I preach not. 1. Corin. 9.
It is our parts to acknowledge the goodness of God, which would have his
son to dye for our sins, and to rise again for our justification, and has
also given us most faithful witnesses, of Christ's most profitable
resurrection. Let us therefore believe their testimonye, that being borne
again of the seed of the immortal word, we may be made the heirs of God,
and coheyres with Jesus Christ: to whom be blessing, honor, glory, and power
for ever. Amen.

The ninth Homely.
THEN they appointed two, Joseph which is called Barsabas, whose surname was
Iustus, and Matthias. And when they prayed, they said: Thou Lord which
know the hearts of all men, show whether of these two thou have chosen,
that he may take the room of this ministration and Apostleship, from which,
Judas by transgression fell, that he might go to his own place. And they gave
forth their lottes, and the lotte fell on Matthias, and he was counted with
the eleven Apostles.
The choosing of Ministers must be done duly and orderly.
AS the Church has great need of Ministers of the Word, by whose mean it may
be instructed and confirmed in the knowledge of God, and mysteries of the true
faith: so it behooves that the same be duly and truly chosen and ordained,
that all men may perceive they be chosen and appointed of God. Which thing was
the cause, that in the election of a new Apostle to be put in the room of
Judas, the primitive Church proceeded with so great circumspection and
deliberation. And the holy ghost would have all this hystory diligently
described, for that a sure rule and president might be left to them that came
after, whereby to order the election of their Ministers. The first thing herein
to be observed, is, that S. Peter refers all the matter to the congregation,
to be discussed by their whole consent and counsel. We are taught hereby, that
nothing ought to be appointed or decreed in the Church, by any one man's private
authority. 1. Cor. 3. Roma. 1. 1. Timo. 3. Math. 24.
For where the Church is, as Paul says, Gods building, and Gods husbandry,
yea the household and familye of God. No man must take upon him so much
authority, as to think he has power given him, to prescrybe any thing of his
own head. And although the rashness of some go so far: yet he shall little
profit amongst the true sheep of Christ, John. 10.
which use to harken and follow the voice of Christ only. But let us return
to the narration of the hystory begoon by Luke, who having recited Peter's
oration, now rehearses the election of the new Apostle, which we must
diligently expende in every point. First, he shows that two be openly named,
and set in the sight of the whole congregation. Then with godly and devout
prayer they commit the election it self unto God, whose will and pleasure they
seek to enquire by religious lottes.

Then they appointed two (says he) Joseph which was called Barsabas, whose
surname was Iustus, and Matthias. Although the order how this was done, is not
expressed: yet it is likely it was done by common consent of all the
congregation. For where Peter referred the matter to the whole Church he could
not pretermit the judgment of the Church. It seems therefore every man's
sentence was asked, and that they named all those to the Church, whom they
thought meetest for the office of an Apostle. And here the Church at length
agreed, that either Joseph or Matthy should be chosen to that room, as men who
excelled the others in all kind of virtues. And both of them undoubtedly was
such, that whether had had the place, the lot could not seem to have erred.
When they were named, they were bidden stand forth, that all men might look
upon them and know them.

Let Ministers be chosen openly, before the congregation.
And this example of the Primitive Church is very notable, whereby we are taught
that the election of Ministers of the word and of the Church, should not be
done in corners secretly, and within the house by a few persons, but should
be done openly in the sight of the congregation, and before all the people. 1.
Timo. 3.
For if a Bishop must have the testimony of them that be without, as Paul
says, how much more ought he to be well known to them over whom he is put in
charge? Which thing if it be not observed, or be neglected, either obscure or
unknown persons, either else wicked and infect with corrupt manners, shall be
appointed over the Church. And they shall be overseers of the Church, which
deserve not the lowest room in the Church. This we are taught by the rytes of
the old Testament, where, Leuit. 8. Numer. 30.
by Gods commandment, Aaron and his children were openly chosen into the
holy ministry, all the people looking on. Neither let it trouble us, that
Paul seems to give authority to Titus and Timothy to choose Bishops. For
he would not have them of their private authority to do any thing, but
according to the duty of Superintendentes, to take heed that such as were
worthy and meet, might be chosen for Ministers. And it is not likely, that
they had more granted to them, than the Apostles had, which without the
Churches counsel, would never do any thing in this matter. For not long
after they chose Deacons openly before the congregation, Acts. 6. and 14. cap.
and Paul and Barnabas by election ordained Elders in every congregation.

Hereby is reproved, that most corrupt and pernicious usage of choosing of
ministers, which many years has borne all the rule in this matter. Where
many times some one person, in many Churches uses to choose and order
Ministers of his own authority. Wherein chiefly, Abbots, Bishops, and
Prouostes, be to blame. And many of them also that glory in the name of the
Gospel, and will be taken for reformers of the Church, handle not the matter
much better. For while they put Monks and Bishops out of their usurped
possession (as right is) yet they restore not to the Church the liberty, which
by tyranny they took from it, but at their own pleasures administrate the
things used before time, usurped by the same Bishops and Monks. And hereof in
many places sprang that preposterous order, for such to choose and order
Ministers of the Church, as neither well know the Ministers, nor yet the
Churches, over which they are set. And because many naughty affections are
joined with ignorance, they are many times therewithal so led out of the
way, that without all regard of religion in so weyghtye a matter, they seem
to mind none other thing, but to show the power they have over Churches, with
as great pride as the Bishops and Monks did before them. Which evil and
inconvenience, unless it be shortly repressed, it will bring us forth both
Simonie, and the deadly confusion of all ecclesiastical discipline. And all
this we are bound to the Bishops of Rome for, which have extorted from the
Emperors, by bloody wars, that they alone might have authority to give
Bishoprics, and al other whatsoever ecclesiastical Benefices. There be yet in
Germany not a few places, which can remember these battayles, and the
Christian bloodshed about the ^ame. Certes it is manifest, that Henry the
fourth being Emperor, both for this and diverse other causes, joined battle
and fought with the Popes in open field threescore and two times. And at
length through the craft and counsayles of the Bishops, The year of our Lord
1122. Look the Chronicle of Vrspurgensis.
had his own son as an enemy, sent by them against him into the field, who
at length perceiving their subtlety and sleyghtes, began to withstand them,
but being overcome with their importunity and boldness, granted to Calixtus
the second all his authority: since which time, the liberty of the Church
pining away, as of a deadly disease, is at length utterly lost, which liberty,
whosoever will have restored again, be they Ministers or Magistrates, they
must know that they ought all to labor, to have the ancient usage of
choosing Ministers to be restored again.

Now to come to the exposition of this present hystory: when they had set two
before the congregation, Joseph and Matthy, men furnished and endued with all
kind of virtues: yet none of the Apostles would take so much upon him, as to
pronounce whether of them should be Apostle: nay, they thought it not safe to
commit so weighty a matter to the number of voices, but turning to devout
prayers, refer all the success of the matter to the infallible judgment of
God. For they say: Thou Lord that know the hearts of all men, show
whether of these two thou have chosen. etc. This is a singular document of
godly minds, and of such as will not over boldly challenge to themselves any
thing in Gods causes. Which example if they would with like religion imitate,
which now a days have the handling of Church matters and affairs, many
things undoubtedly would succeed more happily than they do.

The choosing of Ministers must be ascribed to God alone.
Hereof we gather that the election of Ministers depends of God alone, and
must be referred to him. We think it the duty of the Church in this case,
being lawfully assembled, to lay aside all private affections, and to search
out such, as to whom the function of the Church, may safely and conveniently be
committed. And here we principally require a fervent desire of religion,
whereunto fasting was wont to be joined, that their prayers might be the more
ardent and earnest. Act. 13.14.
And when there are any found, that are thought worthy of so great a charge,
yet must we not then attribute to much to the judgment of men. But the most
commodious and safest way is, to refer all the success of our counsayles to
the judgment of God. Although I am not ignorant, that we find certain
places of Scripture, whereby Ministers might seem to be chosen by the judgment
of men, 1. Timo. 3. and.5. Titus. 1.
and the matter appears not to have been determined by lottes, as here it
was, whereunto these sayings seem chieflye to be referred, which are written.
1. Timoth. 3. and. 5. Titus. 1. But I suppose mention is there made only of
such things, as are requisite in this case for men to do, as ministers and
guides, the order and president of the Primitive Church standing still in
force, the which for diverse and weighty causes, is necessary to be observed
still in the Church. For, first it is evident that the Church is the household
and family of God (as was aforesaid) wherein the Ministers be as it were
Bayliffes and Stewardes. Math. 24. 1. Corin. 4.
Howbeit, none that is wise takes so much upon him in another man's house, as
to prescribe at his pleasure either the most vnderlyng servant or else the
Steward of the same. What absurdity therefore shall it be for any man, to be
so bold in the house of God to do it, and to commit a matter of so
greatweyght, to the judgment of our blind reason? Further, in the choosing of
Ministers, no man will deny, but that the chiefest regard ought to be of the
mind. For in the mind is the residence of such virtuous qualities, as the
holy ghost requires in a Minister. But I pray you what man judging of another
man's mind can be sure of his judgment? Must we not confess, that men herein
are deceived every day^ since at length we find by evident tokens, how
naughtye they are, whom before we took for very perfect persons? The Apostles
may herein be examples unto us, who were ignorant a great while what Judas was,
although he were a thief, and such a one as robbed God of his honor. But God
is of such property and condition, that he can be beguiled with no craft or
dissimulation. For he sees not only what is without us, but searches the
hearts and reins, yea, he foreseeth the thoughts and counsayles of men, long
before they arise in their minds. Therefore all this matter can be to no body
more safely committed, than to his judgment. Which thing chiefly moved the
Apostles in this business, to say: Thou Lord which know the hearts of all
men, show whether of these twain thou have chosen. etc. In the which words
they plainly confess, what moved them to run to the judgment of God.
Uerily, for that they were not able to see into the hearts of other men.
Whereas we therefore cannot but confess the same likewise, in our choosing of
Ministers: we must needs seem over rash, if we will make our selves Judges
in a matter, where the mind is chiefly to be considered. Last of all, the
manner and order of election which the Apostles used, both gets the Ministers
no small authority in the minds of the hearers, and encourages them also
against the manaces and attemptes of the wicked, and other dangers hanging
over them. For thus it comes to pass, that the very enemies (if they will
confess a truth) cannot suspect the Ministers either of temeritie or
falshoode. For who can be thought to have crept into the Ministry by unlawful
means, or through favor and authority of men, which is declared a Minister
by the judgment of God? Or who with a safe conscience dare either contemn or
hate him, whom he knows to have been elected and ordained by his own
prayers, and the prayers of the whole congregation? In like sort these things
animate and embolden the Ministers, a thing very necessary for them, against
the threats and attemptes of this world. For where they know they are not
elected by the counsel and favor of man, but by Gods ordinance: they may
assure themselves of Gods aid and assistance, if they will be faithful in
their office. They know it is said unto them: Be not afraid of their faces,
for I am with thee to deliver thee, says the Lord. Again: Hiere. 1.
they may be sure they shall find God a revenger and punisher, if they be
slothful, wicked and unfaithful in their office. For they know that it is
said to all Ministers which is spoken to the Prophet: If I say unto thee,
concerning the wicked man, that (without doubt) he must dye, and thou give
him not warning, nor speak unto him, Ezech. 3. and.33.
that he may turn from his evil way, and so live: then shall the same
ungodly man die in his own unrighteousness, but his blood will I require of
thine hand. The consideration whereof me thinks gave such boldness to the
Prophets and Apostles, that neither the flatteries of false brethren, nor the
threats of wicked enemies, could daunt or discourage them. For after this sort
Amos the Prophet deluded the crafty counsel of Amasias. For where he exhorted
the Prophet to fly away, least Jeroboam the King should lay hold on him,
for his sermons that were so full of threats and rebukes, and so come in
danger of adversity: he answered on this wise: I am neither Prophet, nor
son of Prophet, but a keeper of cattle. Amos. 7.
Now as I was breaking down Mulberies, and going after the cattle, the Lord
took me and said unto me: Go thy way and prophecy unto my people of
Israel. etc. By the which words the Prophet means that he did nothing of
his own head or private counsel, but went about the office enjoined him of
God, and that therefore he could not give over the charge, that God had laid
upon him. The same Amos in the third chapter says: When the Lion roareth,
Amos. 3.
who will not be afraid? Seeing then the Lord God himself speaks, who will
not prophecy? Hereto are to be referred, the things, that the Apostles did with
like courage, before the counsel at Jerusalem. For when they were forbidden
to preach any more in the name of the Lord Jesus, they answered: We must
rather obey God than man Again: Whether it be right in the sight of God to
harken unto you more than God, Acts. 4. and. 5.
judge ye. But for what cause had it been lawful for the Apostles thus to
say, if they had not certainly understood, they were called and chosen to
this office by God. And surely in vain shall a man look for such boldness
of speech, and affiance in doing, in those which through favor, and by
unlawful means, creep into the Ministry before they be called. For knowing
in their conscience how they come in by craft, and being in their dangers, by
whose mean they come to such promotion, they dare do no notable thing in
setting forth the truth and glory of God, but playing the egregious tryflers,
study to please both God and man: yea, at the length casting aside all fear
of God, they give themselves wholly to hunt for worldly praise, and so like
rattes perish by bewraying themselves, Galath. 1.
because (as Paul says) they be not the servants of God, but men pleasers.
Therefore whosoever would have in the Church the ancient authority of
discipline, and the boldness of the Prophets and Apostles in the Ministers:
and to be short, the old integrity and soundness of the whole Church: let
him labor to revoke and call again this ancient order of choosing of
Ministers, showed us by the example of the Apostles.

The lotte of Ministry, or Apostleshippe.
But before we go from this matter: it is requisite to see with what words,
they describe the office of the Apostles. They call it the lot of the Ministry
and Apostleship. By this word lot, they allude to the manner of casting lottes,
whereby a litlte after, they mean to enquire Gods mind and pleasure. But in
the division of things, a lot is oftentimes taken for a part or portion of any
thing that falls to us by lot. In the which sense, they here call the lot of
the Ministry or Apostleship, a part of the same. Therefore they oftentimes
acknowledge and confess an equality of state and condition among the
Apostles. For if Matthias received a part of that Ministry, which was as well
committed to Peter as others: then none of them obtained the whole, whereby he
might be called the head or Lord of others. Neither could Peter's authority
in preaching the Gospel, be greater than either John's or Matthias, because
they all received but one and the same commandment of the Lord Jesus, as is
plain. Again, they join the names of Ministry and Apostleship together,
both to withstand ambition, and to fortify the worthynesse of the office. For
where it is a Ministry that is here entreated of, it is foolishness and
great absurdity, under color thereof to seek reverence of the people, or to
exercise tyrannical Lordship over them. But rather it behooves us to observe
the rule of Christ: Math. 20.
Whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister, and who so will
be chief among you, let him be your servant. And for this cause Paul should
be preferred before many ofthe Apostles, 1. Cor. 15. 2. Cor. 11.12.
because he labored more than all the other in the Church of Christ. There is
a preposterous order in the Church in these days, where they are counted the
first and chief, that labor least in the ministry of the Church, that live
most pompeously of all others upon the Churches goods, and which heap up
treasures to them and their posterity of the same. Again, least the name of
Ministry might seem to signify any vile or base condition, and that the
contemners of the Gospel should take no occasion of ungodliness thereby, nor
ye Ministers themselves esteem ever the worse of their office, they make
mention also of an Apostleship. By the which word we are taught that they are
the Ministers of Christ and his Church which are occupied in that ministry.
For an Apostle signifies as much as a Legate or one that is sent. But he is no
Legate that runs of his own head, and handles his own matters, but he
that is sent from a more excellent and superior, and is appointed for the
entreaty and discussion of public affairs. In so much that Legates are not
esteemed with wise men, so much for their own persons sake, as they be for his
worthynesse from whom they are sent. And the Apostles were sent from Jesus
Christ, as we heard before, who would have them to be witnesses over all the
world, of the redemption and salvation of mankind, which he had purchased by
the merit of his incarnation and death. Such therefore ought they to be
esteemed, and not to be contemned because of their outward port, which is vile
and abject in the sight of the world. For it is Christ's saying: If any man
receive whomsoever I send, he receives me. And whosoever receives me,
receives him that sent me. John. 13.
And Paul to the same purpose says: We be messengers in the room of Christ,
2. Cor. 5.
even as though God did beseech you through us. Therefore even as in the
Apostleship the ministry must be considered, least the Ministers puffed up with
ambicion, aspyre to Lordship and bearing of rule: so in the ministry let both
the Ministers and hearers remember the Apostleshippe, least either the hearers
contemn the Ministers, or the Ministers thinking to slenderly of the
ministry, forget their duty and dignity.

Now let us come to the last part of this place, wherein is declared, Matthias,
is chosen by lottes.
how they sought the will and pleasure of God by casting of lottes. They gave
out their lottes (says he) and the lot fell on Matthias, and he was counted
with the eleven Apostles. Here we first have to speak of lottes. For there are
places of Scripture not a few, wherein soothsaying Arts, and curiosity of
man's wit, in searching for secrets and things to come, are earnestly
condemned. See Leuiticus the.ix. and Deuter. viij. Chapter. And the Prophet
Esaye in the.viij. Chapter, calls all men to the law and testimony, and as
for all other means of seeking Gods counsel, he forbids with great
authority. And Micheas in the fifth Chapter excludes out of the kingdom of
Christ, all soothsayers, and such like rabble of men. Unlawful lottes.
But we must mark how there is two kinds of lotteries or casting of lottes:
the one lawful, the other unlawful. That is unlawful, when they go about
after the curiosity of man's brain, by sciences condemned of God, to search
out secrets, and what is to come, the knowledge whereof belongs not unto us.
This the Astrologers use which write Prognostications of the course and
success of years to come, according to the Clouds, the Planets, and
influences of heaven. Which kind of men reigns now a days amongst
Christian men, not without the great shame of christian religion. To these may
we join those, that when they have the hour of ones Nativity, look upon
the Ascendent, and according to the position and figure of heaven, pronounce of
the course of his whole life, of the nature, conditions and disposition, and
come to such impiety, that they put man the excellentest creature of God, yea,
Geomantie is a kind of profession, consisting of circles and figures made on
ye ground.
and Lord of all the things that God has created, under the rule and
governance of the Planets and stars. To these appertain they which are given
to the study of Geomantie, and think they are able to foretell the success
and effects of all things. And as many as by any Art forbidden by God, search
after secret matters and things to come. For where these men of a curious
audacitie go about to pierce into Gods secrets, their boldness must plainly be
judged to be wicked. Lawful lottes.
The lawful kind of lottery or drawing of lottes is, when the success of a
thing lawful, yea, necessary, and belonging to us, is committed by lottes to
the judgment of God. And this is used commonly, for the more authority of
things in hand, and for the avoiding of contentions, which men, led with
hatred or private lucre, use for to seek. And this kind of drawing lottes
Solomon shows us, where he says: Prouer. 18.
The lot pacifieth variance, and parts the mighty a sunder. The usage of this
kind of lottery is very ancient, and the very Ethnicks thought it not
irreligious or unlawful. Homere writes that the Greeks in times past used
it, when they chose any out of the number of the valiant Captains, to fight
with Hector, demanding the combat. The Romans used the same, when they sent
forth their Magistrates to bear rule abroad in the Provinces, because they
should not seem to take authority or bear office, without the Gods
appointment. The Israelites also were commanded to deuyde or distribute the
land of Chanaan by lottes. Numer. 33.
And the use of lottes in the dividing of inheritance, has been used amongst
us, and may be retained without hurt of Christian religion, so it be not
corrupted with any other kind of superstition. Therefore the Apostles in this
doing, take no ungodly thing in hand, but are only careful to understand
Gods will, and to that end make their hearty and faithful prayer before. And
it is plain by Solomon, that men in these days also should not offend, if
they would use lottes with the like godliness or religion, in the like case.
For he separateth them far from things chaunceing by casualtie, and puts
them under the governance of Gods providence, Prouer. 16.
saying: The lottes are cast into the lap, but the ordering thereof stands
all in the Lord.

Matthias is chosen Apostle, and Bars^bas refused.
But Joseph is pretermitted or put back, and Matthie appointed to succeed
Judas, in the room of an Apostle. But as far as may be gathered by this
place, Joseph to man's judgment seemed the meeter and better man, who beside
the surname of Barsabas (which signifies the son of an oath, that is to
say, one most faithful and true of his word) was also called Iustus. And as
touching Matthias, there is nothing mentioned in the Scripture, beside his bare
name. Yet he in the judgment of God, is preferred before the other. This thing
serves both for our instruction and consolation. For it teaches us not to be
proud of the judgment of men, and of the great estimation they have us in.
For as men may be deceived in their judgments: so they oftentimes change
their judgments, as they see men's fortune uses to change. And there are
examples in all Nations, which teach us that they have been thrown into
extreme ignominy, which not long before, that many headded beast the people,
extolled above the stars. Let us therefore seek to stand upright in Gods
judgment, who as he cannot be deceived, so whom he once favors, he never
casts of, if that they continue in their duty. Again, this example
comfort us, when we see our selves charged with ye unjust preiudices of men,
or rather altogether rejected. For then we must not think, that therefore God
also contemns us, forasmuch as he depends not upon man's authority, but
many times chooses the despisedst among men, to the weyghtiest and greatest
affairs, to the end that all glory may be given to him, and that no flesh
should eralt it self in his sight. See 1. Cor. 1. Moreover, we must not
pretermit to consider in this place how neither Joseph, nor yet those that
favored him murmured or grutched when they heard Matthie admitted by the
Lord. Neither is it like that Joseph was discouraged therefore, forasmuch as
he knew there were diverse other states and callings, wherein he might declare
his obedience and service unto God. Let us follow the example of so great
modesty, and being content with our estate, let us not covet to climb any
higher, least we rashlye accuse the judgment of God, and while we think our
selves worthy of greater honor, be found unworthy of that place that God
has set us in. There be many implements in a well stored house, and also great
diversity among the same. The chief room the Apostles are worthy of, which
they obtained through the mere favor of God. They continued in the same room
and place with constant faith, contemnyng themselves living innocently, and
charitably, whose steps whosoever will follow, they shall live an immortal
and blessed life with them in Christ Jesus our savior: to whom be blessing,
honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The second chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The tenth Homely.
WHEN the fyftie days were come to an end, they were all with one accord
together in one place. And sodeinly there came a sound from heaven as it had
been the coming of a mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they
sat. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues, like as they had been of
fire. And it sat upon each one of them. And they were al filled with the holy
Ghost.
AMongst the promises wherewith our Savior Jesus Christ uses oftentimes to
comfort his Apostles, there is none more often repeated, than that promise
touching ye sending of the holy ghost. For where he says they should be feign
to plead, their causes before Princes, and Rulers, he puts all fear out of
their minds, in that he says, they should have the holy ghost to counsel
them, who should furnishe them with Arguments, and all kind of vtteraunce.
And when he was near unto his death, he iterateth the same promise of his
spirit three or four times, which he says, should be unto them a Comforter,
a Counceller, and a guide in all they should go about. Finally, when he was
risen from death, he both admonishes them again of his promise, and
commands them to wait for the same holy Ghost at Jerusalem. And this so
diligent a repetition of his promise must not be thought superfluous. For it
served both for the instruction of the Apostles, least either they should run
unprepared to the function of so high an office, or else through fear of
danger should be dismayde or discouraged. And it is very profitable for us in
these days, for we may gather hereof, that the Apostles doctrine is inspired
from God, and may not without manifest impiety, be despised. But least any
obscurity or ambiguitie of so great a matter might remain, it behooued that
the spirit so often promised, should not come into the minds of the Apostles,
by any secret manner of inspiration, but visiblie, and not without public
miracle. Which thing, Luke shows both was done, and how it was done, in this
place he declares diligently, and with great perspicuitie. It is an History
very worthy, whose circumstances every one, should be thoroughly considered.

After what sort the Apostles received the holy Ghost.
Before we enter into the Evangelists words, something must be said touching
the holy ghost, that we may well understand what the Apostles received. First,
we must not imagine, that before this time, either there was no holy ghost, or
that the Apostles were wholly destitute of him. For, that he is from
everlasting, of the same substance that God is, it is plain by many
testimonies of the old Testament. David verily confesses, that all the hosts
of heaven were made by the breath of the Lords mouth. And Peter teaches us
that the Prophets in times past, Psalm. 33.
were inspired with the spirit of Christ, by revelation of which spirit, they
prophesied long before, both the afflictions that Christ should suffer, 1. Pet.
1.
and also the glory that he should have. Also the Archangell Gabriel promises
that Marie the Uirgin should conceive and bring forth, Luke. 1.
through the operation of the holy ghost. As touching the Apostles, there is
no man will affirm, that is in his wits, that they utterly lacked the
spirit of God, until this day of Pentecost. For although their weakness and
imperfection was great: yet they both knew Jesus Christ, and plainly
confessed, Math. 16. John. 6.
that he was the promised Savior of mankind, which thing, as Christ
testifies, they could not do, without the revelation of the holy ghost.
Neither must we expound this History of the substance of the holy spirit,
as though the third person in Trinity (as ancient writers call it) had come
down and been enclosed in the minds of the Apostles. For this person can be
contained in no one place, but (which is a sure and certain note of Godheade)
enters through all things, and fills all places both in heaven and in
earth. To the which thing David had a respect where he said: Whither shall I go
from thy spirit, or whether shall I go from thy presence? If I climb up into
heaven, Psalm. 133.
thou art there: if I go down into hell, thou art there also. etc. Therefore
it is manifest, that all this History ought to be expounded, of the operation
and gifts of the holy ghost. And the Apostles are said to receive the holy
ghost, because the same (which otherwise is incomprehensible) wrought
effectually in them, and endued and furnished them with all manner of gifts, as
was meet to the execution of so weighty an office. After which sense every
where in the Scripture, they are said to have God, and the spirit of God
present in them, in whom he woorketh, and who suffer themselves to be guided
and directed by him: and they lack God and his spirit, which withstand his
woorking, and rather give themselves to the unruly desires of the flesh, and
the world, than unto the governing of the holy ghost. Yet these things shall
appear more plain by the context of the History, wherein first we will note
the time, then the Apostles persons, and last of all the manner of this sending,
all in order.

Luke begins with the description of the time, The holy Ghost was sent at
the feast of Pentecost.
not so much for Hystoricall order sake, and to purchase and get credit to the
thing that was done, as to advertise us of very great mysteryes, whereof the
divine providence had chiefly a consideration. It was the day of Pentecost,
which otherwheres the scripture calls the feast of weeks, or of new corn,
because on that day the Shewbread of new corn was offered. It took the name
of Pentecost amongst the Greeks, of the number, because it was celebrated the
fifteth day after Passover or Easter. He that will see the Ceremonies observed
on that day, may look them in Leuit. 23. and Deuteronomy. 16. Leuit. 23. Deuteronomy. 16.
The chief thing here to be considered, was the remembrance of the law,
which the Scripture says, was given that day and uttered by the mouth of Gods
Majesty. It shall appear that this day, was appointed by God for this
business, not without a cause, if we consider the number of people which used
to be present at this feast, and well mark Christ to be the truest, and best
expositor of the old law. For it is every where seen that God uses to
notify and publishe to all men, the things that concern our salvation. For he
would have (as Paul says) all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge
of truth. 1. Tim. 2.
It was therefore most commodious, that the preaching of the Gospel should
begin upon one of the greatest holy days, and amongst the greatest number of
people, that both the more people might be instructed, and also that the
miracle of the holy ghost, which should shortly be published to diverse nations,
might after a sort prepare for the Apostles, the way of preaching. And the
Lord observes in the Apostles, that thing which we read him self observed,
while he was on the earth. For as he chose public places always to preach in:
so was he wont on the holy days to go to Jerusalem, that as well his doctrine
as miracles might be known to the more people. Yea, he would be crucified at
the feast of Passover, that the knowledge of his death being so profitable,
might the sooner, and the wyder be published abroad. It shall be profitable
for us diligently to mark the tokens of Gods goodness, which teach us, that
the redemption made by Christ Jesus, is offered of God to all men, and
appertains to all men, neither can we have any surer consolation, any where
in our temptations. Uerily Satan will not lightly deny, that Jesus Christ is
a Savior and a Redeemer. But he uses this policy in assaulting our faith,
that the redemption which is by Christ, appertains not unto us, and teaches
us to measure the merits of Christ and the limits thereof, according to our
worthiness or unworthiness. And it cannot be chosen, but here our faith must
quayle, forasmuch as there is no man, but finds himself most unworthy of
salvation, when he thoroughly has considered his own nature. But the
consideration of those things, which teach Christ to be the universal Savior
of all them that believe in him, and a most bountiful Author of health, that
is glad to benefit most men, does most strongly prop and bear up our faith
thus faltring. But the other cause is more diligently to be searched, where we
said that the spirit of Christ was given in Pentecost, because of the law
once published on that day. It is manifest that all the things which happened
to the Jews, were shadows and figures of things to come, to the
accomplishment and performance whereof, Jesus Christ from everlasting was
ordained, and appointed. Therefore Augustines observation seems to me neither
superfluous nor curious, who in the consideration of this present History,
compares it with the figure of the old Testament, touching the setting forth
of the law, where there is a great likeness of all circumstances, and a just
proportion or measure of mysteries on both sides to be observed, which we have
thought good to expound by Austens words. A sheep is slain (says he) the
Passover is holden, and within fifty days after, the law written with the
finger of God, is given to make us fear. The Epistle to Ianuarye. 119.
Christ is slain, who like a sheep was led to be offered, as Esaias witnesses.
The true Passover is celebrated, and within fifty days after, the holy
ghost which is the finger of God, is given to make us to love. etc. Yea, Paul
the Apostle diligently compares the preaching of the Gospel, which began at
Pentecost, 2. Corin. 3.
with the publishing of the law, and by that comparison proves the authority
of the Gospel. And the Scripture shows that Christ is the end of the law,
Math. 5.
whereof he professes himself to be a true interpreter. Therefore there could
be no fitter time chosen to send the holy ghost in, than the fifteth day after
Easter, which by reason of the law then published was very notable. For hereby
we are taught, that there is but one spirit of the old and new Testament, and
not two diverse as the Manychies in time past dreamed. For Christ would not take
upon him to have interpreted the law, if it had been published with any other
spirit than the spirit of God, neither would have commended and celebrated
the memorial thereof, with so wholesome a miracle. Further, we are taught that
the true sense of the law can be gathered of none other, than of the spirit
of Christ. For where Christ only has satisfied the law, to whom the law
led us as a guide and Schoolemayster: they shall in vain traueyle about the
understanding thereof, Galat. 4.
which are destitute of the spirit of Christ, and faith in Christ, which he
works in us. Which thing is the cause that Paul says, the Jews have yet
the veil before their eyes, 2. Corin. 3.
by reason whereof they cannot look upon Moses face, that is, they cannot
understand the true and plain meaning of the law. Therefore the Jews and
false Christians, the mainteyners of man's righteousness, object to us in vain
the law, and works thereof, whereas Christ is both the end of the law, and
without him there is no true knowledge of the law. But in the mean season the
contempners of the old law are reproved, who think there is no more use of
the same to be had among the Christians. As though the will of God were not the
same now, that it was wont to be, and as though we also had not need to be
led by the hand of the law unto Christ, that distrusting our own
righteousness, we might learn to take hold of the righteousness of God,
that comes by faith in Jesus Christ. In deed we confess that the Ceremonies
of the law are abholished, because all figures are fulfilled in Christ: yet the
use of the law remains whole and sound, whose duty it is to teach us our
unrighteousness, and corruption of nature, and all our satisfaction for the
same to be in Christ.

Furthermore, it behooves to consider the persons of the Apostles, that we may
understand what they were doing at this time, The state and condition of the
Apostles.
where certain things are to be repeated out of the first Chapter. First, we
heard how they obeyed the commandment of Christ, being now ready to
ascend into heaven, who bade them return to Jerusalem, and there to wait
for the spirit which he promised them. Therefore they return thither and
there abide, unto this day in the which the spirit is sent, as a little after
we shall see, where Luke says plainly, this happened at Jerusalem. Moreover,
he attributes unanimity and concord to them. For they went not dispersed up
and down the City, neither was there such brawle and contention between
them, as was wont to be, but they tarried with one accord, all together in one
place. Add unto these a third point, whereof mention also is made before,
how they continually persisted in prayer. For it is not to be thought that
they were become ever the slacker in praying, seeing they were compassed about
with danger on every side, and (as appears by choosing of Mathias) prepared
themself diligently to the administration of their office.

These things serve for the public instruction of us all. For they teach us
how they ought to prepare themselves, How men must prepare themselves to
receive the holy ghost.
which desire to have the holy ghost given unto them, and to have his gifts
increased in them. Hereof we have need by reason of our inward and natural
corruption, wherewyth, unless we be borne again, we shall not see the
kingdom of God. We have need of the same spirit, because of the world and
the desires of the flesh, wherewith we be many times revoked from the way of
salvation. John. 3.
We have need also of the same by reason of temptations, wherewith Satan
oftentimes goes about to bring us in doubt of the certentie of our salvation
and redemption, and would easily overcome us, except we were confirmed with the
spirit of Christ, which (as Paul says) is the sure earnest, and pledge of
our salvation. But the same spirit enters not into a froward soul. 2. Corin.
1.5. Ephesians. 1.
Therefore we have need to prepare our selves, that we may be meet to receive
him. First therefore obedience is requisite, whereby it behooves us to be in
subjection to the will of God, and to his precepts: yea, even in those things
that to our reason seem dangerous, hurtful, or superfluous. For, by what
means shall we think, it will come to pass that they shall have the spirit
of God given them, which are not ashamed to rebel, against God? Psalm. 50.
God can not abide that they shall glory in his law, and in his word, which
run on in disobedience. How much less will he vouchsafe, to give his holy
spirit to such? Furthermore, it is meet that they be of one accord, and in
charity together, which shall receive the holy ghost. John. 13.
For where God himself is charity, he requires earnestly the study thereof
in those that be his: yea, Christ appointed it as a Cognizance for his to be
known by. And it cannot be that Christ will judge them worthy of the spirit
of Christian brotherhoode, that are divided by hatred, envy, contentions, and
open enimitie, and so declare themselves, to be strangers from the body of
Christ, which is the Church or Congregation. Moreover, unto the study of
concord, and obedience, must be joined fervent and continual prayers. For,
although God promise his spirit freely, and gives the same of his mere grace,
he will yet have us to pray to him, and as well does the majesty of God require
we should pray to him, as the duty whereby we be bound to him. Neither can we
declare any more manifest token of our faith, than if we go about by prayer to
obtain those things, that belong to our salvation. Therefore we hear David
say: Make me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me.
Psalm. 51.
Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me.
And we say every day as Christ commands us: Let thy kingdom come. Yea,
Christ himself promises us that we shall not ask God his spirit in vain.
Where he says: If you being evil can give good gifts unto your children,
Luke. 11.
how much more shall your father of heaven give the holy spirit, to them that
desire it of him. Therefore let us in these days join together these three,
obedience, unanimity, and prayers, after the example of the Apostles, and then
shall we perceive in our selves a marvelous coming forward in true
godliness, and a most wholesome increase of the holy ghost.

The spirit of Christ, is the Author of concord and holiness.
Furthermore, the consideration of the Apostles teaches us, that the spirit of
Christ which works by preaching of the gospel, is a spirit of concord and
holiness, and not the Author of dissension and carnal liberty, as some in
these days cry out, which by this means would bring the doctrine of the
gospel in suspicion and hatred, because (say they) it is the seed of
dissension, and a planting of licencious living. But we may easily answer
their slanders. For as the Apostles being at unity and concord received the
holy spirit: so it is plain that after they had received him, their concord
was not disturbed, but every day more and more confirmed. And the same effect
of the spirit is in all them that believe. For, it cannot be that he can be
Author of discord amongst them, whom, being knit together in one head Jesus
Christ, he makes members of one, and the same body, and coheyres of the same
kingdom. And as it is impossible, that the members of one body, quickened
with one spirit can be at variance together: so can they not strive amongst
themselves, which are brought by the doctrine of the gospel unto Christ, and
are endued with his spirit. As touching that our enemies object to us the
liberty of the flesh, we deny it. For whosoever has any taste of the
doctrine of the gospel, shall confess, that the preaching thereof beats
down the same. Neither does the spirit of Christ by outward word only
oppugn the same, but it also consecrateth the minds unto God, that they, which
a little while ago were the bondslaues of sin, are now become the Temples of
the living God. In the mean season we deny not, but there are many which
abuse the color of the gospel, to sow dissension, and to plant liberty. But
ought the gospel to be charged therewith? I pray you what wise man condemns
the Magistrate, because diverse under the color thereof, have become Tyrauntes,
and oppressors of the liberty of their Country? Why do we not rather mark
the use of the Magistrate, which is appointed for that end, that the lust of
private persons should be restrained, and violence and tyranny be brideled.
Even so let us confess that the right use of the Gospel and effect of the
holy ghost is, only to set up true concord, and holly honesty of life. Nay,
if we shall confess the truth, there is none other concord acceptable before
God, than that which is among the faithful in Jesus Christ, which are borne
again of the word and spirit of God. Neither can there be any other true
holiness and innocence, than that whereof Christ's spirit is the Author. For
that holiness which men counterfaite without his spirit, is hippocriticall,
and is not able to abide the judgment of God, as strange from the
righteousness of Christ, which uses to supply all the defectes and wantes of
the faithful.

The manner how the holy ghost was sent.
Now to these aforesaid points. Luke joins the manner of his sending, which
was visible, both because the Apostles might conceive, through presence of the
spirit, the greater confidence and boldness to go about their office, and
also for our cause, that it might appear how Jesus Christ never forsakes his
Church, but defends it by his invisible grace, which he declared by the
sending of his holy spirit. For hereto serves that notable promise: I will not
leave you comfortless. And again. John. 14. Math. 28.
Behold I am with you until the end of the world. But touching the manner
how this thing was here done, three things remain to be discussed.

First, there was suddenly a noise from heaven. And it is not without a
mystery, that these things come to pass suddenly or unlooked for. Suddenly a
noise came from heaven.
For this is always Gods usage, that he then most truly performs his
promises, when we least look for them, yea when there is no more help
remaining in man. So he performs his promise, in delivering his people out of
the bondage of Egypt, four hundred years after the Israelites were bereft of
all liberty, and were constrained to behold most horrible examples of
Tyranny, in their new borne babes, and have nothing safely to trust unto. So
in this place he sends the holy ghost now suddenly, and when they least
thought of it, whose coming he had deferred now a.xj. days long. We are
taught by these examples, patiently to wait for the promises of God. For where
God is truth it self, he cannot deceive. And forasmuch as he is our Lord, and
we his servant, it becomes us to attend his leisure, and not to prescribe
him any time. Tarry thou the Lords leisure (says David) be strong and he
shall comfort thine heart, and put thou thy trust in the Lord. Psalm. 27.
Habac. 24.
And the Prophet says: If he tarry, yet wait thou for him. For in very
deed he will come, and not be slack. And such a noise and sound came from
heaven, because we might know, that the holy Apostles endued with an
heavenly and divine spirit, were become preachers of an heavenly and divine
doctrine, and not man's, the authority and credit whereof might be called in
doubt. This serves to confute the foolishness of such, as with the ritche
glutton, require teachers to come from an other world, from heaven, or from
hell. And whatsouer things are said of man's salvation and duty, they reject
with this scoff, saying: there was yet never none that came either from heaven
or hell, to tell us what is there to do. So they disclose how their wicked
minds are void of all religion. For unless these wicked men had utterly put
away all shamefastness, they would know that the son of God came down from
heaven into flesh, and rose again from death, and most faithfully declared
unto us, the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven. They would know that the holy
ghost came down from heaven, and spoke these things by the Apostles, which
they have taught us, touching the mean of our salvation, and what our duty
is. But he that would require any new kind of learning, yea though an Angel
brought it from heaven, he ought not to be believed, Galat. 1.
but accursed.

Secondly, a certain blast or violent wind russhing in, A vehement wind
fills all the house.
filled all the house where the Apostles dwelt. And that the spirit is
signified by blast or wind it is no doubt, because the very name of spirit is
a borrowed speech, and the divine power is so called, for that it pierces and
by his power conserueth all things. And the Hebrews use this word Ruach, which
is as well used for the wind, as for the spirit. Christ would in this place
therefore use the token of wind, to set before our eyes as it were, the
strength and efficacy of the holy spirit, which is incomprehensible to man's
capacity, and can be attained to, by no power of man. It is better to here
himself interpretate the same thing. For reasoning with Nicodemus, of the
operation of his spirit, by the which, they that believe are borne again, he
says: The wind blows where it will, and thou hear the noise thereof, but
know not whence it comes, John. 3
nor whither it goes. For as the wit of man could not hitherto show us, for
a certayntie, the causes and begynnynges of the wind, although they have long
and much searched for the same: so the operation of the holy spirit, far
passes the capacity of man, although we effectuallye feel the same in our
hearts. And even as the blowyng of winds can not be let by any device, or
force of men: so the spirit of Christ which works by the gospel, fears
not the strength of men, nor is not hindered thereby to show his power, where and
when he will. Yea foolish and ridiculous is the endeavor of them whosoever
will strive with God, to bring the spirit and word of God to their bent, and
will hold them within bounds of them appointed. Examples hereof we have every
where, but the Apostles examples of right, ought to have the first place. They
were commanded of the Lord, that they should fill all the world with their
preaching. This seemed a thing impossible to be done, by simple unlearned men,
and despised persons. Yea, as many as were counted either of power or wisdom
in the world withstoode them. Yet the spirit of Christ by the ministry of
the Apostles burst into all the world, which this vehement blast here did
foresignifie, and in despite of the world, and Prince of the world, the
doctrine of the gospel was published throughout all Nations. Let these things
comfort us against the vain enterprises of the world and Tyrannes, which
study to stop the course of the gospel. For Christ lives still, which from
high derideth the counselles of them, and whose spirit blows where he will,
Psalm. 2.
and is not ruled at men's pleasure.

Cloven tongues, as they had been of fire.
Thirdly, there appear cloven tongues as it were of fire, which when they were
settled upon the heads of each of them, they were all filled with the holy
ghost. We said the wind was a token or sign of the holy ghost. But here
comes a visible sign also of the presence of the spirit, that there might
be no doubt at all thereof. For this is the manner and trade of God, to declare
by outward tokens, the inward and spiritual gifts, which are conceived by
faith only, and have their being in the mind. The which by reason of the
proportion and infallible truth of God, whereof they are signs and seals, use
to be called after the names of the things that they signify. By this means
it comes to pass that Luke reasonyng of the tongues which sat upon the
Apostles heads, so speaks of them as though the spirit him self had sit on
their heads. But it is evident that these tongues were neither essentially the
holy ghost, nor yet had the holy ghost included in them. For who will say the
substance of the holy ghost is of fire, except any man list to dote with the
Persians, which worshipped the fire as a God. Who also will think the holy
ghost which pierces through all things, and whom the scripture teaches to
be every where present, can be enclosed in so small a thing, as a tongue?
Besides, Luke says not that the holy ghost sat on their heads, but that
their minds were filled with the holy ghost. And the holy ghost should in
vain sit upon our crowns, unless he entered into our minds and showed forth
his power and efficacy. Therefore the tongues were tokens of the presence of
the holy spirit, neither could the name of holy ghost for any other cause be
applied to them, than by reason of proportion and similitude that is between
them, as even now was said.

Furthermore, as in all other signs which God accustometh to use, there is
perceived to be a great likeness with the things that they signified: so here
also the presence of the spirit, could by no other sign have been more
evidently and properly expressed. The likeness of tongues was most agreeable
with the Apostles office, whom God had appointed to be preachers. The division
of the same tongues represented the gift, which they chiefly had need of,
because they must bear witness of Christ in all Countries, and be
understood of all men. And the element of fire signified, that the voice of
the Apostles should be effectuous through the workyng of the spirit. For by
this the spirit as by a bright brenning fire, consumes all the things in us
that are carnal and earthly. By the same, the spirit kindles the minds of
men with the love of heavenly things, that leaving all earthly things behind
them, they may aspire to the only eternal goods of the heavenly kingdom.
With this the holy ghost warmeth men that are benumbed with sin, and makes
them meet and nimble to all good works, and to do all things in Christ.
And this feruencie and fiery zeal is the proper mark of them, which are led
with the spirit of Christ: Which spirit who so ever feels to be quenched in
him, let him cease to glory in the spirit. I could here rehearse diverse
other effects of Christ's spirit, but that there is more commodious place to
speak thereof in the sermon following, where it shall be declared what the
spirit wrought in the Apostles. Let us acknowledge the truth and goodness of
Christ, whereby he would thus provide for his Church. And let us prepare our
selves after the ensample of the Apostles, that we also may be endued with the
spirit of Christ, and enflamed with the holy love of God, that being found
stout in the duties of Christian life, we may be taken for the true children
of God, and Coheyres of Jesus Christ, to whom be blessing, honor, glory and
power for ever. Amen.

The eleventh Homely.
AND they began to speak with other tongues, even as the same spirit gave
them vtteraunce. There were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews devout men out of
every nation of them that are under heaven. When this was noysed about, the
multitude came together, and were astonished, because that every man heard them
speak with his own language. They wondered all, and marueyled, saying among
themselves: Behold, are not all these which speak of Galiley. And how hear
we every man his own tongue, wherein we were borne. Parthyans and Medes, and
Elamytes, and the inhabiters of Mesopotamia and of Jury, and of Capadocia, of
Pontus and Asia, Phrygia, and Pamphylia, of Egypt, and of the parties of Lybia,
which is beside Siren, and strangers of Rome, Jews, and Proselytes, Greeks
and Arabyans: we have heard them speak in our own tongues the great works
of God. They were all amazed and wondered, saying one to another, what means
this? Other mocked saying. These men are full of new wine.
ALthough the promises of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, were first made
to the Apostles, and may seem to belong to them only. Yet is it manifest that
the same are general, and to be extended to all them that do believe. For as
the Apostles, because of their imperfection, and other faults, had need of
the holy ghost, and without the help of him, could not discharge the office
committed to them: even so we have need of the same spirit, because if we be
destitute of him, we can neither order our life christianly, nor hold the
certainty of faith against the temptations of Satan. Therefore ye consideration
of this present history no man ought to think either unprofitable or
superfluous, which both strongly mainteyneth the authority of the Apostolic
doctrine, and also instructs us many other ways: For it teaches us how we
should prepare our selves to receive the spirit, and how we should judge the
spirits. As touching ye first, was spoken yesterday. The other may be learned
by this present place. For Luke goes on in ye description of the hystory, and
declares the effects of the holy ghost, which he wrought as well in the
Apostles, as in their hearers.

The gift of tongues.
And beginning with the Apostles, he attributes two things unto them, which
they received by the operation of the holy ghost. The first is that by and by
after they had received the holy ghost, they began to speak with strange and
diverse tongues. This is so great and wonderful a miracle, as I know not whether
ever there happened a greater amongst men. For who is ignorant how much
labor and industry is required even from our childhood, to learn diverse
tongues? We see that men grown in years, are scarce able to learn any one
tongue, and the perfect use thereof. But the Apostles, men of ripe years and
well stricken in age being, idiotes and unlearned, which had spent their
childhood and youth not in the study of learning, but in handy occupasions,
even in a moment, became notable and excellent in the knowledge and use, not of
one tongue, or two, but of all tongues at once. Who here acknowledges not the
evident work of God? Who reuerenceth not the operation of the holy ghost? For
what could the industry, or dexterity of man's wit, have done in so short a
time?

Neither was this miracle superfluous, as serving only for bare and vain
ostentation (as the things done by Iuglers are) but very profitable and
necessary for the Apostles, in discharging of their duty and office. For
where Jesus Christ had appointed them to be teachers of all the world, that
through their ministry, the doctrine of the Gospel might be published among
all nations: it was necessary, they should be understood of all nations.
But how could all men understand them, if they could have used but their
own tongue only, in every place? Yea I think they found no greater lack
hitherto in their office, than that they perceived themselves destitute of so
necessary a knowledge of tongues. And so great was the incommoditie of the
diversity of tongues, which the bold enterprise of man's pride (as Moses
shows) brought in: that by means hereof it seemed the most wholesome doctrine
of the Gospel was hyndred, and the passage thereof into diverse nations
stopped. But God in one sound, takes away all this impediment and stoppell,
and the Apostles even in the first coming of the spirit, feel them selves
eased of that difficulty, which was thought would much have hurt them. Hereof
may be learned a common and general comfort, that none walking in the vocation
of God, despair of his help and favor. God uses to cast many things in the
ways of such, which seem to be impedimentes, whereby they can not go through
with their charge and calling. But God means not so much to hinder them, as
to try their faith and patience. Therefore it behooves us with constant
faith, and good courage, to set on the things that pass man's strength, and we
shall find God true and faithful in the things that seem impossible to us to
be brought to pass. So neither banishment, nor stuttyng tongue could let
Moses, from bringyng Israel out of Egypt: Yea when the red sea was in their
way, and stopped their passage, while they followed Gods calling it was taken
out of their way, and dried up. I pass over infinite examples of like sort,
which are to be seen every where, as well in holy, as profane hystories.
Whosoever therefore are appointed teachers or magistrates to govern the people,
let them remember these things, and take unto them good courage of mind. Let
private men also be mindful of them, and go forward with like constancy in
their vocation. For God will finishe the work he has begun in us, so that
we repent us not of the labor that must be taken for his sake.

Let us also mark in this place, The Apostles are not licensed to preach till
they were well instructed.
how Christ Jesus which chose ydiotes and unlearned men to be Apostles, would
not give them license, to preach abroad in the world, till he had made them
perfect, and learned in all things parteyning to the office of preaching. For
they which a little before, understood none but the Syrian tongue, and not that
neither so perfectly, but by the pronuntiation (as appeared in Peter) they were
taken for Galileans: they now come forth furnished with the knowledge of all
tongues. Besides thexact understanding of the old Testament, which the same
spirit taught them, as appears by their sermons. This condemns the
insolent barbarousnesse of the Anabaptists, that step from the Plough, and
Cart unprepared into the Pulpet, and then think themselves very Apostolic
fellows, when being destitute of all good learning and manners, they can
contemn all kind of knowledge, and peruerte the whole order of the Church.
But so far are they from being defended by the Apostles example, that rather
the authority thereof, sends them to learn the things, that are needful
for a minister of the word. Paul certes would have the Rectour of the
Church, to be instructed with ability, and sufficiency to teach, and
requires in him, not the bare knowledge of the Articles of faith and salvation
only, but such a knowledge, as whereby he may be able to confute the adversary.
Therefore he commands Timothy whom he witnesses, was brought up of a
child, 1. Tim. 3. Titus. 1.
in the study of the scripture, to be diligent in readyng. We confess in
deed, there is no need of all those tongues now, which the Apostles by
miracle understood: nor it becomes us not, to require the same of God, who
if he had need of new Apostles, could both easily find them, and also
furnishe them with meet gifts. But we require chiefly the knowledge of those
tongues, without the which, the books of holy scripture can not commodiously
and sufficiently be declared: I mean the Hebrew and the Greek tongues, the one
having the old Testament written in it, and the other the new Testament,
published by the Apostles. And Paul in a certain place says, that the chief
use of tongues is, in the interpretation of the holy scripture. 1. Cor. 14.
Which things whosoever lacks, he shall never attain to the certain
knowledge of holy scripture. For while they depend upon other men's
interpretations, they become like unto those that see with other men's eyes,
hear with other men's ears, and go with other men's feet. There is needful
to the understanding of these tongues, the knowledge of hystories, and
specially the science of vtteraunce, which whosoever lacks, certes, I will
say, he shall do very little good in the ministry of the Church.

Schools.
But because all these things are not bestowed upon men myraculously, and that
that we read chanced here to the Apostles, happens to few others, therefore
our industry, our labor, and continuance in study is requisite, where we may
both perceive how necessary Schools and Uniuersities are and also, how
needful it is to have teachers to train up youth for the ministry of the
word. And I think there is none ignorant, what a special care was had
always of schools amongst the people of God. For hereunto is to be referred,
all the things written of the children of the Prophets, and of the Colleges,
whereof the holy Prophets Samuel and Elizeus had the rule and governance, with
great care and diligence. And in the Prophet we read how they are grievously
reprehended which went about with dissolute manners and conversation, to
corrupt the young men, appointed for the ministry of the Church. Amoz. 2.
Truly the godly Princes in times passed, perceived of what profit it was,
for the setting forth and maynteyning of religion, to have Schools duly and
truly appointed, who for the preservation and continuance of them, thought
good to provide for them, both by their counsel and authority, as appears
easily by the foundations of most ancient Colleges: Ruffinus in the Eccles.
history, the first book and chapter.
Which after they had degenerated, that they were become the dens of idle
men, given to the throat and belly, or of pieuishe supersticiouse: then sprung
thereof the horrible ruin and decay of the Church. Which Julian the Apostata,
a subtle and crafty man, well forespyed, who for this cause commanded that
the Christians should be kept from learning, that through ignorance and lack
of knowledge, the subtyltie and mockery of Philosophy, might take place.
Therefore if Christian Princes will not be taken for folowers and fellows of
Julian, let them know that the prouidyng and caryng for Schools, belongs to
them principally.

But let us return to the Apostles, who we said erewhyle were instructed with
the gift of tongues by the holy ghost. The holy ghost changes our tongues,
and teaches them.
For although this seems to have come to pass in the Apostles only: Yet is
it further to be extended: For this is always the effect of the holy ghost, to
change and instruct the tongues of the beleeuyng. For because the natural man
perceyueth not the things belongyng to the spirit of God: therefore he can
not reason of them as meet is. And as often as he goes about to dispute of
divine matters, so often he bewrays his folly and infancy, which thing
chanced to the gentile Philosophers, as Paul says. Besides, that man is
delighted in vanity, Romans 1.
and rejoices in filthy talk, and oftentimes gives the bridle of his tongue
to blasphemy, as every day may be seen in the daily communication of the
children of this world. Over and besides these mischiefs, he cannot speak,
no not when he would be taken for most religious. For when he goes about by
prayer to crave the help of God, his mind is pulled away either by vain
thoughts, or else he is troubled with the conscience of his sins, that he
can not pray with sure affiaunce of mind, and the prayer that is without faith
can not avail. But the spirit of Christ remedieth all these faults. For where
he regenerateth the minds of men, and powers into them the true knowledge of
the mysteries of salvation: he makes us able to reason of the nature of God,
of his will, and of his judgments. And the tongues which were used to
blasphemy, backbyting, raylyng, perjury, filthy talk, and all kind of
uncleanness, he loses them to praise God and to give him thanks, and makes
them speak those things that set forth the glory of God, and serve to the
edifying of other, and to abstain from those things that corrupt good manners.
Again, because he is the spirit of adoption, and bears witness, that we
certainly be the sons of GOD. He is the aucthour that we dare call upon GOD
the father, and distruste his good will and favor no longer. And Paul
expresses this effect of the spirit, saying: You have not received the
spirit of bondage to fear any more: but you have received the spirit of
adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father. And again: Because you are sons,
Romans 8. Galat. 4.
God has sent the spirit of his son into our hearts crying: Abba, Father.
Whereunto the large promises of Christ are to be referred, that promise them
that pray to his father in his name to be heard. John. 14. and. 16.
This spirit likewise withstandeth the cogitations of the flesh, and
enflameth the minds, as they are praying with the desire of salvation and glory
of God. Besides that, the spirit of Christ works here a new miracle: For as
he divided the tongues of the Apostles, that they might be able to speak the
languages of all nations: so he gives to the faithful of all nations, one
and the same tongue, whereby in all parts of the world, they invoke one and
the same father, with one and the same sound, and with one and the same faith.
And so those tongues be knit again in one, which the insolent and bold
presumption of man had divided in sunder. And this seems to me to be that
tongue of Chanaan which the Prophet said the Cities of Egypt, Esaias. 19.
and all nations should speak.

And if the holy ghost change the tongues of men so that he makes them to
speak the things that are holy and godly, and which edify many, Against
blasphemers and filthy talkers.
and make them with sure confidence to ask help of God: then it easily
appears with what spirit they are led, with utter blasphemies, and cursinges
with open mouth, which breath out the poison of slander, and cursed speaking,
which offend the minds of many, with their impure and filthy talk, having no
regard, neither of age nor sex, and which in prayer are either altogether
cold, or else invoke creatures, and are not afraid to ascribe to them, the
glory due to God alone, or else are void of that sure trust and affyaunce,
which they should call upon God with. For these are not the effects of that
holy spirit, but of that malign and unclean spirit. And Christ says, The
mouth speaks of the abundance of the heart. Math. 15.
Therefore the hearts of such are undoubtedly possessed of the unclean
spirit of Satan. Christ therefore does not without a cause confess, that we
shall either be justified or condemned by our sayings. Math. 12.
And David among the precepts of life, numbreth this very gravely as the
chief: Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile.
Add hereunto, Psalm. 34.
that Paul the Apostle commands all scurrilitie of tongue and filthy
communication to be far from the mouths of Christians, Ephesians. 4.5. Collos.
3. Psalm. 141.
and numbreth filthynesse of speech in that roll, for the which the wrath of
God comes upon the chidren of disobedience. Let Christian men therefore have
this prayer of David often in their mouth: Set a watch O Lord before my
mouth, The holy ghost makes men bold in the confession of Christ.
and keep the door of my lips.

Let us consider the other effect of the holy ghost, in the Apostles, which we
may gather of the whole context of the story. The same is a bold confession
of Jesus Christ, deuoyde of all fear. For they begin openly, every where to
preach him to every one that they meet, and with diverse languages they set
forth the great works of God, as they that heard them bear witness. For
they call the preaching of Christ or the Gospel, (...), that is, the great and
wondrous works of God: because that in Christ, the whole majesty of God is
most euidentlye, of all other things seen. And although there are many works
of God, whereby he shows us his nature and power: yet amongst them all this
work that Christ did is the chiefest. For in him the rigor of Gods justice
was seen, who would not have his own son spared, to the end our sins
should be purged with due punishment. This also declares the unspeakable
favor and mercy of God, wherewith he so tenderly loved us, that he had rather
see his own son dye on the cross, than that we all should be condemned.
Herein also appears the infallible truth of God. For he that would not then
deceive us, when his sons life was in hazard, how should he deceive us in
other things. This commends to us besides, the inuinsible omnipotency of
God, which being covered with vile and mortal flesh, was able to vanquishe
Satan, and all his power, together with sin, death, and the gates of hell.
This is an argument of his unsearchable wisdom, whereby he could invent
such a remedy for the redeemyng of mankind, which both served to set forth
the mercy of God, and also satisfied the rigor of Gods justice. To conclude,
whosoever well marketh the things that fell out in Christ, he has evidently
perceived the majesty of God, as far forth as the same may be perceived of
us, living in this prison of the flesh. Therefore the Apostles are truly
said, to have set forth the great woonders of God, when they preached Christ.

Now this other effect of the holy ghost is to be extended to all true
beleuers. For as the Apostles which forsook Christ not many days before, by
reason of fear, and kept themselves close for fear, with the doors shut
about them, as soon as they were endued with the holy ghost, laying all fear
aside, begin to preach Christ openly, and in that City that shed his blood,
and where Christ's greatest enemies bare all the rule, and feared not the
multitude which was thither gathered: so whosoever that spirit inspireth, he
so boldneth them and freeth them from fear, in the confession of Christ, that
they think it their duty to be only occupied in setting forth the glory
of Christ, neither will they yield to any man, which shall go about either by
worldly entisementes, or threats, to bring them from their purpose. It
becomes us to labor for this gift of the spirit, with all our possible
power, since it is evident, that confession by no means can be separated from
true faith. For it is the saying of Christ: Whosoever shall confess me before
men, him will I also confess before my heavenly father. And again: Math. 10.
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words, before this adulterous and
sinful generation, him shall the son of man be ashamed of, when he shall
come in the glory of his father with the holy Angels. Mark. 8.
Out of the which words, Paul took this saying of his: To believe with the
heart justifies, Romans 10.
and to acknowledge with the mouth makes a man safe. These sayings the
triflers of these days ought well to observe, which account the confession of
faith, amongst things indifferent, as though it were sufficient to have faith
in the heart, and no further vtteraunce of it to be required. These men boast
of their faith, but they are utterly ignorant of the force and property
thereof. For the holy ghost is of necessity joined with faith, which neither
is idle himself, nor suffers those whom he enspireth to be idle. And because
he kindles the mind with the love of Christ, men being led forth with that
love, seek Christ only, have him only in their mouth, and follow him only
through fire and water, as they say: therefore it were an absurd thing, that
they should deny the name of Christ, and faith in him which have tasted of his
spirit. And if these men's judgment should prevail, then might we justly
accuse all the Martyrs of folly and madness, which offered themselves to most
cruel torments, whereas by dissembling, they might (as these men would) have
escaped them. Sozomenus in the History Tripe^tite* the book sixth, and third
Chapter.
How much better did Iulianus soldiers, who perceyuyng that through the craft
of the Emperor, they had unawares burned incense to the gods, published
openly how through ignorance they had erred and blemished faith, and thought
best to defend the glory of Christ, which they seem to have prejudiced
through error with sufferyng of death. But these our high wytted men, think
it a matter worthy pardon and commendation, yea to be the greatest point of
wisdom, through their crafty dissimulation, to tread down the faith of
Christ. Surely it were better they were altogether key cold, since they will
not be whot. But because they are but warm, Apoca. 3.
God will spewe them out of his mouth.

Now where we have hitherto spoken of the Apostles, The hearers of the
Apostles, were of all Nations.
and of the things which the holy ghost wrought in them: it is meet at length
we come unto the things that happened among the hearers of the Apostles, of
whom Luke says there was a great multitude by and by gathered together. There
are many nations reckened, and they diverse, and far distant one from an
other, which makes for the setting forth of the miracle, forasmuch as amongst
so far distant nations, there could be no affinity of speech or language.
To speak of the names, situation, original manners of these nations, is not
my meaning in this place, because they may most commodiously be learned out of
the Geographers, books, and tables. And of them all, it is said in general,
that they were amazed and astonished at this miracle, and bold speech of the
Apostles. This is a thing commonly seen where the Gospel is preached. For both
good and bad are afraid at the preaching thereof. But this is an wholesome
fear and amazedness, because they give ear and greedily embrace the doctrine
of salvation. The wicked also are afraid, but their fear ends in a beastly
kind of giddiness and dullness, which afterward they go about to put away
with wicked scoffs and mockeries. In this place we have examples of both these
kinds of amazedness, because Luke writes that both kinds of these hearers
were present. Therefore we will say somewhat of each of them.

First it is said there were certain godly and devout men present, Godly and
religious hearers.
being Jews borne, but dwelling dispersed among diverse nations. For it is
evident by histories, that there were diverse occasions of the Jews dispersyon
in the captivity of Babylon, and from thence hytherwarde. For the greatest
part of them remained amongst the Assyrians, and would not use the liberty
granted them by Cyrus to return home. Those that returned home, the rage of
Antiochus caused to scatter, and the tyranny of others, of whom we omit to
speak any further. In the mean season, they that were most devout, used to
come to Jerusalem at the feast days, to be present at the sacrifices and holy
assemblies instituted of God, by the ministry of Moses. Of which number
there was not a few commen together, to whom Luke ascribes the praise of
godliness and religion, because they used godly meditations in the promises
and precepts of God, and looked for the promised savior of the world, with
constant hope and trust. This is a great argument of Gods goodness, which
amongst the Jews scattered here and there by reason of their sins, Esaias.
1.10. Romans 10.
would reserve some remnauntes of his elect to be saved, as he long before
prophesied by his Prophet. And of these he brings not a few to Jerusalem,
even this day, that the holy ghost is given to the Apostles, that among the
first they might be won unto Christ, by the preaching of the Apostles, as
about the end of this Chapter we shall hear. Now these men are astonished and
wonder at the great miracle of God, which they see showed in the Apostles, and
they extol it with many words, leauyng out nothing that makes to the setting
forth of the same. For they both confess the Apostles are Galileans, and they
bear witness they hear every one their own proper phrase of speech, and
they also reckon up the nations, whose tongues they hear them use. Yet they
stand not still in this bashement, but going further, they seek the end and
use of this matter: saying: What means this? We are taught by the example of
these men, who are meet hearers of the doctrine of the Gospel, and in whom
this doctrine brings forth worthy fruits. They are such which being not
wholly destitute of religion, do humbly marueyle at the miracles of God, and
stick not only in the outward contemplation of them, but earnestly think of
the end and use of them. God suffers not these men's studyes to be frustrate,
whose pleasure it is, that men should come to the knowledge of truth. And we
read that Solomon said: Proverb. 2. Math. 7.
If thou seek after wisdom as after money, thou shall find her. And Christ
says: Seek and you shall find.

Now after these men follow another sort of men, whom Christ calls by the
name of Dogs and Swine, Scoffers, Dogs, and Hogs.
and the scripture in other places calls them scorners and mockers. For Luke
says, there were as well that mocked the Apostles, as those that woondred at
them, saying: These men are full of new wine. The example of these men is set
forth, to show us how far the wickedness of such runs, as have once
purposed to persecute the truth. For they become incurable, and can be
reclaymed with no manner of words or deeds. For with what miracle will they be
moved, whom this miracle can not move, which was the greatest that ever was
wrought amongst men. But they are so far from being moved therewith, that
they take occasion rather to reproach and blaspheme it, and they attribute it
to the detestable vice of drunkenness, which of force they perceive to be the
workyng of the holy ghost. There are diverse examples of this sort apparaunt,
which serve all to this end, to teach us that we be not offended with the
unjust judgments of this world, concerning the truth. For this is always
seen, that the doctrine of the Gospel is to some the savor of life unto
life, 2. Cor. 2. 1. Cor. 1.
and to other some the savor of death unto death. And Paul teaches us, that
Christ crucyfied, is a stumblyng block unto the Jews, and foolishness unto
the Greeks. Therefore let us leave such to the judgment of God, and let us
frame our selves to the doctrine of the Gospel, that it being quickened in our
hearts by the woorkyng of the holy ghost, may bring forth worthy fruits by
the which we may be known to be true believers, and may enjoy the everlasting
promises of the Gospel in Jesus Christ, to whom be blessyng, honor, power
and glory for ever. Amen.

The.xij. Homely.
BUT Peter stepped forth with the eleven and lift up his voice and said: Ye
men of Iewry, and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, be this known unto you, and
with your ears hear my words. For these men are not drunken as ye suppose,
seeing it is but the third hour of the day. But this is that which was spoken
by the prophet Joel. And it shall be in the last days (says God) of my
spirit, I will pour out upon all flesh. And your sons and your daughters
shall prophecy, and your old men shall dream dreams. And on my servants,
and on my handmaydes, I will pour out of my spirit in those days, and they
shall prophecy.
WHen Jesus Christ the son of God was newely borne into the world, and was
brought by Marie his mother into the Church, according to the appointment of
Moses law: the holy and reverend old father Simeon, by inspiration of the
holy ghost, among other things said: Behold, Luke. 2.
this child is set to be the fall and vprisyng again of many in Israel, and
for a sign which is spoken against. Howbeit that which is spoken of Jesus
Christ may be understood of the Gospel of Christ, preached by the Apostles.
For although the doctrine thereof be plain and simple, and shows also the
true way how to attain to salvation: Yet shall men always have diverse
judgments touching the same, and there shall be no small number of such as
shall openly speak against it. This did Esaias the prophet see long ago, who
vtteryng a prophecy of Christ, and his doctrine, begins after this sort:
Who has given credence to our preaching? or to whom is the arm of the Lord
known? Esaias. 53. John. 3.
The Lord declares the cause of all this matter, where he says, this world
can not abide the light, because the works thereof are evil. The scriptures
also set forth many like examples, the end and warnyng of all which, is, that
we should not be offended when the like happen in these days. Among which,
this example that the Apostles proved the first day they received the holy
ghost, and went about to administer their office, is very notable. For where
they were endued with a singular miracle, such as the like had never been hard
of till this day, which was the understanding of all languages, and preached
Jesus Christ in diverse tongues, by reason of their hearers of diverse nations:
by and by the unconstant people were divided into sundry and diverse opinions.
For the more godly sort, woondered at the work of God, and diligently searched
after the meaning thereof. The wicked scorners accused them of drunkenness. So
true it is that Paul says: that Christ seems foolishness to the wise of
this world. But because we spoke hereof in the last Sermon, let us haste to
the explication of this present place, where the faith and courage of the
Apostles is more clearly and evidently to be seen. For they are so little
moved or feared with the wicked slanders of men, yt Peter rather takes
occasion hereof, to speak unto them, and with a fruitful sermon wins many
of them unto Christ.

The effectual op^ration of the holy ghost
Before we go about to expound Peter's Sermon, let us consider what is said of
him, and the other Apostles. Peter (says he,) standing with the eleven, lift
up his voice. They stood therefore without fear, and thought neither to fly,
nor leave their charge, although they were so unjustly judged. And yet there
seemed no small cause of fear and desperation. For what should they think
they could prevail in words with them, whose wicked and froward minds, so
great a miracle as ever was wrought, could not mollify and move? But they
stood vnfeared, and not only remain and tarry by it, but also begin to set
forth Gods quarrel and cause with great boldness. Therefore by their
example we may see how effectual the operation of the holy ghost is. For they
which not long before used handy crafts and occupations, being rude and
unlearned men, are now able to abide the sight of such a multitude, and the
diverse clamours of so unruly a sort, with constant courage. And those whom
before, every light occasion made so afraid, that they durst not profess the
name of Christ, before a few of rascal segons: do now defend his quarrel
most stoutly before a great assembly gathered together of every nation and
degree: neither lack they for the hands of tormentours to make them confess
the truth, but offer themselves freely to defend the same. Learn hereof how
we must try and prove whether the spirit of Christ reign in us yea or no.
For unless this zeal and stout courage to defend Christ and his truth be
seen in us: We shall in vain boast of his spirit. And yet now a days,
amongst those that most brag of his spirit, it is thought a commendable
thing for a man to stop his ears at the horrible blasphemies of wicked men,
uttered against Christ and the truth of his Gospel, as if they were but
Sirenes songs. The Apostles show themselves in this place to be far other
manner of men, amongst whom, Peter moved but with a very light taunt or quip
(as it might seem) begins with bold speech to defend Christ's cause and
the Gospels.

Further, it is not lightly to be passed over, how Peter is said to stand
with the eleven. The Apostl^s take themselves for equalles and fellows.
This is an evident argument of equality, which the Apostles diligently
conserved among themselves. For where Christ put them all but in one office,
which they (now having received the holy ghost) better understood then before:
all that most vain contention about superiority, wherewith before they were
enflamed, is utterly quenched. Therefore Peter sytteth in no throne alone by him
self, the other standing about him, as his servants and guard. He is not
separated from the other, but joined together with them, and shows evidently
that he is but one of their number. And although he alone make the oration, yet
he defends not his own cause, but the common case of them all: so that
herein Peter might seem rather the minister of the residue, than the prince
and chief of them. Away therefore with them that by Peter's example, challenge a
supremacy to themselves in the Church, and are puffed up with pride of the
Persians. Christ gave his Apostles example of humility, which to follow, it
becomes all Christian men, much more them whom he has appointed to be
Sheepeheardes of his Church. Hereunto is to be referred that place of Paul,
which using great obtestations, urges this one thing, that they that will be
accounted the ministers of Christ, must seek after unanimity, and for
humility, which is the mother thereof. Let nothing be done (says he) through
contention or vain glory, but in meekness of mind ^et every man esteem
another better than himself. Look not every man on his own things, but every
man on the things that are other men's. Let the same mind be in you that was
also in Christ Jesus. See the place to the Philippians the second Chapter.

But let us consider Peter's sermon, in which, The argument of Pet^rs s^rmon.
the effect and power of the holy ghost shall more clearly appear. The
beginning hereof is neither affectate nor ambicious. For the doctrine of the
truth is simple, and has no need to be commended with vainness of words,
forasmuch as it commends it self sufficiently, in that it teaches us most
plainly the way of salvation. Wherefore Peter only calling upon the men whom
he purposes to speak unto, says: Ye men of Jury, and all ye that dwell at
Jerusalem, be this known unto you, and with your ears hear my words. He
uses the name of Jews to admonish them both of their ancient glory, and of
their duty. For God in times passed had chosen them, and made them Iehudim,
that is Confessors, by whom he would be celebrated and worshipped. Whereupon
in some place it is said: God is known in Jury. Psalm. 76.
For the same cause he makes mention of Jerusalem, which is often times
called the holy city, to show them that they ought to be moved even with the
holiness of the place, to listen diligently to the things which appertain to
the glory of God, and to their own salvation. For he is not content to be
heard only by the way, as of men that are otherwise occupied, but diligently,
and will have it laid up in their minds. His oration consists of two
parts. The first answers the slander of the wicked scoffers, which accuse
them of drunkenness, a thing which first of all behooued to be put away,
because their sayings should have been of no authority or credit, if they
had been taken for drunkardes and blowboldes. The other part preaches Jesus
Christ, and comprehends all the order of man's salvation.

We are taught by example of the first, Christians ought to put away slander,
and to defend their good name.
that it is lawful to make answer unto slanders, and to defend the
honesty of our name and fame, against slaunderers and detractours. For as
Solomon says: A good name and honest report is to be preferred before much
riches. It behooves them specially which are in the ministry to have a
regard thereof, because the slanders whereby their name and estimation is
impaired, Prou. 22.
does not so much touch their own persons, as God himself, to whose contempt
they specially tend: 1. Tim. 3.
which was the cause that the Apostle would have a Bishop to have the
commendation of those that be abroad also. How much more ought he to take
heed, that he be not contemned of those he has the charge of. But because the
naughtiness of many goes so far, that they are not ashamed to charge the
holy Ministers of God with false crimes, for that they may the more easily make
the doctrine of truth to be hated, and suspected: therefore excusations and
purgations of themselves be both necessary and lawful. For we read that
Christ many times used them, thereby to bring his doctrine out of contempt.
And Paul not so few times as one, plentifully and copiously disputes against
his adversaries, touching his Apostleshippe, his calling, and truth which he
used in the same: because he saw he could not be contemned, but his preaching
of the Gospel also must grow out of regard in the minds of very many.
Therefore Peter begins his ora^^on very well with purging of the crime,
thereby to bring the Apostles out of all suspicion. Neither are they to be
regarded which in such case require sufferance. For Christian patience lets
not but that we may defend Christ and his truth to the uttermost. And they
that be of this opinion, to think all the slanders that are joined with
contempt of the Gospel, ought to be passed over as though we hear them not,
deserve neither the name of pacient nor modest men, but are to be counted
rather warmelings, and cowardly forsakers of the standing, and place that they
are set in.

Howbeit in putting away the crime, he neither uses a bare denial only, nor
waywardly retorteth slander for slander, but proves by arguments that it is
false, that they laid to their charge. The first argument he takes of
circumstance of the time. These be not (says he) as ye suppose drunken, for it
is but the third hour of the day. For the ancient fathers used to account
twelve hours in the day, as may be gathered by the history of the Gospel,
and profane writers also. And because they began their count from the day
spring or rising of the sun, this third hour must be referred to the
morning, and with us in the summer time, it may be called seven or eight a
clock in the forenoone. Peter's argument therefore is of this sort. They that
are given to drunkenness begin to banquet and bouse toward evening, or the
beginning of the night: But where it is now but morning, we cannot of right be
accused of drunkenness. But O happy state of those days, when men might
reason after this sort. For although it be credible, that many were given
as well to drunkenness, as to other vices: yet such was the honesty of that
time, that it was a shame to be drunken, and those that were given to such
drinking, were drunken (as Paul says) in the night, for fear of open shame.
In these days this argument should be of small force and authority, where as
they every where now rule the roast, which rise early to drink wine as Esaias
complayneth of the usage of his days. Esaias. ^.
Yea, there be found amongst the Princes and Magistrates, which forgetting the
saying of Solomon, rise up betymes to banqueting, and riot. ^cclesi. 10.
But what speak I of Princes, seeing there be deuines, not free from this
vice? I remember once, being at the Sessions Imperial, where they went about
to establishe a general peace, and to appoint an uniform religion through
Germany, how I saw a divine of great name and fame, yea the standard bearer
of the contrary part, that said he would not dispute of so weighty a matter
when he was sober. And he was so constant of his word, that I saw him not so
few times as once well whitteled by one of the clock. But would God there
were not to be found, even among them of our own profession, which being
infected with this public and common evil of all Germany, were not given to
much to this quassing. And surely if there were none other argument apparaunt,
this one were enough, to reprove the corrupt manners of these days. For who
can deny but the days of Noah, and Lot be amongst us, where with one mouth,
all men talk of their cups, and to be drunken, is accounted with all states,
and degrees, a commendable, and an honorable matter. This vice we may thank,
not only for corruption of good manners, but also for the overthrow of justice
and laws, and the decay of religion, and oppression of the liberty of our
country.

But return we to Peter's Sermon, The place of Joel, second Chapter.
who takes an other argument of things spoken long before, to acquit the
Apostles of suspicion of drunkenness. For where even the good also might
justly marvel, how unlearned men should suddenly come to speak such diverse
languages, and to be expert in them, and the wicked and mockers imputed it to
drunkenness: it was needful the truth of the matter should be more openly
declared. Therefore Peter teaches, that this was the work of the holy ghost,
the sending of whom he proves by the.2. of Joel, to have been promised long
before in the kingdom of the Messiah. This Joel prophesied in the time of
Esaias, and Micheas, and forewarned the people of the wars that Sennacherib
should make against them. And least the godly should despair, and think that
God had left off to care for his people any more, he comfort them, and
shows how Israel should not quite be destroyed, because the Messiah should
be borne of that people, whom God had ordained to be the Savior and redeemer
of mankind, and for the more comfort of them, describes in few words, the
kingdom of the Messiah. Which place Peter the more diligently and at large
cyteth, for that he would accuse them of doltishnesse, and lack of wit,
which ascribed the most manifest effects of the holy ghost, to drunkenness.
For this was a most filthy error, not to mark and observe so great a
benefit of God, and that promised so long agone, and most diligently
described, but to rail at it. This place gives us three things to consider.
The first prophecieth of the plentiful and liberal pouring out of the holy
ghost, which should be in the time of Christ. The other describes the
troublesome estate of this world in the kingdom of Christ, insomuch that it
reckons up the punishments wherewith God will revenge the unthankfulness and
incredulity of the world. The third declares the manner of salvation, and
shows the way, how men may escape safely all dangers. But at this present
we will declare only the first part.

This the Lord in these words utters by the Prophet. The promise of the
holy Ghost.
And it shall come to pass in the latter days (says the Lord) that I will
pour out of my spirit upon all flesh. And your sons and your daughters
shall prophecy. And your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall
dream dreams. And on my servant, and on my handmaydens, I will pour out of
my spirit in those days, and they shall prophecy. These words are by
themselves plain and evident enough, yet are they more deeply to be
considered, because of the things comprehended in them, serving to our
instruction.

The first thing to be observed in them is, that where the Prophet prophecieth
of the kingdom of Christ, The gift of the holy Ghost, is the greatest gift
that GOD has given us.
amongst the great and singular benefits bestowed on us by Christ, he chiefly
commends the gift of the holy ghost. The cause thereof seems to me was, not
for that the holy Prophet either was ignorant of other things, or despised
them: but because next after Christ, there can nothing be given us of God more
excellent, than that spirit of Christ, which here is spoken of. For our
heavenly father has enclosed in Christ his son, all the treasures of his
grace, and of our salvation. But men are regenerated by his holy spirit, to
become the sons of God, and heirs of the goods which Christ has purchased
us. Which regeneration is so necessary for us, that unless we be renewed by
the same, we cannot (as Christ testifies) see the kingdom of God. John. 3.
The same spirit illuminateth our minds, to understand the mysteries of the
kingdom of heaven, and kindles in us the desire of them. Without the which
light, the natural man cannot perceive the things belonging to the spirit of
God. 1. Cor. 2.
This spirit is a comforter, by whom we being encouraged, are able to abide,
and overcome whatsoever adversity in this world, betydeth us for Christ's
sake. And he does not only the part of a comforter, but is also a most
faithful counsaylour. For he tells us what to do, and when we be in
perplexity and doubt, he lights us the torch of truth, by whose conducting,
we escape the dangers of faith, and ofsaluation. Beside all this, he is the
earnest, John. 14. and.16.
and sure pledge of our redemption and salvation. For as Jesus Christ taking up
into heaven the flesh that he took of us, would have it there, to be a gage
of our salvation: so he puts his spirit in our hearts, in steed of a
pledge, to imprint the confidence of salvation in us, and to arm us strongly
against temptations. Wherefore he is called of Paul, Romans 8. Galath. 4.
the spirit of adoption, because that being regenerated by him, we are assured
by his testimony, that we be the sons and heirs of God. Therefore it is not
without a cause that the Prophet, takes the gift of this holy spirit amongst
all other, most to be commended. We are also here taught, what we ought chiefly
to do in the kingdom of Christ. In which place we may see the diverse and
noisome errors of men, which while they follow carnal things only, and
under the color of Christ, gape after worldly goods, use many times to deny
Christ in their life, whom they profess with their mouth. And to these shall
be joined those, to whom hereafter it shall be said: Math. 7.
Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom
of heaven, but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven. Christ's
kingdom is a spiritual kingdom, and not of this world. Therefore let us
desire the gifts of the spirit, wherewith if we be furnished, Math. 6.
the other things that we have need of shall come of their own accord.

Moreover, it is convenient we see the manner of this promise, and to whom it
apperteyneth. After what sort and to whom the holy ghost is given.
He declares the manner in this one word of pouring out, whereby he promises a
large and plentiful grace of the spirit. As touching the persons to whom he
will give it, he treats more at large saying: I will pour out of my spirit
upon all flesh. Therefore this is an universal promise. But he adds for
expositions sake, sons and daughters, young men and old, to teach us that
there is no difference in the kingdom of Christ, either of age or sex. For in
Christ (as Paul says) there is neither Jew nor Gentyle, Galath. 3.
neither bond nor free, neither man nor woman. In the mean season, least any
might think that the holy spirit was given to good and bad alyke, God
restrayneth his promise to his servants and handmaydens, to the end we
should understand that it ought universally to be expounded of them. For where
he is the spirit of adoption, he can be received of none, but of them who^ God
does vouchsafe to acknowledge for his sons. But they be sons of God which
acknowledge him to be their father, and call upon him, which serve him, which
worship him, which please him, and honor him. And although they cannot
perform the things that belong to the sons of God, before they be
regenerated, by this spirit, through the free benefit of God, (and
therforethey be oftentimes unknown to us, before we see the effects of the
holy ghost in them:) yet it is evident, that none be partakers of this spirit,
but such as the Lord takes for his. And he knows who be his, and so knows
them, 2. Tim. 2. John. 10.
that no man can take them out of his hand.

And here by the way, comes the difference of the old and new Testament to
be considered. For although one and the same Christ, The difference of the old
and new testament.
one and the same faith, and way of salvation, one and the same spirit is set
forth in both of them: yet there may be perceived no little difference: wherein
easily appears how much greater our dignity and felicity is, than theirs
of the old Testament. This appears first in the number of the faithful, and
next in the manner of teaching. For in the old Testament it is plain, there
were but a small number of worshippers, and the knowledge of salvation seemed
to be compassed within the bounds of the people of Jury. For the words of
God be well known, which he says to the Israelites: Ye shall be mine own
above all Nations. For all the earth is mine. Ye shall be unto me a kingdom
of priests, and an holy people. Again: Exodus 19. Amoz 3.
You only have I accepted of all the Nations on the earth. For which cause
sake, me thinks that is also spoken in the Psalms. In Iewrie is God known,
his name is great in Israel. At Salem is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling in
Syon. Psalm. 76. and.147.
He shows his word unto Jacob: his statutes and ordinances unto Israel.
He has not dealt so with any Nation, neither have the heathen knowledge of
his laws. But in the new Testament, the spirit of the Lord is poured upon
all flesh, and the way of salvation is stretched to the farthest ends of the
earth. There it is said, that they shall come from the East, and from the
West, that shall sit in the kingdom of God with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
Math. 8.
There the Apostles receive a commandment, to preach the Gospel to all
Nations. There Peter learneth us how, Marc. 16.
there is no respect of persons with God, but in all Nations they that fear
him, and work righteousness, are accepted of him. Acts. 10.
And here is fulfilled that which was spoken before by the Prophet: That the
barren and desolate, should have more children, Isa. 54.
than she that was married* Again, though there be singular examples, of the
faithful of the old Testament, the like whereof you shall hardly find in
these days: yet is it plain, that the way and mean of our salvation, is now
much more manifestly taught, than it was wont to be in the old Testament.
Before the law was published, there were in deed large and liberal promises,
but obscure enough, if we way them that lived in those days, which saw them
not as then fulfilled. In the law our salvation was shadowed with signs and
figures, but such as whereof many took occasion to establishe the
righteousness of works. Then followed the Prophets, and they declare the
mysteryes of Christ, somewhere darckely, and somewhere more plainly and
openly. And the things which seem to us most evident, in their writings,
seemed without doubt to them in those days, obscure and dark enough. But in
the new Testament, the veil of darcknesse is rent, and that light brought in,
which being come, John. 1.
gives light to all men in the world. In the Gospel, the things are plainly
taught, which before time were hidden and secret. And there fishers and
Publicanes see and hear those things, Math. 13.
which many Prophets and just men desired in times past to hear and see. As
touching this plentiful and bounteous gift of the holy ghost, and true light
thereof, Joel also prophecieth. The end and use of all these things serve to
provoke us to consider our dignity, and Gods liberality toward us, to
celebrate the goodness of God, and to show our selves thankful for his gifts,
which he so merciful a lord, so bou^tifully has bestowed upon us.

The effect of the holy ghost is c^mmon to all believers.
Last of all, Joel rehearses the effects of the holy ghost, which are common
to all them that believe. In which place he makes mention of prophecy, the
gift whereof he says both young men and old men, sons and daughters shall
receive. By prophecy, we suppose ought to be understood, not so much the
gift of telling things to come, as the true and certain knowledge of the
mysteries of salvation, and chiefly the understanding of the old Testament, 1.
Cor. 14.
according to the exposition of Paul which is to be seen. He adds by way of
exposition, visions and dreams, because that by those means God used in times
past, to reveal his will unto the Prophets, as may be seen in the book of
Numbers. 12. Chap. For the Prophets use to set forth the mysteryes of Christ,
with certain phrases of speech, such as were known and in use with all men
in their days. Examples whereof may be seen every where of such as read
their wrytings. So by this word prophesying, he promises the true knowledge
or understanding of Gods will, and that salvation that is common to all men in
the kingdom of Christ, which also we read is promised in other places. Esaias
verily says, that the earth shall be full of the knowledge and understanding
of God. Esaias. 11.
And the Lord says. I will plant my law in the inward parts of them, and
write it in their hearts: Hiere. 31.
and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. And from thenceforth
shall no man teach his neighbor or his brother, and say: Know the Lord. But
they shall all know me from the lowest unto the highest, says the Lord. etc.
John. 6. Esaias. 54.
And Christ out of the Prophet testifies, that they shall be all taught of
the Lord. Therefore the principal effect of the holy ghost, and which is
common to all men, is a sure knowledge of the will of God, and an understanding
of salvation, and the mysteryes of the kingdom of God, and (as far as is
requisite for every man) an intelligence both of the old and new Testaments.
By this therefore we may judge what they be, that set naught by the knowledge
of the will of God, and where they understand it not of themselves, will yet be
taught of no man, whom this one place may prove to want the spirit of
Christ. To this may be joined the Lords over the faith, and the Tyrants of the
Church, which drive the Christian people from the reading of the Scripture, and
dare call that general benefit of the holy ghost, which the Prophet so
highly commends, the beginning and seed of heresies and errors. It is our
parts (brethren) to acknowledge the gift of Gods grace, and to embrace the
spirit of Christ, that we being borne again by his operation, illuminated and
made meet to all good works, may enjoy the eternal inheritance of the
kingdom of heaven, with Jesus Christ, the son of God, to whom be blessing,
honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.xiij. Homely.
And I will show woonders in heaven above, and tokens in the earth beneath,
blood and fire, and the vapoure of smoke. The Sun shall be turned into
darcknesse, and the Moon into blood, before that great and notable day of the
Lord come. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name
of the Lord shall be saved.
THe Apostle Peter drives his first sermon, which he made at Jerusalem, after
he had received the holy ghost, to that end, that the Apostles observed in all
their sermons, that is to say, to bring his hearers to the knowledge of Christ,
and to win them to the salvation that is in him. Which thing, that he might
with the more ease, bring to pass, he by and by, in the beginning is well
ware, that his doctrine be not rejected, before it be known and heard. For he
diligently before hand, answers all those things, which might give his
hearers any cause or occasion to mysiudge or suspect it. Among these there were
some godly and devout: yet more that were ungodly, untoward and obstinate. And
the religious were holden with ignorance, so that they were astonyed at so
great a miracle, and being in doubt, could not tell what to judge or think of
the matter. But the other were in far worse case and taking: for with cauils
and slanders they mock and delude all the meaning of the miracle, accusing the
Apostles of drunkenness, and those that heard them, of foolishness.
Therefore it was needful some present remedy should be had, which he took
out of the second Chapter of Joel. For by that place he teaches, that here
is nothing done either of error or affection of man, but that all this doing is
the work of God, and promised of God long agone by the Prophets. And he is
very diligent in cyting the words of the Prophet, because the place not only
served to confute their reproach, but also greatly made for Peter's purpose.
This place, as I said in the Sermon before going, has three members or
parts. The first comprehen^deth the bounteous and most liberal promise of the
holy ghost: The second describes the troublous state of the world, which
should continue even to the end thereof in the kingdom of Christ, and so
rehearses the punishments wherewith God would revenge the contempt of his
son, and the Gospel, which thing served marvelously to make the Jews
afraid, that they should not think they should escape scot free, for
contemning of Christ and his Gospel. The third shows the way how to avoid
all these evils and mischiefs. The first part we declared yesterday. It
remains that we now set forth the two later.

And because I see there is a doubt and controversy touching this great and
notable day of the Lord, Which, the great day of the Lord is.
whereof the Prophet makes mention in this place: First, it seems good to me
to show my judgment concerning the same. There be that understand it to be
the day of Christ's resurrection, and the signs and woonders which are here
prophesied should come, they expound to be the things that happened in the
death and resurrection of Christ. Surely their sense and meaning is godly.
But because of the prophecies of Jesus Christ, which he utters almost in the
same words concerning the state of the later times, the end of this day is
farther to be extended. Other think the whole time of the world after
Christ's birth is comprehended in the signification of this day. But me
thinks the glorious and notable day of the Lord when he shall judge the
whole world, may here be understood. For where he had made mention of the
later time a little before, he says the state and condition of the time which
he now describes, should continue until the end of that time drew near when
Christ appearing in the glory of the father, and pronouncing a final sentence
upon all flesh, should appoint a full and absolute bliss to his faithful
deuoyde of all sorrows, dangers and griefs, which they should enjoy both in
body and soul.

The use of the prophecies concerning ye troubles of the later days.
It behooued therefore that this troublesome state of the world which should
always remain after the birth of Christ, and after he had fulfilled the
work of our redemption, should be thus diligently described, least any man
after this great promise of the holy ghost, and favor of God, should promise
himself to have all things in this world in peace and safety, with which
error we read the Chiliastes in times past were bewitched. Chiliastae were
such as imagined that Christ and they after the general doom should reign
personally on earth 1000. years.
And there want not in these days which hope for an universal, and stable
peace and tranquillity ofall things under Christ, which because they see not
as yet come to pass, they begin to suspect all that is written of our faith
and religion. They draw the cause of their error out of the Prophets
descriptions of the kingdom of Christ, such as both otherwheres and also in
Esaias. xj. and lxv. Chapters are extant. But there are other places of Scripture
which ought to have been joined with them, where we are ab undantlye taught,
that we ought to look for no such thing in this world. Psalm. 110.
For David says: Christ shall reign in the midst of his enemies. And
Christ denies that his kingdom is of this world. He every where
admonishes his children of the cross and bitter afflictions, John. 18.
which he would have them prepared for. John. 16.
In the world (says he) you shall have tribulation. They are therefore
ridiculous in very deed, which contrary to Christ's saying, promise as well
others as themselves, ease, peace, and tranquillity in this world. And yet we
deny not the things that are read in the Prophets, touching a peaceable state
of Christ's kingdom. But we understand them partlye of the tranquillity of
the mind, and of the spiritual joy of the faithful, and partly of the
faithful only, and of the conversation and fellowship which they only have
one with another. For so they be truly at rest and certain of their
salvation, and dwell safely among them, who (where before they might have
seemed Woolues and Lions) being converted to Christ, are become most meke
sheep and lambs. And yet many stryfes and afflictions they shall abide,
Math. 24.
which (as Christ plainly admonishes us) shall be so much the more grievous,
Marck. 13.
how much nearer the universal redemption of the godly approaches: which when
he comes shall be clean dispatched. Luke. 21.
But to come at length to the words of the Prophet, two things in them seem
chiefly to be considered, whereof one is the troublesome and unhappy state of
the world, which he says should be after Christ his coming in the flesh:
the other concerns the causes of the evils and calamities which serve not a
little as well to comfort us, as to instruct us.

The state of the later days shall be very troublous.
He describes the state of the later days in these words: I will show
woonders in the heavens above, and tokens in the earth beneath, blood and fire,
and the vapor of smoke. The sun shall be turned into darckenesse, and the
moon into blood. He makes mention of strange woonders, which because they
be tokens of things to come, in considering of them, we must also comprehend
in our mind the calamities and miseries which they portende. For it is not
Gods property or custom to delude the minds of men with vain and idle
sights. And Jesus Christ in the gospel, repeating the same things, makes
mention of afflictions also, whereof these be signs and prognostications. Ye
shall (says he) hear of wars, and tidings of wars. For nation shall rise
against nation, and Realm against Realm, Math. 24.
and there shall be pestilence and hunger, and earthquakes in all places. The
Prophet proponeth diverse kinds of woonders, to make us the more attent. He
says there shall be woonders in heaven, in the number whereof, blasing
stars, firebrands, flashings of light, flying Dragons, long stars like
swords and darts, and what so ever such like may be accounted, which
although the Astrologers number amongst the things proceeding of natural
causes: yet this place sufficiently teaches us that they be signs and tokens
of calamities to follow. Furthermore he says, there shall be also signs
upon the earth, amongst the which, earthquakes ought to have the first place:
whereby it is manifest great alterations of things have many times been
portended. Hereunto appertain the strange inundations and ouerflowings of
waters, monstrous births of children, the uncouth voice of beasts, springs of
waters running with blood, the strange fruits of trees and plants, with
infinite others like, examples whereof we have both in hystories and daily
experience. But the Prophet returning again to heaven, makes peculiar
mention of the sun and moon, whose brightness he says shall be obscured
with horrible darkness, and the terrible sight of blood. The meaning of all
which, is, that in the later day such shall be the countenance of the
world, that whither soever we turn our eyes, there shall appear the
horrible signs of Gods wrath and his judgments, even in those creatures, the
use whereof has been chiefly to set forth the goodness of God, and to
comfort man, amongst which, we take the sun and moon to be the chief.
Moreover, if we compare the things here spoken with hystories, we shall see
that all these things in sundry ages have many ways been fulfilled. But what
need we run to hystories? where in our own days we have seen many
examples hereof, and may every day still see new. What age ever was there
since the beginning of the world, wherein so many blasing stars have been
seen, as has appeared within these.xxxiij. years? I speak not of spears,
swoords, darts, horses, sights of men, yea armed hosts, Lions, and many other,
which having been seen in the Clouds, have feared the minds of the lookers
on. Who knows not of the ^arthquakes and horrible inundations of waters? The
monstrous birth both of men and beasts brought forth within the space of
this.xxx. years, no man can easilye number. Blood has sproong out of the
earth, and run, not in so few places as one. We have seen in the ears of
corn marvelous and strange sights. The bearded grapes, and clusters having
tuftes of hear growing out of them, have vpbraided the Germans with their
drunkenness, as it were men strong to drink wine, as the Prophet says.

Here we must learn the continual usage of God which never punishes man
before he give warning thereof by woonders, The use of woonders.
and that their seeing of these woonders should not be in vain, he joins
most times his word to the same. For where he would have men to be saved, he
does nothing (as the Prophet says) except he reveal his secrets before,
Amoz. 3.
unto his servants the prophets. This may be proved by the examples of all
ages, from the first beginning of the world. Noah the preacher of
righteousness went before the flood, by whose preaching the world might have
been brought to repentance. Loath was sent by God unto the Sodomites, by whose
words and examples they might have been admonished. The Egyptians beside Moses
and Aaron saw such horrible and monstrous tokens, that if there had been any
sense or understanding in them, it might have mollified their hearts. Rachab the
harlot testifies that the Chanaanites had warning before of the destruction to
come. No man but meanly traueyled in the wrytings of the Prophets, is
ignorant how many and faithful aduertisements went before the captivity of
Babylon. Concerning the signs and woonders that went before the last
destruction of Jerusalem, and people of Jury, Josephus and Egesippus have
written most strange and monstrous things. I let pass the things contained in
other histories, the truth whereof was always tried by the effect falling out.
By these let us learn to know the goodness of God, and to judge of the
woonders and strange signs of our days, least if we (like blind and deaf
folk) neglecting them, be found despisers of God, and suffer grievous
punishment for our contempt.

But some man may marvel what should be the cause of so unfortunate and
troublous a state, The causes of the troublous estate of the later days.
seeing the son of God appeared in the flesh, to make a love day between
God and us, at whose birth the Aungelles were heard to sing: Glory be to God
on high, peace upon earth, and unto men a good will. Where now God may seem
more angry and more offended with the earth, than before his sons
incarnation. Surely hereof in times past, the enemies of Christian profession,
took occasion to inueigh against Christ's religion: as after whose birth, a
whole sea of mishaps burst into the earth, and ouerflowed all mankind: whose
slanders Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine, Arnobius, and diverse of the ancient
writers have gravely and learnedly answered and confuted. Yea, we shall find
some among the professors of Christianity, whom the consideration of these
evils does not a little dismay. Therefore to mark and search out the cause of
these evils, is neither unprofitable nor superfluous, but two ways to be
observed. For it is to be searched as well in the godly as the ungodly: and so
it shall easily appear that the cause of these calamities is in us, and that
the Christian faith and Christ himself is in no fault. In the ungodly needs
no great inquisition to find the cause, whereas they daily commit many things
which deserve the wrath and punishment of God. For either there reigns in
them the life of Epicure, and a careless contempt of God and all holiness, or
else superstition and idolatry. Both these engender an hatred to the truth,
and stir up persecutions against the ministers of Christ, which by the light
of the truth, reprove licentious living, and accuse superstition. These things
reign in our days, yea they swarm in every place, that there is no man so
blind but may see them, nor none so impudent that can deny the^. We may hear
euerywhere mockers, which (as Peter warned us) with pretty taunts can deride the
day of judgment, and call the resurrection of the dead into question, yea
flatly deny it. And they that can bridle their tongues, yet with
licentiousness of life testify, that they are stained with the same impiety.
Against these the professors of religion set themselves, but being
superstitious and given to gross ydolatrie, they fight for their cold
ceremonies, for man's traditions, for the painted righteousness of their own
works, with no less ungodliness and waywardness, than the Jews in times
passed strove for the righteousness of the law. Both these kinds of men
consent in oppugning the truth, as once we read the Phariseys dalied with the
Herodians against Christ. And the matter is not concluded in words and
arguments, but with chains, imprisonments, haulter, fire, and sword. And
ungodliness in many places is gone so far, that there is counted no more
heinous offense, than purely to confess Christ, and boldlye to defend the
verity of the Gospel, and the synceritie of Christian faith. These things
because they are daily committed, it needs not further to search the cause of
the calamities that are daily seen, considering how the same wickednesses
caused Israel in times past to be led captive to Babylon, and afterward
utterly to be rooted up. Read the second book of Chronicles.xxxvj. Math. 23.
Luc. 19. Chap.

But I know (thou will say) the wicked are auctors of evil, and that their
doings deserve more grievous punishments, than they yet feel. The godly
also are cause of calamities
But what makes this to the godly and sincere worshippers of Christ, who are
wrapped in the same calamities, and whom we see are the first that feel the
smart of them? Ought the impiety and frowardness of the ungodly to prejudice
them? Howbeit we must in the godly not only consider the truth of their
doctrine, sincerity of faith, and integrity of religion, but also the
imperfection and vices which cleave unto them by reason of the flesh, and then
it shall appear, that they are not faultlesse, and suffer not for others
faults. For in them many times the desires of this world show themselves, and
not seldom times under the cloak of Christ, they seek with the sons of
Zebedaeus their private honors, dignities and riches. Therefore it is
necessary that they also do drink of the cup of Christ, and being exercised
with afflictions, learn that the kingdom of Christ is not of this world.
Furthermore oftentimes, the godly are to bold and confident, through
security, whereof they slip into many enormities, which thing (as is
manifest) happened to David, and many others. Therefore it behooued that that
carelessness and security should be shaken of with affliction, and with the
Cross, least they also should grievously offend, or that when they had
offended, they might learn to say with David: Psalm. 119.
It is good for me that I have been in trouble, that I may learn thy
statutes. My soul melts away for very heaviness, comfort thou me according
to thy word. And because God considers the contrite in heart, and Christ
calls them that traueyle and are heavy laden unto him: it is necessary we be
brought down by afflictions, that when we feel our selves burdened and heavy
laden, we may go the gladlyer unto Christ. Besides this: The servant that
knows his masters will, and does it not, shall be the sorer beaten. Luc. 12.
And if we would judge or accuse our selves, 1. Cor. 11.
we should not be judged or condemned of the Lord. But because most times we
flatter our selves, and wink at other men's faults, Gods judgments are
necessary, to show that he is no favorer or allower of sin. Last of all,
the glory of God requires that where he punishes the wickedness of the
world, judgment should begin at his house, as the Apostle says, least he
might seem to bear and allow in his own folk, that he severely punishes
in other. 1. Pet. 4.
If we consider well these things, we shall have no occasion to complain or
find fault with God. Great comfort we may gather hereof, if we mark the
difference betwixt the afflictions of the godly and ungodly. For the one,
because they neither can nor will repent, have no end of their afflictions,
but eternal torments in hell remain for them. But to the other, they be as
the rod of a father, wherewith they are quickened to amend their lives, to be
zealous in faith, to be fervent in godliness, and to be desirous of Gods
word, and the end and use of them, is that none should perish with the
unhappy world. 1. Cor. 11.
So the things that are written touching the troublesome state and calamities
of the later times, serve for all ages. For they fear the wicked with
threats, that they may understand what to hope for because of their contempt
of Christ and his Gospel. And the godly be admonished by them of their
duty, and having warning of his will, strengthen their minds against the
offense that rises of such adversity. But return we to the place of the
Prophet.

The way how to escape these calamities.
In the third and last part of this place, he shows a remedy against these
calamities, and the way how we may escape and avoid them. And Peter would not
omit that part, because the Jews might see, that the same way of salvation in
times past was showed by the Prophets, which he now preached. And this is a
great argument of Gods goodness, which in the midst of adversities so
favorably shows the way how to avoid them. For look how terrible the
things are which go before the state of the later days: so pleasant and
comfortable are the things that follow after. For the Prophet says: And it
shall come to pass that whosoever calls on the name of the Lord, Romans 10.
shall be safe. This is a most notable and very euangelike sentence, the which
Paul also used to beat down the righteousness of the law and of works.
And in this present place Peter takes occasion of the same sentence, more at
large to discourse of Christ. We will briefly speak of such things as are to
be considered in the same.

Salvation consists in invocation.
First he shows that there is salvation and deliuerye by invocation, which the
Scriptures with great consent teach to be due unto God only. Ergo, in our
selves there is no hope of salvation or deliuerye. For if there were any
strength in our selves to save us by, it were an absurd thing to seek
salvation otherwheres. And the salvation also which is showed us to be in God
without our selves, we cannot attain unto through our own power and ability.
For we have need to use invocation and prayer, which are due to none but to
him, in whose mere kindness and liberality we put our trust. For he that is
persuaded he has deserved any thing, uses no entreaty or prayers, but law
and right, in requiring those things which are due unto him. It is manifest
therefore that both salvation is to be found in God only, and that the same
is the mere and free gift of his liberality, and that we must labor to
obtain the same by prayers and continual invocation.

This done, he sets forth the manner how we should invoke him, wherein
many are perplexed and much in doubt. The manner of invocation.
For there be some that understand well enough how all salvation is in God
only. But they suppose by reason of their sins, they are debarred from the
majesty of God, and therefore either they abstain altogether from invocation,
as unprofitable and superfluous, or else they exercise it to coldely, and
without faith. But to these, the Prophet proponeth not only the Lord, but the
name of the Lord to be inuocated. But what name of the Lord shall we say this
is? Is it any peculiar name consisting of letters and sillables, whereby (as we
see in the names of other things) the nature of God, his disposition, and all
his properties be comprised? I will think no man so simple, as that he
supposes the everlasting, incomprehensible, infinite and unspeakable essence
and nature of God, can be comprehended in a few of letters. Therefore that is
called the name of God, after the manner of men, that sets forth God to us to
be known, as far as is possible. And hereto are to be referred whatsoever
things are spoken of his majesty, verity, justice, goodness, wisdom,
grace, power, mercy, and all his whole nature. And because these things be
most evidently seen in Christ only, which is the express image of God the
father, and the brightness of his glory coeternall with him and
consubstantiall, therefore he may well be called the name of God, in whom all
invocation ought to be made. For he was seen in the flesh, and has revealed
to us whatsoever things are meet for us to know concerning God. John. 1.
God also has made him an Aultare and propitiatory for us, in whom we offer
to him prayers, and all kind of worship. To him has God borne witness from
heaven saying: Math. 3.17.
This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased. And by him is there an
entrance for us unto the throne of grace, as the Apostle teaches. Hebr. 4.
Therefore all that will invoke God, are sent unto him, both that they might
believe God to be such an one, as he is declared in Scripture to be, and also
desire of him to be saved, and heard for Jesus Christ's sake. This reprooueth
our righteousness, and teaches us that we are void of all merits before
God. For if in our prayers we have need of another help, which (unless they
be offered by Christ) are not allowed of God, what hope shall be left us all
our life after, if Christ be taken from us? But because he is comprehended by
faith, it is meet our prayers should proceed of faith, and of such a faith,
as certainly believes that we for Christ's sake are accepted with God. Hereof
sprang that ancient usage of the Church, where all prayers for the most part
are concluded with the name of Jesus Christ. For the holy fathers well knew
the saying of Christ: John. 14.
No man comes to the father but by me. Also this same does recreate with
marvelous comfort, men's minds that are afraid with the conscience of their
sins. For although we see our selves such as are unworthy whom God should do
for, and whom he should mercifully hear: yet a most certain and an
infallible trust rises in our minds, which makes us to think that Jesus
Christ is ours, and that we shall be heard of God, because of our faith in
him. And this is that true invocation which Christ himself teaches to consist
in the spirit and in truth. For faith springing in us of the holy ghost,
John. 4.
leads our minds and spirits into the contemplation of God. And because it
breeds in us a sure trust of the grace of God, our prayers cannot be feyned,
but are a most true testimony of our faith and hope.

Wherefore the Prophet promises us a most excellent fruit in them, The
fruit of invocation.
when he says: that he shall be saved that calls upon the name of the Lord.
Where we may note a double consolation. First it is an universal promise which
promises salvation to all them that call upon the name of the Lord. Ergo, here
is a door of salvation opened to all men, from entering into which, we are not
kept back, neither by poverty, nor infamy of the world, ^^yther by diseases,
nor cruel torments, neither by sex nor age, neither by difference of nation
or kindred. Nay, we cannot be put by, neither by sin nor death, because in
Christ we have expiation of all our sins, and he has overcome death and the
gates of hell. Furthermore, salvation is absolutely promised, so that we see
they have all things necessary to salvation that call upon the name of the
Lord. Whereupon we gather that they which feel no taste nor comfort of
salvation by their prayers, call not upon the name of the Lord, that is, they
are destitute of faith in Christ, which faith will not suffer our prayers to
be made in vain. And this is the only way of salvation which the holy
scriptures teach us euerywhere. And Peter thought to make mention hereof in
this place, to the intent the Jews might understand how they could none other
ways be delivered from the imminent dangers, and the horrible judgment of
God, but by casting away all trust in their own works and righteousness, and
turning unto the throne of grace, by the faith that is in Jesus Christ. The
same must we also in these days mark and consider. Whatsoever troubles or
calamities the Lord or his Apostles foretold should happen in the later
days, they urge and assault us on every side. The wysest and greatest men
consult in every place, how to get a way and remedy to be saved. And the
unhappy success of things in these days, teach us how vain all counsayles
be that proceed of man's deuyse. Let us therefore hold this way, which as it
is the most simplest and playnest, and delivers us from many cares and
troubles: so is it infallible and certain, because it stays and rests upon
the promise of God, which no force of the world can ouerturne. Wherefore, let
us acknowledge our sins, and in them let us seek the causes of the evils
which we suffer. Let us use the acknowledging of our sin, to beat down the
affiaunce in our own righteousness. And then turning unto God, let us call
upon his holy name, who surely will hear us, and deliver us for his names
sake in Jesus Christ, to whom be blessing, honor, power, and glory for ever.
Amen.

The.xiiij. Homely.
YE men of Israel hear these words. Jesus of Nazareth a man approved of God
among you, with miracles, woonders and signs, which God did by him in the
midst of you, (as ye your selves know) him have you taken by the hands of
unrighteous persons, after he was delivered by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God, and have crucified and slain him, whom God has raised
up, and loosed the sorrows of death, because it was impossible that he should
be holden of it.
WE have heard the first part of Peter's Sermon already, wherein he clears
the Apostles from the crime of drunkenness, and teaches how they were endued
with the holy ghost. He uses in the place of demonstration, the testimony of
the Prophet Joel, which he so rehearses, that therewith he declares the
horrible punishments remaining for the contemners of the Gospel, and teaches
the only way of remedy and escape to be the faith in Jesus Christ: which
things because they were sufficient to fear them that were not altogether
incurable: the Apostle passes to the other part, where he preaches Christ,
whom of late we said was the chief mark that the Apostles shot at in all
their doctrine. And least his preaching might be in vain, he so proposes the
matter, that he stirs up their minds with the conscience of their sins,
to the end that being feared therewith, they might with the more fervent faith
and greediness embrace Jesus Christ, in whom they heard salvation was
preached. And his chief study is to be short and plain, least any man might
think, the knowledge of Christ, and the way of salvation contained therein, to
be like the dreams of the Philosophers, which neither can be explicated in
infinite volumes, nor be discussed by any disputations, nor fully be
comprehended of any man. For he compriseth the chief articles of our faith in
few words: which whosoever understands, he has both attained to the
knowledge of Christ, and to all the way of salvation. For first, he descrybeth
the person of Christ, and teaches us what he is and how we should know him.
Secondly, he entreats of the passion and death of Christ. Thirdly, he
declares his resurrection. Of these three we mean to say so much as his
spirit shall give us grace.

In speaking of Christ's person, he handles all things prudently, The person
of Christ.
and circumspectly, least they that were as yet weak, might take occasion of
offense. For when he had gotten them to be attent, by a short kind of
exhortation, he brings them by little and little, to the knowledge of Christ,
saying: Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God amongst you, by miracles,
signs and woonders, which God wrought by him in the midst of you, as ye your
selves know* etc. In the which words he pronounces of Christ two things.
First, that he was a man: for he calls him one of Nazareth, which name he had
of Nazareth a City of Galiley, where he was brought up, as appears by the
story of the Gospel. But because this seemed not sure and strong enough, he
calls him Virum, that is to say, a man, which name agrees to none but him
that is a very man in deed. And Christ is truly called a man, because as Paul
says, he takes on him no Angels nature, Heb. 2.
or other heavenly essence, but the sede of Abraham. Furthermore, least any man
might take him for some common person, he makes a difference between him and
other, adding: approved of God amongst you with miracles. etc. And although
he purposed to teach the divinity of Christ, yet he prudently as yet,
dissembleth the name of God, which would have seemed very strange in the ears
of the Jews. He would have them by his deeds to learn that he was very God,
whom hitherto they thought to be only but a rascal and common person. It is
as much as if he should say: I preach unto you Jesus of Nazareth, which many
of you judge to be but a man only. But you ought to consider that God has
openly showed in him many declarations of a divine nature, the end of all
which, was to commend him unto you, and to teach you, that he was that long
waited for savior of mankind, which in time past he promised you. And the
works of Christ whereof God commended him, he adorneth with three titles.
First, he calls them powers, or virtues, least he might seem to have any
affinity with Iuglers. For the things which the Evangelists write of him, he
did verilye and in deed, and of his own power, as Luke plainly testifies,
where he says, Luc. 6.
virtue or power went from him whereby the sick were healed. And himself
says in another place, power or virtue went from him, Luc. 8.
when he healed the woman that was sick of the bloody flux. Then he calls
Christ's works woonders, because they exceeded the common course of nature,
and drew the minds of the beholders into an admiration and amazedness. But
because the things whose causes we know not, are oftentimes taken for woonders,
when in deed they portende nothing, at length he calls the things that
Christ did, signs. For the works of Christ had a certain end, which was to
bear witness of his Godheade, and of his office. For by them he was known to
be both the son of God and also he that was promised to be the redeemer of
the world. For the which cause he sent the disciples of John to the
consideration of his works. Math. 11.
And oftentimes he inculcateth his works to the Jews, and vpbraydeth them, so
that the fault of their incredulity is the greater. The works (says he) that
the father has given me to finishe, the same works that I do, bear witness
of me that the father has sent me. John. 5.
Again, If I do not the works of my father, believe me not. But if I do, and
ye believe not me, believe the works, John. 10.
that ye may know and believe that the father is in me, and I in him. And
again: If I had not done among them the works which none other man did,
John. 15.
they should have had no sin. Therefore Peter does very well to call the works
of Christ, signs. He says these signs were done amongst them, and he
calls none other to witness the same but themselves, to whom he preached,
which did see them. And so he quippeth their great waywardness and
ingratitude which could not be mollified and overcome with so many and so
great benefits of Christ, being so marvelous and wonderful. He also goes
about by the consideration hereof, to bring them to the knowledge of Christ's
divinity, whereof not long after, he discourses more largely. For although he
here say that God did these things by Christ, yet it derogateth nothing from
the power and divinity of Christ, whereas he confesses these works are given
him of the father, and that the father and he be all one. John. 14.


In these things we are taught the true knowledge of Jesus Christ. He is very
God and man in one inseperable person. Christ is very God and man.
Uerye God from everlasting begotten of the father. Man made of a woman, when
in the time appointed he came into the world to be the redeemer of mankind.
And we must well mark the difference of the natures, to say, the divine and
human, which neither deuyde the unity of person, nor by reason of the unity
are confounded among themselves. For the properties of both the natures
remain inviolable, whole and sound, according as the Evangelists teach us in
every place. For even Christ himself which touching his divinity, is all one
with the father: speaking of his manhood, confesses his father to be greater
than he. John. 10.
And Christ in his humanity or manhood dies: who in his divinity or
godheade, is subject neither to death, ne yet to any other corruption. Such an
one does the holy scripture teach us every where that Christ is. For whom the
Prophets call the offspring and son of David, the same they use also to call
the father of eternity our Lord, Isa. 11.9.
and our God. And whom they prophecy should be borne in Bethlehem, Ierem. 23.
his progress and outgoing they confess to have been from the beginning and
from everlasting. Yea, the Lord himself speaking of Christ, Mich. 6.
says: Arise O thou sword, upon my shepehearde, and upon the man which is my
fellow, or (as some interpret it) my coequall. Zach. 13.
In the which words the two natures of Christ are more clearly to be seen
than the day. For God calls him Virum, that is, a very man, and also
testifies that he is his coequall. Many other testimonies might be brought to
this purpose, if need so were, which they that read the scriptures, may
every where see. On these things rest the first articles of our faith and
belief in Christ. For we protest that we believe in the only begotten son
of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, which was conceived by the holy ghost, borne of
the virgin Marie, and so forth. To the declaration whereof, all those things
serve that are written in the Evangelists concerning the mysterye of his
incarnation. See Luke. 1. and. 2. John. 1. Math. 1.

It shall be profitable for us to hold fast the knowledge of both natures in
Christ, because that upon these depends the office of Christ, The use of
Christ's divinity and humanity.
and the certainty of our salvation. For where it is manifest that he is both
God and man, we certainly believe that he is a mediator between God and man,
because such ought to be the condition of a sequester, or mediator, that he
may be accepted of both the parties at variance. But the infirmity of man was
not able to abide the rigor and majesty of Gods justice, no more than the
justice of God allows man's righteousness, which is nothing. Therefore Jesus
Christ was found out, who being the son of God, of the same eternity and
substance with God, was made man, and joined both the natures so together in
one person, that by his mean, we have a peace renewed with God, and a free
entrance prepared to the throne of grace. His merit the father can not deny,
because he is both his beloved son, and also free himself from all sin and
wickedness. To him also may we safelye trust, considering he has experience
of our infirmities, and knows how to have compassion on us. Whereunto Paul
had a respect, saying: We have not an high Priest which cannot have compassion
on our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, Heb. 4.
but yet without sin. Again: Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of
flesh and blood, he himself also likewise took part with them, that through
death he might vanquishe him that had Lordship over death, that is to say, the
devil: and that he might deliver them which through fear of death, Heb. 2.
were all their life time subdued unto bondage. For he in no place takes on
him the Angels, but the seed of Abraham takes he on him. Wherefore in all
things it became him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be
merciful, and a faithful high Priest in things concerning God, for to purge
the peoples sins. For in that it came to pass that he himself was tempted,
he is able to succor the^ also that are tempted. The consideration of these
things might teach men how they dote, which leave this only mediator Jesus
Christ, and turn them unto creatures, and think their causes must be relieved
by intercession of Saints. In which doing they plainly testify that they are
void of the knowledge of Christ, forasmuch as they are ignorant of his
office, and of the causes, for the which, he being God from everlasting, would
take very manhood into the unity of his person. He surely says in the
Gospel: No man comes to the father, but by me. John. 14.
And Paul as he acknowledges one God, so he testifies that there is but one
mediator between God and man, that is Jesus Christ. 1. Tim. 2.
But because we shall otherwheres have occasion to speak more largely of these
things, let these few suffice for this present. And let us take it for a great
comfort that we see his Godheade, whom we rejoice in as our savior and
redeemer, and after whose name we be called Christians, proved by so many
arguments. Let us now return to Peter's sermon, and to the explication thereof.

The passion and death of Christ.
Secondarilye he sets forth the passion and death of Christ, in such sort,
that he labors to bring them in fear, considering how heinous a matter
they had committed. For he says: This Jesus have you taken by the hands of
unrighteous persons, after he was delivered by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God, and have crucyfied and slain him. Three things are here
affirmed concerning the death of Christ. First, he accuses all the people of
so horrible a murder. You (says he) have crucified him, and slain him. Yet
Peter was not ignorant that the soldiers hong him on the cross with their
own hands. And yet truly does he lay this crime to all the peoples charge,
because they did not only consent to his death, but also required with
importunate and sedicious clamor to have him crucified, and with their
importunacie overcame Pylate which long withstoode them, as the Evangelists
teach us.

The preaching of the Gospel must begin with reproouing of sin.
By this example of Peter we are taught how to begin the preaching of the
Gospel: verily with the rebuking of sin, the which must be detected,
published, and accused. For except men acknowledge their sins, they will not
care much for Christ, so long as they think they have no great need of him.
For it fares in this matter as in the diseases of the body. They that either
perceive not their sickness, or else go about to hide it, care not for
Physic, neither will they receive the Physician, though he offer himself.
So, whosoever feel no conscience of their sins, or think their sins may
be dissembled or purged by their own satisfactions: they neither seek Christ
greatly themselves, nor worthily receive him, showing himself to them in his
Gospel, but standing rather upon the affiance of their own righteousness,
fear not to withstand him. Whereof we have many examples in the Phariseys.
For the which cause Christ professes he is the Physician of those that be
sick, Math. 9.
and that he came not to save the righteous, Luc. 5.
but to call sinners to repentance. And speaking of the holy ghost, John. 16.
amongst his properties he first reckeneth, that he shall reprove the world
of sin. Again, when he commends the preaching of the Gospel to his
Apostles, Luc. 24.
he will first have repentance to be taught, next after which, he will have
remission of sins to be joined. Therefore Peter does not without a cause
proceed in this order, that speaking of the death of Christ, he first proves
his hearers to be guilty, and to be the auctors thereof. And so were it
necessary to have Christ's death preached in these days, that all men might
understand the son of God dyed for their sins, and that they were the
auctors thereof. For thus it shall come to pass, that men shall learn to be
sorye in their heart for their sins, and shall embrace the salvation offered
them in Christ with the more feruencye of faith.

But least Peter might seem to accuse the Comminaltie only, he adds another
thing, The boldness of P^ter in rebuking sin.
whereby the heads and chief are accused to be the ringleaders of so heinous
a deed. For you (says he) have taken him by the hands of unrighteous and
slain him. But who are those wicked and unrighteous? The first among them is
Judas, sometime a disciple of Christ, and an Apostle, but afterward a captain
to them that took Jesus. The next to him are the high Bishops, with all the
College of Scribes and Priests, who brybed Judas with money, and hired him to
do so outrageous a mischief. In the same number may Pylate be reckoned, which
sitting in judgment as Lieutenant to the Emperor, pronounced sentence of
death upon him. And Herod is not altogether faultlesse, who when he might have
set him at liberty, being sent unto him, thought it better when he had mocked
him, to send him back again. All these Peter comprehends under the name of
unrighteous, whose power and authority was greatest in the City of
Jerusalem. How dangerous a matter it was thus to say, he shall easily
perceive that diligently considers the state and degree of these persons. It
is an heinous offense to say the sentence of the Judge condemning the guilty,
is unjust and unrighteous. Yet Peter boldly says so in a most populous City,
where the remembrance of Christ whom he so highly commends, was yet very
fresh. Here therefore (as in a glass) we may behold how stout and bold
defenders of Christ the holy ghost makes them, whom he does vouchsafe to
inspire with his spirit. We are also taught what liberty and freedom of
speech ought to be in the ministers of the word to accuse public offenses,
and how little they are to be regarded who require I can not tell what manner of
modesty in the ministers. For we need not thus to extenuate sin, Psalm. 36.
which otherwise of it self (as David says) uses to flatter us. Nor we
must have no respect of persons, seeing the person or the auctor can not excuse
sin: yea, how much more of authority the offender is, so much more hurtful
is the offense. Besides, the minister is a public person, to whose office and
charge it is manifest all men are subject. For Christ has made him a steward
of his household, wherein are rich, poor, Nobles, Math. 24.
and Commons, Magistrates, and subjects. And that the Lord says to Hieremie,
is spoken to all ministers: Behold, this day do I make thee a strong fensed
town, an iron pillar, and a brazen wall, against the whole land, against the
kings and mighty men of Judah, against the priests and people of the land.
Ierem. 1.
Therefore whosoever have taken upon them the office of teaching in the
Church, let them regard no reasons of the world nor of the flesh, whereby to
be made afraid, but let them rather follow the examples of Jesus Christ, the
Prophets, and the Apostles, all which (it is plain) used the like liberty in
reprehending of sin that Peter uses in this place.

And whereas the things he spoke of Christ's death might give occasion of much
offense, Christ dies by the appointment of God.
as though he had been oppressed by the craft and power of men, and therefore
might seem not to be God: Peter preuenteth this offense, saying he was
delivered into the hands of unrighteous men, by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God. For this is as much as if he had said: let no man think
that either Judas the traitor, or the Priests, or Pylate, had either so much
counsel or power, as to do any thing herein which God knew not, or suffered
not to be done. For whatsoever chaunsed unto Christ, came to pass by his
foreknowledge and decree. Whereunto also he had a respect in his Epistle, where
he says that before the world was made, Christ was ordained before hand for
this end. 1. Pet. 1.
For demonstration sake, may be brought the promises of God made in the
beginning of the world, and the Oracles of the Prophets, which teach none
other way of our redemption and salvation, than that which is gotten by the
blood of the son of God. Uerily Esaias says, that the Lord has brought to
pass, Esaias. 55.
that the iniquity of us all is heaped upon him. It was therefore the decree
and work of the same Lord, that our sins by his blood should be pourged.
This is a notable place to cause us to learn rightly to judge of Gods
providence.

The providence of God has both counsel and prescience in it.
Let us mark therefore that he touches not only Gods prescience, as it were,
by the way, but also makes mention of Gods counsel or decree: Yea, he sets
it before Gods prescience, because he testifies it was an appointed and
determined matter, which is as much as if he should say in our manner of
speech: all this business was concluded by the premeditation, and long before
devised counsel of God. Here is confuted the gloss of them, which imagine
nothing in God almost but prescience or foreknowledge: saying that God
foretold by the Prophets, that he foreknew should come to pass, taking from
him in the mean while all providence and administration of things. Which men
seem to me, to make God an idle gazer upon the world, and a slothful and
sluggishe body, suffering many things to be done against his will, and
otherwise than he had appointed. But David instructs us far otherwise,
which says, that God beholds the things done in heaven and in earth, Psalm.
113.
and makes him also to rule kingdoms, and to govern all things with his
beck. And Peter in this place says that God foresawe not only the falshoode
of Judas, the bloody enterprises of the Priests, and the iniquity of Pylate,
suffering them to come to pass by a certain idle permission, but also deduceth
all the success of this business, from the certain and determinate counsel
or decree of God. And that that happened in the son of God, ought to be
understood of the universal governance of mankind, which God susteineth and
wieldeth, unless we suppose that God which is always constant in himself, is
swarued from his common order and usage. But chiefly it is convenient we
consider the end wherefore Peter alleges the decree of Gods providence: The
use of Gods providence.
which end because many observe not, they by and by cry out that we make God
the auctor of evil, because we say all things depend upon his counsel and
appointing. Howbeit Peter in this place neither excuses Judas nor his
accomplices, nor yet charge God with that they wickedly and unjustly did. For
where they sinned of their own voluntary malice, and set before their eyes
neither the counsel of God, nor the redemption of mankind, but followed the
naughty affections of covetousness, ambition, and hatred: the fault was in
themselves, and justly were they punished for the same. Peter makes mention of
Gods providence and decree, because he would put away the slander and
offense of the cross, and teach us how to judge of all Christ's affairs and
our redemption. The same use of Gods providence must we also set before us,
that it may serve as well to the instruction of our faith and life, as for our
comfort in adversity. So by the decree of providence, the scriptures teach us
that our salvation depends upon the mere grace of God, who before the
world was made, ordained Jesus Christ to be our redeemer, and chose or elected
us in him. See Ephe 1. Romans 9.10.11. etc. And thither does Christ send us
saying: you have not chosen me, John. 15.
but I have chosen you. Again: without me you can do nothing. Therefore the
consideration of predestination and Gods free election, only beats down the
pride of man's righteousness, and the perilous affiance that we have therein.
The same brings us most strong comfort in adversity, when the wicked are in
prosperity and aloft. For why should a man be offended at them, considering
he is sure that he is under the tuition of Gods providence, and that no
adversity can happen unto him without the will and pleasure of God? Therefore
Christ sends us to the flowers of the field and birds of the air, in the
which, Gods providence is most easily perceived: and comfort the Apostles
against the slanders of persecution with arguments taken from them, saying:
Are not two little sparrowes sold for a farthing? Math. 6. and.10.
And one of them shall not light on the ground without your heavenly father.
Yea, all the hears of your head be numbered. If we examine these words after
the capacity of our reason, I know they seem to exceed all truth. But if we
consider the wisdom and omnipotency of God, which far passes all man's
reason, there can nothing be said that may seem so far to exceed the
truth, but his force and power pierces through it and passes it. See what is
written. Psalm. 139 and.147. If we set these things before our eyes, the
consideration of his providence shall yield us much learning and comfort. And
if any man will go beyond this, and pass his bounds, to him we say as
Solomon sometime said: He that will search out high things, it shall be to
heavy for him. Prou. 25.
And as Paul said: What art thou O man which disputest with God. etc. See the
place. Romans 9. Neither was it without the will of God, that the Apostle which
was rapt into the third heaven, and heard words not meet to be uttered to
man, disdeyning to answer curious questions about this matter of Gods
providence and predestination, concludes all that disputation with an
exclamation full of admiration and wonder, saying: O the deepenesse of the
riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God. How unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out: For who has known the mind of
the Lord? or who has been his counselor? or who has given unto him first,
and he shall be recompensed again? For of him, and through him, and for him,
are all things. To him be glory for ever. Amen.

Last of all, The resurrection of Christ.
Peter joins the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, in these
words: whom God has raised up, and loosed the sorrows of death because it
was impossible that he should be holden of it. This also is a remedy against
the slander of the cross, but rather it is to be referred to the order of our
redemption and salvation, which he purposes to entreat of. But because he
speaks of the resurrection in the process following, we will now be the
shorter. Among other things, it is chiefly to be considered, that having
described the person of Christ, omitting many other things, he makes mention
only of his death and resurrection. The cause was, for that in these two, the
whole sum of our salvation is contained. For by his death, he pourged the
trespass of our sin, which otherwise could not have been pourged. By his
resurrection, he overcame death, which was the punishment of sin, and subdued
the forte thereof, according to the saying of the Prophet, alleged by Paul:
Hose. 13. 1. Cor. 15.
Death is swallowed up in victory. Death where is thy sting? Hell where is thy
victory? The same thing Peter seems to mean, in this place, where he says
that the sorrows of death were loosed by Christ's resurrection, because it was
impossible that he should be holden of it. Neither of the dolors of the body
(which follow death,) can it be expounded, sith yet we feel them to be most
bitter. But the powers of death are loosed, and the terrors taken away,
wherewith in times past it tormented men's minds. For it used sin as a sting,
the punishment whereof, God appointed this death: and therefore it must needs be
terrible, seeing it was the punishment of sin. And albeit Christ has taken
sin away, yet death remains, whereby we pass out of this life and world:
but by the merit of Christ, it is made the door of life, and therefore it can
no more fear them that believe, as Christ says: He that hears my word, and
believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
damnation, John. 5.
but is escaped from death unto life. Therefore says the Apostle in another
place, that Christ through death subdued him that had Lordship over death: Heb.
2.
Which could not have been said, unless he had risen again after death.
Therefore these two must always be joined together: which thing Paul does
diligently observe, where he says, Romans 4.
Christ was delivered for our sins, and raised again for our justification.
Again: This is the word of faith which we preach. If thou knowledge with thy
mouth that Jesus is the Lord, Romans 10.
and believe in thy heart that God raised him up from death, thou shall be
safe. Where he makes mention only of the resurrection: but he therein
includes death also, because a resurrection without death can not be imagined.
Let us therefore learn to know Jesus Christ, who being very God from
everlasting, became man for our sake, cleansed our sins by his death,
overcame the sorrows and strength of death, Romans 8.
by his glorious resurrection, and being ascended into heaven, makes
intercession for us. To him be blessing, honor, power and glory for ever. Amen.

The.xv. Homely.
FOR David says of him: before hand I saw God always before me: for he is
on my right hand that I should not be moved. Therefore did my heart rejoice,
and my tongue was glad. Moreover also, my flesh shall rest in hope, because
thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thine holy one
to see corruption. Thou have showed me the ways of life: thou shall make me
full of joy with thy countenance.
THe Apostle Peter in our yesterdayes Sermon, declared the chief articles of
our Christian faith, showing us how Jesus Christ was very God and man, how he
suffered death for us, and rose again from the dead. The end and use of all
which, is to teach us to acknowledge him to be the redeemer of mankind that
was promised. Howbeit the article of resurrection for many causes, might seem
very incredible among the Jews. For besides that it seems doubtful to man's
reason, there was no small number of Saduceys which flatly denied it. And the
soldiers being bribed of the Priests with money, had bruted a false rumor
how the disciples of Christ had stolen his body out of the grave. Yea, and
Christ himself after his resurrection, did not show himself to all the
people as before he used, but was conversant only with his disciples.
Therefore it was necessary that this article should be both more plainly
declared, and with more sound arguments confirmed: especially for that the
Apostles faith was had in suspicion of all men. Wherefore Peter flies to the
authority of David, the most notable king and Prophet among the Jews, by the
testimony of whom taken out of the.xvj. psalm, Psalm. 16.
he proves that the resurrection of Christ ought to seem neither strange
nor incredible: forasmuch as the same came to pass according to ye counsel
and ordinance of God, and was also long before prophesied by the Oracles of the
Prhphets. And because Peter afterward confirms the authority of this
testimony, and shows that it appertains only unto Christ: it should be
superfluous now to tarry long in proof of the same. For the authority of so
great an Apostle ought to suffice us, which the Jews their selves to whom
these things were spoken, were not able to refell. Let us rather mark that
David so speaks this in the person of Christ, that he himself also takes
comfort thereof, which comfort belongs also to all them that woorship Christ,
because the things spoken of the head, must after a sort belong also unto the
members. We must therefore diligently consider this place, which most
absolutely comprehends in it all the reason of true religion, with the most
wholesome fruits of so holy a study, amongst which, the resurrection of the
bodies is mentioned, which the holy Prophet declares diligently and at large.

He expresses in one verse the whole sum of all godliness, The sum of
godliness and religion.
and holy life, where he says: Before hand I saw God always before me. For
he is on my right hand that I should not be moved. Here are two things said.
First he tells what he does, then wherefore he so does. Touching the first he
says: Aforehande I saw God always before me. Or as it is in the Hebrew: I
set God in my sight, or before mine eyes. Therefore Christ followed this rule of
life, to set the Lord always before his eyes, and to think he lived always
in his sight. This to do, as it ought to be, two things are most worthy to be
observed. The one is the study and endeavor of obedience. For we use to say
they set God before their eyes, which have regard to his precepts, and being
stirred up with an holy fear of God, study to please him, from whom they know
nothing is hid. Concerning this study of obedience, God himself speaks,
where he commands Abraham to walk before him, or in his sight. The other is
faith, Genesis 17.
whereby in adversity we look only to God, and seek for help, succor, and
delivery from him only. Hereof David in an other place speaks, saying:
Behold even as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their Masters,
Psalm. 123.
and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her Mystresse: even so our eyes
wait upon the Lord our God, until he have mercy upon us. Both these
properties may easily be seen in Jesus Christ. For so reuerentlye did he
behave him self toward his father, that as Paul says, he was obedient to
the death: yea, even the death of the Cross. Phil. 2.
And such a diligent care and regard had he of those persons that his father
gave him charge with, that going to his death, he could yield an account of
them, saying: Those that thou gave me have I kept, and none of them is
perished, but that lost child. Again: John. 17.
I have glorified thee upon earth, I have finished the work which thou gave
me to do. Furthermore as a very man, with firm and constant faith, he set his
eyes upon God only, whom he only called upon in all adversity, and thanked him
only for the benefits he received, as the hystorye of the Gospel teaches.
He might therefore by David truly say: I have set the Lord always before
me. By this example must all they which will be accounted the true worshippers
and children of God, frame all their life and doings. And this was the only
cause of all the virtues, which we read flourished sometime in the Saints.

Seneca gave counsel in times past that for the better avoiding of faults
which use to be done in secret when we be by our selves, In his third book^ of
Epistles, the.xxv. Epistl^.
we should suppose some severe person, such as was Scipio, Laelius, or Cato,
were present, as a beholder and witness of our doings. But how much more
profitable would it be to think how God always beholds and sees what we
say and do? Because Joseph did set God always before his eyes, neither
could he be brought by his Mistress entycements, from the tracke of right and
honesty, neither was he dismayed when he was in prison and adversity. Genesis 39.
The like reason may we make of all other things. And here may we epsy the
great difference that is between the godly and ungodly. For the ungodly when
the world goes well with them, set not God before their eyes, but (as David
testifies) blinded with wicked folly, deny that there is any God. Psalm. 14.36.
Whereby it comes to pass, that like wild horses, breaking their bars and
reins, they burst into all kind of mischief. For as it is said in another
place, they are persuaded that God has neither eyes nor ears, Psalm. 94.
wherewith to see and hear their mischieuousnesse. But when God whom they
will not set before their eyes, shows himself to them to be angrye, and as
it is said, reprooueth them to their faces, Psalm. 50.
and punishes their wickedness, they run to him again, but yet ask no
help and succor (as the children of God use) of him that corrects them,
Esaias. 9.
but for a season strive against his justice with their own strength, whereby
when they see they profit nothing, they turn and call upon creatures, or else
being utterly at their wits end, rushe headlong into the pit of
desperation. There are infinite examples of such men, of which, this ought with
us to be the use, to learn to set God before our eyes, to whom we ought to
approve our self and our life, and in whom we ought to have all our trust
and affiance.

But Christ shows the cause of his so godly and holy an industry, adding:
because he is on my right hand that I should not be moved. Therefore (says
he) set I God before mine eyes, because he is present with me, what soever I
do. If I please him, he is at hand to aid me, that I be moved with no fear
or terror. If I neglect him, he is at hand to behold all my doings, and in
time to come, will be a most severe judge against me. For this cause, the
worshippers of Christ are moved to have Christ before their eyes, as they many
times profess themselves. Hereunto belongs that that we read David and such
as he was, said: The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom then shall I
fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, Psalm. 27.
of whom then shall I be afraid? God is our hope and strength, a very present
helper in trouble. Therefore will not we fear though the earth be moved,
Psalm. 46.
and though the hills be carried into the midst of the sea, Again: God is
my strength and my salvation, he is my defense so that I shall not greatly
fall. Psalm. 62.
Let no man think this a vain tossing or repeticion of words. For this
confidence of the Saints stays upon the promises of God, and upon experience
and dailye examples. For it is the word of God: Call upon me in the time of
thy trouble, and I will deliver thee. Again: Because he has set his love upon
me, therefore shall I deliver him, Psalm. 50.
I shall set him up, because he has known my name. He shall call upon me,
and I will hear him: yea, I am with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and
bring him to honor. These promises are confirmed by many examples, Psalm. 91.
such as in the holy Scriptures we read of Joseph, David, Daniel, and his
fellows, Susanne, Ezechias, and many other. But we have no need of old
examples, since we every day have experience of the truth of Gods promyses. For
although there be many tribulations in this life, yet God delivers his
children from them all, and his right hand, as it were, stays us as we
slip, and he suffers us not to be tempted above our strength. 1. Cor. 10.
And as David confesses: In the multitude of our sorrows, his comfortes
refresh our soul. And this is that safety of the godly, Psalm. 94.
a far other thing than that which makes the wicked to look aloft, while by
reason of their riches and worldly glory, they think themselves out of danger
and gunshot, who must needs be deceived, because all flesh is grass, and the
glory thereof as the flower of the field. Isa. 40.


But Christ proceeds on, speaking in his spirit by David, The fruits of
godliness.
and rehearses the singular fruits of this study and endeavor. For this
cause (says he) did my heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad: moreover, also
my flesh shall rest in hope. Here are three things said, every which of them
far passes all the riches of the world, which as I said, must be
considered both in Christ and his members.

First he speaks of joy, and of the joy of the heart, Joy of heart.
to teach us that that is a true, sound and stable joy. He means the same
joy, which he afterward promises to his Disciples, where he says: Now ye
have sorrow, but I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, John. 16.
and your joy shall no man take from you. Paul speaks of the same, bidding
the Christians always rejoice Principally it is meet we consider the cause of
joy. 1. These. 5 Phil. 4.
For this cause (says he) my heart rejoiced, because the Lord is on my right
hand. Then the faithful rejoice in the Lord. The wicked also be glad and
rejoice, and for joy many times become mad. But this they do either
because they have riches and honors, and the fruition of the naughty lusts of
the flesh, or else by reason of their wickedness, Prou. 1.
as Solomon says of some. But their joys are neither sound nor sure, but are
ended in most grievous sorrow. For Christ's sentence in the Gospel was long
ago pronounced against them: woe be to you that now laugh, Luc. 6.
for you shall mourn and weep. But the mirth or joy of the godly, because
it stays upon the Lord, cannot quayle or be ouerturned. For they glory and
rejoice in afflictions, because that in all things they know they shall
overcome, by him which loved them in Jesus Christ. Romans 5.8.


The second fruit of godliness is the gladsomnesse of the tongue. Joy of
tongue.
By this is expressed the greatness of the joy which can not be kept within
the mind, but breaks forth by the tongue. For this tongue of the godly
rejoices not in light affections and ribauldrie, or in wanton talk, such as
we may see in the ungodly, but in godly giving of thanks, and in setting
forth the name of God and his benefits. And surely this is a great glory of
the godly, that they perceive themselves every day bound unto God, by new and
fresh benefits, for the which cause they praise his holy name. Many rejoice in
the favor of Princes, and think it a worthy matter when they have any just
occasion offered them to praise and commend the Princes liberality. But the
glory of a christian man is far greater, which every day finds most
weighty causes and fresh occasions to commend and set forth the goodness of
God. And herein consists not the least part of our duty: For God will be
magnified and extolled of us, and requires none other thing of us for his
beneficence, because he has no need of any thing that is ours. Call (says
he) upon me in the time of trouble, so will I hear thee, Psalm. 50.
and thou shall glorify me. Hereof proceed those vows of the Saints, which
promise songs and hymns unto the Lord. Christ in one place in the person of
David, promises this thing to his father, saying: I will declare thy name unto
my brethren, in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee. Psalm. 22.
My praise is of thee in the great congregation: my vows will I perform in
the sight of them that fear him. And David where he asks help of God,
speaks after like manner: I will praise the name of God with a song: and
magnify it with thanksgiving. This also shall please the Lord better than a
bullock that has horns and hoofes. Psalm. 60.
Hereto may be applied the voice of the godly spoken of by the Prophet: O
forgive us all our sins, receive us graciously, Hose. 14.
and then will we offer the bullockes of our lips unto thee. Here, by the
way, may the infelicitie of our days be perceived. For where there be very
few whose tongues rejoice in giving God thanks and in praising his holy name,
therefore is that true joy also very rare that is conceived by faith, and
holy exercise of obedience. By the which argument we may strongly conclude,
that the exer ise of faith and godliness is also very rare.

Cheerful death.
The third fruit of godliness is: My flesh shall rest in hope. He speaks
of death, which he promises him shall be joyful and without all grief.
Here, in the meanewhile, is shadowed out a most absolute felicity and bliss,
which by death (as the Poet says, death is the last end of all things) can
not be let or hindered. By death, which for the most part comes suddenly, all
things whereby this unhappy world measures felicity, use to be disturbed.
At the mentioning of death, rich men are amazed, ambicious men quake,
voluptuous men tremble, and the most valiant men use to be afraid. But Christ
rejoices herein, as in a rest full of great hope. So do all the members of
Christ, to whom above all other men it is given to contemn death, yea, to
rejoice in death, whose property the Prophet in this place most lively
expresses. First, he makes mention only of the flesh or body, showing that
death has no power upon the soul, which is the chief part of man. For the
soul departing out of the body, goes to everlasting life, as otherwheres we
have showed, which was the cause that Paul desired to be loosed and to be with
Christ. Then speaking of the flesh or of the body, Phil. 1.
he threatens it not with destruction, but says: My flesh shall rest in
hope. Therefore he promises a rest to the flesh, which the godly in death
find to be most sure. All the whole race of our life swarmeth with heaps of
calamities and dangers. Travel and pains are still at hand. Sorrows and
cares spring every day still a fresh. And to be brief, this short life is
tossed with the continual storms and tempests of combrances and traueyles,
Psalm. 90.
so that the Prophet truly said: The days of our age are threescore years
and ten, and though men be so strong, that they come to four score years:
yet is their strength then but labor and sorrow. And in other places the
Scripture says, that man is borne to labor, as the bird to flying. But in
death is rest, and he that is dead, Job. 5.
has escaped all the toil of labors and care, sickness, and all other
accidents of adversities. And least any man should think we had none other
rest in death, than such as beasts and other living creatures have, which have
no life after this: he shows that our flesh rests in hope. He means the
hope of resurrection, which is both certain, and also the only cause of true
comfort. For God puts us in this hope, in calling himself the God of them
which are departed this life, as Christ teaches of Abraham, Isaac, Math. 22.
and Jacob. And in the Prophets he constantly promises there shall be a
resurrection. See Ezechiel. 37. Dan. 12. Isa. 26. and. 66. Christ reasons
oftentimes in the Gospel of the same. The time shall come (says he) when all
they that be in their graves shall hear my voice, and shall come forth.
John. 5.
etc. Look more touching this matter in Math. 25. John 11. Job speaking of
this hope, says: I know that my redeemer lives, and that I shall rise out of
the earth in the last day, and shall be covered again with my skin, Job. 19.
and shall see God in my flesh: yea, and I my self shall behold him, not with
other but with the same eyes. And doubtless the holy Martyrs being emboldened
with this hope, overcame all the sorrows which they sustained, with great
constancy of mind. Therefore it is not without cause that Paul bids us
out of these and such like places, to take arguments of comfort, 1. These. 4.
in the departure and burials of our friends.

Furthermore, The article of resurrection declared.
because the Prophet took occasion to make mention of the resurrection, he
more fully sets forth the same, going on and speaking still under the person
of Christ. For he says: Because thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither
will thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption. Thou have showed me the
ways of life: thou shall make me full of joy with thy countenance. There be in
these words diverse things, which are to be understood of Christ only, as
Peter teaches in the things following. Yet because the certainty of our
resurrection depends upon Christ's resurrection, whom Paul for that cause
calls the first fruits of them that sleep: 1. Cor. 15.
the fruits and effects of all those things that came to pass in Christ's
resurrection, appertain also to us. Therefore it shall be profitable for us
diligently to consider the things here said. For as they set forth the
resurrection of Christ: so they teach us wherein to hope, and paint out the
order and manner of our resurrection, with that true felicity which follows
the same.

First he says: Thou shall not leave my soul in hell. The descention of
Christ into hell.
The Hebrews take this word Inferi (which we english hell) sometime for the
sepulcher or grave, sometime for the dead and buried: in which sense the
brethren of Joseph say: Thy servants shall bring the graye head of our
father with sorrow, ad infernum, sieve inferos, that is to say, to the grave. The
sense therefore of Christ's words is, that ye soul of Christ should not tarry
long separated from the body, in the place where the souls of the blessed be,
but should return shortly to the body again. Many have understood these
words of the discention of Christ into hell, which we profess among the
articles of our faith: whose judgment me thinks ought not altogether to be
rejected. Great disputation hereabout has been kept among the ancient
writers. And in our days have certain phreneticke persons starte forth, which
have said that the soul of Christ has suffered in hell the torments of the
damned. But Christ himself confuteth them: which, a little before he died,
said unto the thief: This day thou shall be with me in Paradyse. Luc. 23.
Besides, being ready to give up the ghost, he sends not his soul to hell,
but commends it into the hands of his father. Furthermore, it is manifest,
that he offered himself upon the altar of the Cross for the sins of all
the world, and did there fully accomplish the business of our salvation,
John. 19.
so that he truly said: It is done or finished. Therefore it must not be
suffered that any shall say, Christ's soul suffered any thing after it departed
out of his body. It was heavy and sad, and felt the terrors of death at
mount Oliuete, as he himself confesses. It seemed also to have felt the
angrye countenance and wrath of his father, in punishing sin, when he said
upon the cross: My God, my God, why haste thou forsaken me? But because his
death and passion was sufficient to purge our sins: it is a very absurd and
unchristian point to add any thing else thereto. Therefore Christ's
descending into hell may plainly be understood, if we say either that he
truly died, or that the merit of his death extended unto them also which died
before him, from the beginning of the world, as Peter in another place seems
to mean, saying: that Christ preached unto the dead which were in prison. 1.
Pet. 3.4.
This served both to the greater comfort of those which believed the promises
made of him, and increased the pains and sorrows of the reprobate which
wickedlye contemned them. In the mean season, the utility and profit of the
things here spoken is derived unto us also. For as Christ's soul was not
forsaken: so our souls be in the protection and hand of God, Sap. 3.
and shall return to our bodies again in the later day.

The resurrection of the body.
Secondly therefore he adds: Neither wilt-thou suffer thine holy one to see
corruption. This after a sort perteyneth to the exposition of the first member.
In the mean season, as he spoke of the soul: so he shows what shall become
of the body. He says it shall not see corruption, which afterward, at large
he declares to be understood of Christ's body only. And surely it is plain
that all our bodies are subject to corruption, for the saying of God must of
necessity be fulfilled: Thou art dust and into dust thou shall return again.
Neither does the art and industry of man any thing prevail, Gene. 3.
going about to conserve the bodies of great men, with sweet odours, spicery
and perfumes. But Christ's body, because it was raised again the third day,
could not see corruption, much less be corrupted, but rose again a glorious
body, and void of all corruption. Here is the resurrection of our bodies
proved. For although our bodies corrupt, and moulder to dust, yet by the power
of Christ, when the last day comes, they shall be restored again, as we have
heretofore declared. For our mortal bodies (as Paul says) must become like
unto Christ's glorified body. Neither shall it be impossible for him to raise
our bodies from the dust, Phil. 3.
which made man at the beginning of claye, yea, all this great frame of the
world of nothing. They may here also be confuted which say Christ's body in
the resurrection was vanished away, and had not the true properties of a body,
such as is to be felt and handled, to be contained in a place, to move from
place to place. etc. For if he saw no corruption, how could he lose those
things, without the which a very body cannot consist?

Thirdly he says: Thou have showed me the ways of life, that is, Life
everlasting.
thou have brought me into life. And he speaks of the heavenly and eternal
life, which only is worthy so to be called. Ergo, life everlasting follows
after resurrection, which life, even as Christ had, so shall we have the same
in him. This is well to be observed where it is said, the way of life is
showed to Christ. Adam by sin deserved death, and the door of Paradise after
he was driven out, God fensed and guarded with a sword of fire, least he
should return thither and eat of the tree of life. Genesis 3.
God signified hereby that men of their own strength and power could not enter
into life. But in Christ the way of life was set open again, that even as by
one man sin entered into the world, and through sin death: Romans 5.
so by Christ only, righteousness and life should be restored again.
Therefore the Apostle speaking of Christ, says that the life appeared to us.
1. John. 1.
And Christ every where is called the bread of life, the light, and the way
of life, and the resurrection, and the life. John. 6.14.1.^1.
This commodity therefore which the resurrection of Christ has gotten us, is
very singular, because we shall be raised to an heavenly and an eternal life,
not to an earthly and mortal, such as we now live, which may be trulyer
called a death than a life. The mean hereto is in Christ alone, whom
whosoever despises, he cannot attain unto life, as Christ says: No man
comes unto the father but by me. John. 14.


Last of al he adds: Thou shall make me full of joy with thy countenance. The
state of the heavenly life is m^ste blissful.
By these words is expressed the condition of an heavenly and eternal life,
which is of a far other sort, than the life we have here on earth. For this
life as was aforesaid, is full of traueyle, sorrow, care, and trouble. The
eternal life is full of mirth and joy. For there God will wipe all tears
from the eyes of his faithful. And there shall be no more death, Apoc. 21.
neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any more pain. And
these being taken away, there can remain nothing, but joy. Therefore Christ,
says he, will say to the faithful servant, enter into the joy of thy Lord.
Math. 25.
This joy in an other place Christ calls the glory, which he testifies he
had with his father before the world was made. John. 17.
Christ's humanity was taken up to be partaker of that joy and mirth in that
kingdom, which in his godhead he possessed from everlasting. For so we read it
was promised long agone, God saying: Psalm. 110.
sit thou on my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footestoole. In
these words are contained an article of our faith, where we confess Christ is
ascended into heaven, The ascension of Christ.
and sits upon the right hand of his father omnipotent. In the mean while,
we that by faith are graffed in Christ, and made his members, must believe that
these things appertain to us likewise. For it can not be that the members can
be pulled from their head. And Christ promises: Where I am, John. 12.
there shall my minister be also. And declaring this promise otherwheres in more
words, he says: In my fathers house are many dwellinges: If it were not so,
I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you: John. 14.
and if I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you
even unto my self, that where I am, there may ye be also. Yea, being ready to
go to his death, when he had made and disposed of his will, as by way of a
testament, he says: Father, I will that they which thou have given me, be with
me where I am, John. 17.
that they may see my glory which thou have given me. Which things, for that
they should not be understood only of the Apostles, he plainly testifies
that he prays not for them alone, but also for all those which should
believe in him through their teaching. Therefore it is no doubt, but we also
shall be filled with joy, in that eternal and heavenly life, which shall
follow the resurrection of our bodies.

Here must we not omit to mark how he says and shows the cause efficient of
this joy, The face or countenance of God.
is the face of God. Which we must understand to be the favorable and
merciful countenance of God, wherewith he looks chearefully upon us for
Christ's sake, so that there appears no token of the old anger, which we
deserved by sin. For as the cherefull countenance of a king is life (as
Solomon says) and by his looking well about him, Prou. 16. and* 20.
all evil is driven away: So in the look of God all fullness of joy is to be
had, for them that believe, whereunto me seems Christ had a respect, saying:
Blessed be the clean in heart, Math. 5.
for they shall see God. And therefore the godly pray: Psalm. 80.
Show us the light of thy countenance, and we shall be safe. Hereof may we
gather, how great misery they shall be in, which being secluded from the face
of God, shall be thrown into utter darkness. And thus hitherto has the
Prophet in few words described all true godliness and true felicity. Let
us learn to set God before our eyes, to reverence him obediently, and to trust
in him only. Of this endeavor shall spring true joy, and we shall have every
day new occasions to set forth Gods goodness, and when we depart this life,
we shall rest in glad hope. And after that, shall follow a blessed
resurrection, wherein the souls shall be restored to the body, and being taken
into that true life, we shall be filled with all joy, before the face of God,
with Jesus Christ, our brother and coheyre, to whom be blessing, honor,
power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.xvj. Homely.
YE men and brethren, let me freely speak unto you of the Patriarch David: for
he is both dead and buried, and his sepulcher remains with us unto this
day. Therefore seeing he was a Prophet, and knew that God had sworn with an
oath to him, that Christ (as concerning the flesh) should come of the fruit
of his loins, and sit upon his seat: he knowing this before, spoke of the
resurrection of Christ, that his soul s^oulde not be left in hell, neither
his flesh should see corruption. This Jesus has God raised up, whereof we
all are witnesses. Sythence now that he by the right hand of God is exalted,
he has received of the father the promise of the holy ghost, he has shed
forth this gift, which you now see and hear. For David is not ascended into
heaven, but he says: The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right
hand until I make thy foes thy footestoole. So therefore let all the house of
Israel know for a surety that God has made that same Jesus, whom ye have
crucified, Lord and Christ.
Because the whole order of our salvation is accomplished, as it were, in the
resurrection of our bodies, therefore the scripture is greatly occupied in
proouing the same: which was the cause that Peter argued so diligently of
Christ's resurrection, whereupon it is manifest that our resurrection
depends. For he is not contented simply and plainly to preach the same, but
describes all the order and manner thereof out of the *xvj. Psalm, the
authority whereof he uses, to prove the same resurrection: to the entreaty
whereof, this present place also serves. For first, preventing the objection
of his adversaries by a preoccupation, he proves that this Psalm ought to be
expounded of Christ. Then comes he back again to Christ, and teaches us
that whatsoever was prophesied by David, is fulfilled in him. And at length, he
concludes his sermon with a grave obtestation, and beseeching of them.

About the testimony ofthe Psalm, Peter does two things. First, The testimony
of the.xvi. Psalm is proved.
he teaches them that it cannot be expounded of David by any means. Then he
proves that David prophecieth of Christ. And because the authority of David
was very great with the Jews, he mollifieth the minds of his hearers with a
proper preface, lea^t they might think he spoke any thing contemptuouslye of
David, yea, he cites themselves as witnesses of the things that he means to
say: Let me (says he) speak of the Patriarch David to you, who I know are
not ignorant in David's matters, and are earnest students of his prophecies.
And because many would think that he spoke these things which we have cited,
of himself, the matter must be the better marked, and then shall it appear,
that they are most manifestly deceived in their opinion. For David speaks of
one whose soul should not abide with the souls of the deceassed, and which
in his body should suffer no corr^ption. But it is evident that David is
dead, and his tomb at this day is to be seen amongst you, 1. Reg. 2.
wherein his body after the manner of all flesh (as he says of himself) is
consumed into dust. Therefore the words of the Psalm cannot be understood
of him. Howbeit though this be a firm and sure argument, yet was it not
sufficient, unless also he could prove, it ought to be understood of
Christ. Wherefore he adds: Therefore seeing David was a Prophet, and knew
that God had sworn with an oath to him, 1. Pet. 1. 2. Pet. 1.
that Christ (as touching the flesh) should spring of the fruit of his
loins, and sit upon his seat: he knowing this before. etc. By the which
words, he teaches us that no man ought to marueyle that David prophesied
these things of Christ, which was promised to be the savior of the world. He
uses two kinds of argument. The first is taken of David's person and of his
office. For all men know that David was a Prophet. But this was the office of
all Prophets, by the spirit of Christ to search out his mysteries, chiefly
his death and resurrection, as Peter in other places diligently teaches. And
if a man search the books of the Prophets, he shall there find manifest and
plain prophecies of Christ, and of his kingdom, which thing Christ himself
acknowledged, saying after his resurrection: It behooued that all the things
should be fulfilled which was written in the law of Moses and in the Prophets
concerning me. Therefore what marueyle is it that David being a Prophet, Luc.
24.
prophesied of Christ? The other argument is touching the promises of God. God
had promised by an oath unto David, that out of his loins should spring he
that was promised to be the savior of the world, which should establishe the
throne of his kingdom, and possess it for ever. Therefore David ought and
might easily expound the mysteries of that sa^iour ^o promised. And the things
here rehearsed, ought manifestlye to be understood of him, because they can
not be meant of David, nor of any other. The promises made long ago unto
David, appertain to the explication of this place. Amongst which, the chief
is that, that Nathan the Prophet by the spirit of God declared in these
words, when David consulted touching the building of the Temple: When thy
days be fulfilled, thou shall sleep with thy fathers, and I will set up thy
seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy body, 2. Sam. 7.
and will stablish his kingdom. He shall build an house for my name, and I
will stablish the seat of his kingdom for ever. etc. Which place as may
easily be perceived, can not be understood of Solomon, because he was borne,
and set in his kingdom, David being yet alive, neither was the seat of his
kingdom continual. But this promise is fulfilled in Jesus Christ, which many
years after took flesh of the stock of David, and appointed the house of
God, that is to say, the congregation of all Nations and peoples, whose
kingdom (as the Angel testifies) shall have none end. Luc 1.
Besides this promise, to put all things out of doubt, he added an oath,
whereof Peter in this place makes mention, and which is expressed in the
scriptures. For hereunto appertains that which we read Psalm. 89. I have
sworn once by my holy nesse that I will not fail David. His seed shall endure
for ever: and his seat is like as the sun before me. He shall stand fast as
the moon, and as the faithful witness in heaven. etc. And again. The Lord
has made a faithful oath unto David, Psalm. 132.
and he shall not shrink from it. Of the fruit of thy body shall I set upon
thy seat. And meet and convenient it is that we should add hereunto, that
which is read of the Priesthood of Christ, confirmed with the oath of God. For
David prophesying hereof says: The Lord has sworn and will not repent him:
Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech. Psalm. 110.
Where therefore David was instructed with such and so many promises of God,
it is easy to perceive, that this ought to be understood of the true
Messiah, which is the very son of David, because they are more excellent and
high mysteries, than can fall out either upon David, or any of his children.
But before we leave this place, two things are to be noted.

The old fathers were not utterly void of the knowledge of Christ.
First, we are taught that the ancient fathers were not altogether ignorant of
Christ's mysteries, and specially those which concern his death and
resurrection: In deed we must confess that a more full knowledge hereof was
reserved unto the time appointed. But to deny Antiquity, the whole knowledge
of Christ were to rash a part, because we know Christ testifies of Abraham,
that he rejoiced to see his day, that he saw it and was glad. John. 8.
And as we said erewhyle, he says Moses and the Prophets prophesied of his
mysteries. This might be proved by authority of elder promises, and the
books of the Prophets abundantlye, if need so were. But let it suffice us to
learn this, namely, that the books of the old Testament appertain to us
also: which thing many now a days over boldly use to deny. For it is
evident, that in them the knowledge of Christ is contained. Therefore we must
confess that they appertain to us also, unless we will reject the knowledge
of Christ, as nothing belonging unto us. How much better does Paul who says:
Whatsoever things are written before time, are written for our learning, that
through patience and comfort of the Scriptures we might have hope. Romans 15.
Add hereunto that which he says in the second Epistle to Timothy Cap. 3.

God swears.
The next thing worthy to be observed in this place, is how God does vouchsafe
with an oath to confirm and establishe our redemption and salvation, which
only is included in Christ our Lord. Howbeit the credit and authority of Gods
word alone, far passes any oath that can be made. Howbeit that high God
stoupeth down to our capacity, because he would have us nothing doubt of our
salvation. And he bound not himself on this wise to David only, but also to
Abraham, as Paul says. Heb. 6.
For to him it is said. I have sworn by my self (says the Lord) because
thou have done this thing, and have not spared thine only son. etc. Gene. 22.
Afterward this oath was repeated again, where the Lord said to Isaac: I
will perform the oath which I swear unto Abraham thy father. etc. Gene. 26.
And hereunto appertain those earnest and solemn contestations of God the
father, wherewith he bears witness from heaven that Jesus Christ is his
beloved son, for whose sake he is reconciled unto us. Math. 3.17.
And the son himself binds his promise to us by an oath, as often as he
repeateth that verilye I say unto you so much used in the Gospel. These
things serve much for our comfort, and instruction, we are taught to make much
of Christ, and not to despise the salvation which comes by his merit, and is
offered us by preaching of the Gospel, as he commanded. In time passed (as
Paul says) they which had transgressed the law of Moses, dyed without
mercy under two or three witnesses. How much sorer shall he be punished, Heb.
10.
which treads under foot the son of God, and counts the blood of the
new Testament as an unholy thing. etc. And John the Apostle admonishes us
earnestly hereof saying: if we receive the witness of men, the witness of
God is greater which he testified of his son. He that believes in the son
of God, 1. John 5.
has the witness in himself. He that believes not God, has made him a
liar, because he believed not the record that God gave of his son. etc. But
what can be more horrible than to accuse God of a lie, which is both eternal
truth, and also may so easily revenge the contempt of himself? Furthermore,
these things comfort us as much in the conflict of temptations. Satan many times
goes about to call the certainty of our salvation into doubt. But if we
consider how the same is sealed and confirmed, as it were by an oath, our
faith can not waver. For God is true, and his word endures for ever. Isa. 40.


But Peter returns to Christ, and proves that in him whatsoever things
David before times prophesied of the Messiah, are fulfilled. Whatsoever was
prophesied of the Messiah is fulfilled in Christ.
The end of all his sayings, is that men should understand how Jesus of
Nazareth was the savior of the world that was promised. And of a many of
things which he might have alleged, he speaks only of the resurrection and
ascension, because these two sufficed his purpose, and served chiefly for the
present cause and controversy, which rose by sending of the holy ghost. We
shall speak of each of them in order.

He reherseth the article of the resurrection to prove Christ to be the savior
promised, which argument Paul uses also. By the resurrection Jesus is proved
to be the Messiah. Romans 1.
Of Peter's words we may frame this argument: David a great while since,
prophesied of the Messiah, that neither his soul should long abide with the
other souls of them that were departed, nor that his body should suffer
corruption, because God would raise him from death: But this prophecy is
fulfilled in Jesus of Nazareth. Ergo, it is manifest that Jesus of Nazareth is
the Messiah and savior. Touching the Mayor, there is no doubt. Therefore Peter
labors in proouing the Minor, the verity whereof he confirms by the
common testimonye of the Apostles, of this thing (says he) we be all
witnesses. Neither might these witnesses in whom there were such evident
tokens of the holy ghost, and of Gods working, be easily rejected or contemned
of men in their right wits. The Apostles use oftentimes to prove Christ to
be our savior by his resurrection, because Satan through death, which happened
by reason of sin, had the rule and Lordship over us. Neither could we safely
acknowledge Christ to be our savior, except we were certain that he had
subdued the force of death.

In the mean season, we must diligently consider the loyalty and trustynesse
of Peter and the other Apostles. The Lord chose them to be his witnesses, as
we said in the first Chapter. They therefore perform the duty of witnesses
faithfully and boldly, without all fear of any peril. For in the city of
Jerusalem before a great assembly of people, they testify that Jesus is risen
again from the dead, by the power of God, yet was there a far other rumor
spread abroad in that city. For the soldiers, as is declared in the last of
Matthew, being bribed with money by the Priests, bare witness that the
Disciples by night had stolen the body of Jesus away. What a dangerous
matter it was openly to gainesay these men, every one may easily judge, seeing
they had the authority of the Priests, and of Pylate the Roman President to
defend them. But the Apostles by faith in Christ, overcame all fear of
danger, and left all men an example to follow, which have the testimony of
Jesus Christ committed unto them.

By the ascension, Jesus is proved to be the Messiah.
The other argument whereby he proves Jesus to be the Messiah promised, he
takes of Christ's ascension. And this argument it seems he uses chiefly,
because of them which might think it a ridiculous matter to preach him to be a
savior, which could be seen no where amongst men. Which also is the error of
the^ in these days, who think him not a savior, unless he will show
himself bodily unto them. But Peter speaks on this manner: He being exalted
by the right hand of God, and having received of the father the promise of the
holy ghost, has shed forth this gift which you see and hear. This saying
seems the obscurer, because for the brevity thereof, it cannot be perceived
whereunto it is to be referred. But the obscurity is easily put away, if we
join therewith, the Oracle which David uttered touching Christ's ascension.
For of this Oracle and those things that Peter says, we may frame an whole
argument after this sort. David prophesied that Christ should not only rise
again from the dead, but also taught us that he should ascend into heaven.
For so he says: Thou art gone up on high, Psalm. 68.
thou have led captivity captive, and have given gifts unto men. This thing
as also the other before, is fulfilled in Christ. For he after he was risen
again, being exalted by the mighty right hand of God, ascended up into
heaven, we looking on, and poured upon us the spirit which he obtained of God
the father: which spirit has wrought in us these gifts of tongues, which you
do see and hear. Therefore it is manifest, that this is the Messiah. Further,
no man must be offended for that he says Christ received the spirit of his
father, as though he were not of like power with the father. For Peter speaks
this of Christ's humanity, wherein Christ confesses that his father is greater
than he. Although in an other place again he says, his father and he be both
one, that is to say, in respect of his divinity. And Christ himself very
trimly loses this knot, speaking of the sending of the holy ghost, in this
wise: He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine, and shall show unto
you. John. 16.
All things whatsoever the father has, are mine. Therefore said I unto you,
that he shall take of mine, and show unto you. etc. When the comforter is come
whom I will send unto you from the father, even the spirit of truth which
proceeds of the father, John. 15.
he shall testify of me. etc. But least any man might suppose that the things
spoken of Christ's ascension, were to be understood of David, or would call
them in question, he answers them by another testimony, saying: For David is
not ascended into heaven, but he says: The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou
on my right hand, until I make thy foes thy footestoole. This argument
consists of two points. First, David ascended not into heaven: Ergo, these
things ought not to be understood of David. He denies that David is
ascended into heaven, not because he thinks him to be reckoned in the number
of the damned, but speaks of his body, which (as was beforesayd) was
consumed into dust and earth. Touching the soul, this saying of Christ
stands in force: He that believes in me, has life everlasting, and shall
not come into judgment, John. 5.
but is passed from death unto life. The other argument stands upon the
testimonye of David, who shows that these things ought not to be understood
of himself, but of Christ which should be borne of his stock. For in the
Psalm.Cx. he says: The Lord said to my Lord. etc. which place is so
clear and so undeniable, that Christ thought good to use it against the
Scribes. Math. 22.
In the mean season we are taught by Peter's example that the Scriptures ought
to be expounded by conference of other places, least, standing rashly upon some
one place, we gainesay many other, which thing is the cause of many errors in
the Church.

It is to be marked how unto Christ's ascension into heaven, Christ's absence
in body, is no damage to the believing.
he joins the sending of the holy ghost. This does he very prudently, and in
order. For hereby he teaches us that though Jesus Christ have taken his body
out of this world, yet ought he not to be contemned. For he has not for all
that, cast of the care of the Church, but by his spirit is present with the
same, by the which spirit he woorketh more effectually in the minds of those
that be his, than before he did when he was conuersaunt with us in body:
wherefore he says unto the Disciples, that it is expedient for us that he
leave the world, and go unto the father. For so place should be given to the
holy ghost, which we could not have so long as we did stick to his bodily
presence. And surely, John. 16.
after that Christ had given his body upon the aultare of the Cross for the
life of the world, and had by the raising up thereof again, overcome death,
there was no more for his body here to do upon earth. It remained therefore
that by his glorious ascension, he should open the gates of heaven, which our
sin had shut against us, and should become a pledge for us in heaven, In his
book entitled, the prescriptions against heretics.
whereby we might be assured of the inheritance and possession of heaven.
Therefore Christ carried his body into heaven, and set it on the right hand of
his father, and has sent unto us being here on the earth (to use Tertullians
term) his holy ghost to be his vicare or substitute. By the operation of him,
John. 3. 1. Peter. 1. John. 14.15. 2. Cor. 1.5. Ephe. 1.
he regenerateth us through the immortal seed of the word of God, to be the
sons of God. By him he teaches us and comfort us. The same is the earnest
or gage of our salvation. Through the encouragement, we cry Abba father. By
him it comes to pass, Romans 8. Gala. 4.
that Christ dwells in us, and we in him. All which things, since Christ
works in us most effectuallye by his spirit, there is no cause we should
complain of the absence of his body, which is resident in heaven for our
healthes sake. And they that require the presence of his body, and desire to
have it showed on earth, seem to me little mindful of the admonitions which
are read in the.xxiiij. of Matthew.

Also Peter describes the kingdom of Christ with the words of David, What
manner of kingdom Christ's kingdom is.
which it behooves us oftentimes diligently to consider. The first point
herein is, how he says Christ is exalted by the right hand of God, and
ascended into heaven. Therefore his kingdom is heavenly, not of this world, as
himself confessed before Pylate. In deed all power is given unto him in
heaven and in earth, John. 18.
but not to rule after the manner of Princes in this world, in whose reigns
must needs fall out uncertain and unstable intercourse of matters, because
they labor to obtain kingdoms by the uncertain and vain power of the
flesh. We are also taught that we must not seek for worldly goods in the
kingdom of Christ, such as are riches, honors, pleasures, friendship of the
world, and others of like sort. They are eternal, and celestial goods,
which God the father has given us in Christ. Therefore we ought altogether to
be busied in studying for them.

The right hand of God.
Then he teaches us that Christ sits at the right hand of God: by the which
phrase of speech, both a certain place is appointed of beatitude and bliss,
and also an equal power of kingdom or empire with God the father. John. 3.
For the father loves the son, and has given all things into his hands.
He also commands all men to honor the son, even as they honor the
father. John. 5.
Whereunto also this word sitting belongs, whereby is expressed the majesty
of Christ in his reign, and the sure and immovable power of his kingdom.
Last of all, he says, that all his enemies shall be subdued, and become his
footestoole. Christ is therefore a victorious king, and an invincible vanquisher
of his enemies. Satan is the captain and standerdbearer of them all, who was
threatened with death long since by the first promise of salvation that was
made in Christ, when God said: The seed of the woman shall tread down the
serpents head. Gene. 3.
And Christ teaches us that he is already judged, and cast out. In like manner
it is as plain that sin is overcome. John. 12.16.
For God (says Paul) sent his son, and has condemned sin by sin, that
is to say, by the sacrifice of his son, offered upon the altar of the cross
for sin, he has put away the guilt or trespass of sin, Rom 8.
and has taken away the power and force thereof, that it shall hereafter not
hurt us. But sin being put away, it is evident that death also must be
vanquished which fought against us by none other weapon than the sting of
sin. 1. Cor. 15.
Therefore all the power of hell is truly subdued by Christ. He also
overcomes the world, and tyraunts with all the ^able of the reprobate. For we
read that it has been long since decreed by the father that they that will
not be governed by the wholesome word of his son, shall be bruised and broken
to poulder with his rod of iron. Neither want there examples of days long
passed and now present, Psalm. 2.
which teach us what notable victories and triumphs Christ atchieueth of the
enemies of his Church. Let us learn therefore to acknowledge this king, and not
to fear this world, which when it rages most, is nearest to destruction, and
is able to do nothing against them whom Christ takes charge of, against
whom the gates of hell are not able to prevail. Math. 16.
And although we suffer afflictions in the world, let us be encouraged with
his saying, where he promyseth that he has overcome the world, John. 16.
and that we shall have peace in him.

But let us see the end of this Sermon which Peter infers in these words:
Therefore let all the house of Israel know for a surety, The conclusion of
Peter's sermon.
that God has made the same Jesus whom you have crucified, Lord and Christ.
This is a very brief, but yet a grave sentence, and very Apostolyke, every
word whereof is able to minister an argument, and matter of a long sermon. But
because we shall every where have occasion to speak more at large of these
things, we will in few words note unto you, what Peter means by this
saying. First he speaks to all the house of Israel. In the name of the
house, he comprehends all sorts and degrees of men, teaching us that Christ
is the universal savior of all men, with whom there is no respect of persons.
And this is no light or slender token of the goodness of God, that to a most
corrupt people, and yet embrued with the blood of Christ, he does vouchsafe to
promise all salvation in his son. Furthermore, let them know for a surety,
says he. Ergo, our salvation in Christ is certain, and such as a man may
safely trust to, for he cannot deceive, which is the very truth it self.
Thirdly, he shows what all men ought to know: that God has made this Jesus
of Nazareth, Lord and Christ. He calls him Lord because he is our redemer.
For, who is ignorant that redeemers have a certain rule or Lordship over them,
whom they have either redeemed with their money, or with peril of their life:
For this cause he says in the Prophet: I am the Lord: This is my name, Isa.
42.
and my glory will I give to none other. He calls him Christ, that is to
say, anointed, because he is a King and a Priest. For it is plain by the
Scriptures, that in the old time, kings and priests were used to be anointed.
And concerning the office of a King we spoke somewhat before, whereunto also
belongs the name of a Redeemer or Lord. Surely, Christ makes laws as a
king: according to them he governs the citizens of his kingdom, and
defends and enricheth them most liberally with heavenly treasure. He is also
a priest. For both in times past he taught, and at this day does teach us by
the ministry of that word, whereof he is the Author in his Church. And he has
made a full satisfaction by the sacrifice of his body, once offered upon the
cross, for the sins of all the world. And as while he was once upon the
earth he prayed for us: Heb. 2. 1. John. 2.
so even at this day he appears before God for us a faithful high Priest and
an advocate. Therefore he is in deed Christ, or the anointed of God. And it
is evident that they commit horrible sin, which reject him, and appoint them
other Lords, Kings, Priests, and Redeemers. But as Peter in the beginning of
his treaty of Christ, admonishes them of their wickedness committed against
him: so he concludes his sermon with mention of him, declaring that he talks
of him whom they crucified. We may easily judge the heynousnesse of the
offense, by the things which he so singularly commends in Christ. And he
vpbraydeth them herewith for none other cause, but for that he would inflame
them, being pricked with the conscience of their sin, to embrace Christ, and
their salvation, as shall appear by the success thereof in the sermon
following.

Luke has given us a view of the Apostles preaching. Peter comprehends in
these few words all the articles of the Christian faith. He has spoken of
God the father, creator of all things. He has spoken of the son of God,
which was made man of the stock of David, and therefore in unity of person
ought to be acknowledged for very God and man. He has taught us, that he
died, was buried, descended into hell, rose again, and ascended into heaven
for us, where he sits on the right hand of God the father, and shall come to
be our judge, what time he shall put all his enemies under his feet: yea, he
shall throw them into the lake burning with brimstone. He has showed us that
the holy ghost is come, being sent from him to govern his Church and all the
faithful. Finally, he has proved that this Jesus is the Lord and savior,
in whom remission of sins, resurrection of the flesh, and life everlasting
is purchased for all believers. Here is no word spoken of our satisfactions,
nothing of private absolution, auricular confession, pardons, purgatory, and
such like wares. Let us therefore keep the simplicity of the Apostles
doctrine, and let us embrace Jesus Christ with steadfast faith, that by him we
may be saved, to whom be all bessing, honor, power, and glory for ever.
Amen.

The.xvij. Homely.
WHEN they heard this, they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto
Peter, and the other Apostles: ye men and brethren, what shall we do? Peter
said unto them: Repent you of your sins, and be baptized every one of you,
in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins: and ye shall receive
the gift of the holy ghost. For the promise was made to you, and to your
children, and to all that are a far of, even as many as the Lord our God
shall call.
THus far has Luke rehearsed the first Sermon of the Gospel, that Peter
made at Jerusalem, after the receiving of the holy ghost. The content thereof
was, that Jesus of Nazareth, whom the Jews crucified, was Christ, and the
promised redeemer of mankind. But where it was Peter's purpose not only to
teach that, but also (as he was once told) to catch men alive, and to win
them to Christ, therefore he set the heinous wickedness of their sin against
Christ plainelye before their face. For in the beginning of his treatise of
Christ, he shows how they crucified him, whom God by many miracles declared
to be his son, and the savior which he had promised. After this, gathering
all that he had spoken of Christ into a short sum, he shows again that
they nailed him to the cross, and leaving this in their minds as a sting, he
concludes his sermon. Howbeit the success of the matter declares that these
things were spoken by Peter, not of desire to reproach them, but for their
health and saluations sake: which success Luke now describes, leaving also a
notable example, wherein the true way of attayning to salvation by Christ, is
perfectly declared. This place therefore is worthy to be diligently considered,
for the more profit whereof to be had, we shall speak of every part thereof in
order. First the Evangelist speaks of the hearers. And after that he
declares how Peter further traueyled with them.

Touching the hearers, he shows what effect Peter's sermon had. The effect of
Peter's sermon.
When they heard this (says he) they were pricked in their hearts, and said
unto Peter, and the other Apostles: ye men and brethren what shall we do? He
attributes two things unto them. First, they are pricked in heart. He
understands the terrors of conscience which rose in them by the
acknowledging of their sin, and by the feeling or fear of the wrath of God
in them. With these must we begin, if we will take any profit by preaching
of the word. For as long as we live careless in sin, and are touched with
no feeling of our sins, nor fear of the judgments of God: we can not
earnestly think of the way of salvation, as men that judge the care thereof
unprofitable and superfluous. And because this fault cleaves to us by
corruption of nature, but being delighted with the enticementes of sin,
acknowledge not our selves for sinners: it is necessary that our sins be
reproved, and accused by the word of God, which thing Christ declares to be
one of the first works of the holy ghost. By reason whereof, the word of the
Gospel is called a sword and the light. For being sharper than any two edged
sword, Heb. 4. John. 3.
it enters through even unto the dividing a sunder of the soul, and the
spirit, and of the joints and the marrowe, and is a discerner of the
thoughts, and of the intents of the heart, and sets them not only before our
selves, but before others to behold. And that this is a thing necessary, we
are taught not only by the express word of God, but also by the example of
Gods elect, to speak nothing in the mean season of the filthye children of
the world, which cannot repent. Surely David, although he were a man even
according to Gods own mind, yet did he not acknowledge his grievous sins of
adultery, manslaughter, and many such vices as followed them, till he was
reproved of the Prophet, by the word of God. And then he begins to cry
out: I have sinned against the Lord. Again: I acknowledge my faults, and my
sin is ever before me. My bones are vexed, and my soul is also sore
troubled. There is no health in my flesh because of thy displeasure: neither is
there any rest in my bones by reason of my sin. And such like as are read in
the Psalm. lj.vj.xxxviij. and in other places. And the like we may see even in
our own sins. There were now fifty days and more gone, since the death of
Christ. And how many were there at Jerusalem of them, that cried the blood of
Christ be on us, and on our children, which showed any token of repentance? But
rather lived careless, and out of doubt had perished, if god had not shaken
that carelessness of fro their minds. For they being provoked by Peter's
sermon, begin now at length to be pricked in their hearts, to tremble, and to
think of their salvation. We must say the same even of our selves, if we will
confess the truth. They therefore are greatly deceived, which will not have
sins rebuked by the word of God, and cry out that it belongs not to the
duty of Ministers to be busied in reprehending of sin. Such men find
sometime dumb dogs, which frame their doctrine according to their lusts:
but then is that saying of the Prophet fulfilled, that the sword of the Lord
comes upon the careless, Ezech. 3.33.
and the blood of them that perish shall be required at the hands of the
flattering preachers.

To this pricking of heart and terror of conscience, Let the (...) h^^rted,
(...) counsel (...) word of God.
is added an other thing, that is to say, they seek counsel at Peter and the
Apostles, how to be delivered from their sin, and to be restored again to
Gods favor. And this is no less necessary than the first, whereof we spoke
even now. For it is manifest that the very wicked are compunct and stricken
sad with the word of God, and the accusing of their sin. But as all
things work to the best in the elect: so the wicked take occasion on every
side to offend the more grieuouslye, as we see in this place it comes to
pass. For where their sins are openly detected, either through impacient
fierceness they rise against the word of God, and will not seem to have
sinned, whereof we have examples in Achab, and afterward in the Priests of the
Jews: or else turning them to their own works, they seek by them how to
satisfy the justice of God, and to avoid his wrath. And when they can see
nothing but the heynousnesse of sin, and the horrible wrath of God, then
begin they to cry out with Caine: My wickedness is greater than can be
forgiven, and so at length with Judas, come to an unhappy end. We must
therefore after the example of these men, go farther, and not stick in the
bitter terrors of conscience. We must take counsel of the thing whereof our
terror rises, that is to say, of the word of God, which (as Pelias did
sometime with his Iaueling against Telephus) both wounds our consciences, and
makes them whole again. Neither must we here be so afraid with the
grieuousnesse of sin, that we must think our selves forlorn and past hope.
For this sentence of God remains still in his full strength, Ezech. 18.
which says: I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that ^ee convert and
live. And Christ our Lord does not only promise, that they that seek shall
find, but also professes that he is a Physician for such as are sick in
conscience, Isa. 61.
and in every place bids them that traueyle and are heavy laden, Math. 11.
to come unto him. And we must think it was not without the secret instinct
and working of God, that they whose hands as yet reeked with the blood of the
son of God, were the first that heard the Apostle preach. For God in this
doing would have us persuaded, that the merit of Jesus Christ, and the
liberality of his goodness, could not be counterpeysed or outweyed with any
sins, so that we would cleave unto him by faith. But let us hear Peter's
short and sweet counsel.

Repent you, and be you every one baptized in the name of Christ, for the
remission of sins: Peter's counsel.
and ye shall receive the gift of the holy ghost. For to you was the promise
made. etc. He requires of them three things, but we will entreat only of two
at this present, of the third we will speak in the sermon following.

The first thing he dispatcheth in one word: (...) (says he) which the Latin
interpreter translateth poenitentiam agite, Repentance.
that is, repent ye. He begins with that which the Scripture every where
exacteth. Moses verily shows them which should be punished for their
offenses, and for transgressing of the law, Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 32.
that their way to be saved, stood only in repentance. That this repentance is
that thing which the Prophets chief^y urge, is more manifest than needs to be
proved. John the Baptist, the first minister of the new Testament, begins
his preaching with the same. And Christ when he begun to preach, cried:
Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Math. 3.
The same he commanded the Apostles to preach not so little as once, as may be
seen Math. 10. and Luc. 24. Therefore Peter remembering his master and the
commandment which he gave, bids them also to repent, and declares that
all he had hitherto said, touching their iniquity, was not to the end that he
would have them perish through despair, but that they should repent and be
saved. Now, because the holy ghost would have this counsel written and
registered for our sake: something must be said of repentance, that we may
learn also what is requisite for us to do.

The Latins say that they do poenitere, that is to say, repent, What
repentance is.
whom it yrketh or grieueth for that they have committed, whereof is derived
this word poenitentia, repentance. The Greeks call it (...) of this verb
(...), which signifies the correcting or amending of the mind. For (...) with
the Greeks signifies that excellenter part of the soul, which the Latins
call men's, the mind. Whereupon the Greeks call that (...) which the Latins
call understanding or perceiving with the mind. We say therefore that he does
(...), that is to repent, which understands his error, and begins
earnestlye to think of amendment. The Hebrews call it Theschubach, which is
as much to say, as conversion or turning. But because this conversion (as the
nature of the Greek word signifies) is referred to the mind, we may
briefly define repentance to be, a conversion or turning of the mind unto
God, from that which is evil and naught. The word of God proves this
definition, speaking thus by Hieremie: If thou will return thee, o Israel,
then return unto me. Hierem. 4.
And in other places the Scriptures say, they are gone from God which have
sinned. Whereof it follows necessarily, that repentance, whereby we renounce
sin, ought to be called a returning and conversion unto God. And the diligent
consideration of this definition helps most grievous errors. For there are
some which when they have sinned, use to turn unto creatures, and to the
works of their own hands, and so pollute themself with a double fault, as
the Lord says, while they forsake the fountain of the lively water, Hierem.
2.
and dig themselves pittes that will hold no water. There are another sort
that imagine penance, to be a game or stage play, and think it sufficient, if
after the manner of the Jewish hypocrites, they light wax candles, burn
incense, go barefooted, wear hearecloth, and do such like exercises, the
superstition whereof long since has been condemned, by the preaching of the
Prophets. See Esaias. 1.58. Hos. 6. Mich. 6. Zach. 7. But we shall well
understand yt all these things do little profit us, if we consider that
repentance is a conversion or turning of the mind unto God. Hereunto belongs
that which the Lord speaks. Joel. 2.
Turn unto me with all your heart, in fasting, weeping and lamentation. Rent
your hearts, and not your garments, and turn to the Lord your God. etc.

Also we may learn hereby how many parts of penance there be, The parts or
branches of repentance
and wherein it consists. The chief point is the acknowledging of our sin:
for except we have that, we can neither be sorye for our sin, nor turn from
it unto God. This knowledge is taken out of the glass of the law, which does
not only detect open and notorious sins, Romans 7.
but also discloseth the nature of sin that lies hidden in us, as Paul
teaches. Terror of conscience, sorrow of mind and contrition, follow the
knowledge of sin, whereof we spoke even now. For it cannot be but he must
altogether be afraid, must sorrow, and be contrite in heart, that beholds in
the law the countenance of God, which is angry with the heynousnesse of his
sin. And such is the force of this contrition and sorrow, that it extorteth
and forces us to confess our sin, not in another man's ear (whereof there
is neither commandment in all the Scripture, nor example) but even unto God
himself, that we be miserable and sinful wretches, as John the Apostle
teaches us in his first Epistle, and first Chapter. To confession is joined
invocation, which by no means can be separated from it. Now, of all these
springs a fervent desire of amendment of life, and not of life only, (but as
much as may be) of our whole nature. For now a man begins to mortify his
flesh, now he desires to die to the world, and to be crucified with Christ. He
is now wholly set on fire, with the desire of holiness and innocence. He
burns in the love of righteousness and truth. He is wholly occupied in good
woorks, the exercise whereof, he hears commended of God, having in the mean
while, no regard to them, which are prescribed by the superstitious traditions
of men. Finally, because he knows, that all the fountain of this evil,
sprang of going from God and his word, he labors to address himself
again wholly to the word of God, and to all his life after the rule of God.
And this is no purpose or intent for a few of days only, but a permanent and
a continual, such as by reason of our continual slippes and falls, is
n^edefull every day to be renewed. For, as the just man falls seven times a
day, so he uses seven times a day to rise again. Prouer. 24.


Hereby it appears what Peter would have them to do: verily, to acknowledge
their sins, to fear the judgment of God, to be sorry for their offenses, to
be contrite in heart, to confess their faults unto God, and to beseech him of
his grace, and finally to labor to amend their life, to mortify the flesh,
to give themselves to innnocencie, holiness, righteousness, and charity. To
this purpose the Prophet cries: Let the ungodly man forsake his own ways,
and the unrighteous his own imaginations, Isa. 55.
and turn again unto the Lord. etc. Let every man think this is spoken to
him, and compare his life with these things, and it shall easily appear what
ways he ought to take, and what to refrain.

To be baptized in the na^^ of Christ.
The second thing that Peter requires, he expounds in these words: Be you
every one baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins.
This precept seems to conteyne in it two things. For first, in that he will
have them to be baptized in the name of Christ, he sends them to Christ, and
shows them that salvation and forgiveness of sin is to be found in
Christ only. So Christ commanded them to preach, showing them that remission
of sins ought to be declared in his name. And it was necessary, Luc. 24.
because of the Phariseyes doctrine, which taught that men were justified by
their own works, which opinion also many hold in these days. And surely if
Peter had required nothing but penance, he might seem to have consented to
their doctrine. But seeing he sends them that repent unto Christ, he teaches
us plainly that we must of duty repent, and yet that al desert of
justification is to be had in Christ only. Therefore whosoever makes no mention
of Christ in teaching of repentance, offends against the example of Peter.
And so be they cause to the ignorant, to establish their own righteousness,
wherein they can find no certainty, nor soundness.

Next, he speaks of outward baptism, To be baptized for forgiveness of
sins.
which he commands them to receive, for forgiveness of sins. Which words
are not so to be understood, as though outward baptism washed us from
sin: For it is evident that we be cleansed from all our sins by the blood
of Jesus Christ. This is attributed to baptism, 1. John. 1.
because it seals in us the benefit of purification, which is gotten us by
the blood of Christ. Which thing we may see in Circumcision. For where Abraham
was justified by faith, he received Circumcision, as a sign of the
righteousness of faith. Romans 4.
So they which are contained within the Testament of Christ, and be therefore
justified, receive baptism for remission of sins: that is to say, the
righteousness of God which he has given us in Christ, is sealed in them by
baptism. Wherefore, Peter by this manner of speech, assures them of their
salvation, and comfort them by an argument deduced or taken of the end of
baptism. In the mean season, because we be taken into the Church of God by
baptism, and are become professors of Christ, as people which under his
conduct must fight against this world, and the Prince thereof: Peter requires
further of them, The confession of our faith in Christ necessary.
a free and an open confession of their faith in Christ. For Christ will have
no such worshippers as shall be ashamed of him. Howbeit the Jews did openly
deny Christ, before Pylate, while they cried they had no King or Messiah,
beside Caesar. Ma^c. 8.
Wherefore it was necessary that they should as freely confess Christ, least
they might be judged still to be of the number of the false runnagates. This
could be done no way more commodiously than by baptism, which Christ would
have administered to the end, to get and bring him disciples, as may be read.
Math. 28.

Now, if a man will compare the things together, The order of the doctrine of
justification
which have hitherto been said: it will appear after what order Peter taught
the way of justification and salvation. He began with rebuking of sin, as we
have hard before. Then when he saw them pricked and contrite in heart, he
requires them to repent, by this means bringing them to some hope of grace
and favor. Then again, least they should trust in the works of penance, and
lean upon their own righteousness: he sends them to the name of Christ,
and to his merytes. At length he commands them to profess Christ openly,
and to join themselves to his Church. This order of teaching we see the
Apostles every where observed, which they had learned of Christ their master,
as no man can deny. For thus he said a little before his departure from hence:
Luc. 24. Marc 16. Math. 28.
It is necessary that repentance and forgiveness of sins should be preached
to all Nations in my name: Go ye therefore into all the world, preach the
Gospel to all creatures, and bring me disciples from out all Nations,
baptizing them in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy
ghost. Which things if a man compare with auriculer confession, satisfactions,
merits, pardons, yeremindes, purgatory, and infinite such like, exacted of
those that should do penance: he shall find they are far wide a sunder.

Furthermore, Peter comfort with promises.
because Peter had to do with them which felt themselves guilty of such an
heinous wickedness, as had not been seen the like, he comfort them with a
double promise, as is the manner of the Gospel, for fear they should be
swallowed up of desperation.

First, you shall receive (says he) the gift of the holy ghost. The gift of ye
holy ghost.
He seems to speak of a peculiar gift of the spirit, such as in the time of
the primitive Church, ye beleuers were endued with, either to speak with diverse
tongues, or else to be notable in other miracles, as hereafter in the eight
Chapter it shall appear more plainly. For it behooued to have the ministerye
of the Apostles adorned with some singular gifts, to the end, men might the
more easily be woonne unto Christ. And although these gifts in these days for
the most part be ceased: yet there remain other more necessary effects of the
spirit, through whose operation, the believing are regenerated, mortified,
renewed, assured of their salvation, emboldened and confirmed in perils, so that
they dare stoutly and without any fear, stand to the confession of the name of
Christ. For it is the spirit of adoption which uses to work al these things
in the children of God that they have need of in this world. This promise was
able singularlye to comfort them whose consciences were afraid by reason of
sin. For how could they doubt to have forgiveness of their sins, which
heard they should have the same spirit, that the Apostles had? In the mean
season this promise serves also for our instruction. For it teaches us that
true believers and Christians cannot utterly be destitute of the gifts of the
holy ghost. There are diverse operations, and diverse gifts of the spirit (as
Paul says) and we see that some excel other some therein. But there is not
the meanest of them all that is utterly void of the spirit, because they be
not the members of Christ which have not the spirit of Christ. Romans 8.
Therefore ^aine is the profession of Christ, except we show and declare that
we be quickened and governed by the spirit of Christ: Jacob. 2. Math. 5.
which thing caused the Apostle to say, that faith is known by works, and
Christ commands us to follow his father in our doings.

Secondly, he alleges an ancient promise: To you (says he) was the promise
made, The promise of the old Testament.
and to your children, and to all that be a far of, even as many as the Lord
our God shall call. These things are to be understood of the covenant and
promises which were made in the old Testament, the sum whereof may be seen:
Genes. 17. yet does Peter extend the same promises to those that are a far
of, that is, to the Gentiles, which as yet were strangers and alienes from the
society of the people of God, because he would the easilier induce and
persuade them. For they which were borne of Abraham could doubt no longer of
Gods goodness, seeing they heard the same extended also unto the Gentiles.
These things teach us to what use Gods promises serve, verily to confirm our
wavering faith in temptations and all other adversities. But before we make an
end of our sermon, two things in these words are to be noted.

The promise of salvation belongs to infants also.
First, he says the promises appertain not to the fathers only, but also to
the children. The words of the covenant teach us the same, where the Lord
says thus: I will make my bond between me and thee, and thy seed after
thee in their generations, by an everlasting Testament, that I may be God unto
thee, Gene. 17.
and unto thy seed after thee. etc. Whereof we gather, that the infants of
those that believe, whom we cannot exclude from the name of seed, are as well
contained within the covenant of salvation, as are the elders and fathers. For
the objection of those that say, the words of God are only to be understood
of that posterity of Abraham, which when it was of age, was able to profess
their faith, is nor ought to be of no authority. For it is evident that Isaac
and Jacob were included in the covenant before they were borne, as may be
seen. Genes. 17.25. Romans 9. And Paul doubts not to call those children
holy, which have but one parent faithful and a believer. 1. Cor. 7.
Christ also plainly teaches us that the kingdom of God belongs unto
children. Marc. 10.
Here the Papists and Anabaptists errors are confuted, whereof, the one deny
salvation and the fruition of God to children that die without baptism: and
the other keep children from baptism, whom Christ commands to be brought
unto him.

Then next, declaring the promise of salvation, The vocation of salvation, is
of gods free mercy.
he makes mention also of Gods vocation and calling, least any man might
think the children of God were either borne of the flesh, or of the merit of
their own free will, and strength: for the children of the flesh be not the
children of God, but the children of the promise. And it is not in man's will
or cunning, Romans 9.
but in the mercy of God. Salvation is set before us in Jesus Christ, and as
the parable of the Gospel says, the time of marriage approaches, and all
things are ready. But it is needful that men should be called and bidden,
that they may come unto the feast. Therefore God sends forth the preachers of
of his Gospel, whose voice is gone throughout the world many years since.
Howbeit, because they can do nothing in the minds of men, it is needful
they should be drawn by God, and by the operation of his spirit, according
to that saying of Christ: No man comes unto me, John. 6.
except my father draw him. And God according to his free and holy will
works, and the wind blows where it will. By the which it is manifest,
John. 3.
that our salvation depends upon the mere favor of God, which calls whom
he will, draws whom he will, and makes them like to the image of his son.
In the mean season it is our duty, being called, to answer, being drawn,
not to pull back, and being subject to the Gospel, through the obedience of
faith, to make sure our vocation and election, 2. Pet. 1.
as the Apostle teaches.

This may suffice for this time touching Peter's counsel of salvation, who
shows them what way to take, whose consciences are feared with the
consideration of their sins. The residue behind remaining shall be entreated
of in the next sermon. Let us follow the holy ghosts counsel, which spoke by
the mouth of Peter. Let us repent us truly, let us seek whatsoever things
belong to our salvation in Christ, let us give our selves wholly to him, and
freely profess him. Let us not break our promise made to him in baptism, but
let us live a life worthy the name of Christ, and then we shall live hereafter
with him in heaven, to whom be blessing, honor, power and glory for ever.
Amen.

The.xviij. Homely.
AND with many other words bare he witness, and exhorted them, saying: save
your self from this untoward generation. Then they that gladly received his
preaching, were baptized: and the same day there were added unto them about
three thousand souls. And they continued in the Apostles doctrine and
fellowshippe, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers. And fear came over
every soul. And many woonders and signs were showed by the Apostles.
THe Apostle Peter so ordered his first Sermon of the Gospel, that he
earnestlye vpbrayded his hearers with the grievous and heinous offense that
they committed against the son of God. But after they were overcome with the
conscience of their sin, and sought counsel how to be saved, he gave them
both friendly and faithful counsel: showing them that way of salvation, that
all men in these days that are desirous to be saved, must likewise take. For
he prescribed them to repent, and sends them to Christ, to be consecrated to
him by externe and public baptism, that in his name they might obtain
remission of their sins, and the gift of the holy ghost. But because there
were a great many, whose authority might pull them from the way of salvation,
or at the leastwise greatly hinder them, he warns them also of those persons,
which is the first thing in this sermon, whereunto afterward Luke joins the
effect and fruit that followed of the Apostles counsel, with an elegant
president of the ancient and primitive Church, all which are very worthy to be
diligently considered. Of Peter, thus says the Evangelist: with many other
words bare he witness, and exhorted them saying: Save your selves from this
untoward generation. The admonition going before might have seemed sufficient,
and verily it comprehends all the order of true salvation. But because it
might seem an hard and weighty matter to forsake and cast away the ancient
religion of their forefathers, and to embrace a new, having the example of many
against them: it was necessary to use other admonitions, wherein he shows
that Peter used great earnestness, and passing vehemence. For he did not
simply monishe them only, but also used many obtestations and exhortations. And
this was the sum and end of them all: To save themselves from that untoward
generation. By this word saving, he admonished them, that their salvation is
in peril, which they could not attain to, except they would separate
themselves from such as they were.

The untoward generation are the Priests and Scribes.
First, let us see of whom he speaks. For although it might seem he spoke of
the whole nation of the Jews, which was guilty of Christ's bloodshed: and was
polluted with the greatest crime that could be: yet chiefelye was this name
due to the Priests and Scribes, who as it is evident, were the chief authors
of all the calamities that were among that people. They were puffed up with the
pride of their gorgeous and holy titles and styles. For besides that they
challenged the common name of the children of Abraham, they thought also they
only had the knowledge of the law, and they were taken of every man as guides
of the blind, lights to them that walked in darkness, instructors of the
unwise, and teachers of the unlearned, Romans 2.
as appears by Paul's words. But Peter with great plainness calls them a
naughty, perverse, and untoward generation, following the example of John
Baptist and Christ, who before that, had greeted them by the same names. For
John called them the generation of vipers. Math. 3.
And Christ plainly called them, a naughtye and adulterous generation. Math.
12.16. John 8.
Let no man impute this to evil speaking, or railing, a thing far unfit and
unseemly for the holy spirit: for diverse weighty causes urged Peter to paint
them out by these names. First, where they despised the faith of Abraham, which
only makes us the children of God, and in the mean season challenged to
themselves, the names of his children: they ought not to be taken for any such.
Next, because their authority was great with all men, for that they were in an
office long before appointed of God, and gloried in that they successed most
holy men: it was needful they should be reproved, and known unto all men
for swar^ers from them, least any man should be deceived with their glorious
styles, and vaunt of their succession. Therefore Peter does wisely, godlily,
and boldly, in calling them a naughty and perverse generation. For in so doing,
he both admonishes us, that they ought to be avoided, and puts the simple
out of fear and doubt, which thought it an heinous matter openly to forsake
them.

By Peter's example, we also in these days are taught what to do. A great many
suppose a bare and simple knowledge of the truth, is sufficient, whereof they
use marvelously to glory* among those that are desirous of the truth. And yet
they are still conuersaunt with the wicked, and with the professed enemies of
Christ: yea, they keep company with the authors of false doctrine, and can not
abide that the Ministers of the Gospel should openly reprove them. But it is
plain that Peter the Apostle was of a far other judgment: who would have
the faithful separate themselves from the wicked, and fears not to note
deceyuours, by the name of an untoward generation, contrary to the common
opinion of all the people. Math. 7.15.23.24. John. 10. etc
He took example of Christ so to do, which every where bids us to eschew
false teachers, and teaches us that their company is pernicious and hurtful.
The same the other Apostles also did, as it is manifest, which thought not they
had done their duty, to point at the false teachers of their days with their
fingers, but also warned us of them, whom by inspiration of the holy spirit,
they knew should come in the later age of the world, whereof we have
testimonies. 1. Timoth. 4. 2 Timoth. 3. and.4. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1. John. 2. and.4.
Therefore whosoever has in these days the ministry of the Gospel committed
to him, let him imitate the faithfulness and diligence of these men. Because
it is evident the sheep are so foolish that they can scarce beware of the
Woolfe when they are warned, yea, for hope of a little lucre, they will creep
into the mouths of them: Let them therefore paint out in their colors, and
term by their true and proper names, all these deceyuers, and take no regard
to them which for private gain, hold with them. Let other also learn to obey
their faithful aduertisementes, and to fly the professed enemies of Christ,
whose company if they avoid not, they can not be taken for the members of
Christ. Let them at the least be moved with fear of the danger, which we
know hangs both over their heads and them that follow them. For they that
refuse to come forth of Babylon, the mother of whoredom, Apoc. 18.
shall taste of those plagues also which the Lord has ordained for her.

We have therefore Peter's counsel touching the way of salvation, The effect
of the Apostles counsel.
whereunto Luke joins the notable success that followed thereof. For he
says: that they that gladlye embraced his preaching, were baptized, and the
same day there were added unto them about three thousand souls. The godly
writer in marvelous brevity comprehends a great matter. For here is
fulfilled that that Christ said unto Peter, when he was called to be an
Apostle: Luc. 5.
Hereafter thou shall take men on live. For he which a little before was but a
rude fisher, letting slip the net of the Gospel, brings three thousand
people unto the obedience of the faith in Christ, who both gladly received his
preaching, and willingly continued in the same. This place teaches us two
things very needful to be known.

The preaching of gods word is not in vain.
First, we learn that godly and faithfulfull ministers do never preach the
word of God in vain, although many things seem to stop and hinder the
course thereof. This the Lord witnesses by his Prophet: Like as the rain
and snow comes down from heaven, and returns not thither again, but
watreth the earth, makes it fruitful and green, that it may give corn to
the sower, Isa. 55.
and bread to him that eats: so the word also that comes out of my mouth,
shall not turn again void unto me, but shall accomplish my will, and
prosper in the thing whereto I send it. We have in this matter a most
manifest example hereof, where we may also see things that might hinder the
profit and fruit of Gods word. A people of nature rebellious and stubborn,
such as Moses and the Prophets describe and set forth. As many as were of any
power and authority, w^^e enemies to the doctrine. Great danger and peril in
receiving the doctrine of the Gospel, John. 9.
because before this, as many as followed Christ, were excommunicated. The
Apostles were rude, contemned, and despised persons, yet the word of the most
high God driven like a shower or storm with his wind or breath (which as
Christ says, blows where it likes) bursteth through all these stoppes and
impediments. John. 3.
This ought to comfort us in this age, that we despair not of Christ's Church,
and the success thereof, notwithstanding we see so diverse enterprises and
attemptes, every where busily bent, and meant against the same.

Next, we are taught what the nature of faith is, and what the property of
Gods elect people is. The property of faith, and of the elect.
For here are two things ascribed unto them. One is, that they gladly embraced
Peter's sermon. For where the minds of those that believe, are drawn with the
spirit of God, they straight way know his voice, John. 10.
and the chief shepeheards, and follow it. Neither have they any greater
pleasure than in the study of the word of God, wherein they understand that
that most merciful father, and the only author of salvation, talks with
them. The other is, that Luke says, they continued in the same, which is as
necessary a property as the first. For Christ says: He that abides unto
the end, shall be safe. But he that sets his hand to the plough, Math.
24. Luc. 9.
and looks backwarde, is not meet nor worthy of the kingdom of God. If we
compare these things with the manners of our age, it will easily appear how
unhappy an age it is. For with many and continual sermons can very few be
woonne unto Christ. And we may see even in them that have professed Christ,
either a negligent contempt of Gods word, or else some detestable lightness,
whereby upon every trifling occasion they dishonestly starte from the truth
that they have known and professed.

But let us return to Luke, which in few words sets out the form of the
primitive Church, The form and order of the primitive Church.
the manners, the rites, and the exercises of the same, the chief use whereof
is to learn us to know the order of the Apostolic Church, and wherein the
same is in these days decayed, to restore and reform it thereafter again:
They continued (says he) in the Apostles doctri ne and fellowship, and in
breaking of bread, and in prayers. He rehearses four things, of every which
we have something to say.

In the first place the Apostles doctrine: what that was, The doctrine of the
Apostles.
it shall otherwheres appear. It was Christ's commandment, that they should
teach all Nations, those things that they had before learned of him. Math 28.
Luc. 24.
He commanded them to preach repentance and forgiveness of sins in his
name. In the which articles it is plain, the knowledge of the whole law and of
Gods will, and all the manner of our salvation is contained. A taste of this
doctrine we saw in Peter's sermon gone before. And their writings abundantly
declare, that they observed this form of doctrine in all places. Therefore the
faithful of the primitive Church abode in that order and trade of doctrine
which we see at this day comprehended in the books of the Apostles: and in
these is no mention made of any man's traditions, and inventions. Luke places
doctrine first, because by teaching, the Church is gathered together, and by
the same (as Paul declares) comes faith, and all the believing are borne
again of the immortal and eternal word: touching which point see Romans 10. 1.
Pet. 1 etc. Here we learn that the chief care in the Church ought to be for
doctrine. For where through it (as was said even now) we be gathered into the
unity of faith: it cannot be chosen, but they must fowly and miserably be
scattered, that admit diverse and uncertain doctrines. Those be diverse and
uncertain, which de pend and consist of the will of man. Wherefore it
behooves us to hold and retain the Apostolic doctrine, which they learned
at Christ's mouth, and which they being illuminated with the holy ghost,
taught to all Nations upon the earth. This doctrine is both certain, plain,
per^i^e, and autentike, so that it needs neither man's invention nor
authority, either to commend or confirm it. John speaking of this doctrine,
says: 1. John. 2.
Let that which you heard from the beginning remain in you. And Paul will
not have himself believed, no nor an angel coming from heaven, if he dare
to preach any other Gospel or way of salvation, than the Apostles have
taught. This reprooueth the unconstant wethercockes of these days, who have a
delight to dally with doctrine and religion, and dare every day alter and
change it at their pleasure, and for private lueres sake, as we read
Jeroboam used to do. As though the use of religion and doctrine, 1. Reg. 12.
were to none other end, but to keep men in awe, as it were, with vain
buggebeggers. Here are they also reproved, which like children suffer
themselves to be led with every blast of doctrine, contrary to the precept of
Paul. For the chief mark of those that be faithful and true Christians,
Ephe. 4.
is a faithful and constaunt keeping of the Apostles doctrine. Whosoever
rashly forsakes this doctrine, he must needs confess that he knows not at
all what the Church of Christ is.

Secondly he says that they continued in communicating, Communicating of
goods.
he understands the beneficence and liberality they used toward the poor:
according to that saying of the Apostle: To do good, and to distribute forget
not. Heb. 13.
He joins this next unto doctrine, because that by it (as was even now
said) we are united unto Christ our head, as members of one body. Therefore
they that be in this wise united together, must count each others adversity,
and prosperity as their own: whereunto it seems Christ had a respect, where
he showed that love was the cognisaunce and badge of his Disciples. John. 13.
And this is a singular and worthy praise of beneficence, to have the next
place unto doctrine, among the exercises of the Church. Whereby we may easily
perceive what to think of them who are touched with no pity of their needy
brethren, but snorting in wealth themselves, care not though all other want, so
they may enjoy the riches and delights of this world. But because we mean
hereof to speak more hereafter, let this little for this time suffice.

The breaking of bread or receiving together.
Thirdly, he recites breaking of bread: by the which he understands the
mystical supper of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ. He uses this name, for
that in the supper the bread is publicly and solemnly broken, partly to set
forth the memory of the Lords death, and partly to put us in mind, that we
were the causers of the death of Jesus Christ, seeing it was necessary he
should suffer and die for our sins. He makes mention only of the supper,
not for that he barreth baptism out of the Church, but because he had spoken
thereof before, where he said they were baptized. And he speaks of those
which were already received into the Church, not of their children, and those
that should afterward profess Christ, whereof we gather that baptism ought
not to be yterated, because it is sufficient to be once received into the
Church of Christ. Another reason why he spoke of the supper was, because Christ
ordained it to be a solemn memorial and remembrance of his death, which for
this cause ought to be the oftener celebrated. Mark here in the mean while,
the simplicity of the primitive Church, which being contented with the rites
and sacraments delivered by the Lord, neither durst devise any new, ne yet set
forth the old with any new ceremonies, for fear of prescribing Christ. And
although Luke express not the rytes, and order of the mystical supper, as
they used it: yet there is no doubt but they had a respect to Christ's
institution, because Paul afterward confesses, that he delivered unto the
faithful that order which he received of the Lord, and reuoketh them which
had swarued from the same to the observation and keeping thereof. These things
ought they to have marked, which glorying in the name of the Gospel, are so
bold as to change and alter the manner of the Lords supper, ordained by Christ
himself. For to say nothing of the lights, the riot in vestiments, the
pieuishe gesturing, and infinite such like, which they (perhaps of a good
zeal) thought to commend the authority of the supper the more with: this me
thinks, can not be pardoned, that they have taken from the supper, the
breaking of bread, whiles they make the pieces of the mystical bread round,
before they come to the supper, and put them whole into the mouths of the
receyuers. If they take away this breaking, what will they leave us whereby to
remember the death of Christ, or to admonish us of our sins, and of
repentance? considering the breaking of bread was of such authority in the
primitive Church, that under that name they comprehended the whole supper of
the Lord. Therefore we must hold fast the ancient simplicity, which if any
man dislyke, certes, he to boldly contemns the authority of Christ, by whose
institution the same was commended.

Praying.
Last of all, he speaks of prayers, which we suppose ought to be understood
of public prayers. For Luke means not to tell what every man did privately
at home in his own house, but what the public exercises of the Church were.
He did not think it good to forget publyke prayers which Christ commended unto
us by a notable promise, where he says: If two of you agree in earth, upon any
manner of thing, whatsoever they desire, they shall have it of my father which
is in heaven. Math. 18.
And we read in Joel the Prophet, that public prayers are greatly commended
in times of affliction. For where God rejoices in the unanimity of the godly
and faithful, he cannot choose, but grant the prayers of a great many which
with one heart and mouth (as it were) burst in upon him. And if we diligently
consider the manifold hazardes on every side of us, it shall appear they are
not without a cause commended unto us. Wherefore their blindness, and
slothfulness is greatly to be bewailed, which both privately, in their own
house call very seldom upon God, and openly despise and neglect the public
prayers of the Church, yea, rascallye deride the holy assemblies which the
Church has ordained, for preaching of the word, and for public prayers.

Here therefore we have the exercises of the primitive Church, which no man, I
think, will deny to be both Apostolic and Christian. That Church continued
in the Apostolic doctrine, by mean whereof it was gathered together, and by
baptism. It did exercise mutual and public benevolence and liberality
toward all Nations. It observed the order of the mystical supper, as Christ
did institute it. It continued stedfastlye and dailye in praying. Whosoever
endeavor in these days, thus to do, ought to be taken for the members of the
Church, and for Christians, although they be hated and despised of all the
world beside. And whosoever we see estraunged and divided from these ways, it
is impossible they should either be Christians or Apostolic. The worshippers
of the sea of Rome, glory now a days in the title of the Church, and condemn
us of heresy, because we are departed from them. But they must first prove
that the name of the Church, ought to be with them. If they deserve the title
of the Church, why neglect they the Apostles doctrine? why do they persecute
it with fire and sword? why lode they them with new traditions, whom Christ
has made free from the yoke of the law, by the price of his own blood? why
do they riotously spend the goods of the Church, given by the liberality of
Princes, and private men, to relieve the poor with, and for the most part
bestow them on ruffyans, iesters, and buggered boys? why profane they the
supper of the Lord, and turn it into a sacrifice for the quick and the
dead? why have they in steed of public prayers, brought in a roaring and
yelling of an outlandishe tongue? These things might be dilated at large, so
that all men might see they are most unworthy the name of the Church. But it
suffices to diligent hearers of the word, to give but an occasion to consider
further hereof. In the mean season, let none amongst us that glory in the name
of the Gospel, think all is well at home, seeing that in us also remain many
things to be amended. The doctrine of the Apostles sounds in our Churches,
but how little a great many set by it, the thing it self declares. The study
of charity and distribution is waxed cold. The use of the supper with some is
far degenerated from the primitive simplicity, with other some it is made
little account of. What negligence reigns in public prayers, may be judged
by the Church assemblies, to the which very few use to come, and they seldom
times. Wherefore we also must frame our selves better to the primitive order,
if we also will not in vain brag of the Church.

What defended ye church.
But some may marueyle by what succor or defense the primitive Church could
live in safety among such professed enemies in so bloudthirstie a City? This
Luke declares, saying: fear came upon every soul, and many woonders and
signs were showed by the Apostles. The minds therefore of the wicked were
bridled with a certain secret fear. They saw the marvelous boldness of the
Apostles, and their bold liberty of speech. They saw them who not long
before were enemies of Christ suddenly changed. They saw signs and wonders
wrought by the Apostles. They marueyle therefore and are amazed. Add hereunto
the spirit of Christ, which as he works in the elect, a childely fear,
hope, faith, and obedience, so he horribly troubles and fears the wicked
with the conscience of their sin. They fear therefore to begin any thing
against the green springth of Christ. So God can defend his sheep in the
midst of the woolues. For we depend not upon the will or power of our
enemies, but upon the counsel of Gods providence. With this we read the
Patriarchs sometime were defended among the bloody Nation of the Chanaanites,
the Lord thundering in their minds: Touch not mine anointed. etc. Psalm. 105.
With the same succor and defense is the Church guarded also in these days,
wherewith Christ has promised always to be present. These things ought to
stir us up, and to embolden us. We have professed in our baptism to serve
Christ. Let us give our selves to such things as become Christians, and let us
not fear the enterprises of the world. For faith which is our victory, 1.
John. 5.
overcomes the world. With this, let us embrace Christ truly, who being our
Captain and Protector, we shall be able to overcome. To him be blessing,
honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.xix. Homely.
AND all that believed, kept themselves together, and had all things common, and
sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as every man
had need. And they continued dailye with one accord in the Temple, and brake
bread from house to house, and did eat their meat together with gladness,
and singleness of heart, praising God, and had favor with all the people. And
the Lord added to the congregation dailye, such as should be saved.
AS God would have all the mean of our salvation comprehended in his only
son Jesus Christ: so is it manifest that the same appertains only to them
which be members of his Church. For the Church is commonly called his body,
because it is by faith united and knit to one head which is Christ, which
pours into all his members the spirit of health and life. And as it cannot
be that a member divided from the body, can feel any part of lively spirit
that comes from the head: so is it impossible, that they can be quickened
with the spirit of Christ, which are divided from the Church, which is his
body. And because all sects that ever were or yet be, challenge to them the
title and name of the Church of God: it is necessary to have some exact
knowledge of the true Church, least other either deceive us, or we our selves,
by a false and counterfeyt name of the Church. Which thing caused Luke, moved
by the holy ghost, so diligently to describe the order and manner of the
primitive Church. For this is the end and scope of this description, that we
should hereby frame a true and perfect pattern of a Church, according to the
which, we might both judge of others, and also rule our selves. Yesterdaye he
began certain principal and most general points, of things appertaining
to the same, declaring how the first believers were gathered together, by
Peter's preaching, and were taken by baptism into the fellowship of Christ and
his Church. Furthermore, he rehearses their studies and exercises, such as
were of continuance in the Apostles doctrine, mutual benevolence, and helping
one another, the godly and sincere use of the mystical supper, and continual
prayers. But because in these points some things remained, requiring a further
declaration, he now adioyneth and supplyeth the same. And first he speaks of
the mutual communion and distribution of their goods. Then entreats he of
their public assemblies and meetinges. Thirdly, he describes the whole order
of their life and conversation. And at length shows how greatly they profited
by these their exercises.

To the mutual and common distribution of goods, it appertains,
Communicating of goods
where he says: All that believed kept themselves together, and had all things
common, and sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as
every man had need. First he attributes to them unity and conjunction of
minds, which is the very spring and fountain of a ready good will to help.
For although the Greek phrase (...) (that is, they were together) may be
referred to the place, yet it shall be more commodiously expounded of the
joining together of their minds, forasmuch as the things that follow
abundantly show, that they dwelt not together in one house, but in diverse. The
knitting together of minds brought forth this communion of goods, and all
kind of benefits, which extended so far, that many sold their possessions,
and made their goods common to all men, least the poorer sort through
impaciencie or any other occasion that might be given, should fall from the
truth.

It is diligently to be enquired what the manner and order of this communion
was. For where the Anabaptists and diverse such newfangled and factious
fellows understand it not, they would bring in Plato his communion of all
things, and say, it is unlawful that any Christian man should possess any
thing of his own: whom we might shortly answer, that of a singular example,
no general rule ought to be made. But for the simples sake it must be proved
by arguments, that they are fowlye deceived. First, the express
commandments of God repugne against their opinion. For he has given laws,
touching the ordering of families and housholdes, he has prescribed rich men
diverse duties: which were needelesse, if it were not lawful for a Christian,
to possess somewhat of his own. Paul surely commands rich men, 1. Tim. 6.
not to forsake or cast away their riches, but to use them godlily, and in
holy works. 1. Tim. 5.
He says that they which provide not for their family and house, are worse
than Infidels. But what need we of such care and providence to feed our own
folk, if we ought to possess nothing of our own, but may use other men's
goods as common to us with them: Likewise theft is forbidden by God, with all
kind of deceyte, fraud, and guile. But how can there be any theft where all
things are common? But where our adversaries contend by examples, let us by
examples confute them. And we will easily prove this was not the Apostles
mind nor meaning, that all things should be common without any property
belonging to any man. Math. 27.
Joseph of Arimathea, which honored the son of God with his burial, was
rich, and also a Disciple of Christ. We may say the same of Nicodemus, Lazarus
and his sisters, and Simon the leprouse: who both kept their houses and goods,
and used them to the relief of such as belonged to them, and of Christ, and
his disciples. To these may we join the women, which also, as it is said in
Scripture, ministered to Christ (not of other men's, and common goods) but of
their own. Luc. 8.
It is further manifest that our Lord never used any man's goods against the
will of the owner. For he took the Ass whereon he rode into the City, by
request and entreaty: and the house where he kept his last passover, he
obtained by the leave of the Goodman of the house. What injustice then shall it
be, for men to challenge more right and interest in other men's goods, than
Christ's example will suffer, to whom all power is given in heaven and in
earth? And even in this self book ^hal be rehearsed the examples of diverse,
whose faith is singularly commended, which neither sold their houses, nor made
their goods common. Of which number are Thabita, Lydia, Mary the mother of
Mark, Simon the Tanner, Cornelius the Captain, Philip, and diverse other. What
shall we say of Caius the host of all the congregation? What of Philemon, w
hich had a servant bought with his own money: Romans 16.
which thing Paul so little reprooueth, that he sends him back again his
servant which ran away from him. But what need we examples set from other
places, whereas this present place evidently proves a property and
possessing of goods? For first the Christians sold their possessions, and if
it be a fault for one to have any thing of his own, then caused they other
men to offend, to whom they sold their goods. Yea, they must be convinced
to have used couine and deceyt, taking money for those things which by Gods
law no man might keep or hold as his own. But doubtless they whose faith,
godliness, and religion, the holy ghost so greatly commends, were clear and
free from both these. Further Luke makes mention here, of distribution,
whereby was given to every man as he had need. It was not lawful for every
man, to take at his pleasure. Besides that, no man was compelled to sell that
he had, or to give it, but all this distribution depended upon each man's good
will, as we shall learn hereafter in the example of Ananias and Sapphyrae.
Wherefore by this word (common) is understood nothing, but a voluntary
contribution, whereby every man gave, as seemed him good, after his ability,
to the relief and maintenance of the poor, least through impatiencie and
poverty they should take any naughty ways, or turn to their Jewish religion
and superstition again. The diligent consideration of the Communion which we
have in Christ, and the fervent desire of the love of God, wherewith every man
is inflamed when he sees his brother in need, enforced them thus to do,
which, as John says, 1. John. 3.
cannot shut up the bowels of pity. Over and besides this, the first believers
were to be envred by this voluntarye contribution, to take the more patiently
the loss of their goods, which shortly after should ensue, when persecution
arose: seeing they had learned before to bestow them on others, and were
contented themselves to live with a little.

Therefore this place ministers no example of confusion, whereby these
phrenetike disturbers of commonweals may be mainteyned: but only a certain
liberality toward the poor is in this place commended, which God would have
always to flourish in his Church. We know what God says, Deuter. 15. Let
there be no beggar at all amongst you. Deuteronomy. 15.
Yet God was not ignorant there would be always that should be pinched with
penury. But that the same should run vagarant about, as public spectacles
of poverty and beggerie, is most contrary to the nature of charity, whereunto
all Gods people are bound. And there are diverse other laws of God extant,
Deuteronomy. 14.15.16.24. etc
whereby an order is declared how the poor may be commodiouslye provided for,
that they need not go begging from door to door. Hereof it comes to pass,
that the Prophets in every place commend the poor unto us. And Christ does
vouchsafe so to commend the care and help that ought to be taken for them,
that he testifyeth, he will in the later day reward them that have done good
to the poor for his sake, Mat. 25.26.
even as though they had done it to himself: which order and institution was
of such force and authority with the Apostles, that they were not ashamed to
make provision for the poor. Yea, when Paul and Barnabas had declared the
trade of their ministry, to John, Peter, and James: they thought good to
admonish them of this one thing, Galat. 2.
that they should not neglect the poor whom they knew Christ had so
diligently commended unto them. Besides that, Paul exhorts the Corinthians,
that they should not only see for the provision of their own poor, 1. Cor.
16. 2. Cor. 8.9.
but also (where they were very rich) they should help the needye brethren at
Jerusalem, which were very poor. And surely, it is evident that our
predecessors had a great care hereof, if we consider the donations, and
foundations, both of Princes and private men, which with greater liberality
had given their goods to the Church, to the end that both purity of doctrine
might be preserved, and the poor and needy relieved and helped. But in these
days religion is grown into such contempt, that they are very few and scant
which will give ought of their own, but every where there are enough which will
rape and reave, and prodigally waste that which others have given. They shall
one day prove that Christ is a revenger which will not contemn the cry of
his poor, and will most severely revenge the spoil and waste of his Church.
And it is to be feared least they shall leave them to the wicked, enemies of
the Church, and faith, to be rifled, because they disdain to bestow them on
their even Christians, the brethren of Christ.

But let us return to Luke, The congregation and meetings of the faithful.
which describes the publyke and holy assembly of the Church, where he says
they continued every day in the temple with one accord. Then they came
oftentimes together in the temple, not for that they would be at the Jews
sacrifices, which they knew were abolished through the blood of Christ: but
because of the concourse of the people, that they might teach and win the
more unto Christ. By this example, we are taught to seek occasion on every
side, to set forth the kingdom of Christ: and for this cause the people ought
oftentimes to meet together, that there may be the greater number to hear the
word of God. For where the faithful are governed by the light of the truth,
they cannot be ashamed thereof, John. 3.
and seek not darckenesse and corners, as they do, whose works be evil.
Uerily we read that Christ taught always openly, Luc. 22. John. 18.
and thereby excused himself both when he was taken, and afterward also
before Caiphas. And Paul the Apostle in his first Epistle to the Corinthians
the.xj. and.xiiij. Chap. diligently describes the public assemblies and holy
meetinges: which he would never have done, if he had not understood they had
been of much force to the setting forth of Gods true religion.

Two things are ascribed to the primitive Church: continuance together, and
unanimity of minds, which are needful at all times, but specially in
assemblies and Church meetinges. For where God (as it has otherwheare been
said) has commended them by a singular promise: such an earnest study and
perseverance in keeping the same, is meet for Christians. Again, where these
assemblies are made, both for doctrine sake, for public prayers, and use of
the sacraments, unanimity for this purpose is chiefly requisite. With this it
becomes Ministers of the word to be joined together, least they be authors of
partaking, and sects, such as we know were once in the Church of Corinth:
but let them with one accord urge and set forth the doctrine of truth, and
labor to bring Disciples unto Christ, as he commanded in the.xxviij. chap. of
Matthew. That unanimity in prayers, is of great weight before god, appears
hereby, because mutual love is every where commanded, and Christ earnestly
desires of his father, John. 17.
that all the believing may be one, as he and his father are one. The same
reason may be made also of the sacraments. For where they seal unto us the
benefits of Christ, and are tokens and pledges of the fellowship and unity
which we have in Christ, by the using whereof we are taken into one body with
Christ: it cannot be that they can use them duly which are at enmity amongst
themselves. These things ought well to have been considered in these days,
where there is great fault committed on all sides. For they that glory in the
doctrine of the Gospel, and have enjoyed the same a long while, wax slack
for the most part, and are quite void of perseverance, as though they had
attained already to perfection, and had now no more to do. They are divided
into diverse and sundry sects, and one of them exco^municateth another. So that
it must needs come to pass that Paul says: Galat. 5.
If you byte and devour one another, take heed least you be likewise consumed
one of another. And it is no marueyle that the Gospel does no better succeed
and go forward, considering those men are neither fervent in perseverance, nor
joined together in unanimity, in whom the same of all other is chiefly
required. Let who so will read Eusebius preface, upon the eight book of the
Ecclesiastical history: and he shall find a most lively description of these
times, and what we may look for.

Unto these, Luke joins the trade of life that these first Christians lived
in, How the Christians lived privately.
privately among themselves: And they brake bread (says he) from house to
house, and did eat their meat together with singleness of heart, praising
God. And although this that he speaks of breaking of bread, may after a sort
be understood of the mystical supper, as is declared in the Homely before
going: yet for that he makes mention also of common meat, it seems this
place commodiously may be wholly expounded of their private trade of life, in
bidding one another to their houses to meals and repastes. Luke teaches us
that the richer sort did not only depart with some portion of their goods to
the relief in general, but also that they did exercise liberality toward
the poor, and others, of that which they had reserved peculiarly for
themselves. And he therefore expresselye mencioneth houses, that it might
appear diverse of the number of the faithful kept their houses and goods
still, whereby that confused and sedicious communion of things, which the
Anabaptists do imagine, is most strongly confuted. But here such an order and
trade of life and conversation is expressed, as is full of benefits, love, and
mutual helping one another. And because men offend much in immoderate and
excessive ryote and pride of feasting: Luke thought good chiefly to entreat
hereof, saying they observed three things therein. First, they feasted
together in gladness, according to that saying of Paul: He that shows
mercy, Romans 12. 2. Cor. 9.
let him do it with cherefulnesse: For God loves a cherefull giver. Therefore
in their feasting, there was no disdainfulness, which causes us to yrke at
our benefits, but they received every man with glad and cheerful mind, and
chiefly those whom they knew wanted living. For so Christ commands us to
bid the pore, Luc. 14.
which are not able to recompense and requite us with benefits again. Unto
cherefulnesse he adds singleness of heart, by the which he understands
sincerity of mind, void of all deceyte and guyle, which is contrary to that
vice, which will seem to benefit others, and yet seeks their own commodity
and gain, little minding the utility and profit of others. Thirdly he
rehearses thanksgiving, whereby they did set forth the bounty of God, who as
he made all things: Psalm 147. Math. 6.
so is he the preserver and nourisher of them all. And if a man join these
three together, it shall easilye appear, that they had a singular care of
temperaunce: for where this is not, there is no true cherefulnesse, and
christian simplicity, much less, giving of thanks. Therefore christian men
must draw them a rule out of these things, how to behave themselves in their
banquets. Let them know that the chief thing therein must be charity and the
benefiting of others. Let them study to be harborous, and know that they are
not appointed Lords, but stewardes of the goods that they have. Let them be
merry and cheerful in giving, because as Christ says: It is better to give,
than to receive. Acts. 20.
Hereunto let there be joined such a singleness of mind, and sincerity, as
becomes Christians. Chiefly let them be mindful of God: let them
acknowledge him to be the author of all things belonging to our life: let them
ask their necessaries of him, and thank him for his gifts received. For
through faith and giving of thanks (as Paul says) meats are sanctified. 1.
Tim. 4.
We have in Christ an example hereof, whom we never read to have broken
bread, without blessing or giving of thanks, as may be seen Math. 14.15.
Luc. 24. John. 6. etc. These things teach us what we may think of their
banqueting, which either utterly despise the poor, or else give them with an
evil will, and forgetting to give God thanks, rejoice in scurrilitie, and
kindle intemperancye by loud singing and unseasonable music. Against these
are the sermons of the Prophets. Isa. 5. and Amos. 6.

Further, The fruit of true godliness.
least any man might think this fervent study in godliness lacked his
success: Luke teaches us what commodity ensued thereof, where he says:
They had favor with all the people. And the Lord added daily. etc. He shows
a double fruit hereof coming. First, they were in favor and authority with
all men of the wiser sort: For it is plain by that that was said before, that
the wicked were afraid of them. We are hereby taught, what thing gets men
true authority: verilye the study and desire of Gods religion and glory. For
it must needs be true that the Lord said by the Prophet: I will honor them
that honor me, and they shall be put to shame that despise me. 1. Sam. 2.
Let the Rulers of the church and other Magistrates mark well this thing. The
superintendents know that they have need both of authority and favor, but
they go not always about to get it that ways that they ought to do, whiles
some of them hunt for worldly praise, some study to heap up riches, other
seek to be aloft in worldly pomp, being little careful in the mean while
for the honor and glory of God. Where the fervent zeal and desire of Gods
glory is the most compendious way to come unto glory. For God, which can turn
the hearts of men which way it pleases him, and preserves the remembrance of
them that be his, as the Psalmist says, will surely reward them for ever. An
other fruit or commodity thereof is, that the Lord added daily unto his church
such as should be saved. The church or congregation therefore increased, and
they that first entered into it, felt their faith in them also increased. No man
therefore can labor in vain in the vineyard of the Lord, so that he earnestly
apply his vocation. Mark in the mean time how all increase of the Church is
attributed to the Lord. The Lord (says he) added every day unto the
Congregation such as should be saved. In deed the Apostles preached, and drew
men by preaching of the word. But all the success of their labor must be
ascrybed to God only, who only has power upon the hearts of men. For Christ
has taught us that no man comes to him, John 6.
except the father vouchsafe to draw him. This thing Paul expresses by an
elegant parable of husbandrye, in the first to the Corinthians the third
Chapter. And the Lord testifyeth by his Prophet, that he will write his laws
in the hearts of the faithful, Iere. 31.
so that they shall need none other instruction. Whereupon in another place
the believing are called most properly (...), that is to say, taught of God,
or the Disciples and scholars of God. Isa. 54.
And Christ himself says that his spirit shall be our counselor and master
to lead us into all truth. John 14.
Here is the impudency of them reproved which gather themselves disciples,
and call them after their own name. And they also are as faulty, which
acknowledge other masters beside Christ, and rejoice in their names more than
in the name of Christ, Math. 23. 1. Cor. 1.3.
whom Christ and Paul most earnestly impugn and rebuke. Let no man take
occasion hereby to be slothful. For every man must have a respect to his
calling, and walk in the same, and ascribe all success, not to his own
industry, but to the grace of God, which works in us according to his good
pleasure, those things that make for his glory, and for our and other men's
salvation.

Let these suffice, for declaration of the order of the primitive Church. Let
us know it is our parts to be occupied in the same exercises, which they
sometime were given unto. Let the end of them all be, the glory of God and
the salvation of many, whom we must labor to bring unto Christ. For so shall
it come to pass, that we shall have favor and authority amongst men, and
shall receive plenteous fruit of our traueyle in Jesus Christ: to whom be
blessing, honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The third chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The.xx. Homely.
PETER and John went up together into the Temple at the ninth hour. And a
certain man that was halt from his mothers womb was brought, whom they laid
daily at the gate of the Temple (which is called bewtifull) to ask alms of
them that entered into the Temple. When he saw Peter and John that they would
go into the Temple, he desired to receive an alms. And Peter fastened his eyes
on him with John and said: Look on us. And he gave heed unto them, trusting
to receive something of them. Then said Peter: silver and gold have I none:
such as I have, give I thee. In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, arise up
and walk. And he took him by the right hand and lift him up. And immediately
his feet and ancle bones received strength. And he sprang, stood, and
walked, and entered with them into the Temple, walking and leaping, and praising
God.
WE have perceived in the Sermon before going, what the trade, success, and
increase of the primityue Church was. This thing of all other was notable, that
the faithful grew in favor and authority with many men, and caused the
wicked to be afraid of them. Among other things, mention was made of many and
diverse miracles, which Luke says, the Apostles did. Wherefore out of a number,
he takes one, which gave occasion of a new sermon, by the which Peter
brings certain thousands to the knowledge of Christ, as we shall see when we
come to the place. Now, because this is so singular a miracle: it is meet we
diligently discuss all the circumstances thereof, with as much regard as Luke
has penned them, who begins first with the occasion of the miracle, then he
describes the lame man's person, on whom the miracle was wrought: and last
of all shows what success followed of the miracle, and what the lame man did,
after he was healed.

The occasion of the miracle
The occasion of the miracle was, that Peter and John, about the ninth hour
went up into the temple, at what time this lame man was brought thither to ask
alms of the people. The ninth hour of the day with them, was three a clock
at the after noone with us, as may be gathered of that we said in the second
Chapter, touching the counting of hours. He calls it the hour of prayer,
because the people of God had certain appointed hours, when they made their
public prayers: as may be seen as well otherwheres, as also in Daniel the
sixth Chapter. And God had appointed in the law the morning and evening
sacrifice, which no man being in his wit, Exodus 29. Nume. 28.
will say was done without prayers. Touching the time of midday or noone,
which also was appointed for prayers: we shall speak hereafter in the tenth
Chapter: where Peter at the same hour, being in Simon the Tanners house, went
into the upper story thereof to pray. And it is not without a cause that the
Scriptures make such diligent mention of the hours of prayers. For first we
are taught hereby, that we ought to begin, finishe, and end all our doings,
with calling on the name of God, because without his help and grace, it is
impossible for us to accomplish any thing well. For as Solomon says: A man
deuyseth a way in his heart, but it is the Lord that ordreth his goings. Prou.
16.
Whereupon the Apostle S. James sharply reprooueth them, which without respect
unto the will of God, so deliberate and appoint their matters, Jacob. 4.
as though the success of them depended of their own power. Also we are
admonished, that disciplyne is needful in the Church, according to the which
(as Paul says) all things appertayning to religion, and the honor of God,
ought to be done decently and in order. We confess in deed, that it is the
duty of Christians, in every place to lift up pure and clean hands unto God,
when and where we have need of his help, and that he may hear us. Yet
because Christ has commended unto us public prayers, by a peculiar promise:
it becomes us to have a special care and consideration thereof, and not
without a cause to refrain from the holy congregation, which it is evident
was instituted long ago, for doctrine, and prayers sake. And though many
things afterward grew into superstition, yet ought that to be no impediment
unto us. For the superstition ought to be taken away, and the primitive and
lawful use to be restored. Now there is nothing left but the iangling of
belles, whereby we are called in the morning, at noone, and at evening, to
prayers. The superstitious usage whereof many accuse: but very few traueyle to
have the solemn hours of prayers, as they were at the first used, to be
restored.

The Apostles are specially to be marked, who says Luke, went into the Church,
at the hour of prayer. Which was not for the sacrifice sake, that then was
offered, as was heretofore declared. But because they were desirous to pray,
and also hoped to find some occasion whereby to teach the people. And they
would not because of the pieuishe superstition of the Jews, which easily might
be corrected, leave their duty undone, and let slip such an occasion and
opportunity to do good. Whose example teaches us that we must seek all
manner of occasion to set forth the doctrine of the Gospel and knowledge of
Christ. The duty that we owe unto Christ binds us hereunto. For as he
intermitted nothing belonging to our salvation, so must not we fail of our
duties, in enlarging the bounds and borders of his kingdom. 2. Cor. 11.
This caused Paul to think the weight and care of all congregations lay on
his shoulders. And in another place he rejoices in the attemptes of his
adversaries, and yllwillers, Phil. 1.
because he perceived they served after a sort, to the setting forth of the
Gospel. Let us be ashamed therefore of our negligence and sloth, who like
sluggardes (to say no worse) do daily let pass the occasions that the Lord
offreth us. And here chiefly has that saying of the Prophet, place: Iere. 48.
Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently.

Secondly, Luke diligently describes the lame man's person, The description of
the lame man.
on whom the miracle was afterward wrought. In which description, the
excellency of the miracle, and the power of Christ the author thereof, do
evidently appear. First he says, the man was lame from his mothers womb,
Halt or lame from his mothers womb
and so lame, that having lost the use of all his limbs, he was feign to be
borne. Unto the which join his age, taken out of the words that follow, ( for
he was forty year old) and thou shall perceive his disease could not be
cured by any art of man. For such are the diseases for the most part that
cleave unto us from our nativity, or else by long time and continuance of
years, grown as it were into a nature, or custom: yet was the end of all
most blessed. For those things that did aggrauate and increase the poor
man's calamity, served to the setting forth of Gods glory: for it might have
seemed but a small glory to Christ, for Peter to heal a disease curable by
man's art and cunning. But whereas he whose health no man ever hoped for, was
healed by the name of Christ: it is evident that Christ is almighty and endued
with divine power, and therefore is very God. And to this end commonly serve
the greatest calamities which God uses to take from us, that by those things
which no counsel or help of man can remedy, he sets forth the glory of his
name. Example whereof we have both here in this place, John. 9.
and also in him that was blind from his nativity. For the Disciples
demanding whether it was his fault or his parents that he was borne blind:
Christ answers: Neither has this man sinned, nor yet his father and mother:
but that the works of God should be showed in him. This serves both for our
instruction and consolation. For it teaches us that we must not rashly judge
of other men's mishappes and miseries, as though they that were fallen therein
had deserved them through their ungraciousness. For many times it comes to
pass, that God suffers us to be afflicted for none other cause, but for that
by us he will set forth his name and glory. Wherefore we must not be to hasty
in judgment, least we run against the same rock, that we read Iobes
friends once did: which of his calamity gathered, that through his wickedness
and sinful life he had deserved the wrath of God. Also let them take comfort
hereof, whose calamities are so great, that there is no more hope or help for
them in man: let them not therefore think they are forsaken of God. But let
them yield themselves patiently to God, to do his pleasure on them: and they
shall shortly prove that those things which they thought were tokens of his
wrath, pertayned to the glory of his name, and to their salvation, whereunto
Paul had a respect when he said: We know that for them that love God, all
things work to the best. Romans 8.


A beggar.
Besides this remediless disease, Luke testifies he was poor. And it is a
token of extreme need, that he was laid every day at the temple gate, which
by reason of the gorgeous building was called beautiful, to ask alms of them
that went by, to find him. But that this was against the law of God, appears
by that was said in the last sermons. For Gods law is manifest, Deuteronomy. 15.
forbidding any beggar to be in Israel. And many things are commanded of God
for the relieuing of the poor, which he would have so ordered, that our
brethren should not go abroad like public stages and woondermentes of
misery, and beggerie, whereof they were little mindful, as appears by
example of this miserable creature, who was as it may seem by his bringing
every day to the Temple gate, one of Jerusalem, and dwelling in a most welthye
City. And yet he is compelled amongst his brethren, and among an infinite
number of Priests, to beg for his living. Such other have we described. John.
9. and Marc. 10. This declares the great corruption and degeneration of the
Jewish nation. For hereby it appears, that the goods which God had appointed
to feed the poor with, were alienated from them, and through abuse transposed
other ways. So true it is, that there is nothing in right order among the^,
which in Gods religion dare rashly dispense with any thing contrary to his
word. And not long after, extreme destruction followed such extreme corruption.
Whereby we may judge what we ought to look for in these days, who are in like
fault as the Jews were. For we contrary to the example of the primitive
Church, suffer those to beg, whom we ought to take and love as our brethren.
The true use of the Church goods is marred and depraved by the Papists, and
those things serve to the maintenance of idle men, wherewith the poor of the
Church ought to be found and nourished. And although they that brag of the
Gospel, have put away superstition and ydolatrie: yet all their reformations
of the Church stop here, when they should dispose the Church goods truly, and
relieve the poor Christians, whereby it is manifest that a great many under
the cloak of the Gospel, seek but their own gain only. But Christ which
shall come in the later day to revenge the quarrel of the poor, Math. 25.
will not fail of his duty.

Last of all, this is to be considered in the lame man, that Luke says, he
asked alms of the Apostles. But where he was daily laid at the gate of the
Temple, it is not unlike that he was ignorant what miracles they did every
day. Why then did he not rather ask the health of his body? Shall we judge of
him according to the property of the beggars in our days, which cast
themselves into diseases, and refuse to be healed, whereby to get the more by
begging? God forbid. For so great a benefit could not have light upon so
profane a contemner of God and his grace. Me thinks rather it was for cause
he was now utterly in despair to be cured of his disease. There were in
deed diverse examples of many which Christ had restored to their former health,
but he knew of none borne lame from his mothers womb that he had healed.
Wherefore since he was out of all hope of having his health again, he thought
it in vain to desire it of any body, and having none other care but for his
living, he asked of the Apostles that, which thereto belonged. But he received
more than either he durst hope for, or ask. For he is delivered from his
sickness, and made a singular instrument and vessel of Gods goodness, and
glory: which he did use to the salvation of many. This is a singular goodness
of God toward us, which oftentimes uses to prevent, and to do beyond all
our hope and prayers, in so much that he gives us both more and greater things
than we once could have hoped for. Gene. 17.
So he promises unto Abraham being only careful for Ismael his life, a son
also by Sara called Isaac. So brought he the people of Israel out of Egypt,
Exodus 12.
with all their own substance, and part of the Egyptians also, who scarce ever
hoped to be delivered. David proves the like goodness, and notably sets
it forth, where he is promised that the Messiah should be borne of his stock,
2. Sam. 7.
which thing he never once durst have looked for. I let pass many such other
examples, because we try and find the like every day, whereas we being
careful for things belonging only to the body, he promises us of his own
accord, such bliss of his heavenly kingdom in his son, Esaias. 64.
as passes all man's understanding and capacity. Let us therefore learn to put
our trust in his grace and goodness, and let us not despair of his good will,
which is more liberal and bountiful, than we can either wish or desire.

Now let us come to the third part of the history, The report of the miracle
which contains in it a diligent description of the miracle that Peter
showed: the circumstances whereof we must as diligently consider. Peter
begins with causing the lame man to take heed and be attent, saying: Look
on us. He would by this saying, procure him to take diligent heed that he
should well acknowledge the author of that benefit, that within a while
after, he should receive: least he might suppose it was done either by chance,
by man's art, or by magic. For is evident that they only fruitefully
receive the benefits of God, which consider God is the author of them, and
ascribe all glory and thanks to him therefore. But they which neglect Christ,
and look only upon the Ministers, miracles are many times to such men a cause
of superstition, as we may see in the men of our days, which defend
worshipping of Saints, chiefly by reason of the miracles that they wrought.
This is a token of great modesty in Peter, that he speaks not of himself
alone, but says, Look on us. He acknowledges therefore John to be his
partener and fellow, far from the pride of the Popes, which while they will
be taken for Peter's successors, do imperiously Lord it over other Bishops, and
challenge to themselves, all power upon the Church of Christ.

Then being not ignorant that the man looked to receive some money of them, he
puts him out of that conceyte, The poverty of Peter.
and causes him to hope for a better thing, saying: Silver and gold have I
none* such as I have, give I thee. For the Apostles be the Stewardes of
spiritual goods, and of the mysteries of God, as Paul says, and not of
money, wherewith the ungodly most times abound, more than the godly. 1. Cor.
4.
Peter professes two things very profitable to be marked. The first is
poverty, and that he has neither silver nor gold. For he was one of that
company that had left all they had and followed Christ. Marc. 10.
Therefore he could not have the riches of the world. Shall we therefore
think him unhappy and in misery? God defend. Let no man therefore measure
felicity by the goods and riches of this world. For he cannot be miserable
that possesses Christ, although he were bereaved of all his goods, and with
Peter had neither silver nor gold. And if Peter lacked these goods, how come
Peter's successors by so great abundance? what manner of patrimony, I pray you
of Peter's is it, and from whence comes it, that now a days has not only
the greatest revenues of gold and silver, but also whole countries and
kingdoms? Surely we have nothing in the scriptures written hereof, neither do
credible hystories make any mention hereof. Only of Judas there is mention,
which sought gold and silver by unlawful means, which was the cause of his
desperation and destruction. And of Antichrist there is a prophecy that he
should possess the treasures of the earth. Daniel. 11.
Let the Popes therefore stint to brag of Peter's patrimony, whereas Peter so
plainly reprooueth them of lying. But how should they stinte which are beco me
so impudent, that they fear not to make a laughing game of Peter's words, when
their new Pope lift up on high, in a stool (of easement) whurleth amongst the
people, a kind of counterfeyt money, which is neither gold nor silver, Look
the Pontifical of the fathers, touching the Popes coronation.
saying: Silver and gold have I none. etc. But within a while after, being
removed to another place, he casts to his own creatures gold and silver,
they crying: He has scattred abroad, he has given to the poor, his
righteousness remains for ever and ever. I pray you what is playing and
jesting with the word of God, if this be not? Uerily Thomas Aquinas did
feately quippe these godless men, andforsakers of the truth. For where in
the Counsel at Lions, certain revenues and annuities were brought from Naples
to Gregory the tenth, he was not ashamed to say to Thomas: we cannot now
say, as Peter once said: Silver and gold have we none. But Thomas answered
him: Neither can you say, Arise and walk. For the learned man saw that
through covetousness of the Popes, both the Church was brought out of square,
and the gifts of the holy spirit, wherein the Church did sometimes flourish,
were utterly extinguished. Many men perceive the same now a days also, but
such is the untowardness of this time, that men will wittingly be deceived.
Let us whose eyes the light of the Gospel has opened, fly their snares and
impudent tyranny, and not suffer our selves any longer to be deluded and
robbed by them.

Secondly, Peter professes a promptness and readiness of good will to
benefit, and to do good, where he says: Such as I have, give I thee, which
is as much as if he should say, if I had money I would give it thee also.
Howbeit I will give thee that I have. These words show an example of a well
willing mind, which we also ought to have in the exercise of benevolence. For
there be that profess an earnest good will, but they say they wot not what,
nor how much they should give the poor. But the law of love and good will,
answers all these questions, commanding us to love our neighbor as our
self. Whosoever thus do, enquire not how much they should give, but seek
what their neighbor has need of, and if they find that they have it, depart
with it to their neighbor liberally. Wherefore if they have money, they help
the needy with money: If they have plenty of victualles, they deal it
amongst the hungrye: if they have rayme^t, they cloth them that they see go
naked. And if they have none of all these, at leastwise, they give their heart
to their poor brethren, the good will whereof they declare with friendly
words, with counsel, and comfort, wherewith they rear and cheer up the
poor body that is afflicted. So, following the example of Peter, they give
whatsoever they have. Whereupon we gather, that they be void of charity, and
led with no affection of doing good, which ask what and how much they
should give unto the poor.

Now, what that was the Peter had, and gave so liberallye unto the poor, he
adds: In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, Arise and walk. And he took
him by the right hand, and lift him up. Then he gives him perfect health of
body: which power he had received together with the other Apostles of Christ.
And he so gives the same, that it may appear to all men, that he does it not
by his own power, but that Christ is the author thereof, by whose
commandment, power, and operation, all the miracle was wrought. Of the which
thing afterward, he discourses further before the people. Also many things
concur and fall out that make for the verity and setting forth of the
miracle. For Peter takes the lame man by the hand, and lifts him up. And by
and by his anclebones and feet receive strength, so that he has not much ado
to rise, as they whose limbs are weakened with long sickness, but starteth
up and leapeth. And it was no sodeyne moving or pang only for a season, such
as theirs is who are phrenetike, or haunted with some spirit: but he stands
steadily on his feet, and walks up and down. Besides, he goes into the
Church with the Apostles, springing and leaping, and declaring the benefit of
God. Therefore this lame man was so healed, that there remained no sign of his
former infirmity and disease. For Gods works be perfect, and there is in them
no point of craft, fraud or deceit. But before we conclude our sermon, we must
speak of two things, serving to the institution of our faith.

The first is a figure of our spiritual restitution, which the holy ghost
thought good to set forth by this miracle. For touching the soul, A figure of
the restitution of mankind.
we be all in like case as is this lame man. He took his sickness even from
his nativity, which bereft him of the use of al his limbs. So we be borne
sinners from our mothers womb: and such is the force of the sin that
naturally from Adam, our father, has overflowed all his posterity, that it
has left in us no power whereby to fulfill the law of God, and to do such
things as belong to our salvation. For, the law of God is spiritual, Romans 7.
but we be carnal, sold under sin. Then, as the merciful Lord by his
goodness prevented this lame man, being without all hope of health: so God
first sought for, and called our first father, which being feared with his
sin, fled from the sight of God, Gene. 3.
and comforted him with the free promise of salvation. And as the lame man is
healed by the name of Jesus Christ, which Peter preached unto him, and taking
him by the hand, lifts him up: so through the merit of Christ have we
gotten salvation, and the preaching of the Gospel offreth us the same: which
when we have received through faith, straightwayes we feel Christ's spirit
effectually working in us, which gives us the hand, lifts us up, and makes
us strong, to overcome the tyranny of sin, and to be able to walk in the
ways of the Lord. For it is his work, to regenerate, to inflame with love of
heavenly things, to stir up affiance of salvation, John. 3. Romans 8.
to certify and make men sure of their ado^tion, and to teach them to cry,
Abba father: Besides, he lightneth our minds with the knowledge of God and his
will, John. 14.16
he leads them into all truth, and comfort them in all adversity.
Therefore by his operation it comes to pass, that we which before were weak
and lame, are now able to do all things in Christ which comfort us. Phil. 4.
And although the property of the flesh remains, which makes us sometime
to slip, and inuegleth us with diverse temptations: yet always Christ's
spirit overcomes, and suffers us not to be tempted above our strength. For
it is a perfect health which is gotten us in Christ, which can be disturbed
with no endeavor of the world, or Prince thereof.

An example of them that be restored.
Secondly, the restored to health, are taught their duties by example of this
lame man. He as soon as he heard that health was promised him in the name of
Christ, and was lift up, by Peter's hand, he springs by and by. So, after
that by preaching of the Gospel we have health offered us in Christ, and
perceive our selves to be quickened and stirred with the suggestion of the holy
spirit: let us rise by and by out of the puddle of sin, and embrace the
benefit of Christ with cheerful mind. For they can live no longer in sin,
Romans 6.
whom the merit of Christ has delivered from the bondage of sin, as Paul
teaches at large. Afterward he goes with the Apostles into the Temple. Now
it is plain the Temple was a figure of Christ. Let us therefore join our
self unto him, and follow the Apostles, which show us the way how we may be
joined to Christ, and to his Church. And into the Church of Christ can we not
be received, unless we first forsake the tents of Satan, under whom it
becomes them to refuse to fight, which desire to be Christ his soldiers.
Besides all this, it is said that he rejoiced, and praised God. Let us also
rejoice in the Lord, and let us praise his goodness, which it becomes us
plainly to confess, and to set forth. For they are in vain redeemed and
delivered, who are ashamed of Christ their Redeemer, and of the benefit by him
obtained. Therefore he requires of us every where confession of our faith, and
has dedicated a remembrance of his death in his mystical supper, which he
would have always to continue in his Church. It behooves us therefore to
labor for these things, that being truly graft in Christ, and quickened with
his spirit, we may reign with him in heaven: to whom be praise, honor,
glory and power, for ever. Amen.

The.xxj. Homely.
AND all the people saw him walk and praise God. And they knew that it was
he that sat and begged at the beautiful gate of the Temple. And they
woondred, and were sore astonished, at that which had happened unto him. And as
the halte which was healed held Peter and John, all the people ran amazed to
them in the porche that is called Salomons. When Peter saw that, he answered
to the people. Ye men of Israel, why marueyle ye at this, or why look you so
on us, as though by our own power and strength, we had made this man to go?
LVKE has expounded the notable miracle whereby Peter healed the man, that was
halt from his mothers womb. The end of this miracle was the same that is of
all others, that is, that it should serve to confirm the Apostles doctrine.
Wherefore the Evangelist not contented to have told the history hereof only,
declared also what success and effect followed of the same. And first he
shows how the lame man took the benefit of Christ, who (says he) joined
himself unto the Apostles, went with them into the Church, and openly set
forth the praises of God. By this example is shadowed unto us, what they ought
to do whom Christ has restored again through the virtue of his merit. They
must embrace the Apostles doctrine, and thereby be openly joined to the Church,
and declare the benefit of Gods grace, that it seem not to be bestowed upon
unworthy persons. But Luke passes to other matters, declaring what effect this
great miracle took among the people, and how an occasion of preaching was
thereby offered to Peter: where the proper and right use of the whole history
shows it self.

The people (says Luke) saw the lame man walking and praising God. And not
only saw him walking, How the people received the miracle.
but knew certainly it was he that was wont to sit at the gate of the Temple
to ask alms. Which thing makes for proof of the truth of the miracle, least
any man might deem there were any craft or sleyght used in the matter. Then
being ravished with admiration, they ran thick and threefolde to the
Apostles, whom the lame man for joy had not yet let go and forsaken. Here we
have two things to observe, the one worthy of great commendation, the other of
reprehension, as more plainly shall appear by Peter's words.

First, being stricken with marvelous admiration, To marueyle at the works of
God is necessary.
Luke says they were provoked to run to the Apostles, and to bethink them
of so strange and unwonted a matter: which no man can deny, but was well
done of them, and not without a cause. For we ought diligently to consider the
works of God, and to marueyle at the excellencye of them, for the which end
some Philosophers, not altogether vnwittily, have said, that God made manne.
Because that observation and marueyling, stays not in a certain blind and
amazed dullness of the mind, but is a certain preparation of the mind,
whereby we are drawn to the true knowledge of God. For God verily reuealeth
himself and his will, in his word, which being long since written, he has
commanded always to be preached in his Church. But such is the corruption of
our mind, that unless we be drawn by some forcible motion, we can never be
brought from earthly things to the consideration of heavenly. Wherefore God
joins to his word many times certain signs, and most singular works, that
they may awake our minds out of that dull sleep, and bring them to the
consideration of his word and will. And for this cause Christ oftentimes,
either before his teaching, or in his teaching, used miracles, to make men the
more ready to receive his doctrine. Which miracles how much good they did,
appears by the example of Nicodemus and others, John. 3.7.
who by them came first to the knowledge of Christ. Now in all the miracles,
judgments, and works of God, this is the chief end and purpose, that by
them we should take occasion to rise higher to the better knowledge of Gods
will and pleasure. But here the sluggishnesse of this age is to be bewailed,
whereby it comes to pass, that many are waxed so deaf, that they neither
can hear nor see any of the things whereby God puncheth us and waketh us up
to acknowledge our salvation. The word of the Gospel is preached, andthe Lord
commands us to watch. We see every where horrible examples of Gods
judgments, wherewith he bridleth and punishes the incurable wickedness of
this world. There are signs, woonders, and tokens of all sorts and kinds
showed. To conclude, whatsoever things Christ prophesied should come to pass
in the later age before his glorious coming, Math. 24. Luc. 21.
are daily done in our sight and fulfilled. But we lying bolt upright and
snorting, regard none of all these things, so that if there were none other
sign or token, surely by the over great security and carelessness of the
world, it may be perceived that these be the dangerous days whereof the
Apostles many times have admonished us. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2. Pet. 3.
But let us awake (O brethren) and learn by this present example, the works
of God, that our marueyling at them, may be an help for us, to come to a more
perfect knowledge of God.

The other thing in the people is to be reprehended. For although God pricked
and stirred them up by so notable a miracle, To be too much addicted to
miracles is the beginning of ydolatrie.
yet were their minds and eyes still upon the Apostles, whom they thought to
be the authors of the miracle, whereas they ought to have lift up their minds
to the consideration of Jesus Christ, in whose name, and by whose power the
miracle was wrought. This is the property of the flesh, to stick to the
present and next causes, and to lift their mind no higher, to know the true
and only author of all things that are done. And this is no small error, for
of this, all superstition and ydolatrie took their beginning. For hereof it
came to pass, that the Gentiles worshipped the Sun and Moon, and the other
planets as Gods. For in ascribing to them the benefits that God by them
bestowed on mankind, what other thing did they? The same error moved them to
make these men Gods, which had be^^e authors to them of any public weal or
pleasure. And this error stayed not in men, but because of the benefits they
received by beasts and other creatures, they thought there was a certain
kind of Godheade in brute beasts, rivers, fountains, trees, and herbs, and
turned the glory of the immortal God into the likeness of men, flying
fowls, and fourefooted beasts. Neither did the ydolatrie used among the
Christians, Romans 1.
spring of any other occasion. For when the miracles wrought in times past by
Saints, began (to doltishly) to be written by those that were unlearned, and
were also more foolishly preached and blazed in the pulpets, straight way the
ignorant people thought them to be done through the virtue and power of the
Saints. And so another error sprang of that false opinion, and caused them
that were sick, or in other great dangers to make vows to the Saints, by
whose help they heard that either themselves, or other before had been
delivered. And because God sometimes mainteyned the remembrance of his Saints,
by miracles wrought at their sepulchers, they thought some godly power was also
in those places, whereof it came to pass, that they tied worshipping and
invocation to places peculiar. And least any thing should be wanting to this
superstition and ydolatrie, Sa^an began to beautify the images of the
Saints, with signs and miracles, whereby the matter came so far out of
frame, that now the things due to Christ alone, were not only attributed to
Saints, but also to the Saints images, which superstitions men had set up
against the commandment of Gods majesty. And it was not enough to make vows
to the Saints, but there must also be some famous place and image of the Saint
wrought and carved. That these things were of a truth done, we are taught both
by histories and examples of superstitious men, which show us in these days an
infinite number of them. Wherefore where the negligent consideration of miracles,
and the foolish admiration of them, has given occasion of foul error, and
manifest ungodliness: we are warned that whatsoever miracles are done, without
the doctrine of Gods word, which teaches us truly to judge of them, they
ought never to be regarded. Diversity of signs or miracles.
For that duiers signs and woonders as well true as false be wrought amongst
men, we are taught by the holy Scriptures. They are called true miracles, when
that thing is truly done, that is said to be done, and which bears witness
to the doctrine of truth, Marc. 16. Math. 10.
such as were sometimes the myraculous works of the Apostles done by Christ's
institution. They are called false which deceive us by some lying show, as
Charmers and Iuglers use: or which call men from God, and from the faith and
doctrine of the truth. Such as sometimes Iannes and Iambres showed before
Pharao. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Math. 24.
And such as are ascribed to Antichrist, and to the deceyuers in the later
days. And God suffers them otherwhiles to be done in the sight of his people,
that in the elect he may try the constancy of their faith, as Moses
testifyeth, Deuteronomy. 13. and in the reprobate he may exercise the severity of
his judgment: because through the efficacy of error (as Paul says) they
are seduced, which would not admit the love of the truth. Therefore miracles
are neu er so to be taken, that we must clea^e only to them, or to their
doctrine that work them: but we must examine them, after the rule of Gods
word, that in those which bear witness to the truth, and teach us to trust
in god, we may acknowledge God to be the author, and reject all other as false,
by whose baytes, Satan uses to lie in wait against our faith and salvation.
If this thing be not observed, we shall through our own default be deceived,
not only by false miracles, but also by true, whereof God is the author, while
we heeding the persons, regard not the end wherefore they are done. Whereof
this place gives us an evident example, and another hereafter is written of
the people of Lystra, Acts. 14.
which took occasion to commit ydolatrie of a miracle done by Paul, as in his
place shall appear.

But let us consider Peter which of the peoples amazedness takes occasion to
preach. The argument of Peter's sermon.
Think you he abuses the ignorance and error of the people? Goes he about
by this mean to get himself and his fellows authority, which he might
easily have done? No verily. Nay, he begins to preach Christ, and defends
his honor and glory. There are four members or principal points of his
sermon. First, he corrects the ignorance of the people, and shows them that
there is nothing here done through ^he power and virtue, or holiness of men.
Secondly, he declares God to be the author of the miracle, who has wrought
the same by his son: where he also admonishes them of their heinous offense
committed against the son of God. Thirdly, he requires of them repentance.
Last of all, because the Christian religion did seem to repugne with Moses and
the Prophets, he teaches them that they did set forth Christ, and that they
must of necessity believe Christ, unless they will seem grieuouslye to
offend against Moses and the Prophets. And therewithal he also teaches that
Christ which was promised to the fathers, belonged also to them, least they
should be drowned in despair, through the conscience of their sins. But at
this present we will speak but of the first part, only purposing to entreat
of the reast in their place and time.

Peter puts away error and ignorance.
First he goes about to remove ignorance and error out of their minds. This is
the right and most commodious way of teaching the truth. For man's property
and condition is like to the earth whereof he was made. The earth yields
thorns and briars of it own accord, neither brings it forth good seed
with any increase, unless it be diligently cleansed and rid of them. So the
mind of man corrupt with original sin, brings forth errors of it self*
which except they be strongly repulsed, it neither can suffer the doctrine of
truth, nor receive any fruit or commodity thereby. Wherefore the Lord
commands the Prophet to break down, and root up, Ierem. 1.
before he build or set. And Peter is not cold in this behalf, as though he
^hunned honor for civility and modesty sake, as ambicious folk use, which
hunt for glory, even then when they feyne to be contemners thereof. But
framing his talk by an interrogatiue point, makes it the more vehement,
saying: Ye men of Israel, why marueyle ye at this, or why look you so on us,
as though by our own power and strength we had made this man to go? These
words savor of some reprehension. I pray you (says he) what cause has
moved you to conceive such abashment of this miracle, whereas not long since
many such were wrought by Christ? how comes it to pass you remember not
them? And then it should easily appear who is the author of this. Surely in
vain you look upon us: yea, your error is so great that it may not be winked
at. For our power or holiness has herein done nothing. But it is another
work, who must have all the praise of that is done.

The Saints or holy men ascribe all glory to God.
Let us observe in this place the modestye, and truth of the Apostles, whereby
they so challenge unto Christ, all honor and glory, that they reserve nothing
to themself of that is due to him. This is the property of all the Saints.
For they acknowledge Christ's voice, saying by the Prophet: Esaias. 42.
I am the Lord, this is my name. And my glory will I give to none other.
There are examples of this endeavor, not only in this place, but also
otherwheares. The Baptist when he was asked whether he were Messiah, John. 1.
the savior, he gives all that praise to Christ only, whose forerunner only
he confesses himself to be. The same, before his Disciples which of a carnal
zeal envied Christ, testified that Christ was the bridegroom of the Church,
to whom all men must be brought, and shows that all power and glory was
given unto him from God the father, John. 3. Math. 11.
and sends his Disciples unto him. And Paul had rather to be stoned, than he
would receive any godly honor, when they of Lystra offered it him of their own
free motion and will. Acts. 14.
Of this mind, it is plain, also the Angels are. For where John being
ravished with the excellency of revelations, would have worshipped an Angel,
he said unto him: See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant, Apoc. 22.
and of thy brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep the words of the
prophecy of this book. Worship thou God. Whereupon Augustine in his.xlix.
Epistle, disputing of the honor due to God only, writes of the Angels, whom
he calls the spiritual creatures, on this wise: How much more godly it is,
and in subjection to God, so much less it does vouchsafe it self of such
honor, as it knows belongs but to God. And a little afterward, comparing
the evil angels (who says he, joy and are delighted in the errors of men)
with the good, he adds: wherefore even as wicked pride, whether it be of
men* or of Spirits, commands or desires these divine honors to be given
unto them: so, godly humility, whether it be of men, or of holy Angels, has
refused these things being offered them, and shows to whom it is due. Of
these may be taken a sure rule, whereby to judge as well of all apparitions, as
doctrines. For whosoever teaches us to trust in God, and to serve him, and to
worship one God in Jesus Christ, whether they be Angels or men, they ought to
be taken for the holy ministers of God, and we may safely believe them. But
whosoever teaches us to take the glory of salvation from Christ, and to
convey it to himself, or to other creatures, and seeks health in men's own
works, accursed be he, yea, if he were an angel from heaven. Galat. 1.
All apparitions of spirits, counterfeyting the souls of men departed this
life, and teaching that they must be redeemed with sacrifices of Mass, and
such like works, are put to flight by this dart. Likewise all false teachers
which so abuse the simplicity of men, that they challenge to themself the
glory of redeeming and forgiving of sins. And Peter by his example condemns
the Romish Antichrists, which glory in the seat and succession of Peter, of
which number it is reported one said: that there was nothing more profitable
and plenteous than Christian religion. For by it, it came to pass, that he and
his like, were Lords of the world. So the saying of one of them rashly
uttered, bewrayde the mind and opinion of them all.

We are also admonished by Peter's words, God alone is the author of miracles.
whom we should take for the author of all miracles. Wherein men for the most
part respect two things: the power and holiness of them, by whose ministry
they are wrought. But Peter teaches us that neither of these is the cause
efficient of these miracles, in that he reprehendeth the Jews because they
thought so great a thing was wrought by the power and godliness of the
Apostles. And there want not reasons whereby to prove Peter's saying. For they
are called miracles, that are wrought either against the course of nature, or
beside it. But God only is the Lord of nature, Math. 28. John. 3.
which has given all power to Christ in heaven and in earth. Wherefore it
behooves us also to acknowledge him the author of all miracles. For what can
men do against the order of nature, which can do nothing in the things
wrought after the course of nature. It is a natural thing, that by age man's
stature should increase, until he come to a just measure and proportion, and
that when age comes, he should wax gray heared. Now, what man is there that
by his carfulness and industry can add one cubite to his stature, Math. 6.5.
or make one hear of his head white or black? No, there is nothing here to
be attributed to the holiness of the person, as though that were the chief
cause of the miracle, whereas we know there have been many holy men which
could work no miracles. For miracles are wont to be wrought, not for their
sakes which do them, but most commonly for the salvation of other. For the
which cause God would many times use the mean of wicked persons, that nothing
should be attributed to the merits of men. So we see Judas numbered amongst
them, to whom Christ committed the preaching of the Gospel, and gave power to
work miracles. And Christ says in an other place, that many in the later day
shall glory in their miracles, whom he says he will not cast of, for that they
boast of a thing that is untrue, Math. 7.
but because they be workers of wickedness. Therefore as miracles be not
always sure testimonies of the holiness of men: so neither must they be
ascribed to the holiness of them that do them. For what can man do contrary
to nature, which by reason of inward corruption, is unworthy of the natural
and daily benefits of God? Therefore God only is to be taken for the author
of miracles, of these I mean, that serve for confirmation of our faith and
salvation. And he works these miracles, not because we deserve them: but for
that he is careful for our salvation. For they are testimonies of the truth of
his doctrine, and stir up men's minds to the consideration of him. That was
also the meaning of them, which were wont to be done about Saints tombs. For
the Lord by them meant to confirm their doctrine, and to testify their
immortality and bliss, which were cruelly tormented by the wicked persecutors
of the faith, that they which other wise should be offended at their death
might be comforted. Let us therefore hedge in and compass all miracles with
these limits, that all the glory of them may be ascribed to God alone.
Whosoever shall pass these bounds, they shall either deceive others being not
aware, with their miracles, or else by others be deceived themselves.

What we ought after a godly sort to believe of Saints.
Let no man yet so take our saying, as though we envied the holy Saints of God
their honor, and glory. For we ascribe unto them whatsoever the holy ghost in
the Scriptures attributes to them. We acknowledge them while they were on the
earth, to have been singular vessels and instruments of Gods glory and
grace: whose doctrine, whosoever will be saved, ought to hold with firm
faith, and to imitate the example of their life. Math. 10. John. 13.
For we know that Christ has said: He that hears you, hears me. etc.
And we embrace this saying of Paul: Be ye followers of me as I am of Christ.
And now we believe they are in heaven, taken from all the cares, 1. Cor. 11.
labors, and griefs of this world, as the holy men testifye of Abraham and
the other Patriarchs in the Prophet. Esaias. 63.
In the mean season whatsoever belongs to the governance of this world,
and to the business of our redemption, we teach it ought to be attributed to
God, through Jesus Christ. For as in the creation of this world, he used the
help and counsel of none other: so will he that none other shall be partaker
with him of the glory of our redemption. Wherefore let us think it unlawful
to take any thing from him, or to challenge to our self, or any other, any
manner of praise therefore. But let us constantlye trust in him, and cleave
only to him, by his beloved son Jesus Christ: to whom be praise, honor,
glory and power for ever. Amen.

The.xxij. Homely.
THE God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of our fathers has
glorified his son Jesus, whom ye delivered, and denied in the presence of
Pylate, when he had judged him to be loosed. But you denied the holy and just,
and desired a murderer to be given you, and killed the Lord of life: whom
God has raised from death, of the which we are witnesses. And his name through
the faith of his name, has made this man sound. And the faith which is by
him, has given to him this health in the presence of you all.
WE have declared the first part of Peter's sermon, wherein he confuteth the
ignorance of the people, and shows that the miracle done on the lame man was
to be attributed, neither to the power nor holiness of men. Now let us see
the second part, wherein he makes God the author of the miracle, and teaches
them to have a respect unto Christ Jesus, in whose name it was done. And
because this is the chief point of all the sermon, he handles the same very
industriously and in apt order. First, he propounds the sum of the whole
matter in few words. Next, he tells them of their cruel wickedness
committed against the son of God. Then at last, returning to the purpose, he
declares plainly all the whole meaning of the miracle.

The sum of all the matter is: The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, The
author and final cause of the miracle.
the God of our fathers has glorified his son Jesus. He comprehends in
these words, both how God is the author of the miracle, and also how the
final cause of the same was the glorifying of Jesus Christ, the son of God.
And as at the first he showed nothing was to be attributed to the power or
holiness of man: so now he teaches that all is to be referred to God the
only author, and to the glory or setting forth of his son. Where we have two
things to observe.

First, how in speaking of God, he calls him the God of Abraham, The God of
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and of the fathers.
Isaac, and Jacob, and to be short, the God of the fathers, which title or
style God himself uses often in the old Testament. And this is a great token
of Gods love, whereby he declares to us his goodness. The Princes of this
world take to them names of the people and Nations that they have vanquished
and ouerrunne, and think it a great glory to be called Parthians, Gothickes,
Almanickes, Africanes and Numidians. But what other thing do men learn by
these styles, but that they have destroyed this people, and spoiled their
countries with fire and sword? God deals far otherwise, which will be
named after those men, whom of favor, deserving no such thing, he has bound
unto him by an everlasting covenant: and of whom he looks neither for great
spoil, nor any profit, but such as himself brings forth in them. Yet Peter
herein had respect to an higher matter, and gives those tytles to God which he
thought were chiefly agreeing with the present matter in hand. For first
where he names the fathers, he admonishes them of the promises, which God in
times past made to the fathers concerning Christ. For to Abraham it was said:
Gene. 22.
I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee. In thy seed shall all
the Nations of the earth be blessed. Genesis 26.28
Which promise we read was repeated afterward in Isaac and Jacob. To speak
nothing of David and the Prophets, which are busilye occupied in setting forth
the same promises. It was profitable, yea, necessary that those promises
should be repeated, because the Jews a little before, had denied them all, in
the presence of Pylate, saying they had, nor look for none other king but
Caesar, as hereafter we shall hear. Therefore because they should not think
themselves utterly fallen from the covenant and promises, and premised to be
past all hope of salvation: Peter shows them that the same God lived and
reigned yet still which in time past made the covenant with the fathers, and
had not forsaken Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: but even as in the beginning, so
now also, he would be called their God, so that they would turn unto him.
Furthermore, to avoid the suspicion wherewith the Apostles were charged, this
title and style of God served very much. For many suspected that they preached
a new God, a new faith, a new religion, hitherto unknown to the fathers, for
the which cause many would not hear them, and many thought them worthy death
according to the law of Moses. Deuteronomy. 13.
But Peter using this title of God so openly, protests as it were, that he
acknowledges none other God, than he which showed himself in times past to
the fathers, nor preaches none other faith or religion, than that whereby the
fathers pleased God, and were saved. To conclude, he teaches them what fathers
the Jews ought to mark and follow, in faith and religion. They gloried in
certain fathers of a later time, such as after Moses and the Prophets, came
in, and were the authors of manifold superstition. Whose traditions they
observed so straightly, that they had rather break the laws of God, Math.
15.23. etc.
than change or leave undone any jot or point of them: which thing Christ
many times laid to their charge. Neither did any thing more set them against
Christ and his Apostles, than for that they did by their doctrine impugn the
ordinances of the elders. Therefore Peter makes mention of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, to declare that all fathers are not to be followed in religion. For as
God alone is the father of all men, and Jesus Christ alone, the master of all
men, whom the father has appointed to be the teacher of all the world: so
must we only follow their steps, whose faith and religion we know pleased
God, and of whose faith and integrity God does vouchsafe to bear witness. In
the number of whom, Abraham is the chief, whom the Scripture therefore
calls a father of the believing, and of many Nations, because as many as
embrace the faith of Jesus Christ, which was imputed to him for righteousness,
Romans 4.
appertain unto him. Unto the same Abraham Christ bears witness, where he
says he rejoiced to see his day, and says, as many as shall come from the
East and West into the Church of God, John. 8. Math. 8.
shall sit down with him in the kingdom of heaven. Hereof let the men of our
age learn what vanity it is to brag of those younger sort of fathers, which
have devised or followed a new trade of salvation besides Christ. Except we
become the children of Abraham by faith in Christ, we can be defended by no
help or authority of others, no though they were kings and Emperors.

Secondly, let us mark how he says: The God of our fathers glorified his
son Jesus. The purport or end of the miracles of the new Testament.
Yet he speaks of the miracle done upon the lame man, the end whereof he
utters in these words, we are here taught that the glorifying of Jesus
Christ, the son of God, is the mark and end of all the miracles of the new
Testament whereunto al they also, which glory in their miracles, ought to have
respect. The Evangelist by express words vttreth this end, saying: Many
other signs did Jesus, which are not written in this book. These are written,
that ye might believe that Jesus is that Christ the son of God. John. 20.
And Christ himself speaking of the power of working miracles, and of the
judgment given to him of his father, teaches this to be the end thereof,
John. 5.
that all men might honor the son, as they honor the father. And reasoning
with his Disciples of Lazarus sickness, he says: This infirmity is not to
death, but for the glory of God, that the son of God may be glorified by it.
John. 11.
Hereby it appears how we should judge of those miracles and signs
wherewith some men labor to seek their private glory, and to bring men under
them as scholars and servants, whom Christ has redeemed and sanctified with
the price of his blood.

But because Peter had occasion to make mention of Christ, He tells them of
their wickedness committed against Christ
he admonishes his hearers very aptly and commodiously, of the heinous
trespass which they committed against him. And this does he not lightly, as
one that does but touch and go, but lays all the heynousnesse thereof open
before their eyes. For his Oration ascends as it were by certain steps,
the end whereof is, that they should be stricken with the consideration of so
grievous an offense, and be enflamed with repentance, and desire of salvation
in Christ. First he says, they delivered the son of God to the Gentiles to
be mocked and crucified. But it is an horrible offense to deliver an innocent
to death, and there are terrible judgments of God against them that pollute
themselves with blood. Look Numer. 35. But here is a greater and a more
horrible thing. For where God had chosen and consecrated to himself the Jews
out of all Nations, none of them ought to have been delivered to the profane
Gentyles, to be mocked and put to death, without a profane contempt and
treading under foot of God and his glory. Which seems to me was the cause
that Christ speaking of his death, Math. 20. Luc. 18.
makes mention so many times how they should deliver him to the Gentyles. And
that they thus did, not by chance and at all adventures, but by the common
counsel and consent of the Elders, Math. 27. Luc. 23.
and with the lyking and allowance of the people which followed them unto
Pylates house, as the Evangelists testify. Besides this, in the second place
he says: And ye denied him before Pylate. And he speaks not of a certain
light and tryfling denial of him, but of such an one, as whereby they
renounced all the promises of God, touching their Messiah, and king, that
should redeem them, and denied the hope of the fathers, wherewith so many
years, they waited for the coming of their Savior, as we read they did.
John. 19. For where Pylate still repeated to them the name of their king,
respecting no doubt the Messiah promised, and which they all hitherto looked
for, they with great impiety cry out: we have no king but Caesar. Was then
the promise made unto David, to be understood of Caesar, that of his s^ocke
one should be borne that should be a king for ever? And is it to be
understood of Tiberius, that naughty and wicked person, where it is said:
Behold, thy king comes unto thee, even the righteous, and savior, lowlye,
and so forth? Therefore Peter charge them with such an impiety, as whereby
they spoiled themselves of salvation, and all the promises of health and hope
of salvation. And least they should lay the fault on Pylate, as though they
did it for fear of him, he says they themselves did it where Pylate judged
him to be loosed, and gave openly a testimony of his righteousness and
innocence. Therefore he affirms the Jews were in fault, who to fulfill all
wickedness and mischief, made both themselves and their children guilty of
his blood, by public and solemn protestation. These things be horrible, and
yet the Jews wickedness did not herein stay or end. For Peter adds: you
have denied that holy and righteous, and desired a murderer to be given you,
and have killed the author and Lord of life. He charge them with so bitter
hatred against Christ, and with such blindness, that they were not ashamed to
prefer a bloudye murderer before Christ. And to make their wickedness seem
the more heinous, he uses a comparison. You denied Jesus which was an holy
person and a just, and in whom neither the Bishops (although they did what
they could) nor Pylate, nor Herod, could find any fault. Furthermore, you
stewe him which was the author of life, yea the Lord of life and death, whom
you ought to have known by reason of his miracles, and the late raising again
of Lazarus. In the mean season you required a thief, a murderer, and a
rebel, to be delivered you and set at liberty. And where it was in your
choice, and election, whether you would have, forgetting all the benefits of
Christ, you were not ashamed to prefer a wicked thief before him. What
could be said more cruel, grievous, and horrible? Yet Peter speaks these
things in that City, yea, in that Temple, where they bare all the swinge, that
were the chief authors of this wickedness, and who he knew as yet breathed
hatred against Christ. Therefore we are here again taught, with what liberty,
open wickedness should be reproved, by them whom the Lord has appointed to
be watchmen in his Church, to show the danger, and sword hanging over us,
least men should perish through their own slothe and negligence. And there
is no cause why we should harcken to them, which say there is no need of
such vehemency in these days, forasmuch as there is none to whom such
cruelty can be objected. Nay, the Jews only have not thus sinned, but there
be even in these days that sin as grievously, as ever they did. A number
deliver Christ unto death, in that they every where kill and burn the
faithful servants of Christ. Many deny him for fear, more for favor,
following the pleasure of men. And they sin not of simplicity and ignorance,
as Peter herafter excuses the Jews. For we have seen many which quite
against their conscience have denied Christ. My heart trembles as often as I
remember that heinous offense, that was committed by them, who not only denied
the truth themselves, but compelled those that belonged to them, to deny the
same, and embraced a form of religion, which the very author and inuentor
thereof allowed not. The like impiety to that that was then committed, has
not been heard of. And God grant they may all repent of their wickedness,
that were faulty therein. In the mean season we see how these bloudye
Barabasses every where reign, flourishe, and are had in great price, which
for money are hired and used to shed blood, and provoke the wrath of God, and
horrible destruction against their country, through their ungodliness.
Therefore such must be accused, and where these things be openly committed, and
accounted no more for wicked, there ought no modesty at all to be used. But oh
impiety and ungraciousness. For now a days amongst the professors of
Christianity, it is not lawful to say that, that was lawful for Peter to
say in the bloody City of Jerusalem. We be therefore in this respect,
worse than Jews, that where we commit the same offenses that they
committed, we cannot with like patience abide to hear the word of correction
as they heard it.

The order of the miracle, and of our whole salvation.
Peter returns to his purpose, to describe more plainly how God was the
author of this miracle, and to show all the use thereof. Yet first he preaches
the resurrection of Christ, both for that the reason of our salvation purchased
by Christ, consists in it, and also for that it commodiously does away the
offense or slander of the cross. You (says he) killed the author of life,
but God has raised him from death, whereof we are witnesses. It was needful
that these things should be joined to the premises, least any man might
think the wicked had over much power permitted them. For these things teach
that their cruelty and iniquity could derogate nothing from Christ, as who
being raised from death, does now live and reign in heaven. Hereof we may take
a general comfort. For as the cruelty and tirannie of the Jews could nothing
hinder or let Christ: so whosoever does imitate the Jews impiety and
tirannie, cannot hurt the members of Christ. In deed the Princes of the world
join together, and desire to overthrow the kingdom of Christ. But the Lord
from high laugheth at their devises, whose counsel shall stand for ever.
Look the Psalms.ij. and.xxxiij. Let no man therefore be afraid of men, who
though they rage never so much, have no power but on our goods and body, which
otherwise is mortal and shall perish. Yea, neither have they power thereon
farther than God permits, who has all the hears of our head numbered. But
the soul being out of all danger and hazard trusts, in Christ her
redeemer, and shall never be deceived of her hope. Math. 10.


But let us see how Peter sets forth the order of the miracle. His name
through the faith of his name has made this man whole, whom you see and
know. It seems a dark kind of speech, except a man mark the order of the
words. And it deceyueth many, because they think ( nomen) this word name,
is put in the accusative case, whereas all the order of construction plainly
proves it to be the nominative. Thus must it be set in order and construed:
The name of Jesus Christ has strengthened and made whole this man whom ye see
present, and that through the belief which he has in the name of Christ. And
for the more plain understanding, he adds by way of exposition: The faith
which is by him, has given to him this health in the presence of you all. The
sense of all together is, that Jesus Christ, through his name, that is, by his
virtue, power, and merit, has given health and safety to this lame man,
because he has believed in him. He repeateth the name of Christ, and faith of
Christ the oftener, to the intent the glory of Christ might seem the greater,
in setting forth whereof, the Apostles thought they had never done enough, as
appears every where in their writings and sermons. These words surely are
not lightlye to be passed over. For where we said that in this lame man was
set forth to us a figure of all mankind: in the healing of him we may behold
all the order of our salvation. Here therefore is declared who is the true
author of our salvation, then the mean, whereby we receive salvation, and the
end whereunto all these things serve and tend.

As concerning the author of salvation, Peter alleges the name of Jesus
Christ, whom a little before he called the author and Lord of life. Christ is
the author of salvation.
That this word name, is taken for power, rule, or merit, it is more evident
than needs with many words to be declared. And where at first he excluded
all power and holiness of men from this business, and now makes mention of
Christ only, by whose mean and power all this matter is brought to pass: it
easily appears that the origin and beginning of our salvation is to be
referred to Christ only. For by his merit we are delivered from sin, and
redeemed from death and the tirannie of the devil. And himself in the
Prophet testifyeth, there is none other redeemer but he only. Esaias. 43.
But we shall have occasion to speak more hereof in the fourth Chapter, where
Peter testifies there is none other name under heaven, given unto man, by the
which he may be saved. etc.

The mean whereby we apprehende salvation, is faith.
Howbeit, it is not enough to know that all salvation is contained in Christ,
unless we understand how to attain and take hold of the salvation in him.
But Peter shows that also where he says, this man was made sound and whole
by faith, that is, because of his faith in the name of Jesus Christ. Again:
The faith which is by him, has given to him this health. Therefore we take
hold of salvation by faith: and beside faith, there is nothing in us whereby
to take hold of it, because we be graffed in Christ none other way than by
faith. John. 6.
He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in
him. For where he is departed from us in body, and dwells in us by his
Spirit, and lives and reygneth in us by his Spirit: it is only a work of
faith, whereby we apprehende him, and the salvation in him. For the which cause
oftentimes faith is said to save and to justify. So Christ says to the woman
which was sick of the bloody flux. Math. 9.
Thy faith has made thee whole. And he promises salvation to Marie Magdalen
by the same words. Luke. 7.
Christ only in deed saves and iustifyeth. For in him is life, and he is
made unto us of God the father, wisdom, righteousness, satisfaction,
sanctification and redemption. 1. Cor. 1.
But because faith grafteth us in Christ, and makes us partakers of the
goodness that is in him: therefore salvation and justification is not without a
cause attributed thereto. Mark now the definition of faith, which Peter
compriseth in these words, where he says: The faith of his name, and the
faith that is by him. For by these words he declares that he speaks of such
a faith, as stays upon Christ, and which acknowledges and believes Christ
to be such an one, as he is described in name to be. The name of the son of
God incarnate, is Jesus Christ. He received the name of JESUS of the Angel
before he was borne, but in his Circumcision he took it again, after the
solemn usage of the people of Jews, which signifies a savior or Redeemer,
as says the Angel: Thou shall call his name JESUS, for he shall save his
people from their sins. Math. 1.
This word Christ with the Latins is as much to say, as anointed, and
signifies the manner of our salvation and redemption. For Kings and Priests in
the old time were anointed, and for that cause were called Meschijm, and
Christi, that is to say, anointed. So it behooued the Savior that was
promised should be called, because he is that true King, whom God has set
over his holy hill of Sion, and whose kingdom is stretched over all the world.
See the Psalms. ij.lxxij. Zach. 9. For he like a faithful king, has
delivered his people from the tyranny of the devil, he rules and governs
them, defends and enricheth them most bounteously with the treasures of his
heavenly kingdom. The same is a priest for ever, Psalm. 110.
according to the order of Melchisedech. For he taught in times past, and daily
does teach in his Church. And by the only sacrifice of his body has purged
all the sins of men. And now he makes intercession for us before his
father, being a faithful bishop, to perform all the things which remained to
be done for us with the father. Therefore whosoever truly acknowledge the son
of God to be a king and Priest, and the only savior of the Church of God, and
stay upon him only: they believe truly in the name of the son of God, 1.
John. 3.
which the Apostle teaches to be the chief commandment of God.

The end or fruit of this faith is the wholenesse and soundness of all man,
such as we see happened to this lame man and halt. The fruit of faith.
Christ because of his faith bestowed on him perfect health of body, so that
now he was able to walk, to leap and to skippe. And that his soul and
conscience was likewise healed, appeared by that he praised God, and joined
himself to the Apostles. Therefore Christ has made us all perfitely whole by
faith. And he delivers us not from sin and the punishment thereof alone, but
also regenerateth us by the immortal word of God, 1. Pet. 1.
through the operation of his spirit. Whereby it comes to pass, that we
understand the things that be heavenly, frame our selves to the will of God,
resist the desires of the flesh, and finally can do all things in Christ,
Phil. 4.
which strengthens us. And after this life attain to the perfect salvation
and true bliss, which is prepared for us in heaven. Into this bliss the soul
departing this world, by faith is received, and comes not into judgment.
And the body when it shall have put of all corruption, John. 5. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
being raised up in the later day by the trumpe and voice of an Archaungell,
shall rise again. Therefore this is a most large and ample fruit offaith,
which also we can attain to, none other way, than by faith in Christ. Let us
therefore study the word of God, by the which God gives us faith. Let us
join fervent prayers to our study, that being quickened through this faith,
we may attain perfect health, both of body and soul, and come to the
possession of heaven in Jesus Christ, our only savior, king and Priest: to
whom be praise, honor, power and glory for ever. Amen.

The.xxiij. Homely.
AND now (brethren) I know that you did it through ignorance, as did also
your Rulers. But God which before has showed by the mouth of all his
Prophets, how Christ should suffer, has thus wise fulfilled. Repent you
therefore and convert, that your sins may be done away. When the time of
refreshing comes, which we shall have of the presence of the Lord, and when
God shall send him which before was preached unto you, that is to wit, Jesus
Christ, which must receive heaven until the time, that all things which God
has spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets, since the world began, be
restored again.
THe Apostle Peter in the second part of his sermon touching the miracle done
upon the lame man, has so declared God to be the author thereof, that he has
also showed the Jews of their great wickedness committed against Jesus Christ
the son of God. And where there was nothing more horrible and cruel than
this fact of theirs: it is no doubt but a great number of them in their
consciences were not a little wounded and feared. Wherefore it was necessary to
show them the way of repentance and salvation. This does he in this place,
which is the third member of his sermon, wherein he marvelously frames
himself to their disposition and capacity. First because they seemed to
stand upon the pit of desperation, he teaches them that there is yet hope
of pardon and salvation. Then shows he them the way of salvation, and
exhorts and moves them with most weighty reasons to take hold of the
same. All which things being discussed, shall much serve for our instruction.
For they teach us that God will likewise pardon them which have most
grievously sinned: and they show what way of salvation they must take, which
will be reconciled unto God, and are desirous to be saved.

He puts them that killed Christ in hope of pardon and salvation.
His beginning is very witty and commodious, in that he teaches them they be
not yet past hope of salvation. For except sinners understand this, in vain
shall we exhort them to repentance, because they will think it cannot profit
them. And then it will come to pass that either they will become stubborn,
and heap sin upon sin, or else will be swallowed up of desperation, as we
read Judas was, which thing was the cause that the Prophets among the
grievous reprehensions wherewith they accused the sins of the people, and
threatened them punishment, did intermeddle promises and oracles of Christ our
savior, that being feared with the conscience of sin, they might lift up
their minds again through faith in the savior promised them, and learn to
seek salvation in him. Peter follows the industry of these Prophets, which
knew it belonged to his duty, not to fear the people from Christ, by
threatening words, but to win them unto him. Which end and mark the
Ministers of Christ in these days, ought to set before them. But let us see
the arguments wherewith Peter encourages them to hope for pardon, and salvation.

First he mitigateth their offense by reason and pretense of ignorance. I
know (says he) that you did it through ignorance, How pretense of ignorance
excuses. 1. Cor. 2.
as did also your Rulers. For if they (as Paul says) had had knowledge, they
would not have crucified the Lord of glory. Yet Peter's words are not so to be
taken, as though he would now extenuate or excuse their wickedness, which
before he so set forth and exaggerated. For so could he not do without
suspicion of lightness. And ignorance of it self excuses not the things that
are committed against the glory of God: yea, ignorance is no small fault,
considering we know that men are created to that end, to know God, to
worship him, and glorify him. But he means to make a difference between the
Jews sin and the sin against the holy ghost. This sin is when men
wittinglye and willingly cast away the known truth, and Christ whom they knew
in their minds, and so make war with God, and his Christ, as is evident
Judas the traitor, Julian the Apostata, and such other whelps of that hair,
Math. 12. 1. Ioh. 5.
did. Christ testifyeth that such men's sins shall not be forgiven. And John
forbids us to pray for it. The reason hereof the Apostle in the.vj. Chapter
to the Hebrews, renders by a feate similitude taken from the earth. For as the
earth being well husbanded, and watered from above, and yet remaining barren and
fruitless, by that argument shows sufficiently that it will never be good:
so, if men be not mollifyed with the knowledge of Jesus Christ, which only
seasoneth the minds of men to salvation, and makes them fruitful, but
become the more savage, and of purpose reject and impugn the same: certes they
plainly enough bewray that they be of the number of reprobates, of whose
salvation nothing is to be hoped. Therefore Peter clears his hearers of this
sin to declare that they ought not despair of the forgiveness of their
sins, and of salvation, because they sinned not of purpose, but of ignorance.
And it is like he had a respect unto the prayers of Christ, which for this
cause prayed for them that crucified him, saying: Father forgive them, for they
know not what they do. Luke. 23.
This place is diligently to be considered, to the intent we may learn what that
ignorance is, whereby sins are mittigated and excused. For in the Scripture
we find two kinds of ignoraunces. The first is of those that be wicked, and
openly rebel against God, which we may call a wilful ignorance, because men
will be ignorant of that they might know and learn. Example hereof we have in
Pharao, which says he knows not God, notwithstanding long before he knew
him by his wonders daily wrought, and desired his ministers to pray to God for
him, and a little before his death, said: The God of the Hebrews fights
against us. See Exodus 5. and 14. Such was the ignorance of those Jews, Iere.
44.
which when they had asked counsel of Jeremy, told him to his face they
would not obey his word. Such is the ignorance of a number in these days,
which excuse their superstition with the cloak of ignorance, and say they were
none otherwise taught. And in the mean season refuse the truth offered them,
will not hear it, fly them that would teach them, and stop their ears like
serpents. This is an ignorance inexcusable, because it damneth and stops up
the way to amendment. Yea, Christ testifies that this is the condemnation of
the world, that men fly the light, John. 3.
and wilfullye and wittinglye wrappe themselves in darkness, least their
works should be reproved. There is another kind of ignorance which
springs of a zeal of godliness, and the glory of God, whereby men
persecute the truth, not for the truths sake, but because they think the
glory and worship of God is diminished thereby. It is like that many sinned
through this ignorance against Christ, because they thought him an enemy of
Moses, and the law, of the Temple, and of all the service appointed by God. 1.
Tim. 1. Phil. 3.
And Paul seduced by a like zeal, persecuted the Church of Christ. And
thereby he says diverse of the Jews offended. This ignorance is worthy of
pardon, Romans 10.
for none other cause, but for that it is contented to be corrected and
amended, which if men refuse, then are they culpable of that first, and
incurable kind of ignorance. Let them mark well this difference, which now a
days either flatter themselves or other men, under the pretense of ignorance.
For it is evident that many offend of malice and frowardness.

Unto these things he adds an argument taken from the providence of God, The
providence of God comfort sinners.
for the better persuading them that they should be pardoned and saved. God
(says he) which before had showed by the mouth of all his Prophets, how
Christ should suffer, has thus wise fulfilled. The strength of the argument
is in this, that God used their sin to a good purpose, and that therefore
they ought not to distrust the favor of God. For it is as much as if he
should say: you can not nor ought not to deny but you have committed an
heinous offense. Howbeit you must not despair therefore: but rather respect the
end whereunto the great goodness of God has directed all this your doing.
Your meaning was to blot and wipe out all remembrance of Christ from among
men. Because you thought he was an enemy to God and to true religion,
ignorance blinded you, whereby it came to pass, that you were mad against
the son of God. But the end of all this tragedy was most joyful. For God
by this mean (which thing no man ever hoped) has fulfilled his eternal
counsel of man's redemption, and has accomplished whatsoever in times passed
was prophesied by the Prophets. Why therefore should you despair of salvation
which you hear is now obtained and gotten? Why should you mistrust the
goodness of God, which in your wickedness as you see, has been so merciful?
Surely God will never cast you of, because of this your sin, which he has so
ordered and directed to your commodity, so that you refuse not his wisdom,
which now is declared unto you. We are hereby taught again how we should use
the providence of God: not to seek therein a defense for our wickedness, but
the instruction of our faith and life, and the comfort of our minds. For the
Apostle so quiteth not the Jews, that he charge God with the murdering of
Christ, but shows that God directed the Jews fact, to a good end and
purpose. So if we or others offend, let us acknowledge the fault to be in our
self, and not so excuse our selves, to make God the author of our wickedness.
And if any goodness fall out of our wickedness, yet then let us not think
we be altogether faultlesse, but let us embrace the goodness of God, which
turns the wickedness, that deserved damnation, to our salvation. We alleged
an example hereof before in the history of Joseph, which was sold away by his
brethren, to the which if you join this example also, you shall as it were in
a glass behold all the reason of this controversy and matter. Furthermore,
let us not harcken to them, which say we may sin on hardly, seeing the
glory of God and our salvation, is advanced by our sinning. For as Paul
teaches us, Roma. 3.
we may not do evil that good may follow thereof. Nay, the more arguments we
have of Gods goodness toward us, the more we ought to be sorry for our sins,
and to obey the will of God. Let us also here mark that we must not rashly
judge of other men's sins. They must be examined by the rule of Gods word. We
must not hastilye thunder out the sentence of damnation, because we do not
always know the counsel of Gods providence, which perhaps uses him whom we
of private and to hasty affection, meant to condemn, to the furtheraunce and
salvation of many a man. See what is said of these judgments. Matthew. 7.

Let us now see the counsel that Peter gives touching salvation, which he
comprehends in few words, He gives them counsel how to be saved.
saying: Repent you and convert, that your sins may be done away. This saying
contains in it both a commandment and a promise. The commandment is the
very same that he gave to them before, that were pricked with the consideration
of their sins. He utters one thing in two words. First, he commands them
to repent, which properly comprehends acknowledging of sin, and contrition
of heart. Whosoever will give men counsel how they should be saved, he must
begin always with these two things. For unless we acknowledge our sins,
and be sorry for them: we shall never think of any amendment and
reconciliation with God. But because the wicked sometime acknowledge their
sin, and be sorry for them (as we see Judas did) he adds an other word,
namely, that they must convert. The conversion or turning must be unto that
thing, from which by sin they departed before. But that we depart from God by
sin, is more manifest than needs any great proof of words. Therefore it
is said in the Scriptures, that sinners do forsake the ways of God.
Therefore we must turn unto God by repentance. And we convert unto God partly
by amending our life, and partly by faith in Jesus Christ. The one makes us to
cease from sin, whereby we provoked the wrath of God: the other indueth us
with the righteousness of Christ, and makes us able to stand in his sight.
For the doctrine of the Gospel teaches us, that God the father is reconcyled
unto us by Christ. Of faith springs the invocation of God, and whatsoever
other fruits use to grow of repentance. Therefore Peter shows the same way
of salvation here that he did before, which we must think belongs no less
to us, than to the Jews. We are the shorter in this place, because the things
that might here be spoken, are said before, where he may see more hereof that
lists.

Unto this precept or counsel, he adds a promise, The remission of sins is
of free gift
to move them the more. He promises them forgiveness of sins, whereof it is
credible they were chiefly careful. But mark the manner of speech which he
for great cause and consideration uses. Convert (says he) that your sins
may be done away. He does not attribute unto them any glory of merit or
desert, as though by works of penance they might put away their sins, or
make satisfaction for them. But teaches them how they must be done away by
another, that is to say by God, against whom we sin, and by sin become
debtors unto him. For it is a Metaphore, or translation taken from Creditors or
lenders, who only have power and authority to wype debtes out of their books
of reckening, when either they are satisfied by their debtors, or else
themselves of favor and goodness will remitte and forgive all the debt. And
all they which sin, become debtors unto God, according to that saying of
David. I have sinned against thee, O Lord. And verily, whatsoever is committed
against the will of the Lord, is sin. Therefore unless God wype out the
^^btes of our sins, there can none other deliver us from them. The wysest
both of the Jews and Gentiles, have herein consented and agreed. For albeit
the Gentiles attributed much to their superstitions, yet they confessed they
were in vain, unless some peculiar favor of God were joined with them. Among
the Jews, the Phariseyes attributed much to their works: yet we read that they
themselves confessed openly, that God only had power to forgive sins. Math.
9.
He forgiueth them or puts them away, not because it is in our power to
purge them, and to make satisfaction for them (for before him no flesh is
justified, and all our righteousnesses be as an old, worn, and ragged clothe,
Psalm. 143. Isa. 64.
which can neither cover us, nor keep us warm) but for that Jesus Christ the
son of God has pourged them upon the altar of the cross, by the merit of
his death, and by the price of his blood has cancelled all that, that has
made us guilty of death before God. The Lord in the same sense uses this
translation of doing away or wyping out in Esaias the Prophet, cap. 43. and.44.
And Christ declares all the manner hereof by a feate Parable in the.xviij. of
Matthew. Peter therefore admonishes the Jews hereof, to the end they might
understand that their sins were now all done away, so that they would with
all their heart embrace Jesus Christ by whose merit they were put away. Now,
that which is said to them, we must think spoken also to us, who above all
things must have this care, that in our repentance we have our eyes fast fixed
upon the only forgiveness of our sins, that through to wicked and over
bold a confidence, we challenge not to our selves, or to the merits of our
works, that benefit which comes of the only grace of God obtained by the
merit of Christ.

He urges them by fear of the last judgment.
Furthermore, as there is nothing more wholesome and necessary for man, than
repentance and turning unto God, whereunto Peter in this place counsels us:
so the flesh will credit and believe any thing, more easily than this. For
such is the corruption of our nature, that we delight in sin, and are so
proud, that we are ashamed to confess our fault, and to amend it. Therefore
the Apostle urges them standing wavering and in doubt, with most strong
arguments agreeable to this purpose. He sets before their eyes the
remembrance of the later day, and the glorious coming of Christ our Judge.
His talk or phrase herein is somewhat defective and not full, but may in this
wise be easily supplied. It is not in vain that I require you to repent and to
turn unto God. For the same shall be profitable and necessary for you, that
you may hereafter be able to stand sure, when the time of refreshinge, which
we shall have of the Lords sight, comes, and when he shall send the same
Jesus Christ which was before preached, whom the heavens must receive, until
the time that all things be restored again. Out of the which words we may
gather two arguments. The one is taken of the time, the sense whereof is thus.
This form of the world shall not always endure, neither that trade of men and
other creatures, that we now see. For there shall come a day of refreshing and
restoring of all things, when both the godly shall be delivered, and
restitution required of the wicked. etc. Therefore as your salvation is dear
unto you, so apply you busily that that day may bring unto you refreshing and
salvation, and not fear, and torments. The other argument he takes of the
Judges person* God will send this Jesus Christ, of whom we now speak, to be
a Judge, before whose judgment seat all men must stand, that there they may
receive in their bodies according to all their doings whether they be good or
badde. Is it not therefore necessary that you should get the favor of this
Judge, before he come to punish you for your offenses? It seems that a
third argument also may be gathered of these words, in that he says, he
whom he now preached shall come to be a Judge. For so he takes from them all
pretense of ignorance, that they should not think their former ignorance
should excuse them in the day of judgment. And of such weight are the
things here spoken, that if the consideration of them can not move any man,
certes in vain will he be moved with other arguments.

The day of refreshing.
Here we have to consider the state of the later day, which Peter expresses in
two words. First he calls it a day of refreshing, by a figure called
Synecdoche. This pertains only to the godly, which then shall feel
refreshing, and be delivered from all grief and sorrow. Then shall God wype
away all tears from their eyes. Apoc. 21.
And there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither crying. etc. Then
also shall they be enriched with those goods, which neither eye has seen,
nor ear heard, Esaias. 64.
nor can be comprehended by any reason of man. Then as many as lived in the
world, and suffered all kind of griefs in the flesh patiently, John. 19.
shall (as Iobe says) see God in their flesh. For the which cause, Christ
bids us lift up our heads when we see the signs going before the later
day: Luc. 21.
for then our redemption draws near. For the sight of Christ our Judge, can
not be terrible to the godly, forasmuch as they understand that he is their
Savior and advocate. And this is that great benefit that we have by faith, and
none otherways. For faith only makes us bold and sure of salvation at the
coming of Christ. Then shall they find no help in riches, in honors, 1.
John. 2.
nor friendship of the world, which while they lived on earth, despised this
faith in Christ. Therefore it behooves us to be armed with this hope, against
all the temptations of this world when we be in adversity, and so shall we
never be removed from the way of salvation.

Then he calls it a day of restitution: The day of restitution.
for then shall there be a restitution of al things, and a perfect and
immutable state of creatures. Which many look for in vain as long as they
live in this world. For this world is full of confusion, and breeds new
troubles every day wherewith the kingdom of Christ sometime has been so
assaulted, yt it might seem utterly to have quayled. But in the later day this
kingdom shall be so set up as the Prophets have prophesied. For when all the
power of our adversaries shall be brought under Christ's feet, there shall be
nothing more to trouble the faithful, and then shall be that joyful and
peaceable state of all things, Esaias. 9.11. Ierem. 23. Amos. 9.
that the Prophets many times make mention of. At that day shall the bodies
be restored again, howsoever they have perished. For the sea shall give up her
dead, and so shall death and hell. Apoc. 20.
There shall be restored a joyful and blessed condition of the world. And
this engine and frame of the world that now groneth under the burden of
corruption, shall be delivered, Romans 8.
and made such as it was, before it was accursed for the sin of man. For
there shall be new heavens and a new earth, wherein righteousness shall
dwell. Apoc. 21. 2. Pet. 3.
Every man shall receive in his body according as he has done, whether it be
well or evil. Yea and Christ himself when he has put down all rule, 2. Cor.
5.
and all things be subdued unto him, shall be subject unto him that put all
things under him, and shall deliver up the kingdom to God the father, 1. Cor.
15.
that God may be all in all. To conclude, then shall be such a restitution of all
things, as we can now neither utter by words, nor comprehend by reason, for
now our knowledge is imperfect, and our propheciyng imperfect, but when that
which is perfect is come, then that which is imperfect shall be done away. 1.
Cor. 13.
Now we see in a glass, even in a darcke speaking: but then shall we see
face to face. In the mean while the consideration hereof serves to our
instruction, that we being borne up with the hope ofthis restitution, may
patiently suffer whatsoever adversity and misery, and so order our
conversation oflife by faith in Christ, that that great day of the Lord may
bring unto us also comfort and refreshing among other that be godly.

And so many it seems a marueyle that the Lord deferreth his coming so long.
Why Christ deferreth his coming.
And perhaps the Jews might move some question hereof. For where we measure
God after the property of our flesh, we cannot choose but marueyle at Gods
tariaunce, and deferring of judgment. But Peter answers such questions,
where he says, that Christ must remain in the heavens, or reign in heaven,
until all things be restored and fulfilled, that the Prophets have
prophesied. He has on the earth fulfilled the affairs of our redemption. But
there remained as yet certain things to be done, long before decreed by God
and foreshewed. For it behooued the Gospel should be preached in all the
world, and that the Gentiles should be brought into the fellowship of the
Church, as all the Prophets by one consent testify. There remained the
mystery of Antichrist, through whose tyranny it was needful the Church
should be tried, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Apoc. 7.
and the number of Christ's martyrs fulfilled. Christ therefore has given a
place to these things, by his going into heaven, having received all power in
heaven and in earth. Let no man therefore think he is unmindful either of us
or of his duty, because he deferreth his coming, and day of judgment. For
he knows what he has to do in all things. Let it comfort us that we know
he reigns in heaven. There let us seek him with minds lift up by faith,
without any care ofhis corporal presence in earth, until that great day
come, Math. 24.
when like a lightning he shall appear unto us suddenly. Would to God they
would diligently examine Peter's words, which now a days because they would
ratify a bodily presence of Christ in the earth, say that his human nature
by reason of the conjunction it has with the godly, is so extended and so
pierces through all places, that it cannot be circumscribed or contained
neither within time nor place. Let them therefore look what answer to make to
Peter, who appoints to him both a time and a place. Yea, he affirms it is
so appointed of God, that he should be taken into heaven, and should sit there
until that last day came, when he shall return to be a judge, and to bestow
fully upon the godly the restitution long agone promised. I know they iumble
heaven and earth together, and by this word heaven, understand the heavenly
glory and conversation that he is in here on earth. But as this gloss cannot
be proved by scripture, so was it utterly unknown to the learned antiquity,
and therefore it needs no great confutation. Therefore leaving their
quiddities, let us learn of this third part of the sermon, that in our sins
we despair not of Gods grace, but through repentance and true faith, let us
return unto God, and so let us prepare our selves, that that day on us also
may shine happy and joyful, when Jesus Christ shall come to deliver those
that be his, and to condemn the wicked: to whom be praise, honor, power and
glory for ever. Amen.

The.xxiiij. Homely.
Moses truly said unto the fathers: A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise
up unto you, even of your brethren like unto me: him shall you hear in all
things whatsoever he shall say unto you. For the time will come that every
soul which will not hear that same Prophet, shall be destroyed from among
the people. All the Prophets also from Samuel and thenceforth as many as have
spoken, have in likewise told of these days.
AFter that the Apostle Peter had grieuouslye accused the heinous wickedness
of the Jews, which they committed against the son of God, in the third part
of his sermon, he gave them counsel how to obtain salvation, as we declared
in our last Sermon. He bade them repent and convert unto God, which we partly
do by repentance, and partly by faith in Jesus Christ, through whose merit we
be reconciled unto God. But it was no small block that kept the Jews from
embracing of Christ. For where they were not yet come to the knowledge of him,
a great many feared that if they should receive him, they should offend
against Moses, and the law given them from God. And it seemed a weighty
matter to them, to forsake the religion which God had given unto them, and
which they had held so many years after that order, and according as they
received it of their forefathers. Therefore the Apostle in the fourth part of
his oration corrects this error, teaching them that both Moses and the
Prophets direct the true worshippers of God unto Christ, and that therefore
they so little offended against the law, by believing in Christ, that rather
they disobey Moses, and believe not the Prophets truly, except they receive
Christ, of whom they bear witness. Again, least they should distrust the
goodness of Christ, whom they now so oftentimes heard they had offended by
their great cruelty, he declares that he that was promised to the fathers,
belongs to them also, and is their savior as well as the fathers, so that
they would embrace him with true faith. But at this present we will speak but
of those things only which Peter alleges concerning the mystery of Christ,
grounded upon the books of the old Testament.

He begins with Moses, because he was of greatest authority among the
Jews. Moses bear^th witness of Christ.
Out of whom where he might have brought diverse testimonies, he takes one
among a many, whereby he teaches us that Christ was long agone appointed to
be the teacher and schoolemaister of Gods people. Which thing served much to
this present purpose, because (as I said even now) many thought it a grievous
matter to forsake Moses, who they knew was appointed of God to be their
lawmaker, and master. He shows therefore that it was not Moses mind, that
they should always hang upon him, but that he pointed them to another
Prophet, which should more perfitely teach them all things. The place is in
Deuteronomie.xviij. Chapter. In that place are prohibited all superstitious and
soothsaying Arts of the heathen, whereby they go about to search out the
knowledge of things to come, and the secrets of God, by divination, by the
wicked Mathematicalles, by the noise of birds flying, by Necromancie, and such
like kind of diuinations. And Moses does advertise them, that they should
forsake these things, and turn to the only word of God, and wholly depend upon
the same. And because they should not think it an hard matter to find out
the meaning of Gods word, he says they should never want Prophets, whom God
would raise up from among themselves, by whose ministry they should learn
what the will of God was in all things they should take in hand. And they are
not deceived which think that an universal promise is contained in this
place, whereby the gift of prophecy is established and confirmed in the people
and Church of God. But Peter wittily applies this general promise unto
Christ, who, it is evident, is the chief of the Prophets, and by whose
spirit, as he says in another place, 1. Pet. 1.
all the Prophets were led and inspired. And that the things here spoken by
Moses belong unto Christ, is more evident than needs any long
demonstration. For he was both borne of the Jews, and was sent of God, as
appears by his doctrine and miracles, which we see in all points
conformable to the doctrine of the Apostles. Therefore Peter's argument seems
most strong, whereby he labors to persuade them to believe in Christ,
according to Moses saying, even as if he should say: Moses so little
challenges to him self alone all authority of teaching, that he commands
us to give ear and credit to every Prophet, teaching the word of God, and
has appointed all those that despise the Prophets sayings, to be punished
with death. Therefore, how much more ought you to believe Christ, who has
taught us the will of God the father more plainly and perfitely than any man,
and in whom most truly are verified whatsoever Moses says of that Prophet.
And so Peter trimlye touches the end and scope of his purpose, that is, to
take out of their minds that preposterous religion, which let and hindered them
with the overmuch reverence of Moses and the law, and their pieuish opinion,
and would not let them to embrace Jesus Christ. Yet because both Peter and
Steven (as appears hereafter) expound this place of Moses, as meant of
Christ: we also will here search out such things as may enstruct us in the
knowledge of Christ. And first of all, Moses does elegantlye describe unto us
Christ our savior. Next, he teaches us what duty we owe unto him, and
pronounces sentence of death against them that do contemn him.

First, in the description of Christ, he shows of whom he shall spring, or
be borne: Christ in his very manhood, is borne of the Jews
The Lord your God shall raise him up of your brethren. He must then be borne
of the Jews, which is an infallible argument of his incarnation, and of his
true manhood: whereby they are convinced which say Christ brought his flesh
from heaven, and took it not of the substance of the virgin, but came through
the virgin into the world, as water runs through a conduite. Verily Paul
testifies that he took not on him the angels nature, Heb. 2.
or any heavenly creatures, but the seed of Abraham. And speaking of the
prerogatives of the Jews, wherewith God above other nations did vouchsafe to
endue them, among other things he makes mention how Christ touching the
flesh, should be borne of them, which is God in all things to be praised for
ever. Romans 9.
Whereunto the promises of the old Testament, are to be referred, where often
times he is called one while the seed of the woman, Genes. 3.22 Psalm. 132.
Esaias. 11. etc
another while the seed of Abraham and of David. We must here observe the
singular goodness of God, who having appointed his son to be our savior and
teacher, would have the same incarnated and made man, least either we might be
afraid of his majesty, or think he disdained our infirmity, which Paul
also considered. Heb. 2. and. 4.

Christ is a Prophet.
Secondlye, he declares the office of Christ, calling him a Prophet. Howbeit
Moses was not ignorant that Christ should be both a King, and the Redeemer of
mankind, and denies it not in this place, but makes mention of his office,
which for his purpose and matter in hand, was chiefly to be required. Prophets
whether they show of things to come, or else by the word of God admonish men
of things present, are the interpreters and openers of Gods will. But because
Christ should be a Priest in the Church of God for ever, he must not abstain
from teaching, which is the chief point required in a Priest, as may be seen
Malachie. 2. Wherefore also in another place, he is described in the person of a
Prophet or preacher, as in Esaias. 61. Which place he himself expounds of
himself in the sinagoge at Nazareth. Luc. 4.
And he is not declared to be such an one in the old Testament only, but God
has set him forth also being here on earth, by a very solemn and open
authorisement, to be the universal and undoubted teacher of all the world.
Whereas upon mount Thabor before most credible witnesses both of the dead and
of the living, that is to say, before Moses and Elias, Peter, James, and
John, he pronounced that notable saying: This is my beloved son, in whom I
am well pleased, hear him. Math. 17.
And Christ himself followed the office of teaching with great study and
diligence, and openly confesses that he was sent for that cause. Mar. 1. Luc.
4.
Therefore it is not without a cause that Moses and Peter calls him a
Prophet. And we are taught by this place, that it is not sufficient if we
confess Christ to be our savior and Redeemer, unless we acknowledge him to
be a teacher sent of God, and do that duty to him that scholars owe to a
faithful and trusty schoolemaister. Thou shall moreover consider, how we
ought to reverence the ministry, whereby the Gospel is preached. For whereby
can it more singularly be commended, than by the example of the son of God,
who both himself was a minister on the earth, and appointed the ministry to
be always in his Church, whereunto Paul having a respect, says: that we be
messengers in the room of Christ, and preach unto the world the word of
atonement. Which would God both the hearers and ministers would always
remember, least the one sort think to contemptuously of the ministry, and
the other through their naughtynesse make it to be laughed at.

Thirdly is declared what manner a Prophet Christ should be: Christ is like
unto Moses
to say like unto Moses. Which is not so to be taken, as though we should
acknowledge in Christ nothing of more excellency than in Moses, whereas
Moses was but a mere man and a sinner, and Christ was both God and man, and
the author of our salvation. But this similitude or comparison must be referred
to the office of a Prophet, and figure of Christ which Moses bare: wherein
many things both pleasant and profitable come to be considered. First Paul
testifies of Moses that he had rather to suffer sorrow and affliction with
the people of God, Heb. 11.
than to be taken for Pharao his Nephewe, and enjoy the treasures and
delights of Egypt. The same affection we see in Christ, who being in the shape
of God, humbled and abased himself, and taking on him the shape of a servant,
chose rather to be afflicted with us, and to die for us, than to see us any
longer in misery. Furthermore, as Moses was of his brethren most vnworthilye
refused: so when Christ came amongst his own, his own received him not, and
before Pylate they denied him saying: we have no king but Caesar. Yea, John.
1.19.
and now a days also he is most unworthily rejected of many, to whom he
offreth himself, and in himself eternal life and salvation through the
Gospel. Thirdly, as Moses delivered the people of God from the cruel
tyranny of Pharao, brought them out of Egypt, and drowned them in the surges
of the read sea: so the son of God has delivered mankind from the power of
the devil, and brusting the bonds of sin and death, has slain Satan the
spiritual Pharao, with all his preparation, engines and armor, through the
merit of his blood. Fourthly, as Moses like a faithful shepehearde, led
the people of Israel safely through the unknown ways of the wilderness: so
Jesus Christ is that faithful shepeherde that goes before his sheep, Psalm.
24. John. 10.
and leads us safelye through the deserte of this world, being full of all
kind of dangers, by the light of his word, and guiding of his spirit.
Fifthly, as Moses gave Manna to the people being an hungered, and gat springes
of water out of the rock for them, being a a thirst: so Jesus Christ feeds
our souls unto life everlasting by the merit of his flesh, and has opened in
his side a most plentiful fountain of salvation, by the which only al thirsty
drouthes of the soul are quenched. See John. 6.4.7.19. Sixthly, as Moses was
the interpretor of Gods word to the people, Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5.
when they were not able to abide the majesty of God speaking to them: so
where none of us has seen God, nor can see him as long as we be clothed with
this mortal flesh, the son of God which is in the bosom of his father,
has declared unto us, whatsoever behooves us to know of God, and proves by
that argument that he takes us for his friends, John. 1.15.
because he has hid none of these things from us, which he heard of his
father. Seventhly, as all the weyghtie causes which could not be discussed by
the ordinary Judges, used to be referred and brought unto Moses, and he
receiving sentence from the mouth of the Lord, declared it, and that was taken
for undoubted, and ought not to be countermaunded, as may be seen Exodus 18.
and.33. Leuit. 24. Numer. 15. etc. so whatsoeeuer things either in the
mysteries of faith and kingdom of heaven, or in the conversation of our whole
life pass the capacity of our reason, it behooves they be referred to Christ
only, and we must stand to his sentence, so that we must subdue all our
understanding to the obedience of faith, which Paul testifies, 2. Cor. 10.
Romans 1.
is the end and scope of the Gospel. Eighthly, as Moses always made
intercession so God for the people, as often as they sinned, and did it so
faythfullye, that for their sakes he desired to be wyped out of the book of
God: Exodus 32.33. Number. 11.12.
So Christ when the sentence of damnation hoong over all our heads, made
entreaty for us, and would become accursed for us, Galat. 3.
to deliver us from the curse. The same also being made a mediator between
God and man, makes always intercession for us to the father: And as many as
feel they have deserved Gods wrath through their sins, 1. Tim. 2. 1. John.
2.
must use him for their advocate and spokesman unto God. Many other things
might be alleged, in the which it is manifest Christ was like unto Moses, or
rather an absolute and perfect accomplisher of those things which by Moses
were prefigurated. But it suffices to give occasion to them that list more
deeply and exactly to search them.

We owe to Christ faith and obedience
Now, unto this description of Christ, he joins what the duty is that we owe
him, for Moses says: him shall you hear in all things whatsoever he says to
you. The same, God the father commanded upon the hill of Thabor, as we
declared a little before, saying: Hear him. Yet let no man think he has
fulfilled the commandment of God, if he receive the word of God but into his
ears, as Judas and the Phariseyes, Pylate and many others did. But first an
earnest desire of the Gospel is required, because among many things
whereabout men be most vainly occupied, one thing is necessary, Luke. 10.
as Christ teaches us. From the study of the word the belief which we have
in it cannot be secluded. For how can we labor to get that thing, the credit
and truth whereof we suspect? Obedience follows belief, whereby we
acknowledge Christ to be the teacher of faith, religion, and director of our
whole life, and to our power obey him. These marks of the children of God did
he teach us, where he says: John. 8.
He that is of God hears the words of God. Again: My sheep hear my voice,
and follow me. John. 10.
Whereupon we gather for a surety, that they be not the children of God, nor
the sheep of Christ, which refuse to hear Christ's voice, speaking in the
Gospel. Above all things we must note that whatsoever Christ speaks, we are
commanded to hear it. For there be which hear Christ in deed, but they
hear him but in those things only which like their fleshlye appetyte, against
the which, if any thing be spoken, they think that apperteyneth not unto
them. Of this number be they, which gladly hear, and marvelously embrace the
promises of the Gospel, where the grace of God is preached, and free
forgiveness of sins: but the same will not admit the doctrine of repentance
which rebukes and accuses sin. They be like unto those which after a sort
can suffer the doctrine of truth to be preached, but cannot abide if a man
reprove the deceyuers, and Antichrists. And we see many so affected, that
they will greatly extol and commend whatsoever is spoken of the kingdom of
Christ, of his victory, of the glory of the elect, which they shall possess
in heaven: but yet they so abhor the cross and persecutions, that they can
suffer no mentions to be made thereof. But these men are far deceived. For
Christ is not divided, neither can the parts of Christ his doctrine be
separated. For he that commanded forgiveness of sins to be preached in his
name, Luc. 24.
the same requires all men likewise to repent. And he that said to the woman
that was a sinner and bewailed her sins: Thy sins be forgiven thee: Luc. 7.
The same said unto him that was sick of the Palsy being now healed:
Behold, thou art made whole: sin not again hereafter, least a worse thing
happen unto thee. John. 5.
And afterward he said by Paul, that whooremongers and adulterers without
repentance, should not enter into the kingdom of God. Likewise, 1. Cor. 6.
he that confesses himself to be the light and the truth, Math. 7.24.
and bids us to walk in him: the same reprooueth false Christ's and
Antichrists, and bids us beware of them. Again, he that promises the
treasures of heaven to those that be his: the same affirms constantly, John.
15.16
that in the world they shall suffer tribulation. And he that gloriously rose
from the dead, and with great triumph was taken up into heaven, a little
before that, was despitefully hanged between two thieves. Therefore as we must
embrace whole Christ: so is it necessary that we give ear to his whole
doctrine, unless we will wholly be deprived of him. A figure hereof went before
in the Paschall lamb, which the Jews were commanded to eat whole, and the
bones and other things which could not be eaten, were commanded to be burned.
So must whole Christ be received, and if any thing seem in him intolerable,
that same must be consumed and ouerpassed with the fire of faith and love of
God.

The punishment of those that contemn Christ.
Furthermore, because our flesh herein makes much resistance, which very
vnwillinglye comes to this yoke: Moses urges us with grievous menace and
threatening: It will come to pass (says he) that every soul that will not
hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among that people. This punishment
comprehends the whole destruction of man, both body and soul. For what hope
of salvation can remain for him, which is secluded and cut of from the Church
and people of God, which only is received into the fellowship and communion of
all Gods goodness. But why should he not be rejected from the fellowshippe of
him, which refuses to hear him whom God has appointed to be his master,
and the teacher of his whole Church? How much more grievous punishment does he
deserve, Heb. 10.
which dare tread the son of God under his feet? Hereof are taken those
heavy threats in the Gospel, which seem to many too vehement, and more
cruel than reason would, such as is that saying of the Baptist: He that
believes not the son, shall not see life, and the wrath of God abides upon
him. John. 3.
And Christ when he had promised eternal life to the believers, adds: He
that will not believe shall be condemned. But Peter thought to admonish the
Jews hereof, Marc. 16.
because they should not think the contempt of Christ and his Gospel to be a
game and pastime, but should know that the danger of their soul lay
thereon. And let us think the same is said unto us. For such is the
authority of Jesus Christ with his father, that no man can be accepted and
welcome to him, except he be graffed in Christ. But the bare and emptye
profession of a Christian name graffeth us not in him, but a lively faith,
which makes us to obey his doctrine, and firmly to believe in him. See what
is said of the true and counterfeite hearers of Christ, Math. 7. and Luc. 6.
Chapters.

Although the authority of Moses was great with the Jews: yet because Peter
will omit nothing, The Prophets bear witness of Christ.
he joins hereto testimonies of the Prophets, diverse of the which it is like
he rehearsed. But here he takes all, saying: All the Prophets from Samuel,
and thencefoorth as many as have spoken, have told of these days. He
begins the number of the Prophets with Samuel, because before him was no
Prophet after Moses, whose writings are extant. Yea, before he prophesied,
the word of the Lord was a rare and precious thing, as we read 1. Samuel. 3.
Which afterward by many Prophets began most clearly, both to be preached,
and written every where. And as many as were from that time, have prophesied of
Jesus Christ, as may plainly appear to all them which have read their
sermons or books with diligence. It is a plain and manifest oracle of God
that Nathan tells to David of Christ, 2. Sam. 7.
which should be borne of his stock. There are many other more evident than
this, uttered by David, such as appear. Psalm. 2.22.89.119. etc. Of Esaye,
what need we to speak, which has written so plain an history of all the
things which Christ should do, that (as S. Jerome says) he deserves in
many places to be taken for an Evangelist, rather than a Prophet. The like is
to be affirmed of all the other Prophets, whose sayings if we should rehearce
word by word, we might sooner find how to begin, than to make an end.
Let it suffyce to tell you that there is no so small a thing in Christ, but the
same may be proved by the oracles of the old Testament, whereupon we also
gather, that the books of the old Testament ought not to be condemned, as
certain phanaticall persons affirm, which cry they belong only to the
Jews. They sin against the industry and goodness of God, which thought
good all manner of ways to confirm our salvation.

Therefore let us mark here both the certainty of the doctrine of the
Gospel, and Christian faith, and also the antiquity thereof: The certainty
and antiquity of the Christian faith.
for if we join unto the testimonies of Moses and the Prophets, the figures
of the law, and the ancient promises made long before to the Patriarchs, a
man shall easily perceive that there was never any kind of doctrine or
religion, confirmed and set forth with so many testimonies. The first stands
upon the promise, which was made in Paradise to our first parents, concerning
the seed of the woman, which should tread down the serpents head.
Therefore great is the folly or rashness of them (to speak no worse) which
either openly dare gainesay the doctrine of the Gospel, or else seek other
counselles, by authority whereof, to determine and rule our faith, and
religion. For what do these men else, but reprove God which spoke by Moses
and the Prophets, of lying, or at leastwise call his truth in doubt? Besides,
they foolishly require the authority of men, Galat. 1.
whereas we ought not to believe an Angel teaching the contrary. Therefore
letting them go, let us embrace Christ, whom one uniform consent of Scripture
sets out to us, in whom only all righteousness, sanctification, truth, and
salvation is contained. To him be praise, honor, glory and power for ever.
Amen.

The.xxv. Homely.
Ye are the children of the prophets, and of the covenant which God made unto
our fathers, saying to Abraham: Even in thy seed shall all the kinreds of the
earth be blessed. First when God had raised up his son Jesus unto you, he
sent him to bless you, that every one of you should turn from his
wickedness.
THe Apostle Peter so shows the Jews the way and mean unto salvation, that
therewith also he remooueth all impedimentes which might let them from taking
that way: where we had two things chiefly to consider. The first was the
preposterous observance of Moses, and their auncestries religion. For they
feared if they embraced Christ, they should offend against the law and
religion which God gave unto their forefathers. He teaches them therefore that
therein is no danger, because both Moses and the Prophets directed and sent
men unto Christ. But that they rather offended against Moses which disdayned
to receive Christ, whereas Moses long before appointed that such as they were,
should be punished by death. There was yet one other stop, which was the
conscience of that sin which they had committed against Christ. For where
they had wickedly denied him (as Peter before told them) they saw it was
meet and convenient, that Christ also should deny and forsake them, and not
regard or accept their repentance. And they could not be ignorant how God
by his Prophet rejects the prayers of such as would hold up hands unto
him, Esaias. 1.
embrued with blood. Wherefore Peter in this place remedyeth this
inconvenience, and proves by strong arguments that Jesus Christ appertains
to them also, and will not put them back, if they will turn unto him with all
their hearts: which is the principal state and subject of this place, wherewith
also he concludes his sermon with very good success.

The order of preaching the Gospel.
Before we enter into Peter's words, we have an example in him to mark, which
teaches us the right trade how to preach the Gospel: That consists herein
to make all men understand how the promises of the gospel appertain unto
them. For unless they be hereof assured, they neither can make great account
of them, ne yet surely trust unto them. Which thing is the cause that Paul is
so diligent in proouing the vocation of the Gentyles. For in vain should the
Gospel have been preached to them, except they had known yt the salvation
purchased by Christ, had as well belonged to them as to the Jews. For this
cause all the promises of the Gospel, are universal, and may be applied to
all men, which with true faith will embrace them. Math. 11.
Come unto me (says Christ) all ye that labor and are heavy laden. etc. So
God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son for us, John. 3.
to the end that all that believe in him should not perish but have life
everlasting. And in another place he says, that he prays for all them that
should believe in him through the preaching of the Apostles. John. 17.
Whereunto also is to be referred that that John says, that is, how all they
which are sinners, 1. John. 2.
have Christ for their advocate, because he has given himself an atonement
for the sins of all the world. And Paul oftentimes in the business of
salvation excludes all respect of persons, and testifies that all they that
believe in Christ, have salvation given them of God in him. See Romans 10. Galat.
3. Colos. 3. Ministers must so mind and remember these things, that they must
debar no man from the universal promises of God, but must so divide and
order the word of the Gospel, that no man may doubt of the certainty of his
salvation, but may understand that the merit of Christ belongs to them all
indifferently. Now, after these premises, let us come to Peter's saying, which
with three arguments most strongly confirms the Jews faith.

The Jews are the children of the Prophets.
First, he admonishes them of their ancient dignity, and of their elders,
saying: you be the children of the Prophets: that is to say, you come of that
people or nation, of whom the Prophets came. Or rather, you be the children
of the Patriarchs, who, it is evident were most notable Prophets, as by whom
the promises of salvation were declared first unto mankind. For the which cause
the holy ghost long agone called them Prophets. Psalm. 105.
Hereof Peter gathers, that without doubt the promises long before revealed
by the Prophets, appertain to the nation of the Jews: if so be they will
receive them, and imitate the faith of their progenitors. For Peter in this
place does attribute nothing here to carnal generation: which is of no effect
in those that degenerate, and wax wicked, as those grave expostulations of
John the Baptist and Christ do plainly declare, where they severely and
earnestly rebuke the Jews glorying in the bare title of Abraham. Math. 3.
John. 8.
But Peter by this argument confirms those that might despair, to the intent
they might understand their traueyle should not be in vain, if they would
follow their fathers the Prophets, and embrace Christ the Savior, whom they
foretold was to come.

Mark how Peter going about to persuade the Jews to hope for salvation, first
makes mention of the Prophets. He knew therefore that this was the chief
argument of Gods favor toward us, to give us expositors of his will, because
that except we perfitely knew it, we could not attain unto salvation. Therefore
among the benefits of the old testament, which God in time passed bestowed on
his people, this is chiefly to be remembered, that he furnished them with
Prophets, by whom they might be taught the will of God. See Mich. 6. Amos. 2.
Psalm. 107. 2. Paral. 36. Yea, Christ himself by this argument proves that he
took the Apostles for his friends, because he hid none of those things from
them, which were showed to him of his father. Whereof we gather how great the
ingratitude and wickedness of them is, which dare contemn the word of God,
and hiss at the Prophets, by whose ministry the same is preached. They shall
one day feel the sentence of Christ, when he most severely revenge the
contempt of his servants, as he threateneth Math. 10.

Secondly, he calls to their remembrance the vocation of the Jews, The Jews
are the children of the covenant.
and promise of God, alleging the covenant or testament of God, made in the
time past with Abraham. You (says he) are the children of the covenant, which
God made with your fathers, saying to Abraham: Even in thy seed shall all the
kinreds of the earth be blessed. He seems by an Hebrewe phrase to call them
the children of the Testament, to whom the Testament belonged, and which were
Heirs written in the Testament of God. For so we read they are called the
children of wrath, or death, whom God in his wrath appoints to death. Peter
seems to make two arguments. The first is of a thing before denounced or
showed, saying: A pronunciatis.
God in the Testament which he made with your fathers has written you for
heirs also. Ergo, the salvation contained in the Testament of God, belongs
as well to you as to the fathers. The Antecedent needed no great proof, with
those who knew the promise of God well enough: I will be thy God, Gene. 17.
and the God of thy seed after thee. Then alleging the sum and effect of
the Testament, he proves by an argument a comparatis, that is, A comparatis.
of things compared or laid together, that they cannot be excluded from the
promises. For thus God testified to their father Abraham, that in his seed all
the Nations of the earth should be blessed. And if the Testament of God
extended to foreign Nations, who I pray you will deny that it appertains to
them that be borne of the stock of Abraham? Yet let us always remember that
Peter speaks these things condicionally, and that salvation is promised to
them which (by the faith that was in Abraham) take hold of Christ, least we
attribute unto carnal generation, that which depends upon the mere grace of
God, and his free election, as Paul at large proves to the Romans, the.ix.
Chapter.

By this place may the madness of the Anabaptists be confuted, Against the
Anabaptists.
which will not admit the children borne of the faithful into the society and
fellowship of Christ's Church, yet none of us deny but that salvation stands
in Gods election, and not in carnal generation. In the mean while where as
God in his Testament has long since included the children of the faithful:
it may seem great rashness to deny them the communion of the Testament and
Church of God. Shall we think the conditions of the new Testament more hard
and grievous for our children, than the old were, Gene. 17.
when by Circumcision the eight day they were taken into the fellowship of the
people of God? Or shall the authority of Christ be of no force with us, which
attributes faith to little children, and affirms that the kingdom of heaven
pertains to them? Math. 18.19 Marc. 10.
Or what shall we say to Paul, which speaking of unlike marriages, fears not
to call those children holy, which have but one parent only, be it father or
mother that is a Christian? 1. Cor. 7.
Let us therefore avoid the headye audacitie of our judgment, and constantly
keep the articles of Gods covenant, where it is manifest, that salvation is
promised even to very children.

It is diligently to be considered that God would have our redemption and
salvation comprised in a covenant or Testament. Our salvation is contained in
the testament or covenant of God.
Which thing as it begone in Abraham, so was it afterward many times renewed
with Abraham's posterity and offspring. Hereto appertain the things spoken by
David. Psalm. 89. and. 132. and also the things we read in Jeremy. 31. touching
the new Testament of God. And God did not only make a Testament, but confirmed
the same with an oath. For he swear unto Abraham, and that by himself, Heb. 6.
because he could swear by no greater. These things serve to prove the
certainty of our salvation. For if no man reject or break a man's testament,
after it is engrossed and lawfully proved, then none has so much authority,
Galat. 3.
as to infringe or violate the Testament of God. For Paul says, the gifts of
God are without repentance, Roma. 11.
and his calling cannot be broken. God affirms the same Jeremy the.33.
saying: If the covenant which I have made with day and night may be broken,
that there should not be day and night in due season: then may my covenant
also be broken, which I made with David my servant. etc. And in another place
he says, that the natural affections of the parents toward their children,
be not so sure and vehement, as the care he has to keep the truth of his
Testament, and the certainty of our salvation. Esaias. 49.


It shall be profitable to mark diligently the sum of Gods Testament, The
sum of the Testament of God.
which is alleged by Peter out of the.xxij. chap. of Genesis. In thy seed
(says God unto Abraham) shall all the kinredes of the earth be blessed. In
which words God comprehends three things. First, he shows what profit
comes to us by his Testament. Secondly, he declares the mediator, by whom
we shall receive it. Thirdly, he teaches to whom the inheritance of this
Testament is to be extended.

First, God promises a blessing, which is set against the curse, as appears
in Deuteronomy. 27. and.28. A blessing.
This blessing comprehends in it the whole and entire safety of man, and
specially the favor of God which enricheth us with all kind of goods. For it
cannot be that he can want either in body or soul, that has God favorable
and merciful to him. And it behooued this thing should expressly be promised
us, because by nature, as many as are of the stock of Adam, are accursed. For
the Scripture euerywhere teaches that the curse belongs unto sin. And the
law pronounces him accursed, which fulfilleth not all the things that God
commands. Deuteronomy. 27. Therefore because we be all sinners, and destitute of the
glory and grace of God, Romans 3.5.
we be subject to his wrath and judgment. And as through sin all kind of
evil is come into the world, so God by blessinge promises all goodness.
Therefore this is a most large promise, and comprehends all man's salvation.

And because enmity was grown between God and us, Christ is the mediator of
bliss.
by reason of sin: we could not be reconciled unto him without a Mediator,
nor attain unto this blessing. God therefore shows us this mediator, where
he promises the blessing in the seed of Abraham. Which place Paul the
Apostle with great plainness expounds of Jesus Christ, who we read took
the seed of Abraham. For he writes to the Galathians the third chapter: To
Abraham were the promises made, and to his seed. He says not, and in his
seeds, as of many, but in thy seed, as of one, which is Christ. Neither do
we here regard the cauilling Jews, which expound this word seed (because
it is a nowne collectiue) of the whole nation of the Jews, and make a
comparison, as though all people should be blessed after the example of that
nation. For where it is evident all mankind stands accursed, Gods Testament
should be of no profit, unless he appointed some one which should bless
them and deliver them from the curse. But who that is, the Jews can never
show us, if they refuse Christ, forasmuch as in all Abraham's posterity, many
and great sins may be showed. Whereby it is evident the curse cleaves to
them. For the Lord truly said to them by Esaias. Thy first father offended
sore, Esaias. 43.
and thy Rulers have sinned against me. Only Christ is he, in whose mouth was
found no guile, and which was able to say to his enemies: which of you can
reprove or impeach me of sin. And he only is declared by God the father to
be that man in whom we obtain this blessing. For of him God said: Math. 3.17.
This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased. And he in his last
supper openly testified, 1. Cor. 11.
that the accomplishing of the new Testament consisted in his blood. Through
his blood therefore be our sins purged, which caused the sentence of male
diction to fall upon us. Whosoever therefore will obtain the inheritance of
bliss, let them embrace Christ.

Howbeit, The heirs of bliss.
because this bliss or felicity shall not seem to pertayne to a few
persons, or to one Nation only: he shows expressly how far it ought to be
extended, including within the blessing that comes by Christ, all the
kinredes of the earth. For (as Paul says) he that ordained these things, is
not the God of the Jews only, but of all Nations also. Romans 3.
And we are every where warned, that touching our salvation there is no
difference of nations before God, Acts. 10.
but (as Peter afterward testifies) in all people they that fear him, and
work righteousness, are accepted with him. Further, Christ himself says,
that the salvation, whereof he is author, appertains to all men, where he
testifyeth in the Gospel, that many shall come from the East, and from the
West, and rest with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Math. 8.
in the kingdom of heaven. Whereunto this also appertains, where he gives
commandment to his Apostles to preach the gospel over all the world, Marc.
16. Act. 1. For as the first promise of salvation was made to our first
parents: so God would have the same emparted to all their issue and
posterity. Neither is there any other reason wherefore Abraham can be called
the father of many Nations, but for that all the faithful of all nations
joined together in Jesus Christ, are made heirs of the promises of his son,
and of the salvation set forth in Christ, by faith. The consideration hereof is
both full of instruction and comfort. For it teaches us that we must rashly
contemn no man, nor yet be proud of the vain prerogative of our nation,
which most times depends of earthly men, and of their fond judgment:
forasmuch as Jesus Christ which is our salvation and glory, apperteyneth to all
nations. Again, it confirms us in the temptations of our faith, that we
suffer not our selves to be secluded from Christ, in whom we hear that all
the nations of the earth be blessed: by which argument Peter labors here to
persuade the Jews the certainty of their salvation.

Christ is first sent to the Jews.
Thirdlye, he comfort them with the late benefit of God, and the present
state and condition of things. First, when God raised up his son Jesus unto
you, he sent him to bless you, that every one of you should turn from his
wickedness. He understands not by this word raising up, the resurrection of
Christ from death, but he alludeth unto the oracle of Moses, which a little
before, he cited. As though he should say: God has performed that he
promised, and has raised up that great Prophet and redeemer of mankind, one
of your own brethren. And he has sent him being thus raised up and
incarnated, not to other nations, but unto you, and willed him first to notify
and entreat of salvation among you. Neither can any man deny this. For Christ
taught among you: he wrought miracles among you: Math. 15.
he used himself conuersantly with you: yea, he plainly confesses that he
chiefelye belongs to the lost sheep of Israel. Furthermore, when he first
sent us forth^to preach, he badde us we should keep our selves within the
bounds and borders of your nation, Math. 10.
and not to go into the way of the Gentiles. And his last commandment when
he was ready to ascend into heaven was, that we should begin to preach the
Gospel first at Jerusalem, Acts. 1.
and so to publishe it throughout Jury, and then to bring it to other nations*
Wherefore, you have no just cause to doubt, unless you list to despise the
present grace of God, and to doubt of these things which God (little lacking)
offreth to you to feel with your hands. Howbeit, he beguileth not men with
vain promises, he mocketh us not with empty bragges of benefits, but has a
pleasure to give us them in deed, and takes no greater delight than in our
salvation. We are here taught how we also may assure us of our salvation by
the preaching of the Gospel. For where it is the message of salvation, God
truly offreth salvation to them, whom he calls thereby into the knowledge
and fellowship of his son. Neither is there now a days any other way or
mean, by the which God sends his son unto us, than by preaching the
gospel which fully comprehends all the bliss of salvation.

Now, Peter in few words describes the office of Christ, where he says he
is sent of God to bless us. The office of Christ.
Whereby also we perceive that by the seed of Abraham, he understood none
other but Christ, as before out of Paul we declared. Christ blesses us as he
is a Priest. For it was the Priests office to bless the people, as Moses
teaches Numer. 6. Although there is great difference between them and Christ,
for they were ministers only of the figure and shadow. Christ does not only
wish us good, but also gives it, and in him God blesses us with all
spiritual blessing, as Paul teaches Ephe. 1. But Peter adds the manner also
of this blessing, saying: while he turns every man from his wickedness. For
where, of sinnnes the curse springs, there can be no place for blessing,
before sin be taken away. Now Christ takes them away: yea, he has long
sithence cleansed them by the merit of his death: for which cause the Baptist
calls him the lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. John.
1.
He takes not sin away for one time only, but conuerteth all them from their
sins that believe in him. For where he gives them his spirit, they be
regenerated and renewed by him: so that they which before were given to the
bondage of sin, do cast of the yoke of sin, and live unto God, and
begin to serve him, in study of innocence, and charity. Whereby we gather,
that they are greatly deceived, which imagine Christ to be a patron of carnal
liberty, and say that by preaching of him, we plant careless life in the
minds of men. Certainlye, 1. John. 3.
Christ came into the world to destroy the works of the devil. But among
these works, sin has the chief place as there is none that can deny. Nay
rather, if we will confess the truth, there can be in us no true turning from
sin, but such as Christ is author of, through his spirit, according to that
saying of Jeremy: Ierem. 31.
Convert thou me, and I shall be converted. Again: Thren. 5.
Turn thou us unto thee (O Lord) and so shall we be turned.

Furthermore, before we make an end, we have to be observed, All Prerogatives
with out Christ be of no value.
that the Jews abounding in so many prerogatives and dignities as both here
and else where are declared in the.ix. to the Romans, received no commodity
by any of them all, but were forsaken of God, for that through stubborn
incredulity, they contemned Christ, and despised the preaching of the gospel,
whereof Paul entreats at large Romans 11. Therefore all externe things are but
vain, except we embrace Christ with true faith, who only conuerteth us from
sins, purges our sins, reconcileth us to God, and makes us inheritors of
the kingdom of heaven. This Christ has Peter in his sermon taught them, and
shows them that in him the treasure of salvation is opened unto them,
notwithstanding it might seem they were fallen from salvation and the grace of
God. Let us therefore think these things spoken also unto us, and labor to
become the true members of Christ, and to be quickened with his spirit, that
hereafter we may reign with him in heaven: to whom be praise, honor, glory,
and power for ever. Amen.

The fourth chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The.xxvj. Homely.
AS they spoke unto the people, the Priests and the Rulers of the Temple, and
the Saduceys came upon them, taking it grievously that they taught the people,
and preached in Jesus the resurrection from death. And they laid hands upon
them, and put them in hold, until the next day, for it was now euentyde.
Howbeit many of them which heard the words, believed, and the number of the
men was about five thousand.
HItherto Luke has described the beginning and success of the primitive
church. There have we seen what the doctrine of the Apostles was, which they
delivered unto the Church: also what the studies and exercises of the primitive
Church were. Now hereunto is most commodiously adjoined, how the world
received this doctrine: where we shall see how the very same thing fell out,
that Christ before that, showed his Apostles of. For in John he says: The
servant is not greater than his Master. If they have persecuted me, they will
persecute you also. If they have kept my saying, John. 15.
they will keep yours. Again: They shall deliver you up to the Councels,
Math. 10.
and shall scourge you in their sinagoges. And these things they (whom God had
hitherto kept safe from the fury of their enemies, until the beginning of his
Church might be stablished and settled a little surer) begin now to find
true. But now most fierce enemies suddenly rushe in upon them, they take and
cast them into prison, they bring them to examination before the Counsel, and
at length being vexed with long disceptation and reasoning, they dismiss them
with grievous threats. We must in all this narration, mark this one thing
chiefly above all other, which shall serve much for our consolation and
instruction: that is, not to be offended at the attempts of the wicked,
wherewith in these days, they oppugn the doctrine of Christ and his Church.
For this world, whose property it is to hate and persecute the light of the
truth, John. 3.
because it bewrays their naughty doings, uses of old thus for to do.
Here it behooves us to be armed with the constancy of the primitive Church,
that we leave not our place when we are assaulted, but that we wait for an
happy end and success of such temptation with a strong and invincible
faith, which God grants unto them, whom he sees tried, 1. Cor. 10.
and made the better under the cross. But because we shall have occasion
oftentimes to speak of these things, let it suffice us to have touched this
little hereof, least we lose the mark, whereto all these things must be
directed. Now we shall discuss every part and circumstance of the things that
Luke has said. He describes who were the Apostles enemies, and authors of
their persecution, what crafts, and deceit they used, what cloak they had for
their wicked and unjust enterprise, how violently they laid hands on the
Apostles, and how vain their attempt was, because through their fury the
number of the faithful were rather increased than diminished.

Among the enemies of the Apostles, The authors of the Apostles persecution.
there are three kinds of men rehearced. The first are Priests, whom by the
circumstaunces, we may easilye gather were the ringleaders and beginners of all
this business. Howbeit it had been their parts rather to have taken upon
them the defense of the truth, and to have preached Christ unto the people, of
whom Moses and the Prophets bare witness. After these follows the Ruler
of the Temple, who (by all likelyhoode) was some Captain of the Roman
soldiers. For where the Temple stood in the most impregnable place of the
City, and was well fenced with munition: I suppose the Romans gave the
Presidentes of Jury a special charge thereof, least the Jews under color of
religion and holy assemblies, should move any insurrection or sedition. And
undoubtedly, the Captain of the Temple brought with him his guard or
soldiers, which always attended on his service, and were at his
commandment. There was a third kind of men beside these, called Saduceyes,
who plainly scoffed at all religion. For they denied the resurrection of the
body, and whatsoever else is written of the mysteries of eternal life, as may
be seen Math. 22. and Acts. 23. And it can not be that any sincere religion
could be in them, which durst deny these things, without the which, religion
could not stand. And if we expende the matter well, it shall appear that the
same men came against the Apostles, which were sent out to take Christ at mount
Oliuete, Luke. 22.
as Luke in his Gospel shows.

Let us here mark, The enemies of Christ and his Gospel.
who are always like to be the greatest enemies of the Church, and doctrine of
Christ, and authors of persecution. Uerily, the Priests, that is to say, those
which take upon them the governance of doctrine, and of the whole Church. For
as soon as they being overcome with ambition and covetousness, begin to
seek private honor, and change religion into lucre (which the story of the
Gospel abundantly declares those Jewish doctors did: Math. 7.23. John. 5.
etc.) it can not be chosen but they will be the first to withstand the truth,
because they are the first that are reproved through the light of the truth.
Hereof we see it comes to pass in all ages, that these kind of men have
procured most trouble against the doctrine of truth. The times that the
Prophets lived in, declare this to be true, against whom the Bishops and
Priests made most a do. The same, John the Baptist proved true, John. 1.
whose doctrine and Baptism the Levites sent from Jerusalem, began first to
reprehend. And Christ had no sorer enemies than the Priests, through whose
devises he was taken, condemned, and nailed to the cross. The Apostles now
find the same to be their grieuousest enemies. And those whom Pylate and the
Roman garrison hitherto suffered to preach Christ, are disturbed by them,
whose favor and defense they ought to have had, in setting forth the kingdom
of Christ. Let us remember this gear, and not be troubled, though we perceive
those against us in these days, which hitherto have challenged to themselves in
the Church, the name of learning and holiness. I mean the Popes with all the
rabble of Bishops, and Monks. For where it is evident they are all led with
covetousness and ambition, and have long since obscured the doctrine of truth
with man's traditions, and have made lucre of religion, it cannot be but they
must hate the light of the truth, and wish the extinguishment thereof.

The craft of the enemies of truth.
But let us consider the craft which they use in setting upon the Apostles.
First, they enter not into the Church alone, and so lay hand upon the
Apostles. For so all men would have perceived how they had been led with the
desire of their private honor and lucre. And it was a dangerous matter for
them to provoke the fury and rage of the people against them. Wherefore they
join unto them the ruler of the Temple, who was authorized by public order,
to see there should be no business made in the Church: and so they would
seem to have a regard of public tranquillity: where in deed they did it for
none other purpose, but to use the aid of the officer for the defense of their
tyranny. Then join they also unto them the Saduceyes, men void of all
religion, because they thought such, meetest for their purpose. For such men as
these, think it a point either of a foolish, or a seditious mind, contrary
to custom to alter any thing in religion. Last of all, they rushe in upon them
as they be in their sermon, and that suddenly, because they would fear the
people withal. Whereupon we may think they had consulted hereof before, and
that they did nothing at aladuenture or without deliberation. The like craft
have all they used against the truth, which now these many years have
conspired against the same. For Daniel attributes to Antichrist the eyes of a
man, that is to say, wit and wiliness to foresee things. And Christ says,
the children of this world are wyser in their kind, Dan. 7. Luc. 16.
than the children of light. And surely if we well consider the hystories of
the Bishops of Rome, we shall see they have used the like wiliness these many
years, and that they have then chiefly set forward their own matters, when
they have seemed to do nothing less, and being bolstred up by the secular
powers, have clymed up to such rule and tyranny as now they exercise. So
Boniface the third made Phocas embrued with the heinous murder of Maurice his
master the Emperor, Platina. Sabellicus. Carrion.
to the intent that he again might make him the supreme head of the Church. So
by the strength of the Lumbardes, they drove the Emperors of Greece out of
Italy, and when the Lumbardes seemed to them more intolerable, than the
Greeks, they used the Frenchmens aid to subdue the Lumbardes. Neither made
they Charles Emperor of the west Church (where the Romans had been without an
Emperor more than three hundred years) for any other cause, but to have a
Captain or ruler of the Church, whose aid and help, they might use to
defend their usurped power over the Church, and to bridle such as would
speak against it. They most plainly bewrayed their meaning, when they
conveyed the Empire to the Germans, and caused the Emperors to swear
homage, and obedience to them, and reserved the authority of confirming and
crowning the Emperor to themselves: least any other, than such as would do
after their pleasure, should ascend to such dignity. They shall confess that
I say the truth, whosoever will read the form of oath wherewith the Emperors
are bound, and which they have put among the Canons of their law, and also
the Canon of Boniface the eight concerning maioritie and obedience. For he
speaking of two swords, that is, of the ecclesiastical and secular power does
expressly challenge them both unto the Bishops of Rome, in these words. Both
are in the power of the Church, namely, the spiritual swoorde and the
material. But the one to be exercised of the Church, the other for the
Church. The one by the hand of the Priest, the other by the hand of Princes
and soldiers, but at the beck and sufferaunce of the Priest. etc. Let us
therefore acknowledge the truth of the old President, when we see Bishops
fight against the truth, with force of kings. Let us mark the subtlety of
this beast which compasses her matters by strength of others. Let us consider
her continual trauey^e in oppressing the truth, and not judge of them
according to our leysinesse. They wake when we soundly snort. Let us therefore
awake likewise, and according to Christ's admonition, beware of men. Math. 10.


Howbeit, By what pretense truth is assaulted.
it might seem a strange and tyrannical deed violently to carry men away
without order of law. Therefore Luke shows what their pretense was: They
took it grievously (says he) that they taught the people, and preached in
Jesus the resurrection from the dead. In these words he shows not only what
grieved them, but also what things they laid to the Apostles charge. Uerily
two things. First, it seems to them a thing intolerable that Peter and John
being rude and unlearned men, which all their time before this, had gotten
their living by fishing, and had taken none orders, should teach the people*
This seemed a thing tending to schism, and to bring the people from the unity
of the Church. For the matter was come to that pass among the Jews, that all
administration of the Church was in the Priests hands, which would admit
none to teach in the Church, but those that were sworn to them, which thing
we see the Bishops of Rome have done these many years, in whose Church (as
Christ has prophesied in his revelation) no man may buy or sell, Apoc. 13.
except he have the mark of the beast. Yet we would not have our meaning so
taken, as though all men in the Church should be permitted to preach without
exception. 1. Tim. 3. and.5. etc.
For we know what the Apostles have taught touching the ordering of Ministers.
But we condemn the tyranny of them, which challenge to themself only all
power, whereas they chiefly are authors of all the mischief in the Church, and
deserve not to have the lowest rouine and place in the Church. Secondly, they
think this worthy of punishment that they preach Jesus to be risen from the
dead. The Saduceyes wholly condemned the doctrine of resurrection. But another
thing grieved some of them more. For every man might gather of this rising
again, that Christ was the son of God, and the author of life, and unjustly
condemned of the Priests and of Pylate, as Peter openly said in his sermon.
But this was not only an intolerable slander, but also a sedicious matter to
charge the Apostles that they went about to raise the people against the bloody
and unjust Judges. The Apostles therefore are charged with two most heinous
crimes: to say, with schism in the Church, and sedition in the common weal:
both which, not without a cause seem to all good men both hateful and
detestable. But if we weygh and consider the intent of the Priests and their
conditions, we shall easily perceive this was but a vain pretense. For if they
cannot abide schism in the Church, why regarded they the Saduceyes so much,
who it is evident were not ashamed to deny the chief article of faith and
salvation, that is to say, the resurrection of the body? Why suffer they the
Essenes and Phariseys, men plainly of diverse sects and opinions? If they
abhor the crime of sedition so much, why were they the authors that the
people asked Barrabas a seditious fellow and murderer to be given them, and
required that Christ might be crucified? Therefore they are not so much moved
with danger of schism and sedition, as led with hatred of the truth, and it
grieueth them that their naughtiness and wickedness is disclosed through the
light thereof.

In the mean season we may see with what pretense the wicked ^tryue and
contend against the truth. For it is evident in all ages, that the defenders
of the truth were taken for schismatikes and sedicious persons. Elias is
charged that he troubles all Israel. Amos the Prophet is accused to Hieroboam
of sedition. 1. Reg. 18.
Christ also before Pylate is called a deceyuer of the people, Amos. 7.
and charged to affectate or aspire unto the kingdom against Caesar. The same
crimes also in times passed were laid to the Christians charges in the times
of the Emperors, as appears by Tertullian, Cypryan, Arnobius, Lactantius,
and others writings, wherein they make answer to the reproaches and slanders
of the Gentyles. And in these days also the Gospel is for this cause chiefly
spoken against, because it rippeth Christ's coat without the seame, that is to
say, the Church deuideth men's minds, and kindles wars. But the answer to
these things is easy, and it is well known that it is a far other thing,
that wringeth and disquieteth these men. For if they will not have the Church
divided, why I beseech you do they so highly commend the rules and orders of
Monks, whereby they which only ought to profess the name of Christ, are
divided into most sundry rytes, and factious names, why hearcken they not to
Paul, 1. Cor. 1.3.
which most grievously condemns such things? If they abhor division so
greatly, how comes it to pass that the Bishops of Rome are the authors of
all the wars that have been these many years? We may thank them for the
horrible schism, and never enough bewailed, of all Christendom, whereby the
East Church was rent and divided from the West, and at length subdued to the
tyranny of the wicked Turks? who can justly be named the author and beginner
of the holy war, whereby all Christendom most unhappily was set by the
ears, and rivers of man's blood were shed, but the sea of Rome? I appeal
unto hystories which shall bear witness that I speak the truth, and lean
not to private affection. See we not at this day the Popes Legates in Princes
Tents, and in the Camp among soldiers? See we not how they increase through
the discord of Princes, and establishe tyranny in the Church? And where the
light of the Gospel reprooueth these things, by and by they accuse us of
schism and sedition. Wherefore (O Christian Princes) acknowledge once their
craft, and having so often been warned, be wise, and use not cruelty against
your brethren and Christ's members, for their sakes, who, it is manifest, are
the greatest plagues of all other unto public peace and tranquillity.

But some men may marueyle why the Apostles answered not the crimes laid to
their charge. They fight against the truth by open force.
But Luke teaches plainelye what the let thereof was. For by and by they laid
hands on them, and had them to prison, and that they did with the more haste,
because they should have no leisure to make their purgation before the people.
This is the property of the enemies of truth, with open force to proceed
against the professors thereof, having always an eye unto this, that the
faithful shall have no place or leisure to excuse themselves. For they know
the force of verity is such, that the light thereof will easily disclose all
their attemptes, and they wot well how they are in most safety, when the
people are in most ignorance. Therefore as they use to spread false
accusations among the people, of such as are godly: so they labor all they
can, that no man should understand their innocence. Therefore where they
should by reasons and scriptures go to work, they use plain force, halters,
prisons, sword, fire, and such other like. This is more evident than needs
any long proof. Yet let them remember, as Christ testifyeth, that this is the
power of darkness, and that with the Prince of darkness they shall one day
be punished, Luke. 22.
for their tyranny and ungodliness. We learn by the example of the Apostles
who they be that are unworthily recompensed of this unkind world, for their
faithful endeavor and godliness, and not to be offended if the like also fall
out upon us.

But least we should have any just occasion to be offended, the Evangelist
teaches us how little the wicked with all their tyranny prevailed against
Christ and his Church: Many (says he) of them that heard the words, Through
persecution the Church increases.
believed, and the number of the men was about five thousand. What should we
here first say or marueyle at, O brethren? The unspeakable power of God, or
the wonderful constancy and boldness of the faithful of that time? Here
appears the invincible power of Christ, which does not only scatter the
counsel of his enemies, but also turns it vpside down: Psalm. 2.33.
which David once prophesied he should do. They go about to stop the course
of the Gospel, and by fear to pull men from the Church of Christ. But they
are so deceived, that rather, may be perceived a marvelous fruit of the
Gospel, and new scholars are added unto the Church of Christ. This is the
perpetual condition of the Church, that by persecutions it increases. The
same came to pass long agone in Babylon, what time the kings of Assiria and
Persia did set forth God and his religion. Dan. 3.6.
Under the Roman Emperors, the whoter the persecution was, the more there
were that thought it a goodlye matter to confess Christ with their blood.
This is it that David says, Psalm. 110.
Christ shall reign or bear rule in the middle of his enemies. Let us follow
the boldness of the primitive Church, and not be feared with the cross or
rage of persecutors. Math. 10.
They show cruelty but upon our bodies, and that no further than God
permits, but upon our soul they have no power at all. They bind the
Preachers of the word, 2. Tim. 2.
and the faithful hearers, but the word of God cannot be bound. For the
spirit of the Lord blows not where the world will, John. 3.
but where it self will. Further, he is greater that works in us, John. 12.16
than he that so rages in the world. Christ works in us, Phil. 4. John. 10.
through whose comfort we are able to do all things. He is a strong and
faithful shepeherde, which will not suffer his sheep to be taken from him. He
has prepared for us a place in heaven, to the which it becomes us by the
cross and all manner of tribulations to come, that we may live with him, and
reign in the house of his father: To whom be praise, honor, power, and glory
for ever. Amen.

The.xxvij. Homely.
AND it came to pass on the morrow, that their Rulers and Elders, and Scribes,
and Annas the chief priest, and Caiphas, and John, and Alexander, and as many
as were of the kindred of the high priests, gathered together at Jerusalem. And
when they had set them before them, they asked: By what power, or in what name
have you done this? Then Peter full of the holy ghost said unto them: you
Rulers of the people, and Elders of Israel, if we this day be examined of the
good deed that we have done to the sick man, by what means he is made whole:
Be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the name
of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you crucified, whom God raised up again
from death, even by him does this man stand here present before you whole.
This is the stone which was cast away of you builders, which is become the
chief of the corner. Neither is there salvation in any other. For among men
under heaven, there is given none other name, wherein we must be saved.
ALthough our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ according to his promises, never
fails those which embrace him with true faith, yet he chiefly succoureth
them when they are persecuted of their enemies, and find no help in man,
whereunto to lean. Math. 10. Marc. 13. Luke. 21.
And then he comfort them not only with his spirit, but also shows them
what to do and to say. This present history gives us an example hereof,
while the wise men, and of greatest power in the world, after the worlds
judgment, be overcome and shamefully confounded by Christ's Apostles, being
but unlearned men, and of no estimation. We have seen how the Apostles were
had to prison, because they took upon them the office of preaching, and taught
how Christ was risen from death, being not licensed thereto of the Bishops.
But now Luke declares how they handled Christ's cause, before the counsel at
Jerusalem: which place as well for many other skilles, as for this chiefly, is
notable, because it contains the craftynesse of the enemies of truth, and an
example of a counsel of Bishops assembled against the truth.

The description of the counsel of the Rulers and Elders.
He begins with the benche of the Judges, which he painteth out with a
diligent rehearsal of all them that were gathered together, not only because
we should understand, who and what manner of men were assembled, but also that
we might perceive how the enemies of truth trust more in the authority and
power of men, than in any thing else. It came to pass (said he) that their
Rulers and Elders, and Scribes of Jerusalem. etc. Whatsoever was of any
excellency or authority among the Jews, he comprehends in three degrees.
They are Rulers to whom the Romans had committed the governance of such
things, as chiefly concerned the constitutions and rules of Jury, wherein
they differed from others. The Elders were the state of the Senators, as
appears by other places of the Scripture. The Scribes are they which
attributed to themselves the knowledge of the law, and the Scriptures, and who
had the keeping of the public writings, and records. And not contented to
have rehearsed these degrees, he recites also the names of certain other of
most authority amongst them, that is to say Annas, who seems here to be
the high Priest, not because he was then Bishop (for the hystories report that
Caiphas was this year Bishop) but because he had been Bishop before, then
Caiphas, John, and Alexander, whereunto afterward he joins all those that
were of the high Priests kindred. Now, if you consider well this bench, you
shall perceive there was nothing at that present of greater honor. For they
whose power was of most authority with the Roman Presidentes, were all
assembled together. They also were there, to whom the public administration
of the Church was committed. And they whose name and fame for learning and
doctrine was greatest among the people, were there. But herein stood the
chief point of all others, that these degrees of men, were instituted of God,
and commended for the succession, of about a thousand and five hundred years,
if we count from the departure of the children of Israel out of Egypt, or from
the time that Aaron was Bishop, until the days of Christ and his Apostles.
And in deed they might call themselves the successors of Aaron, Eleazar,
Abiathar, Iehosuah, and others, to whom there is no small praise attributed in
the Scriptures. With these men are the Apostles coped, yea, they are brought
before them and accused, being at that time taken for the most abject and
despised men of all others: having neither nobility of birth, renoume of
succession, neither any other worldly dignity or honor, to commend them of:
and at whom many men were offended, because of that slanderous punishment of
the cross, which Christ their master and teacher suffered. Yet the end of
this Tragedy shows how they had the ouerhande of all these persons. And let
no man think it strange to see such a sort and such manner of men come
together against the Preachers of the truth, because the Evangelists many
times show us the reason thereof. For where they were led with the desire of
ambition and private lucre, and had corrupted the doctrine of truth with the
traditions of men, and had turned godliness into lucre and gain, they were
not able to abide the light of the truth, the hatred whereof had armed them
before against Christ, and even now pricketh them forward, to join against the
Apostles, speedilye to make away with them, like men that would utterly quench
some great fire begu^ne in a City. The consideration hereof in the mean
while, serves for our instruction. For first we learn that no man ought to be
offended at the power and authority of Christ's enemies, so that he either
dishonestly be afraid of them, or else through any preposterous reverence
submit himself, and Gods religion, to their judgment. For as God can easilye
defend those that be his, against all the power of the world, so is there no
dignity of man, able to prejudice or countermaunde his word. The Bishops of
Rome in these days, challenge such an authority unto them, and imperiouslye
enough require men to obey the decrees of their Counsels. Their chief
arguments are, that they sit in Peter's chair, that they succeed in the room
of the Apostles, that their power is confirmed by the authority of Kings and
Princes. And to grant them these things (which yet they falsely challenge to
themselves) all these things we may see here in the Jews, as erewhile we
declared. Yet for all that, the Apostles do not yield to them, because they
had long before swarued and gone out of kind, in that they had both corrupted
the true doctrine, made outward religion their private lucre, and had openly
persecuted Gods verity and truth. Therefore where our case in these days is
like, why may not we do, as the Apostles did? Neither are they to be regarded,
which promise themselves, I wot not what great commodity of these men's
counsayles. An evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit. And what goodness
can they establishe which persecute the word of God, and study both day and
night to establishe their tyranny? And who in their judgments have long
agone condemned us, and have none whom they stand in awe of. They would have
the truth oppressed, the light whereof they cannot abide. Therefore whosoever
would have the truth betrayed, let him commit the judgment of doctrine and
religion to these men. But great is the blindness of our days, whereby it
comes to pass, that a great many both wittingly and willingly submit not
only religion, but also all their goods and the liberty of their Country,
to the insatiable lust of a sort of ambicious Prelates.

The question of the counsel of Priests.
But it shall be good for us to consider the question which the Iewishe Priests
use against the Apostles being brought before them. The same is comprehended in
few words, for that they would seem to speak with authority, and to fraye
them with a vain show of dignity. For they say: By what power, or in what
name have you done this? These words seem to have some show of godly zeal.
For they will seem by virtue of their office, to demand this thing, as to
whom it belonged, to see that the people should not be seduced, either with
false doctrine, or false miracles. Nowbeit in deed, they demand it, to try
if they could take any hold of their words, whereby to accuse them, which
craft they many times also practiced against Christ. For what need had they to
demand that thing again whereof the Apostles before in the temple, had rendered
so evident a reason? or had they forgotten that Jesus Christ through his own
power wrought miracles, and the Apostles long before that, in his name?
Therefore their desire was not to learn the truth, but subtillye by craft to
circumuent the unwary. They are like the demaundes of them, which now a days,
ask our men where they learned their new doctrine, by what authority they
sow new opinions, and reform their Churches? Nowbeit we have long sithence
rendered a reason hereof, whereof they are not ignorant. Therefore it is a far
other thing, than the desire of truth, that these men be led with: nay, their
whole drift and fetch is, to catch some occasion, or hold of some word, which
might unawares escape us, to accuse us of. Therefore we ought to suspect all
such Counsels and devises, and as Christ taught us, to use the wisdom of the
serpent in avoiding them. And we must not be afraid of their craft, seeing
Christ has promised us his spirit, wherewith Peter being prompted, answered
with great boldness of mind.

Peter's answer consists of two parts, whereof, the one answers the
Judges question, Peter's answer.
and the other preaches Christ. The first part he handles with marvelous
prudencie. For before he shows that Christ is the author of the miracle, he
gravely reprehendeth their unrighteousness and preposterous judgment. Yet not
defrauding them of the honor due unto magistrates by Gods commandment, least
he might seem to speak of corrupt affection, or of ticklenesse of tongue.
Thus he says: Ye rulers of the people, and Elders of Israel, if we this day
be examined of the good deed that we have done to the sick man, by what
means he is made whole: be it known unto you all. etc. He seems thus to
say: we marueyled truly, wherefore we were yesterdaye carried to the prison,
and what fault we had made, that you so earnestly searched for. For where it is
the Magistrates duty to enquire after malefactors and evil doers, and we by
our selves knew none evil that we had committed: we could not choose but
marueyle much at your doing. But as far as we now can perceive, we are
called before you, for a benefit and good deed that we have bestowed upon a
poor and pitiful man. This seems me to be the sense of Peter's words. And
in these things we have painted out a plain portraiture of the enemies of the
truth, by whose judgment they only are in fault, that only seek to serve
Christ. For how many think we, were then in Jerusalem, which by craft,
lying, slaundering, usury, extortion, open force, and manslaughter, had hurt
and hindered a many of men? how many which through false doctrine,
superstition, blasphemy, and infinite other wickednesses had provoked the
wrath of God? yet none of them were called Coram. Neither could these notable
Comptrollers epsy any thing in these men's conversation. Nay, such as these,
sat highest among them. Yet are the Apostles who hitherto had hurt no man, but
profited a great many, cyted, examined, and commanded to prison. So in these
days where men burn in hatred of the truth, all men may freely be naught. But
to preach Christ, and to call men's minds through his doctrine from
superstition and ydolatrie, that is an heinous matter I warrant you. This is
the old corruption of the world, which never is afraid of punishment for
sin, but abhors and hates them most, which endeavor to bring them to God.

After Peter had reprehended their unjust proceeding, he answers their
question more apparently, and testifyeth that Jesus Christ is the only author
of the miracle. Be it known (says he) to you all, and to all the people of
Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you crucified,
whom God raised again from death, even by him, does this man stand here
present before you whole. He repeateth the same here again that he said in
the Church. For he so ascribes to Christ only the glory of the miracle, that
therewith also he casts in their teeth their wickedness, committed against
the son of God. He makes mention also of Christ's resurrection, to show
them that they strove against him in vain, seeing he whom they thought to
have made out of the way, had ouercomme death, and now lived in glory. Peter's
example is to be well marked, How we must deal with the enemies of the truth.
for thereby we are taught how to deal with the professed enemies of the
truth. He gives them such honor, as God does vouchsafe to give unto Judges, as
even now was declared. Yet he abstaineth from all kind of vile flattery:
yea, rather he freely and frankly utters those things, which make for the
setting forth of Christ's truth and glory. For both he tells them of their
wicked deed, and shows them, that he whom they persecuted, lives and
reigns. This way must we also take, least either we suffer our tongue to
run at riot, or else for cowardly fear or favor, dissemble the truth For as
it is not meet we should follow the children of this world in evil
speaking: so the enemies of the truth are not worthy to have their tyranny and
wickedness spared. We have other examples of this kind, both in the Prophets
and in the Apostles. But it shall be best to follow the prompting of the holy
spirit, which never fails them that are zealous toward Christ.

The second part of Peter's answer.
Howbeit, where the Apostles were chiefly appointed to preach Christ unto the
world, here Peter also forgets not his duty, but taking occasion of the
premises, teaches in few words, that all our salvation is contained in
Christ alone. But this seemed a great stumbling block, because Jesus Christ
was condemned by them, which had power in the Church, by Gods appointment to
teach and administer every thing. Therefore he first remooueth this block out
of the way, alleging the words of David, out of the.Cxviij. Psalm, The
place of the.118. psalm.
which words Christ also used, as we read in the Gospel. For David who was a
figure of Christ, speaking of himself, says: The same stone which the
builders refused, is become the head stone in the corner. Which words Peter
expressly expounding of Christ, and the Priests of the Jews, says: This is
the stone which was cast away of you builders, which is become the chief of
the corner. The sense of the words is this: I know that both you and also
other marueyle greatly, why we ascribe so great praise and glory unto Christ,
and say that he lives and reigns and is risen again from death, whom you by
shameful death, would have made out of the way. But this ought to offend no
man. Nay rather ye may learn, that he is the same Jesus whom the Prophets
long before said should come: have you forgotten that saying of David, which
teaches us that so God had appointed, that the Messiah should be rejected of
them, which ought to have builded up Gods Church, and to bring all men unto
him? you your selves are those builders. For unto you was committed the office
of teaching, and the whole ordring of religion. You have rejected Jesus, and
would give him no place in the Church of God. Him has God raised from death,
and made him the head of the corner, that is, a Lord and a savior, and the
ruler of his Church. And has so enclosed in him only, all salvation, that
without him, the same is no where else to be found. For among men under
heaven, there is none other name given wherein we can be saved. Peter therefore
so preaches Jesus to be a savior, that he therewith denies all hope of
salvation to them which disdain to embrace him. Here are three things to be
considered, the consideration whereof is no less profitable than necessary.

The first is, how the holy ghost foresheweth, that Christ should be refused
of those, Christ is reiect^d of the builders.
which by Gods appointment were the chief among the people. This reprooueth
the wicked pride of the Bishops of Rome, which say they cannot err. For
although it were manifest they were appointed of God: yet that they cannot err
should never be granted them, seeing they which were ordained by God have so
often erred. But while they say they cannot err, they bewray their folly,
whereas now their errors are open, not only to Barbours and bleare eyed, (as
is in the Proverb) but also to boys and children. The Pope erreth by his own
confession. Look also if you will what Platina reports of Benedict the.ix.
who appeared after he was dead, and said he was damn^^, because he had lived
lawles. They that live lawless and are damned must needs err.
Clement the seventh, being Pope, confessed this gross ignorance, or rather
impudent lust of theirs to lie. For where at his table two Monks (as their
manner is) were disputing whether ye Pope could err or no: after many words to
and fro, they agreed he might err, as he was a man, but as he was Pope and
Christ's vicar on earth, he could by no means err. Clement, offended with this
most impudent and more than slauelike flattery, said to the Monk with angry
mood: nay I confess, that even as I am Pope, I both may and often do err.
For while I bestow benefices and other ecclesiastical dignities (as I
suppose) upon good and godly persons: I find at length they be very knaves, and
worthy of no honor. Let them listen to this oracle of their Caiphas, which now
a days have ye Popes in such admiration that they think it an heinous matter
to swerve one nails breadth from their decrees. Furthermore, this place
teaches us not to be offended when we see Christ rejected of the states of the
world, and of those which some men take for the pillars, henges and heads of
the church. This is the ancient guise of ye world, which uses to prefer
darcknesse before light, which thing Esaias complains of, when in declaring
of the mysteries of Christ, he says, Esaias. 53.
there were but few that would believe him, and truly acknowledge the power of
the Lord. Math. 11.
And Christ testifies that these mysteries are revealed to little ones, and
hidden from the wise of this world. Yea, he prefers Publicanes and harlots
to the kingdom of God, before these, Math. 21.
whom Peter here reasons with. Let this comfort us, that we know Christ's
honor remains safe and sound, howsoever the wicked world rages against
him. For of him has God said from everlasting: I have set my king upon my
holy hill of Syon. I will preach the law whereof the Lord has said unto
me: Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee. Psalm. 2.
Ask of me and I shall give thee the heathen for thine enheritance etc.

Secondly, here is an Allegory to be considered, The Ministers of the Church
are rese^bled unto builders.
where the Rulers of the Church are compared unto builders. For this thing both
admonishes them of their duty, and sets forth their whole office. The name
of a builder is not a name of honor, but of charge and duty, and there is
nothing so unsitting for a deviser or builder, as idleness. For he only
among other that work, labors not, but yet the whole charge and care of
all the building, lies on his shoulders. And his end is to have a fair and
sure house builded. Which end that he may attain unto, he lays a sure
foundation, upon the which, he sets his whole frame, and his whole care is
to have it workmanly finished. 2. Cor. 6. 1. Tim. 3.
These things the Ministers of the Church must observe, whom the Lord has
called to labors and cares. For they are builders of the house of God, which
is the congregation, as Paul says. To the building up of this house, let them
bring all that they are able, remembering, that they have received power to
build, and not to destroy. 2. Cor. 10.
Let them lay no new foundation, but build upon that which the Lord has
laid, which Paul calls the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, 1.
Cor. 3. Ephe. 2. Esaias. 28. 1. Pet. 2. Math. 16.
which is Jesus Christ. This is that precious stone laid (...) the foundations
of Zion. This is that rock whereupon, we lively stones, must be builded, and
against which, the gates of hell shall not be able to prevail. Now, as the
building must be begun with this stone, so the same stone is the chief and
headstone of the top or corner. For in him is our perfection, and he joins
together two nations, the Gentyles and the Jews, into one body of a
congregation, as the corner stone joins together two walls. Ephe. 2.
He professes also he is the door of this building. John. 10.
He is the true householder which has committed the charge of the house to the
Ministers, and will one day require a reckonning how they have used his house.
Mat 24.25
Therefore let all Ministers regard this goodman of the house, and take heed
that they bring no heye or stubble to this building, Math. 15.
where men's traditions have naught to do. As many as fail in this point,
they with the Jews being builders upon a naughty faith, reject Christ, on
whom they fall, and procure destruction to themselves. After the which rule,
if they be well examined, which now a days will be taken for builders of the
Church, it shall easily appear what they may be judged to be.

Salvation is in Christ only.
Last of all, this chief principle of Christian belief must be deepelye laid
up in our minds, wherein Peter ascribes to Christ only, the whole glory of
our redemption, and salvation, saying: There is salvation in none other. That
he proves by the decree of God, adding: For among men under heaven, there is
given none other name, wherein we must be saved. For as in the world, every
thing must be brought to pass by those means, which god has appointed
thereunto: so is it impossible, that salvation can be attained to, by any other
means, than by the merit of Christ, whom God (which is the only author of
man's salvation) has appointed from everlasting to this purpose and business.
1. Pet. 2.
And where it is evident, Gods decree can not be broken, Peter thought this
one place sufficient enough, to confirm his opinion, which otherwise had other
infinite places, whereby to prove the same. For no man can discharge the duty
of a Savior, but he that can take away sin, overcome death, make
intercession for us before God, and give righteousness and life, to them that
believe in him. That all these things be in the power of Christ only, all the
Scripture teaches us, and himself cries out in the Prophet: I am the Lord:
This is my name, and my glory will I not give to another. And of him only the
father bare witness from heaven: Math 3.17.
This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased. Of him he sometime
pronounced by the Prophet: This is my servant upon whom I lean, Esaias. 4*2.
mine elect, in whom my soul is pacified. In him is given unto us grace and
verity. John 1.
In him are all the treasures of knowledge, wisdom, and goodness of God
opened unto us. Coloss. 1.2.
He is made unto us of God, wisdom, righteousness, satisfaction, redemption
and sanctification. He is to them that hunger, 1. Cor. 1. Ioh. 4.6.7. Math. 11.
John. 14.
the bread of life, and to them that thirst, a fountain of liuelye water. He
promises to them that traueyle and are laden, refreshing, and gives it them.
He only is the way, which whosoever takes not, he cannot come unto the
father. He is the lamb of God slain from the beginning of the world, through
whose merit both the old fathers were saved, and as many as believe in him,
shall be saved, until the worlds end. Finally, in him Paul testifyeth that
we be chosen before the foundations of the world were laid. Ephe. 1.
Therefore by this place all other religions which show us any new means of
salvation beside Christ, are confuted. With this Rammer the Gentyles Idolatry,
the Jews righteousness in their law, the Phariseyes boasting and hypocrisy,
the Popedom with all their market of pardons and merits, and all that
confused Chaos of Monkish orders, are beaten down, ouerturned, and brought to
the ground. For whatsoever is beside Jesus, can never save us. Therefore they
condemn not us, but Peter of heresy, which in these days excommunicate us,
because we cleave to Jesus, our only savior, contemning those things, which
the superstition of man has brought up. But we easily contemn their
judgments, which learn of Peter, that it is no marueyle, if many of the
builders reject this precious stone. We embrace him with constant faith,
without whom there is no salvation, and which has promised to all them that
believe in him, salvation, and life everlasting. To him be praise, honor,
power and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.xxviij. Homely.
WHEN they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and understood that they were
unlearned and lay men, they marueyled, and they knew them that they had been
with Jesus: And beholding also the manne which was healed, standing with them,
they could not say against it, but commanded them to go aside out of the
Counsel, and counsayled among themselves saying: what shall we do to these
men? for a manifest sign is done by them, and is openly known to all them
that dwell in Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it. But that it be noysed no
further among the people, let us threaten and charge them, that they speak
henceforth to no man in this name. And they called them, and commanded them
that in no wise they should speak nor teach in the name of IESV.
THe Apostle Peter so answers the question propounded to him and to John, in
the counsel at Jerusalem, concerning the lame man that was healed, that he
teaches them not only that they enquire of, but also declares to them after
a compendious and brief sort, the whole effect and sum of salvation. We are
taught by this example, so to traueyle with the professed enemies of the truth,
as to labor to win them to Christ and to salvation. Which end, Christ as
it is manifest, set before him, as often as he had contention with his
adversaries. But now let us see what effect ensued of Peter's answer, which in
so great vehemency of speech and earnest aid of the holy ghost, could be of
no small force. Where we may see a marvelous confusion of minds, which, that
it might be the more perceived, is so described of Luke, that first he
declares what an abashment it wrought in the counsel, then, what devise and
counsel they took, concerning the Apostles: both which, we mean to entreat
of in order.

First, they are filled with admiration, and amazedness, They are amazed and
wotte not what to do.
and wotte not what way to take, in so much, that they know not what to say
against it. And least any man might think they were fools, or at their wits
end for fear, he shows the causes which made them so perplexed and in
doubt. First was the confidence and boldness of speech in the Apostles, which
they here perceived did surpass their expectation. For they knew they were
simple and unlearned men, not brought up in faculties or arts, beside their
mother tongue. They knew they were taken from fyshers craft to be the Apostles
of Christ. And even yet still did that old opinion bewitch their minds, which
caused them once to say, that none of the Scribes or Phariseys, but the
accursed and rascal people, John. 7.
which were ignorant in the law and scriptures, held with Christ. Therefore
presupposing they should easily have overcome the Apostles, they could not
choose but be amazed, when they see them answer with such discretion, to
their question, reprove their injustice so boldlye, and defend Christ's
quarrel with such wisdom and constancy. For they are compelled will they,
nyll they, to acknowledge some power of God in them, and perceive they are
led with a far other wisdom than the wisdom of the flesh. And this was
the chief cause, why Christ would choose ignorant and unlearned Apostles,
that the doctrine of the Gospel might be acknowledged to be set forth by the
power of God, and not through man's wisdom, eloquence, or authority, and that
all the praise and glory thereof might redounde unto God alone, whereof Paul
disputes at large in the first to the Corinthians the first Chapter. The other
cause of their amazedness, was the evident truth of the miracle wrought by the
Apostles, which they are neither able to call in doubt, nor yet to charge with
any suspicion of Magic, or enchauntment. For they see the man stand before
them on whom the Apostles had bestowed this benefit of health, whether called
by them, or of his own accord joined to them, to see the end and success of
the matter, I wot not. Therefore they are in a perplexity of mind, and have
not one word to answer. So they which thought to have overcome and caught the
Apostles in some trip, by demanding of one question, are shamefully vanquished
and confounded. Here is fulfilled that which Christ promised, saying: I will
give you vtteraunce and wisdom, Luc. 21.
against which, all your adversaries shall not be able to make resistaunce. It
appears also how vain the devises of men are against Christ. He knows
their cogitations to be vain, and brings the counsel of the heathen to
naught, but the counsel of the Lord endures for ever, as David said Psalm.
33. and. 94. For it is he verily, who (as Elephas the Themanite says)
destroys the devises of the subtle, so that their hands are not able to
perform any steadfast thing, John. 5.
he compasses the wise in their own craftynesse, and overthrows the
counsayles of the wicked. The Gospel shows us a like example in a blind
man, restored by Christ to his sight again, who being both unlearned, and a
beggar, does marvelously hold the whole College of Scribes and Phariseyes at
a baye, that the more questions they ask of him, John. 9.
the more they utter their foolishnes. Let no man therefore be afraid, either
of the power or craft of these enemies, where as God so easily turns them
both vpside down. For it is not our cause that we have in hand, but Gods,
which will give us both a mouth and utterance, nor it is not we that speak,
but the spirit of our father which is in us. But before we leave this place,
Math. 10.
we must speak somewhat of two things, very worthy to be observed.

First, it is not without a cause that Luke writes the wicked enemies of
Christ were so amazed, Boldness of speech does most confo^^d the wicked.
at the bold and free speech of the Apostles. For by this example we are
taught that there is nothing so effectual to bridle the wicked, as is freedom
of speech, where they are reproved to their faces, and the truth which they
withstand, is boldly defended. For such is the force of words, that they
easily pierce the mind. But if the zeal of Gods truth and glory be joined
thereunto, it cannot be, but the consciences of the hearers must be wounded,
howsoever* they many times dissemble the same. Whereby it comes to pass,
that although they always do not truly repent, yet many times they
counterfeyte repentance, and abstain from doing evil, where of we may see a
manifest example in Achab, after that Elias had with such liberty as beseemed
a Prophet, 1. Reg. 21.
vpbrayded him with the unworthy slaughter of Naboth. Again, when the
ministers of the word suffer their tongues to be brydled, or else of themselves
keep silence, to please the world, by and by we see the wicked are encouraged
to run into all kind of licentious sin, and fill up the measure of
iniquity, and at length miserably perish with their blind watchmen and dumb
dogs. See Ezechiel the.iij. and.xxxiij. Chapters. For the which cause a
frank and bold kind of reprehension is euerywhere required in the Ministers.
The Lord says unto Esaye, cry now as loud as thou can, leave not of,
Esaias. 58.
lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and show my people their offenses, and the
house of Jacob, their sins. And the Lord commands Hieremie to stand
against the Priests, people, Princes, and Kings, Ierem. 1.
like a brazen wall without fear. Therefore Paul would have sinners openly
rebuked before all men, that other thereby might be brought in fear. Yea, 1.
Tim. 5.
where being i^ prison, he commends himself and his cause to the prayers of
the congregation: Watch (says he) with all instancie and prayer for all the
Saints and for me, that vtteraunce may be given unto me, Ephe. 6.
that I may open my mouth freely to utter the secrets of my Gospel, whereof I
am a messenger in bonds, that therein I may speak freely as I ought to
speak. Therefore let the Ministers never suffer this boldness to be taken
from the^, for the which, they see the Apostle is so careful.

Next, The lame man stands with the Apostles.
we must diligently consider how he writes the lame man which was healed,
stood with the Apostles, when they pleaded their cause, and therefore was in
danger with them. This teaches us the slate and condition of the godly in
this world. As Soon as they have received the benefit of salvation in Christ,
they are under the peril and threats of the wicked. So Lazarus raised again
by Christ, was by and by in great hazard, because the Clergy of the Jews
sought to make both Christ and him out of the way. For as the wicked seek to
have the glory of Christ extinguished: John. 12.
so can they not abide them, by whom the same is set forth and declared. This
is diligently to be observed, least while Christ offreth us eternal salvation,
we promise our selves the felicity and friendship of this world, and being
brought into a fools paradyse, when tribulation afterward comes, we fall
away from him, as we see many do in these days, with the danger of their
salvation. Also this lame man is an example of a Christian thankfulness and
courage, because he forsakes not his benefactors in their perils, but to his
power, stands with them and helps them. Yet there were diverse reasons
wherewith he might have excused himself, and have obtained pardon of the
Rulers, for the benefit which he received of the Apostles. Yet we read he
used none of these things. His example reprooueth such as are glad to receive
the benefit of Christ's salvation, but will abide neither peril nor
tribulation with him. Of whose number they also are, which are contented to
have all our salvation in Christ preached, but will not have those things
joined therewith, which Christ pronounces against Antichrists and deceyuers,
because they see many in the world are offended therewith. To whom also they
are like, which greedily embrace the doctrine of salvation preached by the
ministers, and rejoice that they are delivered out of the entanglinges and
caltroppes of error. But when they see the world rages and stormeth against
the Ministers, they deny them all help and succor, yea, they shun the
sight of them, least they might seem to hold with them. The world in these
days is full of such men, and they may go for the best, which openly rail
not at the ministers when they be in danger, and give them not vinegar to
drink, as they hang upon the cross. But let them remember Christ cannot be
divided, but that we must altogether be without him, or else receive him in
such sort as he is given us of his father. The Scriptures set him forth
crucified, and teach us that by the cross, he is entered into the glory of the
father. We must embrace him in such sort, and come by the same way into the
glory of heaven. He calls those that be his, to the bearing of the cross,
and promises them no better condition nor being in the world, Math. 16. John.
15.16.
than that which he tasted and found in the world. He cannot abide those
disciples and servants, Marc. 8.
which are ashamed of him, before this naughty, adulterous and wicked world.
Let us therefore after the example of this lame man, be armed with a Christian
stowtenesse, and say every one with Paul. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ, Romans 1.
for it is the power of God unto salvation, to all that believe in him.

The decre of the counsel against the Apostles
Now, let us come to the second part of this place, wherein is contained what
the Counsel decreed against the Apostles. For when they had commanded them ^o
go aside, they begin to consult among themselves: where may be seen a
marvelous perturbation, and confusion of minds in them. First, what shall we
do (say they) to these men? O foolish and preposterous question. Were they
ignorant that Innocents ought to be set at liberty, and those to be rewarded
which had done good? But this way they bewray their pretensed malice, seeking
some means how to use cruelty against well doers, and those that were
guyltlesse. But going yet further, they more and more utter their selves, in
that they confess the truth of the miracle, saying: A manifest sign is
wrought by them, and it is known to all the inhabiters of Jerusalem, and we
cannot deny it. They are therefore wicked, because they yet conspire together
against Christ the author of the miracle. They confess also what chiefly
urges and offends them. For they make no mention neither of God nor of
Christ, but are only grieved that the matter is so known and spredde abroad
among the people. Therefore they had more regard of the people than of God, as
who altogether depended upon the estimation of the ignorant, and superstitious
multitude, and had no care for the glory of God: John. 5.
which thing Christ in one place says was the chief cause of their incurable
unbelief. At length they conclude what they will do. The thing that was done
could not be undone. But perceiving the danger like to ensue by the peoples
falling away from them, they think it good, that the matter be noysed no
further abroad. So with oblivion and forgetfulness they think to bury all
memory and remembrance of Christ. And this they labor to bring to pass by
threats and tyranny, when they see they have no reason therefore. Let us
threaten them (say they) that they henceforth speak to no man in this name.
And so they send for the Apostles, and with great gravity of words publish that
godly decree of their sacred and oecumenicall counsel. oecumenicall, signi^^eth
universal or general.
What shall we here first either marueyle at, or detest, O brethren? Their
impudency and wicked tyranny, or their dulheadnesse, and follye? They openly
confess that they cannot deny the miracle, and yet they would have it kept
close. And that that was in every bodies mouth, they forbid the Apostles to
speak of. Furthermore, they take upon them to wrestle with Christ, whom they
could not keep in his grave when he was dead and buried with a garrison of
armed men, and authority of the Roman president, which sealed the grauestone
with his signet. And now he is on live, and in his reign the blockheaded
Disardes think with vain bragges and threats to suppress and extinguishe
his glory.

Let us here consider whereunto obstinate impiety of mind, The wickedness of
persecutors is incurable.
and hatred once conceived against the truth, brings men. They are not able
to cease from striving against Gods counsel and ordinance, no not when they
perceive themselves guilty in their own consciences. For surely there is no
peace with the wicked, as the Prophet says. Esa. 48.57.
And their minds rage like the sea being troubled and tossed with the waves
and sourges of affections. We have examples hereof euerywhere, and in these
days we see very many. For who is ignorant how the light of the Gospel is
pierced so far in our days, that the very Popes have many times confessed
grievous abuses in their Church? They know also that not only the learned, but
also artificers, mariners, Carters, ploughmen, children and women, can reason
and judge of religion. They see euerywhere how they be reproved in Sermons, by
the ministers of the word, how the common people mock them, how in public
songs they are nicked and accused, and most liuelye set forth and portraytured
in all kind of pictures and payntinges. And yet they still challenge all kind
of judgment in the Church. Still they say, they cannot err, forgetting
undoubtedly how they have oftentimes confessed, diverse abuses to be crept into
the Church. Yet they dare command the Ministers to silence, being not
ignorant, that though they hold their peace, the stones will preach, as these
many years they have proved and tried by their Pasquill. Yet they still
think the crakes of their Bulls, and their vain and counterfayte lightnings,
are of sufficient power to oppress the truth of Christ now reigning. O blind
and foolish people which see not so great light. O wicked and deuilishe men
which in the sight of all the world, are not afraid to strive against God?
But they shall one day feel how unhappy an end they shall have, who being
like unto Saul, will not have David to reign over them, and like unto the
Bishops of the Jews, go about to put Jesus Christ the son of David out of
his kingdom. Psalm. 2.


Furthermore, we learn by the example of these men, Power with out the fear
of God is pernicious.
how dangerous a thing it is to commit the rule and authority of the
Church to men void of religion and the fear of God. There can be no wisdom
in them, because the beginning of wisdom (as Solomon witnesses) is the fear
of the Lord. Therefore they run beyond the compass of all reason, Prouer.
1.
into all kind of licentious affections, and then think they have well
discharged their office, if they can notifye to all men, that they are not
under the check either of Gods law or man's. It would therefore be chiefly
regarded in all elections as well of civil as ecclesiastical governors, that
they should have a special care what religion they are of, Exodus 18.
as Iethro counsayled Moses, whose advise God well liked and approved. And
let them which are put in office think, that they have not power given them to
do what they list, but that their authority is restrained within the bounds
of Gods law and religion, Deuteronomy. 1. Psalm. 82.
and that they shall one day give an account unto God, who in the Scripture is
set forth for a pattern and president of all true judgment. If Magistrates
consider not these things, then is their power but in the hand (as it were) of
a mad man, and they shall be the destruction as well of their common weal,
as of themselves, where they ought to be the fathers and preseruers of their
country. See the Psalm. 94. etc.

The world cannot brook Christ and his Gospel.
Finally, here may we behold, as in a glass, the disposition and property of
the world. Here are three sorts of men, all burning in hatred against the
truth, and desirous to have Christ's name extinguished. The first sort be they,
which challenge to themselves the glory of man's redemption and salvation, such
as it appears the Priests of the Jews once were, when they had turned the
Temple and worship of God, John. 2. Mat. 15.21.
into a most filthy Fayer and market place, as Christ vpbrayded them more than
once. Their successors in these days, be those, which say the keys of the
kingdom of heaven belong only unto them, and call sinners to kiss their
feet, selling to them remission and forgiveness of their sins: saying it is
in their power either to canonize men for Saints in heaven, or else to throw
them down headlong into hell. Who, while they go about to establishe their
own glory, can by no means abide the name of Christ, which ouerturneth all
their gain and glory. The second sort is very like unto these. They will not
affirm they can save others, but they think they are able to save themselves,
and (as Paul says) going about with the Jews to establishe their own
righteousness, Romans 10.
will not be under the righteousness of God, which he gives us in his son.
These men stand to their fastinges, holidays, almesses, Rosaries, lyings on
the ground* Mattens, Monks, and Friars, Cowles, hereclothes, shauings,
pylgrimages, and an infinite number of such like, wherein they both waste and
wear their bodies, and spend much money. These also are the enemies of
Christ. For they see that if we admit Christ, all their righteousness falls
to the ground, and that they are to be laughed at, which weary and toil
themself with such traueyle, and are at so great cost and charge in vain. The
third sort are openly wicked, and hogs of Epicures heard, which only
profess a name of religion, because they would not be taken for profane and
godless people. These men cannot abide the word of God, because it reprooueth
their sin, John. 3.
and wickedness, as Christ sometime said. For they perceive that they must
either change their manners, or else go for naughty packes amongst all that
are godly. Yet can all the sort of them craftily dissemble their corrupt
nature, and will not seem to wreake their own quarrel, they defame the
doctrine of Christ, of uproar and sedition, saying, it is cause of all trouble,
misery, and calamity. It is well known how Achab said that Elias disturbed
the whole Realm of Israel. 1. Reg. 18. Amos. 7.
It is well known how Amasias the Priest of Bethel said that Amos the
Prophet conspired against the king, and that the country could not abide his
sermons. Whereunto also may be referred what the Jews in Egypt charged Jeremy
with, to his face, as we read in the.xliiij. Chapter of his book. And it
shall appear hereafter that this people had none other pretense in the.v.
Chapter. Nay, would God they were content to do but as the world in time past
did, and would not show a worse nature in these days. It is good for us to
know these things, that it seem no strange matter unto us, when we hear how
Christ's wholesome doctrine is forbidden. Let us follow the constancy of the
Apostles, whereof shall be spoken in the next Sermon, that when we have
overcome the menaces and attemptes of the world, we may attain to true
salvation in Jesus Christ: to whom be blessing, honor, power, and glory, for
ever. Amen.

The.xxix. Homely.
BUT Peter and John answered and said unto them: whether it be right in the
sight of God to harken unto you more than to God, judge you. For we cannot but
speak that which we have seen and heard. So threatened they them, and let
them go, and found nothing how to punish them, because of the people. For
all men praised God because of that which was done. For the man was above
forty year old on whom this miracle of healing was showed. As soon as they
were let go, they came to their fellows, and showed all that the high Priests
and Elders had said.
CHrist Jesus our Savior not without a cause, does oftentimes preach of
persecutions and afflictions before his Apostles, saying they would always
follow his disciples. And the end of these admonitions is not, by fear to
drive them from the faith, but his purpose is like a faithful Captain, to
arm us with faith and patience against dangers foreseen. For the which cause
he promises us present aid, and says, we shall overcome all the perils and
attemptes of our enemies. The first trouble the Apostles were in, does
euidentlye show us an example of the same, which is therefore the more
diligently to be considered, because both so faithful a defense of Christ
succouring his belooued in their distress, does comfort us, and the example of
the Apostles admonishes us of our duty, being in like case and danger. We
have heard how all they that were of any power or authority among the Jews,
conspired against the Apostles: through whose tyranny, first they were cast in
prison, then were they called before a counsel to give an account of their
faith and doctrine before most wicked Judges: yet the truth overcomes, and
that in such wise that they are all amazed and wot not what to do, having not
long before, promised themselves the conquest and victory. And they perceive
there is no way left them, but by threats to discourage the constancy of the
Apostles: wherefore, they command them, that from thenceforth they make no
more mention of Jesus Christ, nor preach his doctrine any more. This is the
continual usage of the world, to oppress the preaching of the Gospel, both
with public proclamation and open force. But with what constancy of mind,
Christian people ought to withstand their threats, and enterprises, the happy
end of this tragedy which Luke now declares, teaches us: every part whereof
must be the diligentlyer discussed, that we may receive the more consolation
and instruction thereby. The Apostles refuse to obey the Counsels decree.


The Apostles answer is here first to be placed, who plainly testifye that
they neither can nor ought to obey their commandments. Yet least they should
seem froward, impudent, or rash, they allege such reasons as no man could
easilye disalowe or disprooue. The first stands upon the authority of God,
which is greater than ought to yield to any man's commandment, be he never
so excellent. The Argument is on this wise: God must be more obeyed than men.
But God commanded us to preach, and the commandment of the son of God is:
Mar. 16.
Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to all creatures. Again:
you shall be witnesses unto me at Jerusalem, Acts. 1.
and in all Jury. Wherefore we may not obey you, commau^ding the contrary. The
Mayor they prove by a figure called concession or granting, leaving the
matter to their own judgment, as men are wont, in such things as are clear
and out of controversy. And surely it were an impiety more than deuilish, for
any man to challenge to himself, more authority and reverence, than is due
unto God, because it is evident, that he is not only Lord of private persons,
but also of Kings and Princes, to whom we are all bound by public sacraments.
The other reason of the Apostles, is on this wise: we have seen and heard all
those things that we teach: Ergo, we may not keep them in silence, but
disclose them. The force of this consequence stands in this point, for that
they were not chosen and appointed to be idle beholders of the things that
Christ did, but for witnesses as ye Lord says: John. 15. Therefore they might
not conceal any of the things which they had seen and heard, unless they
would incur the danger of false testimony, Prou. 6.
the which Solomon says, God does chiefly detest. Furthermore, because the
redemption and salvation of man consists in those things which were committed
to the Apostles, as witnesses, that saw the same to be preached: they might
not suppress or keep close any of them, without the manifest detriment and
loss of public salvation, and Christ's glory. For, as much as in them had
been, they should have suppressed by silence, the glory of Christ, and
hindered the salvation of many a man, which by preaching of the Gospel, they
might have won unto God. Therefore Peter reasons truly, and his arguments
ought to have been of great force and weight with the Judges, if they had not
openly striuen against God, as afterward Gamaliel plainly tells them.

A right trade of obedience.
This answer of the Apostles is very notable. For first it declares the
right trade of obedience, wherein men use diversely and daungerouslye to err.
For as all men understand, that obedience is necessary, both publicly, in
commonweals and in the Church, and privately in all affairs: so for the most
part, it is most rigorously exacted, in the decrees and constitutions of men,
which is many times the fountain of most errors and wickedness. For hereof
it comes to pass, that Princes and Magistrates dare by their proclamations
command men to forsake the faith of Christ, to deny the truth, and to
embrace superstition and ydolatrie, and many for this cause, the easilier obey
their commandments, for that they think they owe them this obedience, and
are out of all fault if they obey them. Of this fountain it springs, that
children contract marriage with the unbelieving, and soiourne and dwell with
them, because they will not seem to disobey their parents. And some deceived
with the same error, hold fast their professed Monkerie, and
supersticiousnesse, whereunto they bound themselves by vow of obedience. But
Peter answers all these, squaring obedience after the judgment of God:
whether it be right in the sight of God to harcken unto you more than to God,
judge ye. Therefore we must not so much consider what seems right and good
unto men, as what God requires of us. To him we said erewhile, all men were
bound by the sacraments. The Magistrate is his minister, as Paul teaches.
Romans 13. Psalm. 82.
He is in the Scripture called a Judge, and the President of all judgment. To
him shall our parents one day give a reckoning, and as many as have the rule
and authority over us. Therefore we must have a singular regard unto him, and
think no man's authority, so great, that we let our selves be drawn thereby
from the obedience we owe unto him. Hereunto appertains that saying of
Christ, which so teaches us to pay unto Caesar the things that belong unto him,
Math. 22.
that we also give unto God that which is due unto him. True faith, sincere and
sound religion, study of innocence, and charity, invocation, and such like,
belong unto God. Let us not suffer these things to be taken from us by any
commandment of man, whereby to show our s^lues less obedient unto God.
Daniels fellows through the consideration hereof, refused to obey
Nabuchodonozers proclamation, wherein he commanded an image to be worshipped,
against the commandment of God. And Daniel constantly held on, in calling
upon the true God, against the Kings proclamation. God allowed and approved
their obedience with rare and singular miracles. Dan. 3.6.
There are infinite like examples in the Martyrs, whom every man must
confess to have been very fools, if Princes proclamations and
commandments might have prescribed Gods precepts. The same ought we to
observe in the duties we owe to our parents, as we are taught by the example
of Christ, who being chydden of his mother because he tarried in the City
without the knowledge of her and Joseph, answered: Luc. 2.
Wist you not that I must be about my fathers business? The religion of
Monkishe vows is most foolish, and causes the obseruers of them to commit
double offense. For while they vow those things which partly they are not able
to perform, and partly are contrary to the express commandments of God,
they do grievously sin. And that done, because they would be taken for very
religious persons, they obstinately hold on in the things they have ungodly
and foolishly vowed, albeit, they be taught a better way, being like unto
Herod, who because he would not seem perjured, joined murder unto his
unadvised oath. Therefore the safest way is, that we remember what duty we owe
unto God, and promise, nor do nothing for any man's sake, that shall be
against the sa^e. And if any thing escape us unawares, to acknowledge our
fault, and not to perform our promises with more wickedness, than we made
them. And if any shall be found so insolent and proud that will have their
authority to be taken greater than Gods, to set our selves against their
impiety with an holy and godly boldness, as we see in this place Peter and
John did.

Also the Apostles answer teaches us, with what arguments, the Ministers of
the Gospel must arm themselves against the assaults of the world. For we
have said before, how the world will always hinder the preaching of the
Gospel, and daily experience teaches it. Therefore first they must consider,
that it is Gods commandment the gospel should be preached, and that the
ministry of this preaching, belongs to them, for that they are called and
sent of God about this business. Therefore if should be a token of wicked and
ungracious temeritie, to deny God their service, as Amos well saw, which
said to the people of his days that liked not his prophetical rebukes: Amos.
3.
When a Lion roareth, who will not be afraid? Seeing then the Lord God
himself speaks, who will not prophecy? For he saw how unhappily it
succeeded with Jonas when he would have shunned the office of preaching to the
Ninevites. Therefore Paul cries out: woe to me, 1. Cor. 9.
if I preach not the Gospel. Again, let them consider how the testimony of
truth is committed to them, and of that truth which concerns the chief glory
of Christ, and the salvation of mankind. Therefore if they conceal any thing
for favor of men, it can not be but they must commit treason against God,
and be accounted the public enemies of mankind. Finally, let them remember
how they shall one day come before Christ the Judge, who will not only
punish eternally the false embasers and corrupters of the talent committed to
them, but also them that hide their talent, Math. 25.
and labor not as much as in them is, to win^e men unto Christ. These things
must we set against the vain terrors of the world, and then shall we not much
pass for them, which neither will have the way of salvation plainly taught,
nor false Christians, to be reproved, nor open malefactors to be accused.

The Apostles are let go free.
Howbeit, this is much to be marueyled at, that Luke writes the Apostles were
let go, when they had openly refused to obey them, considering there remained
still in the Judges an obstinate will, to persecute the Gospel. For least any
man might think the Council yielded to their reasons, he says: They
threatened them, and let them go. These things express the conditions of the
wicked, and the great hatred they bear to the truth, wherewith being blinded,
they can neither give place to any reason, nor yet fear the judgment of God.
Neither have they any thing to answer Peter's arguments. And yet they threaten
still. And other color of their doing have they none, but that they think the
Apostles unworthy, with whom to have any long disputation. In the mean time,
this example teaches us, that the faithful so overcome not, that they enjoy
long any rest or quiet, in this world. For the world continuallye breaths
^ute threats, and the enemies of truth once overcome, are still provoking to
the fight. So Elias, although he had overcome the Priests of Baal in Carmele,
both by his doctrine, and miracle showed by God, and had put them to death: yet
Iesabel the Queen prepares fresh persecution, and entrappings against him.
Therefore let the soldiers of Christ, never give them to carelessness,
although they perceive they have overcome their enimyes, but let them remember
their triumph must be under the Cross, until they be delivered out of the
prison of the flesh, and shall reign with Christ in Heaven, where they shall
have no occasion, to fear Tyrauntes any more.

The Apostles are let go for fear of the people.
But some man may marueyle, how the Apostles are let go free, from their most
cruel enemies, considering their great power and authority. Luke therefore
declares the cause hereof, saying. They found no way to punish them, because
of the people. For all men praised God, because of that which was done. For the
man was above forty year old, on whom this Miracle of healing was wrought.
Here is the marvelous power of God to be considered, who so easily can bridle
the wicked. They were of such power and authority before, that they were
only taken for Lords and Rulers, and stood in awe of no man's power. But lo,
they are afraid of the people and coystrell Commones. So God which has set
the flytting and rolling sand for lymites and bounds against the sea, a most
raging element, which the sea can not pass, except he permit it: does set most
times the people, the vnconstantest thing that is, against most mighty
tyrants, or else bryd^eth them by other unaccustomed and unlooked for means:
so that they are not able to do that against the weak and succorlesse people,
which they most gladly would, and seems most easily to be done. So he
sometime defended the Patriarchs in the midst of the land of Chanaan, Gene.
35. Psalm. 105.
putting a certain secret fear in the minds of the Chananites. So he
wythhelde Saul from persecuting of David, by the Philisteans, and through their
help defended David, being his greatest enemies. 1. Sam. 23.
And now through fear of the people, keeps the Priests, that they lay not
hands on the Apostles, which people before that, with a savage and bethleem
shoute required to have Christ most shamefully crucified. There are infinite
like examples, which teach us that Tirauntes cannot allwaye do what they list.
These serve to encourage us, that we be not afraid at the vain threats of
the world, but to follow our vocacion boldly, and not to doubt of Gods
defense, and aid, who having nombred the hears of our head, Math. 10.
will suffer nothing to happen unto us, without his good providence, and
pleasure. He defends those that be his in the middle of Babylon, and Egypt,
as long as he sees they serve to set fourth his glory, and to bring other
into the way of salvation. And when they have finished their course, he calls
them unto him. And although it may then seem the wicked have some power upon
them: yet is it none other, but that they ryd the godly out of this miserable
dungeon of the flesh, whereas they themselves in the mean season fill up the
measure of their iniquity, and be received into Hell among them which brought
fear into the land of the living. Ezech. 32.


Furthermore, we may behold the state and condition that tyrants are in, when
they seem to be of most power and authority: that is to say, The state and
condition of Tyrants.
how while they go about to put many in fear they stand in fear of many. The
same comes to pass in them, that we see fall out among cruel beasts, such as
are Bears, Lions, Panthers, and other like. These beasts are fierce against
all they meet with, and are feared of all men. Yet men make taltrops, dig
pits for them, and make engines to kill them: whereby it comes to pass many
times that that beast, which not long before, made an whole country afraid, is
killed by the hand of some one man, the most cowarde, and fearefullest of al
other men. Tyrants many times find, it so comes to pass by them, and
therefore they are still vexed with the preposterous fear, and dread of the
people, and going about to make all men afraid, live in fear of them that are
nearest about them, as Luke in this place says these men did. Hence proceed
those exquisite gardes that Tyrauntes have about them for preservation of their
bodies, and life. For this cause most times they wage soldiers, and armed men
out of strange Countries, and promise them selves, more safety in the defense
of strangers, than in their own countrymen: because among strangers, they
think there be none, that hope for any gain by their death. For this cause
Masinissa King of Numidia, being both in amity and league with the people of
Rome, and having four and fifty children, guarded his body with mastiues, and
band dogs, reposing in them a more sure succor and defense, than in men,
whom he knew he had many times offended. Look V^ler* M^x.ix. bo^e, and.14.
chap.
What shall we say of Dionysius, which caused his daughters to learn the
Barbers craft, because he would not commit his throat to the hands of men.
And after his daughters were mariageable, would trust them no longer, nor
never would company with any of his wives, before they were dilygently
searched and ransaked. But Histories be full of these examples, which may both
comfort us against tyrants, and teach all men that be in authority, to do
iustlye and truly, and not to think their life safe, through unbridled
authority. For the more they make afraid, the more they provoke to lie in
wait for their goods and lives. And whosoever be led with the fear of God,
and think to follow his commandments, and moderate their authority and
power, after the same, although sometimes the wicked craftily lay wait for
them, yet shall they perceive that God defends them, who can easily scatter
the deuyses of all that are seditious, as we are taught by the examples of
David, and Ezechias.

The Apostles declare all the matter to the congregation.
Last of all, Luke tells what the Apostles did after they were let gone,
saying: They came unto their fellows and showed them all that the high
Priests and Elders had said. So they declare all the matter to the
congregation, both for that they would move them to prayer, as the things
following declare, and also, that perceiving the threats and attemptes of
their enemies, they might all arm themselves with a christian valiantness and
patience, and as far as they might without prejudice of religion, take heed
of their ginnes and snares. By which example we are taught, that it is lawful
for Ministers of the Church to declare openly to the congregation whatsoever
the professed enemies of the truth take in hand against Christ and his flock.
Which thing many now a days think not only superfluous, but also to have
in it some likelyhoode of sedition, when either the Popes Bulls, or the
decrees of Synodes and Counsayles, and horrible threats of Antychrist, are
recited before the Congregation. But by these men's judgment, both Christ and
his Apostles shall be accused of sedition, who, it is evident many times thus
did. Let us rather remember that the Ministers of the Church are appointed to
be shepeheardes and watchmen. It is therefore their duty to rebuke Woolues,
and to warn the sheep of dangers at hand. John. 10.
The end of all these things is, that the faithful should turn unto God by
prayers, and amendment of life, and be armed with Christian fortitude, and
constancy of faith, that when we have overcome all the attemptes of our
enemies, we may be taken at length into the blessed kingdom of Jesus Christ:
to whom be praise, honor, power and glory for ever. Amen.

The.xxx. Homely.
AND when they heard that, they lift up their voices to God with one accord
and said: Lord thou art God which have made heaven and earth, the sea, and
all that in them is, which by the mouth of thy servant David have said: why
did the heathen rage, and the people imagine vain things? The kings of the
earth stood up, and the Rulers came together against the Lord, and against
his anointed: for of a truth against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou have
anointed, both Herod, and also Pontius Pylate, with the Gentyles and the
people of Israel, gathered themselves together, to do whatsoever thy hand and
thy counsel determined before to be done. And now Lord, behold their
threatenings, and grant unto thy servants that with all confidence they may
speak thy word. So that thou stretch forth thine hand, that healing, and
signs, and woonders be done by the name of thy holy child Jesus. And as
soon as they had prayed, the place moved where they were assembled together,
and they were all filled with the holy ghost.
AS our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ does oftentimes make mention of the
persecutions of the godly: so the holy ghost would have Luke diligently to set
forth the persecutions of the primitive Church, not only for to maintain the
truth of Christ's sayings, but partly for that we should not be offended at
the adversity and tribulation wherewith the church is now a days troubled, as
at a strange and unwonted thing, and partly for that we should be instructed
with the example of the primitive Church, what to do in time of persecutions.
And to this end principally, are all those things to be applied, which
hitherto have been said of the Apostles. They being brought before the
counsel, do plainly and boldly confess Christ. Then when the enemies had
forbidden them to preach the Gospel, they protest with marvelous constancy,
that they can not obey so wicked a commandment. At length when they perceive
that reason could not prevail with these wicked Counsaylers, but that they
were still threatened, they declare all the matter to the congregation, to
the end that each one being admonished of the danger ensuing, might the more
easily provide for themselves. These proceedings let the Ministers imitate, as
often as they perceive the world raise storms of persecutions against them.
Let their stout and bold confession of Christ be an example unto others. Let
them not yield to the wicked commandments of Princes. Let them faithfully
premonish the congregation, least any man's salvation stand in peril,
through their sloth. Luke proceeds on in his history, and shows what the
Church does, being thus admonished by the Apostles. By which example, it may
appear what every Christian has to do, both particulerly and in general,
when persecutions are stirring.

They (says he) when they heard the Apostles, The Church flies to God by
prayer.
lift up their voice to God with one accord. And he tells of the Church,
how they sought the succor and help of God only by prayer. They were not
careless therefore, nor did not set light, the dangers approaching. Neither
fled they to man's wisdom, help, or counsel, but sought all manner of aid
and succor by prayers. This is the sure sanctuary of the Church, because God
euerywhere promises to be their defender that seek their help of him. And
that which he euerywhere promises, he has by infinite examples performed, so
that none that is a true Christian can doubt of the truth of his promises. To
this may be joined how he delivered the Israelites, Exodus 14.
enuironned with the host of the Egyptians, at Moses entreatie and prayers.
And after that, through the prayers of the same Moses, Exodus 17.
he gave them victory over the Amalechites. In the Psalms there are infinite
examples of them, which testify how God has been favorable and gracious unto
their prayers. Yea, Joel the Prophet gives this only counsel to the Church
in distress, Joel. 2.
that they should all turn unto God, and call upon him for help,
prescribing also such a form of prayers as they should openly use. And that
his counsel was not in vain, the success of the matter proved. For God
sent his Angel which in one night slew the host of the Assirians, and
delivered the city of Jerusalem from the great tyranny of Sennacharib.
Wherefore the primitive Church could not do better than to sue unto God by
prayer, as they did. The corrupt conditions and manners of our days are by this
example reproved. For we see many with overmuch carelessness contemn the
dangers hanging over the Church, scoff and deride all admonitions, and wholly
give themselves to all untimely pleasures and exercises. But when they feel
the fire of persecution burning, either they follow the counsel of the flesh,
dissembling their faith, or else fortifye themselves in the league of Princes,
and help of man. Which is the cause that the more they seek to be out of
danger, the more grievously they entangle and endaunger themselves.

The true trade of praiyng.
Luke also in few words comprehends the right trade and order of praying.
First, they call upon God, who is only to be inuocated, as appears both by
the covenant made with Abraham, by the first commandment in the Decaloge, and
by the order of the Lords prayer. And it is manifest by many examples, that he
only hears us euerywhere, and can deliver us. Wherefore, great and heinous is
their error whosoever they be that make their prayers unto Creatures. Psalm.
12.56.
Then they lift up their voice and pray. And yet is it plain that God hears
even the groaning only of them that are afflicted, and their tears continually
are in his sight. Howbeit, they would express the synceritie of their faith,
by lifting up their voice, and testify that they were not ashamed of their
prayers, and calling upon God for help. For this is not the least point of the
confession of our faith, as we may perceive Daniel well judged, who having
before prayed in secret, when he perceived the King had commanded God should
not be inuocated, sets open his windows, and prays, as it were, in the
sight of all men, because he would not seem to like or allow the wicked
proclamation. Last of all, he attributes unanimity or concord unto them,
which thing, except the Church observe, neither shall their prayers be heard,
ne yet their selves be taken for the Church of God. For the Church being made
one body under one head, which is Christ, is quickened with one self spirit,
calls upon one and the same father, and has one and the same inheritance
laid up for them in heaven. And they that in these things agree, cannot in
their minds be divided. Therefore let us follow the trade of praying used in
the primitive Church, and we shall perceive in our adversities that Gods help
will be most near at hand. It shall be good to consider diligently the prayer
that they made, which may be divided into three parts.

They describe God of his omnipotency.
The first conteyneth a description of God, wherein they acknowledge him for the
creator of the whole world. They make mention first of the creation, that men
might consider the omnipotency of God, and his singular power over all
creatures, whereby they might conceive the greater consolation. For thus they
were advertised that the wicked enemies of Christ neither could hinder the
work of God by their enterprises, nor yet hurt them in any thing, without the
devise and sufferance of God. It behooves us likewise to have a consideration
of Gods omnipotency, that we acknowledge him not only for the creator, but
also for the governor and preserver of all creatures, who though he has set
his throne on high, Psalm. 113.
yet he humbles himself to behold whatsoever is done, either in heaven or
in earth. Which consideration as it is very profitable for the amendment of
our life and manners: so in tribulations it brings comfort, and in our prayers
chiefly confirms our faith, Jacob. 1. Math. 21.
whereupon the effect of prayer principally depends. And this is the chief
use of the first Article in the Apostles Creed where we profess we believe in
God the Father, maker of heaven and earth. For it makes for the confirmation
of our faith, and takes away all cause of distrust, which commonly springs
by reason we think God either cannot or will not help us. But what is
impossible unto him which has made heaven and earth by his word, and has
hither to preserved all this world? Or is it like he will neglect men, whom he
has made Lords over all the things he has created, which has respect unto
things void of life, and sees them governed?

The second part contains the narration, The narration.
wherein they show unto God, the attemptes of their enemies, and the present
dangers that they be in, not that they think God is ignorant of them, but for
that they would somewhat ease their minds of care and grief, by laying their
complaints before Gods eyes, which thing was the chief cause of these
complaints, which the Saints used to intermeddle among their prayers. Here
may we perceive the goodness of God, whose ears be so easily opened to our
complaints, and hears us so mercifully when we complain of our miseries and
distress. They take the beginning of their narration out of the second
Psalm, where David inspired by the holy ghost, described the kingdom of
Christ, and also the wicked enterprises of the world which fight against his
kingdom. The sense of all their saying is thus. We find it now true (O
God) that thou once did prophecy by the mouth of thy servant David. For
truly, in this City of Jerusalem, which in times past was called both holy,
and the seat of righteousness, Herod and Pylate have conspired together
against thy son, the soldiers also of the Gentyles, have gathered themselves
together, and the people of Israel which ought to have served thee. etc. And it
is not for naught that they recyte this old prophecy. For hereby they declare
that there is no strange and unwonted thing come to pass, and that therefore
no man ought to be offended, with the wicked attemptes of Christ's enemies. We
are taught by their example, how we also should call to remembrance the
prophecies of the scripture, when we be tossed with the tempests of
persecution, and specially those where Christ testifyeth, there shall be
perpetual enmity between the world and those that be his. John. 15.16.
If you were of the world (says he) the world would love his own. But
now have I chosen you out of the world, and therefore the world hates you.
And Paul says, Persecution shall follow all them that will live godly in
Christ Jesus. 2. Timo. 3.
Whereunto chiefly belongs that which God prophesied in the first beginning
of the world, that there should be perpetual enmity between the Serpent
and the seed of the woman, that is, between the devil the Prince of this
world, and Christ, who also includes the Church, which is his body. The
consideration of these things makes us not to be offended at persecutions,
forasmuch as we see it is so ordained of God, that the godly shall be tried, as
it were by fire, with the rage and fury of the world. Hereunto appertains
that saying of Peter: 1. Pet. 4.
Dearly beloved, marueyle not that you are proved by fire, (which thing is to
try you) as though some strange thing happened unto you, but rejoice, in as
much as ye are partakers of Christ's passions. etc. But it behooves us
somewhat more diligently to mark, how the holy ghost speaks of the
enterprises of Christ's enemies, both by David, and also by the congregation of
the faithful.

The enterprises of Christ's enemies.
First he describes their enterprises, saying: they rage, they ymagine, they
stand up and take counsel together. These things express an ardent and
earnest hatred against Christ and his kingdom, which they seek by all means
to overthrow. And he trimly describes the manners and conditions of them. For
where he numbreth Nations, People, and Kings among the enemies of Christ, he
attributes to each of them their peculyar properties. The unbelieving Gentiles
rage, as who are led rather with furiousness of affections, than with
counsel. The people (whereby is understood the communaltie) ymagine or
speak things that be vain, while among their Cups commonly they talk of
overthrowing the kingdom of Christ. But Kings and Princes, tossed with the
care of their kingdoms, rise up, join together, and openly take counsel, by
what force and polycie, Christ may be oppressed. And yet (he says) they
altogyther take in hand, Psalm. 94.
and muse upon things that are but vain. For what are mortal men, whose
thoughts and cogitations are but vain, able to do against the Lord? Psalm.
7. Psalm. 33.
They are conceived with vexation, they traueyle with vanity, and bring forth
lying. And God whose counsel endures for ever, does easily bring the
counsel of the heathen to naught. Hereto belongs the saying of the godly in
the Prophet: Break down (o you people) and you shall be broken down. Muster
you, and you shall be broken down: Prepare you to battle, and you shall be
torn in pieces: take your counsel together, yet must your counsel come to
naught: Esaias. 8.
go in hand with all, yet shall it not prosper, for the Lord is with us.

They that read the Scriptures, and stories of the Church, may see euerywhere
examples hereof, so that it needs not greatly to make rehearsal of the
same: yet is that one example of Julian the Apostata or runnagate most notable,
who burning in hatred against Christ, and ready to give up his ghost, In the
tripartite history.vi. book, and.xliiii. chap.
was constrained to say. Thou have the victory o Galylean, thou have the
victory. So that a certain Christian very wittilye answered a wicked
Sophister, asking him what the Carpentare of Galyley did: that he was making a
Coffin, or Beer to bear Julian to his Grave upon.

Christ's enemies war with God.
Afterward, he shows against whom these enterprises are made: They came
together against the Lord, and against his anointed. It might have seemed a
light matter to contend or strive with Christ, by reason of his humble, and
lowly port of man's nature which he took on him. But they are not Christ's
enemies only, but also enemies of God. For as he which disdayneth to
acknowledge the Kings only son, to be the heir and King of the Realm, and
is a procurer of sedition against him, is worthily judged to make war against
the king: so he that will not acknowledge the son God to be our king and
savior, may well be said to be the enemy of God, who has given to him only
all the power of his kingdom, and all the glory of man's redemption, that all
men might honor the son, John. 5.
even as they honor the Father. Neither can God be acknowledged and honored
otherwise, than in his son. Wherefore of consequence, they neither
acknowledge, nor honor God, which do not acknowledge and honor his son.
And if they rebel, and move war against the son of God, then like the
wicked Gyaunts, they may be judged to make war against God also. This did
John the Baptist well perceive, when he said. The Father loves the Son, and
has given all things into his hand. He that believes in the Son, has life
everlasting. He that believes not the Son, John. 3.
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides upon him. And who can doubt,
but he is the enemy of God, that provoke against himself the irreuocable
wrath of God? These things serve both for our instruction, that we defyle not
our selves with like impiety, and also for our comfort, that we be not afraid
with the power of our enemies, when we see our selves to weak for them. For
this is not our fight, but a battle taken in hand under Gods conduct, who can
most easilye subdue their force and attemptes. Which thing John teaches us
when he says, that he that is in us, 1. John. 4.
is of more power, than he that is in the world.

Last of all, The enemies of Christ, fulfill the will of God.
the faithful express more evidently the effect and end of these mischievous
attempts, where they say: They gathered themselves together, to do whatsoever
thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done. Howbeit, the wicked
consult not, nor meet not together, to put Gods will and purpose in execution:
but they declare unto us, how they are able to do nothing, but that which God
has decreed to have done, and that then they most further Gods purpose, when
they most study to hinder it. This shall appear to be manifest, if we
consider, what the Priests of the Jews did. They would keep Christ out of
his kingdom. Therefore they moved the Roman Presidents, and communaltie
against him, and s^ynted not, until they saw him upon the Cross, dead, and
buried. But what other did they in all these things, but help Christ being the
Savior of the world, according to the eternal purpose of his Father, to
enter into his kingdom. And by the consideration hereof, the Apostles remove
out of the way, that block whereat such stumble as think the wicked are able
to overcome Christ by power and force. Here serves the use of Gods singular
providence, to make men understand, that the enterprises of the wicked can go
no further, nor do no more, than God has appointed. Here have we to observe,
that they acknowledge in Gods providence, not only his prescience and
foreknowledge, but also his stable decree, and hand, whereby he does execute
at his pleasure, that which he has decreed, that himself may be all in all.
And yet the wicked are not therefore excused, because they respect not the
decree and will of God, but follow their own corrupt affections, as we have
already many times declared. And although the primitive Church, does truly
believe and profess the same, yet she prays, and with fervent suit
beseeches God of his succor and aid. Therefore the doctrine, that submits
all things, and the success of them unto God, takes not praying away: For God
will be prayed to, and inuocated. And for this cause, the godly use it the more
ardently, for that they know all things are governed by his appointment. For
they do that which he commands, and they search not over curiously after
his secret counselles, but permit the success of all things unto him, whom
they know to be faithful, who will not suffer us to be tempted above our
strength, and brings all things to an happy end, for all them that love him.

The prayers of them that believed.
Now let us see the third part of this prayer, which contains the peticions
of those things, which they perceived then they had most need of. The first
of them is: And now Lord, behold their threatenings. By this word behold,
they mean judgment and punishment, and it is as much to say, as if they
should desire God to revenge their cause. For who had more right to revenge him
than he, for as much as against him this war was made, as they had proved by
the words of the Psalm? This is the peculiar usage of the godly, that when
they perceive they are hyndered in their vocation, or not able to make their
part good, to appeal unto the judgment of God, Psalm. 7.17.26. and others.
as we see David oftentimes did, when Saul persecuted him, yet shall we never
do it with more affyaunce, than when the glory of God by the wicked is openly
impeached. Thus Ezechias laid the blasphemous letter of the king of Assyria,
Esaias. 37.
open before the Lord, and beseeches him, that he will defend his quarrel.
And it is no doubt, but he hears them which be careful for the glory of his
name, seeing he so mercyfully hears the pryuate quarrels of those that be
his. But to the end they would not seem so to commyt this matter unto God,
as to withdraw themselves out of all danger, they beseech God also, to give
them such grace, that they may speak and declare his word boldly, which
thing chiefly is to be understood of the Apostles, and other Ministers of
the word, who unless they be boldened and guyded with the spirit of God, may
easily be made afraid with the threats and assaults of the world, to
intermyt their office. Which thing Paul, after his manifold traueyles in the
ministry acknowledged, and therefore thought good to be helped with the
public prayers of the congregations, that he might speak the word of God
freely and with open mouth. Ephesians. 6.
Yet is this also to be referred to every singular christian, and it behooves
to pray for every particular person, that they may confess Christ boldly and
stowtely, before this naughty and adulterous world. It is necessary, that we
understand how this boldness is given us of God. For so shall we be provoked,
to pray oftentimes, for the increase of faith, crying with the Apostles: Lord
increase our faith. Luke. 17. Man. 16. John. 14.
Thirdly, they require that the power of working miracles may be increased,
because God has appointed them as certain public seals and testimonials to
the Apostles doctrine. And they desire the same may be done by the name of
Christ, to declare that their care is only for Christ's glory. In this place
there shyneth a marvelous stoutness, and most ardent zeal toward Christ,
in the primitive Church. They perceived a little before, that the minds of the
Jews were incensed with the doctrine and miracles of the Apostles, yet desire
they that the Apostles may have more boldness granted them, and their gifts
of miracles to be increased: so little place do they give to their enemies
fury, though but for a season, which yet the men in our days will doer, who
think that to be the best trade of teaching, that most pleases the professed
enymies of truth, and seek nothing but idleness, and the peace of the world,
being little or nothing careful for the increase of Christ's kingdom. These
men think the Ministers are to fervent, and many times also those that be
scarce luke warm, which seems to me is the chief cause, that Christ's
kingdom is so little enlarged amongst us.

To conclude, Luke shows what effect ensued of their praying. The prayers of
the godly are heard.
For God heard their prayers, which was declared both by a sensible sign, that
is to say, by the moving of the house (which signified the presence of God)
and also by most wholesome effects. For they were filled with the holy ghost,
that is to say, they perceived an effectual comfort of the holy ghost, and
courage given them, where before this, the fear of danger did somewhat dismay
them. And they to whom the ministry of the Gospel was committed, preached
the same with great constancy: so that a man might judge them rather kindled
and enflamed with the threats of their enemies, than made afraid. Whereof more
shall be said in the next Sermon. We are taught by this example, Psalm. 34.
that God neglects not the prayers of the godly, but that his eyes be fixed
upon the just, and his ears open unto their prayers. Let us follow the example
of the primitive Church in these days, where most cruel enemies euerywhere
conspire together against the truth, and turning our selves unto God by prayer,
let us commit our whole cause unto him: let us beseech him of increase of
faith, and the holy ghost, that we be not overcome with any dangers or
terrors, but that after we have happily ended the course of our life, we may be
received into his heavenly kingdom, there to live with Jesus Christ: to whom
be praise, honor, power and glory for ever. Amen.

The.xxxj. Homely.
AND they spoke the word of God boldly. And the multitude of them that
believed were of one heart, and of one soul. Neither said any of them that
ought of the things which he possessed, was his own, but they had all things
common. And with great power gave the Apostles witness of the resurrection of
the Lord Jesus. And great grace was with them all. Neither was there any among
them that lacked. For as many as were possessours of lands, or houses, sold
them, and brought the price of the things that were sold, and laid it down
at the Apostles feet. And distribution was made unto every man according as he
had need. And Ioses which was called of the Apostles Barnabas, that is to
say, the son of consolation, being a Leuite, and of the country of Cyprus,
having land, sold it, and laid the price down at the Apostles feet.
AS Luke the Evangelist has diligently described the first persecution that
was raised against the Apostles: so reports he as diligently, what the
faithful did during the time of these whurly burleys. The end of all which
is, that we should learn what to do in like case. First and foremost they
gave themselves unto prayers, which they powered out before God with one fervent
accord of mind. To God likewise must we resort in our adversities, and not to
the vain help of the flesh. And we must ask of him not such things as serve
the carelessness and idleness of the flesh, but such as concern the setting
forth of Christ's kingdom. Now let us see the other exercises of the primitive
Church, whereby it shall appear, that they intermitted nothing that belonged to
their duty.

The Apostles constantly preach the Gospel.
First, Luke speaks of the Apostles, and all those who had the office of
teaching committed to them. He says, they preached the word of God with
confidence, that is, boldly and freely: whereunto a little after is added: with
great power gave the Apostles witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus.
They accomplished therefore that which they protested they would do,
contrary to the decree of the counsel. Luke makes mention only of the
resurrection, not for that they only preached the same only, but because
thereby Christ perfited and fulfilled the business of our redemption and
salvation, and for that we should not think the Apostles yielded any thing
to the Saduceyes, which then were in greatest authority. And it is not without
a cause that Luke makes mention of doctrine first of all other things, for
thereunto a principal care must always be had. For where we are regenerate by
doctrine, and by the same the Church is gathered together: without the same,
the Church cannot stand in her full strength and vigor. Neither was it
without the prompting of the holy ghost, that Solomon in tune past said: When
prophesying fails, the people go to hauock. And that this was truly said,
the examples of all ages abundantly testifye. Wherefore, as before he said,
the Church continued in the preaching and doctrine of the Apostles: so now also
he testifies the Apostles are most mindful and earnest in their office. By
which examples, Ministers are admonished, that they must not suffer the
liberty of preaching to be taken from them, through fear of persecution, and
threatening of enemies, nor when danger approaches, cease not to feed Christ's
sheep with the word of doctrine, and comfort. For that is the property of
hyrelings, as Christ says, John. 10.
and not of those which are ready to lay down their lives, according to the
example of Christ, for the sheep committed to their charge. But because men
are much faulty herein, it shall be profitable, diligently to discuss this
example, that hereby Ministers may learn what appertains to them to do. And
first, bold liberty of teaching, and unfearful affiance of mind is
attributed to the Apostles. Which is necessary for all ministers, as it is
plain, because there will be always some, that would have them brydled and
musseled. John. 3.
For Christ witnesses, that the world cannot abide the light of the truth.
The same world cannot abide to be advertised and reprehended. So that there
were in the old time, which durst say unto the Prophets: Prophecy not to us.
Look not out right things for us: but speak fair words unto us: Amos. 3.
Esaias. 30.
look out errors, get you out of this way: depart out of this path, and
turn the holy one of Israel from us. And Paul says, there shall be in the
later days, which shall not abide the word of truth, but having the ytch in
their ears, 2. Timo. 4.
shall get them an heap of teachers, which shall bring doctrine agreeable to
their corrupt affections. And we see it is euerywhere true, that he prophesied.
Here therefore is required an Apostolic liberty, and bold affiance of
preaching, whereby Bishops in the Church may apply their office in season
and out of season, Ezech. 33.
that they may encourage others, of whom there is yet some hope remaining, and
deliver their own souls, that the blood of them that perish, be not
required at their hands. Furthermore, it is said they chiefly inculcated the
article of resurrection above all other. And in deed this was the principal
and chief article, wherewith the chief of the Jews were most offended. For
through this article they were convinced, partly of putting Christ unjustly to
death, and partly the Saduceyes could not suffer the same to be preached, as
who denied the resurrection. Yet notwithstanding, the Apostles boldly and
stoutly preached the same, so that it may appear they had a great care of the
same. This example teaches us, that those articles are chiefly to be urged,
which the adversaries use most to impugn. 1. Cor. 14. 2. Cor. 10.
For all things in the ministry of the word must be directed to edification
and profit. And the next care must be, that the thing which is edified or
builded, must not fall down again. But he shall perform none of these
prosperously, which most constantly resists not when the truth of doctrine is
assaulted with the craft and tyranny of the enemies, and is most in hazard.
They that are set to defend Cities and Castelles, use to bend and bring al
their force to those places, where the enemies stronglyest assault them. Let
them whom the Lord has appointed governors and pastors of the congregation
do the like. Neither are they to be heard which think those things ought to
be suppressed, and not spoken of, which offend the adversaries in our
preaching. For the Lord has appointed us ministers of his word, and not
masters and judges, upon whose determination and appointment his doctrine must
depend. Therefore their boldness is most wicked, which dare take upon them to
prescribe the holy spirit, which is the only governor of the Church, and of
doctrine.

Secondly, The congregation given to concord.
he shows how the whole Church was given to unity and concord. The
multitude (says he) were of one heart and one soul. The meaning is, that they
were all of one mind and will: the end whereof undoubtedly was none other
than the enlargement of Christ's kingdom. This likeness and parilitie of will
and mind brings forth true friendship and stable concord. For they which
have this mark before them, to set forth the kingdom of Christ, are nothing
desirous of their private lucre, which thing alone disturbeth all friendship.
It shall appear this was a singular work of the holy ghost, if we consider
that the multitude of the believers, in whom this concord and consent so
evidently appeared, were five thousand persons. This truly is the right mark
and token of the faithful, and such as they are never without. For they that
acknowledge but one father in heaven, are received into one baptism, be but
one body under Christ the head, and are all quickened but with one spirit of
Christ, it cannot be that they can be divided among themselves. Therefore
Christ appointed this, 3 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4.
as a cognisaunce to know his by, saying: By this shall all men know that you
are my Disciples, if you love one another. And again, John. 13.
Paul by this argument proves the Corinthians, as yet to be carnal, 1. Cor.
3.
by reason of the envy, contention, and division that was among them. It is
worthy to be considered, how after they had heard the threats, and wicked
attemptes of their enemies, they gave themselves so earnestly to mutual love
and unity. That is the very property of love, then most to show his
effects, when he sees his brethren compassed about with danger and
necessity, and to have most need of help. This example condemns the guise
of our days, wherein men are destitute and void of all unity and concord. We
hear amongst the professors of the faith and doctrine of the Gospel, the
factious names of Zwinglians and Lutheranes: And so far is this emulation
spread, that where the one part is in danger, the other forsake their brethren,
and without any pity or mercy laugh in their sleeves at them. Yea, many
times, they declare their joy by bitter tauntes, and offer the members of
Christ hanging upon the cross, vinegar mingled with gall. To say nothing in
the mean season of the contentions, raylings, vpbraydings, and slaundering one
of another, that is among them. It is to be feared therefore, least while we
bite one another, Galath. 5.
we be bitten and destroyed one of another. Who soever in their distresses will
have any aid or help of God, must first be joined together in mind through
charity.

Benevolence, and helping of the poor.
But least any man might think this joining of minds stood in bare and vain
affection, he shows in the third part, how they declared the same, by their
deeds. First, he makes mention of benevolence and helping of the poor, the
exercise whereof, they cannot omit, whose minds agree together in Christ. And
this place is most worthy to be considered, both because of the Anabaptists,
who (as we declared before in the second chap.) go about by this place to
establish Plato his communion of all things: and because of false gospellers,
which intermit all exercise of Christian contribution. Therefore, for the more
easy understanding of this Treatise, we will first consider the sum of the
matter, then the trade and order which the faithful observed in this case, and
last of all, what the fruit and effect hereof was.

He comprehends the sum hereof in few words, where he says: No man said
ought of the things that he possessed was his own, but they had all things
common. Here the property of things is not denied, because there is express
mention ^^de of possession, but he expresses the affection of mind which the
faithful had, who although they possessed houses, fermes, and such other like,
yet no man was so wedded to them, that he thought they were given to him alone,
but would have them to serve the use and necessity of others also. Whereby we
gather, that all things were common among them by will, Goods were common by
will, not by law.
but not by law. After which sort the Proverb says, all things are common
among friends. And in this place the true fountain of Christian benevolence,
and contribution is declared, that is to say, a mind which is not addict and
tied to the desire of riches, but which judges truly of them, and the use of
them. For according to Paul's saying, the use of the riches of this world,
consists only in meat and drink, and clothing, wherein howseroume also is
understood, forasmuch as we be borne naked into this world, 1. Timo. 6.
neither shall we carry any thing hence with us. But where the faithful person
understands that man's nature is suffised with few things, he cannot be
drowned in over great desire of heaping riches together, and he judges not his
treasure to consist in them, and although he sees they multiply and increase,
Psalm. 62. Math. 6.
yet he sets not his whole heart upon them. But understanding rather, that he
is but a steward of them, he labors to make him friends of the unjust
Mammon, which may receive him when he shall have need, Luke. 16.
into everlasting habitations. The consideration hereof makes the goods of
the faithful to be common unto other, although they keep to themselves the
right of property.

The manner and order of distribution.
The manner and order which they observed in this distribution, makes for the
declaration of this sense. For thereof Luke says: As many as were possessours
of houses and lands, sold them, and brought the price of the things that were
sold, and laid them down at the Apostles feet. And distribution was made to
every man, according as he had need. First, he says, houses and lands were
sold, which every man did not, ne yet they that did sell, sold all, and
reserved nothing to themselves. For there are diverse examples of many which had
houses of their own, and kept families, which Paul not only permytted, but
also as we may read, 1. Tim. 5.
he straightly commanded the same. Therefore they sold as much as seemed
requisite for the present necessity of the Church, and it was at every man's
disposition, either to keep, or sell his own, as shall hereafter appear by
Peter's words to Ananias. Further, they laid not the price or money down for
all men to take, but brought it to the Apostles, whom they thought good to
have the distribution thereof, until Deacons were ordained, by public consent
of the congregation to take that office upon them. Acts. 6.
Neither did the Apostles so publishe the money brought unto them, that every
man might take thereof what he lysted, but distribution was made to every man,
according as he had need. Therefore there was here no disordinate communion of
goods, no confusion of things, no vyolent usurping of other men's goods, such
as the phrenetyke and seditious ymagine. And if we consider all the
circumstaunces well, it shall easily appear, that this contribution was
ordained to the end, that the Church might have some public treasure to help
to serve the poor, that they need not be compelled through poverty, to
shrink from the faith of Christ, and the body of the congregation. And they
had no part of these goods, who either had goods of their own, or were able
by any honest labor to get their living. Here have we to consider how
Ecclesiastical goods should be used. The beginning of them was such as is
here declared. For as in the primitive Church, those that were of the rycher
sort, of their godly liberality, gave their goods to the Church: so came it
to pass in the days afterward, that as the number of christians increased,
Kings, and Princes, and others, who had great wealth, following the example of
these men, enriched Churches and Colleges, with yearly revenues and tithes, as
many old foundations testifye. Wylling that these goods should be so used,
that by them true doctrine might be conserved, and the poor maintained, who
they knew were chiefly commended of Christ to his Church. Which use were
meet in these days also, either to be observed in Churches, or being decayed,
to be restored, if we will have a form and presydent of the primitive Church
remaining. But we may easilyer with sighing seek this use, than call it
again. For ungodliness is come to such boldness, that a many are not
afraid to challenge to themselves, those things which in times past our
ancestors of their liberality gave to the whole congregation. And here in
this point we have seen all the reformations almost of the Churches, in our
days stop: as though it had been sufficient to have taken from Monks and
Friars, the administration of Church goods, and not rather to have restored
them again to the ancient and right use, wherefore they were first ordained
and served. Yea, it were better to leave them still to those filthy
hypocrytes, than to stumble at the same stone with them. And if we ought,
according to the example of the primitive Church, to bestow our own goods,
upon the congregation, if need so require, then must they grievously sin,
which gyuing nothing of their own, openly bereave men of that which other have
given them. Hereof we see it comes to pass, that both the poor are
neglected, and Ministers the more rare and selde, and all religion decays.

The fruit or commodity of contribution.
But let us see the singular fruit of this christian distribution, which Luke
intermedleth with this description, that we may hereby perceive, what we have
in these days to trust to, which so easily neglect the exercise thereof. The
Evangelist shows a double commodity ensuyng hereof. First, it came to pass,
that none among them lacked. Wherefore they fulfilled the law that commands
there should be no beggar in Israel. Deuteronomy. 15.
This seems now a days an impossible thing to many, while they consider the
multitude of the poor. But they are confuted by the example of the primative
church. For by what reason can it seem impossible to them, that live in rest
and peace, seeing the godly brought it to pass, in the midst of their
enemies, in a bloudthirstie City? Were they able with their own goods to
find all their poor, and shall we, furnished with the help of rich
donations, and great treasures, wherewith the Churches in times passed have
been endowed think it impossible, for us to do? Let a mean be observed,
that every one may have according to his need, and we shall perceive we shall
be helped with the blessing of the Lord, and liberality of the godly in such
wise, that we shall find no such lack herafter. That which we require, is both
difficult and impossible, because the thing is handled preposterously, and out
of order, For they have least, which have most need: and on them is most
bestowed, whose parts it had been to give their own goods to the Church. And
if we would consider, what danger, trouble, and discommoditie, both publicly
and privately uses to ensue of the multitude of beggars and poor: we should
see that the commodity of this christian contribution which the primitive
church received, was of inestimable value. But one other commodity springs
of this, that great grace was with them, that is, they were in favor, and
accepted with all the people, and with those also, that as yet were not
illuminated with the knowledge of Christ. For such is the force of liberality,
that it draws very enimyes to wonder at it, and love it. And because the
Lord takes it as bestowed on him, that is given to the poor in his name: he
uses to recompense them with this reward, that they shall be in favor and
authority with many men. If we would consider this one thing, w^ should not
marueyle, why they be hated and enuyed which profess the Gospel. For besides,
that the world hates the light of the truth, and God will have us exercised,
and invred with the naughtiness thereof, our stony hearts, which neglect the
christian poverty, deserves the same: to say nothing in the mean while of
our naughtiness, whereby we hale to us the goods of the Church, under color
of refourming the Gospel: A number of poor in the mean while criyng out, to
whose finding and relief the same should have gone. Let us compare the usage
of the primitive Church with those things that we do, and then if we be not
ashamed of our selves, we shall worthily be called men, not only without
blushing, but also of more impudency, than harlots.

The liberali^i^ of Ioses Barnabas.
Howbeit, he adds to this treatise, a singular example of benevolence, and
christian collation, that one Ioses a Leuyte of Cyprus showed, who sold his
land, and laid the price thereof down at the Apostles feet, that is to be
bestowed, as they thought good. It may seem that this example is therefore
first declared before the example of Ananias and Sapphira, to the intent their
naughtynesse might be the more perceived, who could not be moved with so
notable a Presydent. The holy Ghost also teaches us how they ought to be
commended, which show any notable token of virtue, that the provocation of
their praise, might stir up the minds of other of more towardness, to
follow them. Twee things are told of Ioses, which make him the more to be
commended. For where he was a Leuyte, he was converted to the faith of Christ,
to whom the priests were most enimyes, because Christ greatly hindered and
empayred their gain and honor. But Gods spirit blows where it pleases,
neither must we despair of any man's health, because of his profession and
trade of life. Further, where he was a Cypriote, he so looued the faithful of
Jerusalem, that on them only he would bestow, or show this liberality. For
he understood without doubt, that in Christ all difference of nations was
abolished, as otherwheres the Scripture teaches. And his so great liberality
wanted not a singular commodity. For his virtue is enrolled in perpetual
memory, and the Apostles thought good to call him Barnabas, that is to say,
the son of consolation. For he deserved to have so singular a name, which by
his liberality gave so singular comfort to so many. In the mean season we be
taught, what names they deserve, which defraude the poor of Christ, by raping
and reauing the Church goods, and as much as in them is, let and hinder the
religion and doctrine of Christ. These be in very deed, the children of
disturbance, and perdition, whose judgment steepeth not, as the example of
Ananias following, will teach us. Let us mark the exercises of the primitive
Church, and give our selves to the like, in this most troublesome world, where
Satan euerywhere raises up persecutours against the doctrine of truth. Let
the preachers be armed with a bold liberty of teaching the word, and let them
remember they are the servants of God, whom no authority of man ought to
move. Let them which profess the name of Christ, be at unity together in
Christ. Let them labor to show their unity and concord by works of
liberality, and specially by helping of the poor. These be the marks of
Christians, and these be the strongest weapons, and defenses of Christians. For
by these they be known to be the Disciples of Jesus Christ, who is able easily
to defend them against all the assaults of the world, and shall at length
deliver them from all peril and danger, and bring them to his celestial
kingdom: to him be praise, honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The fifth chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The.xxxij. Homely.
A Certain man named Ananias with Sapphi^a his wife, sold a possession, and
kept away part of the price, his wife also being of counsel, and brought a
certain part, and laid it down at the Apostles feet. But Peter said,
Ananias, how is it that Satan has filled thine heart, that thou should lie
unto the holy ghost, and keep away part of the price of the land? Pertayned
it not to thee only? and after it was sold, was it not in thine own power?
why have thou conceived this thing in thine heart? Thou have not lied unto men,
but unto God. When Ananias heard these words, he fell down, and gave up the
ghost. And great fear came on all them that heard these things. And the young
men rose up, and put him apart, and carried him out and buried him.
THe Evangelist Luke has declared what exercises and studies the primitive
Church was given unto, in the most perilous time of persecution. We have there
seen all things belonging to a perfect and most absolute form, and order of a
Church. For the Apostles taught the word of God boldly and truly. The people
as meet was, received the same, as their unanimity, concord, and earnest
love, abundantly declared. But the holy ghost was not ignorant, that there
would be always phrenetike and troublesome men, which hereof would take
occasion rashly to condemn all Churches, wherein all things were not
answereable to the perfection of the primitive Church. Wherefore he would have
the history of Ananias and Sapphira to follow, which teaches us that Satan had
in this holy society his bondmen, whose dissimulation at last burst forth and
appeared. Wherefore nothing is in all points sound and perfect. And they are
not to be regarded which condemn whole congregations, because of a few of
dissembling merchauntes, or voluptuous livers that are found in the same:
considering we read of Judas among the Disciples of Christ, and that he
testifies that as well badde as good be drawn by preaching of the Gospel.
Math. 13.
Before we begin the history, we must mark that as Judas took occasion of
his sin by the goods of the Church: so Ananias stumbling at the same stone,
begun the first disturbance in the Church. The holy ghost thought good to
admonish us by these examples, that the managing of ecclesiastical goods is a
perilous matter* and that they manifestly put their salvation in hazard that
offend therein. Therefore whosoever glory in the name of Christ and his
Gospel, let them diligently take heed to themselves. But if they would weigh
this one thing, they would never like hungrye Cormoraunts, run so greedily
to the administering of them. The history has in it two parts. The first
declares what became of Ananias, and next, what of Sapphira his wife. But for
the better understanding of the first part, we will first consider Ananias
fact, then Peter's judgment touching the same, last of all, the punishment
which God laid upon him.

Ananias deed is told with great simplicity, (...)
least we should think the Apostles leaned any thing to their affections. A
certain man named Ananias with Sapphira his wife, sold a possession, and kept
away part of the price, his wife also being of counsel: and brought a
certain part, and laid it down at the Apostles feet. Here is principally to
be enquired what that fault was which the Lord a little while after, punished
with sodeine death. For after the judgment of the flesh here is no fault
made, but we may think Ananias rather worthy of praise and reward. For to
sell his land, it was no fault, because it was lawful for him so to do, both
by Gods law and man's. And of any craft or collusion used in the bargain and
sale, here is no mention. Neither has the Lord forbidden us, to reserve part
of our own goods for our necessities, because Paul says, they be worse
than Infidels, which look not to their own families. And he teaches us, 1.
Tim. 5.
that we must not so give alms, that our liberality be occasion to others of
ease, 2. Cor. 8.
and to our selves of want and distress. Furthermore, it seems he is very
beneficial to the Church of Christ, that gives but the half, the third, or
fourth part of his goods to the use thereof. Also Christ testifyeth that he
shall be rewarded that gives but a cup of cold water to any of his Disciples
in his name. Therefore we must consider the mind of Ananias, Math. 10.
which we may gather in the other part of the history by the words of
Sapphira, and so we shall see wherein he offended: to say, in hypocrisy and
counterfeyting of faith and love, wherewith he went about to deceive as well God
as the congregation. For the ambicious man saw what praise and glory Ioses
the Leuite had gotten through his liberality. Wherefore, he being desirous
also to be extolled, thought good to do like as he did, yet because he was
covetous, meaning to provide for ne^de that afterward might ensue, he privily
withholdeth a part of the price for his, and his wives necessities, seeking yet
to be accounted in the number of those which had given all they had unto the
Church. Many other things be annexed with this fault, which aggrauate the
heynousnesse thereof. For, to say nothing of the ambicion and covetousness
which tossed the unhappy mind of this hypocrite, as it were, with contrary
waves: it is manifest that he was distrustful, and altogether void of faith,
which is the beginning of all mischief. For he distrusted the promises of
Christ, Math. 28.6.
who says that he will always help his Church, and will abundantly provide
those that be his, of meat, drink, and cloth. Which promises, if he had
believed, he would neither have feared penury following, nor by craft have
made provision for the time to come. To this distrust was joined the great
contempt of God, such as David ascribes to them which in their hearts say
either, Psalm. 14.94
there is no God, or else persuade themselves, he regards not what becomes
of men: and supposed he had only to do with men, which is the property of all
hypocrites. For it is not like that he durst thus have done, if he had believed
that God had been the beholder of our thoughts and deeds. Beside this, he
committed sacrilege in his own goods. For where he would have men believe
that he had given all the money he received for his land, to the Church: he
thereby plainly confessed that it was due to the Church. Wherefore he cannot
avoid the blotte of sacrilege. And where afterward all they which had given
their goods to the relief of the Church, were found of the Church treasury
and money, it was a sacrylegall collusion, whereby he meant to deceive the
Church, in joining himself to them, whom the Church gave living unto. So full
of evil is distrust and unbelief, and such new vices spring thereof
continually. So Ananias is a president of all false Christians, who mean so to
profess Christ, that it shall never be to their loss or hinderance. For when
they see Christ has set up his kingdom in any nation, and doubt of the
continuance thereof, they will consent and agree to the present reformation,
but they will well beware of giving any such counsel, as may be occasion of
any loss to them when the Church fails or decays. They go about to serve
two masters, that is to say, Christ and the world, Math. 6.
which Christ himself says is impossible. Yet such men most commonly have
the greatest praise of wisdom and modesty. But in very deed they be
Ananiases, whose heart is not right with the Lord, although there appear some
benefits of theirs toward the Church. These kind of men bear the swaye now
a days, and would God they alone bare it. For there is almost a greater
number of such, as beside they do no good to the Church, wax rich of the
church goods, and appropriate to them selves the things that other have given,
who follow the example of Judas, John. 12.
which where he himself gave nothing unto Christ, used to imbecill and pilfer
away that that other did give. And not content with this wickedness, betrayed
Christ also, so that by his example, we may learn what to look for of such as
he is.

Peter's judgment touching Ananias fact.
Furthermore, where in these days, such men as these are in all places, and
will be taken commonly for Nurses and refourmers of the Church: they go about
by many reasons to defend themselves, and for the most part, cloak their
covetousness with the tranquillity of the Church, and common weal, the laws
of man, feaultyes, donations, and many such like. But let us hear the
judgment of the holy ghost, pronounced by Peter the Apostle, that thereby it
may appear, what we may judge of them, which in these days be worse than
Ananias. For Peter by releuation of the spirit, perceived this guyle, and how
great praise so ever Ananias thinks to get by his subtlety, yet he could
not beguyle Peter's spirit, so ^rue the saying of Christ is, Math 10.
that nothing is so secret, but it ^hal be disclosed. And the Apostle cloketh
not the fault he espied, but most severely accuses it. By which example we are
taught, that Ministers must not only, openly accuse manifest faults, but also
whatsoever the wicked go secretly about, against the truth, and church of
Christ. For as it is the property of a good Captain, not only to resist the
open attemptes of his enemies, but also to prevent and disclose their
ambusshes, and lyings in wait: so must Ministers of the word, fight with all
encouragement against all the enterprises of the wicked. There is in Peter's
words, a marvelous vehemency, and his saying ryseth (as it were) by certain
steps, to the end Ananias heinous fault might appear the more. First, he
detecteth the root and beginning of all this evil, saying: Ananias, how is
it, that Satan has filled thine heart? By the which words, he declares that
he is destitute of all belief, and a plain reprobate. The godly and elect are
also tempted of Satan, which runs up and down always, seeking whom he may
devour. But for as much as they resist him, being strong in faith, he can not
fill their hearts. The state of the wicked, is of an other sort, who after
they be once fallen from the faith, are wholly possessed of Satan, so that there
is no more place left for the holy ghost in them. We are also admonished, that
all hypocrites, and as many as use dissimulation in religion, are the bondemen
of Satan. For Christ teaches us that he is the father of lying, and by this
argument, proves the Phariseys, John. 8.
to be borne of the Devil. Where unto the example of Judas also may be
referred, into whom it is said that Satan entered, after he had gone about by
his rooted hypocrisy to be guyle Christ, and the Apostles, as his last supper.
John. 13.
Furthermore, Peter shows the effect of Satan, where he says Ananias was
brought to that point, to lie unto the holy ghost, which may be understood,
two manner of ways. For partly he falsely feigned, he was led by the holy
ghost, and partly he went about to beguyle the Church, which he knew hitherto
by many arguments was endued with the holy ghost. Both these meanings argue an
impudent boldness in him, and declare how far men run, if once they
suffer Satan to have power over their minds. Thirdly, drawing nearer to
Ananias fact, he accuses him, for that he had withdrawn a part of the price
of his land. Therefore he accuses him of theft and sacrilege, which (as I
showed a little before) we may commyt in our own goods. And they are all
partakers with Ananias, which couetously convert to their own use, the goods
which they know are due to the poor, or else ryotously waste and consume
them. We offend herein both particulerly and in general. In general, while
many convert the Church goods, as they are called to profane uses, the poor
in the mean season not only pyning away for hunger, but also the Churches
lying desolate for want of faithful and fit teachers. We offend also
privately, when we glory that God has appointed us for stewardes of his
goods, and in the mean while we either make hauock of them, neglecting the
poor, or else hoorde them up at home, so that they neither profit us, nor
others. Yet such men as these, commonly complain of the mulitude of beggars,
as though it were impossible to help them all. But they are reproved of
lying, by their prodigality: which to maintain, they have goods enough, by
the rust of their money, which with insatiable greediness they lay up, and
look upon in their Cofers: and by the abundance of their apparel, which they
rather suffer mothes to eat, than they will give them, or the money they might
make by selling them, unto the poor, and so (as James says) they shall one
day feel their damnation to be increased, by those very things, whereunto
they have been so much given and addicted. But that Ananias should have nothing
to excuse himself by, Peter shows he was forced by no necessity to do so
wickedly, saying: Pertayned not thy land to thy self only? and after it was
sold, was it not in thine own power? Thou might either have sold thy
land, or else have kept all the money thereof to thy self, and no man would
have thought thee ever the less worthy the company of the Christians. Whereby
it may euydently be gathered, that no man was compelled by any law to sell his
goods, but that this was a free and voluntary contrubution, as was declared in
the former Sermon, and yet Peter leaves not here, but shows the heynousnesse
of this offense to be so great, that a Christian man should not once have
thought any such thing, much less have done it. For he says: Why have thou
conceived this thing in thy heart? For Christ requires so great sincerity and
uprightness in those that be his, that he will not only have their manners and
outward conversation pure, but also their minds and cogitations void of all
dissimulation. Last of all, he rehearses the chief of all the matter. Thou
have not lied to men, but unto God. For thou have not to do with men only,
but also with God, which searches the hearts, and the reins, who thou shall
perceive will be a revenger of thy wickedness. Let us mark in these things,
how to take them, which under the pretense of faith and religion, go about to
deceive men. Amongst whom, with Ananias, they be the chief, which haulting
on both sides, so profess Christ's religion, that although the kingdom of
Christ fail, or fall upon the earth, they will provide for themselves well
enough. Next unto these be those, which like unto Judas, rob Christ and his
Church, either by craft or open force, and at length betraye him with a kiss.
Whereunto may be joined Ieroboamyshe princes, which use religion to establishe
their tyranny, while they prescribe such articles of faith, and thrust in such
rytes of religion, as they know are not commanded by Gods word, but depend
upon the mere traditions of men: and seek none other thing, but to keep men
in awe and obedience, over whom they reign, as we read Jeroboam once did, 1.
Reg. 12.13.
the first author of tyranny among the Israelites. And as many as under the
cloak of the gospel, and christian faith, seek to live licentiouslye, are
like unto them, whereof there is in these days a great number. And it is an
easy matter, for all these, either to beguyle men, or else to put them so to
silence, that they shall not bewray out their hypocrisy. But because they lie
not unto men only, but also to God himself, Psalm. 5. Prou. 12. Apoca. 21.
they shall never escape unpunished. For as nothing can be hidden from him: so
uses he most to hate and abhor^e liars, of all others. And Christ testifyeth
that such shall be shut out of his kingdom. For who would think him an
honest man, which would suffer other to be beguyled under the pretense of his
name? Therefore what folly, or madness is it, to imagine God to be such an
one, who is truth it self.

The punishment of Ananias.
But to return to the history: does Ananias fact seem so horrible a thing to
Peter only? Nay, it is more horrible in Gods judgment, as the success
thereof declares. For as soon as he heard these words, he ended his life by
sudden death, casting all them into a great fear, by his miserable end, who
heard of the same: whereof we will speak hereafter, when we shall entreat of
the like destruction of Sapphira his wife. First, we have here to consider the
efficacy of Gods word, which God will have performed, though it be uttered
but by man. For the strength thereof depends not on man's authority, but
stands of, and by it self. This is to be understood as well of the
promises, as threats which are contained in the scripture. For whatsoever the
preachers promise the faithful servant of God, they shall be as well
fulfilled, as if God from heaven would thunder them out. And whatsoever they
threaten unto the wicked, and profane contempners of God, they shall
undoubtedly fall upon them. The word of Christ witnesses the same, which
says, Math. 16. John. 20.
that whatsoever his ministers bind or loose on earth, shall be bound, or
loosed in heaven. And let no man here object unto me, that God always uses
not so present an execution of his judgments, as we here see. For although the
wicked take occasion hereby to mock, and make light all manner of threats: Yet
shall they buy this carelessness full dear, when they shall here the voice of
Christ their judge, whom they shall not be able to abide. Let us rather
acknowledge the long suffering of God, which therefore sometimes differreth his
punishment, to give us a time to repent in. And sometimes again shows some
examples of his judgment, to declare the truth and authority of his word.

Furthermore, it is to be considered, how Peter slays Ananias by the word
and pronouncing of Gods judgment, whereunto that is not unlike that Paul did,
when he struck Elymas the Sorcerer blind, as we shall see in the.xiij.
Chapter. These things might seem to have been vns^emely for such as had the
Ministry of life and salvation committed unto them. But the Apostles deserve
no manner of reprehension, to whom amongst other gifts of the holy ghost,
Paul teaches the efficacy of powers was given, that is an effectual power
of perfourming the thing that they spoke. 1. Cor. 12.
Here also is the right and authority of the sword proved, which the
Magistrate has to punish malefactors by. For if Peter and Paul may be
excused for that they used the gift given them of God against Ananias and
Elymas the Sorcerer: with what reason shall we accuse the Magistrate, who
likewise has the authority of the sword committed him of God? Romans 13.
And me thinks there needs no long disputation, against them, which in
matters of religion will have the authority of the sword altogyther to cease.
For though we grant them, that no man ought violently to be compelled to the
faith, for that it is the gift of God, yet is it the Magistrates duty, by the
sword to keep under both blasphemers, deceyuers, and false teachers, least
for lack of punishment, they do, and speak agayns^ the glory of God, and
public tranquillity. See the ^aw. Leuit. 24. Deuteronomy. 13. Neither seems Peter
in this present place, nor Paul afterward, to have sought any other thing,
than the defense of religion. In primis let us bear in mind the chief point
of this history, and being frayde with the horrible example of Ananias, let us
fly dissimulation, let us worship God in spirit and truth, and cleave to
Jesus Christ, with minds burning in godly faith: to whom be praise, honor,
power and glory for ever. Amen.

The.xxxiij. Homely.
AND it came to pass, that as it were about the space of three hours after,
his wife came in, ignorant of that which was done. And Peter said unto her.
Tell me. Sold ye not the land for so much? And she said yea, for so much.
Then Peter said unto her. Why have ye agreed together to tempt the spirit of
the Lord? Behold the feet of them which have buried thy husband, are at the
door, and shall carry thee out. Then fell she down streyte way at his feet,
and yielded up the ghost. And the young men came in, and found her dead, and
carried her out, and buried her by her husband.
Because our Savior Jesus Christ was not ignorant, that there would be
always false brethren and hypocrites in the Church, which would be authors of
great offenses: he would therefore in the beginning and springth of the Church,
have some terrible example showed against them, whereby we might learn what
such as they be, should look for and trust to. We have seen the first part
hereof in Ananias, in whom the conditions of hypocrytes are trimly expressed.
These men are destitute of true faith, which thing is the fountain and
beginning of all evil. For hereof it comes to pass, that they wickedly
mock and despise as well God, as his Church. Hereunto may we add incurable
obstinacy, the accomplishment of all vice, whereby it comes to pass, that a
man may easilier convert open sinners, than such as have once purposed in their
mind, to deceive the congregation by hypocrisy and dissimulation. These
things shall appear the more plainly, if we consider the other part of this
story, which contains as dolorous and lamentable an end of Sapphira, which
within three hours after, not knowing of her husbands death, came in unto
Peter, and the faithful which were with him, as Luke reports. For commonly
it so comes to pass, that we know those things last, which it behooued us
first to know, because men use rather in our absence to disclose our
faults, than to reprove us to our face. Then also the affection of love so
works in the godly, that they vnwyllingly bring tidings of any thing, which
may give occasion of grief to their neighbors. Which seems me to be the
cause that Sapphira as yet, knew not of the death of her husband. But to the
end we may receive the more utility by consideration of this history: first
of all we will speak of the question wherewith Peter begins with her, and
then of the over bold confidence of Sapphira, and last of all, of the
punishment, wherewith God was revenged on her.

Peter's demand was neither light nor superfluous. For thereby Sapphiras
impiety did appear the playner, Peter reprooueth Sapphiras naughtiness.
which otherwise might either have seemed ignorant of her husbands craft, or
else to have been induced by his authority so to have dissembled. Therefore
Peter requires of her a reason, of this their doing, saying: Tell me, sold
you the land for so much? Furthermore, where the success of the matter
declares, that Peter did nothing of private affection, but by the instinct of
the holy ghost, it behooves us here to mark the order that God uses in
punishing the wicked. The incurable naughtiness of Sapphira, could not be
hidden from him, neither could any man have let him, to have punished the
same by and by. But he would have a time of repentance granted her, and her
mind to be tried, and stirred up by a strange demand, least he might seem
over hasty to any man by his severity. Such examples of Gods long
sufferaunce, are euerywhere extant. For he is well ware of using any cruelty
against the guilty, as Tyrannes do, but will have them understand by what
offenses they have provoked his wrath and punishment against themselves. Thus
we read he did with our first parents, Gene. 3.
and he gave them that lived in the beginning of the world, an hundred and
twenty years space, wherein to repent them, and did also vouchsafe to send
them Noah, Gene. 6. 2. Peter. 2. Gene. 15.
the preacher of righteousness. Likewise he would not destroy the Chanaanites
and Amorrhites, until he saw they filled the measure of iniquity, and were
become alltogither incurable. But what need examples, seeing we have plenty
both in the holy and profane hystories, to let pass those things whereof we
see experience daily, both in others, and in our selves? Let us rather apply
these matters to our instruction, and first of all, let us not abuse the long
suffering of God. For he provoke us to repentance. Let us not therefore like
reprobates, procure unto us the wrath of God, Roma. 2*
by contynuing in sin without repentance, and wax every day worse and
worse. For God is slack in punishing, but this slacknesse, (as the heathen
have used to say) he recompenceth with weight and heaviness of punishment.
Also let us follow the goodness of God, Valerius Maximus 1. book. 2. chap.
and not be to hasty in our judgment, although it appear some have deserved
punishment. For where God every where desires the salvation, rather than
destruction of men, what boldness is it I pray you, to s^ryue to overcome Gods
justice by our rigor and severity? which thing they have chiefly to
consider, which have received power and authority from God to punish other,
least through their severity and hastiness of judgment, they bring the
bodies and souls of them in ieopardie, whose salvation they should
principallye seek.

But let us harcken to Sapphira, who boldly lies without all shame and fear
of God. And she does not simply affirm the thing, but using a sign of
contestation, confirms as it were by an o^h, that which she knew to be false.
For where every man had liberty to give what seemed him good, it was like
hitherto that no man was required to give account before the congregation what
he received and laid forth. Therefore Sapphira should have thought that it was
not without some mystery, that such a question was now moved, especially
knowing in her self that she was guilty. But where without all care, and
boldly she dares to lie, she proves by a strong argument, that she is
altogether incurable* For what goodness may a man there hope for, where shame
is banished, wherewith honest natures (as it were with a bridle) are kept in
doing their duty? In the mean season, Sapphira expresses a confident
audacitie, which is the peculiar property of hypocrites. For whom fear they,
that have minded to beguyle God, and are not afraid of his sight* Wherefore
the Scripture by many examples proves that that there is nothing more bold
and confident than hypocrisy. And where open sinners for the most part fall
down at the first word that God speaks, and are afraid to come in his
sight: Hypocrites dare even then vaunte of their integrity and perfection,
when they feel their consciences wounded and laid open before the judgment of
God. Caine shows us an example of this thing, who being asked for Abel his
brother, durst malapertly answer God and say: who has made me my brothers
keeper? Gene. 4.
And in the Prophet, the Hypocrytes expostulate with God, as being to wayward,
where they say: wherefore fast we, and ^hou see us not? we put our lives to
straightness, Esaias. 58.
and thou regardest us not? Again: It is but lost labor to serve God: what
profit have we for keeping his commandments, and for walking humbly before
the Lord of hosts? Malach 3.
What shall we say of Judas the Traitor, who when he knew Christ was not
ignorant of his wickedness, and perceived he was grievously rebuked and
reprehended, yet with the other Apostles he dare to ask Christ, whether he
suspect him of so great an offense? Math. 26.
And Sapphiras confidence is as great, considering there were so many examples
that declared the Apostles were inspired with the holy ghost. It is very
profitable to mark well these things, that through their boldness and
temeritie hypocrites beguile us not, or by their wicked sayings put us of.

Ananias and Sapphira, tempted the spirit of the Lord.
But let us return unto Peter, who by inspiration of the holy spirit
understands this fraud and guyle, and suffers himself not to be moved
with this womanish and hypocritical boldness, but pronounces the sentence
of God which the same spirit put in his mind, against her, which consists
of two parts. The first accuses and reprooueth her sin. For God punishes
no person, but first convict of his sin, that he may understand wherefore he
is punished. How comes it to pass that you have agreed together to tempt
the spirit of the Lord? He amplifyeth the boldness and heynousnesse of the
fact, by admiration and interrogation: and he says they have conspired
together to tempt the spirit of the Lord. But if a man would have asked
Ananias or Sapphira of this their doing: I believe they would have earnestly
denied they had had any such meaning. But it makes no matter what judgment we
have of our sins, for they are examined after the rule of Gods law. And
because these two married folk went about to beguyle the congregation, in whom
the spirit of God is resident and reigns: it cannot be denied, but through
wicked temeritie they tempted the spirit of God. Therefore, by their
hypocritical wiliness, they sinned against the law, Deuter. 6.
which forbids to tempt God. And they are lymed with the same fault which go
about in these days to beguyle the Church of Christ with counterfayting of
faith and holiness, who also shall well find that God will not let them go
unpunished for their tempting of him.

And least Sapphira might be excused by the authority and commandment of her
husband, Consent in sin deseru^th punishment.
Peter first accuses the consent that was between them, and by that argument
takes from her all excuse. Where we learn that no man must consent to evil
men, if he will escape the judgment of God, no not to those which have
authority over us given them of God. For the man had power given him over his
wife, when it was said to Eve: Thy lust shall pertay^e to thy husband, Gene.
3. Ephe^^. 5. Colod. 3.
and he shall have the rule over thee. And the Apostles command wives to be
obedient unto their husbands. But Sapphira is blamed for this only, that she
consented to her husband, who craftily withhelde a part of the money which he
would seem to have given to the church. Therefore the sin that is committed
against the laws of God, can be excused by no authority or commandment of
man: because we must obey God rather than man, as Peter before had said, and
shall be repeated again in this Chapter. Now, if it be not lawful to consent
to their sin^es which have power over us, by the ordinance of God: what s^all
become of those, which allow and defend not only with consent of mind, but
by unlawful company and public praise, the wickedness of them, whose
company they may altogether forbear, yea, which by the laws of God they
ought to forbear? To say nothing of them which are companions with them in
their traueyle and dangers, and help them forward in their mischieuousnesse.

The other part of Gods sentence pronounced by Peter, The punishment of
Sapphira, was the same, that Ananias had.
conteyneth the punishment which Sapphira had with her husband. Behold
(says he) the feet of them which buried thy husband, be ready at the
door, to carye thee out. And by and by, she fell down dead at Peter's feet,
and was carried forth, and buried by her husband. This is the tenor of Gods
justice, that they which commit like fault, are punished with like punishment,
as he testifies in the Prophet, saying: Should I not punish these things,
and should I not be avenged of all such people as these be? Ierem. 5.
Hereof ought a general rule to be taken, which must extend to all sins and
wickedness. For he that in times past revenged most severely the oppression of
the poor, unjust violence, tyranny, usury, slaughter, adultery, whoredom,
and such like: he will punish the same in us at this day, except we repent as
be comes Christians. Yet the chief end and meaning of this place is, that
we should learn what remains for them, which under the pretense of Christ,
seek their own lucre, and dare deceive the Church. It seems sometimes that
the world laugheth upon them, but their felicity is not stable, and they long
enjoy not their goods wrongfully gotten. For, Job. 20.
the gladness of the ungodly is quickly ended, and the joy of hypocrites
continues but the twinkling of an eye. We have also an example hereof in Judas
the Traitor, who when he thought he had best provided for his own behoof, and
seemed to have been in high favor with the Bishops, feels in himself such
severity of Gods justice, that it drives him to the halter, so that he could
long enjoy neither his life, nor his money, which was dearer to him than his
life. And God grant that a number in these days, taste not of the like
punishment, which under color of the Gospel have sought nothing else but the
spoil and possession of the Church goods. We have seen these men turned out
again by Monks and Bishops, and that they have found no help or succor in
those goods, which they had laid up for that use to defend the Church, by
force against the open enemies of religion. And better success let them not
look for, which commit like offense. For if Ananias and Sapphira deserved
sodeyne death, who as Luke writes, took nothing from the Church, but
deceytfully put aside and withhelde part of their own goods: what deaths and
mischiefs do not they deserve* which dare ryfle Churches by open force, and
public authority? Let us in these things acknowledge the power of Jesus
Christ, who, as he always does vouchsafe to be merciful to his Church, so
will he not suffer her to be beguiled, but will worthily punish both her
professed enemies and persecutors, and also all hypocrites and deceyuers, that
the synceritie of true religion may be preserved: to him be praise, honor,
power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.xxxiiij. Homely.
AND great fear came on all the congregation, and as many as heard it. By the
hands of the Apostles were many signs and wonders showed among the people.
And they were all together with one accord in Salomons porch. An^ of other
durst no man join himself to them. Nevertheless, the people magnified them.
The number of them that believed in the Lord, both of men and women grew more
and more: in so much that they brought the sick into the streets, and laid
them on the beds and couches, that at the least way the shadow of Peter,
when he came by, might shadow some of them. There came also a multitude out of
the Cities round about, unto Jerusalem, bringing sick folks, and them which
were vexed with unclean spirits. And they were healed every one.
We have heard the horrible example of Gods judgment, whereby Ananias and
his wife Sapphira were punished with sodeyne death, both for that they falsely
counterfeyted a faith in Christ, and al so went about to beguyle the Church,
in the goods that were given for the relief of the poor. This example
teaches us how great the severity of God is, in punishing of hypocrytes, who
as he cannot be deceived, so can he not but be grieuouslye offended with them
that go about to beguyle him. We have seen also what a fervent desire was in
the primitive Church, to conserve and mainteyne discipline, least either
dissemblers or open malefactors should creep in, and cause the faith of
Christ either to be defamed or suspected. And to the intent all posterity might
be enflamed to follow the same, this present place follows, which rehearses
many and singular fruits of this example, whereto are adjoined the traueyles
and exercises of the primitive Church, to the intent we may learn by them, what
we have in these days to do, if we desire to have the kingdom of God
enlarged, or Christ to be favorable unto us.

First, Luke says: And great fear came on all the congregation, and on as
many as heard these things. Discipline keeps both good and bad in their
duty.
Then the Christians feared as well as strangers, to whom the report of this
thing came. And this was no unprofitable fear, for by it, the godly were the
more aware, and traueyled the more earnestly in Gods affairs* and the enemies
durst do the less against the Church, which they saw had the spirit of God
so manifestlye with them. This is the chief fruit of ecclesiastical
discipline, that it keeps the godly in doing their duty, and fears the
ungodly. Now a days because all men may do what they will, the Churches being
disordered by licentiousness of life, The use of the judgments of God.
become a pray to the enemies. Here must we also learn the use of Gods
judgments, which consists in this, that by them we learn Gods justice, and
being afraid, amend our lives by the godly consideration thereof. God taught
us this use* when he showed Abraham the horrible destruction of Sodom, saying:
I know that he will command his household, and his children after him, that
they keep the way of the Lord, and do after right and conscience. Gene. 18.
And for this cause would ^e, that the presidentes of his judgments, should
be recorded in writing, and be read in the Church both privately and apertly,
as Asaph testifies: where he thus writes: He made a covenant with Jacob, and
gave Israel a law: which he commanded our forefathers to teach their
children. Psalm. 78.
That their posterity might know it, and the children which were yet unborn.
To the intent that when they grew up, they might show their children the same.
That they might put their trust in God, and not to forget the works of God,
but to keep his commandments. And not to be as their forefathers. etc.
Therefore this use of Gods judgment whereby Ananias and Sapphiras
dissimulation is punished, must also be now a days retained, that we may
conceive a true fear of God, and take heed of hypocrisy, and worship God in
spirit and truth, as Christ has commanded us, yea, let all men be excited
with this example, and apply unto themselves whatsoever any where in hystories
is written of this kind, that by other men's examples they may learn what
they have to do, if they mean to avoid the wrath of God.

Secondlye, it is said of the Apostles, The m^racles of the Apostles.
that by their ministry many signs and woonders were showed among the
people. Whereby it appears the prayers of the faithful were heard also in
this behalf, which besought God that the Apostles might be endued with
miracles, through the authority whereof they might be helped in setting forth
the kingdom of Christ. And they work not only common miracles, but their
power is extended so far, that the diseased laid in the street desire but
the shadow of Peter pa^sing by, and think that it will help them. Now
begins that saying of Christ to be fulfilled: He that believes in me, the
works that I do, he shall do the same, and greater than these shall he do.
This is the second fruit of ecclesiastical discipline, that God hears the
prayers of the Church, Prouer. 28.
and increases the gifts of his spirit, where contrarily, he abhors their
prayers, which stop their ears at his law. This appears by histories, which
evidently declare, that the rarer gifts of the holy ghost, and working of
miracles, began then to cease, when discipline began to wax dissolute, and
corruption of manners increased. Yet let no man think that superstition is here
defended, by that is written of Peter's shadow, no more than by that we shall
afterward hear of Paul's handkerchefe* Some use thus to reason of this place.
If Peter's shadow helped many, how much more shall his raiment and bones? And
hereof springs all that confused Chaos of superstition, which we see is in
pilgrimages, and about Saints relics, whereof the most part be counterfeyted.
But we say that these miracles were not wrought to testify either of Peter or
Paul's power, but to confirm the preaching of the Gospel, whereof they were
ministers. Therefore they serve to commend and set forth the Gospel, and
send men unto Christ, whom vain superstition has hitherto entangled in
trifles of no profit. Furthermore, we may more firmly reason of Peter's words
which we heard in the third chapter. There is more regard with God of virtue
and godliness, than is of garments, or of all man's body: yea, the virtue
and godliness of the Saints auayled nothing to the working of miracles.
Therefore much less ought they to be ascribed to their garments, or to their
bones. We will add to this argument, how in an other place it is said, Luke.
6.8.
that power went from Christ himself, not from his cote. But superstition will
quickly fall, if we consider the end and mark whereto all miracles are to be
referred, and directed, which is of two sorts. First, Math. 10. Mark. 16.
it behooued that by them the doctrine of the Apostles should be confirmed, as
Christ himself teaches. Whereupon we gather that he is to be believed, and
that now a days we need no new miracles. For if the Ministers preach the
doctrine of the Apostles, that doctrine has long sithence been proved and
confirmed by miracles. And if they teach a doctrine not agreeable with that,
they ought not to be received, though they work never so many miracles:
forasmuch as miracles are permitted to false and Antichristian teachers, to
the end the faith of the elect may appear the more manifest and evident. See
Deuter. 13. Math. 24.2. These. 2. The other end and use of miracles is, to
teach the knowledge of Jesus Christ, in whose name they were wrought by the
Apostles, and Apostolic men. Diverse diseased with sicknesses and infirmities,
are in Christ's name healed, and with them some Demoniackes, whom the naughty
spirit of Satan did haunt. Therefore let us acknowledge Jesus Christ to be
he, which as says the Prophet, has borne our diseases and infirmities, and
he that heals not only our bodies, but also our souls. For we being borne
again of his spirit and word, Phil. 4.
receive fresh strength, so that we are able to do all things through his
comfort. He only delivers us from the tyranny of Satan. For he therefore came
into the world as John says, 1. John. 3.
to destroy the works of the Devil. And the first promise of salvation
teaches us, Gene. 3.
that through his power and merit, the serpents head must be trodden down.
Which to be done already, himself partly teaches in the gospel, and partly
the miracles wrought in his name, abundantly testify. And Luke says they were
all healed in the name of Christ that were brought unto the Apostles to be
healed. Whereupon we gather, that he is an universal Savior, who as he
calls all men unto him that labor and are laden: Math. 11. John. 6.
even so he excludes none that come unto him.

He adioyneth to the Apostles miracles, the public exercise of the whole
Church, The exercises of the primitive Church.
where he says: they all continued with one accord in Salomons porch. Which
is to be understood of their holy assemblies, as appears by the end of the
second Chapter, where there is mention made of houses, in which they brake
bread. The Evangelist by this place means none other thing, but that the
faithful had a special care to come unto the Church, and there to be united
together, not so much in bodies as in minds, by faith and charity. Wherein
they show us an example of christian stoutnesse and constancy, who being not
ignorant of the threats and decrees of the Counsel, would not yet for all
that, refrain from coming among the congregation. Howbeit, it would have
sufficed man's wisdom to have kept their faith in their minds, and to have
commoned of Christ with their faithful brethren, within their private houses.
And now a days many excuse their dastardlynesse by these reasons, whereby they
account the confession of Christ amongst indifferent things, and suffer
Princes by their decrees and laws to wring and wrest it from them, yea, it is
thought a point of prudencie in time of danger to dissemble our faith, to
intermit coming to the Church, and all Sacraments, either utterly not to
meddle with articles in controversy, or else to make a shypmans hose of them,
or else wholye to deny the faith. But what ill end the successes of this
wisdom has, the Church finds not without great grief, and the destruction
of many. They do much better which have learned of Christ's words, that
confession can not be separated from faith. For with the heart we believe unto
righteousness, but with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. Romans 10.
And it is Christ's saying: Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and my words in
this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the son of man be
ashamed, Marc. 8.
when he comes in the glory of his father, with the holy Angels. Let us
consider that it is not without a cause that mention is so often made of
coming to the Church. For, hereof we gather, that the Church can by no means
stand without these assemblies, both because of public prayers, which Christ
has commended to us, not without a peculiar promise, and also to prevent false
teachers, whose property Paul writes, is to go into houses, and to bring
into bondage women laden with sin, and all such as lie open to their
craftynesse. 2. Tim. 3.
And that no man should take occasion to trouble or break so necessary an
order, Christ himself never shunned coming to the Church, but taught therein
openly, and by that argument proves, Job. 18.
that he ought to be taken neither for schismatike, nor false teacher. And for
this cause it seems that the first believers abhorred not the Jews temple,
because they had no more commodious place in all the City. The Anabaptists
are confuted by this example, a fanaticall brood and kind of seditious
people, which think it unlawful to come within our Churches, and in our
congregation, and have a great warynesse that they be not polluted with them,
where notwithstanding it seems to them but a trifle, to make a schism in the
Church of Christ, which is the most horrible and detestable crime that is.

But let us return to the discipline, The majesty of those that be unfeigned
Christians.
and exercises of the primitive Church, amongst which in the third place is
contained a certain majesty, that made the enemies afraid of them, and all
the people to reverence them. For Luke says: Of other durst no man join
himself unto them. But the people magnified them. Which is to be understood
of those which were not vtter^y godless, and void of all religion, and yet
were led with the carke and cares of the world, and the flesh. For when
they had seen the horrible and unhappy end of Ananias and Sapphira, they
were afraid to join themselves to the company of those that punished
hypocrisy so severely, their consciences well knowing their own imperfection.
Therefore the society and company of the Church, was from thence forth the
purer, into the which perhaps at the first, many such as Ananias was, had
craftily crept in, yet these men in the mean season, had a good opinion of
them, and published their praises abroad, because they saw a certain kind of
heavenly and Aungelike life shine in them. Diverse like examples of them may we
read in hystories. And under Traian the Emperor, Plinius the yong^r in his
epystles, Tertullian in his Apology for ye Christians, whom Eusebius cyteth
in the.iii. book of his history cha. 32. and. 33.
the Christians life was so unblameable, that where he intended to persecute
them, at the entreaty of Plinius Secundus, who was one of the judges, they
were let alone and not meddled with. This place teaches us two things, most
worthy to be observed. First that the Church consists only of faithful
persons, and such as are true christians, and that lying hypocrites can have no
place therein. For where Christ is the king of truth (as he testified before
Pylate) he can not abide nor suffer liars and hypocrites. And in the Gospel he
says, they shall be put out from the marriage, which come in without the
wedding garment. In an other place, Math. 22.
he adiudgeth them to eternal damnation, with the fearful and unbelieving,
and the abominable, Adoc. 21.
and murderers, and whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolators. Secondly, we
learn what gets christians authority and favor with men, verilye when
they answer to their vocation, Math. 5.
and live a life aunswerable to the name of Christ, whereby God our heavenly
father may be glorified. For that that God said unto Heli the priest, by his
Prophet, shall always stand firm and ratified. 1. Sam. 2.
Them that worship me, will I worship, and they that despise me shall come to
shame. Which things if we would diligently consider, it should easily appear,
how it comes to pass, that the name of the Gospel in these days is
euerywhere enuyed, and the professors thereof for the most part are hated and
slaundered. Our unbridled and dissolute life deserves it, whereby under a
pretense of the gospel, we burst into all ungodliness, and we which would
seem holyer than all others, do pass all other almost in lycentious living.
Let us amend these things, and we shall quickly prove the Church shall be
reverenced again, as she was wont. The Church is increased by persecutions.
Fourthly he says, that there was daily added to the Church new christians,
as well men as women, which were endued with true faith, and were moved
thereunto by the holy ghost. This teaches us how vain the attemptes of
Christ's enimyes are, seeing they that had the supremacy in the City of
Jerusalem, were not able to hinder the growth of the Church now springing. For
as Christ says: The wind blows where it will, John. 3.
and is subject to no man's pleasure or appointment. And diverse examples teach
us, that the Church in time of persecutions always increased, rather than
diminished. For this is the property of Christ, to bear rule in the midst
of his enemies. Psalm. 110.
Let no man therefore be feared, with the manaces of wicked enemies, as though
it were in their power to overthrow the Church. For it is buylt upon Christ,
against whom the gates of Hell cannot prevail. Math. 16.


The kingdom of Christ spreads to them near unto Jerusalem.
Besides this, the kingdom of Christ begins to be spread abroad in the
Cities nigh adjoining. For the fame of these miracles being carried to and fro,
caused a great many to bring their sick and demoniake people to Jerusalem,
and by that occasion, they came to the knowledge of Christ. The chief use of
this place is to make us in these days understand, by what means Christ's
kingdom may be enlarged. Wherein they which under the cloak of the Gospel,
follow carnal wisdom, and have not yet subdued the same, to the obedyence of
faith, take diverse consultations. For there be some, that think it best for
the faithful to serve the time, to grant many things, and to wink at other,
until the world may look with an other countenance, and their minds wax
calmer, which now hate the truth. Other again, turning to carnal defenses,
think good by confederacy and fight, to bring the matter to pass. But the
success of things proves both these sorts to be far wide and deceived.
For this is Gods business, and can be brought to pass with none other power
and strength than his: zach. 4.
Neither through an host of men, neither through strength, but through my
spirit, as the Lord says by his Prophet. And again: I will save them in the
Lord their God, and I will not save them by bow, nor sword, nor by battle,
nor by horse, nor by horsemen. etc. We know in deed sometime that he uses the
ministry of Princes and men, and war, as the examples of the Machabees, of
Constantine, and Theodosius do testify, but even then he so moderateth the
matter, that the power of his spirit, shows it self in the middle of these
things, and has only the preheminencie. Therefore let as many as consult how
to have the Church mainteyned and the kingdom of Christ advanced, regard him
only. For when they go about to bring the matter to pass by man's counsel and
defense, there will not God work any longer. Therefore let us continue in the
exercises of the primitive Church, such as Luke hitherto has rehearsed. Let
the teachers constantly preach the doctrine of truth, and not suffer themselves
to be plucked from the same, considering it has been confirmed by so many
miracles, let them that will be taken for christians, earnestly harken to the
same, and let them join contynuall prayers to the study of the word, for as
much as without Gods secret working, nothing can be brought to pass. Let the
authority of Ecclesiastical discipline be in force, that neither hypocrites,
nor open naughty packes, may have any place in the Church. Let the study of
love, and liberality toward the poor, reign amongst us, that the household
of faith through our covetousness, be not gased on, like public stages of
beggerie. Because these things now a days, are not only neglected, but also
perverted, it is no marueyle, that we see so little fruit of the doctrine of
the gospel. Let us therefore settle our selves hereunto, with all our hearts,
and our Lord, and savior Jesus Christ will help our studies and endeuoures:
to whom be praise, honor, glory and power for ever. Amen.

The.xxxv. Homely.
THEN the chief priest rose up, and all they that were with him (which is the
sect of the Sadduceyes, and were full of indignation, and laid hands on the
Apostles, and put them in the common prison. But the Angel of the Lord by
night opened the prison doors and brought them forth, and said: Go and
stand, and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life.
When they heard that, they entered into the Temple early in the morning, and
taught.
THat Oracle of David the King and Prophet, Psalm. 110.
saying that Christ should reign in the midst of his enemies, is very
wonderful. Hereof we gather that Christ shall rule in this world, yet so, as
he shall never want those, that shall go about to subvert and overthrow his
kingdom. Examples hereof we may every where see in the Scriptures, and
Ecclesiastical Hystoryes. But most manifestlye of all others, is it seen in
this present Book, where, in the report of the Apostles acts and description
of the primitive Church, Luke always joins these two things together (that
is to say) the success of Christ's kingdom, and the furious rage of the
ungodly against the same. These things serve to the end that we should
neither be offended at the Cross and adversity, whereof Christ so often times
has given us warning, neither hope for any contynuall peace and tranquillity
of the Church in this world, but that we should even then prepare our selves
to the cross, when the Church seems to be most in safety. Whereunto this
present history is chiefly to be referred. For Luke a little before, sets
forth unto us a flowrishing state of the Church, showing us what a^thoritie it
grew in, and how it increased day by day, in so much that the City of
Jerusalem was now to little to conteyne the kingdom of Christ, because it
began to be carried abroad among strange Nations. But among these so many and
prosperous proceedings, there follows a grievous persecution and great
danger, because Christ gave his enemies such power that they laid hands on
the Apostles and put them in prison, thinking also to put them unto death. Yet
these things serve more to comfort us, than to fear us, because the Lord so
presently helped the Apostles, being in danger, for the glory of his name.
But that we may receive the more utility and profit hereby, first we must
consider the enemies of Christ and the Apostles. Then how the Lord did elude
and frustrate their enterprise. And last of all, we will declare what the
Apostles did, after they were delivered from the peril they were in.

The enymies and persecutours of the Church.
Luke writes diligently of the enemies and persecutours of the church, and of
their enterprises. For he says, the high priest rose up against the Apostles,
and not he alone, but all his complyces and fellows, and they that were his
nearest friends and familiars, and these (says he) were of the Sadduceyes
sect, that we may perceive what corruption reigned now among the Jews, when
they were supreme heads of the Church, to whom the resurrection of the dead
(which is the chief article of our faith and religion) seemed but a game and
pastime, 1. Cor. 15.
as we have often times declared. And surely, if they had not been utterly
void of all religion, either the sincerity of the Apostles doctrine, or the
reuerente majesty of the congregation, or the wonderful worthynesse of
miracles, and so great concursse of all sorts of people to the kingdom of
Christ, might have moved them less to have raged. But Luke declares also
what incensed them. For he says they were full of zeal, that is, envy and
indignation. For they could not abide them to be had in prise and estimation,
by whose doctrine their honor and advantage was defaced. Yet is it no doubt,
but they made the zeal of God, and the public commodity of all the people,
to be the pretense of their private affections, as we read Caiaphas and his
complyces did before. Whereunto came this zeal? so far that they laid hands
on the Apostles, and commanded them to the common gayle, as breakers of
public peace, and open malefactors. These things must be applied to our times
also, because it is manifest al things are written for our sakes, that we may
have enstruction, Romans 15.
and comfort thereby.

First this example teaches us, who are always like to be the greatest
persecutors of Christ's truth. From the company of the Priests, come the
greatest enemies of the truth.
Truly, they which glory in the title of Priesthood, and will be taken for
the chief heads of the Church, and ought chiefly to maintain, and preach
the truth. But as soon as under pretense of Religion, they begin to seek
their own gain and lucre, then can they neither believe themselves, nor yet
suffer the light of the truth whose brightness discloseth their naughtiness,
and deceit. And such for the most part are these Sadduceis, yea the Hogs of
Epicures heard. For unless they thought the things written in Scripture
touching Heaven and Hell, the immortality of the souls, and the resurrection
of the dead, more vain than fables: they would never neither so wickedly
corrupt the scriptures, with their traditions, nor yet so impudently turn
relygion into private lucre and advantage. 1. These. 2.
Therefore Christ and the Apostles, show us how Antichrists place and Sea, 1.
John. 1.
should be even in the very church that we might perceive from whence most
danger were to be looked for and feared. And if we well mark these times, it
shall appear they only have been the enemies of the doctrine of the Gospel,
and kingdom of Christ, which heretofore have been thought to be the chief
heads of the Church. For it is evident that the matters attempted by Princes
and Kings, were done for their sakes, and by their procurement and instigation.
This thing offends many in these days, and make them think that the
doctrine in our Churches is not the truth, because the Popes and Bishops are
enemies thereto. But great folly it is to be offended with that which has been
the most usual and common thing, since the world began, as other whers has
been declared.

But we must as diligently consider with what craft, The crafts of the enemies
of truth.
and weapons these men fight. Where first is to be noted how egregiouslye they
can counterfaite the zeal of God, whose glory they lament to be trodden under
foot, and his Church to be so daungerously divided. But this is but a corrupt
zeal, as we see in Caiaphas, to whom the confession of truth which Christ
uttered, seemed blasphemous and intolerable. So, nothing seems so impious
and intolerable to these our heads, as that that tastes of the truth of the
Gospel, and is repugnant to their proud tyranny and advantage. And it
appears even by this place, that we ought to have no better judgment of the
zeal of our enemies, because that as the Bishops of the Jews, could bear
with the mad errors of the Saduceyes, so they would help to bring down
Christ: so these men can bear with the wicked sale and mart of holy things,
condemned by the Popes own Canons, with the scorcing of Gods doctrine, with
horrible periurye, whoredom, and all kind of unbridled living, so that those
things that pertain to their vaineglory, and advantage, might be left alone
and untouched. But to grant them, that in deed, they have a zeal to the
glory of God, yet can they not be excused, but are like unto the Jews, Romans 10.
which as Paul says, had a zeal of God, but yet were void of all knowledge
and truth. For GOD will not have us follow our own zeal, but his word,
which for this cause he has witsafed to reveal to all ages, to the intent no
man should follow the suggestions of the flesh, and wisdom of man. But what
manner of zeal these men had, may be judged by the success of the thing. For
they that were Stewardes of the word of God, and ought with arguments of
Scripture, to have brought them that erred into the way, and to have convinced
the gaynesayers, as men having forgotten their duty, turn unto force, and
shut them in the common prison, which as yet were convicted of no fault or
crime. And this is it that Christ laid to their charge, when they came out
armed with swords and Clubbes, Luke. 22.
to take him whom they daily heard teaching in the Temple, where he ought to
have been convinced, John. 18.
if he had taught any thing repugnaunt to Gods truth. Nay, they used open
force, even in their Counsel, in that they suffer the high Priests servant
to strike Christ on the cheek without check. Histories declare how they have
fought these many years with the same weapons, against the doctrine of truth.
Neither need we to heap many examples together, because that one fact of the
Counsel at Constance is sufficient, which the heads of the Roman Church
committed against that holy martyr of Christ John Husse, whom neither his safe
conduyct, neither the Emperors majesty, neither law of arms, neither
entreaty of the godly, nor threats of the Bohemians, could deliver out of
their bloody hands. And our masters and Bishops in these days, use no
arguments more often against the Teachers of the truth, than to arm Princes
against the same, and those that teach it, and then think they are notable
defenders of the Church, when they persecute the true Church of Christ with
fire and sword. To speak nothing in the mean season of such as say the
examination and hearing of these matters, appertain nothing to Princes, and so
hale they the martyrs of Christ to their execution, without hearing their
cause, first cutting out their tongues, because they shall not declare their
faith and cause of their death, to the people looking on. But how far these
men pass the tyranny of the Iewishe Bishops: so much more grievous shall that
punishment be that Christ has ordained for them, whose kingdom can be
oppressed by no force of man.

God disappoynteth his enemies purpose, and delyuereth his.
This does the other part of the story declare, wherein is showed what the Lord
did in the mean while, who might seem to have cast of all care of his Church,
and suffered his enemies to long. But he neither sleeps nor forsakes those
that be in danger, for his sake. For the Angel of the Lord came, who
neither feared the authority of the Priests, nor yet the law for breaking
the prison, but opens the doors, brings out the Apostles, and commands
them to return to the Temple, and there to preach the words of life, that is
to say, the Gospel of Jesus Christ, in whom only life is to be had. These
things teach us, how God has a care for those that be his, and that his
word cannot be bound, although his Ministers lie bound in prison. For the
breath of God breaths where it will, and is not subject to the judgment of
the world. And Paul says that he lies bound, but that the word of God
cannot be bound. Let no man therefore be offended with the imprisonment of the
Ministers of Gods word, 2. Timo. 2.
no not with their death, seeing the setting forth of his word depends not
of us, but of the pleasure and power of God. It shall be good, more diligently
to consider the manner and end of this delivery.

The Angels are the Ministers and keepers of the elect.
In their delivery this is chiefly to be observed, that God would have the
prison doors opened, by the ministry of an Angel, which he might many
other ways have brought to pass. But God would this way testify and
declare the great dignity of his elect, whereas not only the inferior and
earthly creatures, but also the heavenly spirits and Angels, are appointed to
do them service. We are taught by many places of Scripture, to gather a
general rule hereof. Paul verily teaches us that the Angels are ministering
spirits, sent out for the service of them, which shall be heirs of salvation.
Hebr. 1.
And that saying of David is well known: The Angel of the Lord tarieth
round about them that fear him, and delivers them. Psalm. 34.
And that which the malignaunt Tempter expounds of Christ only, is to be
referred to every one of his members, whom God has commended to the charge
and custody of the Angels, that they should not dashe their foot against a
stone. Psalm. 91.
And there wants not examples of them which have been helped by the visible
ministry of Aungelles. Loath was delivered from the burning of Sodom by the
aungelles. Jacob ^eeth an host of Aungelles, Gene. 19. Gene. 32. 2. Reg. 6.
Daniel. 6.
and perceyueth himself in safety by their aid and succor. Whole armies of
Angels deliver Elizeus out of the hands of the Assirians. Daniel confesses
the Angel of the Lord did shut the mouths of the Lions, that they could
do him no hurt. Dan^. 6.
An Angel many days faithfully served Thobias son, in visible shape and
likeness. An Angel smites the first borne of the Egyptians, and guides the
people of Israel through the wilderness. And it appears Ezechias was
delivered from the siege of the Assirians, by the help of an Angel. Esaias. 37.
These examples and such other like, are rehearsed, not to the end we also
should require the ministry of Angels, in visible wise, but that we should
not doubt of their aid and help, although they appear not to us. We many
times find this true, when we be delivered from secret dangers, and so
escape unknown ieoperdies, without all counsel or help of man. Let us
therefore acknowledge the dignity of our nature and condition, wherein we be
set through the benefit of Gods grace. Let the same serve for our comfort,
that we despair not in adversity, and for our instruction, that we offend not
through our impure and naughty life the Angels, and so drive from us so holy
and necessary a succor and defense.

Furthermore, the Angel shows the end why they are delivered, The end of
deliuerye.
where he says to the Apostles, being brought out of prison: Go and stand, and
speak in the Temple, all the words of this life to the people. He appoynteth
them therefore to return to the execution of that office and charge, that
Christ had put them in, and co mmaundeth them to their uttermost power, to set
forth the kingdom of Christ, whose aid and help they now presently had
proved. Psalm. 50.
This agrees with Gods commandment in other places, that being delivered
out of any distress, we should glorify him. For this was not spoken only to
the Apostles, but appertains indifferently to all men. For God will have all
men diligently to apply their vocation, and being delivered out of danger, to
return thereunto with the more feruencie, the longer they have intermitted it.
Therefore their offense is grievous, which being delivered from sickness, or
poverty, or other kind of calamity, give themselves unto vice and
naughtynesse, and pollute the name of God with impuritie of life, who seem
unto me to be like those soldiers, which being sent out to take Christ, when
they were cast to the ground by his secret power, yet when they were
permitted to rise again, laid hands on him, and bound him. And their
offense is not much less, who when they have once or twyse been in danger for
the name of Christ, as though now they had done all their duty, shun all
dangers that after may ensue, and avoid all trouble that may betyde us, for
Christ's sake. And yet there be that offend more grievously than these, who to
keep themselves out of danger, fear not to deny the truth. But we should
after Paul's example finish our race and course. For it is not in our power to
appoint our selves an end of our labors and traueyle, but we must abide the
pleasure of the Lord, who although he defer his help for a season, Abac. 2.
yet will he not fail them that firmly and constantly trust in him. And he is
not meet for the kingdom of Christ, which having once set his hand to the
plough, looks back again, Luc. 9. Math. 24.
but he shall be safe that continues to the end.

It is chiefly to be noted, The Gospel is the word of life.
how the Angel calls the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the word of life. It is
adourned with diverse other names in the Scripture. For it is called the word
of grace, because it declares the grace of God given us in Christ. Paul
calls it the word of reconciliation, because of Christ, 2. Cor. 5.
who has reconcyled God the father unto us. He also testifies, that it is the
power of god unto salvation. In another place it is called the word of truth,
Romans 1.
and salvation. But this is the excellentest name, where it is called the word
of life, which is the proper and peculiar name belonging to it. 1. Pet. 1.
Esaias. 40. John. 6.
For both that immortal word lives and raygneth for ever, and gives life to
al men, which vouchsafe to embrace it with true faith. For it preaches to us
Jesus Christ, which only has the words of eternal life. It shows us and
gives us in him all things necessary for our life. In him we have
forgiveness of our sins, satisfaction, righteousness, sanctification, price
of our redemption, and whatsoever other like. And this word does not only
regenerate us into the sons of God by faith in him, but also gives us being
now regenerated, the spirit of adoption, by whom we cry Abba father, Romans
8. Ephe. 1.
which is the infallible pledge of our salvation. And for this cause the
doctrine of the Gospel, excels all the wisdom of the world, because it is
the guide of eternal life, where the professors of other sciences, cannot
safely promise us the safety of this present life. Therefore it is truly
compared to a most precious pearl, and to an incomparable treasure, for whose
cause all men that desire true salvation, ought willingly to lose and bestow
all their goods. Again, because for Christ's sake, who is life and salvation,
the Gospel is adourned with so singular a title, all those doctrines ought to
be reputed for deadly and pestiferous, that obscure the merit of Christ, and
pull men's minds from the faith in him. Which doctrines whosoever profess,
they are thieves and murderers, both for that they rob Christ of his glory,
and also for that in steed of the word of life, they give unto the simple
followers thereof, the deadly poison of man's traditions.

But let us return to the Apostles, who as Luke writes, obeyed the Aungelles
commandment, The Apostles obey the Angel.
and by and by in the morning went into the Church, and preached there. Yet
many things might have persuaded them the contrary, both because of the late
danger they had been in, and the tried power of their adversaries, which they
knew would no way sooner be provoked, than with their preaching of the
Gospel. Furthermore, by this fact of theirs, they might seem to bring all the
congregation besides in danger, in kindling their enemies rage with fresh
matter. But so little are they hereby let from their purpose, that without
further deliberation taking, they obey the commandment of God. Their
obedience is set forth for an example to us. For it is a general rule of
God, that we do not that which seems good in our own sight, Number. 15.
but that we fulfill his commandment. And there is no greater nor more
hurtful plague, than to take our flesh to counsel, where God has expressed
his will by plain commandment: which thing, the example both of Saul and
others, abundantly declare. And Paul many times witnesses, that the obedience
of faith is the mark and end of preaching the gospel. 2. Cor. 10. Romans 1.16.
Therefore whosoever cast this obedience away, and harken to the counsels of
the flesh, surely they glory but in vain in the Gospel and faith of Christ.
Wherefore, let us apply the example of the Apostles to our selves, and let us
diligently execute that thing that God has commanded us, not regarding the
tyranny of the world, and then Jesus Christ shall not fail of his help and
succor in our godly enterprises: to whom be praise, honor, glory and power for
ever. Amen.

The.xxxvj. Homely.
But the chief Priest came, and they that were with him, and called a Counsel
together, and all the Elders of the children of Israel, and sent men to the
prison to set them. When the Ministers came, and found them not in the prison:
they returned and told, saying: The prison truly found we shut with all
diligence, and the kepers standing without before the doors. But when we had
opened, we found no man within. When the chief Priest, and the ruler of the
Temple, and the high Priests heard these things, they doubted of them,
whereunto this would grow. Then came one and showed them. Behold, the men
that you put in prison, stand in the Temple, and teach the people. Then went
the Ruler of the Temple with Ministers, and brought them without violence, for
they feared the people, least they should have been stoned.
WHen that King and holy Prophet David purposed to describe the kingdom of
our Redeemer and Savior Jesus Christ, taking his beginning of the furious
attemptes of wicked enemies against the same, he says: why do the heathen so
furiously rage together, and why do the people ymagine a vain thing? The
Kings of the earth stand up, and the Rulers take Counsel together against the
Lord, and against his anointed? Psalm. 2.
Let us break their bands a sunder, and cast away their cords from us. He
that dwells in heaven, shall laugh them to scorn. The Lord shall have them
in derision. Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his
sore displeasure. Whereby we are taught that the attemptes of Christ's enemies,
are not only vain, but also ridiculous, and to no men more dangerous than to
the authors, and beginners thereof. Many ensamples of such attempts might we
bring forth, amongst which, this is one of the chief that our holy writer
Luke now proponeth. For the Apostles were apprehended at the counsel and
instigation of the Bishops, and were put in the common prison, not only
under lock and keye, but also are safely kept with watch and ward. The next
day after in the morning, the Bishops come together, and call an assembly or
counsel, consulting which way they may quench the fire of the Gospel. But
the Lord from above laughing at them, and meaning to make all the world laugh
at them, by the help of one Angel, delivers the Apostles out of prison,
and marvelously eludeth the counsel of their enemies, who thought themselves
crafty and wyly enough. But because it seemed good to the holy ghost, to
describe all the parts of this history: we also must think no study or
diligence to much, to search them out, because we may receive much profit by
our traueyle therein.

First therefore, let us consider the Counsel, They use pretense of a Counsel
against the Apostles.
to the which we said they busily addressed and hyed themselves: the
circumstaunces whereof being considered, we shall perceive all things declaring
a show and countenance of a lawful Counsel. The chief in the Counsel is
the high Priest, who in these cases was appointed of God, to have the highest
authority, and who by Gods apoyntment was most to be obeyed. For sentence of
death was long ago given against them, Deuteronomy 17.
which durst obstinately despise the Priests saying. To him be adjoined the
other Priests, least any man might think the Bishop did any thing of his
private affection. And least any man also might suspect the whole order of
Priests, the Elders were also called, the institution of which order, was long
before appointed of God, and represented the form of the whole Church. Number. 11.
Furthermore, they take unto them the Captain of the Temple, with the other
public Officers, that because they would seem to do nothing against the
common weal. These things being thus ordained, what lets now that this
should not be a Counsel lawfully gathered together? Surely touching outward
appearance, you can easily require none other thing. But if a man regard the
end of all this doing, it shall appear they were not gathered together by the
holy ghost, but by the instigation of Satan, and that therefore no good or
godly person ought to obey or submit himself to them. For they assembled
together to oppress the truth, and they go about to overthrow the kingdom of
Christ by conspiracy.

This place teaches us to judge of counsayles, which are now a days, in every
man's mouth, Of Counsels
because many suppose, controversies of religion, can not be decyded without a
general counsel. Touching whose opinion, as I will not now dispute, so it
seems to me it would be very profitable, if such a free and general counsel
might be obtained, wherein all controversies might be concluded, by the only
word of God, such as was the Synod of the Apostles, whereof shall be spoken
in the.xv. chapter, and such as we know, those old counsayles were of Nicaea,
Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon, and such other as the godly Emperors,
by their authority governed and ruled, least the ambition of Bishops might
kindle more contention. But whether we may hope for any such like, in these
days, I can not easily tell, because I see, none of the contrary part,
contented to forsake their possession of the Church wrongfully usurped, nor
wylling to submyt themselves to the judgment of others. Again, if we
consider, what counsels have been, these many years, since the Bishops of Rome
gate the supremacy, over the Church, no man that is in his right wits, can
look for any goodness to come of them, because they observe not so much as
any outward show of a lawful counsel. For to begin with the chief
point. Their counsayles use to be summoned and called, by the Bishops of Rome,
whose supremacy is not ordained of God, and is most contrary to the glory of
Christ. They also will be the chief rulers, Presidents and Judges of the
counsel, which ought rather to pleate their cause, and to give an account of
their stewardship, which many years now has been required of them. They have
Bishops sytting which them, not such as Paul requires, but such as the God on
earth uses to create: from whom, if a man take their pieuishe and stage play
apparel, and vain names and tytles, they shall have nothing left, that
represents any show of Byshoply duty, or dignity. And they only have
authority to give sentence, which are not worthy, the lowest rowme in the
Church, but are by Gods sentence, long since excommunicated. For the Prophet
affirms, that the Chanaanites, z^ch. 12. Io^n. 2. Math. 21. Apoc. 21.
that is to say, sellers of holy things, shall have no place in the Lords
house. And such as they, did Christ long since drive out of the Jewish temple.
And Christ says in his revelation, that Infidels, Murderers, Whoremongers,
Wytches, Idolaters and all liars, have their place prepared in the lake burning
with fire and Brymstone. And who I pray you, Apoca* 21.
is so impudent, that will deny, but a many of them are polluted with these
vices, which yet have only the power and authority to judge matters of
religion. And although they use to call Emperors, kings and princes to their
counsel, it skilleth not because it is evident, they have all sworn
obedience to the Pope, and are not accounted for Catholics, unless they give
up themselves wholly to the Sea of Rome. Wherefore, this outward show
represents no lawful counsel, but with a vain visure, beguyleth the
simple and unwary. And if a man mark the end, whereunto they refer all
thing, it shall appear more plainly, that they seek only the oppressing of
the truth and the gospel, than needs with many words to be declared. For
this does the blood of the Martyrs of Christ testify, which they have shed,
and most greedily thirst after. The wars whereof they have been the first
authors, against the mainteyners of the true faith, do prove the same. They
confess the same in their Bulls, whereby they summon and call counselors. For
they so burn in hatred of the truth, that where they are wholly covered with
hypocrisy, and furnished at all points, to cloak and dyssemble all things: yet
can they herein little or nothing dissemble, their great hatred, but openly
profess, that which they long ago, have conceived against the Gospel.
Therefore let them that desire the overthrow of Christ's church and kingdom,
and will wittingly perish, submit matters of faith and religion to their
judgment. But whosoever has a care of his own salvation, of the glory of
Christ, and safety of the Church, let him understand, that this saying of
David chiefly belongs to this place: Blessed is that man, Psalm. 1.
that has not walked in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stand in the way of
sinners, and has not sit in the seat of the scornful.

But let us let pass these matters, and come to the priests and Elders, God
disappointeth the enterprises of his enemies.
who having consulted, about the Apostles, send their servant to the prison,
to bring them before the counsel. And here the Lord against whom they strove,
does marvelously mock and deryde them. For the servant find the Apostles
delivered out of prison. They return to their masters, and so declare the
matter, that they manifestly set forth Gods help, and the myraculous delivery
of the Apostles. For they say, they find the prison close shut, and the
keepers diligently watching, and yet no man in the prison. What other could be
hereof gathered, but that this was the work of God? For who was able so to
have beguyled the keepers, and brought out the Apostles, without their
knowledge? They are therefore not without a cause wonderfully vexed in their
mind, and wot not what to do. For they feel the pricks of conscience,
which use to take hold, even on the wickedst. But there comes an other
message, that more moves and grieueth them. For there comes one, that
tells them how the Apostles, are openly and boldly teaching in the Church,
which could not but be occasion of great grief, to such ambitious men,
perceauing that their authority was neither regarded, nor their power feared.
This example teaches us, how easy a thing it is for God, to frustrate the
wicked attemptes of his enemies. For who would have thought the Apostles could
have been brought out of the prison, without the knowledge of the keepers? But
that which seems impossible to man, is as easy to God, as the dust to be
scattered with the wind. For he is able to beguile them, whom it seems, no
man can beguile either by sleep, either by benumming of senses, either by
giddiness of head, or many other ways. Furthermore, they have them to
witness and declare the miracle, whose help they thought to use in oppressing
the truth. Therefore the same thing happens here unto them, that did at the
first, when they sent their servants to take Christ, and they returned
again, not only without him, but also gave a notable testimony of his
doctrine. John. 7.
Whereunto that testimony was not unlike, that the soldiers gave of Christ's
resurrection, whom they therefore hired to watch his grave, Math. 28.
because he should not rise again. Like examples we read euerywhere in the
scripture. Pharao went about to oppress and destroy the children of Israel.
And yet he brought him up in his own house, and set him on his lap, whom God
had appointed to be the delyuerer and revenger of his people. Afterward, when
he set the Magitians against Moses, Exodus. 8.
he heard them openly testify, that the finger of God wrought by Moses. And
this is also like where Balaam hired by the king of Moabytes, Numer. 23. and.24.
to curse the people of Israel, was enforced, whether he would or no, to
bless them. What shall we speak of Achab, who most cruelly persecuting the
Prophets of God, cherished and reverenced the most faithful Patron of the
Prophets, and the very only Mecaenas of those days, amongs the Lords of
his Court? I omyt infinite examples of like sort, which might be brought both
out of later, and ancient hystories, besides those, whereof we have daily
experience, I thought good to admonish the faithful servant of Christ, by
these only, that they might diligently mark and observe the like. For great
and very profitable is the use of these examples. For first, they comfort us
in adversity, in that we see man's power far inferriour to Gods, and that
man's enterprises, can not hinder the purpose of God. Next, they profit us to
frame our life after, that we rashely withstand not Gods prouydence and
ordynaunces. For what is impossible to God, which in times past, so
merueylous^y did frustrate and disappoint the attempts of the men in the
beginning, with the wonderful division of tongues, and not so few times as
once, by the ministry of one Angel only, made kings and princes to be
laughed at of all men. Wherefore, to humble our selves under his mighty hand,
is both safest and profitablest for our health and salvation.

The Apostles are brought back again before the counsel.
Further, let us consider the priests, and other that satte in this counsel,
which yet have not learned to give place unto God, and not content, that their
folly is now opened to all men, show yet an incurable impiety of mind. For
the Captain of the Temple being sent by them, brings the Apostles without
any resistaunce, before the counsel, absteyning in deed from vyolence, not
that the consideration of Gods work and miracle made them ever the meeker,
but because they feared least the people would stone them. Here we have to
consider, not only the priests and their complyces, but also God and the
Apostles.

The blindness of the wicked is incurable.
In the Priests and Captain of the Temple, may be perceived the incurable
malice, and perverse blindness of mind in the wicked. For it was said
before, how they were in doubt and perplexity what to do. Whereupon may
easily be gathered, that they were stricken with some perseueraunce of the thing
that was done. But yet they go not on therein so far, to acknowledge the
miracle with their heart, and to yield unto God. Nay, they return to their
purpose, and (as the things following declare) go about to kill them, whom they
saw, God a little before, had so marvelously saved. Many examples prove,
that this is the disposition of all wicked. Pharao many times overcome with the
majesty of Gods miracles and grief of plagues, confesses the God of Israel,
desires Moses to make intercession for him, and promises he will accomplish
the commandment of God. By and by, he falls to his old usage, being ready
to resist God again a fresh. And even as these men do here, so did they
before in the resurrection of Christ. For when they knew it by relation of the
soldiers, they would neither believe the truth, nor fear the invincible
power of Christ, but brybed the soldiers with money, and spredde false
rumors amongst the people of him, as though Christ's glory could have been
defaced by lying, whom the authority of the Emperors majesty (in whose name
the grave stone was sealed) could not keep within the grave. And would to God,
we had only but old examples of this obstinacy, and found not every where
now a days, such as neither by the judgments of God, nor testimony of their
own conscience, are content to yield to Christ and his truth. This is an
infallible argument of reprobation, and a worthy punishment of the contempt of
Gods word, which once by his Prophet, and afterward by Christ he threatened to
his enymies, where he says: ye shall hear in deed, but ye shall not
understand, Esaias. 6. Math. 13.
ye shall plainly see, and not perceive. Harden the heart of this people, stop
their ears, and shut their eyes, that they see not with their eyes, hear not
with their ears, and understand not with their hearts, and convert and be
healed. These things ought to fear us, that we continue not in hatred of the
truth, the end whereof has so evil success.

We are further taught, The wicked can not do what they list.
that the wicked can not always do that they would, but that they many times
are brydeled by the secret power of God. For hereof comes it to pass, that
the Captain and his soldiers hold their hands, fearing least the people
would stone them. So he that thinks he may contemn God without
controlment, fears the common people. This is always the property of the
wicked, that their judgments and the godlyes be diverse. For the saying of the
godly and faithful person is this: The Lord is my light and my salvation,
whom then shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom then
shall I be afraid? Psalm. 27.118.
The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man does unto me. Psalm. 94.
The voices of the wicked be these: The Lord shall not see, neither shall the
God of Jacob regard it. But these which have cast from them the fear of God,
are compelled to fear mortal men, and many times their servants, yea their
own children: and they which will not be led with the courageous fear of
God, are vexed with the cowardly and slauishe fear of most miserable men. So
God reuengeth his contempt. And this preposterous fear, is a worthy punishment
for tyranny, set up against righteousness and truth. Which thing Magistrates
desyring to continue in office with commendation, ought diligently to beware of.

But some man may marueyle, The faithful triumph under the banner of the Cross.
why God would suffer his Apostles to be apprehended and brought before them
again, whom a little before he delivered by the ministry of an Angel, was
he no more able to defend them? Or passed he no more on them, who so
diligently obeyed his commandment? Not so. For their great constancy declared
God had a singular care of them. But God would hereby teach us, that the Godly
must triumph under the baner of the cross. For where Christ hanging on the
cross, overcame the world, with the Prince thereof, and also sin, death and
hell: it were unjust, that we should desire an easier way of victory, but we
must follow his steps, as Peter teaches. This is a good remedy against the
slothfulness and security of the flesh, 1. Peter. 2.
always to be ready to bear the cross.

And the Apostles show us a singular example of christian modesty, who being
taken and carried away in the vocation of God, neither murmur impaciently
against God, The modesty of the Apostles.
nor move the people to sedition against the magistrate. For they knew God
would order all things wisely, justly, and to their behoof and commodity.
They knew that Christ's kingdom was not of this world, nor to be defended with
worldly weapons. They knew that God would assist them, if his glory and their
salvation so required. Therefore they commit themselves to his care and
tuition, and wait patiently for his help. All they are reproved by this
example, which mutter against God, and dare over boldly reprehende his
judgments. And as many also, as seek to mainteyne themselves by unlawful
sedition, as though it made any thing to the setting forth of Christ's
kingdom. We know in deed, that Tyrannes are sometimes punished by sedition,
and that by Gods just judgment, it comes to pass, that they be a pray for
the seditious, because they are not contented to use a moderate and just kind
of rule toward the godly. But we never read, that the godly were authors of
sedition, 1. Sam. 24.26.
from which it appears David so abhorred, that he would not kill Saul his
open enemy, because he would commyt no heinous offense against the anointed
of the Lord. I speak of private men. For the Magistrates office is an other
thing, which if they be christians, must use the sword committed to them of
God, chiefly for the defense of the godly and glory of Christ. And what
Bishops and Ministers of the Church have in such a case to do, we are taught
by the example of Ambrose, who when the Emperor commanded him, to deliver the
Churches to the Arrians, and that thereupon, ensued not only the disturbaunce
of the congregation, but also an uproar of the whole City, he would neither
forsake the congregation being in peril, ne yet move or procure fight against
the Emperor. His words unto the people amongst many others, were these: ye
were afraid, least I would forsake the Church, and leave you, for fear of mine
own safegarde. But you may remember (he speaks of the answer he made to
the kings officers) what I have said: that I can not forsake the congregation,
because I more fear the Lord of the world, than the Emperor of this world.
Surely if any force should carry me from the Church, Among his Orations in
the.v. book of his Epistles, after ye.xxxij. Epistle.
my flesh might be put out of possession, but not my mind: that I am ready
to do as the Priest uses to do, if he purpose to do as the Prince ought to
do. Why therefore are you troubled? willingly I will never forsake you:
enforced, I know not how to resist. I may sorrow, I may weep, I may mourn:
Against battle, Soldiers, and the Gotthes, my weapons be tears, for such
is the armor of a priest. Otherwise I ought not, nor may not resist: and to
fly, and forsake the Church, I use not. etc. And when he was bydden by the
officers of the Goths, to appease the people, he answered: In my power it is
not to incense or move them, but it is in the hand of God, In his.xxxiii
Epistle.
to appease them. I though good here in this place to note these things, that
ministers may learn constancy, joined with true and christian prudencie, by
these things. In the mean season, it is every man's duty, constauntly to abide
in his vocation, patiently to suffer perils, faithfully to wait for the help
of God, and then Christ will not fail us, which has promised to be the
defender of those that be his. To him be praise, honor, glory, and power for
ever. Amen.

The.xxxvij. Homely.
AND when they had brought them, they set them before the Counsel. And the
chief Priest asked them saying: Did not we straightly command you, tha^ you
should not teach in this name? And behold you have filled Jerusalem with
your doctrine, and intend to bring this man's blood upon us. Peter and the
other Apostles answered and said: we ought more to obey God than man. The
God of our fathers raised up Jesus whom you slew and hanged on tree. Him has
God lift up with his right hand, to be a Ruler and a Savior, for to give
repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. And we are records of these
things which we say, and so is also the holy ghost whom God has given to them
that obey him.
ALthough God had delivered his Apostles out of prison, by the ministry of an
Angel, yet he suffers them to be apprehended and brought again before a
Counsel of their most cruel enemies. For hereby he would teach us, that he
is able not only to deliver us from dangers toward, but also to save and
preserve us being in danger. This doctrine teaches us, that we must not
despair of our safety and Gods help, whenever he suffers us to be tempted
with dangers and adversities, and takes not from us that cup, which he once
began to us of, that we should drink it up after him. For he is out of
danger and safe, which dwells under the defense of the most high, and under
the shadow of the almighty, Psalm. 91.
although a thousand fall beside him, and ten thousand on his right hand.
Luke in this present history gives us an evident example hereof, where he
declares what they did with the Apostles in the Counsel: wherein we shall
hear, they were whipped, and so escaped the hands of their enemies. Yet
before the Evangelist comes thereunto, first he describes how the Priests
accused the Apostles, and how they answered and defended themselves. Hereof
at this present we purpose to say so much as the Lord shall give us grace and
leisure for.

The Apostles are accused by the high Priest, The high Priests accusation
against the Apostles.
who also is the chief Judge in this controversy. Neither does he so accuse
them, as though it were a matter doubtful, wherein they had offended, but his
intent is with great exaggeration of words to fraye them, and almost to
ouerwhelme them, as persons convicted of heinous offenses. For he says: Did
not we straightly command you, that you should not teach in this name? And
behold you have filled Jerusalem with your doctrine, and intend to bring this
man's blood upon us. By which words, if they be well marked, we shall
perceive, the Apostles are accused not of one, but of diverse most weighty
offenses. For first, they accuse them of contumacie and disobedience, because
they continued preaching, Disobedience.
against the manifest Edict and decree of the sacred Counsel. And this was no
small offense, because the authority of the high Priest was of great account
even by Gods appointment, and it was death to resist him. Deuteronomy* 17.
Furthermore, they might be called transgressors and breakers of Gods
constitution, in that neither being called nor anointed, they took upon them
so boldlye the Priests authority, and to teach as we read Corah with those
of his conspiracy did. Nu. 16. etc.
And that the Bishops had a special care, that none should thrust themselves
into the room of teachers, except they had taken their orders of them, after
the accustomed manner, appears by this, that they oftentimes demanded of John
the Baptist, John. 1.2.18 Math. 21.
and of Christ, who gave them authority to teach as they did. But the second
crime is more grievous, where they say they had filled all Jerusalem with
their doctrine. False doctrine.
For this is as if a man would say. It is an heinous offense that you have
thus continued teaching against the Counsels decree. But in that you have
spread abroad yours, that is to say, a new and false doctrine, this is by no
means to be suffered: forasmuch as God in the beginning appointed them to dye,
Deuteronomy. 13.
that were authors of any false doctrine. To these they add yet a third
offense, more heinous and grievous than the rest, Sedition.
where they say: you mean to bring this man's blood on us. For by these
words, they charge them with sedition, as though therefore they preached to the
people that Jesus Christ was unjustly put to death, because they would incense
and move the minds of the people against them, as open tyrauntes. But it is a
marvelous matter that they now so much abhor to be charged with Christ's
death, seeing before Pylate they took upon them with solemn protestation,
all the fault thereof. For when they perceived Pylate somewhat slack to
pronounce sentence of death against him, because it stood not with his
conscience, they cried: His blood be upon us, and upon our children. And now
as though they had forgotten all this, they think they are much wronged to be
counted the authors of such an offense. This is the perpetual guyse of the
ungodly, that although they glory in their wickedness, (as the holy Psalmist
says) and seek praise of their mischievous acts, yet will they not have them
reproved and accused by the word of God.

The pride of Antichristian Bishops.
But chiefly we have here to consider the tyranny and insolency of false and
wicked Bishops, which when they have gotten the supremacy in the Church, under
the color of Gods ordinance, dare exact and require what pleases them, and
will have men obey their commandments without further ado. Hereof came it
to pass, that they thought the Apostles had so grievously offended, because
they continued teaching contrary to their commandment. And would to God this
tyranny had reigned but in the days passed only, and did not in these days
also bear to great a swinge. For since the Bishops of Rome have persuaded the
people, that they be the lawful successors of the Apostles, and that it is
said unto them: he that hears me, hears you, I will give you the keys of
the kingdom of heaven. etc. We see how they are gone so far, that they have
not only changed laws and times (as Daniel prophesied long sithence Chap.
vij.) but also they say they are not to be reprehended, though they should by
heaps tumble men's souls into hell. See the.xl. Distinction Chapter. If the
Pope. O shamelessness, O blindness. And yet even in these days when they see
their iuggling and craft disclosed by the light of the Gospel, they dare
require obedience of us, and strive most egarly for them, where they ought with
all diligence to defend both their own liberty, and theirs which are
committed to their charge, of which liberty Christ is the author.

Let us also here mark what crimes the Ministers are commonly charged with.
For the world holds his own, What crimes are w^nt to be laid to the
ministers.
and strives against the truth at this day even with the same weapons, and
sleightes that it used at the beginning. Disobedience and contumacie was
always laid to the charge of Gods Ministers, and that they would be Lords
and Rulers, and obey neither Princes proclamations nor Counsels decrees. They
were also called deceyuers and beginners of sedition, as men delighting in
tumultes and vprores. There are many examples hereof in Moses and the
Prophets. 1. Reg. 18.21.
Achab calls Elias the disturber and troubler of the people of Israel, and
says he is his enemy. He says also he hates Micheas, because he prophecieth
nothing but adversities and troubles toward him. 1. Reg. 22. Amoz. 7.
Amos is accused to Jeroboam, for that the City and whole Country could not
away with his sermons. They lay to Ieremies charge, that he fears the
minds of the soldiers with his sermons, Iere. 38.44.
whose strength served for the defense of the Country, and they openly say he
was the cause of all the adversity and trouble that they suffered. What things
the enemies of Christ laid to his charge, are more manifest than need greatly
to be rehearsed. It is no marueyle therefore, if the Apostles be charged with
the like, and as many as in these days follow their steps. Let no man
therefore to rashly believe those which lay such faults to the Ministers
charge, but let him search the truth, that he be not deceived through to rash
judgment. In the mean season, let us acknowledge the naughtynesse of the
world, and the ingratitude of the people, who being blinded, take them for
their enemies, by whose ministry the benefit of salvation is offered them.
But let us hear the Apostles answer, very Apostolic, and venerable, by
reason of the gravity thereof, which may be divided into three parts. First
they put away the crime of disobedience. Secondly, The answer of the
Apostles.
they answer the other two objections briefly. And last of all, they declare
the whole matter of Christ's kingdom, if happily they might win any of them
unto the same.

The fault of disobedience they excuse briefly, not denying they were
forbidden to preach, but replying that they ought to obey God more than men.
Which sentence they before also so propounded, that they made the Priests
themselves Judges thereof, because all men endued with common reason and
understanding, might easilye perceive the authority and truth thereof. But
forasmuch as they perceive the Priests grown to such impudency, that they
stick not to prefer their own authority before Gods, they boldlye and
plainly repeat the same again. In these words we may learn the true trade
of obedience. The true trade of obedience.
For they deny not that men must be obeyed, to whom God has given rule over
us, such as be our parents, teachers, Officers, masters, and Lords, but that
we must obey God more than them. They therefore appoint certain bounds and
limittes of obedience, within the compass whereof they must walk, which shall
prescribe others what to do. For parents have left them their authority over
their children. Magistrates have their power reserved by doctrine of the
Gospel, over their subjects. And that authority which God has given to the
Ministers of his word, must not be broken or violated. And Peter in another
place commands servants to obey their masters, though they be unreasonable
and waywarde. 1. Peter. 2.
The like reason is also of persons married, and of all others whom God has
made superiors over other. But if they begin to abuse their power and
dignity, and will take upon them to command things contrary to the laws of
God, and to the duty that we owe him, we must then run unto the rule of Peter,
and not suffer the authority of man, and counterfayte show of Gods
institution, to prejudice or derogate any thing from Gods commandment. For
as soon as they begin to pass their bounds, and to resist God, they are but
mere men, and not to be accounted as the ministers of God. But because we have
spoken hereof before, let these few words suffice for this time.

The doctrine of the Apostles is not new.
Secondly, they answer the other two crimes in one, saying: The God of our
fathers has raised up again Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on tree. In
few words they dispatch two things. The first is, the God of our fathers has
raised up Jesus: that is to say: we preach that Jesus and savior, which we
have not imagined of our own head, but which the God of our fathers once
promised, yea, whom he from everlasting ordained to be the savior of the
world. Therefore no man ought to accuse our doctrine, 1. Peter. 2.
either as new or false. And I see none other cause why they make mention of
the fathers, but for that they would put them in mind of the promises
revealed to the fathers concerning Christ. Where by the way, may be perceived
the antiquity and infallible certainty of the Christian faith and religion.
And we may use the same argument in these days, against them which accuse our
doctrine of newness and falshoode. For why is it called new, which preaches
Christ that was promised from the beginning of the world? Why is it called
false, which shows us salvation in him that is the way, The Apostles be not
seditious.
the light and the truth? The second is, where he speaks of Jesus, saying:
whom ye slew and hanged on tree. As though he should say: we go not about to
bring upon you ye blood of Christ, nor to charge you with his death. For you
your selves were the authors and principalles of that heinous deed: you
condemned him by your consents, and delivered him to Pylate, you required him
to be put to death when Pylate judged him to be let loose. It was you that
said: His blood be upon us, and upon our children. These things al men know,
because they were openly done. And though we would hold our peace, yet the
thing it self cries out, and will not be kept hid. etc. We learn by the
Apostles example with what constancy and liberty, we must cope with the
professed enemies of the truth. It behooves us boldly to defend the quarrel of
ye truth. We must also freely reprove their wickedness, that they think not
men be afraid of them. For such is the nature of wicked Bishops, that ye more
they be feared, the more fierce they wax, because they think their craft is
not yet espied. But if a man withstand them to their face, then their comb is
cut. Hence springs yt constancy of the prophets, whereby they withstoode most
mighty princes. For this cause Christ, which was the myldest of all other men,
seems to thunder, when he has to do with the Scribes and Phariseis, whom he
knew to be altogether incurable. Therefore their modesty is preposterous that
now a days flatter Popes, and Bisshops, who in deed are greater enemies of
the truth, and worse than the Iewishe Priests. Howbeit, least they might seem
to neglect them, which perhaps might be woonne, they briefly set forth the
whole hystory of Christ, and of our salvation, and confirm the same with most
sure testimonies which is the third part of this Apology or defense. For they
say: Him has God lift up with his right hand, to be a ruler and a Savior, for
to give repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness of sins. And we be witnesses
or records hereof. etc. In these words both Christ himself, and the manner
and mean whereby he gives us salvation, is described. And they say Christ is
not only a savior, but the Prince of salvation, exalted by the right hand
and power of God. In the Scriptures, mention is oftentimes made, how Christ is
a King and Prince, chiefly in the Psalms, and sermons of the Prophets. For
hereunto belong the things read in the Psalms. ij.xlv.lxxxix.cx. etc. Mich.
5. And the Angel Gabriel seems to have alluded hereunto, where he says: he
shall sit in the chair of David his father, and of his kingdom shall be none
end. Luc. 1.
Thus the holy ghost teaches us that Christ is not only the minister of our
salvation, but is the author which by his own power has delivered us from the
tyranny of the devil: also that he is so mighty a savior, that no man is
able to resist him. Neither did he by force take unto him that honor, but when
he had most lowly humbled himself, that name was given unto him, that is above
all names, Phil. 2.
in the which every knee should bow. etc. This serves for our comfort in
temptations. For where Christ is a mighty king, whom the right hand of God
has exalted, and to whom all power is given in heaven and in earth, Math. 28.
John. 10.
it shall be an easy matter for him to defend us, neither shall any man take
his sheep out of his hand. And as the impious rage of the Priests, could
not let God from exalting him with his right hand: no more shall the wicked
enterprises of Princes and the world in these days any manner of ways hinder
or empayre his kingdom and glory.

They show also the way and mean how Christ gives salvation, The way of
salvation.
which all men must needs embrace, that are desirous of their salvation. This
way or mean consists in two points, to say, repentance and forgiveness of
sins, of both which it is written, Christ is the only author. That
repentance is a conversion and turning of the whole man unto God, has many
times already been declared. This conversion unto God, is necessary for all
men, because we all through sin have gone astray, and daily swerve from the
way of salvation. But that this is no work of man's power, or strength, we are
taught not only by the scriptures, but also by daily experience, and no man
can be converted, except he be converted of God. See Jeremy. 31. Lamentations.
5. This conversion Christ only, works truly in us, while he makes us new
men by the seed of his word, and by the spirit of regeneration, illuminating
us with the knowledge of God, and enduing us with a new and holy will, and
gyuing us strength to do that, which of our own power, we should never be
able to do. They are here confuted, which hearing repentance required, by and
by, think the merit of their own righteousness, is confirmed and extol the
power of free will. But what glory we in our own will, if Christ be the
author of this conversion in us? And what I pray you shall we merit by our
repentance, which are not able to repent, except Christ by his spirit stir
us up, and lead us thereto. But although a man be converted unto God, yet
herein is not our salvation perfect and full. For where we be sinners, we have
need also of forgiveness and satisfaction, that nothing want to satisfy Gods
justice. But where we said even now, that we could not convert unto God,
unless we were regenerated by Christ, Math. 18. Luke. 7.
much less can we satisfy for our sins. And Christ teaches us, that our
sins be such a debt as we are not able to pay. Wherefore, as in the first
part, Christ succoureth our infirmity: so in this also he helps us. For by
the merit of his death, he both purges the debt of our sin, and makes us
just in the sight of God, while he bestows on us that believe in him, his
justice. For therefore he became sin for us, that we by his means should be
that righteousness, 2. Cor. 5.
which before God is allowed. And because both these things without the which
no man can be saved, come by the benefit of Christ only, we most strongly
gather hereof, that without Christ, we have no salvation, which is the cause
that he comprehending the sum of the gospel in few words, teaches, that
repentance and forgiveness of sins, Luc. 24.
must be preached in his name. In the mean while, we learn also, how much
they err, which under a pretense of Christ, seek to live lycentiously, or
think he is any cause or occasion of dissolute conversation, where as he is
the very only author of true and healthful repentance.

Furthermore, they confirm their preaching of Christ, by testimonies, where
they say. The Apostles and holy ghost be witnesses of the Gospel.
And we be witnesses of these words, and also the holy ghost, whom God has
given to them that obey him. And let no man think it rashlye and insolently
done of the Apostles, to allege their own testimony, before them, of whom
they were accused. For, where Christ appointed them witnesses of his doings,
John. 15. Acts. 1.
they might not refuse to do their duty in this behalf. And hereby their
doctrine was greatly authorized, which no man by any means ought to deny,
except he will accuse Christ of falsehoode. But because the Apostles were not
ignorant, that their testimony should be of little weight, before the
Priests, they add an other testimony also, to wit, the testimony of the
holy ghost, which holy ghost God gives unto them, which be obedient unto
Christ. And although all the believing feel his testimony within their
minds, and by the same be assertayned of their salvation: yet chiefly these
words be to be understood, of the gifts and operation of the holy spirit,
whereby he bare witness in the primitive Church, to the doctrine of the
gospel. For by the power of the holy ghost, it came to pass, that the
faithful spoke with new tongues, that they suddenly became new men, and
that they wrought miracles, which things as we need not in these days, for as
much as the Apostles doctrine is sufficiently proved: so, testimony of the
holy ghost ought to suffice us, whereby we feel our minds confirmed, and
through whose encouragement we cry Abba, father. But this is not negligently
to be passed over, where he says: the holy ghost is given unto them that obey
Christ. And yet it must needs be that they were endued before this with the
holy ghost, because without him, they neither could believe, nor obey. But in
them the gift es of the spirit were augmented and increased, as Christ says:
To every one that has shall be given: Whereof we gather again, Math. 25.
that they cannot have the holy ghost which strive against Christ. For he
confesses, that the holy ghost is such a thing, as the world can not receive.
John. 14.
Hereby it appears, why the operations and gifts of the holy ghost, be so
rare and seldom in these days: for this cause verily: because there be so
few, that endeavor to obey Christ. It becomes us by these examples to be
stirred up, to the holy obedyence of faith, that being endued with the holy
spirit, we may go forward in all goodness, and atteyne to salvation in Jesus
Christ: to whom be honor, praise, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.xxxviij. Homely.
WHEN they heard that, they claue a sunder, and sought means to slay them.
Then stood there up one in the counsel, a Pharisey named Gamaliel, a Doctor
of law, had in reputation among all the people, and commanded the Apostles to
go a side a little space, and said unto them. Ye men of Israel, take heed to
your selves, what ye intend to do, for before these days rose up one Theudas
bosting himself, to whom resorted a number of men, about a four hundred,
which was slain. And they all which believed him were scattered abroad. After
this man, was there one Judas of Galyley, in the days of the tribute, and drew
away much people after him. He also perished, and all (even as many as
harkened to him) were scattered abroad. And now I say unto you, refrain your
selves from these men, and let them alone. For if this counsel, or this work
be of men, it will come to naught. But and if it be of God, ye can not destroy
it, least happily ye be found to strive against God.
THe Evangelist Luke yesterdaye declared unto us, what crimes the high Priest
objected to the Apostles, and how the Apostles answered them. Which hystory
serves chiefly to this purpose, that we might understand with what crimes,
the wicked are wont to defame the truth, and the Ministers thereof, and also
what constancy and boldness, it behooves us to use in the defense of the
same. Where the first and chief care must be for the duty, that we owe unto
God, that for any man's favor or pleasure we offend not against the same. Then
we must take heed, that through our fearfulness, our enemies wax not the
more insolent, as it appears their property is. Furthermore, we must
constantly hold fast and keep the confession of Christ, that we be not
ashamed of him before men, who was not ashamed to become man and suffer death
for our sake. Now it follows, what effect this answer or Apology had, with
the wicked enemies of Christ: which is a very notable place, because it
reprooueth both the incurable obstinacy of the wicked, and also teaches us,
how easily God beats down their bloody enterprises.

First, Death devised against the Apostles.
speaking of those which had conceived an implacable hatred against the truth,
he says: when they heard that, they claue a sunder, and were as men ready to
burst for anger. For it spited the proud and ambitious men, to see their
authority so little regarded, and it seemed a thing to them intolerable, to
here the truth of Christ, so boldly and stoutely defended. Therefore in the
very presence of the Apostles, they consult, how to put them to death. And it
is very like they rather used furious exclamations, than any grave
deliberation. This example teaches us, that the wicked and reprobate, which
are hardened in the hatred of Christ, can no manner of way be mytygated and
mollified. For such can not receive the holy ghost, who only has power to
alter and change the hearts, as we said in the last sermon. For although the
outward word of God pierce their minds and touch their consciences, yet it
hardens them, and makes them the more fierce. And as great heat in the
upper region of the air, dissolueth not a colder matter, drawn up thither,
but makes it congeale into yse: Even so the minds of the wicked, the more
they are urged with the word of God, the more fierce they wax, and hard
hearted. Or else, as the heat of the sun melts the wax, but hardneth mire
and claye: so the word of God, wherewith the minds of the ungodly are wont
to be taught and enfourmed, makes the ungodly more stubborn and froward. Not
that the fault is in the word of God, but because the corruption of nature in
the wicked is such, that it lets and stops the true effect of the word.
Examples here of we have in Caine and Pharao, in Saul, and Achab, in Judas the
traitor, and infinite others, whereunto these men may also be adjoined, as the
matter well declares. Here let us learn what to judge of the men in our
days, which manifestly utter their ^ankred hatred, against the word, where we
are further taught, what an heinous offense it is to persecute the truth,
especially if it proceed not of ignorance, and of a foolish zeal toward
God, but of the instigation of most corrupt affections. This thing deserves,
that we are made unfit, for the medicine of Gods word, which only is able
to restore us to health and life.

The end of Christ's enemies attemptes.
Furthermore, this example teaches us, what the wicked enemies of the truth,
meaning and purpose is in their counsels: surely none other, but that the
ministers of truth may be made out of the way, who alone they suppose hinder
their desires and wyshes. For this they all peculiarly think, that there is
nothing more against them than the word of God, which reprooueth their
wickedness, whereby it comes to pass, that they are not ashamed to show
all their power against a few of simple men, and to strive with all their
might and main against them, whom valiant men, and of haultie courage, would
scarce vouchsafe to take any labor or pain about. But these men be of an
other opinion, for they have persuaded themselves, that then they are safe,
when they be no more troubled with the painful sermons of Gods word. So
Achab thought Elias only was his enemy, and the disturber of the people of
Israel, and promised himself certain victory against the Assyrians, till he
took Micheas to counsel, who as he was persuaded, delighted in nothing, but
in telling of unlucky tidings. Even so these men believed they should then be
free from the gylte of Christ's blood and in safegarde and sure, if the
Apostles might be dispatched out of the way, that they could ring no more in
their ears. And even now a days, if a man happen to demand of some men,
what it is that most grieueth them, they only complain of the Ministers of
Gods word. And hereof comes it to pass, that this world so rages against
the preachers of the truth, that it believes they only are the disturbers of
all public peace and tranquillity, which thing since it has in all ages been
done, let us not marueyle at the usage of our days, nor be offended at the
attempts of the wicked, of whom Christ has so often given us warning. Let us
rather arm our selves with the spirit of constancy, fortitude, and patience,
Mat. 10. etc.
let us also walk warely and circumspectly in the vocation whereunto the Lord
has appointed us, as Christ long ago has taught us.

But some man may marueyle by whose help and intercession the Apostles were
delivered out of the hands of their most cruel enemies, Gamaliel delivers
the Apostles from death.
and from the peril of present death. Luke shows there stood up a patron
and defender of them, one of their own bench and number, that is to say,
Gamaliel, whose profession he diligently describes. For he says he was a
Pharisey, which sect as it ascribed to it self a countenance of outward
justice: so was it most adversary to the Christian faith and doctrine. Further,
he was a doctor of the law, whereunto it appears he gave more study than
the residue of his profession, and his study wanted not a profitable success.
Beside this, he was of great authority, which made all the people to love him
and reverence him. And that was a thing in this matter very commodious and
available. For where the residue of them feared the people, his authority
they could not reject, upon whom they knew all the Commons depended. He
therefore being moved with the importunate devises of his fellow Phariseyes,
and meaning to withstand their furiousness, commands the Apostles for a
little while to stand aside, that he might the more freely entreat of this
cause, declaring by this his doing, how much more prudent and wise he was than
the residue, which in the presence of the Apostles so bewrayed the impotencie
and rage of their minds. Then by and by declares he his judgment, whereby he
mittigateth their moodes, who judged the Apostles to be put to death. But
before we declare Gamaliel his words, we have to consider how easy a thing
it is for God to deliver his people from danger, seeing he can raise up for
them defenders even from among their enemies; and by the counsel and
authority of one man, can confound the enterprises and attempts of a great
many. For as even now was said, John. 12.
no kind of men were more bent against Christ and his doctrine, than the
Phariseyes, who had a good while before this, pronounced sentence of
excommunication against all those that professed Christ. And yet of this
College also was Nicodemus, John. 7.
who before this defended Christ's quarrel. Now comes Gamaliel out of the
same College, whose means it pleases the Lord to use, for the delivery of
the Apostles. And this one man without any armor or weapon, only by prudent
counsel dasheth all the devise of the whole counsel. There are other
examples of like sort, which teach us to take a general doctrine and
consolation hereof. Hereunto apertayneth it that Ruben only, who also hated
Joseph in his heart, Gene. 37.
yet afterward saved him from present death. To this may we add also how
the Philistines delivered David, 1. Sam. 23. Exodus, 2.
being enclosed on every side with Saules soldiers. What shall we speak of
Moses the Captain of the people of Israel, whom the daughter of cruel
Pharao saved from drowning in the river Nilus? But it would be very long, if
we should tarry in all the examples which might be brought. It behooves us
rather to observe the use of them, which is, that we be not feared with the
attempts of men, which the Lord can forthwith bring to naught, to whose service
we all are bound. Which one thing if men as well in general as particulerly
would thin ke on, they would by no means suffer themselves to be pulled from
fulfilling their vocation.

Gamaliel his counsel.
Let us mark Gamaliel his counsel, full of wisdom in deed, yet such as
wherein a man may perceive diverse things wanting, which declare he was not yet
fully instructed in the truth. Yet it pleased the Lord to use his help, and
it is to be thought that he afterward grew to more godliness. His saying
consists in three points. First he uses a pretty preface, whereby he
apeaseth the furious, and exhorts them to do nothing rashly or unadvisedly:
Take heed to your selves (says he) concerning these men, what you intend to
do. As though he should say: I hear that you determine they shall suffer
death. But I fear your deuyse is to headie, and therefore to dangerous, I
would therefore have some diligent and sober deliberation taken, that in our
wrath we commit not that which afterward we may repent. This is a most
profitable and in all ages, necessary admonition, that in our anger we do or
appoint nothing. For the ancient writers said anger was an evil counsayler,
as the which is a very phrenesie for the while. And what goodness or equity
may a man hope for, of a mad man? Jacob. 1.
wherefore James most truly says: The wrath of man works not the
righteousness of God. And would God the authority of this sentence were as
much in these days, as we read it was among the Ethnickes. It is said of
Augustus that he thought the company of Athenodorus the Philosopher very
necessary for him, Erasmus among the Apothegmes, or witty sayings of Augustus.

Saint Ambrose upon occasion of a great slaughter committed by Theodosius
commandment, at Thessalonica, enjoined him from thence forth* that sentence
of death or banishment pronounced by him, should not be executed, till
after.xxx. days following: that if wrath or fury had pronounced any thing
unjustly, reason in the mean while might expende, and redress the same. See
Theodor. in the Tripartite ix. book 30. chapter.


because upon his departure from him, he admonished him that he should decree
or appoint nothing to be done in his anger, before he had first recyted the
Alphabet or names of the.xxiiij. letters. For the wyseman understood that
wrath, by leisure, would cool and abate. And as notable is it that another of
the Philosophers said to his servant that had offended him: Thou should be
beaten if I were not angry. But now a days among Christians, many think, that
men in their anger may do what they list, and they go about under the cloak of
anger, to excuse most heinous offenses. And in deed if God had made us Bears
or Lions, their excuse might take some place. But forasmuch as we be men, who
ought to be ruled with the bridle of reason, and word of God, we shall be
inexcusable, as many as let our selves be carried and ruled with the lust of our
affections. But chiefly men of authority and Judges, must be myndefull
hereof, least they being carried away with wrath, swerve from equity and
righteousness.

Gamaliel his saying also is worthy to be diligently considered: Take heed to
your selves. etc. Why the Apostles case was in question, and their life in
danger. But the wise man and diligent obseruer of Gods law, perceived that
Judges commonly were more in danger through giving false judgment, than they
that were accused. For what thing can chance unto them more acceptable than
death, that change this mortal life for an immortal? But these Judges
provoke the wrath of God against them, which sits in the midst of them, as
is written Psalm. 82. and will not suffer their boldness to go unrevenged,
which under the pretense of godly judgment, exercise unrighteousness.
Therefore whosoever bear office, let them think this said unto them, and take
heed to themselves, that being blinded with affections, they stray not from
the tracke of righteousness.

In the second part of his Oration, he intermedleth examples, out of the which
a little after, he draws the arguments of his sentence. He first alleges
examples very prudently, and so tells them, that at the first it appears
not what he will conclude thereof, least either they should not harken to his
saying, or without expending of it, reject it. Out of a great many he chooses
two specially, which as they were to all men known, so were they able most to
move their minds: the one was of Theudas, Concerning Theudas and Judas
Galilaeus. See Josephus book of the Iewishe ^ntiquities, the.18. book 1.
chapter. And second book of the Jews wars, or else Eusebius in the history
of the Church. 1. book. 3. chapter.
the other of Judas of Galiley. Josephus also makes mention of them, but
touching the order of the story, he much dissenteth from Luke, because he
writes Judas was many years before Theudas, whom yet Gamaliel openly
testifies to have risen long before him. But the authority of an holy writer,
must be of more credit with us than Josephus, who it is evident, was deceived
in many other things also, and whose writings might easily be corrupted and
perverted. In the histories there is no difficulty, and Gamaliel his purpose
is to teach none other thing thereby, but that none hitherto went unpunished,
that took upon them the name and office of the Messiah, but that they with all
their sect perished, which under this pretense went about to seek their own
profit and advancement, whereof afterward he gathers, that the like would
come to pass by the sect of the Christians, if Christ had been a fraudulent
and deceytfull worker, and that therefore they ought to abide the judgment of
God. etc. We have to observe in the rehearsal of these examples, what shall
become of them which will not embrace Jesus Christ the true Messiah. For such
men commonly as are authors and beginners of such mischief, become a pray for
sedicious and wicked persons. For who sees not here that saying of Christ
fulfilled: I came in my fathers name, and ye receive me not. If another come in
his own name, John. 5.
him you will receive. Which thing we see comes to pass also in these days.
For the nature of the world is incurable, delighting and rejoicing in seducers
and deceyuers, and hating the Ministers of the truth continually. Therefore it
comes to pass by the just judgment of God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
that they taste of effectual elusion, and wittingly and willingly run into
destruction.

But let us return to Gamaliel, to see how he uses these examples. A Dilemmas
is a kind of argument consisting of two propositions or parts, either of
which whosoever grants* shall be catched in a trip.
For of these he gathers the foundation of his sentence, whose proposition or
conclusion is, abstain from these men, and let them alone. Which to persuade
them, he brings his argument in form of a Dilemma, in this wise. This
business whereof the Apostles (whom you judge worthy to die) are ministers and
stewards, is either of God or of man. But whether soever it be, I think it good
you absteyne from shedding their blood. For if it be of man, and is governed
none other ways than by man's counsel, it will fall of it self, as the
examples of Theudas and Judas within these few years passed abundantly declare.
Therefore what madness were it to incense and stir up the ^urie of the
Commons, to take that out of the way, which within a short space though no
man set hand to it, will fall to the ground alone. But if it be of God, and
be governed and ordered by him, it cannot quayle by any force or counsel of
man. For what is man, being but dust and ashes, able to prevail against God?
Now, the end of this counsel must be diligently observed, the which while
many neglect, they take occasion hereby of a most pernicious opinion, whereby
(say they) no attemptes be they never so wicked, no errors be they never so
blasphemous, are by force to be kept under. Whereof can follow none other
thing, but the overthrow of all discipline, as well civil as Ecclesiastical.
For the Magistrate shall carry his sword in vain. And in vain does Paul
appoint such Ministers in the Church, as shall not only teach the truth, but
also be able to confute and convince the gaynesayers. Who will think that this
so wise a man meant to loose all the sinews of Civil and Ecclesiastical
government at once? It appears rather he had this meaning, to save the
Apostles from the fury of the Judges, and from present death, which he saw he
should most commodiously do, if he showed them, that they could not without
manifest danger conclude any extremity against them. For either they must
fall in danger to Godwarde, if the Apostles doctrine were true, and they the
ministers of God, or else of the commons, whose rage they were better to
avoid, than to provoke, specially in such a matter as could not long stand,
if it were but men's working. Furthermore, whether he understood the truth or
not, he yet seems ambiguous and doubtful in his talk. Therefore their case
is of a far other sort, which being illuminated with the true knowledge of
the truth, ought by office to defend it, and to root out errors and
wickedness.

The counsels or purposes of God can not be let.
In the mean season this ought to be to us as an Oracle, that we learn Gods
counsels can be hindered by no force of men, but that man's counsel falls of
it self. For God is eternal and immutable, so is his word eternal, Esaias.
40. Psalm. 33.
and can by no means be infringed. And David testifyeth that God scatters
the counselles of the Nations, but establishes his own counsel for ever. We
have examples every where to prove the same. Saul long stryued against the
counsel of God, who had fully decreeed to make David king of Israel. But the
more he stryued, the less he perceived, he prevailed, and found an evil end
of his contending with God. But chiefly this thing is to be applied to matters
of faith and religion. It is Gods counsel and decree that his son whom he
begat from everlasting, Psalm. 2.
should bear rule over his holy hill, that is to say, the church. To him it
was said: Psalm. 110.
Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thy foes thy footestoole. Satan from
the beginning of the world, has withstanded this devise and counsel. And in
Abel (whom for this cause, we may call the first Martyr of Christ) began
this persecution, which continued all the years following, and yet to this
hour endures. But the kingdom of Christ and the Church endures also, 1.
Cor. 3. Math. 16.
because it is buylt upon that rock, against the which the gates of hell are
not able to prevail. And if on the contrary side, a man consider the usage of
the Gentiles, and that monstrous Chaos of ydolatrie, which most mighty
Monarchies followed, confirmed by space of many years, allowed by the
consent, almost of all people and nations, assaulted at no time by force of any
man: he shall see it is fallen down of it self, and scattered abroad by the
spirit and word of Christ. The like reason is of the holy scripture, which
the Apostle calls inspired of God. For if a man consider the profane
writers, their Books surely were in great estimation, and had no enemies to
make them away, yet the most part of them are perished, and scarce are the
names of those books extant, which in times past most rich kings sought with
great diligence, and bought full dearly, as is reported of Ptolomeus
Philadelphus, Irenaeus in his v. book against heresies. And Eusebius in his
ecclesiastical history.v. book and viij. chap.
and such other like. But the holy books of Scripture so many times burned,
banished, and hated of most mighty princes, are yet forth coming, and being
almost translated into al tongues, be in stead of masters and teachers over
all the world. Let these things therefore serve for our instruction and
comfort, that we rashely do nothing against God, nor fear not the threatening
decrees and ordynaunces of the world and of tyrannes, against the kingdom of
Christ. But let us so acknowledge God for our revenger and defender, that we
may faithfully serve him in buylding up of his church, according to our
vocation, as Coadiutours of Jesus Christ: to whom be praise, honor, glory and
power for ever. Amen.

The.xxxix. Homely.
AND to him agreed the other: And when they had called the Apostles, they bette
them, and commanded that they should not speak in the name of Jesus, and let
them go. And they departed from the counsel, rejoicing that they were counted
worthy, to suffer rebuke for his name. And daily in the Temple, and in every
house they ceased not, to teach and preach Jesus Christ.
Because it is so ordained, that all men of a certain natural instinct, are
desirous of health and wealth, it can not be chosen, but they must be much
offended at adversity and tribulation, especially such as accustometh to rise
because of religion. For it comes to pass most times, that men judge of
religion, according to the effect and success thereof, and accuse that religion
of falsehood, whose professors they see exercised with persecutions and
adversities. Wherefore, it is not so profitable, as necessary, that we be well
instructed against all occasions of offenses. Which thing is the cause that the
holy ghost would have Luke so diligently write the afflictions of the
primitive Church. Wherein chiefly is to be observed, what has always been
the state of Christ's Church in this world, and how through the present and
faithful aid of the Lord, it has in times past been preserved in greatest
tribulations: that we neither be offended at the calamities of our days, as
unwonted, nor despair of Gods help, and preservation of his Church. This
present hystory shows us examples of both these things, the conclusion
whereof the Evangelist now discribeth, and first he tells what the coniured
enemies of Christ did, and afterward, what the Apostles did.

Concerning Christ's enemies gathered together in the counsel, The Apostles
are beaten with rods
Luke writes thus: They agreed unto Gamaliel, and when they had called the
Apostles, they bet them, and commanded them, they should not speak in the
name of Jesus, and let them go. He says, they obeyed Gamaliel his saying, when
yet they did two things, which he counseled them not to do. For they bette
the Apostles with rods, and renewed their first decree, whereby they go about
to prohibit the preaching of the Gospel. Yet they herein obey Gamaliel, that
they put not the servants of Christ to death, as they had minded to do, yet
could they not refrain, but beat innocent men with whippes and rods.
Therefore it must needs be, that they were in a very great rage, which when
matters seemed done and past, was not yet quenched. But this is the very
property of the persecutours of Christ, that when they seem pleased and
appeased, yet secretly foster hatred and fury in their minds, and seldom
will let any of Christ's ministers pass, without some mark of ignominy, or
open punishment, least they might seem unjustly to have risen against them,
and for that they would put those that follow them in fear. So Pylate,
although he judged Christ to be innocent, yet would he not let him go, before
he had scourged him. It is yet very comfortable, Luc. 23.
that the Lord so brydeled their rage by the only persuasion of Gamaliel,
that they durst not put the guyltlesse to death, whereof we gather, that the
wicked can not always do what they list, but are ruled even against their
wills, with the raynes of Gods providence. There are in this example diverse
other things, the observation whereof, is also very profitable for us in
these days.

No man must be offended at the afflictions of the ungodly as strange.
John. 16.
And first we are taught, that it is no strange and unwonted thing, though the
godly, and holy worshippers of Christ in these days, be subject to the will
and pleasure of the ungodly, and suffer afflictions. For Christ himself gave
us warning hereof long ago, and told us that a time would come, that
whosoever killed any of his people, should think he did God service. He
calls those that be his to the cross, and by his own example teaches us,
that we should not ho^e for any better state or condition, than he suffered.
Math. 16. John. 15.
The Apostles now feel the same, and are not offended thereat, but rather
oftentimes admonish us, that we be not offended, as at any strange thing, if
at any time we be tried by fire. See the first of Peter, the fourth Chapter. It
shall be profitable for us diligently to consider and think upon the same. For
in so doing it shall come to pass, that we shall neither use our selves
insolently in prosperity, nor yet be discouraged in adversity, because we have
foreseen them both.

Secondly, it is worthy of consideration, that the Apostles the elect
instruments of Christ, in a very good and holy quarrel (which to defend they
take upon them, according to Christ's commandment) are ignominiouslye beaten.
They are dece^ued that judge of religion and doctrine, according to the
afflictions.
Whereof we plainly gather, how foul and shameful an error they are in, which
judge afflictions, to be a token and argument of a naughtye and unrighteous
cause: of whose number are they which now a days, charge us as causers of all
kind of miseries and calamities, whereby it appears (say they) how we err
in our belief and religion. But herby it appears how destitute they be of
wit and reason, for that they perceive not those things, wherein the very
Ethnike Poets gave a better judgment. For it is well known what Naso says: I
wyshe he may miss of success,
That of the effect the deed does guess.


For if these men's judgments prevail, we shall find few or none of the true
worshippers of God, but they deserve likewise to be condemned, because a blind
man may see many of them, not only molested with many persecutions, but also
slain by the hands of most cruel enemies. And that we should hope for no
better, Christ's word, where he aduertiseth us of the state of the latter
days, abundantly teaches us. Wherefore, whosoever judges of religion,
according to the falling out and success of this world, may be judged like to
the Jews Soldiers, which gave Christ hanging on the cross, Uineger to
drink, and said. If he be the king of Israel, let him now come down from the
cross, and we will believe him. Math^ 27.
He trusted in God, let him deliver him if he will have him, for he said he
was the son of God. And surely what more tarte and eger Uineger can there be,
than such vpbraydings, whereby both the glory of God, and the certainty and
truth of his word, is called in question?

And yet we may not think, The causes of afflictions.
that God has no care nor providence of the world, when we see the true and
holy servant of God afflicted. For to say nothing of his secret judgments,
there are infinite other causes, wherefore God suffers these things so to come
to pass. For this ways God sometime pulls down the secret corruption and
haultinesse of our flesh, which unless it were tamed, would burst forth to the
great inconvenience and damage of his people. And we may not reply and say
that God many times uses to humble and bring down those that otherwise are
lowly enough, and never showed any great sign of fierceness or pride. For God
knows the naughtiness of man's inclination, and whereof we have need, better
and surelier than we can perceive. Therefore he chastises us in time, and some
while preuenteth our naughtiness, before it wax strong, and make us
incurable, and to be condemned with the world. Furthermore he tries our faith
by this means, not that he is ignorant of any thing, but that both we may be
an example to others, and also prove what infirmity as yet remains in us,
and how much we have need of the help and grace of God. Beside this, he will
hereby show unto the world, how sin displeases him, seeing he so severely
corrects the small faults of his electes, yea their secret and hidden
naughtiness. And hereunto had Peter a respect where he says: The time is
come, that judgment must begin at the house of God. If it first begin at us,
what shall be the end of them, which believe not the gospel of God? And if
the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner
appear? Would God these people would mark well these things, which of our
afflictions in these days (the consideration whereof, ought to serve for
amendment of their life) take occasion of great impiety and blasphemy.

Thirdly, it is not to be neglected how Christ delyuereth his Apostles from
peril of death, but yet suffers them to be beaten with rods. We must
beware of carelessness.
By which example he teaches us, to shake of carelessness from our minds,
least having escaped some one danger, we suppose all things after to be safe
and in quiet, but we must rather think there remains for us other conflicts,
whereunto we must prepare and make ready our self. For the which cause, God
every where exhorts us to watch and to pray. And we want not examples, that
teach us, how unhappy an end comes of carnal security and slothfulness.

But let us also see the other thing which they did otherwise than Gamaliel
counseled them. These wicked Bishops, and the other sitting with them, The
decree which forbad Christ to be preached is renewed.
renewed the decree, whereof mention was made in the chapter before going, and
commanded the Apostles, that from thenceforth, they should teach no more in
the name of Jesus, that is, that they should not preach the Gospel. This is a
great argument of stubbornness, which is peculyar to the wicked. For where in
all other things they are tossed to and fro with diverse affections, and are
light and inconstant: yet they remain most firmly in the hatred of the truth,
and most earnestly urge whatsoever things they think make for the overthrow
thereof. But let us diligently mark the tenor and form of their decree,
whereby they forbid them to speak in the name of Jesus. Thus the name of Jesus
Christ is hated of the wicked. The world can after a sort, abide the doctrine
of penance, and forgiveness of sins. For both in times passed, the wise men
of the Gentiles wrate many things touching repentance, and pourging of
sins, and in these days the Papists much entreat of both these points and
Articles. And where as the things they say, come out of the closet of humane
reason, they easily admyt and allow them, because they are wont to be led
with the reason of the flesh. But as soon as repentance and remission of
sins is preached in the name of Christ, according as he has commanded: this
doctrine the world cannot away with all, because it is contrary to the things
which man's wisdom has invented, in matters of religion, and salvation,
wherein men commonly use greatly to glory. For if Christ give us true
repentance (as Peter before has taught us) and we be not authors thereof our
self, then the liberty of our will is fallen, man's power is dashed, and we
have no cause to glory any more in our merits. Yea that is found true that
Christ says: without me you can do nothing. John. 15. Phil. 2.
Likewise is that saying of Paul true. It is God that works in us both the
will and the deed. Again: what have thou that thou have not received? And if
thou have received it, why reioycest thou as though thou had not received it:
1. Cor. 4.
Again, if we have remission of sins in the name of Christ, then is the
glory of our satisfactions quayled, and the trust in our own works is found
vain, and ridiculous, yea, an impious, and blasphemous Fair or market of holy
things, the which covetous men that think gain good religion, have brought
in. Further, where the heynousnesse of sin is such, that it could no way be
taken away, but by Christ's blood only: it easily appears, how earnestly
and fervently we ought to labor, that we fall not again from that holiness
and liberty, into the which we be brought, by the benefit of Christ. And here
are opened the springs of christian discipline, without the which the
profession of a christian name, serves more to damnation, than to salvation.
Yet men of their corrupt nature and disposition, abhor from all these things.
Whereby it comes to pass, that they can not patiently brook and hear the
doctrine of Jesus Christ. It is profitable to consider these things, least the
ignorant suspect the doctrine of the Gospel, which we see the world so
enuyeth and hates.

Let us pass from the wicked enemies of Christ, to his elect vessels the
Apostles, and let us see how they here behaved themselves. Of whom Luke
tells specially two things. The Apostles rejoice in the reproaches they suffer.
First, that they went from the Counsel, rejoicing that they were counted
worthy to suffer rebuke for Christ's name sake. The other is, that they ceased
not daily, both in the temple, and in every house to teach and preach Jesus
Christ. Of both which we have the more diligently to entreat, because they
serve much to our comfort, and instruction. The Apostles rejoice that they are
in reproach beaten with rods. Let no man imagine the Stoikes indolency or want
of affections in them, or that they were so far out of their wits, that
they could not judge between honor and shame. For it is both evident they
were men, and also subject to the affections that are in men, and such as had
diverse times defended their good name against the sclaunders of the wicked.

They rejoice that for Christ's name sake, they were able to suffer shame.
Where we see two weighty causes of joy concurring together. For first, it is
evident all men are sinners, and that even in the godly remain smatches of
sin, whereby they many times grievously offend, so that they deserve to be
punished of God. But such is the goodness and clemency of God, that he sends
such punishments under the name of Christ, and for the truth, which ought to
be punishments for sin. Which is, as if a Prince should deliver a thief
which had deserved hanging, from shameful death, and would set him in the
fore front among the chief of his Court, to fight for the liberty and
safety of his kingdom. And it is very like the Apostles had this
consideration, who could not as yet forget what they had commmitted, partly by
their foul flying away, and partly by their foul denial when Christ was
taken. And where their minds hitherto might be in doubt, now have they an
infallible argument of Christ's reconciliation, perceiving that they are made
partakers of his cross and affliction. Hereunto is to be joined another cause
proceeding of Christ's promises, whereby he promises the joys of the kingdom
of heaven, to them which suffer persecution for righteousness, and his names
sake. For he says: Blessed are they which suffer persecution for
righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are you when
men reuyle and persecute you, and shall falsely say all manner of evil sayings
against you for my sake. Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in
heaven. Again: Luc. 22.
you are they which have abidden with me in my temptations, and I appoynte unto
you a kingdom, as my father has appointed to me, that you may eat and
drink at my table in my kingdom. etc. Which promises because they saw
fulfilled and confirmed in Christ, which through the cross triumphed over all
the power of hell, and by death entered into the kingdom of heaven, they could
not but greatly rejoice, when they perceived that by these beginnings they
hasted to the inheritance of the heavenly kingdom. And as these things were
an occasion to the Apostles, to rejoice, so ought they to cause us in
afflictions to rejoice and be glad. Romans 5.
For this is the property of all Christians (as Paul says) to rejoice and be
merry in afflictions. And surely, there are notable causes, which in these
days ought to stir us to the consideration of these things, forasmuch as we
see these many years, the enemies of Christ swarming in Germanye, who for this
cause most cruelly persecute us, for that we have chosen rather to obey Christ,
than Antichrist. At whose victories and success many are so offended, that
they suspect, as it were, the doctrine of truth, and we have seen many (more
is the pity) as touching the faith, to have made shipwreck. But if we would
call to remembrance our sins, and would diligently consider the ingratitude
whereby Germany these many years, has partly neglected the unspeakable
benefit of Gods word, and Christian liberty, and partly betrayed it, and
with unbridled licentiousness of life, polluted the same: we should see the
wonderful goodness of God toward us, who would have us in ieoperdie for
the truth of his word, and become witnesses of his son, and yet had deserved
destruction through our sins and wickedness. And that it might appear, we
stood in danger, and suffered not for our own wickedness, but only for
religion and the truths sake, he sent in among us, such enemies, whose living
and manners abundantly declare, that they were not so much provoked with our
sins against us, as with our only confession of the truth. Therefore what
more evident argument of Gods goodness and grace could be showed unto us,
than that he has given us strength, not only to believe in Christ, but also
to suffer for his names sake? For hereof we may conclude with Paul: If we die
with Christ, we shall live with him^ 2. Tim. 2.
If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him. Because many see not
this glory of the cross, either they filthily fall away from the profession of
the faith, or else with ungodly reproaches, vpbrayde us with our faith, and
sclaunderously defame us, which mourn under the cross of Christ. As many
truly, as consider these things as they ought, cannot choose but glory and
rejoice in Christ, when they see his marks appear in their bodies. Therefore
greatly is their folly to be bewailed, who are offended at the afflictions and
cross of Christ, whereas they might rather gather arguments of comfort, and
joy of the same.

The perseueraunce of the Apostles in teaching.
Finally, Luke says of the Apostles, that without any regard had to this
wicked decree, they ceased not to teach and preach in the name of Jesus
Christ. And this they did openly in the Temple, as long as they could be
suffered. But when the tyranny of their enemies had driven them out of the
Temple, then began they to preach in the houses of the faithful. For Gods
truth is not bound to any certain place, but may be taught every where, so
that a regard be had of order and comlynesse, as Paul teaches. Thus they
perform in very deed that which they protested in the Counsel, 1. Cor. 14.
that is, how God was more to be obeyed than men: and by their example confute
them, which now a days affirm, that in matters of faith and religion, we must
simply obey the magistrates. As though God had made himself and his religion
subject to man's pleasure and appointment. But because we have already
entreated hereof, once or twyse, there needs no more to be said at this
time. In the mean whyle^, the^ constancy of the Apostles is wonderful,
which being scourged and beaten, do boldly go on in the office that God
appointed. The slothfulness of men in our days, is by this example confuted,
who having suffered somewhat for the truths sake already, think they have
now done all their duty, and will henceforth suffer neither pains nor
danger any more. In deed their doings might after a sort be borne with, if it
were in our own liberty to appoint the bounds of our labor. But because we
be servants, it becomes us to wait upon the Lords will, and to abide his
leisure with silence. And Christ says they be not meet for his kingdom which
look backewarde, but such as continue unto the end. See Luke the.ix. Matthew
the.xxiiij. Beside, it is the commandment of God, that we being delivered out
of dangers and distress through his benefit, should glorify him. Which
thing they cannot do that leave and forsake their standing, Psalm. 50.
and being overcome with fear of perilles, procure their ease and quietness.
Wherefore, let every man in his calling follow the constancy of the Apostles,
but chiefly such as the Lord has committed the dispensation and ordering of
his Church and word to: and let them not distrust his aid, who they see so
long agone had such a care of his flock. Whosoever can give a just account of
their ministerye unto him, shall be partakers of his kingdom. To him be
blessing, honor, glory and power for ever. Amen.

The sixth chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The.xl. Homely.
IN those days when the number of the Disciples began to increase, there
arose a grutch among the Greeks against the Jews, because their widows were
despised in the daily administration. Then the twelve called the multitude of
the Disciples together and said: It is not meet that we should leave the
word of God, and serve Tables. Wherefore (brethren) look you out among you
seven men of honest report, and full of the holy ghost and wisdom, to whom
we may commit this business. But we will give our selves continually to
prayer, and to the ministration of the word.
THe Evangelist Luke thus far has set forth the beginning, proceeding,
increase, and order of the primitive Church. In the which we have seen all
things very wisely ordered according to the word of God, and amongst the
horrible persecutions and cruel attemptes of the enemies, with most
prosperous success, administered. Howbeit, because the things there entreated,
be somewhat general, now at length the godly writer descends to matters
more special, declaring how certain peculiar persons employed their great
traueyle to promote and advance Christ's kingdom. Among whom, because Steven
which was one of the Deacons, of whom no mention has been heretofore made, is
the first, he begins most commodiously his history with the institution of
the Deacons, and in this present place teaches, upon what occasion the order
of Deacons was appointed, and then shows after what order and manner those
first Deacons were elected and ordained by the Apostles. And in this narration,
are many things, whereof in these days, the Church has great need.
Wherefore we shall speak of each thing diligently.

The cause why Deacons were ordained.
The multitude of the believers was the occasion and cause of this new devised
order in the Church, by reason of a quarrel and grutch grown among them. For
at this time the Church of Christ grew, and was marvelously increased, and
the enterprises of the wicked Bishops, which labored to oppress the Church,
were utterly vain. Howbeit, because this Church was gathered together of
diverse kinds of people, it could not long agree. For there arose a quarrel or
grutch among the Greeks, against the Hebrews. He calls them Greeks, or
Proselites, either because they returned from their Gentilitie to Iudaisme,
either for that they were borne of parents that were Jews, and scattered among
diverse nations. For it is evident that at this time the Gentiles were not as
yet received into the fellowship of the Church, forasmuch as long after this,
Peter was rebuked for having preached the gospel to Cornelius and his family,
men that were not circumcised, as appears hereafter in the.xj. Chapter. The
cause of this grutch was, for that the Greeks widows were neglected in the
daily administration, that is to say, in the distribution of the living dealt
every day among the believing. For it has been heretofore declared, how many
laid their moneys together, to be at the disposing of the Apostles, to give
thereof to every manne, as he should have need. In this case it chanced,
that the Apostles either being ouercharged with multitude of business,
ouerhipped some few amongst them, or else that they deemed they were
despised, which things, these strangers (a suspicious kind of people) above
all other, bitterlye complained of. And this thing was the cause why the
accustomed order and manner of administration of this money hitherto, seemed
now somewhat to be altered. But before we speak hereof, we have here certain
other things to observe.

And first is to be considered, how even the primitive Church was not void of
her defectes and faults, The primitive Church not void of faults.
which hitherto yet seemed prosperous, and perfect in all points. And they are
no light faults which are here recited, but horrible. For they observe
differences of Nations, where, in Christ there is none at all. (For in him is
neither Jew nor Gentyle, Scithian, or Barbarous. Gallat. 3. Colloss. 3.
and being factiouslye divided, they now bear not malice and grutch secretly
in their heart, but utter the bitterness of their minds with unjust
complaining. We see therefore the primitive Church infected with that fault,
for the which we read many thousands under Moses were sometimes ouerthrown
in the wilderness, 1. Cor. 10.
by Gods horrible judgment. To this may be added a detestable ingratitude
toward the Apostles, who they knew were occupied in many other affairs, yea,
who were once or twice before cast in prison, and who alone they saw bare all
the brunt and danger almost of the whole Church. And where it is a great
offense to have a wrong opinion of those that deserve well of us, and benefit
us, these by their murmuring call the Apostles credit into doubt, and give
occasion of sedition. And this they do in a time of persecution, when it
behooued them all to have been most careful of mutual love and unity. By which
example we are taught, that there can never be appointed so perfect a president
of a church, but yt always some thing may happen worthy to be amended, not that
there is either such obscurity in the word of God, or such incertaintie, that
nothing can be perfitely ordered thereby, but because such is the corruption of
our wit, that it always seeks occasion to infringe and break the most
holy ordinances of God. Therefore, foolish and most arrogant is the boldness
of those men, which think they have attained to the highest perfection, and
will abide no kind of admonishment. Furthermore, the rashness of them is here
reproved, which forsake those congregations, in whom they find or perceive any
blemishes or imperfections, and are the authors and causes of schism, wherein
the Anabaptists commonly are guilty. But if these men's reason should take
place, then shall not the primitive Church be judged free, nor thought worthy,
to whom a man may join himself. Also where Christ has chiefly commended to
us the keeping of unity, it easily appears, with what spirit they are
sedde, John. 17. 1. John. 2.
which think it but a trifle to break the unity of the Church.

Further it is to be observed, Grutch in the multitude.
that this grutch arose when the number of christians increased, when they
ought most to have acknowledged Gods grace, and to have embraced unity. But
this is all way seen where a multitude is, there is also murmuring and
confusion, because it is impossible in such diversity and desires of minds,
to satisfy all men's wyshes. And nature has so ordained, that they which are
not pleased and content, seek always some occasion of puling complaint. That
faithful servant of God Moses, whom the Israelites many times went about to
stone, when they remembered their flesh pottes in Egypt, found this to be
true. The like now feel the Apostles, who notwithstanding in their
administration of these things, used undoubtedly all kind of truth and
diligencie. Let no man therefore think it strange or wonderful, now a
days, though in that multitude of poor and needy, which we euerywhere see,
murmurings and complaynings be heard, which as it is in all places used, so
chiefly is it to be seen in Hospitals, and in such places where the poor are
found and mainteyned. For though there be no cause else, yet poverty of it
self is always whyning and complaining, which fault for this cause chiefly
deserves pardon, because there chances daily diverse occasions, which are
able to move minds, be they never so constant. Let them rather that have the
charge and oversight of the poor, beware that they give no just occasion of
murmr and complaint, whiles either they vnwyllingly distribute such things
as they have need of, or else wickedly convey away that which is given for the
finding of the poor. For it is no small or tryfling fault that they commit
herein. For they contamynat themselves with great sacrilege and lie unto the
holy ghost, and also be occasions to the poor of no small offense in that they
give them causes to be angry and moved, which otherwise had need to be
comforted. Let it weigh with them how the primitive Church was troubled with
none other encumbraunces, than such as sprang either of unjust, or negligent
administration of ecclesiastical goods. For the scripture teaches that Judas
stumbled at this block. John. 12.
We see also how Ananias and Sapphira made wrack of their salvation on this
rock. And in this place the Grecians take no other occasion of their seditious
murmuring, than for that they thought, their Wydowes were neglected, in the
public distribution of the Church goods. Which examples, the holy ghost would
therefore diligently to be written, to declare what dangers chiefly they
ought to shun and avoid, which purpose not unprofitable, to brag of their
christian calling, but in their doings, mean to express the same. For it
becomes not them which either have already forsaken their own goods, for
the name of Christ, or else ought to forsake them, if necessity so require, to
bestow the goods of the poor fraudulently and guylefully. And it is an
absurd, and never enough punishable offense, to purloyne and imbecill away
those things, which other men have given to the relief of the poor, for the
maynteyning of whom, we are commanded to spend all we have. But would God it
were as easy a matter, herein to correct the usage of our days, as we may not
without great cause bewail the same.

But what do the Apostles, after this grutch is risen? Do they rail on them
whom they hear thus murmr against them, The Apostles speedily consult of
the redress.
for their unjust distribution? Do they forsake these unkind murmurers, and
leave of in displeasure, all care of administration of the Church? Do they of
their private authority prescribe any new order to the Church? Or (which
thing might have had some show of charity) do they dissemble and make
delays, as though by delaying and winking at the matter, this mischief might
have been qualified? Luke makes no mention at all of any such things. For
they see that minds already to much incensed, are not to be more provoked:
neither can they for a few of murmurers sakes, leave of the care of the whole
Church, which Christ had committed to them, neither do they of their private
authority, as aspyrers to tyranny, prescribe Gods household or inheritance any
such thing: neither do they think it good, to dissemble or negligently to
pass over so apparaunt an inconvenience. But in time they provide a remedy,
and calling all the multitude together, they openly and friendly consult of
some better order and way to be appointed for the poor. This example or
president, is not only in all ages to be observed, but also with great
diligence to be followed, if we desire the churches preservation and safety.
1. Peter. 5.
For neither must the pleasure of a few be so borne with, that they shall do
whatsoever lyketh them, and like Lords prowdely bear rule over the church,
neither must open vices be winked at, especially such as give occasion of
murmurings and complaint. For both they gather strength, and creep further
with long tarryaunce, and so inflame the minds, that that evil which at the
beginning might easily have been cured or remedied, becomes incurable. It
also comes to pass, that hereby occasion is given to such as be rash and
seditious, to invade and usurp a rule and dominion over the Church, and so at
their pleasure to make and appoint new orders and reformation. This thing
ought they to have considered, which now a days brag of their false
succeeding the Apostles, and will be taken for chief rulers of the Church, who
think it intolerable that the godly Magistrates, should appoint any
reformation in their Churches, as the complaints of the whole world these
many years, could not awake them, to take away, the manifest and horrible
abuses, whereof they have been to long, both the authors and defendors. Yea and
we also ought to have considered this thing, which glory in the name of the
gospel, and will seem to have reformed our Churches. For who is so foolish,
that hears not the poor every day, for the like cause murmuring and
complaining? And would God the complaynts of poor were not more just than
theyrs, of whom it is here entreated. For in many places the Magistrates rape
and reaue the Church goods, and they are spent and consumed by such as neither
serve the Church, neither are led with any desire of Euangelike truth, the
poor in the mean while, and the ministers of the church also being in extreme
beggerie, and ready to ster^e for hunger, Math. 26.
whom Christ so diligently has commended to his church. To say nothing of the
neglecting of studies, and wasting of schools, the contempt of discipline and
good manners, and infinite like mischiefs, all which we may thank this wicked
robbing of churches and Colleges of. Many wise men see these things and lament
them. Diverse faithful Pastors of Churches, reprove them and desire
amendment. Many openly bewail it, and there want not which with seditious
murmuring, testify the indignation of their minds. But what profit is there
in all these ways? There be men which think these murmurers, are to be
brydeled, by threats and proclamations, and by punishments. And they that
seem to be the best, neglect and care nothing at all therefore. So no man
thinks earnestly of any reformation, because no man will be put out of
possession of the Church goods. But the Lord will find a way one day, and by
his horrible judgment, will awake these sluggardes, whom no admonishment of
his divine word, nor complaints of the poor can awake.

But where the matter is of great wait, that is here entreated, The Apostles
oration concerning the ordeyning of Deacons.
Luke also recites the Apostles Oration, wherein they proposed this matter to
be discussed of the church. The Oration is deliberatiue, and the state thereof
is, that Deacons must be ordained, to whom the distribution of the common
money, and care of helping the poor, may be committed. And the Oration
consists of three points. The first conteyneth a brief excuse, wherein they
both render a reason of their present doing, and modestlye put away the crime
laid against them, by these murmurers: so that they take upon them all the
fault, least any occasion of suspicion, or vpbrayding should remain. For they
say, It is not meet that we should leave the word of God, and serve at the
table. The argument is deduced of impossibility. For they declare, that it can
not be, that they can discharge both the offices, that they have hitherto
sustained, wherefore, it is necessary that one of them be committed to some
other. They also declare that no man ought to take it grievously, if they have
made any default, consydering the manifold affairs, wherein hitherto they had
been occupied. It is as much as if they should say. Because the money was
taken unto us, which certain godly disposed had given to the churches use, we
gladly took upon us, the distribution of the same, least we should seem any
way to neglect the Churches commodity. But we learn by experience, that we
are not able both to satisfy the place of teaching, and also this office of
distribution, and we confess that among so manifold businesses, something
might be ouerseene of us. Wherefore we must lay aside the one or the other of
these offices. But we may not intermyt the office of teaching, seeing Christ
has commended the same unto us, and has appointed us witnesses of the things
he has done. Therefore, this other office, must be appointed to some other,
that may serve at the table, that is to say, which may see to the things,
belonging to the helping and succouring of those that be poor.

We are taught in the first part of this relation, how great the dignity of
the gospel, and word of God is, The dignity of the gospel.
consydering the Apostles prefer the preaching hereof, before the
ecclesiastical distribution and helping of the poor, which yet is a most
godly thing, and very necessary. Neither were they ignorant that the
ministers of the Gospel ought by no means to despise the poor, seeing
afterward they so earnestly commended the care of them to Paul and Barnabas.
Galat. 2.
But when the matter came to this point, that either the ministry of the
table, or word must be intermytted* they think it unmeet, to neglect the
preaching of the word, under the pretense of looking to the poor. Because
greater respect is to be had of the soul, which is fed with the word of
God, than of the body and bodily food, as Christ himself teaches: Math. 6.
Seek first the kingdom of God. etc. Yea Christ himself prefers the
study of his word, before all other duties, which sometimes were done unto
him. For he answered the woman, that said, blessed be the womb that bare
thee, and the pappes that gave thee suck: yea blessed are they rather which
hear the word of God and keep it. Luc. 11.
Whereunto is to be referred the story of Martha and Marie, Luc. 10.
Lazarus sisters, in the same Evangelist.

And Paul thought he ought to have more regard of the Gospel, than of the
sacraments, where he says, he was not sent to baptize* but to preach the
gospel. 1. Cor. 1.
Furthermore the Apostles in this place plainly teach, that the excellency
and weight of his office is such, that it requires a peculiar man, void of
all other cares and labors. Which was the cause that Christ would not have his
Apostles occupied in the administration of Empyres and kingdoms of this
world. Math. 20. Luc. 22.
Herein our counterfeit Bishops in these days are very faulty, which will
do any thing rather than preach, and are oftener seen in the Courts and
Camps of princes, than in the Pulpit, 1. Tim. 3.
where Paul says the chief property in a Bishop is, to be able to teach.
But would God they only herein offended, and that we had not among us, that
either through immoderate desire of riches, or in vanities, to say, in
banqueting, hawking and hunting, and sometime in dishonest exercises, spent
not the greatest part of that time, that otherwise should be employed to
reading and teaching. They shall one day feel the horrible judgment of God,
when the blood of those which have perished through their negligence, Ezec.
3.33. Math. 24.
shall be required at their hands.

In the second part of the Oration, they show what is to be done, for the
succouring of the afflicted Church, What manner of men must be chosen to be
Deacons.
where they say: Look out therefore among you seven men of approved
honesty, being full of the holy ghost and wisdom, women we will appoint for
this business. They think it good to ordeyne Deacons or Stewardes, to whom
this charge might peculiarly appertain. And they will have seven to be
chosen, because they suppose that number sufficient for that time, not that
they would have all Churches bound to that number. Although this might seem
profitable to commit the charge of public goods to no fewer, because many
times comes to pass, that such either wax the more insolent, or else seek
after their private gain, unless they be restrained by the rule and
authority of others. And though no such thing fall out, yet a few are sooner
suspected, than many standing charged with one thing. But least they might err
in their election, they diligently declare what manner of men must be ordained.
First, they will have them chosen out of the company of the faithful.
Therefore none must be admitted thereunto, which is an adversary of the faith,
or estraunged from it. Then, they require men of a tried honesty, to the intent
that public goods might safely be committed to them. Thirdly, they look that
they be full of the holy ghost, not such as are led and ruled altogether
with filthy affections. Last of all, they will have a respect to be had of
their wisdom, that is, of their skill and dexterity in handling of matters,
because without this, the lawful dispensation of such goods cannot be
exercised. 1. Tim. 3.
Join unto these, the things that Paul requires in Deacons, and it shall
easily appear, what in these days is to be observed and followed. But as in
other things, so herein also is committed great oversight. For with the
Papists has nothing remained but the bare name of Deacons only, yea, even
they that are called Gospellers, whether they bring the Church goods to the
public Treasury, or convert them to other uses, they commonly make such
Stewardes as are strangers from the faith, which hate the word of God, and
the Ministers thereof, who when they have wasted and consumed their own goods,
seek to enriche themselves by the Church goods, whom a man may see rather
full of wine, than of the holy ghost, and not led so much with the spirit
of wisdom, as with the impotent and unruly perturbations of the mind. These
men grieuouslye offend, but no less do they offend, by whose voices such
men are chosen. 1. Tim. 5.
For Paul testifies that they are partakers of other men's sins.

In the third and last part, The duties of Ministers of the church.
they declare what they themselves intend to do, least any man might suspect
they sought their own ease or idleness. We (say they) will give our selves
to prayer, and to the ministration of the word. By this word ( give) they
express an ardent and earnest industry and endeavor, which all Ministers of
the word must have that will do good in their office. In two duties they
comprehend the chief points of Ecclesiastical ministry. The first is,
doctrine or teaching, which, for that it must be taken from the mouth of God,
we have need diligently to study the holy scripture, in the which God
speaks to us. 1. Tim. 4.
Therefore Paul bids Timothy to apply his reading. Again, because the
same must be applied to edification, we must take good heed that the word of
God be duly broken and divided, that it may serve as well to instruct as to
comfort every man. But because the endeavor and diligence of the Minister is
in vain, except God give the encreas: he must by continual prayer be
entreated, 1. Cor. 3.
that he will vouchsafe to draw and inspire the minds of the hearers, by his
holy spirit. Christ our Lord joined both these together, whose example the
Apostles in this case think good to imitate. Let as many as be Ministers of
the Church follow the same, and they shall perceive that they shall not
labor in vain. For Jesus Christ that true and supreme king of the Church,
shall with the grace of his holy spirit prosper their studies: to whom be
blessing, honor, power and glory for ever. Amen.

The.xlj. Homely.
And this saying pleased the whole multitude, and they chose Steven a man full
of faith and of the holy ghost, and Philip and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and
Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicholas a Convert of Antioch. These they set before
the Apostles, and when they had prayed, they laid their hands upon them. And
the word of God increased, and the number of the Disciples at Jerusalem
multiplied greatly, and a great company of the Priests were obedient unto the
faith.
AS Luke has descrybed a sound and most perfect pattern of the primitive
Church: even so he declares with great diligence, the vice that sprang in the
same. The beginning whereof was about the Church goods, and how many ways
they offended of late, we perceived. The Apostles erred of ignorance, and
multitude of businesses, being not able to discharge two offices at once. But
of a little error follows a great offense. For certain conceived and took
occasion hereby of discention, and became murmurers, so that now the Church
seemed in a far other case than heretofore it was, when Luke said all the
people were of one mind and will. The holy ghost meant hereby to teach us,
that no man should be offended; as at a strange thing, though he perceived
some blemishe or vice to spring in any Church, or congregation. For what so
much argues us to be men, as to err, and to be deceived? we must therefore
study how to correct these things, that vices spread not to broad, or by
delays become incurable. The Apostles well noted these things, which calling
the multitude together, modestly excused themselves, and also friendly gave
counsel what was best to be done. This is the end and scope of their
counsel, that Deacons or Stewards may be chosen, to whom both the charge of
public goods, and also the oversight of the poor in the congregation might
be committed, and least they should err in their choice, they diligently
declare what manner of men ought to be chosen. Then follows what was done
after the Church by their authority had allowed the Apostles counsel. This is
the second part of this present history, wherein is described the choosing of
the Deacons of the Church: In the consideration whereof it behooves us to be
diligent, that we may understand what we also ought to do in these days.

The congregation choseth Deacons.
First, he declares by whom the Deacons were chosen. This saying (says he)
pleased the whole multitude, and they chose Steven. etc. Then the Deacons are
chosen by the consent and authority of the whole Church. Therefore the choosing
of Deacons, to whom the administration of Church goods is committed,
belongs to all the Church. For where these goods be consecrated to the whole
Church, it must not be suffered, that a few shall have the disposing of them at
their pleasure, or choose the disposers of them. For so may it come to pass,
that those goods, which the godly and faithful of a godly and christian
zeal, gave for the conservation of the Church, may be an occasion to have the
same spoiled. It is worthy of great commendation, that Luke says the counsel
of the Apostles pleased them. For they perceived it was right and necessary,
that they whom Christ had appointed to preach the Gospel, should not be
burdened with temporal affairs. They perceived also that this institution
agreed with the example of Christ, who had committed to Judas the purse of his
daily expenses, and care of the poor, for that he would have neither himself
nor the other Apostles hindered in the ministry of the word. Therefore with
one consent they agree to the Apostles saying. This is the right and proper
mark of the true Church, that she harkeneth to the voice of her shepehearde,
John 10.
and strives not against Christ's counsel or example. And their frowardness
is inexcusable, which will have nothing to be altered or changed, because they
would not seem to have erred, although they see the order and form of the
Church, altogether marred and corrupted. The Louianistes offend in this
behalf, who think this Maxima to be defended with tooth and nail, that the
Roman Church cannot err. etc. and will admit no reformation, although they
are neither able to dissemble, ne yet to excuse great errors and abuses in the
same. We see diverse Gospellers also stumble at the same stone, which, while
they will not swerve one straw breadth from the first reformation of their
Churches, do not only mainteyne old errors in some articles, but suffer new
also daily to arise. Let us therefore follow the readynesse to yield that was
in the primitive Church, least while we seek to be clear from all suspicion
of error, we become altogether distayned with errors.

Secondarily, is declared who they were that the Church did choose. A scroll of
the Deacons names.
For there is rehearsed a scroll of their names, in the which as Steven is the
first, so is he commended with a singular praise, in that it is said he was
full of faith and of the holy ghost. The occasion of which commendations, is
partly because of the history of Steven following, and partlye for that we
might understand, what the Church chiefly observed in this election. For here
is no yielding to private affections, nor no admission of ambitious men's
sleyghts and subtelties, who are led either with desire of private glory or
utility. But they judge that such ought to be chosen as were able to answer
the rule prescribed by the Apostles. Read what Eusebius writes of him, in the
third book of his story, and.29 chapter, citing Clemens Alexandria in his
third book, (...) for the same.
Yet among these was Nicholas rehearsed who (as the ancient writers say) made
his wife common, and was the author of the detestable sect of Nicholaites,
whose works Christ says he hates. Apoc. 2. Neither could the whole Church
with the exhortation of the Apostles use such diligence, but such a beastly and
wicked man, was able to get into this most holy order. Which certainlye was a
thing both wonderful and absurd, unless we were assured that as well the
affairs of all mankind, as of the Church, were ruled by Gods providence. And
the Lord suffered him by his just judgment to obtain this notable room in
the Church, because the same served much for our instruction. For first we
learn that wicked men many times creep, and get into the society of those
that are good and godly. For Satan cease not to throw and sow taxes among
the good seed, while men sleep. Math. 13.
So we see Judas was reckoned among the Apostles, whom Christ knew to be a
Devil and Traitor. Wherefore no man ought to be offended, John. 6.
if the like fall out in our days. For God will have his people tried and
exercised. And there must needs be heresies or sects, that the chosen may be
tried. 1. Cor. 11.
Furthermore, he makes us attent to examine both our selves and other, that we
either deceive not our selves, or suffer others to deceive both us and the
Church. Which thing in elections, is of all other things to be regarded. For
if the primitive Church were deceived in her judgment, being fervent in an
holy zeal of Christ, what think we will come to pass, if the corrupt
affections of the flesh be taken to counsel, or if judgments be rashly and
unadvisedly given? The example of Nicholas teaches us further, what a care and
consideration they ought to have which think they stand sure, 1. Cor. 10.
least perhaps they fall. For as of nature we be prove to all kind of vice, so
the devil our common enemy, is not idle, but walk eth still up and down like
a roaring Lion, 1. Peter. 5.
seeking whom he may devour. Neither ought they to promise them self
security and safety, which have before their eyes the falls of so many holy
men, Prouer. 24.
and know that even the just man falls seven times in a day. To conclude,
they are reproved by this example, which vaunt themselves in the bare name of
Predecessors and succession, manifestly offending against the laws of God. We
see the Nicholaites which seem to have been the beginners of the heretics
called Gnostici, the wickedst kind of people that ever the world brought
forth, had this Nicholas for their author, whom the primitive Church thought
not only worthy to be of the number of the faithful, but as far passing
others, chose him to be one of the Deacons. Paul says that Antichrist shall
sit in the very Church. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
And Christ out of the Prophets teaches us, that abomination shall occupy
the holy place. It is therefore foolishness to brag of succession, Math. 24.
and holiness of order, and not to endeavor to answer our vocation.

The Deacons are publicly authorized.
But let us rrturne to the Deacons, whom we said were even now elected, and let
us see what was furthermore done. For they enter not by and by into their
office, but are first confirmed by common authority. And first they are set
before the Apostles, as unto whom belonged chiefly both the charge of the
whole Church, and care of the poor. Whereby those new Deacons were taught, that
they ought so to behave themselves, in their office that they might be able to
give an account to the Apostles, whose severity in these affairs not long
before appeared in the examples of Ananias and Sapphira. By this example, the
men of our days be reproved, which think it meet, that Ministers of the
word and congregation, should be utterly debarred, from the view and
oversight of public goods, and that it is unfit they should talk of the
distribution and distributors of Ecclesiastical goods. Howbeit it is evident
that they ought not to neglect the care of the poor, whom Christ has put in
charge with his whole church. For with what reason shall they neglect one
piece, which are bound to see to the whole? Therefore, these men must either
deny, that the poor belong to the Church, or else they must needs let the
Ministers have a care and oversight of them. And how can they deny but the
poor are a part of the Church, seeing Christ so tendereth them, that he takes
whatsoever is done to them, as done to himself. But it is plain, what these
men of ours hunt for, verily even this, that without all restraynt, and fear
of discipline, and comptrolment, they may make hauock of the Church goods, at
their pleasure, which goods were appointed for the relief of the poor.
Therefore whosoever will faithfully and with commendation live in the
ministry, must not stowpe or yield to this their tyranny. Secondarily, Luke
makes mention of prayers. These the Church with one consent, powered forth, for
the Deacons newly chosen, that they might obtain for them the gifts of the
holy ghost, whereof they knew, they had most need. They commend unto us by
their example, the study and care of religion, which as in all other things,
so in those things which belong to the public administration of the church, it
is chiefly to be regarded. And they are not unworthily judged wicked, which
contemptuouslye neglect prayers, either private, or public. Furthermore we are
taught, that we should pray earnestly for all them, which are in any public
office. For as such men labor not for themselves only, but are careful and
vigilaunt for the weal public: so, if they offend in any thing, commonly it
is the occasion of some public evil. Therefore we see how the Church not
long before, made their public and common prayers, for the Apostles. And Paul
commends himself to the public prayers of the congregations, that he may
preach the word of salvation freely, and with open mouth. He commands the
christians, to pray for magistrates, Ephesians. 6.
and all other in authority, that they that are not able in other things, at
leastwise with their prayers, might help and promote the public weal. Which
was a thing so observed in the primitive Church as Ecclesiastical writers
testify, that the christians daily prayed unto God for the Roman Emperors,
being yet infidels. And surely it is an argument both of an unthankful and
blockishe mind, to have no care of them, to whom the weal public is
committed. The third thing in their election, was the imposition of hands,
which was partly a sign of their consecration, and partly of their commission.
For as the priests in times past, used to lay their hands upon the
sacrifices, thereby declaring they were consecrated unto God, so did the
Apostles use to lay hands upon the Ministers of the Church, to the end they
might know they were consecrated unto God, and be the more assured of their
vocation. And it was not a little needful for them, to be admonished hereof
by a public ceremony. For except a man certainly understand, that he is
called and ordained of God, he shall do his duty no longer than he sees all
things proceed prosperously. For if adversity begin once to thunder, because
he is vpholden with no hope of Gods help, he shall dishonestly forsake his
tackle and standing. In the mean while let us diligently observe, that they
join prayers to the imposition of hands. For hereby the declare that the
grace of the holy ghost is not tied to the outward sign, but that it comes
from God, and is to be obtained by godly prayer. And this is the most sincere
way of making Ministers and Deacons of the Church, which it is euydent the
primitive church used many years. With the which if a man would compare the
things that the Papists observe, he shall see the ancient simplicity utterly
worn out, and all the things which belong to the true worship of God, and
which should admonish men of their duties, with most vain and cold
ceremonies, all to be blotted and blurred.

But least any man might think this ordeining of Deacons, The profit ensuing
of the error corrected.
and so diligent a correction of this error, had been superfluous or
unprofitable, Luke shows that great utility ensued thereof. For the word of
God increased, both for that it spread farther unto others, and also for that
it did bring forth more fruit in the minds of them, which before had heard
and received it. Then again the number of the faithful, whom the chief
Bishops and priests desired, not only to have diminished, but utterly to be
extinguished, was meruaylously increased, and that in Jerusalem, where the
power and authority of the enemies was greatest. Furthermore, not only the
commons and those of the lay fee, but now also the priests begin to submit
themselves to the obedience of faith, and to profess Christ. These things
have in them marvelous consolation, if they be diligently considered. For they
teach us by what armor and weapons Christ's church is most profitablie enlarged
and conserved. Uerily, not with the counsels of fleshly wisdom, or men's
devises, but with purity of doctrine, and holy discipline, whereof this ought
to be the end, that all outward things may answer to the doctrine of
Christ, and that such errors as happen, may diligently be corrected. And the
end and mark of all together must be the glory of God, and the salvation of
many. When these things be diligently observed, the wiser sort (which before
were feared with novelty) begin to give ear to the doctrine and credit it.
And no doubt, but there would be in these days, better success in church
affairs, if we in this behalf, were not utterly deaf. For as though the bare
profession of a christian name were sufficient to salvation, we stay ydlely in
the same, and are moved neither with public corruption of manners, and
manifest errors, nor with the just complaints of the godly, earnestly to
amend the things, that ought to be amended. Therefore through our negligence
and security, it comes to pass that the gospel in these days goes no
better forward. Again, we are taught by an euydent example, how vain and
forcelesse the enterprises of the wicked are against the kingdom of Christ.
For the more they rage, the more it spreads: and now the christian faith
finds place among the priests, which faith before was thought unmeet to be
suffered in the common people. The like thing happened while Christ was yet
upon the earth, when Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathaea believed in him, whom
all the residue of that order wyshed out of his life. Yea while Nero by cruel
proclamations, thundered against the Church, yet were there found in his own
Court, which professed Christ, as Paul to the Philippians witnesses. This is
also a singular token of the goodness and mercy of God, that he does vouchsafe
to illuminate with the knowledge of his truth, a many of that number, that had
shed Christ's blood, and were taken to be the chief procurers of his death.
Who shall henceforth despair in his sins, when we see these men have found
forgiveness? Let us rather hearken to Christ, which does of his own accord,
offer to sinners remission and peace, and did vouchsafe to pray for them, that
crucified him. And yet this example serves not only for our consolation, but
also for our instruction, that we also with like facility and readiness must
pardon them that do us iniurye. For so it shall come to pass, that we having
the true spirit of the children of God given unto us, and being delivered from
all the debt of our trespasses, shall come to the inheritance of the heavenly
kingdom, with Jesus Christ the only begotten son of God: to whom be
blessing, honor, power and glory for ever. Amen.

The.xlij. Homely.
AND Steven full of faith and power, did great wonders and miracles among the
people. Then there arose certain of the Synagoges, which is called the
Synagoge of the Libertines, and Cyrenites, and of Alexandria, and of Cilicia,
and of Asia, disputing with Steven. And they could not resist the wisdom,
and the spirit which spoke. Then sent they in men, which said, we have heard
him speak blasphemous words against Moses, and against God. And they moved
the people and the elders, and the Scribes, and came upon him and caught him,
and brought him to the counsel, and brought forth false witness which said:
This man cease not to speak blasphemous words against this holy place, and
the law: for we heard him say: This Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this
place, and shall change the ordinances which Moses gave us. And all that sat
in the counsel, looked steadfastly upon him, and saw his face as it had been
the face of an Angel.
FOr as much as our Savior Jesus Christ, is entered into the kingdom and glory
of God his father, by the bitter death of the cross: the same lotte must all
they abide, that desire to live godly, and to be partakers with him, of the
heavenly kingdom. And forbicause we are offended with nothing, more than the
cross, God would have us instructed and confirmed, not only with precepts,
but also with the example of the primitive church, that we should not be
offended with persecution and adversity, as at any strange and unwonted
thing: for as much as we see in times passed prosperous successes among
horrible persecutions mixed, the church for all that, still increasing. An
example whereof ye story that we presently have in hand shall show us, if it be
compared with the things that went next before. For Luke has declared unto us
the most prosperous proceedings of the gospel, and how not only the common
people, but also many of the priests, began to believe it. So that the
church affairs, seemed now to have been in quiet and safety, seeing it was
defended by so many and such singular Patrones. But behold a new conflict
begins more horrible and perilous than any yet before was, in the which
Steven by whose side the whole church of Christ was foyned at, was constrained
to defend Christ's quarrel, not only by words, but also by stowte
protestation of his faith and by his blood. The use of the history, is
chiefly in this point, that we must not be offended, though grievous tumults
suddenly arise, when all things seem hushte, and when they whom we hoped to
have our faythfullest defendours, either are not able, or wylling to help us.
For God suffers it so to come to pass, to take from us the trust in carnal
helps, and for that we should learn in deed, that Christ's kingdom is not
enlarged, neither by host of men, nor by force, but by the spirit of the
Lord. But because diverse other things are here concurrent, which make both for
our instruction and consolation, the whole history with all the circumstaunces
is diligently described of Luke. First, beginning with the description of the
person, he shows who Steven was, and of what calling. Then he descrybeth his
enemies, and their attempts against him. Thirdely, he declares how Steven
behaved himself in this concertation, and his glorious martyrdom. Now will
we speak of the things that belong to the treatise of this present place.

Luke in the beginning showed how Steven was the first in the number of the
Deacons. The description of Steven.
Now he adds the things making for this present history. And first he
says, he was full of faith, doing us to understand, that he was sincere and
no bragger or counterfaiter of the faith, but endued with true faith, and
fervent in the zeal of Christ's glory. He joins power to his faith, whereby
we understand the gift of miracles, according to that treatise of Paul,
touching the division of gifts, in the first to the Corinthians.xij. Chap. And
as he declared his faith by his feruencie of zeal, so he testified that other
gift of the holy spirit, by notable miracles and woonders. And although
nothing is said of his public sermons, it appears yet by order of the text,
that he used to preach both often, earnestly and effectuously. Wherefore, we
may here note by the way, that the Deacons in the primitive Church were not
wholye debarred from the ministry of the word, but although they were
chiefly busied about distribution of the Church goods, yet they bestowed
their labor as far as they were able in other services of the Church, that
by this mean as Paul says, they might win themselves a good degree. 1.
Tim. 3.
Here chiefly is to be observed the verity of Christ's promises, whereby he
instructs his faithful and industrious servants. Math. 25.
For he says, they shall be set over great and many things, which are
faithful in small matters. He promises, that they that have, shall receive
more. Steven proves the same true, as this place teaches. For where he well
used the gifts of the holy ghost, which he had in the beginning, and did
faithfullye administer temporal goods, he is increased with more gifts, and
advanced to higher degree, yea being made match with the Apostles, he
begins to distribute the eternal and heavenly treasures of the Gospel,
with great praise and utility, whom Christ has vouchsafed to adourne with
the crown of martyrdom. Let us therefore be stirred up with the consideration
of this example, and not suffer our selves to be pulled back from well doing,
with the consideration of our unworthiness, whereas we may attain to the
increasing of the holy ghost, by faith and diligence, and may prepare for our
selves an entrance and degree into more excellent ministeries.

Steuens adversaries.
Howbeit this valiant and stout soldier of Christ, finds by and by such as
withstoode his godly purposes and enterprises. For there stood up men of
diverse Nations, of the school or College of the Libertines, which disturbed
and troubled him. For where the city of Jerusalem was ordained to be a place
both for outward religion, and for an university and study of the law:
there were in it diverse Colleges of Jews, which either for religion sake, or
for study, came thither from diverse nations: of the which number this Sinagoge
of the Libertines was, who were the principal and chief Captains of this
conspiracy, devised against Steven. But how this Sinagoge came so to be
called, there are diverse opinions amongst the Interpreters. Howbeit, I like
best their opinion, which suppose there was a certain College builded by
those of Rome which were called Liberti, Liberty were such as had sometime been
bondmen* and after, ^^^ding favor in their Lords sight were made free and
advanced to great dignity
wherein strangers were taught and instructed. For we know that these Liberti
were of great power and authority, and that many of them went about to win
the favor of the people, by such benefits, we learn by example of the
Centurion, whom the Priests for this cause commended unto Christ, because he
had builded them a Sinagoge. But it is not without a cause that Steven is
resisted, by men of diverse Nations, and such as are learned, and of experience.
For as the mysteries of the kingdom of Christ, are for the most part hidden
from the wise of the world: so the greater is the glory of the Saints, which
they get by such conflicts. This serves also to comfort us, that we yield not
for fear, if at any time we see our selves assaulted by many and furnished
enemies. Now it is profitable to consider after what sort, and with what
conueyances, these conspirators appoint their onset against Steven.

Luke says they begin with disputation, Steven is set on by disputation.
the end and drift whereof as appears, was none other but to catch and
entangle him in his own words, which thing the Scribes also many times assayed
against Christ. For trusting in their wit and learning, they hoped easily to
have the victory of a rude and unlearned body, or at least such an one as yet
had no great name of learning. But the matter fell out far otherwise than
they looked for. For he whom they supposed to be rude and unprovided, being
instructed with heavenly wisdom, and prompted with the holy spirit, does not
only answer the questions they propone, but uses such plenty and force of
arguments, that they by no means were able to resist him. Whereby we see
again, that Christ who is the very truth it self, never fails of his
promise. He promised his spirit to be a comforter and counselor, to lead
those that be his into all truth. He promised them vtteraunce and wisdom,
John. 14.
against the which, men should not be able to stand. Luke. 21.
He has hitherto performed his promises, as we have seen in the examples of
the Apostles. And the treasure of this heavenly wisdom is not yet spent and
drawn out, but Steven also draws out thereof such things as are necessary in
this conflict. Let no man therefore fear either the wisdom or authority of
the world, 1. Cor. 1. Coloss. 2.
forasmuch as it is not our business but Christ's that we have in hand, who
is made unto us of his father, wisdom, and in whom all the treasures of
knowledge and wisdom are hidden. Let us also consider that he is greater that
is in us, 1. John. 4.
than he which makes such a stir in the world.

But do these Sophistical Libertines being overcome by disputation, False
witnesses are brought against Steven.
yield? No, but turning them unto unlawful and crafty conueyances, they
labor to oppress him by lies and false witnesses, whom they perceived
strengthened with truth, and therefore invincible. They suborned men that had
their tongues to sell, which through slanders went about to bring the most
faithful Preacher of Christ in envy of all the people. And of these we will
speak a little hereafter. Now let us consider how far they use to go, which
nourishe hatred in their hearts against the truth, and will not yield being
yet ouercommen. Such men are given up into a reprobate sense, and become so
blind, that under the pretense of godly zeal, wherein they wickedly glory,
they think they may do what they will, and fear not most manifest and
heinous wickedness. For these Libertines could not be ignorant of the law of
Talio, appointed by God, Talio, is when the doer suffers such like damage and
hurt himself, as he does to an other. Look the place. Deuter. 19.
for false witnesses. And though there were no laws any where extant, yet
common reason teaches us, that they commit grievous a fault, which either
bear false witness themselves, or else bring forth and allege false
witness. But they that burn in hatred of the truth, make no count of these
things, and it comes to pass by the just judgment of God, that they are
bereft of common reason, and therefore pollute themselves with great
wickedness, chasing and driving away the truth, after she has shyned in their
hearts. There are diverse examples hereof extant as well old as new, amongst
which this one is very notable, which the Bishops of the Counsel at Constance
used toward John Husse, against all right and law, whom they were not
afraid with breach of their own promise, and the Emperors safe conduct,
cruelly to burn, having none other cloak to excuse their heinous fact, but
that promise was not to be kept unto heretics. Let no man therefore marueyle,
though he perceive him unjustly and unworthily entreated. In the mean season
let us learn in the beginning to quench the fire of hatred, glimering against
the truth, least we also fall into the like blindness and incurable
frowardenesse.

Steven is oppressed with sedition and taken.
Now, because the importunacie of a few could little or nothing prevail
against the doctrine of the truth, these most subtle Sophisters labor
earnestly to set all the people with the Elders and Scribes in Steuens top. And
as may be gathered bythe circumstaunces, they raise an open tumult in the
city, meaning to apprehend him and bring him before the counsel. Which is an
old policy of Satan, meaning to make them away in an uproar or sedition,
whom they see armed with the defense of truth and law. But most times it
comes to pass, that they which with seditious sleyghtes assault thetruth, do
most miserably perish by sedition, as we may see it has happened to the nation
of the Jews. And here is set forth a notable example of the leuitie and
inconstancy of the common people. It was declared before, how the Apostles and
all the Church were in great estimation with the people, both for the
notablenesse of their miracles, and also for the show of an heavenly, and as it
were, divine majesty that shone in them. But now a number circumuented with
the sleyghtes of these Sophisters, stand up against the doctrine of truth. The
like lightness in the people did Christ also find, whom one while they
would have made a king, another while like mad men they cried out to have him
crucified. So the men of Lystra at the first cried out, Acts. 14.
saying Paul was a God, but within a while after, they would have stoned him.
And many like doings we read in the histories of the Gentiles, the use of all
which is, that we hunt not for praise of the people, nor study not to please
the world, but rather God, whose will is certain, and remains stable and
immovable.

Steven is accused of impiety and obstinacy.
Now let us see what things they laid to Steuens charge by these false
witnesses, whom Luke says they brought before the Counsel. The sum of their
accusation is: This man cease not to speak blasphemous words against this
holy place, and against the law. He is therefore accused of impiety, and not
thereof only, but also of incurable obstinacy, which hitherto by no reasons
could be persuaded. They make mention of the holy City and Temple by name,
because it seemed to the Jews an intolerable impiety to speak or intend
any thing against these places, being commended by so many promises of God.
Therefore this was chiefly laid to Hieremies charge, that he prophesied against
the holy City and Temple. Hierem. 26.
But because it behooued the crime should be proved by witnesses, and that
the blasphemies should be declared more plainly what they were, they add:
for we have heard him say, how this Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this
place, and shall change the ordinances which Moses gave us. Therefore where
they thought both their religion and their City should endure for ever, they
judged him that should say any thing touching the destruction thereof to be a
wicked body. Furthermore, whence they took hold of this accusation, may easily
be gathered of the Apostles doctrine. For they taught that men were justified
and saved by the mere grace of God, through the merit of Jesus Christ, and
that nothing in the business of our salvation, was to be attributed either to
man's works, or outward ceremonies. For the one were polluted and imperfite,
and the other were shadows and figures of the redemption in Christ to come,
which Christ had put away in the sacrifyce of his own body, as might be
gathered of the renting of the Temple, which happened at the death of Christ.
They also exhorted al men to cast away al their vain hope in the
righteousness of the law, and to embrace with sure faith the righteousness
of God, offered them in Christ. The which thing, because they would the more
easilye persuade them, they called to their remembrance the peril of present
destruction, whereof Christ oftentimes had warned them. Therefore the crafty
and most impudent sclaunderers, take occasion of their accusation hereof,
saying: Steven spoke of the abolishing of their religion, and destruction of
the City, but they craftilye conceal the causes moving him so to say. Yea,
they so set forth the matter, as though Steven should seem to have threatened
to set the temple on fire: and speaking very contemptuously of Christ, they
compare him as it were, with the glory and magnificencie of the Temple, to
make his doctrine to be the more despised. This place is with all diligence to
be observed. For as it teaches us that truth for the most part is assaulted
with lies: so it plainly warns us that Christ's doctrine can never be so
wisely and modestlye preached, but that the wicked world will take occasion to
sclaunder the same. We find it to be true in these our corrupted days,
wherein whatsoever the faithful teachers of the truth say, is most unjustly
carped at. For where we teach, that men are justified by the mere grace of
God, and that our strength and works have no praise in the case of our
salvation, by and by we are called the enemies of good works, and mainteyners
of carnal liberty. Again, if we say, that whatsoever belongs to our
salvation, is contained in Christ only, because he is the only mediator,
advocate, and intercessor, appointed between God and us: straight way we are
condemned as wicked blasphemers of the blessed Uirgin, and Saints. Item, if we
go about to deliver the Church of Christ, from the intolerable yoke of humane
traditions, to correct abuses, and to restore the ancient simplicity of the
primitive Church, by and by there start up, that cry out, we are adversaries
of religion, and the true worship of God, deprauers of the Sacraments, and
robbers of God of his honor. And if we declare unto the world, drowned in the
filthy ^lowes of wickedness, the imminent wrath of God, and the punishments
long agone deserved therefore: then we are condemned and railed at, as
disturbers of public tranquillity, and sowers of sedition. And to be brief,
nothing can be done so soundly, so godlily, and so modestly, that can escape
the censure and check, of the sclaunderous and envious adversary. But no man
must be so moved with these things, that he must leave or forsake the charge
committed to him of the Lord. Let us consider that this is the old guyse of
the world, against the which we must both constantly and prudently strive and
resist. Let us likewise be encouraged with the testimonies of the Scripture,
which promises that the godly are not forgotten with God, but have laid up for
them in heaven, Psalm. 34. Math. 5.
a most plenteous reward. In the mean season, the world shall not escape scot
free, for their shameless sclaundering, but as the Jews were enforced with
extreme misery, to abide the horrible destruction of their City and nation,
which they would not have had the Apostles to speak of: so this is always
found true, that they shall feel the smart of deeds that will not be amended
by words, and disdain to be threatened.

Steven in the danger of death is not afraid.
But what says Steven in all this ado, which is snatched at of every one,
like a sheep in the middle of a sort of Woolues? Is he dismayed with fear?
bewrays he his fear of heart with palenesse of face or trembling? Nay,
rather he renders a reason of his faith and doctrine with great boldness and
liberty, and sharply reprehendeth their impiety, and incurable contending
with God, as we shall see in the chapter following. And least any man should
ascribe his saying unto railing, it is declared, that there shyned in his
countenance, a token of a courageous mind and conscience, rejoicing in
Christ. For where the Judges (as is often times seen) earnestlye countenaunced
him, they saw his face, as it had been, the face of an Angel. This me
thinks is to be expounded of an unaccustomed, and more than humane
brightness, wherewith God would dazell the eyes of his enemies, to the intent
they should perceive, that such as he was, feared them not. And without all
doubt, Steven in the mean while, had some incredible comfort of Gods spirit,
risen in his mind. Furthermore, God gave him herein a token or taste of the
glory to come, through the hope whereof, they may overcome all adversity, that
shall happen to be in danger for the testimony of his name. Examples whereof
we have many in the histories of Martyrs, amongst the which, one that was to be
seen not far from us, above thirty years past, is worthy for ever to be
remembered. A certain husbandeman of the country, for his profession of the
gospel, was brought to the fire to be burned. And where before, while he was
in prison, he had showed many tokens of a christian stowtenesse: yet the
nearer his death approached, the more euydent the same appeared. For being
bound to the Gybet, and ready to be let down into the fire, he said alowde,
A notable history many ways to comfort the persecuted for religion.
that he would feign speak to the Justice ear he dyed, to whom when he came
(though the Justice used many delays to put him of) he said on this wise: Sir
quoth he, you have this day condemned me to be burned for heresy. Howbeit
though I confess my self a sinner, yet I acknowledge no crime of heresy in
me. For I profess and embrace with all my heart, that faith which is contained
in the Apostles Creed, and so recyted the articles thereof. Now good Sir
(says he) I crave this last bowne or peticion of you, that you would lay your
hand first on my heart, and then on your own, and so testify unfeignedly unto
this people, here standing about, whether your heart or mine, quake and tremble
more for fear. I truly with cheerful heart, haste unto Christ, in whom I
have believed. Now of what mind and opinion you be, see you to it. The Judge
had never a word to say, but bade have the execution: so yet that there was
perceived more pensiveness in his countenance, than in the Martyrs. This is a
great glory of our faith, that even then it most comfort and cheereth our
hearts, when all things seem most horrible and fearful. Let us therefore
labor to keep this faith with all diligence, that having passed the race of
this life, and goulfe of persecutions, with merry minds and cheerful
conscience, we may attain to the joy of the glory in heaven, promised us in
Christ Jesus: to whom be blessing, honor, power and glory, for ever. Amen.

The seventh chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The.xliij. Homely.
THEN said the high Priest, is it even so? But he said: ye men and brethren,
hearken: The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham, when he was yet in
Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Charran, and said unto him: Go out from thy
country and from thy kyndred, and come into the land which I shall show
thee. Then he went out of the land of the Chaldeys, and dwelt in Charran: And
from thence after his father was dead, he brought him into this land, in the
which ye now dwell.
WE have heard how the blessed martyr Steven was accused of his enemies,
through false witnesses, that he was a blasphemer of God, and of the law given
by Moses, and how he threatened both the city and the Temple with destruction.
These things are set forth to this end, that we should understand, how the
first Martyr of the Apostolic Church in the beginning, as well as all the
other afterward, were oppressed with false accusations, and that we should
learn hereby, what case the Ministers of the truth stand in, in this world,
and all others which go about to promote the glory of God, and the common
salvation of all people. For such are judged for wicked enemies of Gods glory,
and of public tranquillity, as Christ oftentimes admonished, and has been
declared long sithence, by the examples of many. Therefore the wrong judgments
of the men of our days, concerning the mynisterie and Ministers of the truth,
ought not to offend any man, whereby he should lysten the less unto Gods
calling. But because we spoke of these things in the last sermon, and at diverse
other times, we will now let them pass, and entreat of this present place,
in the which Luke shows how this matter was handeled, in the counsel.

And first he begins with the high priest and says, How ye wicked suffer
Christ's cause to be entreated of in Councels.
he demanded whether these things were even so as was declared by Steuens
accusers, yea or no? Wherein is set forth unto us, a notable example of craft
and wiliness, wherewith these counterfeyte Bishops use to set on the Ministers
and followers of the truth. For therefore does he ask Steven this question, and
provoke him to answer, for that he would under the visure of justice deceive
the unwary, as though he gave Steven liberty to pleate and defend his
matter, where it is euydent he meant nothing less. For as yet that wicked
decree, whereby they had forbidden all men to preach in the name of Jesus,
stood with these men in force. And now he enquyreth not, touching the right
or equity of the deed, but simply of the fact only, as though it might
seem a sufficient accusation to all men, if Steven should have been found to
have said any of the things, which were objected to him by his ungodly
accusers. The like trade use our persecutors in these days, neither begin
they any other ways with the true worshippers of Christ, than to know, by
their own confession, whether they have spoken any thing, against their
received superstition, abuses, and errors of Popish tyranny, yea or no. Which
thing if once it appear, by and by sentence of death is pronounced, neither
will they hear any reasons or arguments, whereby they are able to defend
their doings. So that if any man confess, he have denied the intercession of
Saints, and has spoken against the superstitious worshipping of them, he is
straight way condemned of heresy, and not permytted to give any account of his
doctrine in that behalf. Likewise he is judged an heretic, that speaks
against the sacrifice of the Mass, against the fire of Purgatory, against the
supremacy of the Sea of Rome, against selling of pardons, and diverse such like
merchaundizes, and farther reasons of his doing or teaching, will they not
hear. Let us well note these things, that they beguile not the simple, when
they see they give us free liberty in the counsel to pleate our matter. For
there lies a Snake in the grass: and they covet nothing else of us, but the
confession of the truth, which of all other things, they most hate and detest.

The argument of Steuens oration.
But let us hear Steuens answer, which consists of a whole narration or
history taken of the first Origene, and beginning of the Iewishe Nation, and
comprehends in it, the chief benefits of God bestowed in times past, upon
the fathers, with the deeds done again by them, either good or evil. What
the end and scope of the whole discourse is, may easilye be gathered of the
points of his accusation. The chief points whereof were, that he had
blasphemed God and the law. Therefore he begins to purge himself of
impiety, and least he might seem to beguile them with vain and trifling
arguments, he does utterly protest, that he is altogether void of such
impiety against God and his ordinances. His first argument consists herein,
that he acknowledges and preaches the same God that whylome wrought diverse
things among the fathers, and whom they only worshypped. Then proves he that
he ought not to be judged ungodly, for abrogating the law and the ceremonies,
for as much as the fathers in time passed pleased God without the law and
ceremonies, only by the obedience of faith, and that the same God liked not
many of them, after the law and ceremonies were instituted. And thereof he
evidently proves, that the law and ceremonies had a far other use and end,
than that men could be justified and saved by them: but rather that such a way
of salvation was shadowed by the^ as was at length, accomplished in Christ: and
that therefore the ceremonies were to be let pass, and Christ to be embraced
by true faith. And at length, for that he would drive them from their vain
affiaunce in the fathers, he sets before their eyes, their stubborn and
incurable impiety, accusing them earnestly that they had lieffer to follow
their Progenitors, than those ancient and holy fathers, which through faith
pleased God. And this is the sum of all Steuens oration, wherein we are
taught, after what sort, and how boldly we ought to defend Gods quarrel,
against the enemies thereof. Here appears also a marvelous power of the holy
ghost, which could instruct him with so perfect a knowledge of divinity, and
with so great boldness of mind, that being set in the middle of these
Woolues, he could so wisely give an account of his doctrine and faith, and so
constauntly contempne his enemies. Which example ought to encourage us, to
think that the power of the holy ghost, can not be overcome with the
stowtenesse and frowardness of the wicked. Let us see now the beginning of
his oration, contained in this place.

The beginning is brief and short: For he says: The getting of attention and
good will.
ye men and brethren hearken. He calls them brethren, because of country
sake, by which name the Jews used often to salute one an other: and fathers
for the dignity and office sake which they were in, by Gods appointment, whose
authority he wyllingly acknowledges, although he knew them to be very
corrupt and wicked. Yet is he not so amazed at their dignity, that he thinks
it unfit, to dissent from them, but rather he plainly and freely speaks his
judgment, and accuses them of error. By this example we are taught, that the
christian faith does not abolishe the duties of humanity and civility, which
we owe unto them that are in authority and dignity above us. For although
touching the state of salvation, Gallat. 3. Col. 3. etc.
there is no differences of persons in Christ Jesus (as Paul teaches) yet the
degrees of dignity remain, and Christ has not abolished the law of God the
father, which commands us to honor our parents, and to rise up unto a gray
head, and as the same Apostle witnesses, it is the property of christian
modesty, that one go before an other in honor. Yet the chief care would be
of Gods will, Romans 12.
and of the duty we owe unto him, least we dissemble the truth, for man's
sake, the confession whereof, Christ every where requires of us. Neither must
we at any time, forget that Apostolic, and very christian Maxima or sentence
that teaches us, we must rather obey God than men. As therefore by the example
of Steven, the barbarous vncurtesie of certain frenetike persons is condemned,
who to show themselves christians, salute princes, and all others in
authority, by none other name than brethren: so is the tyranny of them also
confuted, which think it not meet, that any man should gainesay the Bishops
of Rome, because their authority is confirmed by prescription of so many
years, and privilege of so many Princes. But vain and ridiculous is the
glorying in man's authority, seeing it was lawful for the Apostles, to dissent
from them, whose power was ordained of God, and whom they acknowledged for
fathers, by reason of Gods institution. The plainness and simplicity of the
gentile Philosopher is much to be commended, which said: Socrates is my
friend, but truth is more my friend. What unrighteousness is it therefore, to
require of christian men, that they should have more regard of the Antichrist
of Rome, than of Christ, and his eternal truth?

But let us return unto Steven, Abraham pleased God without the ceremonies of
the law.
which begins his narration with Abraham the father of the Iewishe nation,
because they did most glory in him. And by his example, he proves, that the
ceremonies of the law, are not necessary to salvation, and that they are not
to be thought wicked and blasphemous, which preach they are abrogated, because
Abraham in time past pleased God without them. The circumstaunces of place and
time, make for the amplification of the argument. For least they might think,
that God had any respect to the land of promise, he shows that God called
Abraham forth, being yet in Chaldea or Mesopotamia, and that after Thares his
father was dead (by reason of whose age or sickness, it is like he stayed in
Charran) he came into the land of Chanaan, where he received the seal of
circumcision. Howbeit because all things are written for our instruction, we
must apply the example of Abraham, not only to this present cause, but also
to our selves, and there shall no little profit ensue unto us, if we well
consider the calling of God, and the faith or obedience of Abraham.

God calls unto salvation.
In the calling of God, whereby Abraham came out of Vr in Chaldaea, into the
land of Chanaan, are two things principally to be considered. The first is,
that he was called without any merit or desert of his before going. For
Iehosuah in his.xxiiij. Chapter testifies that he dwelt among Idolaters, and
worshipped strange Gods. Yea, Epiphanius by report of ancient writers says
that Thares Abraham's father was the first that made images of claye, In the
beginning of his first book against heresies.
and that therefore he was punished of God with the death of Haran his son,
who was the first among the ancient fathers, that of natural death died
before his father. Neither could he be commended, because he was circumcised
or was in the time of the Temple, whereof the one was built many years after,
the other was a sign of the covenant made with him, Romans 4.
whereas the righteousness of faith which he had already attained, was sealed
and confirmed. The second is, how all this calling depends upon the bare
word of God. For he is commanded to forsake his country and kindred, and
sees nothing that might cause him to look or hope for any better state or
condition. For God promised him neither trustier friends, nor fruitfuller
country, but speaking directly, says: Come into the land which I shall show
thee. These things are worthy to be diligently observed. For first they teach
us, that we are called to salvation, and to the heavenly country (whereof the
land of Chanaan was sometime a figure) through the mere grace of God, without
respect of any our works or deserts in this matter. For what had we deserved,
seeing we were chosen in Christ before the world was made? Ephesians. 1.
Or what can they brag of, that have nothing but that they have received? 1.
Cor. 4.
And surely, if we consider the disposition of our nature, it shall appear
that we are no more mindful of the heavenly Country before we be called and
drawn, than Abraham was of the land of Chanaan, whose name he had not heard
of, yea, when the Lord calls us, we prove the untoward nature of the flesh
stryueth against Gods calling, which we can never be able to overcome, except
we be helped by the effectuous drawing of the holy spirit. Furthermore, we
are taught, that our vocation which offers us salvation, depends upon the
only word of God, and therefore can not be taken hold of by fleshlye sense,
or man's reason, but by faith only (which also is the gift of God) For the
natural man perceyueth not the things belonging to the spirit of God. Ephe. 2.
And God has prepared such things for them that love him, 1. Cor. 2.
as neither eye has seen, Esaias. 64.
nor ear heard, nor yet has entered into the heart of man. And here the power
of faith marvelously declares it self, which only takes hold of the
promises of God, and most surely embraces those things that far exceed all
sense and capacity of man's reason. Therefore Paul calls it a sure
confidence of things which are hoped for, Heb. 2.
and a certeyntie of things which are not seen. These things ought well to be
considered of them who think the doctrine of the justification of faith, so
light a matter, as though it appointed to easy a way unto salvation, and so
mainteyned the security and licentiousness of the flesh. For how can that be
judged a light and easy matter that surmounteth and passes all the powers of
man? Or shall we account it a matter of greater weight before God, that men do
of their own power, than that that cannot be done without the power of the
holy ghost? Let us compare faith with all the works of all the Monks that
ever were, and yet shall we find more, yea, and perfiter works among the
Philosophers of the Gentyles: but faith shall we be able to show in none, but
in him that is borne again of the word of God, through the holy spirit.
Therefore our salvation and justification is justly ascribed to the greatest
and exellentest thing that any man living can have upon the earth.

Now, Abraham, an example of the obedience of faith.
the belief and obedience of Abraham following the calling of God, is very
wonderful. There were diverse things which might have let and hindered hi m.
For to let pass all other, great is the force of our native soil and
country, and draws men (as the Poet says) with a great desire and lyking,
and still makes them mindful thereof. And it is no small authority, that
kinsefolke and allyaunce be of, whom we then most vehemently love, when we be
ready to forgo them. The age also and infirmity of his father might have
stayed him, whereof he dyed before he came to the borders of the Country
promised. And it is also likely, that Abraham was in great honor in his
country, such as he could not easily hope for, in a forreyne land, among
strangers. But none of all these things, could withholde that godly breast,
but that without delay he would follow the vocation of God, without any
curious inquiry of the condition and state of the Country. This is that
obedience of faith so oftentimes commended of Paul, and which he says is the
end of the law. 2. Cor. 10. Romans 1. and. 16.
This does Christ require of us, where he commands us to forsake father,
mother, sister, brother, wife, children, and our selves, if we will be his
Disciples. And the accomplishment hereof is so difficult a thing, that it is
undoubtedly impossible for us to perform it, except we be regenerate and borne
again of the holy spirit, as Christ teaches, disputing with Nichodemus.
John. 3.
Therefore let them that desire to be called Christians, examine themselves
after this rule, least while they rashly brag thereof, they become like
foolish buylders, Luke. 14.
who go about to set up some great building, before they have cast the charges
thereof. Let this consideration awake us, incessantly to make our fervent
prayers, for the increase of faith, that after the loss of all these worldly
goods, we may come to the inheritance of the heavenly Country, with Jesus
Christ our savior: to whom be praise, honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.xliiij. Homely.
AND he gave him none inheritance therein, no not so much as one foot, and
promised that he would give it him to possess, and to his ^eede after,
whereas yet he had no son. God said on this wife, thy seed shall be a
soiourner in a strange land, and they shall make them bond, and entreat them
evil four hundred years. And the Nation whom they shall serve, I will judge
says the Lord. And after that they shall come forth and serve me in this
place.
Because Steven was accused as a public enemy of Gods glory and all religion,
by reason of his doctrine of abrogation of the law and ceremonies, he
appoynteth such a state and end of his answer, as whereby he proves, that
although he teach the ceremonies of the law to be abrogated, yet he ought to
be judged neither impious, nor enemy unto Gods honor. This he proves, not
with vain show and noise of words, but plainly and in deed. For he
recounteth diligently how God dealt with the fathers in the old time, partly to
prove that he acknowledges the true God, whom the fathers sometime
worshipped, and partly to show that justification and salvation is not tied to
the ceremonies of the law, because the fathers served God and pleased him
without them, whereby he gathers also, that he is no adversary to true
religion, considering he beats down but those things which the fathers might
well forbear, and which were instituted to that end, to signify the true
trade and way of salvation, which is only contained in Jesus Christ. And he
fetches his beginning from Abraham, of whom they most bragged. And first he
says, that when he was yet beyond the river, among such as worshipped
strange Gods, he was called of mere favor into the land of Chanaan, (which
is a figure of the celestial country) before the Temple was either builded, or
the ceremonies of the laws instituted. And he declares that the Scripture
says nothing of Abraham, but of the obedience of his faith, wherethrough he
followed God, when he called him, and embraced the favor and grace offered him.
Whereby he goes about to provoke the chief of the Jews, to forsake their
superstitious observation of ceremonies, and to embrace Jesus Christ, the only
author of true salvation, by sure faith. But because in the judgment of the
flesh, faith seems a thing not of so great weight and force as can purchase
us salvation, Steven busieth himself earnestly in setting forth the faith of
Abraham, to the end he would declare, that faith is of such force, that it
passes all power and capacity of man's reason. For through this faith,
Abraham so overcame the love of his sweet Country, the familiarity of his
kinsefolke, the enjoying of dignity and honor, the laborious pains and
griefs of iourneying, sorrows and cares, and whatsoever is either pleasant
or yrkesome to the flesh, that without any tariaunce or delay, he obeyed the
calling of God. For declaration whereof this present place also makes, where
the notable faith of Abraham is more fully set forth, if by any means he
might kindle in them any desire or love unto the same, which thing because we
also stand in need of, it shall prevail us to consider every thing
diligently.

Steven goes about to declare what God did unto Abraham after he came into the
land of promise, Abraham's faith is set forth.
and thus he says: And he gave him none inheritance in the same, no not so
much as one foot, but promised he would give it him to possess, and to his
seed after him, when as yet he had no child. In which words three things be
contained, which make much to the setting forth of Abraham's faith. First, when
he came into the land promised, and showed him through many labors and perils,
he found it not empty, but inhabited and possessed of the Chanaanites, a very
fierce people. And he was so far from the possessing of it, that he could
not say, there was one foot of ground there that was his. Yea, he felt every
day more misfortunes than other. For he had scarce set up his Tents, but he
was constreyned through famine to fly in to Egypt. Then returning again from
thence, his Nephewe Lot and he which was an only comfort among such
despitefull people, brake company, and departed the one from the other, by
reason of their heardmen and shepeheardes contention and falling out. And not
long after he was wrapped in perilous wars against the kings of the East.
And to let pass diverse other things, when Sara his wife died, he was feign to
buy of Ephron the Hethite, a place to bury her in. Might he not therefore
think he was deceived of his hope? This done, he shows what stayed and
comforted Abraham in all these adversities and troubles, verily the promise of
the land that God had made him. But how uncomfortable a thing it is to trust
a bare promise, without any further assurance or confirmation, daily experience
teaches, specially if the success of things agree not with the promise, as
we said erewhyle in this matter came to pass. But a third thing there is yet
more grievous than all the reast, which is, that Gods promise to man's
wisdom might seem ridiculous. For God promised this land to Abraham's seed
or posterity, whereas he had no child, and by reason of his age, was unlike
to have any hereafter, being an hundred years old, and Sara his wife barren,
and past bearing of children. Who therefore sees not how many ways and how
strongly Abraham's faith was shaken and assaulted, and how great occasions he
had to distrust Gods promises? But none of all these things could vanquishe or
quayle that godly heart. For he believed in hope beyond all hope, and regarded
not his own body which was now dead, nor how his wife Sarah was past child
bearing: he stackered not at the promise of God through unbelief, Romans 4.
but became strong in faith, and gave God the praise, being full certified that
he which had promised the same, was able also to make it good. And this is
that faith which Moses says was imputed to him for righteousness. Gene. 15.


Moreover, as Steven goes about to stir up the Jews unto faith, by the
example of Abraham, so the consideration of the same example, God exercises
the faith and patience of those that be his. Roma. 4.
must serve for our instruction. For as Paul says: These things are not
written because of him only, but also for our behoof, to whom after like
sort, faith shall be imputed for righteousness, if we diligently follow the
steps of Abraham. It shall be very profitable for the confirmation of our
faith, if we note how God uses to exercise his beloved, while he so ordreth
things in this world, that all the success and effect of them seems
contrary to his promises, which thing in the history of Abraham, is more
manifest, than needs to be proved with many words. Neither was the state
of Isaac his son, and afterward of Jacob any better. For when God had cast
upon Jacob the privilege of maioritie, or first begotten, and had amplyfied
the same with many and great promises, for fear of Esau his brother, he was
feign to return to the place, from whence his Graundsyre Abraham came, and
there with his unkind and churlish Uncle served like a bond servant, his
brother Esau, whom God had rejected, flowing in wealth, and ruling like a
king, all the mean season. We read the same came to pass unto David also,
who having received a promise of God to be king of Israel, before he was set
in his throne, was banished his country, and proclaimed for a Rebel, and
public enemy of the kingdom and his country. And none other state be we all
in, if we consider the case of our salvation, and the condition of Christ's
kingdom, into the which, through faith we be grafted and received. To them
that believe in Christ, is promised peace, safety, joy, salvation and
victory, against the world, and Satan the prince of the world. But if a man
consider the course of this world, he shall perceive, that the faithful are
exercised with perpetual troubles, adversities and calamities, and be in
subjection to the will and pleasure of Tyrannes: But shall we doubt of Gods
truth, while these things thus fall out, and complain that we are beguiled
with false promises? No. But let us learn rather that Christ's kingdom is not
of this world, and that we must not judge of it according to the outward
show and appearaunce of it. Let us also learn to extend the eyes of our
faith further, and to have a regard unto the promyses of God, which will never
fail, notwithstanding this unhappy world toss and turmoyle never so much.
For it is Gods saying: My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that
is gone out of my lips. Psalm. 89. Psalm. 2.33.
He sees the counsayles and devises of Nations and princes, and not only
sees them, but brings them to naught, but his counsel stands fast for
ever. And this is chiefly to be understood of the promises of our salvation,
the truth whereof is inviolable, because they are founded on Christ, against
whom the gates of hell, are not able to prevail. Math. 16.
Who so shall constantly cleave unto him, according to the example of Abraham,
shall prove at the length, that they shall have the ouerhand of the world and
the Devil. And shall see them thrown under their feet, which now so greedily
gape after their lives. For they overcome in all things by him, who has loved
them, and has given his son for us, so that with Paul they are able to say:
Roma. 8.
If God be with us, who can be against us? who shall be able to separate us
from the love of God?

The place. Gene. 15.
Steven goes forth with his history begun, and rehearses the Oracle of the
bondage of the people of Israel in Egypt, which is declared in Genesis. 15.
chap. And albeit he purpose hereafter also to speak thereof, yet thought he
here to make mention of the same, least any man might think it came to pass,
at all adventures, and without the appointment of God. And this place must be
referred to that end, whereunto all the things before be referred. For herein
appeared the faith of Abraham, that he quayled not at this heavy news and
prophecy: and it also teaches us, that there was a Church sometime in Egypt,
which God acknowledged for his people, and which of his singular benefit, he
set at liberty, when they neither had temple nor ceremonies leuiticall.
Whereupon any man may gather, that the grace of God and our salvation, is not
bound to outward sacraments, but depends upon the mere favor of God, which
can none other ways be taken hold of, but by true faith. For this was plain,
that the delivery out of Egypt, was a sign of the salvation to come. And if
the servitude or bondage of the body could not be put away, but by the mighty
hand of God, who sees not, that man's merits and power can nothing avail, in
putting away the servitude of the soul, without the help and grace of God?
These things are to be applied also to our enformation, because they set out to
us, the condition and state of Gods Church, to be beholden, as in a Glass.

First it is to be considered, how in speaking of the seed of Abraham, The
Church is as a Pilgrim in this world, and afflicted.
to whom the inheritance of the land of Chanaan was promised, he says: It
shall be a soiourner in a strange land, and they shall evil entreat them
four hundred years long. These things teach us what case the faithful be
in, upon the earth. For that they be the very seed or children of Abraham,
John. 7. Romans 9.
both Christ and Paul testifies. To these is promised the inheritance of the
heavenly kingdom, as Christ bears witness, saying. Fear not little flock:
for it has pleased the father to give you a kingdom. Again: father, Luc. 12.
John. 17.
I will that where I am, these be also with me. And again: In my fathers house
are many dwellings. I go to prepare you a place. And I will come again, John.
14.
and take you unto my self, that where I am, there may you be also. Whereunto
Paul seems to have alluded, where he says: Phil. 3.
Our fellowship or conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for Christ
our Savior. And although we be inheritours of the heavenly country, yet it
appears not to the world that we shall so be, but in the mean season we be
Pilgrims in a strange land, that is to say, in this world, and have nothing
of our own. And that this life of ours is like to a pilgrimage, we are taught
not only by the oracles of scripture, but also by daily experience, for as
much as we come naked into this world, and depart hence naked. And we be not
only Pilgrims, 1. Tim. 6.
but also many ways afflicted by the children of this world, which challenge
to themselves the rule and dominion of this world, so that the Prophet does
not without a cause compare the Church unto a stone, to the rearing up whereof,
all people exercise their force and strength. Zach. 12.
And Chronicles teach us that even since the beginning of the world, as many
as have given themselves to God by true faith, have been in danger of
persecution, which things we must bear in mind, 1. Pet. 4.
that we be not offended with things that come to pass in our days as
strange and unwonted. This must we hold, as undoubted true, that nothing
happens to us, by hazard or chance, but according to Gods prouydence and
ordinance, which governs all things rightfully. Neither could this world,
or Satan the prince thereof do any thing against us, but through Gods
permission and sufferaunce. And he permits or suffers him not as one that
rejoices in our calamities, or mourning, as Tyrannes use, but because he sees
it good that the natural corruption, growing and cleaving unto us, should this
way be brydeled and punished, whereby it comes to pass, that somewhyle we
stand amazed at the consyderation of riches, somewhyle at the pomp of honors
and dignity, somewhyle with the desire of carnal pleasures and concupiscence,
or else decline and swerue from the way of salvation. Then therefore it is
needful, to have this noisome stupiditie shaken of, and the desires of the
flesh to be quenched, with the cross and tribulations, that we may learn to
hate this world, and to be enflamed with the ardent love of the heavenly
Chanaan. And let us promise our self no better state in this life, because the
world that can not abide the truth, will always be one, and our corrupt
flesh, howsoever it be corrected, will upon every light occasion, fall to her
old usage.

The Church is defended by God.
Yet this in the mean season ought greatly to comfort us, that God here adds:
The nation whom they shall serve, I will judge. For God is judge of all the
world, and will not fail of his office, although he seem sometime, neither
to see nor hear the fierce and cruel attemptes of the wicked, nor the
afflictions of the Godly. For how should he not see, that has made the eye,
Psalm. 94.
and how should he not hear, that has made the ear? For he beholds not
the Theater or stage of this world, after the manner of idle gazers, but
vieweth and considers all things in the world, as a just Judge. And because
nothing is more dear unto him, than the church, which he has redeemed with
the blood of his son, therefore he lets no man go unpunished that does
molest or afflict her: yea, they are judged to touch the apple of his eye,
Zach. 2.
that over boldly touch any of the faithful Ministers of God. There appear
horrible examples of Gods judgments against such persons: amongst which, this
that he showed against the Egiptians, as he here threatened, is first to be
numbered. The Assirians felt even the same, which were grievously punished for
their tyranny against the people of God* Neither did Antiochus long escape
quyte, for his cruelty against them. What was showed upon Herod, is more
apparaunt than needs long rehearsal. And if a man consider the things that
followed after Christ's incarnation, he shall see none that ever persecuted the
Church, The ten persecutions in the Church.
escape the horrible hand of Gods justice. The first in this number was
Nero, who perceiving that the people of Rome took in evil part the firing of
the City, whereof he was author, accused Cornelius Tacitus in his xv. book.
as Cornelius Tacitus reports. And God suffered the rage of the most cruel
tyrant so far to burst, that they say he also shed the blood of Paul and
Peter the Apostles. But shortly after, God revenged the blood of his Apostles
with an horrible judgment. For there ensued a pestilence, that consumed more
than thirty thousand of his people. After the pestilence the Roman army
was overthrown in Britain, and certain provinces in Armenia fell from them,
The Roman Legions brought into subjection.
and the Roman Legions were constrained in shameful wise to yield to their
enemies. And at length the vengeance of God caught the tirant himself, who
being judged by the Senators to be an enemy to his Country, first sought to
save himself, by dishonest and shameful flight, and at length, being
disappointed of his hope, Domitian following and treading in the steps of Nero,
felt Gods justice also, being murdered by his own men. Tra^ane although he
Asia, Galatia, and Graecia were overthrown and soonke with earthquakes. The
fourth Emperor after Nero that rose against the M. Antonius Verus, not long
after whom, rose the Germans, and such a plague followed thereupon, that
certain towns in Italy with the infection thereof, were quyte left destitute
of any dwellers. Lucius Septimius Seuerus began, who was both greatly vexed
with civil wars, and being young of years dyed in England Julius Maximinus
was little moved, but boldly raged against the Church: it came to pass by ye
just judgment of God, that he and his son were torn in pieces by their
soldiers, all men crying, that one whelpe ought not to remain of so
ungracious a Sire. And Decius had a death not much unlike, for after he had
shed the blood of Christ's martyrs, he and his son died in a barbarous
Licinius Valerianus the eight persecutor Sapores king of the Persians, was
constrained to lay his back on the ground like a block, for Sapores to get
on horseback by. Valerius Aurelianus which would be the ninth Dioclesian,
with Maximiniane, Galerius Maximinus coparteners, armed themselves against
Christ's Church, they evidently felt the hand of God revenging the same. For
we read that many thousands of men were consumed with earthquakes. Dioclesian
and Maximinian of their own accord in one day resigned and gave up the
Empire, either for sorrow that they saw they could not bring to pass that
they attempted, or else for fear of Constantine. And Dioclesian afterward,
hearing that Constantine had killed and overcome Maxentius, slew himself. But
Maximinian desirous to have his Empire again, being expulsed by Maxentius,
fled to Constantine his son in law, whom he lay in wait to have killed.
But his daughter preferring her husbands life before her fathers, disclosed the
treason, and so he was killed at Massilia* And this was the end of two most
cruel tyrants, which whole ten years had cruelly afflicted the Church.
Gale^ius being overcome with the gryping panges of an incurable disease, called
in, the bloody proclamations which he had sent out against the Christians. And
all these things came to pass within the space of three hundred years, unto
the reygne of Constantine the great. And the Lord from this time yet was not in
rest. For when Julian the Apostata, both by open force* and also by craft and
subtlety, had undermined the Church, being overthrown in the field, and
wounded with a Iaueling, he cried out, Thou have overcome o Galileyan, Histor.
Trip. lib. 6. cap. 47
thou have overcome. For so had he used to call Christ in contempt. Infinite
others might be reckoned beside these, if it were needful. But there want not
later and fresh examples, whereby God has in our age showed the severity of
his judgment against the persecutors of his Church. This therefore shall stand
fast for ever, that God will by his judgment, take vengeance on them, which
enterprise to vex his people by tyranny at any time. These things ought to
serve both for our comfort and instruction. Let it comfort us, that we hear
God is a revenger of his Church, that we think he neglect us not, when we be
afflicted. We are also taught to lay aside the raging desire of private
revenge, and to commend all the judgment of our enemies unto God, who says:
Vengeance is mine, I will recompense. Deuteronomy. 32.
The same doctrine may also be stretched further, that we seek not by any
means violently to oppress any man, knowing that God reuengeth the injury
that is done to the weaker sort. For Christ says: with what measure you meat,
with the same shall other measure to you again. Math. 7.
And the Prophet cries: woe to thee that destroyest, for thou shall be
destroyed. Again: Esaias. 33.
woe be to him that builds the City with blood: Abacuc. 2.
woe be to him that heapeth up other men's goods. Whereunto are to be referred
the things which God in his law threateneth to the oppressors of wyddowes, of
fatherless and strangers. See Exodus 22. In the consideration whereof would
God they were more occupied, that think now a days the greatest commendation
of manhood, and safety of a commmon weal, stands in waged warrefaring.

The delivered serve God.
But it is not to be negligently ouerpassed, how God speaking of the end of
their delivery, says: And after that, they shall come forth and serve me in
this place. This is a general precept, that they whom God has delivered,
Psalm. 50.
must serve him: whereof we are also admonished. This must specially be
considered in our salvation. We are delivered out of the tyranny of the
devil, and from the horrible bondage of sin, by the singular benefit of
God, who has vouchsafed to give his son for us. Let us therefore come forth
of Egypt, and casting away the desires of this wicked world, let us serve God
in holiness, purity, innocence, faith, and love unfeigned: touching which
things, see what is said euerywhere in the writings of the Apostles. Romans 6.
Tit. 2. and. 3. 1 Thessalonians. 4. etc. The same must they do that are delivered out
of any other distresses. They that are recovered of sicknesses, let them think
that spoken unto them that Christ says to the man healed of the palsy: John.
5.
See thou sin no more, least a worse thing come unto thee. Let them think
likewise, that are delivered from poverty, hunger, pestilence, wars, or
whatsoever like calamyties. In times past, the sacrifices, called (...), which
God ordained to be offered to him for benefits received, admonished us hereof,
which also were used of the Gentyles, although they were strangers from the
true worship of God. And to this end did Christ institute his mystical
supper, which the ancient fathers called Eucharistiam, that is to say, a
giving of thanks, because they knew it was ordained in the remembrance of
Christ's death. And their wickedness is very worthy to be condemned, which
glorying in the benefit of redemption, and feeling every day the vengeance of
God, yet will not serve him, but give themselves wholly to serve sin, and the
devil. Let that principally stick in our remembrance, that Steven urges so
insta^tlye, that is, how we be delivered from the tyranny of Satan and sin,
by the benefit of Gods grace only, and that therein nothing is to be
attributed to our works, and other cold ceremonies. Let us therefore by faith
embrace this benefit, and serve God our Savior in spirit and truth, that
with him we may hereafter enjoy the bliss of the heavenly Chanaan, through
Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom be praise, honor, power, and glory for ever.
Amen.

The.xlv. Homely.
And he gave him the covenant of Circumcision. And he begatte Isaac, and
circumcised him the eight day. And Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob the twelve
Patriarchs. And the Patriarchs having envy at Joseph, sold him into Egypt.
And God was with him; and delivered him out of al his adversities, and gave him
favor and wisdom in the sight of Pharao king of Egypt, and he made him
ruler over Egypt, and all his household.
THe godly Martyr Steven was accused of impiety against God, the law, the
holy place, and all the laws ceremonial. His adversaries took occasion to
accuse him, for that he taught me^ that these outward things were abrogated by
Christ, and that they could not be justified by them, but that justification
and salvation came by faith only in Jesus Christ, and that the ceremonies
served for none other use, but to signify the way of salvation which is
contained in Christ, and to bring men unto him. Wherefore, it behooued him to
use a kind of earnest and grave defense before them, whith stood altogether
upon ceremonies. He so handles therefore and frames his defense, that he
proves by the matter it self, he is clear from all impiety. For he
diligently rehearses whatsoever God did to the fathers in time passed, partly
to declare that he acknowledged and kept the ancient belief of the fathers,
and partlye for that the Jews should understand how the fathers in time
past were justified by faith only, without any ceremonies. Whereupon every man
may easily gather, that there is no cause or let why men now a days also
should not be saved without the ceremonies of the Leuiticall law by faith in
Christ, and that therefore they are not to be accused of impiety, which hold
and affirm that they are abrogated. And beginning with Abraham, he diligently
sets out his faith, in following the merciful calling of God, without any
his deserts before going, to the end he might stir up the Jews to follow his
steps. But because the holy martyr of Christ was not ignorant, that the
Jews did principally glory in their Circumcision, and in the fathers, against
the grace of God given them in Christ, he continues on in his Oration begun,
because he would wype them clean from both these gloryinges.

Of circumcision he briefly entreats saying: He beats down the affyaunce
in circumcision.
And he gave him the covenant of circumcision, and he begat Isaac, and
circumcised him the eight day. He confesses that circumcision was instituted
of God, but while he joins it with the things going before, he thereby
puts it away, in that he shows it was given unto Abraham, after all those
things which hitherto had been recyted. For after he was called out of Chaldea,
and had declared his belief openly by many and notable signs, and was by his
faith and belief justified: God gave him the testament of circumcision, that
is to say, he made a Covenant with him, which was sealed as it were, and
confirmed with circumcision. Whereupon it follows, that he was not justified
by circumcision, but that his circumcision was a seal of the righteousness,
which he had already gotten by faith. Which argument Paul also used in his
fourth chapter to the Romans. And as Abraham received the institution of
circumcision simply and plainly, as the Lord did appoint it, so he plainly
observed, and commended the same to his posterity. For he circumcised Isaac
the eight day, according to Gods institution, without adding of any other
superstitious ryte, which thing none that is godly doubts, but that Isaac
also did to Jacob his son, and he again to his twelve children, which were
the Patriarchs of the people of Israel. And the holy Ghost would have few
things, now almost remembered, touching this matter, that it might thereby
appear, how the holy father s stacke not in these outward things, but rather
had a regard unto Gods testament and covenant wherein was contained the
promise of salvation, than to the outward ceremony. The things, we read in
the.xvij. of Genesis make for the better understanding hereof. Genesis. 17.
In the mean season, Steven plainly reprehendeth the preposterours religion
of the Jews, which gloried so much in their circumcision, and were touched
with no consideration of that healthful covenant, that was sealed, and
ratifyed by the merit of Christ.

Of Sacraments, and sacramental kinds of speech.
And this place teaches us also to judge of sacraments, and sacramental
loqu^tions, whereof certain superstitious and contentious persons, take
occasion now a days, of contynuall quarrelling, forasmuch as they still urge
the letter, and seek for no deeper understanding of the mystery. Steven
says, that Abraham received the covenant of circumcision, and he says it not
of his own head, but in respect of Gods word, which once said unto Abraham:
This is my covenant, which you shall observe between me and you, and your
seed after you. Let every manchilde among you be circumcised. etc. Which
words, if we understand, according to the letter, then shall circumcision it
self, be called the covenant, and undoubtedly this thing deceived many in
times past, who thought they had served God thoroughly, when they were
circumcised. But the thing it self declares, it ought otherwise to be
understood. Deuteronomy. 10. Iere. 4. Iere. 31.
For first God required by his law and Prophets, the circumcision of the
heart. Then in Jeremy he says, that they which were circumcised, abode not in
his covenant. Beside this, Abraham before he was circumcised, had obtained the
things, which God promised in his covenant. For before this, he obeyed God,
when he called him: before this, he received the promises by faith and belief:
before this, had God imputed his belief unto him for righteousness, and
therefore he was grafted into Christ, without whom neither righteousness, nor
salvation can come unto man. Therefore circumcision is called the covenant, by
reason of the proporcion and agreement, that is between the signs, and the
things signified in the sacraments, and because God testifyeth by this seal,
that he acknowledge them for his confederates and heirs that truly fulfill
and keep the articles of his covenant. And as by circumcision they were
received into the society of Gods people: so the same confirmed their faith in
temptations, which faith God would have underset, and as it were shored up,
with outward proppes, because of the fleshes frayltie. The like or same
reason, was of the sacrifices, which were wont in the law to be called
sins, and expiation or clensing of sins. But if a man would here urge or
strain the letter, he should hear the Apostle speak against it, saying. The
blood of Oxen, and Gotes can not take away sin. And we know that God by his
Prophets, rejects them as wicked and unclean persons, which daily gave him
offerings, and spared no cost nor labor. Shall we think therefore that God
mocked his people, commending sacrifices by so goodly names? No. But there was
a certain and true meaning of them, that they signified Christ that true Lamb
of God, which takes away the sins of the world, in whom whosoever then
trusted unfeignedly, he was for his sake delivered from all his sins. And when
any used to do sacrifice, wanting this faith, God had no more regard to their
sacrifices, than if they had offered a Dog or an Hog, as in Esaias he
testifies. And if we come to the sacraments of the new testament, we shall
find the like reason in them also. For the Apostle calls baptism, the Lauer
of newness or regeneration. But (alas) how many shall we find, which after
they are baptized, show any tokens of a body renewed or regenerated? And yet
the holy ghost, commends not baptism with false praises, but has respect
to the use thereof: namely, because according to Gods institution, it
effectually and truly seals in the elect, the invocation and regeneration,
whereof Christ himself is the Author. So in the mystical supper, the bread
is called the body of Christ, and the wine his blood. Whereupon many gather,
that the true body and blood of Christ, is eaten and drunken reallye and
substantially, as well of the good, as of the badde. But we make Christ the
Judge of this controversy, and reason after this sort upon the self same
words. Whosoever eats the flesh of Christ, and drinks his blood,
dwells in Christ, and Christ in him: But many that eat of the bread of the
supper, and drink of the Cup, neither dwell in Christ, nor have Christ
dwelling in them: Ergo, the body and blood of Christ are not received really
and substantially in the mystical bread and wine, nor bound unto these
outward signs. No man can deny, but the Mayor is of Christ's making. And
daily experience proves the Minor: and would God it were not proved by the
examples of them, which herein sufficiently show, how far they be from
Christ, in that they bring an horrible schism and division into the Church by
their contention, and cruelly persecute the true worshippers of Jesus Christ.
Who sees not therefore, that the words of the supper are to be understood
sacramentally? yea, as the sacrifices in the old time profited none but them,
which were endued with true faith, and brought Christ unto them: even so by the
supper shall we receive no fruit, except we bring him by true faith with us,
and having our minds lift up above the heavens, feed on him by faith: Which
faith whosoever wants, are far from Christ, and profane and unhallow the
supper by their hypocrisy, and therefore eat and drink unto themselves
damnation. These things for this end we must consider, that we may learn it
is a pernicious error, to be tied and addicted unto outward ceremonies, and
to seek in them, that that belongs only unto Christ, and through faith
only is to be found in him. So therefore must we use the sacraments, that
first we must acknowledge Gods goodness, which does vouchsafe to confirm our
faith by outward signs and ceremonies. Then when we are moved to use and
receive them, we must rear up our minds to the things signified by them, and
chiefly we must perform those things which God prescribes to us by them.
Hereunto serves Augustines rule, which in his books of christian doctrine, is
uttered in these words: The Lord himself, and the Apostolic doctrine has
delivered unto us, Third book and.ix. chap.
a certain few of Sacraments, in stead of many, the same being very easy
to be done, very singular and excellent in meaning, and most pure and clean
in observation: such as is the Sacrament of baptism, and the celebration of
the body and blood of the Lord. The things that every man receives, he
being instructed or inspired, knows whereunto they are to be referred: that
he may reverence them, not with carnal servitude, but rather with spiritual
liberty, for as to follow the letter, and to take the signs, for the things
which are signified by them, is a token of seruyle weakness and infirmity:
so to interpretate and expound the signs unprofitably, is a token of wandering
error etc. And surely it is a miserable servitude of the mind, to cleave unto
outward things, and not to be able to lift up our senses into heaven, that
we may enjoy Christ sitting on the right hand of the father above.

Now, if the ceremonies instituted of God, can neither justify, nor save us,
yea, to use them it is hurtful, if they be done without faith: how much more
detestable is the error of them, which will attribute to man's constitutions,
and to the wearishe and cold ceremonies, that the bold curiosity of brain
has devised, the glory of justification and salvation? For as the Lord once
universally condemned all the traditions of men, so it is as clear as the
Sun, Isay. 29. Math. 15. Roma. 10.
that these ceremonies can not be ministered with faith, because faith can rest
upon none other foundation, than the word of God, as Paul teaches. Therefore
this only Canone overthrows all Popery, which with all the rytes and
ceremonies thereof, is so mainteyned with the foolish decrees of superstitious
men, that it needs no further demonstration.

Steven prosecuteth his narration begone, and beats down the vain
affyaunce in the fathers, He beats down their affiaunce in the fathers.
in whom they marvelously gloryed, as we tofore have declared. And to prove
that the fathers were justified, neither by circumcision, nor ever a whyt the
better therefore, nor yet merited salvation by any works, but were saved
through the mere and unspeakable goodness and favor of God, he rehearses
the strange and unnatural deed, that they did against Joseph their brother,
which he touches in few words, but such, that it may easily appear, how
heinous a deed it was. For thus he says: The Patriarchs having indignation,
sold Joseph into Egypt. The story is in Moses, Gene. 17.
Gene. 37. chap. First, he shows the spring of this fact to be envy, wherein
they boiled, against their innocent brother, for none other cause, but for that
they understood God had appointed for him great honors and dignities. They
were in the like fault that Caine once was in. For he slew his brother Abel,
Gene. 4.
blinded with the affection of envy and hatred. For although the Patriarchs
shed not his blood, yet were they guilty of murder, both because of their
pretenced malice of mind, the fulfilling whereof God stopped by means of
Ruben, and also for that they sold their brother, Exodus. 21.
to alyauntes, which was a thing that God afterward, appointed to be punished
with death. Add unto this, a number of other things concurring, in the doing
of this deed, and it shall appear, that by this one fact, they had deserved,
to be cast of for ever: and therefore, that it was not to be ascribed to their
righteousness, but to Gods goodness, that he did vouchsafe to make the nation
that came of them, his own people and inheritance. For they upon a bold and
rash impiety and ungodliness, took upon them to contend with God, whose
devise by this mean they thought to stop and hinder. They were also unkind
toward their father, who they knew well, had a great delight in Joseph, and
whose old age they should rather have comforted, than have made sad. Of
their ungodliness toward their brother, what needs it to speak, whom (as
much as in them lay) they went about not only to kill in body, but also in
soul, whiles they sell him to Ismaelites into Egypt, miserably to serve among
such, as they knew had no knowledge of God, nor his will. What punishments
therefore, what Helles were sufficient, to revenge such a deed, if God would
have showed his rigor rather than his goodness and mercy?

This place also serves for our information, The glory is vain that is sought
in the virtue of au^cestrye.
and teaches us that it is a vain thing to vaunt or glory in the virtue of
our ancestors. Not that we deny it is a singular gift of God, if any man
happen to have famous and excellent progenitors, but we say we have them not to
thend to brag of them in Gods sight. For though our forefathers were never so
good, yet had they that goodness of the favor of God, and to us comes no
profit by their virtue, unless we endeavor to follow it, which thing is at
large set forth in Ezechiel the.xviij. Chapter. And it is manifest, that God
never sharplier threatened the Jews, than when they begone to brag of
Abraham's virtue. For then John calls them Adders brood, and Christ, Math. 3.
John. 8.
the children of the Devil. And that that Steven noted in the Jews, the same
is most evident to be seen in all Nations, as well particulerly as generally,
For although there be some of their forefathers, which by reason of their
virtues, and good deeds deserved some praise amongst men: yet there want not
diverse others, whose ungraciousness deserved not only the destruction of the
whole Nation, but also eternal damnation, and forsaking of the whole
posterity, unless God of his peculiar and favorable sparing, would have
them saved. Let us all therefore humble our selves in the sight of God, and let
him that rejoices, rejoice in the Lord, who is merciful, loving, pacient,
and of great goodness, who deals not with us after our sins, nor rewards
us according to our wickedness. See the Psalm. 103.

And because Steven is entered into the history of Joseph, Joseph also is of
favor saved.
whose chastity, wisdom, righteousness, and godliness might seem to
deserve to bring him to promotion and dignity, and that for his sake all the
Nation of the Jews was honored and benefited, he answers this error also,
and shows that even Joseph also received whatsoever he had, of Gods favor,
and not of his own desert and merit. God (says he) was with him, and
delivered him out of all his troubles. Where Joseph therefore suffered
adversity patiently, that he was not overcome with the whorish entisements of
his dishonest mistress, that he kept his faith and trust to his master
unblemished, that he despayred not in the misery of prison and captivity, all
this was the benefit of God, which would not leave him destitute of his
grace. By his grace it came also to pass, that he being instructed with the
spirit of prophecy, could give the king wholesome counsel, and get his
favor. Wherefore it is to be attributed neither to Iosephes wit, neither to
Pharaos clemency, but to Gods goodness, that Joseph came to be governor of
all Egypt. Add hereunto how God would have all these things come to pass in
a profane Country, when the people of God had yet no temple builded, nor
ceremonies of the law as yet appointed. Whereupon again we gather, that the
ceremonies which long after ensued, were not delivered to justify by, but to
shadow to us the true mean of justification and salvation, which was given by
promise in the beginning of the world, and was to be fulfilled by Christ, in
the time thereto appointed. What mean we therefore to contend for those
things, without the which it is plain the fathers pleased God, and were
saved? There remain in the example of Joseph certain other points that serve
for the information and teaching of every man, whereof we have yet farther to
speak.

God aydeth his people when they be afflicted.
The first is, that he says God was with Joseph. Then neither the falshoode of
his brethren, nor the shameful slander of his mistress, nor the rash
unrighteousness of Putiphare, could deprive Joseph a faithful worshipper of
God, of his help. And that that came to pass in him, falls out in all those
that be godly. Psalm. 34.
For the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open unto
their prayers. And we may also say with David: when my father and mother
forsake me, Psalm. 27.
the Lord takes me up. For as Christ said, he was not alone, though all
his Disciples forsook him: so can not they be alone, John. 16.
that are graffed in Christ by faith, forasmuch as to them belong the promises
of Christ, such as are: I will not leave you comfortless, John. 14. Math. 28.
I am with you even unto the end of the world. In the mean while let us
mark, that Joseph was tossed with diverse calamities, although he was vpholden
by the present help of God. For he is sold by his brethren, he is tempted by
his mystresse, he is in danger of his life by mean of her accusation. He is a
long while kept in prison. Let no man therefore think that God is with him, but
only when he is in safety and at liberty. Let no man also upon presumption
of Gods help, promise himself all kind of rest and security of flesh. But
let us understand that God does not so defend and deliver us, but that
sometimes we must bear the cross, and yet that we be never more under Gods
protection, than when we be most tried by afflictions. Psalm. 56.
For then he tells our fleetings, and our tears are gathered together as
into a bottell.

Whatsoever we have that is good, is of Gods gift.
Next, let us note, how Joseph had wisdom and favor given him. Ergo
whatsoever good or excellent thing we have, it is the gift of God. And it is
his benefit, if we be able so profitably to use the gifts that be in us, that
others accept or favor us the more for the same. For if we consider the nature
of man, 1. Cor. 2.
all things are corrupt in him. Our negligence perceyueth not the things
belonging to the spirit. Our will follows but earthly things, Genes. 8.
and is ruled after the desires of the flesh, whose imaginations are evil
even from our youth. We have no strength to do good. Except therefore the Lord
regenerate us, and endue us with his spirit, there will be nothing sound or
whole. Again, except he cause us and our doyngs to please others, we shall
nothing prevail. For what shall he be able to do with others that is not able
to teach and govern himself? As therefore it was Gods gift, that Iosephes
counsel was well accepted with Pharao: so except God inclyne the hearts of men
to like us, all our doyngs shall be unprofitable and vain. Which thing Paul
well marked in the ministerye of the word, when he said: he is nothing that
waters, neither he that planteth, but God that gives the increase. The
consideration hereof makes us not to be proud of Gods gifts, and to use them
as we ought to do. For what have thou that thou have not received? 1. Cor. 4.
And if thou have received it, why gloryest thou as though thou had not
received it? And if thou have received it, surely thou shall hereafter give an
account, of that thou have received and laid out, as Christ has taught us in
the Parable of the Talentes. Math. 25.

Joseph is a figure of Christ.
Last ofall, it shall not be unprofitable, ifwe consider the figure of Christ
which Joseph purporteth, forasmuch as the end and mark of all Steuens oration
was, to bring the Jews unto Christ. For as the brethren would not acknowledge
Joseph for their Lord and king: John. 1.
so when Christ came among his own, his own would not vouchsafe to receive
him. As Joseph was sold by his brethren: so Christ was sold by Judas, and
afterward was delivered unto the Gentyles by the Jews, which after the flesh
were his brethren. As Joseph suffered many things with the Baker and Cupbearer,
whereof the one was put to death, the other was saved, so we read Christ
suffered in the middle of two thieves, whereof the one through the grace of God
was saved, the other damned. As Joseph came unto honor by many dangers and
horrible adversities: so Christ by the bitter and horrible death of the Cross,
entered into the glory of the father, and has obtained a name which is above
all names, Phil. 2.
whereat every knee ought to bow and obey. I omyt diverse other things, which
in their time and place may be more commodiously entreated. It is our parts
with true faith to embrace Jesus Christ, whose figure Joseph bare, and through
the manifold perils and hazardes of this life, to aspyre to the inheritance of
the kingdom of heaven. Which is prepared from everlasting, for them that
believe, and purchased with the precious blood of Christ: to whom be praise,
honor, power and glory for ever. Amen.

The.xlvj. Homely.
THERE came a dearth over all the land of Egypt and Chanaan, and great
affliction, that our fathers found no sustenaunce. But when Jacob heard that
there was corn in Egypt, he sent our fathers first. And at the second time,
Joseph was known of his brethren, and Joseph's kynred was made known unto
Pharao. Then sent Joseph a message, and caused his father to be brought and all
his kin, lxxv. souls. And Jacob descended into Egypt, and dyed both he and
our fathers, and were carried over into Sichem, and laid in the Sepulcher that
Abraham bought for money of the sons of Hemor, the son of Sichem.
THe godly Martyr Steven goes on in his discourse of the things, done in old
time, touching the fathers, the chief end wherofis to prove, that he firmly
holds the ancient religion of the fathers, who (as it is plain) without
Temple and ceremonies pleased God, and were saved. Whereof he gathers, that
the temple now also is not necessary, but that the people should have respect
rather, to him that was prefigured thereby. And among other things, he treats
the history of Joseph diligently, because he (as I said in the last Sermon)
was a figure of Jesus Christ. And in the same history, he notes chiefly,
how Joseph was sold into Egypt, and how there through the favor of God, he
was not only preserved, but also made Governor of Egypt. After this is
declared, the going down of the whole people of Israel into Egypt, whereof
Joseph himself, is the occasion and author. And this part of the discourse is
to be applied to the same end, whereunto we said, the things gone before, were
to be referred. For Steuens meaning is, to teach them that true religion, and
the way of man's salvation did so little depend upon that worship which Moses
appointed, and was for many years observed in the land of Chanaan, that the
fathers in time past by reason of a great dearth were compelled to come from
thence into Egypt, where about a two hundredth and ten years (for so many are
reckoned from the children of Isreal's coming into Egypt, to their going out)
were accepted for the people of God, although they neither had Church, nor
other ceremonies of the law. And that therefore nothing let, why they might
not at this day also be saved without a Temple, yea, that it ought to be
abrogated with all the ceremonies leuiticall, forasmuch as it was plain, he
was already come and exhibited, of whom all such things in time passed, were
but signs and shadows. The story is written in Genesis. 42.43. and in other
Chapters following: where at large are set forth those things which Steven
touches but briefly. But least we lose the commodity ensuing of the
discourse, it behooves us to note the chief points by themselves, and so to
apply them to our instruction. Let us examine therefore the cause that moved
the people to go into Egypt, then their going down, and last of all, what is
said of the Patriarchs death and burial.

The cause that Jacob went down into Egypt, was a great dearth, wherewith he
was troubled in the land of Chanaan, The cause of the going into Egypt.
and which he could by no means more commodiously avoid, because through
Joseph's counsel, Egypt only had store of corn laid up, for such use. Here
it is worthy to be well considered, how God suffers Jacob a true worshipper
of him, and a very holy man, to be troubled and molested with famine. This
might be imputed to his childrens naughtiness, if we read not how the like had
been seen in Abraham and Isaac. Genesis 12.26.
And there are many examples that teach us, how the faithful and true
worshippers of God, have been afflicted also with other adversities, and
calamities. Hereof we gather, that adversities and afflictions, are not always
arguments of Gods wrath, and that we should not despair in them, as though we
were quyte out of the favor of God. For either God of a fatherly care hereby
preuenteth our naughtiness, and brings down our hawtie courage, least we
should grievously offend him, or else like a father corrects our faults,
and by correction brings us into the way, or else by this mean, executes
his secret judgments, not yet perceived of us, as in this present history,
we see it comes to pass. For Jacob with all his family, is constrained by
famine, to come into Egypt, to make away to the Oracle, wherein God had said
unto Abraham, that his seed should soiorne in a strange land, out of which,
Gene. 15.
after many afflictions, God should bring them again. And the daily effects
of our afflictions, sufficiently teach us, that God brings many things to
pass, by his just and wholesome judgment, which we before, had no
understanding of. But this has in it a singular comfort, that as he would have
Jacob feel the smarte of famine: so he sent Joseph before into Egypt, and made
him ruler of all the country, that by his counsel and provision, he and all
his family should be fed. This goodness and trust in God, is set forth in the
hundredth and fifth Psalm, where it is thus said: God called for a dearth upon
the land, and destroyed all the provision of bread: But he had sent a man
before them, even Joseph, which was sold to be a bond servant. etc By him
therefore, had Jacob most succor, in whom he supposed, he had greatest cause
of sorrow. For he had mourned and lamented bitterly for Joseph, whom he
thought was dead, through whose liberality he is now notwithstanding
mainteyned and cherished. Joseph acknowledged this counsel of God, where he
comfort his brethren, being feared with the remembrance of their
wickedness, saying: that he was sent before into Egypt, by Gods prouydence,
for the benefit and public utility of many. And oftentimes it comes to
pass, Gene. 45.
that the things that our enemies unjustly and ungently procure against us,
serve to our benefit and commodity. And yet their wickedness is not to be
excused therefore, because they in their doing, go not about to fulfill Gods
counsel or purpose, but to satisfy their own unruly lusts, as has
oftentimes already been declared.

Also we have here to consider both Pharao and Joseph: The wisdom and
thankfulness of Pharao.
For Pharao deserves no small commendation of wisdom, and kindness, in
that he makes Joseph, whom he sees to be of more wisdom and counsel than
his other men, governor of his kingdom, although he knew he was both a
stranger and bond man: and in that he saw things prospered according to his
devise and counsel, he liberally considers and rewards both him and all his
kinsfolk. Of which example men in authority may learn, not only
thankfulness, but also how profitable a thing it is, to put them in office,
that worship God truly, because the blessing of God follows such, and that
which is done unto them, God takes as done unto himself. This thing Putiphar
before that, perceived well enough, whom God prospered in all his doings,
while Joseph was ruler of his house, although he little considered the same.
The same does Pharao now find, where, by Joseph's industry and wisdom, he
perceyueth himself greatly enriched, and all Egypt and the nations adjoining
preserved and mainteyned. So afterward in this book, for Paul's sake, as
many as sailed in his company were saved from drowning. And as by the godly,
great commodity uses to come unto many: so oftentimes through a few that be
wicked, if they be of authority and power, and may do what they list, ensues
great inconvenience and mischief. Joshua. 7.
Achan only through his sacrilege (as close as it was) was the occasion of a
public calamity. And Jonas flying from Gods sight, endaungereth not only
himself, but also the Mariners, and as many passengers as were in the ship.
So perilous and hurtful a thing the company of the wicked is. What may
therefore be hoped for, where such are put in office and authority? Surely
none other, but that they will be the cause of public calamity, and general
destruction. Whereof we have an example in Manasses, through whose bloudye and
cruel wickedness, it came to pass, that God being greatly offended against
the Jews, let them be carried to Babylon, having their City and Temple first
destroyed by fire and sword. Therefore in choosing of Officers for commonweals, and the Church, the chief care must be, that they be godly, unless we
will have destroyers reygne over us, rather than benefactors. And surely the
only consideration of this place is sufficient to teach us what the chief
cause of the evils in our days is, seeing such are euerywhere put in office
and authority, as are touched with no care of godliness nor religion.

In Joseph we have to consider the nature of love, Joseph's love tempered with
justice.
tempered with the rule of equity and justice. For he acknowledged his
brethren, who had handled him very naughtily and discourteously, and gives them
food most liberally, but yet he tries their minds with a certain
counterfaite a usteritie and sharpness of words, and would not make himself
known unto them, till he saw they repented and were sorry. Herein he followed
the property of God the father, and of Jesus Christ his son, who in times
past having suffered all kind of injuries at our hands, and yet daily
suffers, cannot yet forget his love and liberality, but acknowledges us for
his brethren, and does good even to them that have deserved a thousand deaths
and crosses. Let us imitate this condition of God the father, if we will be
called and taken for his children. Math. 5.
Yet is there no cause why their sins should not be reproved and accused,
who we see have done and do many things out of square. Nor we may not so
pardon them who have iniuried us, that through our to much bearing they become
the worse, but we must think this the chief point of charity, if we can by
any mean call them from sin and destruction, which as yet be void of
godliness.

The coming of the children of Israel into Egypt.
But let us consider the second part of this place, where Jacob and all his
family and kindred comes down into Egypt. Here it appears none remained
in the country of Chanaan that were of the number of Gods people, but they
were all outlawes, and preserved there without any ceremonies, or rytes of the
law, by the mere grace of God. And it is not without a cause that Steven so
diligently reckons the number of souls. For the consideration hereof sets
before our eyes the ineffable and invincible power of God, which was able
within two hundred and ten years, to make so small a company so innumerable.
For as Moses testifies, when they went out of Egypt, there were mounstred.vj.
hundred thousand and three, five hundred and fifty fighting men of the
Israelites. With the which thing if we compare the tragical attempts of Pharao
which every way went about to destroy and root out this people, it shall
easily appear, that the promise of God made sometime to Abraham ( Genes. 15.
and. 17.) could no ways be hindered by any power or deuyse of man. This ought
to be observed for the instruction and comfort of us all, that we fear not the
threats and enterprises of the world, seeing it appears the force thereof
against God is altogether vain. Let us compare this to Christ and his Church.
God promised him a kingdom which he possesses, and shall for ever possess,
despyte of his enemies. He promised also that his Church should be enlarged
which thing we see is fulfilled, although one Pharao alone has not sought the
overthrow thereof. Let every body mark this in their temptations, that they
suffer not their faith to be overthrown seeing (as Paul says) there is
nothing that can separate us from the love of God. Roma. 8.


The Patryarches dye in Egypt. Gene. 50. Exodus. 13. Joshua. 24.
In the later part of this division Steven shows how the fathers died in
Egypt, and were afterward carried to Sichem. And Moses writes plainly of
Jacob, that his corpse was carried into Chanaan. And the Scripture likewise
shows, that the Israelites, brought Iosephes bones out of Egypt, as he gave
commandment. Concerning the other Patriarchs, although Moses write nothing,
yet it is credible that their bones were also brought by their posterity,
because Steven affirms it so boldly before them who he knew were diligent
markers of his words. Furthermore, that the writers have erred in the name of
Abraham, it is more plain than needs long declaration. See at the least what
is written touching this field which Jacob bought of the sons of Hemor.
Genes. 33. and Joshua. 24. He says the Patriarchs dyed in Egypt, for that it
may appear, they dyed in that religion, which consisted in no ceremonies, but
in the only faith, which embraced the promyses of God. Whereof may be gathered,
that they were justified and saved by faith, through the mere grace of God,
and not by the law ceremonial. In the mean season we are taught that the
faithful dye godlily in what place so ever it be, and that they are not to be
thought miserable which dye in exyle out of their country. For where this life
wheresoever it is led, is but a Pilgrimage, and our country or City is
permanent and abiding in heaven: he cannot dye in banishment, which having
ended the race of his pilgrimage, is taken into the haven of the heavenly
country. For the Angel calls them blessed which die in the Lord. Apoca.
14. John. 5.
And Christ testifies that they which believe in him pass from death unto
life. Furthermore, God is present euerywhere with his that are ready to die.
And in the later day, the earth, the sea, and all the parts of the world shall
render again all those that ever they made away and consumed. Apoca. 20.
Therefore, pieuishe and foolish is the superstition of those, which measure
beatitude or bliss by holiness of places, and think it a great matter in
what place a body is buried: whereas it is plain, that all the earth is the
Lords, whose power and grace can be included and bound to no place. And let
not these men object to me the Patriarchs, which wylled their bones to be
carried out of Egypt into the land of Chanaan. For they did not that, to the end
to show they had any hope of salvation in the place of burial, but this was a
work of faith, which no fear of death could drive from them. And for that
they would testify to all men, that they firmelye believed the promises of
God which he had made unto them touching their posterity to be possessors and
inhabiters of the land, and would allure their offspring to love the same,
therefore they would there be buried: so that even at the point of death it may
be said, they had an hope and belief in the same. And that good cause thus to
do appears by the conditions and behavior of their posterity, who being
delivered out of Egypt by the singular miracles and woonders of God, had yet an
eye still unto the same, and despised the Country where their fathers were
buried. What would they therefore have done, if their fathers had appointed
their Sepulture in Egypt? Therefore the example of these Patriarchs, nothing
help their superstition, which think so great an hope of man's salvation and
glory in the burial place. Let us rather mark the point of this division, of
Steuens whole oration, and leaving the observation of ceremonies, let us keep
fast our hope and faith, that we may fit with the holy Patriarchs in the
kingdom of heaven, as Jesus Christ has promised us: to whom be praise,
honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.xlvij. Homely.
BUT when the time of the promise drew nigh, which God had sworn to Abraham,
the people grew and multiplied in Egypt, till an other king arose, which
knew not of Joseph. The same dealt subtly with our kynred, and evil
entreated our fathers, and made them cast out their young children, that they
should not remain alive. The same time was Moses borne, and was acceptable
unto God, and nourished up in his fathers house three Months. When he was cast
out, Pharaos daughter took him up, and brought him up for her own son. And
Moses was learned in all manner wisdom of the Egyptians, and was mighty in
deeds and in words.
ALthough God taught our first fathers the faith and way of salvation, which
is founded on the merit of Jesus Christ only, and therefore his doctrine
only is most ancient and most true, yet every where, it is accused of
novelty and falshoode. The cause is, that men more regard such outward
signs and shows, as spring of their own deuyse and brain, than the word of
God. Therefore it comes to pass, that while they look only to these
external things, they take them for authors of new opinions, and enemies of
Gods religion, which teach the contrary, and labor to bring again the way
of salu^tion, and true religion, that God has ordained and instituted. This
thing came to pass in Steven, who teaching the gospel of Jesus Christ at
Jerusalem, and sending the people from the ceremonies of the law, unto Christ,
was by and by accused, as one that deadly hated the temple, and true
worshipping of God. He excuses himself not in words only, but also in
deed. For gathering together an history of the fathers, he declares that
they followed none other way of faith and salvation, than that which is in
Christ. He brings his history from the very origin and beginning of the
nation, until the coming of Israel into Egypt, and the death of the
Patriarchs. Now, he begins to declare the increasing and delivery of the
people, wherein he uses great diligence, because the delivery out of Egypt,
was a figure of the redemption made by Christ, whereby we are also taught, what
state the Church has been in in all ages of the world, and shall be still.
Now, the very same scope and end, as well of this part, as of the things above
rehearsed, is to show, that the Jews were delivered, through no merit of
their works or obseruaunce of the law, but through the singular benefit of
Gods favor and grace, according to his former promises. Whereupon he gathers,
that the mean of true religion and salvation, consists not in outward
ceremonies, but rather in faith, which takes hold of the grace and promises
of God. But because we shall entreat of all these things, in their place, at
this present, we will speak of the increasing of the people, and of Moses
their delyuerer, both which things Steven touches in the words already read.

The people were preserved and multiplied in Egypt by the grace and favor of
God.
The multiplication of the people in Egypt, he proves by two arguments, ought
not to be ascribed to any counsel or industry of man, but unto the goodness
and favor of God. The first argument, he takes of the cause efficient: the
second of the state and condition of the time. As Soon (says he) as the time
of promise drew nighe, which God had sworn unto Abraham, the people grew and
multiplied in Egypt. But that this promise was of favor, none will deny, for
as much as it was made unto the Jews being not yet borne, and is manifest,
that Abraham was chosen of mere favor, and called out of Chaldea. Whereby is
gathered that this people, was preserved by the grace of God, and grew to such
a multitude, Number. 1.
as other where is Moses reports.

It is very worthy the consideration, that the godly Martyr, The prouydence of
God comprehends al times Genes. 15.
appoints a certain time, to Gods promise, whereof he knew mention was made
in the word of God. Where in the fourth generation, Abraham's posterity is
promised to be delivered from the yoke of servitude. The history agrees very
fitly with the promise, where it teaches that Moses the Captain of the
people, was the fourth from Jacob. For Jacob begat Leui, Leui begat Cahad, and
of Cahad was borne Amram, who (as it is written) was Moses and Aarons father.
We are taught by this place, that not only the effects of things coming to
pass among men, but also the causes and the circumstances are comprised within
ye providence of God. For what can that everlasting mind neglect, which both
numbreth the hears of our head, Math. 10.6.
and has also most exact knowledge of the flowers of the field and birds of
the air. That he compriseth also all times and seasons, Christ himself
testifyeth, where he reprehendeth his Disciples, because they were inquisitiue
of things, Acte^. 1.
such as his father had reserved in his own power only. The consideration of
these things, must serve for our consolation, when we be in great distress or
trouble, and see God so defer his help, that it might seem, he had both
forgotten us, and his promises. Then let us remember, that God has appointed a
certain time, when to perform his promises, which God will never let so to
ouerpasse, but he will help them that trust in him. It is our duties, in the
mean while, to wait and abide for the help of God, and to appoint him no
time or order when or how to do his pleasure. Psalm. 27.
Tarry thou the Lords leisure (says David) put thy trust in him, and he shall
comfort thine heart. Yea, it is said in other places, they have tempted the
Lord, that have prescribed him any time to show his power or will, in such
as were those in the desert, that durst ask flesh, and the Nobles of
Bethulia, which said, Number. 11. Psalm. 78. Judith. 8.
they would wait but five days for the help of God. Let us use this Tryacle
and Conserve against the impaciencie and waywardenesse of our flesh, and
think that God brings his affairs about, in their certain times, and
places, and yet in the mean while, Abacuc. 2.
forsakes not such as put their hope in him.

The other argument is taken of the state of the times, wherein the people was
increased. For it would have seemed no great marueyle, if the people had
multiplied among them, which remembering Joseph and his benefits, would have
cherished them, and done for them, as it appears the former kings of Egypt
did. But the people of the Jews grew and multiplied, even against the wills
of the chief rulers, and they stryuing all they could, against it. For there
arose a new king, which knew not Joseph, and had no regard of the benefits
before done unto them. This king not only neglected the people of Israel, but
let all others misuse them, and craftily set upon them, and made all Egypt to
hate them and suspect them, and used such cruelty and tyranny against them,
that not contented to bereave them of liberty alone, and to oppress them with
bondage, he caused their children at their birthe time, either to be killed, or
else after they were borne, to be thrown away, or else to be sought for by
the ministers of his cruelty, and other ways to be made out of the way. See
Exodus the first chapter. Yet this notwithstanding, the people grew and
increased exceedingly, and like a palm tree rose up, despite of the tyranny
that oppressed it and kept it down. Who therefore does not acknowledge this, to
be a certain singular work of Gods goodness, and that it ought not to be
ascribed to any ceremonies, seeing there are none at this time, as yet
appointed?

God mixeth adversity among prosperity.
First let us here consider, how when the time of promise drew nigh, God raised
up such a king as oppressed his people with tyranny, and so entreated them,
that scarce they had any more hope, to be delivered. This is Gods usage of
old, to mix adversity and prosperity together, and then to suffer Tyrannes
most to rage, when their destruction draws nighest. By this mean, he uses
to try the faith of his people, and is very careful that they by
carelessness abuse not their liberty. There are euerywhere examples hereof in
David, Ezechiel, and infinite others. Hereto belongs that that came to pass
after the people returned from Babylon, about the restoring again of the
church, when neither the authority of Cyrus could repress the attemptes of
their enemies, and Cambyses his son following, encouraged the enemies of the
church by his supportacion, insomuch that they that wrought upon the walls of
the City, were feign to work with one hand, Nehem. 4.
and fight with an other. It is for our profit, diligently to consider these
things, that we be not to bold in prosperity, least we be entangled in
security, but rather that we consider how we must tryumphe under the cross,
and that we therefore must prepare our selves unto the same, howsoever all
things seem to laugh upon us.

Small is the remembrance of benefits received with Princes.
Next we have to consider, that he says a king arose which knew not Joseph. And
if we search the Chronicles we shall find it to be scarce fifty years
between the death of Joseph, and the reign of this tyranne. For Joseph at
thirty years of age, was made ruler of Egypt. Then followed the seven years
of plenty, and in the second year of the dearth he sent for his father Jacob
to come unto him. Wherefore, if we allow them any time to prepare for their
journey, and to journey in, we shall find that Israel, came into Egypt, not
long after Joseph was forty years of age. Joseph lived yet after this, three
score and ten years, for Moses says he dyed, when he was an hundred and ten
years old. Now, the Israelites were in Egypt, two hundred and ten years,
from which, if we take the three score and ten years of Joseph, and the four
score years, that Moses lived, before he brought out the people, there shall
but three score years only remain, between the death of Joseph, and the
birth of Moses, from which yet must be taken ten years at the least, that
Amram lived in matrimony, in the time of persecution, before Moses his son
was borne. For it is plain that Aaron was borne three years before Moses. And
when Moses was found by the river side, his sister Marie was of that age, that
she was able to talk with Pharaos daughter, and to give her counsel, how to
save and bring up the child. The consideration of these things teach us, how
little remembrance princes of this world, have of good turns, that men do
unto them, seeing the kings following within so little a space, are ignorant of
Joseph, through whose counsel, Egypt was preserved, and the kings power so
greatly increased. For being drunken with prosperity and good success, they
easily wax proud, and think it an heinous matter, to acknowledge themselves
debtors to any man. Therefore David both truly and wisely says: Put not your
trust in Princes, Psalm. 146. Psalm. 118.
nor in any child of man, for there is no help in them. Again: It is better
to trust in the Lord, than to put any confydence in Princes. We are also
taught, how hurtful a thing it is, to forget or to be ignorant in the
ancient acts, laws, and privileges. For this place plainly testifies,
that this thing was the cause of most cruel tyranny, and at length of most
horrible destruction. Therefore, notable is the custom of the Persians and
Medians, whose kings as Hystoriographers say, are contynually occupied in the
reading of the Chronicles. For how much profit ensues thereof, Hester. 6.
the only history of Mardocheus, abundantly declares.

Thirdlye, The wylynes of tyraunts.
let us consider the crafts that tyrauntes use in oppressing their subjects.
For Pharao seems not to use his absolute power, but craftily circumuenteth
the people of Israel, and so uses the matter, that he seems to have great
regard both of public tranquillity and equity: and yet in deed he cruelly
persecuteth a people spoiled of their ancient liberty. For undoubtedly, he
complained that it was not reason and right, that a strange Nation should be
free, and have more liberty than the Egyptians. Furthermore, he shows that
it was a dangerous matter, and to be feared, least they should join with some
forreyne Nation, and aspyre to the kingdom of Egypt. But if we consider the
falling out of the matter, the end was altogether covetousness, which taught
the Egyptians how to wax rich, by oppressing and abusing the labor of others.
Hereof followed a cruelty passing all other, which the very infantes newborn
could not escape. So lawful think they it is, for them to do all things,
which once have violated and broken all law and right, and have tasted any
private advantage or profit thereby. Let us mark these crafts, that we may
learn the easilier to beware of the^. Yet let us not be discouraged, forasmuch
as it comes to pass many times, that tyraunts enterprises, set forth the
power and glory of God, who can most easily ouerturne the devises of people as
the godly prophet teaches, and as appears, came to pass in this place.

Now, Steven going forth with his narration, brings forth Moses, in whom
the Jews, as in their Captain, deliverer, and law maker, Moses saved and
brought to dignity by the goodness of God.
chiefly gloried. And he proves that he was preserved and advanced to so
high a dignity, through the singular goodness of God, and had nothing wherein
to rejoice. Whereupon it is easy for every man to conclude, that they which
were delivered by his ministry, and received the law of him, were much more
bound to the goodness of God. There are three reasons whereby he proves
that that we have said. First, arguing of the time, he says, he was borne
when the tyranne most raged, Of the time.
and when he could by none other means be saved, than by the secret working
and goodness of God. He adds another point, that even when he was new
borne, there appeared manifest tokens of Gods favor, which surely can be
ascribed to no deserte of Moses. In the mean season, we must note how he was
then borne to be their deliverer, when there was almost no hope of delivery,
and when himself was like to be in danger, before he could declare any
token of his valiantness in delivering of them. So God uses to succor his
people, when all hope is past, and (as Esaye says) that he may do his
work, his strange work, Esaias. 28.
and to forget it (as it were) that he may execute it afterward with the more
glory. For it is Gods proper work to save men, which he then does, when all
hope and help seems to them quite past. The like thing fell out in Christ's
nativity. For when the Jews had lost their liberty, and were compelled to
pay tax and tribute to a strange Prince, and an Ethnike, and every man was
ceased by Cyrenius, then was that promised (and so long looked for) Savior of
the world borne. Yea, he was borne of the stock of David, Esaias. 11.
where as it had lost all dignity, and seemed as Esaye once said, a rotten
and unprofitable stock. Therefore let no man despair in imminent afflictions.

The second argument whereby he proves Moses to be saved by the mercy of
God, Of the cause efficient moving his Parents.
he takes of his Parents, who brought him up three months, at home at their
house, contrary to the kings commandment. For this was (as Paul testifyeth
and interprets it Hebr. 11.) a work of faith, whereby they respecting Gods
mercy, and his promises, were so comforted, that they durst break the kings
commandment. But that faith and boldness of mind, are the gifts of God,
is more evident, than needs long proof. So therefore must the faith of
Moses parents be considered, that we encouraged by their example, must learn
to contemn those wicked commandments oftyrauntes, which no man can obey
with godliness. For in such things must Peter's rule be followed, which
plainly says: we must rather obey God than men.

Of the manner and order of his delivery.
Thirdly, he rehearses the order and manner, how Moses was saved, that the
grace and power of God, may the more appear. For Pharaos daughter took him,
being cast out into the river Nylus, and brought him up, as if it had been her
own son. Furthermore, being trained up in the Court, in all manner of
wisdom of the Egyptians, he became expert in all qualities belonging to a
ruler and governor. Who will in these things attribute any thing to man's
deserts or merits? Exodus 2.
who will not acknowledge Gods singular grace and favor? Here is the power of
God marvelous wonderful, who disappoynteth and laugheth at tyrants
enterprises. Pharao brings up in his own Court, and as it were in his own
bosom, the Captain and deliverer of that people, which he sought most to
oppress. So while Achab persecuteth the Prophets, and the Church, Abdias a
most faithful defender of the Prophets, and true doctrine, is in greatest
honor, and authority in the Court. So under the Roman Emperors, sometime
the mainteyners of the true faith, had greatest charge in the field, although
the Emperors would have had the faith destroyed. And many other examples there
are, which declare how the greatest enemies of Christ have furthered and set
forward the Church. Who therefore will be afraid of their attempts, which are
ruled by the bridle of Gods power and providence? Let us also consider how he
says Moses was brought up in all manner wisdom of the Egyptians. Christians
therefore may read the works of Gentyles and Philosophers, as it appears
Paul did, by his writings and sermons, wherein he feately places the
sentences of the Ethnickes. Yet a mean must be observed, least the mysteries
of the word of God, begin to be contemned of those that delyght in Gentyle
philosophy, and that we make not to much of those things in their writings,
which openly impugn the prophecies of heavenly wisdom. This thing comes to
pass in Astrologers, and in the over curious searchers of natural causes,
which yet are not ashamed, to defend their ungodliness by Moses example. But
they ought rather to follow his modesty, who in the description of the frame
and workmanship of this world, having great occasion to have showed and set
out his Egypticall wisdom, comprehends all those things in marvelous
playnenesse and brevity, that the curious wits of Mathematicalles, and
Philosophers, have wearied their brains unprofitably about, now these many
hundred years. For where he refers the causes of things to God alone (as
the Scripture euerywhere does) he easily saw, that it was a wicked ostentation
of the wit, to spoil God of any part of his glory, and to bring the
governance of the world in subjection and bondage to the course of Creatures.
Therefore their foolishness and madness is detestable, which make Abraham and
Moses the authors of judicial astrology. Let us rather depend upon Gods
appointment and providence only, who of his goodness chose both Abraham and
Moses, and has by them promised us his son to be our Savior and King: To
whom be all praise, honor, power, and glory. Amen.

The.xlviij. Homely.
AND when he was full forty years old, it came into his heart to visit his
brethren the children of Israel: And when he saw one of them suffer wrong, he
defended him, and aduenged his quarrel that had the harm done to him, and
smote the Egyptian. For he supposed his brethren would have understand how
that God by his hand should deliver them, but they understood not. And the
next day he showed himself to them as they strove, and would have set them at
one again, saying: Sirs, ye are brethren: why hurt ye one another? but he
that did his neighbor wrong, thrust him away, saying: who made thee a Ruler
and a Judge over us? will thou kill me as thou did the Egyptian
yesterdaye? Then fled Moses at that saying, and was a stranger in the land
of Madian, where he begat two sons.
WHereas the blessed Martyr Steven following the order and tracke of the story
of the fathers, is commen to Moses, in whom the Jews so greatly glory, as in
their deliverer and law giver, he diligently handles his history, partly
because Moses, touching their delivery out of Egypt, was a figure of Christ,
and bare witness of Christ: and partly because he would not seem to be a
contemner of Moses, as they accused him, in that he preached against the
Temple and Ceremonies of the law. And because he would quyte take from them,
the vain affiaunce they had in outward ceremonies, he shows that the
fathers so little trusted in man's righteousness, that Moses himself had
nothing whereof to rejoice before God, because through no help of man, but by
the only grace of God he was saved, and called to such honor as he had.
Whereupon it follows, that whatsoever afterward he did, worthy of any
singular praise and commendation, it was to be attributed unto Gods goodness
and grace. The same is more plainly set forth in this present place, where he
declares how Moses began to use his office, whereunto God had appointed
him, and how the fathers unworthily despised the benifyte of delivery given
them, and very discourteously rejected Moses their revenger and defender.

Moses stirred up by God, takes upon him the office of a deliverer.
He begins with Moses age, and with the cause that moved him to take upon
him the charge of the people, being so grievously afflicted, he says he was
forty years old, before he gave any token of the peoples delivery. In the
mean time, living in the Court, among the Nobles of the Realm, he seemed to
have little regard of the people, which thing Steven manifestly teaches,
where he says, when he was full forty years of age, it came into his heart
to visit his brethren? Who put that thought in his heart? Or else could it
spring of it self, in such an one, as had been brought up in Courtly pastymes,
and taught in the sciences of Egypt? No. Then it was the secret motion of the
holy spirit, which twitched Moses by the ear, being as one in a sleep, and
awoke his mind, with the consideration of ancient promises, making him to
join himself to that people, of whose stock he understood, that the Savior
of mankind should be borne. Paul agrees herewith, which attributes Moses
doing unto faith, which faith all the whole Scripture teaches to be the gift
of God. For he says: By faith Moses when he was great (or in honor) refused
to be called the son of Pharaoes daughter, and chose rather to suffer
adversity with the people of God, Hebru. 11.
than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, and esteemed the rebuke of
Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt. Also it appears very
evidently by this place, that all the praise of their deliuerye, is to be
ascribed to God alone, who did not only give Moses strength, but put a will
thereto in his heart also.

Except we be drawn of God, we do no good.
This must in the mean season, serve for our learning, that Moses took not on
him, the care of his brethren, till he was stirred up by God. Hereof gather we
an universal doctrine, that they which are yet led with worldly and fleshely
desires, and ruled by worldly wisdom, can do nothing that is good, or
commendable in Gods affairs, unless they be drawn, by the motion of the holy
ghost: forasmuch as of our selves (as Paul says) we can not think well. 2.
Cor 3. John. 6. Cant. 1.
And Christ teaches us that no man comes to him, except the father draw
him. Wherefore the bryde in Solomon cries out, not without a cause: Draw me
after thee. Whereupon it follows again, that no praise of merit, is due to
our works, but that whatsoever good thing we do, it is of grace only.

Also, Moses example teaches us our duty, that when God stirs and draws
us, We must obey God, calling and drawing us. John. 10.
we must yield thereto, and show our selves obedyent. For of such force is
Gods calling with the faithful, that it can not want effect, for as much as
Christ says, this is the property of his sheep, to hear his voice, and to
follow it. Which thing they use to do, with such feruencie and zeal, that
they despise all things, that might hinder their calling, as noisome, and but
very dunge, and again think nothing intolerable, or to hard that is joined
with Gods calling. Both these things we see in the example of Moses. For as
soon, as he hears the word of God speaking in his heart, without any
delay he refuses the delycacies of the Court, the pomp of the Realm, the
dignities of public authority, the friendship of greatmen, riches, ease, and
whatsoever else like is to be had in the Court. In stead of these, he chooses
traueyles, poverty, shame, and infinite dangers, wherewith he saw the people
of God every day vexed, under most cruel enemies. And that we see Moses did,
the same we see in the Apostles, who although they forsook not so great
riches, yet that little they had, they forsook, with as earnest an affection
and zeal as he did. Unto whom we may join Zachaeus, and diverse other. With
the example of whom, if we compare our own sluggishe slothfulness, who
think it not meet nor reasonable, to lose or suffer any thing, for Christ's
sake, it shall plainly appear, how far we yet be from a christian
perfection. For this is that forsaking and denying of themself, that Christ
requires of his Disciples. This is that obedience of faith, that Paul every
where urges, and without the which, the profession of a christian name, is
unprofitable.

But some will object: we confess all that is here said of Moses, The
delivery of the fathers out of Egypt was of grace.
yet it is to be thought, that the fathers by their merits deserved, that God
should appoint him, to be their revenger and defendour. Steven therefore
prudently preuenteth this objection, and shows, that the fathers of the
Jews, in their delyuerie out of Egypt, deserved so little praise or glory,
that rather they were worthy to have been perpetually in bondage, because they
rejected the benefit of their redemption, offered them of God by Moses very
churlishly and unworthily. And for a proof hereofhe alleges the story,
written in the second of Erasmus, where he may see more, that thinks Luke in
this place to brief or short. The end of all is, that the fathers despised
the benefit of God, and Moses their deliverer, wherefore their whole departure
out of Egypt, was to be attrybuted only to the favor of God. Steven also
manifestly retorteth the contempt of Moses, wherewith they charged him, upon
their forefathers, and vpbraydeth them with their old ungodliness and
ingratitude, not with railing in^ent, but to show them how well they followed
their fathers steps, seeing with like contempt they rejected Christ, whom
Moses long before commanded them to hear, and to follow.

But that we omytte not such things, as serve for our erudition: The duty of a
Magistrate.
first of all Moses is to be considered, and in him the duty of a governor or
Magistrate. He is not ashamed of the people whose Shepherd and ouerseer God
had appointed him to be. Therefore no man must be ashamed of the people
committed to him of God, be he of never so great dignity, in the world. For
though the people be never so much despised in the judgment of the world, yet
in Gods sight they are very dear, who has vouchedsafe to redeem them by the
death of his own son. He also defends them against open violence and
tyranny with armed power, and protecteth them, though with the danger of his
own life. For thus does Solomon describe the duty of a good Prince: He shall
deliver the poor, when he cries, the needy also, and him that has no
helper. He shall be favorable unto the simple and needy, and shall preserve
the souls of the poor. He shall deliver their souls from falsehood and wrong,
Psalm. 72.
and dear shall their blood be in his sight. And Paul teaches us, that God
has given the Magistrate the sword to this end to keep under the
frowardness of the ungodly, Roma. 13.
and to defend the innocent and good. Therefore they greatly are deceived,
which being brag but of a bare and empty title, have no care of the people,
but let other tyrannes to misseintreate them. And these things chiefly
considered, be in religion, which Princes must see mainteyned among the people,
that they be not drawn from God, by the superstitious traditions of men.
Therefore Esaye calls princes, the Nurrices of the Church, the glory of
which name, would God they would acknowledge, which suffer the people committed
to their charge, to be in bondage of the cruel tyranny of Popes, and their
wicked counsels and decrees. Besides this, he is a mean of concord between
his brethren, the maintenance whereof, it becomes them above all things,
well to see too, that will have their commonweals in safety. For this saying
of the Roman hystory, is confirmed by the example of many kingdoms and
nations: By concord small things increase, through discord great things come
to decay. And no doubt but their end is always unhappy, that are at
contynuall discension among themselves. And if we now compare Moses mind and
doings, with those which now a days, have the rule in christendom, we shall
less marueyle at the unhappy state of our age: because now such reign
euerywhere as are both ashamed of their people, and careleslye contemn them,
or else with over great exactions, utterly impouerishe them, and moreover
mainteyne division among them: and to conclude; think their greatest praise to
consist in wars rashely and unadvisedly taken in hand, and in needelesse and
unnecessary shedding of blood.

Let no man be grieved at the ingratitude of the people.
Let us also examine what thanks Moses got of the Jews, by his loving
benefit. Steven says it was very little. For that naughty pack which feared
not to do his brother injury, of his stowte naughtynesse, burst out against
him in all opprobrious manner, saying: Who made thee a Ruler and a Judge over
us? wylt thou kill me also, as thou did the Egyptian yesterday? In which
words, he vpbraydeth him, as though he took upon him, to be a ruler, having
refused and forsaken all rule and authority for their sakes. He also accuses
him of manslaughter, yea, of murder, which with the danger of his own life,
procured the safegarde of the people. And although there is but one noted of
this naughty ingratitude: yet it appears, many were like minded, because none
rebuked him for his sawsinesse and malapertnesse, and not long after, Moses
doing came to Pharaos knowledge, whereof no Egyptian was wytting. It must
needs therefore be, that an Israelite was his accuser. And they were no whyt
the better, after they were delivered out of Egypt, and had learned by many
signs and woonders, that he was sent of God to be their Captain and defendor.
For as often, as all things fell not out, after their minds, so often they accused
Moses of treason and falsehood. And this is the property of the world on this
sort, to recompense their best benefactors. And that that fell to Moses, came
to pass also unto David, Ezechias, Josias, and all the Prophets, and among the
Gentyles to Myltiades, Phocion, Camillus, the Scypions, and infinite others.
The consideration of whom serves to teach us that we be not grieved, with
the ingratitude of the world, and that we leave not our duty and vocation,
for any like cause. Let us therefore, look for recompense at his hand, who is
a most liberal rewarder. Let us remember, that even now is laid up for us in
heaven a great reward, and that if we be faithful in a little, we shall be
appointed hereafter over much. See Matthew the fifth, and.xxv. chapter.

Moreover, A figure of Christ and our redemption.
Moses example comprehends in it the mysteries of our redemption, and
vpbraydeth us with our unkindness toward Christ. For as Moses forsook Pharaos
court, and the riches of Egypt, visited his brethren, and took upon him their
defense: so Jesus Christ being in ye glory of his father, did vouchsafe to
humble himself, and by his incarnation became our brother, Phil. 2.
to take upon him our quarrel and defense. Again, as Moses revenged and
defended the Israelite by killing the Egyptian: so Jesus vanquished and slew
the devil, and set us at liberty. For he is that feed of the woman that was
promised, by whose merit the serpents head should be trodden down. And as
Moses was the author and perswader of his brethren to concord: so Jesus Christ
prescrybeth to them, whom he has set at liberty by the merit of his death,
and made children and members of his body, none other thing, but precepts of
charity, John. 13.15.
and has appointed charity for a cognizance for his disciples, whereby to be
known. And as the Israelites were not afraid, to murmr against Moses: so
many persons fear not to murmr most unworthily against the laws of Christ,
and few there be that acknowledge him for their king and delyuerer, because
the most part of men, either give the glory, to creatures that he alone has
deserved, or else boldly robbing him, ascribe it to themselves, and to the
merits of their own works. Therefore we are to impudent to charge the Jews
with the crime of ungratefulness, where we our selves, offend much more in
the same against the son of God.

It shall be profitable, The punishment of the ungrateful Jews.
now to consider the punishment that God uses against unkind persons. Moses
is driven away, and entertained of Iethro in Madian, takes his daughter to
wife, by whom he has two children, to comfort him in his exylement. In the
mean season the Israelites lack their revenger and deliverer, and are feign to
feel the smart of tyranny forty years longer, out of which they might now
have been delivered, but that they drove Moses away. So many times it comes
to pass, that our naughtiness, is cause that God can not help us according
to the goodness of his nature. This is like as when they came to the borders
of the land of Chanaan, and through their grutching and murmuring, Number. 14.
deserved to be brought back again, into the wilderness, and forty years
long were afflicted with all kind of misery, and there dyed. Therefore they
which are the authors of their own adversity accuse God undeservedly. Let
them mark this, which complain of the diseases which they procure themselves,
through their own distemperancie, likewise they that can not away with
poverty, being through their own ryotousnesse fallen into the same. The same
is like also even in the business of our salvation. For where many disdain to
embrace the righteousness of God, which he offers us in his son, and dare
set up their own righteousness, it comes to pass through their own
deserts, that they are able neither to avouch their own righteousness in
Gods sight, Romans 10.
ne yet to be justified and saved by Christ.

Last of all, we have to consider Moses flight, How the godly may sometime
fly.
by whose example we are taught, that it is lawful for us sometime to provide
for our selves by flying, and to keep our selves for more commodious seasons.
For both we read that Christ so did oftentimes, Math. 10.
and commanded his Apostles to do the like. But here we have need to take
good heed, and to be circumspect, least under the pretense of Christ's
commandment, we seek a cloak wherewith to hyde our fear and dastardlynesse,
and so by dishonest flying leave the standing wherein we are appointed of God.
Moses fled, and yet is not to be accused therefore, because he understood by
his ungentle repulse, that the time of delivery was not yet come, and that he
could not as yet bring them out of Egypt, who so disdainfully cast him of. But
as soon as they began to acknowledge that he was appointed of God for their
revenger, and yielded themselves to the calling of God, then could he by no
threats of the Tyrant be discouraged to fly any more, neither could he have
avoided the name of a deceyuer, if now he would rather have provided for his
own safeguard, than obeyed God. So read we that Christ fled, when he knew
his hour was not yet come. But when it was come, he went to his death
patiently, and without fear. Therefore whosoever is in any public office or
charge, let them set this rule before them, and let them not think they may
leave them, whose minds they see bent to persist in Gods vocation. But if the
malice of the people be such, that they first forsake their duty, and
dishonestly reject their magistrates, (be they secular, or preachers of the
word) faithfully doing their duty, there is no cause, but that they may as
Christ has commanded, seek their own surety by flying, and spare
themselves for better times and opportunity. Here the obedience of faith
tempered with the love of God and our neighbor, shall be much profitable. For
this shall cause that we be not blinded and deceived with private affections.
God grant that we all being mindful of his grace and good will, may
diligently defend our vocation, that being with right course come to the mark
of bliss, we may live in heaven with Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom be
praise, honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.xlix. Homely.
AND when forty years were expyred, there appeared to him in the wilderness
of Mount Sina an Angel of the Lord in a flame of fire in a bushe. When
Moses saw it, he woondred at the sight. And as he drew near to behold, the
voice of the Lord came to him. I am the God of thy fathers, the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Moses trembled, and durst not
behold. Then said the Lord to him: Put of thy shoes from thy feet, for the
place where thou stand is holy ground. I have perfitely seen the
affliction of my people which is in Egypt, and I have heard their groaning,
and am come down to deliver them. And now come, and I will send thee into
Egypt.
Because Steven was accused by his adversaries, that he had spoken wicked and
blasphemous words against Moses, and all the ceremonies of God, given by
Moses: therefore he comprehends in few words (yet with sufficient
exposition) all the history of Moses, partly to show that he thought
reverently of him, and partlye to prove that the salvation of man, ought to
be attributed to no ceremonies, because whatsoever good or excellent thing was
in Moses, he had it through no desert of his, but by the mere grace and
favor of God. The principal scope and end of all these things, is to call
the Jews from the vain affiaunce that they had in the Ceremonialles of the
law, and to trust in the only grace of God, through Christ. And to this end
he declared Moses manner of birth, his bringing up, and first conversation
among the Israelites, showing further, how unworthy their fathers declared
them self to be, of such a deliverer, seeing they rejected him with the
greatest ingratitude that could be, in so much that he was feign to live like a
banished man among the Madianites. Now follows the solemn calling of Moses,
whereby he was restored to his office again, in the which, that we may the more
easily perceive the tokens of Gods favor, we will consider every point thereof
in order.

First the time is noted when Moses was called. It was the fourtyeth year of
his banishment in Madian, The time of Moses calling.
which came to pass in the fowrescore year of his age. Then he joins the
place where he was, and his kind of life. For he says he was in the
wilderness, where he kept the sheep of Iethro his father in law, as may be
seen Exodus 3. Now, if we consider all the time of these forty years, it
shall appear, Moses served God without any Temple, or ceremonies of the
law. Because it is plain these things were instituted afterward. And where
he was in the mean while excluded from the company and common weal of the
Jews, it remains, that it must be the only and mere grace of God, that he
was thus called. In the mean season we have diligently to consider how that
as soon as he would have joined himself to the church of God, he felt ye
grief of long banishment, and of a noble man came to be a keeper of sheep.
For hereof may be gathered a general rule, teaching us what we all may trust
to, when we forsake the world, to be joined unto the Church of God. We fall
into diverse afflictions, because this world can neither suffer that falling
from it, nor cannot abide the light of the truth. And as Moses found Iethro to
be his host and father in law, but yet is made no more account of, than to
keep sheep: so the godly with them that give them houseroume, and seem
greatly to favor their part, live yet but miserablye, and as it were in
contempt. This is the greatest temptation of all other, and which sometime more
wounds the heart, than that that open enemies cruellye commit against us.
Therefore Christ warns us that we rashly take not upon us, the profession of
his name: but that we first try our selves, whether we be able (if need so
require) to suffer banishment, poverty, infamy, persecution, or such other
like, for his names sake. Luc. 24.
And when these things come to pass, let us follow Moses modesty and
constaunt faith, which no doubt was sundry ways tempted. Yet he overcomes
through that faith which before caused him to prefer the rebuke of Christ
before the riches of Egypt. Let us also by the same, overcome the assaults of
temptation, and not be ashamed of the cross of Christ, which he for our sake
has first vouchedsafe to bear. For so it shall come to pass, that he will
not be ashamed of us when he shall come in the glory of the father to judge the
quick and the dead. Marc. 8.
An Angel of the Lord calls Moses.


Secondarily, Steven shows who called Moses, verily an Angel of the Lord,
which he says appeared to him in the desert. Yet the same Angel within a
while after, says: I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob. And again afterward, he says, it wash e through whose working and
power Moses wrought signs and woonders in Egypt, and which was guide unto the
people by the way of the desert, whom Paul the Apostle testifies to have been
Jesus Christ that promised savior of the world. 1. Cor. 10.
Steven therefore calls this Jesus the Angel of the Lord, not for that he
acknowledged in him, no greater thing, or of no more excellency than in an
Angel, but as seeming to imitate Esaias; who on a time called him the Angel
or messenger of the great Counsel, not in that he took on him a nature
Angelical (which thing Paul to the Hebrews. 2. cap. expressly denies) but
in that he was sent of God the father into the world, and accomplished that
great and eternal deuyse, and counsel of God concerning the redemption of
mankind. For Paul teaches, that we were chosen in him before the foundations
of the world were laid. Ephesians. 1.
And Peter says, he was predestinate or foreordeyned from everlasting, 1. Pet.
1.
that we should be redeemed through his merit. We must think it is not
without a cause that he is said to have appeared to Moses. For hereby it is
evident that Christ took not his beginning when he was borne of the virgin
Marie, but that he was from everlasting: yea, and talked with the fathers in
times past of such things as belonged to their salvation. For although he yet
was not incarnate and made man, yet in his divine power and goodness, he
could not choose but help and deliver them, of whom in the time appointed, he
meant to take his manhood. John. 8.
Therefore he says he was before Abraham, and that Abraham saw him. And
Daniel saw in the Clouds of heaven, a Judge like unto the son of a man,
Dan. 7.
which came unto the old aged. Furthermore, Peter plainly confesses that the
Prophets in times past were inspired with the spirit of Christ, 1. Pet. 1.
and so prophesied of things to come. Therefore great is the temeritie of
those, which utterly refuse all the old Prophets, and say their books belong
not at all unto us, whereas both they were illuminated with Christ's spirit,
and diverse and sundry ways bare witness of him. See John. 5. Luc. 24. Let
us rather acknowledge the goodness of God, which in times past did vouchsafe
to declare himself to the old fathers, and by this mean would set forth unto
us, how to know the antiquity and certainty of our belief.

The fierye bushe.
Furthermore, Steven diligently teaches us, in what form and fashion, Christ
appeared unto Moses. For he says, the Angel of the Lord, which was Christ,
appeared to Moses, in a flame of fire in a bushe. This is the ancient guise
and usage of God, to talk with men in times past, in some visible liknesse,
which men were not able to abide his godly nature and majesty. We have
examples euerywhere, in the hystories of the Patriarchs and Prophets. This
causes men to be attent and heedefull, and to be in admiration of God, which
otherwise would carelessly contemn all godliness: yet God for the most part
took on him such forms and shapes, as were most agreeable, with the present
affairs, times, and persons. Which thing we also see done, in this place. For
he would by a fiery bushe, set before Moses eyes the condition and state of
his people, which were afflicted in Egypt. They burned being incensed with the
cruel tyranny of Pharao, but they were not consumed, because the son of God
was in the middle of them, which at the time appointed, should take his
manhood of the posterity of them. And this is the state of the Church in all
ages, in the consideration whereof, it shall be profitable for us often to be
occupied. It is like a bramble bushe, a weak and feeble flock: but such as
cannot easily be scattred abroad, because through faith it is most straightly
knit and joined in Christ, the head thereof. Therefore as husbandmen put fire
unto brambles and thorns, cleaving one to another, to burn them altogether:
so this world puts the fire of persecution to the Church, and with one fire
goes about to destroy it all at once. And Christ suffers this fire to be
kindled, because it is needful this way to have the faith of his people, to
be tried, and the flesh to be kept under and bridled: yet he suffers not his
Church utterly to be consumed, but is himself in the middle thereof. For he
says: John. 14. Math. 28.
I will not leave you comfortless. I am with you unto the end of the world.
Hitherto belong whatsoever things God has done for the defense of his Church,
since the beginning of the world. Caine first set fire to it, who though he
killed his brother Abel, yet he could not destroy his faith, and much less
hinder God, from raising up a fresh spring of his Church in Seth. Neither
after that could the mighty men, which went before the flood, any thing let,
but when they perished as they deserved, God could marvelously preserve
certain remnaunts of his Church, through the benefit of the Arc. This bushe
burned often also in the time of the Judges, but it was always preserved by
Gods aid and assistance. It burned in Babylon, from whence yet the Lord
brought it again, and delivered it. It burned more than once, after their
return from Babylon, and at length, when Antiochus reigned, it seemed almost
past recovery, when God raised up the Machabees, who restored Gods religion,
and brought the people to their liberty again. It burned after Christ was
borne, whole three hundred years almost, until the time of Constantine the
great. Yet God never failed it, who is able to defend his people in the middle
of the fire, as he sometime did Daniels fellows. It burns even at this day,
and there be euerywhere such as put firebrandes under it, and inflame the
mightyest Monarchs of the world with hatred against her. Yet shall they never
prevail so much as they would, but shall feel the wrath of Gods vengeance,
in whose sight, the death of those that be his is precious, Psalm. 116.
and will not suffer the blood of his belooued, to be unrevenged. Yea, while
the persecuting tyraunts, put fire under the Church, they like dry wood are
consumed with the fire of Gods judgment, the Church in the mean while,
abiding in the middle of the fire of persecution, like a Lead or Cauldron,
where metal tryers melt and get out gold and silver. See what is said of
these similitudes. Zachary. 12. and.13.

But let us come to his calling, whereby he is restored to the office, which he
began to execute, forty years before. Moses calling.
This calling has in it certain points, the consideration whereof, is very
profitable. First, God declares who he is, least Moses might doubt any thing
of the certainetie of his vocation. For he says to him, as he was amazed with
the sight of the bushe burning. I am the God of thy fathers, the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of Jacob. It pleased God, among many of his
styles, The God of ye fathers. etc.
to use this title chiefly, to call to Moses remembrance, the covenant made
with Abraham, and the promises made long before, unto the fathers, declaring
thereby, that he was not forgetful of his covenant and promyses, although he
hitherto suffered the people to be afflicted. By which example we are taught,
that in adversity, we should chiefly have respect, to Gods promises, which
God can neither forget, nor fail to perfou^me. Yea, we see the truth of Gods
promises so infallible, that God forsakes not the dead, whom he has once
taken to his tuition. For he is the Lord both of life and death. Romans 8.
Wherefore neither life nor death, can separate us from the love of God. For
whether we live or die, we be the Lords. And to this end it is that he says,
he is the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, which yet were dead, long before,
he thus spoke. And Christ by the same reason, calls Lazarus his friend, John.
11.
being both dead and buried. Whereunto chiefly it appertains, that Christ out
of this place, took a general doctrine, to confirm the resurrection of the
dead, Math. 22.
and certainty of eternal life, against the Sadduceyes cauillations. Let us
therefore be occupied in the meditation of this title, as often as fear of death
arises in us, and we shall perceive by and by, that we shall be delivered,
from all care and pensiveness.

But whereas Moses feared as well with the sight of the burning bushe, as with
the voice of God, The shoes must be put off.
durst not come near, by and by, he is told what he must do. For God says
moreover: Put of thy shoes from thy feet, for the place whereon thou
stand, is holy ground. So he says, because of his own being there, and
for that he had appointed that place to set forth his law in. It is not
without a cause, that Steven makes mention of this precept, for hereby he
means to admonish the Jews, what God in time past required of Moses, and
what he also requires of us now a days, that is to say, neither temple,
neither leuiticall worshipping, no cold ceremonies, whether it be the blood of
Oxen, or Goats, but that we should purge our minds from beastly affections,
which are signified by the shoes, and should be wholly joined to him, by
sincerity of faith, and purity of minds. For this is that true worshipping
of God, which Christ otherwheres says, consists in spirit and in truth. And
hereunto belongs his precept of washing the feet, John. 4.
whereof we ought to have greater respect, than of any outward things. We must
also mark every where, how all the scriptures testify unto us, John. 13.
that God is present in every place, and how daily examples abundantly prove
the same.

God sees the affliction of his people.
Last of all, God opens his intent and pleasure unto Moses: I have (says he)
perfitely seen the affliction of my people in Egypt, and have heard their
groaning, and am come down to deliver them. Which words, serve most aptly to
Ste ens purpose. For they declare, that there was no desert in the Israelites,
for the which they ought to be delivered, and that God regarded nothing in
them, but their afflictions, wherewith they were miserably troubled, whereupon
it follows, that all the benefit of their delivery, appertains to the
mere grace of God. We are also taught, that God does not neglect his people,
although he sometime seems so to do. He sees their tears, Psalm. 56.
which David says, are put in a Bottle in his sight. He hears not only
their cry, but also their groaning, because he searches the heart and the
reins. And they that read hystories, find examples euerywhere, whereby it
may easily be proved. Let this serve therefore, to comfort us, when we are
forsaken, of false and unkind persons. Let it also serve, to instruct us, that
we unadvisedly afflict not those, whom God has so special a care of. Hereto
appertains that that is written, Exodus. 22.
concerning Wydowes, fatherless and strangers, crying unto him. And that that
is written in Zachary, the second chap. He that touches you, touches the
apple of mine eye. And chiefly let us have regard, that we give our se^^es
wholly to that God, which considering the misery of all mankind, has given us
his son, Jesus Christ* to be our deliverer and revenger: to whom ^e praise,
honor, glory and power, for ever. Amen.

The.L. Homely.
THIS Moses whom they forsook (saying who made thee a Ruler and a Judge?) the
same did God send to be a Ruler, and a delyuerer by the hands of the
Angel, which appeared to him in the bushe. And the same brought them out,
showing woonders and signs in Egypt, and in the red Sea, and in the
wilderness forty years. This is that Moses which said unto the children of
Israel: A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, of your brethren,
like unto me, him shall you hear.
Although Steven taught none other way of faith and salvation, than that that
is founded upon the merit of Jesus Christ, the promised Savior, to whom
Moses and the Prophets bear witness: yet he is accused that he teaches a
new faith and an erroneous, yea, that he is a blasphemer of Moses and the
fathers, and goes about, to abolishe the faith which they observed, and
delivered us. The same state was the world in then, that in these days it is,
where they that follow the faith delivered by the Apostles, and sealed with the
blood of the Martyrs, are accused, as subuerters of ancient religion, and
condemners of the old fathers. But what we have to do, in this case, Steuens
example teaches us. He reasons diligently and at large, touching the belief
of the fathers, chiefly he cyteth the history of Moses, that by rehearsal
thereof, he might show partly how reverently he judged of Moses, and partly
prove that he was no enemy to the ancient religion of the fathers, although
he taught them that those ceremonies were now to be put away, without the
which, they well enough served God, yea without the which, Moses also pleased
God, and was advanced to so high dignity and honor. So the vnlearneder sort,
now a days must be taught, what the belief and doctrine of the Martyrs was
in time past, and how they were saved without those things, whereabout now a
days, is such bitter contention. But after Steven had brought his oration to
the solemn vocation of Moses, then prosecuteth he the same at length, and
enters into the praises of Moses, and first testifyeth that he acknowledges
all things in Moses, that God bestowed upon him: Then proves he his doctrine
of Jesus Christ, by the testimony of Moses, whose meaning he says, was not
that the Israelites should stick in the law and ceremonies, given by him, but
that they should have an eye, to that especial Prophet, which God afterward
should send, of whom he was but a sign and figure only. This is a notable
place, whereby we are taught, that we must think and speak so reverently of
the ministry and virtues of the Saints, that yet we leave Jesus Christ's
honor whole to himself, who only has the pre-eminence in all those things,
that concern the true worshypping of God, and mean of our salvation.

Moses the ruler and delyuerer of Israel.
First, he begins with the office of Moses, which was the most excellent
thing, that he could devise. For he says, that God sent him, to be a ruler and
delyuerer of the people of Israel. This thing he so proponeth, that he hytteth
them again in the teeth, with the ingratitude of their fathers, which
unworthily refused Moses, laying to their charge, how they contemned him, in
whom they so greatly bragged. For he says: This Moses whom they denied,
saying, who made thee a Ruler, and a Judge, the same did God send, to be a
ruler and a delyuerer by the hand of the Aungel* etc. Now, because he
acknowledged Moses to be a ruler and delyuerer of the people of God, this one
thing might have been sufficient proof enough, against his adversaries, which
complained on him, as having spoken blasphemy, against Moses.

God aduau^ceth the abject and despised.
We have here chiefly to consider, how God makes him the ruler and deliverer
of his people, who was already hated of the Egyptians, refused of his brethren
the Israelites, and had a long time been in banishment. By which example we
learn, that we should not judge, neither of our own case, nor other men's,
according to the judgment of the world: where oftentimes it falls out, that
they are in greatest favor with God, whom the world contemptuously abhors
and disdayneth. For this is Gods property, to choose the humble and base, and
by them to confound the pride of the world. And we read in the hundred
and.xiij. Psalm, how God takes up the simple out of the dust, and lyfteth the
poor out of the mire, that he may set him with the Princes, even with the
princes of his people. Whereunto that that the holy Uirgin sings is like:
Luke. 1.
He has put down the mighty from their seat, and has exalted the humble
and meek. Examples hereof we have not only in Moses, but also in diverse
others. So, God of an Assekeeper, made Saul a king, and David he took from
the sheepefolde, and set him up in a Princely throne. Whereunto may also be
referred, that that was done in the Apostles, who being for the more part
Fyshermen, and of no authority in the world, were advanced so high, that
they might be called conquerors of the whole world, which by preaching of the
word, they brought to the obeisance of Christ, within few years. Here may
they that are despised, and without glory, receive comfort. Also they that be
aloft and in high degree, may learn to be humble, least presumption (as
Solomon says) go before destruction. Prouer. 16.


After what sort Moses is said to be the delyuerer of the people.
Furthermore, let us see in what respect Moses is called the delyuerer of the
people. For this is not so to be understood, as though he did any thing of
his own private power or authority: For Steven plainly testifies, that he was
sent to be a delyuerer, by the hand of the Angel, which appeared to him in
the bushe: that is, that he did all that belonged to the delyuerie of the
people, by the appointment and commandment of Jesus Christ, whom in the last
sermon, we declared to be the Angel. It is manifest therefore, that Moses was
but a Minister, and that all the glory of their delyuerie is due only to
Christ. After which sense, all the places of Scripture, must be taken and
expounded, wherein any thing peculyer unto God, is attributed to ^^n* For that
is after none other sort, but by the way of Ministry, which they take in
hand, at the commandment of God. So it is said, the Ministers plant,
build, win men unto God, remyt sins, and keep them vnremitted, not
because they do these things of their own power, and at their pleasure: but
because God does vouchsafe to use their ministry, in bringing them to pass,
who also even without them, at his pleasure, is able to rule and govern all
things.

But because he said Moses was made the Ruler and deliverer of the people of
God, he shows how he used his office: He brought them forth, Moses
fulfilleth the office of a delyuerer.
showing wonders and signs in Egypt, and in the red sea* and in the
wilderness, forty years. So that Steven acknowledges in Moses no bare name
of a delyuerer only, but wyllingly confesses that he faithfully discharged
and fulfilled his office. And because he would seem to conceal nothing that
made for his glory, he makes mention of the signs and woonders, which God
wrought by him. These woonders and signs be divided into three sorts, and are
diligently set out in Moses wrytings.

The first sort of them is those, that were done in Egypt, Moses miracles in
Egypt.
amongst which, those are first to be placed, which he wrought to purchase a
credit to his vocation, such as was the turning of his rod into a Serpent;
which Serpent did eat by the Sorcerers rods, which they by enchauntment had
transformed into Serpents. Then followed the ten horrible and prodigious
plagues, wherewith God marvelously afflicted Pharao and the Egyptians. For all
the Egyptians waters were turned into blood, and were made not only unfit for
any use, but also vpbrayded the Egyptians with their bloody tyranny and
babeslaughter. Then were there Frogs sent, which not only in their fields,
but also crawling in their houses, with their troublesome ^oyse vexed their
guilty consciences. After them followed Lyce, more troublesome than the
Frogs, because they stacke fast unto their bodies, eating into their flesh.
By and by after that, came diverse swarms of flies, by heaps vexing both men
and beasts. And because this might perhaps seem but ^^ea^ytings and tryfles,
they had yet more grievous than this sent among them* For an horrible and
contagyous rotte of murhen killed up their cattle both small and great. In the
men's bodies rose filthy botches and sores ugly running. Monstrous hayle
destroyed their whole years crop and increase. And that the hayle touched not,
or sproong afterward out of the ground, again the Caterpyllers devoured
lying in their fields, as thick as bail. And because wyttingly and wyllingly
they persisted in their blind and wilful ignorance of God, he sent among them
fearful and feeleable darkness. And at length, by an Angel that struck
them, all Egypt was filled with the slaughter of all their first borne, so that
no house was void of this horrible calamity and mourning. The consideration
of all which teaches us how easy it is unto God, to keep down and
vanquishe, most mighty Tyraunts. For he is in deed the Lord of hosts, which
uses to send forth as well the good Angels as badde, yea and all the
creatures of the world, against his enemies. And there is no creature so vile
or weak, which is not able enough to vex, yea and to kill man, if it please
God to arm it thereunto. By his justice and judgment it came to pass, that
Pharao was so troubled with Frogs, and so vexed with swarms of Lice and
Flies, who not long before, had prowdely re^ected (...) God of the Hebrews. So
by Mice he revenged the wicked contempt of his name, among the Philistines,
when they had gotten the Ark of God into their hands, which was a sacrament
and sign of his presence. And we read how Antiochus, Sylla, Herod, and
diverse other were eaten up of Lice and vermin that bredde of their own
flesh. Let us therefore humble our selves in the sight of God, and not like
mad men suffer our selves to be bewitched with the vain hope and confidence of
things temporal.

The miracle of the red sea.
The second sort of miracles wrought by Moses, were those which came to pass
in the red sea. For when the Israelites were enclosed with the chariots and
horsemen of the Egyptians, and thought they must needs perish, either upon
their swords, or else be swallowed up of the sourges of the sea, sodeinly the
sea stricken with Moses rod as God commanded, divided it self in two parts
like a wall standing on both sides, and the wind blowing roughly dried up
the myerie fourde, that the Israelites went through the middle of the sea on
dry foot, whom when the Egyptians with deadly hatred pursued, suddenly the
heaps of waters joined together again, and oppressed and swallowed them up.
By which miracle God evidently taught us that he is able to help his people by
those things which seem to them most hurtful and against them, and that he
can give them a passage to escape through the middle of all the things that
lie in their way, that wa^ke in his vocation. Again, he uses to punish his
enemies by those things in which they have their most hope and affiaunce: yea,
he can blind their eyes, and send them the spirit of gyddinesse, that they
shall run into their own mischief, and not be able to anoyde the dangers
lying before their face. For it is certain, the Egyptians took the red sea
for a sure bulwark, and thought that the Israelites, their wives and children
should pershe therein: yet Gods providence so ordreth all things, that the
Israelites pass safely through, both body and goods, and the Egyptians be
drowned, and of their own head enter into the middle of the sea, between the
two main walls of water, notwithstanding they had so often before felt Gods
heavy hand. Whereby we learn that we should despair in no adversity, nor
put any trust or confidence in outward things, because God is able so quickly
to turn all things vpside down.

The miracles in the desert.
In the third sort, Steven comprehends those that were done in the
wilderness, where the people had Manna given unto them, which fed them
forty years together, where Quayles fell round about their tents, where
Moses opened the veins of quick springs out of the hard rocks, where by
godly prayer he gate a glorious victory of the Amalechi^es: where God
marvelously defeated the sleyghtes of Balaam: where the wicked murmurers
perished with strange plagues: where their garments in forty years space,
neither consumed with wearing, neither did rotte for oldenesse. I omit diverse
other things, which by Moses are more diligently rehearsed. But seeing Steven
so willinglye acknowledges all these things, and so highly commends them, he
abundantly declares that they do him no small injury to accuse him as a
contemner of Moses: And because he sends the Israelites from Moses to
Christ, he evidently shows that al these signs served but to confirm Moses
doctrine, and ought not to be racked, to the end to cause the people to
depend and hang upon Moses. And they are confuted by this place, which abuse
the miracles wrought sometime by the Saints, to pro^ue the superstitious
inuocating and worshipping of them* whereas they (...) witness but of their
doctrine, whereby we were brought unto Christ.

And because he was not ignorant that his adversaries chiefelye urged him with
this argument, that he led his hearers by this doctrine from the ceremonies
of the law unto Christ, and the belief in him: he proves that he does not
so in contempt of Moses, but according to his example and commandment. For
this is that Moses (says he) which said unto the children of Israel: A
Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren like unto
me, him shall you hear^* Whereupon he gathers, that it was not Moses
meaning, that the Jews should stick in the ceremonies given by him, but that
he promised them another Prophet, whose sayings they must all hearken unto, or
else perish both body and soul. This Prophet was Christ, 1. Pet. 1.
whom the Scripture calls the Prince of all Prophets, and by whose spirit
all other Prophets were inspired. Also he beats back their accusation of his
contemning of Moses upon their own heads, while he shows that they refuse
Jesus Christ, whom Moses so earnestly and with such authority commended. The
place is in the.xviij. of Deuteronomie, upon the explication whereof, we have
spoken more largely in the.xxiiij. Sermon, where we expounded the same place in
Peter's sermon, which brought the same text. Let us learn that it is God the
fathers will, that we should hear Christ, and be obedient unto him by true
obedience of faith, and so obtain salvation in him: to whom be praise,
honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.lj. Homely.
This is he that was in the congregation in the wilderness, with the Angel
which spoke to him in the Mount Sina, and with our fathers. This man received
the word of life to give unto us, to whom our fathers would not obey, but
cast it from them, and in their hearts turned back again into Egypt, saying
unto Aaron, make us Gods to go before us. For as for this Moses that brought
us out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him. And they
made a Calfe in those days, and offered sacrifice unto the image, and rejoiced
over the works of their own hands.
Because the Jews had all the trust of their salvation in outward ceremonies,
and gloryed in keeping the faith of their auncesters and forefathers: they
accused all those which taught men to seek salvation in Christ only, of great
blasphemy both against God, against Moses, and the fathers. This Steven found
true, as before we have declared: who for that he would the more easilye clear
himself hereof, breaks forth into the praise of Moses, greatly extolling
him and declaring how unworthily their fathers entreated him. The end of all
which is to lay the crime wherewith they charged him, both upon their fathers,
in whom they so greatly gloryed, and also upon themselves which stubbornely
refused Christ, of whom he shows that Moses bare witness. Moreover, he
gathers hereof that the fathers were saved through none of their deserts,
but by the mere mercy of God, and that therefore they ought to put their hope
and trust in none other. The same is the end also of this present place, where
first he rehearses the setting forth of the law, whereof Moses was the
minister: afterward he declares the heinous trespass of their fathers, in
offending both against Moses; and the law of God.

The law given by Moses.
And in speaking of the setting forth of the law, he makes mention of two
other things, which were able to purchase no small credit unto Moses* First he
says: he was in the congregation with the fathers in the wilderness. In these
words he comprehends forty years space wherein he suffered with so great
faith and patience, the Nation of the Jews, that there is to be found in no
hystories any to be compared with him. This is an argument of a singular faith,
which could be overcome by no terrors, by no continual labors, nor by no
unkindness of the people, but would stoutly go forth with the charge given
him of God. The second is, that he says he spoke with the Angel, which both
appeared to him before, and afterward was familiarly conversant with him, when
he appointed him to be Gods interpreter to the people. Exo. 20.24.
We declared before out of Paul, that this Angel was Christ. Wherefore Moses
dignity is here declared to be such, as wherein he excelled all the Prophets
of all ages. For thus we read God said: If there be a Prophet of the Lords
among you, I will be known of him in a vision, Number. 12.
and will speak unto him in sleep. My servant Moses is not so, which is
faithful in all my house. Unto him will I speak mouth to mouth. These things
Steven calls to their remembrance, to make them understand how great the
authority of Moses and the Oracles which God gave by him, ought to have been
both with the fathers in time passed, and ought now also to be with them. And
to that end he afterward adds: This man received the word of life to give
unto us. And it is not without a cause that he calls the law the word of
life. For so he purges himself from all crime of contemning the law, and
sets forth in one word the effect of the law. For truly the law is a
lively word or the word of life, although otherwheres Paul calls it the
strength of sin, and ministry or working of death. 1. Cor. 15. 2. Cor. 3.
Leuit. 18.
For it teaches us the rule how to live holily, and promises life to all
them that fulfill the same. Next, it leads men unto Christ, in whom all the
mean of salvation, yea, and very life it self is contained. For the which
cause Paul resembles it to a schoolemayster. And Moses says he had set life
before the Jews* Galat. 3.
because he had showed them in the law the true way how to attain unto life.
And these things it becomes us to acknowledge in the law, if we will rightly
judge thereof. But if we compare the corruption of our nature with it, it may
worthily be called, the strength of sin, and ministry of death. For it
bewraieth sin, which otherwise lurketh in us, unknown, and witnesses that
we have deserved death. Furthermore, it teaches us, that we are so weak, that
we are not able to fulfill the righteousness thereof, nor of our own power and
merits to escape the wrath of God. Romans 7.8. Moses delivers the precepts he
received of God.
But of these things Paul entreats at large.

We ought well to mark how he says, that Moses delivered not to the
Israelytes the deuyses of his own brain, but the word of life which he
received of God. Which thing it appears he performed with such diligence,
that without the certain and express word of God, he never durst institute or
decree any thing in doubtful matters: as we may see in the case of the
blasphemer, and of the man that brake the Sabbath day, and of those which
being polluted with touching of dead coarses, might not come to the passover
feast with the congregation. And that that Moses observed, Leuit. 24. Nume. 15.9
that same the Prophets and Apostles in time past were commanded also to
observe, that they should teach nothing of their own head, under color of
Gods name, but should diligently set forth the word of God, speaking in the
scriptures. So God puts his words into Hieremies mouth, and commands
Ezechiel to take the word at his mouth that he should show unto the people.
Hierem. 1. Ezech. 3. Math. 28.
And the Apostles are commanded to teach all Nations the things which before,
they had learned of Christ. If they which brag of their succeeding the
Apostles, had with like diligence observed the same, we should have in the
Church more true godliness and faith, and less error and superstition. And
if we consider Moses, the Prophets, and Apostles, we shall find the
boldness of the Popes of Rome to be detestable, which arrogate to themselves
power to make new laws and new Articles of faith, through whose licentious
lust it is come to pass, that the yoke of the christians is more grievous and
burthenous than the yoke of the Jews.

Secondly, The law given also for them that came after.
it is to be observed how Steven testifies that the law was not given to the
fathers living only in Moses time, but also unto their posterity: yea, he
includes himself and all others, that had now professed Christ in the
number, to whom it was given. By which place the error of them is manifestly
confuted, which think the things done by Moses and the Prophets according to
Gods appointment, belong only unto the fathers. Howbeit, it is evident that God
is everlasting and unchangeable. And therefore his will must needs be always
one unchangeable. And it makes no matter though many things be abrogated
which sometime were appointed for the old fathers. For they ought to have
remained but until a time of correction, and to be resemblaunces and shadows
of those things, the verity whereof was to be fulfilled in Christ. And in those
things consisted not the worshipping of God, which ought to be spiritual,
John. 4.
because God is a spirit. In the mean time the true points of faith and
religion, which were first declared in the beginning of the world, and more
fully afterward set forth by Moses and the Prophets, remain safe and sound:
whereunto the Prophet had a respect, saying: Esaias. 40. Math. 5.
The word of the Lord endures for ever. And Christ says, the world shall
peryshe, but one title of the law shall not perish. Let no man therefore
beguyle himself through any false hope, as though the things delivered to the
fathers in time past were not also spoken to us, seeing our faith, life, and
all our deeds, must be tried and examined according to the rule of the old
law.

But let us return unto Steven, The he ynousnesse of Idolatry. Exodus. 32.
which sets against the publication of the law, the ingratitude and
naughtynesse of the fathers, unjustly rejecting Moses and the law. And
although he might have recyted diverse other naughty deeds of theirs, yet
brings he but the sin of Idolatry only, whereby it appears plainly, of
how small authority Gods law was with them, when contrary to his
commandment, they durst make an image of God, and appoint new kinds of
worshipping him, whereas not many days before; they had heard the terrible
(...) of his divine majesty. The story is in Exodus the.xxxi^. ^ha. Steuen^
^arke and end herein is to prove that the fathers were always (...) of
Moses* and that they present, trimly trod in the steps of their
frowardness* therefore as the fathers in old time were saved by grace only:
so there was none other hope of salvation for them, than such as was founded
upon the grace of God. It shall profit us diligently to consider these few
words, wherein this heinous disobedience is comprehended, because they
cunningly paynt out unto us the begynninges and proceedinges of Idolatrye.

The beginning, and going forward of ydolatrie.
First, declaring the fountain of all this evil, he says that the fathers
would not obey the lively word of Gods law, but in their heart returned into
Egypt. And by the name of Egypt, he comprehends the abominable superstition
which reigned in that Nation, whereupon he says they set their minds again.
And in this he notes the execrable leuitie and inconstancy of them, which had
so soon forgotten, both their grievous servitude and bondage, and their
wonderful delivery, and would now imitate and follow them, whose names they
ought in their hearts to have abhorred.

Contempt of the word.
This is the fountain of all ungodliness, when in our hearts we turn from the
word of God, to the presidents and examples of men, and study more to please
them, than God. Forthence springs that detestable unstableness, which makes
us not only to forget the law of God, but quyte puts out of our
remembrance, all the thrall and bondage that before time we have been in. We
have examples hereof in these days euerywhere of them, who to please the
world, follow the superstitiousnesse thereof: and the intolerable yokes of
Antichristianitie, wherewith before they were oppressed, they extenuate and
make very light of, because they will not seem to do wickedly altogyther.

But after the contempt of Gods law, follows the contempt of Moses, Contempt
of the Minister.
which they manifestly express in these words, where they say: As for this
Moses which brought us out of the land of Aegipt, we wot not what is become
of him. They confess then the benefit they received by Moses mean, but of
him they wot not what is befallen. Yet they saw him go up unto the mountain
at Gods calling, he also bade them, to abide his coming. He appointed them Hur
and Aaron, to be his vycares and delegates. Yet as though they had been left
doubtful and uncertain of all things, they dare to complain them. Whereby it
appears that Moses authority was very small with them, seeing they could
wickedly cast the law of God from them. So always where men in their hearts
contempne the word of God, it uses to breed the contempt, and lothing of
Gods Mynisters. For where Satan knows that God has set them as laborers
and watchmen, through whose admonitions, we be kept either in doing well, or
else be brought into the way when we do err: he labors only how to
discredit them, and to bring them out of authority with men. And this place
teaches us what to judge of them which use to scoff and rail at the
Mynisters of the word. Surely, by that argument they prove they are the
despysers of God and his word, although they never so much deny the same. For
as he uses not to contempne the Legate or Ambasadour, which honors the
Prince that sent him: so if they had not learned to ^et ^^d light, they could
not contempne his mynisters and Legate^.

Of these fountaynes began Idolatry to spring. New Gods.
For while they say they ^^ote not what is become o^ Moses, by and by they
add: Make (...) to go before us Shall we think that they were become so mad
as to judge Gods could be made by the hands of men? No. But they wou^^e
have some visible sign or token of Gods presence, whereby they might be
assured of Gods present help, and whereunto they might dyrect the ceremonies
of their outward service and worshipping. And because they had once swarued
from the word, to the deuyse of man's reason, they cause a golden Calfe to be
molten, following the Egyptians, who worshipped Apis their God in form of a
Calfe, wherein they commit manifold error. For first they doubt of the
presence of God, whose many and notable signs they had hitherto seen. And now
they neither remember the woonders which he showed in Egypt and in the red
sea: neither regard they the pillar of cloud and fire that went before their
camp, neither are they mindful of the dreadful Majesty that appeared in
the mount of Sinai. Next, contrary to the commaund^ment of God, they make a
molten Image, wherein they go about to express the form or shape of God, and
(as the Prophet says) turn the Majesty of their God, into the similitude of
a Calfe* that eats hay. Psalm. 106.
Therefore they do God extreme dishonor, and make new Gods while they
imagine God to be a far other manner of one than in deed he is. This is the
next step to Idolatry, when men are not contented with such means, as it
pleased God to reveal himself by, but dare of their own heads devise new
means. God reuealeth himself by his word and Sacraments, by the frame and
workmanship of this world, and by his creatures, in all which there appear
evident tokens of his godly wisdom, goodness, justice, and omnipotency.
And to the intent that we seeing these things, might be stirred up with the
consideration of God and true godliness, there is nothing almost contained in
this world, but the holy ghost has taken parables out of them, whereby he
shadoweth out the mysteries of God and our salvation. Therefore our eyes on
every side behold Images consecrated by the word of God, to admonish us of
our duty. Whosoever despise these Images and follow the reason of the flesh,
they can not choose but be polluted with the vice of Idolatry. For that that
herein came to pass unto the Jews, we read the same also fell out among the
Gentyles* Romans 1.
And that the Idolatry among the christians sprang of the same cause, is more
evident than needs long proof. Furthermore, we are taught how requisite it
is, that from our childehoode we be well instructed in religion, seeing the
Israelites after so many miracles seen, and hearing the word of God, fall
again to that kind of Idolatry, that they were used to in Egypt.

After this new God, follows worshipping. Wherefore he says, Worshipping of
Idolles.
They offered sacrifice unto the Calfe. Howbeit, they would seem to have
offered to the true God, that brought them out of the land of Egypt. For they
make mention of the true God, and Aaron as we read proclaimed an holy day, to
the Lord. But because this Calfe was neither true God, nor the Image of God
(for who will say God is like unto a Calfe) they truly are said to have done
sacrifice to the Calfe. Here therefore thou ^ast what to answer them, which
under a (...) of godly (...) worshipping of Images may be excused: and say,
that whatsoever we (...) in the ^^nour of him, is acceptable unto him* although
we sometime (...) from the rule ofhis word. But the holy ghost speaking (...)
Steven, is (...) there (...) and opinion. For all this worship rests in the
Images, and st^etcheth not unto God, who^^ similitude they represen^ (...) For
(...) should Idols represent God, which is the truth it self* which Idols or
Images* Habacuc. 2
the Prophet calls lying Schoolemaysters* And if thou will say, ^hys worship
stre^cheth yet further: I will confess, it is do^e in deed to the devil, who
is both the father of lies, and only delyghted in lies. This saw Paul, when
in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, the tenth chapter, he wr^te: The
things that the Gentiles offer, they offer to Devil* and (...) God.

Beside all this: they rejoiced in the works of their own (...). In these
words is expressed partly a trust of mind, v. Rejoicing of Idolaters.
and joy that ^^ringeth thereof, both which ought to be sought in God only:
and partly a kind of outward rejoicing, whereinto ydolaters use to fall
without all modesty or measure. The holy history shows that both these
things came to pass in this place. For as soon as the Calfe was molten and
graven, with a great showte they cry: These be thy Gods (o Israel) which
brought thee out of the land of Egypt. Then being filled with the flesh
offered to the Idol, they rise up to play. Hos. 4.
This is the property of Idolaters. For Idol^ too men (...) their hearts, as
the Prophet says. So it comes to pass, that they which should rejoice in
God only, rejoice in Idols, and where they ought to be led and governed with
the spirit of God, they rage in immoderate and unseasonable pastimes. Now, if
thou will compare the things hitherto spoken, with that is done in the Papa^ie
or Popedom, thou shall see them all one. For what other beginning can thou
allege of ydolatrie, but that men leave the word of God, and turn again in
their hearts* to the abominations of the Jews and Idolaters, from whence
through the benefit of God, they were delivered* This appears well, in that
diverse of our doings, agree with the rytes and ceremonies both of the Jews,
and Gentiles. By and by, after contempt of the word, followed the contempt of
the ministry, which the ignorance and blockheadnesse of the priests greatly
set forward, which sent the simple people to dumb images, there to learn
what belonged to their salvation. Of these springes, issued out new Gods,
some like men, some like women, some like oldemen, some like young. Yea, beside
the fourmes of men, were added fourefooted beasts, fowls of the air, worms
of the earth, and fyshes of the sea. I let pass the ghastly fourmes and sightes
of souldyours, the whoorishe prancking and decking of Images, which should have
represented the likeness of saints, and of God himself. But new Gods must
have new ways and manners of worshipping. Therefore in the honor of them were
temples builded, aulters consecrated, offerings hanged up, pylgrimages
appointed, lamps burning, holy days proclaimed, sacrifices offered, and
nothing was left undone, which heretofore was used in the sacrifyces of the
Gentyles. And, as though men had been clean eased of the burden of their
sins* they greatly rejoiced in the works of their own hands. And there
wanted not liberty of carnal joys, which never reigned more than in the
feasts and dedications of these Gods. So grievous and great was the
blyndenes, from the which God has delivered us by the light of his gospel.
Let us therefore hereafter flee the inuencions of our own wit, and the works
of our own hands. Let us serve God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ in
spirit and in truth: to whom be praise, honor, power and glory. Amen.

The.lij. Homely.
Then God turned himself and gave them up that they should worship the
host of the sky, as it is written in the book of the Prophets: o ye of the
house of Israel, gave ye to me sacrifices and meat offeringes by the space
of forty years in the wilderness? And you took unto you the Tabernacle of
Moloch, and the star of your God Rempham, figures which ye made to worship
them. Therefore I will translate you beyond Babylon.
AMongst many other things which Jesus Christ foretold should come to pass to
ye faithful Preachers of his Gospel, this is not the least that he said the
world should persecute them, as public enemies of true religion. This thing
we see the Apostles found true, even in the first springth of the church, and
among them Steven chiefly, who while he goes about to bring men unto Christ,
is accused, for that he had spoken blasphemy against God, Moses, the law, and
all the ceremonies thereof. But he both boldly and wisely answers these
shameless sclaunders, rehearsing the ancient religion, whereby the fathers
were saved, and diligently expounding the things done by Moses, declaring how
he received this word of life, of God, and delivered it unto the fathers. He
shows moreover, that the fathers were never obedient to Gods commandments,
but being addicted to outward ceremonies only, feyned diverse things of their
own brain, contrary to true religion. And by this mean he goes about to put
out of their minds, the vain trust which they had in their fathers religion,
which is the most dangerous impediment and let, that can be, to them that
would come to the right way of salvation. To this end therefore he recyted
the history of the golden Calfe, whereby he conuinceth their fathers of great
ungodliness, showing that they were saved of mere favor, seeing they
deserved destruction through that wicked Idolatry only. And he adioyneth
hereunto this present place very handsomely, declaring that they alone sinned
not herein, but proves that their posterity followed their steps.

The rehearsing of the Idolatry of their posterity, The Idolatrye of the
Israelytes is of continuance
seems to be as it were a preoccupation. For thence he preuenteth them, if
any man should make light of ye erecting this calfe, or should say that it
were long ago expiated by the godliness of their successors. For there is no
excuse left for them, because they were so little the better, after their first
fall, that it rather increased whole heaps of impiety following. For where
they had once thrown away the word of God, and rushed into their own
destruction with minds bent to ungodliness, God which before tenderly
favored them, turns his back to them, and gives them over into a reprobate
sense, to worship all the host of the sky, and with greediness to follow
all manner superstition of the Gentyles. And in these few words, Steven
briefly comprehends all that ever they afterward did, against the laws of
God. For Solomon the first beginner of this evil, for his wives sakes, that
were Aliauntes and strangers, builded Temples unto diverse Gods of the
Sydonians, 1. Reg. 11.
Moabites, Ammonites, and other Nations. Jeroboam after that, brought in again
the superstitious worshipping of Calves. 1 Reg 12 13 1. Reg. 16. 2. Para. 25.
2. Para. 28.
Achab brought in the honoring of Baal. Amasias of a mad counsel and deuyse
sets up the Gods of the Idumeans whom he had vanquished, to be
worshipped. Achaz was delyted with the Gods and religion of the Assirians. At
length Manasses following, which far passed all the wickedness of his
forefathers, brought into Jury whatsoever superstition or ydolatrie was to be
found any where among the Gentyles, and by force defended those religions,
against the true worshippers of God, insomuch that we read, Jerusalem was
filled with the blood of the Saints. 2. Reg. 21.
Whose impiety took so deep root, that it could not be wholly pluckte up
again in Josias days, as the sermons of Jeremy and Sophonie abundantly
declare. And least any man might marueyle, how these things came to pass,
after God had given them his law, he says they were iustlye forsaken of God,
and given up into a reprobate mind, and utterly blinded. And that this was the
just judgment of God, may easily be gathered of the things before going. For
their ungodliness and unthankfulness deserved the same, whom neither the
word of God, nor infinite other things, whereby it pleased God to reveal
himself unto them, could keep in doing their duty. They were worthy
therefore, that even seeing, they should be blind, hearing, they should be
deaf, and should be hardened in their hearts, as God threatens by his
Prophet. Esaias. 6.
Yet may we see in other Nations like examples of Gods judgments. Roma 1.
Paul affirms the same of the Gentyles superstition. And would to God we
saw not the like, even among them that glory in the name of Christians. For
after they had banished the authority of Gods word from them, and that it
lyked them to learn rather of dumb images, than of the lively word of god,
then ran they on so far in superstition, that the very Jews and Turks
laughed at them. And here comes to my remembrance that notable saying of a
Turkishe Ambassador, who being in the Court of a great Christian Prince, and
being asked why the Turks so abhorred the Christian religion, and could not
be induced to believe in it: answered, that no man being in his right wit
could allow or like that religion, which worshipped those for Gods that were
inferior, and of less power, than they that worshipped them. And what he meant
thereby, he after declared by our breaden god, and by the Idols which were
worshipped in Churches, which being made by those that worshipped them, did
prove sufficiently (said he) that the religion was preposterous, and contrary
to common sense and reason. These things Christian Princes know, the Bishops
and people in general: yet no man is grieved at the great injury thereby done
unto Christ, so that wise men are not without a cause afraid, that many even
in our days also are given up into reprobate minds.

This place teaches us also, that no man can hold the right way in religion,
except he be first guyded by the hand and spirit of God. For the natural man
perceyueth not the things belonging to the spirit of God. 1. Cor. 2. John. 6.
Nor no man comes to Christ, except the father draw him. And for because he
draws by his word, we must study the same. For whosoever make light
thereof, and cast it fro them, make themselves unworthy of the grace of God.
Wherefore God turns his back upon them, and wrappeth them in darkness,
deuoyde of all light and truth. Therefore it behooves us to have a diligent
care of the word, and so to depend upon the same, that being entered into the
right way, we swerve neither to the right hand nor to the left. Deuteronomy. 4.12


And least any man should be so impudent, as to deny that the fathers thus
did, Steven alleges a testimony of the Prophet Amos, A place in Amoz the.v.
chapter
written in the.v. chap. There the Lord accuses the people of Israel, as well
for many other vices, as for this, that they abode not syncerely in his word.
And that the heynousnesse of their sin might the more appear, and that all
men might see how God does not expostulate with them, without a cause, he
shows that this is an old impiety, begun sometime in the wilderness, and
afterward so increasing, that it is become incurable, and can not be taken
away, but with the destruction of the whole Nation. It shall make much for our
instruction, if we diligently consider every thing that is here said.

First, he speaks of the disobedience and wickedness of the fathers in the
wilderness, in these words: Gave ye to me sacrifices and meat offerings, by
the space of forty years in the wilderness, o ye of the house of Israel? By
asking the question, he fortifieth his saying, and denies that the fathers
gave any sacrifices to him for forty years long. And yet it appears they
built a Tabernacle, according as God had appointed, and Alters upon the which
they offered all kinds of sacrifices unto God, which brought them out of the
land of Egypt. But God denies that thing to be done in the honor of him,
that is done for any other end than he appoints. For God appointed that the
end of all their outward ceremonies, should be resemblances of the Savior
that was promised, and that they should admonish them of their duty, as well
in faith and religion, as in the whole conversation of their life. But they
forgetting this, were occupied in ye bare ceremonies, and thought that by them,
they satisfied God, and purged their sins. Whereby it came to pass, that
they abused all their Leuiticals, for a cloak and color of licentiousness and
wickedness. Therefore God worthily refuses all this worshipping, and says
it belonged not to him. And there be also other places of Scripture, wherein he
constantlye affirms the same, and shows that the observation of those
things, which he so diligently prescribes in the law, is not profitable.
Look Psalm. 50. Esaias. 1. and.43. Mich. 6. Hoseas. 6. Yea, when he saw that
they gloryed in their circumcision, having no respect to the spiritual
circumcision, he cries out that their circumcision is not auayleable. Ierem. 4.
We are taught therefore by this place, that all that worshipping is in vain,
which is not done to that end that God has appointed it. For it can not be
that without the obedience of faith, any kind of worship can please God. Heb.
11.
But where the word of God is neglected, there remains no place for faith or
obedience: therefore they are but as unclean and profane things, whatsoever
they do, although outwardly they appear agreeable with the word of God. What
shall we then say of those ceremonies, which stand only upon man's
authority, and tradition? the Lord long ago with one word has utterly
overthrown them, saying: they worship me in vain, teaching doctrines of men.
Every plant which my heavenly father has not planted, Esaias. 29. Math. 15.
shall be pulled up by the roots*

The Lord holding on in repeating the sins of the Israelites, rehearses
what their posterity did, after they were in possession of the land of
Chanaan: you took unto you the Tabernacle of Moloch, and the Star of your
God Rempham, figures which you made to worship them. He comprehends all
sorts of Idolatry under three kinds.

The worshipping of Moloch.
The first was the worshipping of Moloch, which as it appears by the acts of
Solomon, who first builded a Temple to him, was the God of the Ammonites. And
it seems he was the God called on at men's natiuities or byrthes, in the
honor of whom, infantes were sacrificed in fire, as Manasse did, which
sacrificed his son in fire. God had appointed death for the punishment of
this wickedness, as is declared Leuiticus. 20. in these words: Whosoever he
be of the children of Israel, or of the strangers that dwell in Israel, that
gives of his seed unto Moloch, let him be slain, the people of the land
shall stone him. And I will set my face against that manne, and will destroy
him from among his people, because he has given of his seed unto Moloch, for
to defyle my sanctuary, and to pollute my holy name. And though that the
people of the land hyde their eyes from the man that gives of his seed unto
Moloch, and kill him not: I will put my face against that man, and against his
kindred, and will destroy him, and all that go a whoring after him, to commit
whoredom with Moloch, from among their people. And yet could not the
authority of this severe inhibition, be of such weight, but that this wicked
kind of sacrificing was common, as easily may appear by the prophecy of
Jeremy in the.xxxij. Chap.

The God Rempham.
The second kind of Idolatry was the worshipping of a Star, that was
consecrated to a God called Rempham, of whom we read nothing of certainty. Some
think it to be ye Planet of Saturn, some of Venus, some of Mars. In deed the
worshipping of stars was used amongst all Nations, because the marvelous
course of them, the brightness and form of them, easily persuaded the
simpler sort of men, that there was some godheade in them. And hereto are to be
referred those places of Scripture, where it is said the Jews worshipped the
host of heaven. We have here to consider that the worshipping of Stars
consists not only in adoration and sacrifices, which were sometime used among
the Gentyles, but also that they worship them, which think the success of
wars, peace, famine, plenty, sickness, tempests, and such like things
depend of them. For it is manifest, that all these things be governed by the
rules of gods providence, whose judgments are not tied unto the Stars, but
are ordered by the rule of his word, and his immutable will. Therefore
whosoever attribute these things unto the Stars, deny God his honor, and
make man which is the excellentest creature of god, subject to the course of
the Planets and Stars. For the which cause the blindness of our days is
much to be bewailed, which is gone so far, that it consulteth with the
Stars, for the enterprising of their greatest affairs, and hang in hope of
them, either of good success, or stand in fear of badde. Why do we not
rather lysten (...) the Prophet says* you shall not lear^e the ways of the
hea^^en, and you sha^^ ^ot be a^^ayde for (...) tokens of heat^^^* For the
heathen (...). Iere. 10.


In the third sor^^ it compr^hendeth figures or similitudes, Worshipping of
Images.
which (...) made to (...) to y^ end he would (...) us, y^ he (...) devised
for worshipping of (...) men ^ill seem to honor him. Such as where they (...)
him, and his works in Images, and where they (...) for the instruction of the
ignorant and ^^learned. These men (...), in that they of their own head and
device, in^^^tute such th^nges in religion, as God no where has commanded.
God has commended unto us the reine (...) of his benefits; in a few of
sacraments, yea, and th^se most easy to be observed. For our instruction he
has appointed his word, and when himself preached, he would have his voice
only heard; but no similitude or Image to be seen. Therefore let us be
contented with these things, Deuteronomy. 4.
and bridle the wisdom of our unruly flesh, least while we will be wyser
than is meet, we become fools, as Paul says of the gentile philosophers.
Romans 1.


Last of all, he threateneth their incurable impiety, every day waxyng worse
and worse with punishment* saying: I will translate (or carry) you, beyond
Babylon, Amos says, Damascus, because he would put out of the ten^e tribes
minds, the vain affiaunce which they had in their league with the Assirians.
But Steven having more respect to the sense, says they should be carried
beyond Babylon. For so it came to pass in deed. For Salmanazar king of the
Assirians, after he had taken Samaria, ouerthrewe the kingdom of the ten
Tribes, and carried them captive into Syria. And not long after, Senacherib
miserably afflicted the kingdom of Jury. But whereas by Ezechias counsel they
turned unto the Lord, and threw down their Idolles: again they were delivered
out of the hand of the Tyrant, by the help of an Angel. But when under
Manasse, they turned to their vomit again, and set up all their abominable
superstition and Idolatry again, and would not admit the reformation that
Josias begun, but would commit Idolatry secretly in their houses, as appears
by the sermons of Sophony: then God sent Nabuchodonozer to destroy their City,
to set fire on the temple, and to carry the remnaunt of the people beyond
Babylon, over all his kingdom. Thus did God revenge this incurable Idolatry,
and profane contempt of his holy name. And we read that the like came to
pass after that again. For when they were returned home from Babylon, and had
made their Temple and religion a market of lucre and gain, and a den of
thieves, and would not admit Christ to reform it, nor hear his Apostles: God
brought Vespasian and Titus to reform them, who set fire on their City and
Church, and scattered the Jews that were living, over all parts of the
world. We ought in these days, diligently to consider these things. The
horrible mischief of Idolatry is greatly increased among Christians. And we
lack not Moloch that lies lurking amongst the Monks, chalenging and burning
those which by baptism are grafted into Christ. Many are beguiled with the
superstitious obseruasion of stars. Images made for us to worship, and to
learn of, stand every where to be sold. And God has these many years, by
the preaching of his word, required a reformation, but all in vain. Wherefore
(...) is to be feared, lea^t they (...) will not b^ reformed, because they will
not seem to have erred, shall ^t length be destroyed. And surely their fear
is not in vain which suspect the Turks shall make all (...) away. For it is
^uident, that the ^mpire of the East was de^ided from the Wes^, for Images
sakes, and th^^ by this (...), the (...) of the Sarazens and Turks is g^eatly
increa^ed, ^o tha^ Go^ may s^^me to show us plain^ly, who and what manner
abolishers of Idolatry he has long since appointed. And experien^e teaches
us, what horrible examples God shows upon obstinate Image worshippers, every
day by ye Turks. And surely we may think that it was not without the
providence of God, that Soliman Emperor of the Turks, not many years ago,
when he h^d won Buda, See Paulus Iouius in the history of his ^yme, the.40.
book.
the chief City of Hungary, would have S. Mary's Church, the chief church in
the city, clean rid of the Altares and all the Images in the Church, before
he would yield thanks to God almighty, for the victory given unto him. For
hereby God would plainly testifye, that the Idolatry, which is exercised
under the pretense of Christ and his Saints, is the chiefest cause, of these
our Turkishe overthrows and calamities. Wherefore the time warns us at
length, to awake, and casting from us all vain inventions of men, to worship
the God of our fathers, according to his prescript, in truth and in spirit,
through Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom be praise, honor, power and glory,
for ever. Amen.

The.liij. Homely.
OUR fathers had the Tabernacle of witness in the wilderness, as he had
appointed them speaking unto Moses, that he should make it according to the
fashion that he had seen. Which Tabernacle also our fathers that came after,
brought in with Iosue into the possession of the Gentyles, whom God drove out
before the face of our fathers unto the time of David, which found favor
before God, and would feign have founded a Tabernacle for the God of Jacob, but
Solomon built him an house. Howbeit, he that is highest, dwells not in
Temples made with hands, as says the Prophet. Heaven is my seat, and the
earth is my footestoole. What house will you build for me says the Lord? Or
which is the place of my rest? Has not my hand made all these things?
THe accusation against Steven consisted of two special points: the one was,
that he went about to abolish and put away the law: the other, that he had
spoken blasphemye against the Temple, and all their rites and ceremonies. The
first, he has thus far answered unto, disputing both earnestly and
reverently, touching the law and Moses, the minister thereof. For he has
showed, that it was given of god by Moses, and confesses it to be the word of
life, because it comprehends in it the rule of life, and leads us as a
guide and teacher unto Christ. Furthermore, because the Jews gloried very
much, in the name of the fathers, he declared that they were always
disobedient, so that it appears they were not saved, by the merit of the
righteousness of the law, but through the benefit of Gods mercy and fauou^.
This done, he passes to the other part of his accusation, and reasons of
the holy place or Temple, wherein their chief hope of help consisted. And to
be short, the end of all Steuens saying is, to prove that God and the right
worshipping of him, is not tied unto the Temple. Whereupon it follows, that
they ought not straight ways to be taken for blasphemers of God, which speak
against the abolishing thereof. First, therefore he entreats of the Tabernacle,
then of the Temple builded about a four hundred and fourscore years, after
their coming out of Egypt.

The Tabernacle was a place ordained for to do Gods service in, The worshipping
of God was not tied unto the Tabernacle.
made of boordes of Sechim wood, and hanged round about with Curtines, being
carried upon two staves, running through ringes of gold, and the Curtines
fastened together with loupes, and buttons of silk. In this Tabernacle was the
Arc of the Covenant, the Golden table, the Candlestick, the Altar of
Incense, the Altar to burn sacrifices on, the Brazen Lauer, with the residue
of the implementes belonging to the service: concerning which, see Exodus
25.26.27.30. etc. All these things he easily grants that the fathers had in
the wilderness by Moses appointment, which was Gods mouth and Interpreter. And
he calls it the Tabernacle of witness, because God by it testified his
presence, and gave answer in that place for the resolving of the peoples
doubts. He adds three things whereby he proves, that the worshipping of
God, and God himself, is not bound to this place.

First, he says it was made, The Tabernacle was a type of heavenly things.
according to the pattern and saumpler showed to Moses in the mountain.
Whereby it appears, it was but a figure and served to shadow the mysteries of
heavenly things, as Paul also in the viij. and ix. Cap. to the Hebrews has
declared. For this Tent was a figure of the Church, which God will have to be
but one, although it consist of diverse kinds and orders of men. For it has
teachers which are in stead of pillars, as Paul calls James, Peter, and
John. Gal. 2. It has boordes of Ceder tree, covered over with gold, whereby
all the faithful are signified, whom faith and belief makes vncorrupt, and
shining in heavenly brightness. All these are joined together, with the band
as well of doctrine, as belief, and love, and are builded upon Christ, which is
the only buttrace and foundation of ye whole church. He is in the Arc
containing the true treasures of heavenly mysteries. He prepares us a table,
where we may receive the bread of eternal life. He is as it were, in place of
a candlestick, and by the light of his word, shines upon his church. The
prayers also that are offered in him, are as a pleasant incense, odoure, and
sweet smell, before God the father. And he is the true Altar, upon whom we
must offer our selves, and the whole conversation of our life. These things
might be more largely entreated, but we touch but the chief points of them,
that it may appear to every man, why Steven says, the Tabernacle was made,
after the heavenly pattern: to the end verilye, that we might thereby
understand, that no man in time past cleaued to the Tabernacle only, but that
by faith he was holden in contemplation of Christ, and his church, the
mysteries whereof, were by this Tabernacle signified. And that the fathers then
pleased God best, when with minds lift up into heaven, they worshipped God,
John. 4.
in spirit and truth. And there are many places of Scripture, wherein they are
grievously rebuked, which cleave to the outward ceremonies, and neglect the
spiritual worshipping. See the Psalm. 50. Esaias. 1.3.4. Micheas. 6. Jeremy. 7
etc. In the mean while we are taught, that nothing ought to be instituted in
Gods service and religion, according to man's devise and pleasure. For it in
time past, when outward ceremonies were most in use, Moses was bound to
observe the pattern, prescribed of God, and where there appear horrible
examples of them, which durst attempt the contrary: then must we now a days be
much more diligent to observe those things which the son of God has
appointed to be in his church for ever, (...) in the time of his last coming
we be taken with him, into the Tabernacle of heaven.

The Tabernacle translated into the land of the Gentiles.
Secondly he says, that when Joshua was captain, the fathers brought the
Tabernacle into the possession of the Gentiles, that is, into an unholy la^d.
Whereby it appears again, that the worshipping of god, and the way of
salvation, cannot consist therein. Here we are taught by the way, that the holy
institutions of God, are not polluted by the place, so that the right and
lawful use of them be observed. For God is present euerywhere, and by his
presence sanctifies both those that worship him, and the ceremonies instituted
by him. Therefore in an unholy land, the inhabitauntes whereof were a little
before worshippers of ydoles, might the tabernacle be placed, and all the
ceremonies appointed, exercised. That that is spoken of the outward service,
ought to be understood also of prayers, which if they proceed of faith,
John. 4.
are acceptable and allowable before God in what place so ever they be said. So
God heard Jonas, praying in the belly of the Whale* and Daniels fellows crying
out of the furnace, found how God was able to deliver them. And the roaring of
the Lions, could not let, but that Daniels prayers ascended up before the Lord.

The place of the Tabernacle uncertain.
Unto these is added an other argument, taken of the place, whereby he proves
the worshipping of God, not to be tied to the Tabernacle. For he says, it had
no abiding place, but was carried up and down for four hundred years, until
the time of David, who was the first that through the singular goodness of
god, had by the Angel, a place showed unto him, where the Temple should be
builded: which thing we read he obtained, by most hearty and fervent prayers,
where he says: I will not come within the Tabernacle of my house, nor climb
up into my bed: I will not suffer mine eyes to sleep, nor mine eye liddes to
slumber, neither the Temples of my head to take any rest, Psalm. 132.
until I find out a place for the Temple of the Lord, an habitation for the
mighty God of Jacob. See the history in the second book of Samuel. 24. chap.
Item in the first of the Chronicles.xxj. chap. Before this time, Joshua. 18. 1.
Sam. 1. etc. 1. Sam. 11.20 1. Paral. 21.
the Scripture plainly teaches, that the Tabernacle had no resting place. For
first it was placed in Silo, where it seems it rested unto the time of Heli.
While Saul was king, it was first in Gilgal, then in Nobe, one of the Cities
of the Priests: Under David, it was placed in Gabaon. At length all the things
belonging to it, were by Solomon laid up in the Temple, as it had been some
singular treasure. Who now that is in his wit, will say that the worshipping
of god, and mean of salvation was tied unto the Tabernacle, where it had never
no sure abiding place? It is worthy to be diligently considered, where he
says, it was through the singular grace of God, that David knew a certain
place, wherein God would be worshipped, until the time of correction. This
made for the confirmation and stabilitie of his kingdom, which thing Jeroboam
euidentlye observed, who perceived that his kingdom could not be firm and
stable, 1. Reg. 12.
without some certain place and house for religion. In the mean season we
learn, that this is a singular gift of god upon earth, if externe religion be
firmly established, and that men may safely follow it. This is a most strong
band to conserve Ecclesiastical unity, and an unspeakable argument of Gods
goodness and favor. They that live under the tyrannous persecutors of the
church acknowledge this thing, and earnestly desire the same. Let us likewise
acknowledge it, which live in rest and peace, least we provoke the wrath of God
by our notorious unkindness, and being in adversity, let us understand how
great a commodity that is, which now a days so many men make so little
account of.

Now having discoursed the things belonging to the Tabernacle, The
worshipping of God is not tied to the Temple. 1. Reg. 6.
he enters to reason of the Temple also, which succeeded in the Tabernacles
place, and which had the very same use the Tabernacle had. And this the
scripture declares was builded by Solomon, whereas before till religion had a
place appointed, there was none. But because David through divine revelation,
knew this place: the Jews seemed not all in vain to think that the true
worshipping of God was in that place only, where Steven sharply rebukes
their blockheadnesse. For although he grant them that the Temple was builded
by Gods appointment, yet he by and by again says: But he that is the highest
dwells not in Temples made with hands. And because he would not be reproved
of rashness, he brings the words of God speaking on this wise in Esaias. 66.
cap. Heaven is my seat, the earth is my footestoole, what manner of house will
you build unto me, says the Lord? or which is the place of my rest? Has not
my hand made all these things? By arguments taken of his own nature, he
proves that he is included in no certain place, nor has no need of these
things which are done by men. For he that is of all power and might, and whom
the heaven of heavens is not able to receive (as Solomon himself confesses.
1. Reg. 8.) it is impossible, that he can be contained within any house.
Again, he that is the Creator and maker of all things, has no need of our
benefits, as is declared at large, Psalm. 50. These things serve both for our
consolation and instruction. For whereas God is euerywhere, he may therefore
euerywhere be worshipped, so that we need to be neither troubled with overmuch
costs, ne yet with any great labor about the same. And for because he has no
need of our goods, the true trade of worshipping him and his favor can not
consist in such things. Therefore it is a foul and filthy error of these
hypocrytes, which when they had done these things, thought they had fully
discharged their duties unto God. Wherefore it behooves us rather to consider
what the true use and meaning of these outward things is. They consist of
time, place, and ceremonies. Time and place is convenient for order sake. For
as it behooves us to appoint certain days, for religion to be observed on:
so, the same cannot be done, but in some place also. But as salvation is not
tied to observation of days, no more is it to this or that place. Yet these
things have their use in religion. For they serve for the use of the holy
congregations, whom it behooves oftentimes to meet together by reason of the
preaching of the word, public prayers, and administering of the sacraments.
And because Temples be appointed to these exercises, therefore they should be
exempt from all profane and secular vsances. Which was the cause that Aggeus
the Prophet so much called on the building up of the Temple. But let us not
supersticiously be tied in opinion, to the overmuch reuerencing of the place.
Now the use of the Ceremonies appointed by God (for of man's constitutions here
is no one word) such as common custom calls Sacraments, is to seal or
confirm unto us the benefits of God, and therefore they lift up our minds,
by contemplation of faith into heaven, and admonish us of our duties, both to
God and to man. These things it be comes us well to observe, and to be
contented with them, least being occupied in outward things, we be wrapped in
the old error of the Jews, and so lose the heavenly goods. Let us therefore
worship God the father in spirit and in truth, who has fully given us in his
son, our only Priest and Savior Jesus Christ, all those things which he
sometimes figured to the fathers in signs of ceremonies, and the Temple: to
him be praise, honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.liiij. Homely.
YE stiff necked and of uncircumcised hearts and ears, you have always
resisted the holy ghost. As your fathers did, so do you. Which of the
Prophets have not your fathers persecuted? And they have slain them which
showed before of the coming of that just, whom you have now betrayed and
murthred. And ye also have received the law by the ministration of Aungelles,
and have not kept it: when they heard these things, their hearts claue a
sunder, and they gnashed on him with their teeth.
THus far the blessed Martyr Steven has answered the objections laid
against him, and with long discourse has showed that he never blasphemed God
nor his law, nor yet the Temple. For beginning at Abraham, he declares that he
is a worshypper of that only God, who did vouchsafe in time past to reveal
himself unto the fathers, and to offer unto them his grace. That done, he
makes a singular discourse of the law, and proves that Christ was evidently
promised to the fathers in the law. At length entreating of the Temple, and
outward obseruances, he proves by most strong arguments, that neither the
grace of God is tied to them, neither the true worshipping of him, nor yet the
mean of man's salvation. But because Steven was not ignorant what manner of
Judges he should have in his cause, and for that they could no longer
dissemble the rage of their minds, as every man may easily gather of the
circumstances, with a weyghtie and vehement kind of reprehending them, he
concludes his Oration. Where we may perceive that it was Steuens purpose and
intent to pluck of the visure from the faces of them, which bragged in the
name of the church, and fowly abused their power, that they should no longer
fear the simple and unlearned with this slye conueyance of theirs. And this is
a thing very needeful, when we perceive we have to do with them, with whom the
word of doctrine will not prevail. And surely in our days nothing so much
hinders the verity, as that they be the enemies thereof, which many years have
challenged to them the name and governance thereof. Wherefore it is necessary,
that they which have the charge of the Church committed unto them, do follow
even at this day also, the example of Steven. But to come to the handling of
this present place, there were three things specially which made them the
prowder: that is to say, Circumcision, the glory and dignity of the fathers,
and the law given them by Gods special benefit. And of all these, the godly
Martyr of Christ so speaks, that he plainly proves all their affiaunce to
be in vain, which they had in them.

And beginning with Circumcision, He beats down confidence in Circumcision.
he shows that they gloryed therein in vain, calling them stiffenecked, and
of uncircumcised hearts and ears. He seems to have a respect unto the words
of Moses, and of God, which are written Deuteronomie. 10. and Jeremy. 4. as
though he should say: I know you have a great confidence in Circumcision,
but that is but a very vanity, seeing you neglect the circumcision of the
heart and mind. God would that you should by an outward sign profess his
covenant, but he commanded you to circumcise your hearts with the sword of
the spirit, and to put your necks hitherto, overmuch disobedient into the
yoke of his obedience. But it is plain that you never would thus do: For you
ever resisted the holy ghost speaking to you by the Scriptures, and by the
Prophets. So Steven accuses them of no common disobedience, but of heinous
incredulity, as who went about to mock God with their Circumcision, which was
but a sign of Gods covenant. This place teaches us, that men are little
helped by outward signs, unless they stick unto the things signified by
them. For where God is a spirit, he will not be worshipped with vain
ceremonies, but in the spirit and in truth. As for the Ceremonies, he has
instituted them for our sakes, to the intent they should bring our minds by
contemplation of faith, to the consideraunce of our duty. Which thing if we
neglect, then the signs improoue us of infidelity, and excuse us not, which
is the cause that the Prophets so earnestly accuse the obseruers of outward
ceremonies, and so carefully commend unto them, the care of spiritual
worshipping. This serves also to teach us, that we cleave not to much to
baptism* and to the supper, and so neglect the faith that is in Christ, and
the study of innocence and charity, without the which Christian religion
cannot consist. And if the cold observation of rytes commanded by God, is not
able to save us, what shall we say of the obseruers of men's traditions, which
God has wyped clean away with the sword of his word, as otherwheres we
have declared? Esaias. 29. Math. 15. We are taught also what manner of men they
are, which wickedly resist the word of God, preached by men, which thing it is
evident the Jews did. For they (says Steven) resisted not the Prophets, but
the holy ghost. And we must not think he thus said at all adventures. For
where Ministers speak by the inspiration of the holy spirit, and the same
spirit works obedience in men's minds, and puts us often in remembrance
of amendment of our life, certes they resist this spirit, that refuse to obey
this word. And this is an infallible argument of uncircumcised hearts, and
stiff necks. Here therefore have we a rule how to judge of the people of
these days, which marvelously please and delyght themselves, in that they
dare boldly contemn the sermons of Gods Ministers, and can scoff and rail at
the m.

He overthrows the confidence in their forefathers. Math. 3. John. 8.
But let us return unto Steven, which likewise overthrows that glory that
they sought in the dignity of their auncestry. For that the Jews put great
confidence in their forefathers, it appears by this. For when John the
Baptist and Christ, admonished them to amend their life, they chopte him in
the teeth with Abraham their father, and alleged the prerogative of their
stock. But Steven makes a difference between their forefathers. There were
among them certain good and sincere worshippers of God, such as was Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and their likes in whom they could not glory, being
altogether unlike them, as bastardes going out of kind. Again, there were
other notorious wicked persons, and bloody tyrannes, against the Prophets.
Unto these says he, these fellows were like, because they lively represented
their natures and conditions, yea passed them. As your fathers did, even so do
you. Which of the Prophets have not your fathers persecuted? Esaias. 53.
And they have killed them, which showed before of the coming of that Just.
So calls he Jesus Christ, who is both absolutely just himself: 1. Cor. 1.
Ierem. 23.
for in whose mouth there could be found no guile and is made of god the father
our righteousness. Wherefore in Jeremy he is called ye lord our righteousness.
Furthermore, as your fathers killed ye prophets, which foretold of him, as the
monuments and sepulchers declare that are builded in ye honor of them: even so
did you betray Christ himself, to the Roman President, and made him out of
the way by the most cruel death of the cross. Thus you have not only
fulfilled ye measure of your fathers, but far exceeded the^. And as these
things were not spoken by Steven without the secret working of Gods holy
spirit: so must we think, it was not without the will of God, that the same
things were written and left unto posterity. For they teach us how we
should deal with them, which glory in the virtues of their ancestors, and in
the title of lawful succession, and beguile the simple people with the
authority they challenge to themselves. In which number we now adays see the
Bishops of Rome are, who notwithstanding they persecute the doctrine of the
Apostles, with fire and sword, infecting the whole world, with the example of
a most abominable and corrupt life, and turn true religion into lucre and
gain: yet they vaunt themselves to be Christ's Uicares, the successors of
Peter and Paul, and constantly affirm, that the Church of Rome cannot err.
And with their fleightes, it is manifest, that the world has been deceived
these great many years. Therefore this visure must be pulled of from their
faces, and the faithful ministers of the church must not suffer that great
Ass disguised in a Lions skin, to iet up and down, and fraye the
consciences of simple people any longer. And they are not in this behalf to be
heard, which would not have these things talked so, but prescribe us rules of
modesty, and meekness. For where the glory of Christ is assaulted, and the
salvation of the soul imperilled, there remains no place for fear, or
meekness. This thing Christ well perceived, whom I think no man will find
fault with about his modesty and meekness. And he thought it good to beat
down the false Bishops, with all kind of severity, rather than by cowardly
or preposterous lenity. Whose example both Steven and the other Apostles, most
rightlye followed. But before we let this piece pass, you shall note that the
Prophets were foreshewers of Christ. This thing Christ himself confesses.
Luke. 24*
And Peter attributes to them the ^ame thing. This makes for the certainty
and dignity of our faith, 1. Pet. 1.
that we think it not a thing either newly invented, or an uncertain
persuasion of a small number of persons.

Steven goes on with his purpose, He beats them from their affiance in the
law. Psalm. 147
and takes from them the vain affiaunce of the law, which seemed to be the
chief thing amongst Gods benefits, David testifying, that god showed to no
Nation the like declaration of his goodness. He confesses this was given them
by ministry of Angels, by whose presence God thought good to show unto them,
the glory of his majesty. But he shows that the glory, which they sought
therein, was but vain, because they were never obedient thereunto. For they
being overcome with the desire of sin, neglected the law, and wickedlye
persecuted Christ, to whom the law brought them. Whereupon we gather, that
that glory also is in vain, which we have in the word of God, and doctrine of
the Gospel, unless we express in our lives, the things prescribed by them.
For Blessed (says Christ) are they, that hear the word of God, Luke. 11.
and keep it. And in an other place, he puts from him, and refuses the
workers of iniquity, which neglect the will of his father. Math. 7.
In the consideration whereof we now a days ought diligently to meditate. For
if the transgressors of Moses law, were grievously punished, what shall come
unto them which wickedly contempne the word of the Gospel, delivered to us
by Christ? Surely Christ says, they shall be more grievously punished, Math.
10. Hebr. 10.
than those of Sodom and Gomorrhe.

And this is the most grave and just defense of Steven the first Martyr, How
Steuens enemies like of his Oration or sermon.
which as it ought to have been of great force and weight with the godly, so
with ye professed enemies of Christ, it lacked not only success, but also did
ex^sperate their minds, as with a sharp goade of greater ungodliness. For
Luke writes, that when they had heard this, their hearts claue a sunder, and
they gnashed on him with their teeth. The cleaving of hearts signifies the
sorrow of an heart, boiling in rage and fury, wherewith they were cruelly set on
fire. For their ire was so great, that they could not hide it, no not in ye
place appointed ever for Justice and Gods religion. Now the gnashing of teeth
testified they were become like unto mad dogs. Hereby is expressed the
property of the wicked, who the more they are urged with the word of God, the
more intollerably they scorn and rage, and are inflamed against them; whom
God has appointed preachers of his word. So we read, that Caine was the more
incensed by Gods speaking and admonition. And there are infinite examples of
these men, the which it is not needful to rehearse, because we see the like
every day. Let us learn, that this is an infallible token of extreme
ungodliness. For what good can a man hope for of him who is not the better,
but ye worse, for the word of God? Let us therefore subdue this affection,
as soon as we feel our selves touched or moved therewith. In the mean season
let us learn, that the ministers of the word, must not therefore hold their
peace because the ungodly are incensed with their reprehension. 2. Tim. 4.
For Paul commands them to be instant both in season, and out of season.
And let no man be offended though he prevail nothing by his saying among them.
For albeit there ensue no other effect of ye word: yet the faithful minister
thereof shall at least deliver his own soul. Ezech. 3.
And in the mean while, there shall not want elect servants of Christ, who
shall be instructed, by that that is preached to the wicked, for a testimony of
just condemnation. God the father of mercy grant that we may duly hear the
Oracles of his word, and that we being transformed into the same, may no
manner of way displease his Majesty, through Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom
be praise, honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.lv. Homely.
BUT he being full of the holy Ghost looked up steadfastly with his eyes into
heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God,
and said. Behold I see the heavens open, and the son of man standing on the
right hand of God. Then they gave a showt with a loud voice, and stopped their
ears, and ran upon him all at ones, and cast out of the City and stoned
him. And the witness laid down their clothes at a young man's seete, whose
name was Saul. And they stoned Steven calling on, and saying: Lord Jesus,
receive my spirit. And he kneeled down and cried with a loud voice: Lord,
lay not this sin to their charge. And when he had thus spoken, he fell on
sleep.
ALthough the word of GOD be both fruitful and wholesome, yet it brings
forth fruit, but in them only which hear the same, with minds rightly framed
and disposed. But it so little profits the wicked, that they thereby are
rather fretted and made the worse. For where their minds froath and boil
like unto the sea, the more they are pressed and urged therewith, the more they
use to rave. Examples we have hereof euerywhere, among which, this one that is
set forth in this Counsel, gathered together against Steven, is very notable.
For where Steven had declared his innocencye by most weighty reasons and
proofs, and had with worthy words reprehended their canckred and old
maliciousness: so little are they moved with any remorse of conscience, to
amend their life that they rather conceive in their hearts, and utter an
untreatable rage and furye, (a most filthy fault in a Judge) not only by
alteration of countenance, but also by a doggish manner of gnashing upon him
with their teeth. And yet might this, after a sort, have been suffered, if
they had held their hands. But as though they had not hitherto bewrayed their
madness enough, they join hereunto the unworthy death and punishment of a
most innocent man: which thing Luke very diligently describes, because it
teaches us many things, touching the death of Martyrs, and diverse other
things are therein comprehended, which make both for our comfort and
instruction.

God comfort Steven, being ready to be put to death.
He begins with the things that God showed by his Martyr wrapped in so many
woes and dangers. For when he perceived himself set in the middle of a sort
of Wolves, and no hope of any man's help appearyng, he began with eyes lift up
into heaven, to seek the help of God. Which thing God long denied him not,
but shows him a vision, wherewith both himself is comforted, and his enemies
made afeard. By which thing we are taught that God forsakes not those that be
his, when they be in danger. For he sees them, and hears them, as the
scripture euerywhere teaches. And for because he is a father, he is touched
with their miseries, he has pity on them being in distress, and shows
himself to be a most faithful revenger. And although he always delivers us
not from present dangers, yet he comfort our minds in such wise, that we
are able to bear and suffer them. Let us therefore learn to have no respect
of man's help, which is most vain, but to lift our eyes up into heaven, and
then shall we not be deceived of our hope. For this is the saying of all the
godly which David utters: I have lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from
whence comes my help. My help comes from the Lord, Psalm. 121.
which has made heaven and earth. And the Prophet pronounces him happy
whose hope and trust is in the Lord, and accurseth him, which trusts in man,
Iere. 17.
and makes flesh his strength.

It shall be profitable for us to consider, The manner and order how God
comfort. John. 14.
the manner and order how God comfort Steven. In this point the holy ghost
has the first place, wherewith Luke says Steven, was replenished. Here the
Lord performed that he promised, where he says: he would not leave us
comfortless, but send us the holy ghost to comfort us. Him we have very much
need of, by reason of the infirmity of the flesh, and him we desire of God
as Christ commands, saying: Let thy kingdom come. With this spirit the
faithful being emboldened, do easily contempne the assaults of the world. For
of him is this saying of John to be understood: Greater is he that is in you,
than he that is in the world. 1. John. 4.
But because there appeared on every side such things as might fear, the
most valiant Martyr, it pleased God also to send him outward comfort. He
shows him therefore a vision, containing all the mean of salvation. For he
sees the heavens opened, which thing we read also was done in the baptism of
Christ. Christ also appeared in his glory, standing on the right hand of the
father. Which things forasmuch as they are reported by the name of a vision,
and where also it was said before, that he lifted up his eyes into heaven, I
think they appeared to him in deed visibly, and were not offered only to the
contemplation of his mind. And we need not here to dispute much of natural
sight, forasmuch as these things appeared to Steven only, to whose eyes it
was a most easy thing for God, to give so strange and far pearcing a
sight. And it was needful, that this first Martyr, should see such things,
that we might understand, what all others had to hope of. For they signify
unto us, that now through the merit of Christ, the heavens be open to us, and
that we have in them, as Christ promised, a place prepared for us. Furthermore,
they declare that Christ reigns in heaven, and does not like an idle and
sluggish body, neglect his peoples quarrel, but stands in a readiness to
preserve and deliver them, as a trusty and faithful Shepeheard, which
suffers not his sheep to be taken out of his hands. Ioh. 10.
And hereunto me thinks are the prayers of the Saints to be referred,
wherein they desire, that God would arise up, and save them. And although
Steven only had the grace, to see these things, Psa. 3.35.44
yet GOD moved him by his spirit to show the wicked Judges of them. Which
thing he did very boldly. For thereby they might understand, that all their
enterprises against Christ were vain, forasmuch as he now triumphantly
reigned in heaven, whom a little before they had put to the most shameful
death of the Cross. We must learn a general lesson hereof, to know that
Christ's power and force is invincible, although the wicked world storm and
strive against him never so much. For David long since foretold, Psalm. 110.
that this would be his property, to bear rule even in the midst of his
enemies.

2. The fury of Steuens enemes is incurable.
But now what did Steuens enemies among all these things? Did the declaring of
these matters any thing mitigate their raging and moody minds? No truly. For
first with furious showting they make a noise and outcrie against the holy man,
and stop their ears, so that they would not, no not against their wills,
hear the word of God. This is the property of all the wicked, that they
refuse nothing so much as the word of God, and can neither hear nor suffer the
same, because nothing is more contrary to their desires and purpose. Wherefore
David likeneth them to Adders, which stop their ears, Psalm. 58.
because they would not hear the words of the Charmer: But this wickedness
deserves, that they shall cry another time, and not be heard, as the
Prophet says. Mich. 3. And at length, they shall hear that last and horrible
sentence of Christ their Judge, which shall send them with Satan their king,
into the pains of eternal fire. And yet not contented with noise and crying
out to trouble Steven, preaching of the glory of Christ, they turn them to
open violence. For with one consent they run upon him, thrust him out of the
City, and stone him. Where it appears with what arguments the wicked use to
dispute against the truth, verily with seditious showting and clamor, with
unjust force, with stones, swords, firebrandes, and whatsoever other
instruments of the power of darckenesse. With these we read the Prophets
were in times past assaulted. With such they disputed against Christ. And the
history following will show how they used the same against the Apostles. But
because Christ has many times given us warning of these things, we must not
be offended at the same. Let us therefore be so prepared, that they light not
upon us unawares, and unlooked for.

The wicked observe a show of equity. Leuit. 24. Deuteronomy. 13.17.
It is worthy of great observation and heed, that while they rage most in
violence and wrong, yet they seem to observe a kind of law and equity. For
because they had accused him of blasphemy against God, and false doctrine,
therefore they give him the punishment appointed of God for blasphemers and
seducers. And the witnesses (as is prescribed in the law) threw the first
stones at him, which to do with the more ease, they put of their apparel, and
deliver it unto Saul to keep, who after he was converted unto Christ, was
called Paul. Therefore here wants nothing, belonging to the form of law.
And Steven might seem justly to have suffered, and according to the law. But
that is not always lawfully done, which has a show of law, and we must
deeply wey the causes of punishments or else we shall grieuouslye err in our
judgment. In the mean season mark how God sometime suffers the wicked,
with whose rage he will have his people exercised, to fill up the measure of
their wickedness. And by example of the witnesses we are taught how far
impiety proceeds, if it be not stopped at the beginning. They sinned in
bearing of false witness, being neither ignorant of the law of God, neither
of the punishment appointed for false witnesses. And they are not afraid that
Solomon says, Proverb. 6.
the Lord hates and utterly abhors a false witness. They are not yet
contented to have committed so horrible a fault: but they go further, and
embrue their hands with innocent blood, where also they were not ignorant of
that that is written in the law touching murderers. Number. 35.
So true it is that Solomon says: when the wicked are once over their shoes,
Prou. 18.
there is no hoe with them. Let us therefore fear the entycing beginnings of
sin, least while they instill into us an hatred to the word of God, we
sticking fast in the toughe myer thereof, be at length wholye swallowed up of
the great gulf of ungodliness. The things said of Saul, who, as it is
written, consented to the death of the holy man, and received great pleasure
therein, make a way and preparation to the history following, and for the
setting forth of the glory of God. But of these things, more shall be said in
their place.

It remains that we declare how Steven behaved himself, What Steven does
being at ye point of death.
when he was put to this cruel death, where three things are told of him.
First he called upon the Lord, which thing we believe he continually used to
do. And it is expressed, that he prayed in three words: Lord Jesus receive my
spirit. These words have in them the confession of a true faith, and an
argument and token of a great and strong belief. For being on every side beset
with the terrors of death, yet he acknowledges and confesses that Christ is
his Savior, following the example of the thief crucified with Christ. Further,
he believes that the souls dye not in death, but pass to the state of a
better life, yea, he knows, that even in death through faith in Christ, men
find life. This is a great praise of faith, that even then it is invincible,
and comfort us when all other helps fail. Also Steuens example teaches us
to whom to commend our souls, when we be at the point of death. Not to
Saints as the superstitious use, but unto Christ our Lord, who as he has
redeemed them with the price of his blood: so by his resurrection he has
overcome death, and by his ascension into heaven, has prepared for us a place,
John. 14.
in the which we shall be gathered unto him. Secondarily, Steven shows a
token of charity, which can not be separated from faith. For following the
example and commandment of Christ, he prays for his enemies, that God
would not punish them for their sin, as they deserved. This reprooueth the
wickedness of his enemies, which put him to death, as an enemy of the common
weal, which witnesses by his last wysh he made, that no man was more desirous
of all men's welfare, than he. But this is the state of the ungodly in this
world, the chief cause of whose infelicitie, is this, that they neither can
know their benefactors, nor beware of the most dangerous enemies of the
public weal. Let us learn to extend our charity, even to the ungrateful,
Math. 5.
and with godly prayers commend them to God which most grievously offend
against us. And let us not suffer our selves to be feared with the wickedness
of men, forasmuch as Gods judgments be unknown to us, and God lightly uses
not to reveal unto every man, who they be, that are incurable amongst men, as
we read he did sometime unto Jeremy. 7.14.15. cap. Let us also be stirred
up with the effect of this prayer, which the conversion of Saul alone
proves, was not fruitelesse.

Last of all is said, that Steven having thus spoken, fell on sleep, Steven
falls on slep^.
whom yet his enemies hoped now with his doctrine, to have now been clean
dispatched out of the way. The scripture oftentimes uses this word sleep,
speaking of the death of the godly. For so is the condition and property of
death set forth. Death is the resolution or dissolution of man, consisting of
soul and body. In this death the soul neither dies nor sleeps, but passes
into life everlasting, as Christ says, John. 5. Whereupon death has aptly
been called, a passing into heaven. The body is said to sleep, because it is
laid in the earth, as it were to sleep, out of the which in the latter day,
it shall be raised up by Christ, that it may also enjoy the bliss of heavenly
life. There are euerywhere testimonies of Scripture concerning these things,
and occasion shall serve oftentimes to entreat of the same. Wherefore we now
mean to be brief. Let us set Steven before us to imitate, that when we shall
depart this life, our souls being gone before, to the dwellings of the blessed
and happy, we being at the last gloriously raised up also in body, may attain
to the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven, through Jesus Christ our Lord:
to whom be praise, honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The eight chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The.lvj. Homely.
AT that time there was a great persecution against the congregation which was
at Jerusalem, and they were all scattered abroad throughout the regions of
Jury and Samarie, except the Apostles. But devout men dressed Steven, and made
great lamentation over him. As for Saul, he made havoc of the Congregation,
and entered into every house, and drew out both men and women, and thrust them
into prison. Therefore they that were scattered abroad, went every where
preaching the word of God.
THe holy ghost would have the unworthy death of the blessed Martyr Steven
with great diligence described by Luke, not so much for Steuens sake, that his
name according to the Oracle of David, might be had in perpetual remembrance,
but for our sakes, for whose instruction and comfort the history does greatly
serve. For we are taught by the example of the most holy man, and first Martyr,
how we also ought to suffer all manner of extremity for Christ's sake and the
truths, and not to shun death, be it never so cruel, forasmuch as we have
Christ to be our revenger, who has laid up for us, a most excellent reward
in heaven. Again, it is most comfortable, that we see the kingdom of Christ
is not overwhelmed with the slaughters and tyranny of the wicked, but rather
dylated and enlarged. For as this thing has oftentimes otherwheres been
declared, so at this time the history following abundantly shows it came to
pass, what time as Steven received the garlande of martyrdom: to the
declaration whereof Luke in this present place prepares him, premising three
things, whereby that that we now have said is proved, every one of which three
things we will entreat of in order.

First, it is said that an universal and cruel persecution, An universal
persecution of the Church.
was raised in Jerusalem against the Church. We have seen diverse things before
attempted by the Priests, but the Apostles were chiefly then thrust at, and
the enemies repressed with fear of the people, were the more calm. But now
perceiving all things succeed against Steven as they would have them, and
that there aryseth no tumult or business in the people, like beasts, having
once tasted blood, they wax the more thirsty therefore, yea, more cruel and
bold, and set upon the whole body of the congregation, to overthrow it.
Wherein they so rage and take on, that within a short while the whole
Congregation is scattered throughout Jury and Samaria, which hither unto dwelt
together in Jerusalem. It shall be for our profit diligently to behold this
view of the primitive Church. For in this Church we see all things are very
well ordered after the rule of Christ. And the Apostles had oftentimes notable
victory, when they were apprehended and caused to plead their cause before
Counselles. Whereupon any body would have hoped that great rest and peace
should have ensued. But (behold) horrible tumultes arise upon the sodeyne,
and the enemies emboldened with the death of Steven alone, cruelly make war,
and set on the whole Congregation. What shall we therefore in these days hope
for, whose sloth and manifold defectes, deserve a more severe correction? For
if God have suffered these things to come to pass in the green tree, what
shall he do in the dry? This place also reprooueth their preposterous
judgments, which use to pronounce of faith and the doctrine of faith,
according to the success of things falling out in the world. For if we shall
believe these men, then must we confess that the Priests quarrel was good
and right, and that the primitive Church was utterly deceived. But we must
search deeper for the causes of Gods judgments, and then we shall perceive
that it is for our salvation, that we be exercised and invred with the
furiousness of the wicked, who in the mean season fill up the measure of
iniquity, and at length receive worthy punishment for their tyranny at
Christ's hands, who is the defender of his Church.

But here is chiefly to be considered, The Apostles remain at Jerusalem
how the Apostles remain in the city, after all the residue were fled. Yet we
read that before this, they were chiefly molested and troubled. Wherefore it
must needs be, that they were woonderfully preserved by ye help of God, in
this boisterous tempest of persecution. For God would have his gospel long
preached in this bloody city of Jerusalem, to the intent that both his mercy
and justice might the more easily appear. His mercy and goodness, in that he
suffered the doctrine of grace and salvation, so long to be preached to them,
that were embrued with the blood of his son. His justice, in that he
subverted by horrible destruction, those that were incurable, and would not
repent. In the mean while we have two things to consider. First, that there
are certain limits and bounds appointed for the wicked persecutors of the
congregation, which they cannot go beyond. For he that has set a border about
the sea, within the which that great heap of waters is contained, and he that
binds Satan by his laws: the same bridleth the wicked, that they cannot do
as they would, nor use cruelty against whom they would. Herein receive we
great consolation of mind, when we consider that the laws of Gods providence,
can not be broken with the rage of the wicked. Again, the Apostles give us an
example of faithful Superindents of the word and of the Congregation. For
although they knew that Christ said: when they persecute you in one City,
fly unto another* yet because they were bound by a certain vocation, and
perceived that the remnant of the Church was like to fall away, if they also
should leave the City, they had rather to hazard their life, than by
dishonest flying to forsake the congregation. And surely, Ministers have need
in this case, diligently to beware. For as all are not rashly to be condemned,
which by flying provide for themselves: so must we not think it lawful for
every man, at all times, and in all places. But if it be in such a case, that
the Minister alone is sought for of the enimye, or else he be forsaken of them
which hitherto would have the name of a congregation, or if no ruin or
detryment ensue unto the Congregation, by his departing: then is there no
cause, why he may not reserve himself for a more commodious season. But they
that forsake the publyke cause of the Congregation, and go from them that hold
fast the confession of faith: these in deed be Apostatas and hyrelinges, John.
10.
who Christ says, use to fly, when they see the woolfe come. Would to God
they had well considered these things, which in these days to hastily forsook
their Churches, whom it behooued rather to have followed the ensample of
Ambrose, Se the Tripartite hystory the.ix. book, and xx. Chap. See a like
storye of godly courage in Ambrose agayn^t Theodosius the Emperor, whom
Ambrose had excommunicated for a great slaughter committed at Thessalonica, and
would have comen into the Church at Milane, but was withstanded of Ambrose in
the same book the xxx. Chap.
which denied to deliver his Churches unto the Arrianes, although the Emperor
commanded it. See the Epistle to Marcella his sister, which in number is the
thirty and three.

What the faithful did toward Steven.
Luke going on in his history begun, shows what the faithful which
remained in the City, did unto Steven being thus stoned. First, he says they
dressed him, that is, they buried him. This is a most ancient usage, agreeable
to that first sentence pronounced of God, where he says, that we came of the
earth, and shall return to the earth again, and conteyneth the mystery of the
resurrection, in that bodies are committed to the ground, as seeds unto the
earth, which afterward shall be raised up with more glory. Howbeit, it is like,
the holy men had an other consideration. For while they decently bury him that
was condemned by the sentence of the counsel, they manifestly reprove the
unrighteousness of their adversaries, and give an evident testimony of ye
faith which Steven had preached. Furthermore, they declare how they reverenced
him, who^ they saw was so singular an instrument of Christ. And they are not
like unto those which now adays use to let slip the raynes of an impotent and
unbridled tongue, against the ministers of the word, by whose free speech and
doctrine, they see their enemies are incensed, and so seek after the blood of
the faithful ministers of Christ, and deride their co^stancy and boldness,
whom they ought to reverence and honor. In the mean time, we learn by this
example what we owe to the bodies of the dead, that is to say, honest and
comely burial: forasmuch as Paul says, our bodies be the Temples of the
holy ghost. We must in our buryinges use no pride or superstition, wherein
diverse faults are now adays committed. For there are some, which puffed up
with vanity, do so forgette their mortal estate, that they will after death
also be proud, while they fasten the arms and cognizances of vain glory
about their Tumbs. There are other again which labor by Diriges and
sacrifices, to do away the sins of the dead, or else, after a peculiar sort
of ceremony, use to canonize them, and make them saints: whereof the one is
peevish, and without example, the other derogatory and repugnaunt unto Christ's
merit and doctrine, which teaches us that those that believe, pass from
death unto life, John. 9.
and have need of no new expiacions. Moreover, they make great lamentation
over Steven. And that is not against the rule of Paul, 1. These. 4.
which forbids us we should not mourn as the heathen do. For they lament
not, as uncertain and doubtful of Steuens estate, but for that they see the
wicked to have such power, and the church deprived of so excellent a Minister,
which might yet have done very much good, in setting forth the kingdom of
Christ. Neither are they to be blamed, which cannot by and by forget their
friends, like men void of all humanity and common sense, but are enforced to
weep, forasmuch as God has not made us blocks, and the scripture every where
condemns those that be destitute of natural affections. On this sort we
read Abraham bewailed Sara his wife, Joseph with his brethren, Jacob their
father: the people of Israel, Aaron, Moses, and Samuel, with godly duty. Yea,
Christ when he saw the two sisters mourn, wept, for his belooued Lazarus.
Ioh. 11.
In deed, a mean must be kept, lest we may be thought either to envy the dead
their heavenly felicity, or else to stand in doubt, or not firmly to
believe the inheritance of the same.

Last of all, Saul is a singular example of tyranny.
Luke sets us out a singular example of tyranny that Saul used against the
church: wherein first the great cruelty of the tyranne, next the vain success
of his purpose and intent, is to be considered. Of this Saul, it was said
before, that he consented to the death of Steven, and kept their clothes that
stoned him, whereby is signified that he was guilty of innocent blood. But now
he can not be satisfied with the tirannye of an universal persecution, but
deuiseth a peculier way, and goes about utterly to pull up the church as it
were by the roots. And he sets not on them alone, which openly professed
the faith, but bursteth into private houses, and draws out, not only men,
but women also, whom the infirmity and weakness of sex defended, and
puts them in prison, in so much, that certain writers think not vnwittily
the Oracle of a Woolfe, that should come out of the tribe of Benjamin, ought
to be applied unto this Saul. Genesis 49.
For he was in deed a rauenyng Woolfe, which yet at length when he was
converted, distributed the wholesome spoils of Evangelical preaching, almost
over the whole world. And the things which Luke here reports of him, he
himself oftentimes confesses, yea, he lamenteth him of the same very often.
See Acts. 26. 1. Cor. 15. Galath. 1. The use of them all is, that we should
acknowledge the goodness of God which did vouchsafe to take into his favor
so great an enemy. For as he himself interprets the matter: On him, would
Jesus Christ show all long patience, 1. Tim. 1.
to declare an example unto them, which should believe on him, unto eternal
life. But what prevailed Saules great enterprise? Could he make havoc of the
church? Nothing less. Yea, he was the cause, that they being scattered hither
and thither, spread the word of salvation and kingdom of Christ the further.
Thus God knew how to set forth the glory of his son, even by those ways,
which seemed most to hinder it. Whereunto also is to be referred, how the evil
spirits, in the gospel even against their will, brought before Christ, and
threw to the ground those whom they thought they had all power over. Therefore
their fear is foolish, which suffer themselves to be discouraged with the
attemptes of tyrannes. In the mean while we are advertised of our duty, that
we be not overcome with persecutions, nor forsake not our duty by and by.
Which thing diverse do in these days, who having been once or twice in
danger, make holyday for ever after, as though they had fully discharged their
duty toward Christ already. But they of whom Luke here speaks do better,
which being driven out of Jerusalem, are by their banishment made the bolder,
and preach Christ euerywhere, being myndfull of that sentence, which says,
they shall be saved, not which begin well, but which continue unto the end.
Math. 24.
Let us therefore follow their zeal, that after we have faithfully finished
this race of life, we may attain to the garland of the heavenly reward,
through Jesus Christ: to whom be all praise, honor, power, and glory for ever.
Amen.

The.lvij. Homely.
THEN came Phillip into a City of Samarie, and preached Christ unto them. And
the people gave heed unto those things which Phillippe spoke, with one
accord, hearing and seeing the miracles which he did. For unclean spirits
crying with loud voice, came out of many that were possessed of them. And
many taken with palseyes, and many that halted, were healed. And there was
great joy in that City. But there was a certain man called Simon, which
before time in the same City used witchcraft, and bewitched the people of
Samarie, saying that he was a man that could do great things, whom they
regarded from the least, to the greatest, saying: this man is the power of God,
which is called great. And him they set much by, because that of long time, he
had bewitched them with sorceries.
ALthough the Kingdom of Christ and the church is always assaulted and set on,
by the wicked, yet can it not be overcome, because the truth of Gods Oracles
and promises is infallible, who has appointed to Christ his son, an
everlasting kingdom. This have we seen hitherto proved and declared, by many
examples. For oftentimes did they strive stoutely, both in the Senate and in
the Counsel against the Apostles, but the truth had always the victory. At
length Steven was stoned, and the enemies being made the more fierce thereby,
show their uttermost power, amongst whom the rage of Saul chiefly appears.
But so little is Christ's kingdom amongst these rages brought under, that
rather where it seemed heretofore to be hedged in, within the narrow walls of
Jerusalem, it stretches it self now through all Jury and Samarie. And hereof
Luke takes occasion to show, with what success, the gospel began to be
preached out of Iurye. And first he treats of the conversion of Samaria,
which we read was foretold of by the prophets: in the historye whereof we
have the longer to stand, for that the things which are most diligently
proponed in it, serve greatly both for our comfort, and instruction.

First, he shows whose ministry God used in converting of Samaria. Philip
the Apostle of Samaria.
It was Philips, not the Apostle, but he which before was numbered among the
Deacons, as the ancient writers of the Church with one consent declare,
chiefly Epiphanius writing of Simon and the Simoniakes. For although it was the
Deacons office to take the charge of the Church goods, and of the poor: yet
they were also permitted to preach the Gospel, when necessity so required,
as hitherto we have seen, by the example of Steven. And may be, there was not
so great need of Deacons at Jerusalem, by reason the congregation was so
scattred in the time of persecution, and therefore they gave themselves wholly
to the ministerye of the word, where before they were distributers of the
goods ecclesiastical. And Paul afterward bade, that the Deacons by their well
ministering, 1. Tim. 3.
should get themselves a degree to a greater office and function. Now it is
reported, that Philip did two things at Samaria. First he preached Christ to
them. And that that Luke touches briefly in this place, he afterward
declares more at large, where he says, he preached the mysteries of the
kingdom of God, and of the name of Jesus Christ. In this place, he makes
mention but of Christ only, because under his name, he comprehends the whole
Gospel. And Christ has appointed the Gospel, to consist of two parts, that
is to say, repentance, and remission of sins. Both which Jesus Christ
gives, Acts. 5.
as Peter before has manifestly taught. For he alone gives the spirit of
regeneration, and succoureth our corrupt nature. He alone also forgiueth
sins, and has purged them with the price of his blood. Therefore he that
preaches Christ, the same of necessity, must preach repentance and
forgiveness of sins. And this is a sure note whereby the true preachers may
be known from the false. For whosoever teach that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, and has performed the things needful for the amendment and
salvation of mankind, 1. John. 4.
they are to be taken for the true Ministers of Christ. But whosoever shows
that these things be other where to be had than in Christ, and inuenteth new
means of attayning to salvation, he is to be called a false teacher, though he
were an Angel from heaven. Galat. 1.
Therefore Paul plainly testifyeth, that he knows but Jesus Christ only, 1.
Cor. 2. Galat. 6.
and rejoices but in his cross only. Unto this preaching were joined
miracles which Philip wrought, according as Christ had promised. For he drove
out unclean spirits from men, and healed folk sick of the palsy, Miracles
were wrought by Philip.
whose diseases were incurable. And this working of Christ's spirit, was not
superfluous. For although by the word all those things are offered us, which
serve to our salvation, yet it is needful, that our minds drowned in a
certain natural slumber be awaked by outward signs, and prepared to receive
the word. Furthermore, where as diverse things fall out otherwhile, whereby our
faith is tried and tempted, it is very profitable, to have it propped up, with
these outward signs. In the mean season we read that such signs were
wrought by the Apostles, as for the most part, admonish us of the benefits of
Christ. For he vanquished the force of the Devil, overthrew his kingdom, and
valiauntly delivered us from his tirannye. He has restored to us again, the
strength of our corrupted nature, that we which were able to do no good thing
of our self, 2. Cor. 3. Phil. 4.
be able through him to do all things. And he himself in the Gospel says,
that without him we can do nothing. John. 15.
But it is very worthy the consideration, where it is said the evil spirits
went out of them crying. It is plain that they did the like otherwheres also.
For in Christ's presence they complain that they are driven out before their
time, and leave them miserablye torn, out of whom they depart, against their
wills. These things set before our eyes, the property and disposition of
Satan, who is altogether given to destroy men. For as from the beginning he was
a murderer: John. 8. 1. Peter. 5.
so he always runs up and down like a roaryng Lion, and seeks whom he
may devour. For the which cause, he unwillingly departs out of them, whose
minds he has possessed. Math. 12.
Yea being ones cast forth, he studieth and labors to get into his old
possession again, as Christ teaches. These things as they stir up in us an
ardent desire to take heed that we be not circumuented, by the craft of so
hurtful an enemy, and lose our salvation: so they declare unto us the power of
Christ, which by his spirit and word is able so easily to expel the Devil,
though he struggle and strive never so much against it.

The Samaritanes embrace the Gospel.
Now let us see how the Samaritanes received Jesus Christ, whom Philip
preached: And the people gave heed (says Luke) unto those things, which
Philip spoke with one accord, hearing and seeing the miracles which he did.
And a little after, There was great joy in that City. In these words the
Evangelist comprehends two special things. First, he teaches that they
received Christ, and how they came to the knowledge of him. Then he shows the
fruit of this earnestness and belief. To the first this belongs, where he
says they heard Philips sermons, they saw his miracles, and gave their minds
and studies to all the things he said and did. Of this study and
earnestness sprange faith, which (as we shall afterward hear) they sealed
with baptism. The order of astayning to salvation.
We have herein to consider the order of salvation. For although we acknowledge
God only to be the author hereof, which works in men according to his
pleasure: yet for the most part he uses to bring men orderly, and by a
certain rule, to their salvation. In this order, first is hearing of the
word. For where God offers us salvation by the word, Psalm. 107.
and (as David says) sends his word and heals us, we must not neglect the
same, if we will be saved. But because hearing alone is not enough (for wicked
men and spirits do many times hear) it behooves that our minds also be
moved and stirred. This thing is brought to pass partly by outward things,
as we see here by signs, and partly by the inward working of the holy
spirit, which working if we feel not, it shall nothing profit us, to hear
the outward preaching or reading of the word, 1. Cor. 3.
as Paul diligently and plainly teaches. Howbeit, when God reuealeth his
word to us, and pricketh our minds by the inward suggestion of his holy
spirit, he requires earnest attention, and taking heed, least we let the
infernal birds eat up the seeds out of our mind, or suffer the same to be
choked with thorns, Luke. 8. Math. 13
or to be trodden under of naughty affections, which thing Christ has
faithfully warned us of. Whosoever therefore after this sort proceed in the
business of salvation, as we read the Samaritanes here did, they shall
quickly receive great profit thereby. And if we compare these things with our
doings, we shall perceive what answer to make them, who marueyle, how it
comes to pass that so few profit by the preaching of the word. For who is it
almost, that stumbleth not (as they say) at the thressholde, or in the
beginning? We see few hearers of the word at the Church, and they think they
have sufficiently done their duty, if they hear the Sermon upon Sundaye
only. And few there are that hear the same attentively, and with desire to
learn. But fewest of all muse or meditate diligently, of that they have
heard. In the mean season, the naughty affections of the flesh, bear rule
every where, carrying us headlong unto the blind desires of the world.
Therefore how can it herein otherwise come to pass, than as in a field
ouergrowne with thorns, and full of stones, except it be diligently ^ylled.
Let us cast of this noisome sloth of mind, and follow the Samaritanes, and
then shall that fruit shortly ensue, that Luke says they received.

For he says: There was great joy in that City. The fruit of the Gospel,
and of faith.
This is the fruit of faith that uses to spring of the feeling we have of
Gods reconcilement with us. For as the countenance of God being angry with us,
does vex and trouble our minds, being feared with the conscience of our
sinfulness: so the doctrine of the Gospel, which teaches that God is
reconcyled to us, in Jesus Christ his son, does marvelously cheer and
recreate our spirits. Therefore the Angels when they told the shepeheardes
how Christ was borne, said that they brought them great joy. Luc. 2.
And that old father Simeon, filled with the feeling of this joy, desired to
have leave to depart, and to be delivered from the prison of his body. Paul
also byddeth the Christians always to rejoice, because this joy cannot be
taken away by any adversity, forasmuch as the godly use to rejoice in
afflictions, as we saw before in the Apostles, which rejoiced in that they
were thought worthy for Christ's sake to be scourged. Therefore they are
wicked, and most unkind men, that say the Gospel is the cause of adversity
and public calamity. Whereas it is evident, God sends such things because of
men's sins and disobedience. But they are like unto those which objected the
same unto Jeremy, saying that from the time he began to preach, Ierem. 4.4.
they felt all kinds of distress and misery.

Furthermore, to return unto Luke, Simon Magus hinders the course of the
Gospel.
there fell out a great hindraunce unto Christ's kingdom, thus luckily
succeeding among the Samaritanes. For Simon the sorcerer, which long time had
borne a swinge in that city, had bewitched the miserable people with his
magical Arts. God would have Philip and his Apostles coped with this
Merchant, to the intent partly, that we might know, how there will be always
hypocrites in the Church, at whose leuitie and falshoode no man should be
offended, and partly, that all men might know by an evident and infallible
argument, that the Apostles wrought their miracles by no magical sleyghtes,
but by the power of God, seeing that so famous a Magitian overcome of them,
acknowledged in them, a greater power than his was, which power he thought he
might with money have purchased. In like sort, would God have the Magitians of
Egypt join against Moses. Here it shall be profitable for us diligently to
consider every person.

And first Philip shows us a singular example of valiant faith. For this
Simon was no small hinderance unto sincere doctrine, Philip an example of
christian valiantness.
because the error of the Samaritanes was confirmed both with antiquity and
superstition. For they did not only think, that Simon was endued with
heavenly power, but also they believed he was the very self power of God. But
Philip is feared neither with the iuglings of his Magical enchauntments, nor
with the rooted error of the foolish people: but rather has a respect to
Christ's commandment, who bade the Gospel should also be preached in
Samaria. Let them follow such a mind as this, whosoever have any office
committed unto them, whether they be public or private persons. For they must
not be afraid of Bugbeares, which profess Christ, whose power by so many
arguments is proved to be so great. Let us consider that he is stronger and
greater that is in us, 1. John. 4.
than he which rages in the world.

This Simon is a notable ensample of a deceyuer, whom a man might fitly
compare with Baalam the false Prophet. Simon Magus an example of a seducer.
It is said, that of long time he had bewitched the people of Samaria. For
being skillful in Magical sciences, he showed strange woonders, and challenged
to himself go dly honor, Eusebius in his. 2. book. and.13. chap. Irenaeus in
his first book and 20. Chap.
calling himself not only the great power of God, but also God the father,
and the son, and Helena his harlot the holy ghost (as Epiphanius, a most
diligent searcher out of old heresies, has written.) By this example we are
taught, that the Devil is able to do much by his Ministers, not of his own
free power, but by the permission of God. For through Gods sufferaunce, the
Magitians of Egypt, did handsomely imitate certain of Moses miracles. And the
Witch at Saules request seemed to have raised up Samuelles corpse out of the
grave. 1. Sam. 28.
Wherewith may worthily be number bred the Oracles uttered long agone at Delphi or
Pytheum, although for the most part, they were doubtful in their
signification. Of like kind are those things which we read of Images, whereof
some have spoken, some have gone out of their places, and infinite others have
been notable, by reason of many miracles: to say nothing of those which were
manifest in the kingdom of Antichrist, as Christ and his Apostles foretold.
God permits these things by his just judgment, partlye because of the
wicked, which deserve to be deceived, whereas they will not embrace the truth,
as the examples of Pharao and Saul evidently prove: partlye for the elects
sake, whose faith must this way be tried, that they may learn to cleave to
the simple word of God, and admit nothing contrary to the same, though it seem
never so worthy of authority. And hereof the Lord himself gives us warning,
where he forbids us in the law to believe false Prophets, although they
confirmed their doctrine with miracles. For the Lord your God (says Moses)
tempts you, to see whether you love the Lord your God with all your heart.
Deuteronomy. 13.
etc. Therefore they object miracles to us in vain, which go about to persuade
us in things, varying from Gods word. See 2 Thessalonians. 2. Math. 24.

Besides, in Simon is set forth a manifest mark whereby a deceyuer may be
known. A mark of a seducer or deceyuer.
For he challenges to himself godly honor, which Satan chiefly desires, to
the end to spoil God of his honor, wherein he far differs from the good
Angels, which refuse godly honor being offered them, and put it over unto God.
See Apocal. 19. and.22. And the faithful servant of God being well remembered
of their natural corruption, be most free from this sacrilegall desire of
godly honor, and give all the praise to God, for whatsoever they do well and
laudably. Example hereof we have seen before in John and Peter, and shall
hereafter see the like in Paul. Acts. 14.
Therefore let them be driven from us, and clapped out of our company, which
dare to take upon them, any, be it never so little a piece of divine honor. For
he can be no faithful servant, that will take unto him his masters glory.

Last of all, The inconstancy of the world.
we have in the Samaritanes an example of the inconstancy and lightness of the
Commons, in that they yield to this crafty deceyuour, and suffer themselves to
be beguiled. This is the property of the world, to delight in deceyuers, and to
rejoice in deuisers of strange subtelties. But if there be any hope of never
so little gain, ye shall see them, who ought to depend only upon the word
of God by and by stricken in a great rage. They that in these days seek after
Soothsayers, to hear tell of things lost, or who has taken them away, give
us examples of this madness. And there be worse than these, which think
diseases may be put away by incantations, and certain conceived forms of
words, and with costly superstition hyre such as profess such kind of
witchcraft. But the obedience of the Samaritanes being better instructed,
deserves praise. This it becomes us to imitate, and not to give our study
to curious sciences, which are long since plainly condemned by Gods sentence.
See Exodus 22. Leuit. 20. Deuteronomy. 18. Mich. 5. God the father has appointed Jesus
Christ to be our teacher and Savior. Him it behooves us to hear, and to do
his commandment: to whom be praise, honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.lviij. Homely.
BUT as soon as they gave credence to Philips preaching of the kingdom of GOD,
and of the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized both men and women. Then
Simon himself believed also. And when he was baptized, he continued with
Phillip, and woondered, beholding the my racles and signs which were showed.
When the Apostles which were at Jerusalem heard say that Samaria had received
the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John, which when they were come
down, prayed for them that they might receive the holy Ghost. For as yet he
was come on none of them. But they were baptized only in the name of Christ
Jesus. Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the holy ghost.
Because the kingdom of our Savior Jesus Christ was to be extended over all
the world, it was therefore necessary, that the gospel, by the teaching
wherofmen are brought unto Christ, should be preached unto all Nations: whereof
we have seen how the Apostles received a commandment of the Lord himself,
being ready to ascend up into heaven. The great persecution which Luke says
began at Jerusalem, gave an occasion of the putting this matter in execution.
For where before the time of this persecution, the sermons of the Apostles
sounded but in Jerusalem only, the other faithful ministers of Christ being
thence dispersed, began to preach in other places, and had such good
success, that within short space Phillip being come to Samaria, wanne unto
Christ by his continual preaching the Gospel, the people of the City, which
Simon long time had bewitched with his Magical sciences. For they contempning
his Magical conueyaunces, began to give ear unto Christ, and to hear him
only. And how prosperously they took this thing in hand, this present place
declares, which sets out unto us a more full constitution and ordering of
that church, and most diligently shows the great going forward of those men
in faith and other gifts of the spirit.

The appointing of the Church at Samaria.
First it is declared how they grew into one body of a congregation, where he
says: As Soon as they gave credence to Philips preaching of the kingdom of
God, and of the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized both men and women.
Therefore this place is attributed chiefly to the belief which they gave unto
Philips preaching, in such sort, that they thought his doctrine was confirmed
with authority enough, by ye miracles which he wrought. We learn therefore that
through faith, congregations do duly grow in one, and are most stronglye knit
with an inward band. For this Faith only grafteth us in Christ Jesus, and
makes us members of one body in him, as Paul in many places testifies.
Whereupon we evidently gather again, that where men want faith, there can be no
church of Christ: for such must needs be led with most variable and contrary
senses and meanings. We are taught by the example of the Samaritanes that the
word of God where men teach, must be believed, and that it must not be
comptrolled by man's reason, so that it shall need every day new authority. For
as Paul testifies that the scriptures are inspired of GOD: Ephesians. 4.
so the ministerye of the word instituted of Christ in his church, expressly
teaches the same. Therefore whosoever believes the ministers of Christ,
bringing Christ's voice and his word, we may say he believes Christ, and
not men. For unto all such belongs this saying of Christ: He that hears
you, hears me. And whosoever receives him that I send, Luc. 10. John. 13.
receives me. Wherefore Paul judges the Thessalonians for this cause worthy
to be praised, for that they received his doctrine, not as the word of a man,
1 Thessalonians. 2.
but as of an Angel. And the same praise the Samaritanes deserve, and as many
as have believed the Gospel, according to their ensample.

Baptism is an outward band of the Church.
Furthermore, to this inward communion consisting of Faith, is joined also an
outward band of communion or society. For it is said, that all, as well men
as women, were baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. For as Christ chose his
elect out of the world, John. 15.
so will he have them separated from the world, and consecrated to himself
only. To the which end, he requires of them, a plain confession of their
faith, and furnishes them with sacraments, whereby they be discerned from
others. For as the sacraments be no vulgar or common tokens of Christ's
benefits, and Gods grace: so is there also no small utility in them, in that
they separate the people of God from the world, and knit them together with
the outward band of Christian communion. Which is the cause that where Peter
before would have the believers to be baptized, he by and by teaches them
also, that they should save themselves from that froward Nation. And Paul by a
like argument teaches that it is not meet, that they that have been partakers
at the Lords table, should be also partakers at the sacrifices of Idolles.
Here by the way, is the error of them reproved, which account the confession
of faith, among things indifferent, and suppose that the faithful are to be
discerned from the world, by none outward sign or mark.

Here also is the dotage of the Anabaptists to be discussed, Against the
Anabaptists.
who where they see in this, and such like places, faith go before Baptism,
would prove hereby that the baptism of children is condemned. Howbeit this
place makes mention, but such as were of full age, which before were far of
and strangers from the people of God, whom it should have been unlawful to
have received into the communion of the church and sacraments, without a
confession of their faith, least they might have seemed to have cast pearls
unto dogs and hogs. But the matter is of a far other sort in infantes,
who being borne of Christian parents, do manifestly appertain to the
kingdom of God. For God in the covenant, promises to be the God of our
seed. And Christ says, Gene. 17. Math. 18.19.
that the kingdom of God belongs unto children, and plainly testifies,
that they have faith. Yea, Paul affirms, that the children borne either of
father or mother only, 1. Cor. 7.
that is a christian, are holy.

Now returns Luke unto Simon, that we may understand what he did, Simon
believes, and is baptized.
when he perceived the people fell from him, and betook themselves earnestly
unto Christ. First, Luke says, that he believed. This me thinks is not to be
understood, as though he counterfeyted altogether. For it appears, his
mind was touched with some feeling of faith, in that he joined himself to
Phillip, as an inseparable companion, and woondered in beholding the miracles
and singular gifts of the holy spirit. Howbeit, because he denied not
himself, and endeavored not to forsake the flesh, which is the true beginning
of christendom, his faith was but temporal and for a season (as Christ
calls it: Marc. 5.
) and therefore when the heat of persecution came it could not abide. Here
appears the great power of Jesus Christ, which so easily takes away the
great impediment and hinderaunce, that Simon was to the course of the Gospel,
and so subdueth this great Iuggeler, so furnished with the sleightes of Satan,
that he which a little before had called himself the great power of God, did
now adhere and cleave to Phillip, being a stranger, and one of small account
or estimation. Hereunto also belongs it, that otherwheres Christ drives out
Satan with little or no ado, so that it evidently appears, he is the
conqueror of Satan, and most valiant revenger of mankind. Further, this is a
singular praise of the Gospel, through whose plain and simple preaching, the
subtle and crafty wisdom both of the world and of the Devil, is so
scornefully confounded. After this, 1. Cor. 1.
Simon is also baptized, and becomes a continual companion of Philip. The
chief cause whereof may seem to be, for that he desired also to have like
power to work such miracles as the things following declare. Here we be
taught, that there shall be always in the church, false brethren, which shall
either craftily counterfeyt the faith, or else having it for a certain space,
fall from it again. For the Gospel is compared unto a net, wherein are
drawn up, as well naughty, as good fish. Let no man therefore be offended, if
he perceive himself at any time deceived by such: seeing that Christ had Judas
in his company, and Paul oftentimes complayneth himself of false brethren.
Those men are over peevish and impatient, which being deceived by one or two,
despise therefore all other without difference, and will not vouchsafe to take
any other for a true christian and brother. We are further taught by the
example of Simon, that the grace of God is not tied to the sacraments:
forasmuch as Simon received the sign of grace without the fruit. And Paul
(although he confess that the old fathers received the same sacraments that
we do) yet says, they pleased not God, because they were void of faith. And
it auayled not Judas, although he sat at the Lords table, and received the
bread at Christ's own hand. It is therefore faith only which grafteth us into
Christ, and makes us partakers of the gifts of God, which are shadowed and
represented to us by the sacraments.

The going forward in faith, and increase of the holy ghost.
Now, forasmuch as we have seen marvelous effects of the holy spirit
flourishing in the Church of Jerusalem: Luke teaches us that among the
Samaritanes also the holy ghost showed the like power and efficacy, least any
man might think that the Church of the Gentyles, was inferior to the Jews
church. He says these gifts were administered by the Apostles, to the end
that the unity of the church might the more strongly fasten among the people,
which heretofore were of diverse minds and at variaunce and discention. For
how great a division of minds was between the Jews and the Samaritanes,
appears both in the fourth of John, and otherwheres. And the Jews of a
certain proud prejudice, used to much to despise the people of Samary.
Therefore God thought good, to use the ministry of the Apostles herein, Romans
10. Galat. 3. Coloss 3.
that it might manifestly appear, there was but one faith of Christ in all
churches, and that all the faithful were quickened but with one spirit, so
that there was no difference of Nation in Christ.

The Apostles give the holy ghost to ye Samaritanes
Luke says that Peter and John were sent from Jerusalem, who coming to
Samaria, prayde for them that had professed Christ, that the holy ghost might
be given unto them also. The cause of this doing was, for that the holy Ghost
was as yet come upon none of them, but were only baptized in the name of
Christ. Which place is not so to be understood, as though the faithful of
the Samaritanes were hitherto utterly void of the holy ghost. For where they
had faith which is the gift and effect of the holy ghost, and were through
baptism planted in Christ, they could not be utterly void of those benefits
of Christ, which by the holy Ghost are sealed in us. Which are the washing away
of sins, regeneration, mortifying of the old man, and adoption, or taking
into the children of god. And the whole scripture testifies, that these
things come none otherwise unto us, than by the operation of the holy ghost.
And these are the common gifts of the holy ghost, without the which no man can
truly be called a christian. Wherefore it is not like, that the Samaritanes
lacked these. By the name of the spirit therefore are understood in this
place, those most excellent gifts, wherein the primitive church flourished,
and which were given to the believers in visible wise, Acts. 1^.19
as in the feast of Pentecost we saw the Apostles were suddenly replete with
the holy spirit. These so evident gifts of the holy spirit, in the primitive
Church, were needful to be bestowed as well at Samaria as otherwheres, to the
end that Christ's kingdom might the farther be spread abroad. And although
now adays these gifts for the more part are ceased, yet this commodity
comes to us thereby, that we know the holy Ghost is the President and
governor of Christ's Church as he promised. John. 14. The industry and
modes^ye of the Apostles.


In this place we have to consider the industry of the Apostles. For as soon
as they hear tell that Philip labors at Samaria, in the business of the
Lord, they send certain of their company undesired, to help him in his
traueyle. And herein appears no manner of way any doltishe ambition. For they
send Peter and John, whose labors hitherto were more apparent and evident than
any others. And they are contented to go being appointed by others, not taking
upon themselves alone, to send Legates a latere, as they are called. And
Philip when they come, A latere, from their side, meaning their ^^tyer friends,
and counsaylors.
does not disdainefully reject them, as thrusting their sickles into an other
man's harvest, and depriving him of some part of his honor and glory, but
courteously gives them the place in that Church, whose foundation he had first
laid. Whereby we are taught that joining of minds, and mutual help is
chiefly to be required in the setting forth of Christ's kingdom. But because
there is no place for these things among the ambitious, therefore Christ
warns his disciples so often of humility. Whereunto if they were given in
these days, which have the rule of Churches, they should surely govern the
Provinces committed to them, more commodiously than they do.

But touching rytes and orders, they use none other ceremony, Prayers are
joined unto the laying on of hands.
than the laying on of hands, which was used of Christ, least any man should
rashlye arrogate to himself power or authority to alter or change any
thing. They make their prayers also before, least any one might think the holy
ghost was bound to the outward ceremony, but that it was given of God, and
that all men might perceive it was obtained through prayer. And their doing
wanted not a prosperous success. We know that of this place, the Papists
have brought in their sacrament of Confirmation: but their invention is so
ridiculous, and their temeritie so manifest, that it deserves no long
confutation. It shall be our parts to follow the unity of faith, according
to the example of the Samaritanes, that we also may prosperously grow together
in Christ Jesus our head and Savior: to whom be praise, honor, power, and
glory for ever. Amen.

The.lix. Homely.
WHEN Simon saw that through laying on of the Apostles hands, the holy ghost
was given, he offered them money saying: Give me also this power, that on whom
soever I put the hands, he may receive the holy ghost. But Peter said unto
him, thy money perish with thee, because thou have thought that the gift of
God may be obtained with money. Thou have neither part nor fellowship in this
business. For thy heart is not right in the sight of God. Repent therefore of
this thy wickedness, and pray God that the thought of thine heart may be
forgiven thee. For I perceive that thou art full of bitter gall, and wrapped in
iniquity. Then answered Simon and said: Pray ye to the Lord for me that
none of these things which you have spoken, fall on me.
THe Evangelist Luke after the common manner of the scriptures, does not only
describe the prosperous success of the primitive Church, and the notable
examples of the faithful: but also he shows the manners of the false
Christians and hypocrytes, and the vices that they brought with them into the
church. So before this, he declared the hystory of Ananias, and the grutch and
quarrel which begun in the Church. And in likewise now he declares the
horrible example of Simon, who did contaminate the profession of faith, with
sacrilegall ambition and covetousness. The use of all these things is, that we
should understand how there shall always be hypocrites in the Church, which
shall be authors of grievous offenses, wherewith the faithful yet must not be
so offended, to think that all other therefore ought to be condemned, or else
forsake the Church, as we have seen the Anabaptists in our days do. This
place is worthy to be well considered, which first declares Simons sin,
next, the earnest reprehension of Peter for the same, and last of all, what
Simon thought thereof, and how he took it.

Luke comprehends Simons fault in few words, saying: when he saw how
through laying on of the Apostles hands, Simons s^nne.
the holy ghost was given, he offered them money saying: Give me also this
power, that on whom so ever I lay hands, he may receive the holy ghost. It
was declared before how Simon believed, and that woondring at the miracles
being so strange, he was among others baptized. But he was of their number,
which although they will not forsake the desires of the flesh, yet being
touched with some fear of God, will not openly strive against him. And these
men after a sort for a while, cloak the corruption of their mind, but they
cannot always lie hidden. And after this sort does Simon bewraye himself, and
sins two manner of ways. For first being puffed up with ambition, he desires
to be like unto the Apostles in dignity of ministry, and so arrogateth to
him self godly honor, while he coueteth to have such power given unto him,
that he might after his own will give the holy ghost unto men. Now unto
ambition, covetousness is a companion, wherewith being blinded, he makes
religion a matter of gain and lucre, and thinks he may make merchandise of
the gifts of the holy ghost. For therefore he would buy this power with money,
to the intent afterward he might make the more gain of the same. Which was to
unholy a cogitation of God and his gifts, and farthest of from the meaning of
Christ, who when he endewed the Apostles with these gifts, Math. 10.
said: freely you have received, give freely. This example of Simon teaches
us, that pride is the cause of all evil, and (as the wiseman says) the
beginning of sin. Eccle. 10.
This was the cause that made the Angels to fall. And Adam pricked forward
with pride, became a transgressour of Gods commandment, while he would
(forsooth) be like unto God. Moreover, daily examples teach us, that proud and
ambitious men do nothing right, and that such for the most part, are most
pernicious disturbers of public weals. But whereas the evil of ambition is
every where a pestilent thing, in the Churh it is most pestilent of all other.
For where it once inuadeth the Church, it sows the seed of dissension among
them, by whose concord and labor, the peace and tranquillity of the Church
ought to be mainteyned. Number. 16. Mat. 18.20. Luke. 22.
Examples whereof we have set forth in Core, Moses enemy, and in the often
contentions of the Apostles, the which Christ so many times and so earnestly
repressed. But the evil of discention might seem but a tryfle (although for
the most part it be pernicious in the congregation) if there were not a greater
plague ensued, that is to say, a wicked robbery and mart which ouerturneth all
religion, and uses to pluck men's minds wholly from religion. This thing is
more evident in Simon, than that it needs long demonstration. For as soon as
he had taken ambition and covetousness to counsel in matters of religion, by
and by he discendeth to spiritual merchandise and robbery. But would God one
Simon were herewith slaundered, and that we eueriwhere saw not others which
offend more wickedly than he. For after that a certain earnest zeal and
desire of religion, had endowed the Church with great abundaunce of riches, and
that Bishops began to be had in reverence and honor: then began Simons not
very sincere led with the spirit of ambition and covetousness, by unlawful
means to aspire to Byshopricks and cathedre dignities. These afterward when
they had gotten the supremacy, devised ways how they might recover again,
that which they had spent in purchasing of voices, and hereof was hatched, that
slanderous buying and selling of religious matters. These beginninges may we
thank of selling of Sacraments, of buying of pardons, of hyring of prayers,
merits of supererrogation, gaynefull dispensations, buying of burial places,
and whatsoever like kind of inventions. That a man may marueyle how the
chief Bishops of the Church are become so impudent to glory in the succession
of Simon Peter, and so manifestly bewraye themselves to be rather the
successors of Simon Magus. These men have reigned many years in the Church,
until the Lord with the whippe of his word began to drive them out. And yet
they repent not, but being taken in their own mischieuousnesse, rather cry
out still, that they are the true and lawful governors of the Church. And yet
we accuse not them only, but also lament that among the professors of the
Gospel many times such plagues are to be found. For we see many come to the
Gospel, of none other mind, but for that they would be fensed under this
plausible color, and so most greedily invade the Church goods, and most
dishonestly abuse them. And many times they meet with Ministers like unto
themselves, who having gotten by unlawful means, to have the rule over
Churches, can neither reprove nor keep under these raueners. Therefore the
spirit of Simon now a days stretches the bounds of his kingdom far and
near, which seems to me to be the greatest plague of the Church, whereby it
comes to pass, that they which are as faulty as are the Antichristians, do
little prevail by preaching of the Gospel.

But let us see what Peter says, who expostulateth with Simon. Peter
expostulateth with Simon.
This is both a most grave and sharp expostulation, and consists of two
points. First, he accuses his fault, and denounces what punishment it
deserves, and figureth or fashioneth his saying, with an imprecation or kind
of curse, beginning on this wise: Thy money (says he) perish with thee: that
is to say: thou and thy cursed money perish together. The Apostle begins
on this sort, not of moodynesse of mind, or of any unbridled affection of
anger, but moved by the holy Ghost, which would after this phrase and manner
of speech, utter the heynousnesse of his wickedness and punishment.
Therefore such imprecations as these, must be referred unto a certain kind of
prophesying, as we see diverse in the Psalms, and wrytings of the Prophets.
But the grieuousnesse of his punishment, is more amplified by the sentence next
adjoined, where he says: Thou have no part nor fellowship in this business.
By which words he declares that he is utterly excluded from all participation
of spiritual gifts, and excommunicated out of the Church of the Lord. And
least Peter might seem causeless to use any kind of rage, he adds the
cause of so cruel threats: because thou have thought that the gift of God
may be obtained with money. Which one thing abundantly declares that thy heart
is not right with God, forasmuch as thou think he is like unto covetous
merchaunts and usurers. Hereof is gathered a general sentence, whereby we are
taught, that no such are allowed before God, as make vauntage and gain of
religion, and under the color of religion, seek their own lucre. We are
taught also by Peter's example with what zeal and feruencie of spirit*
Ministers ought to reprove those which for filthy lucres sake, distayne the
glory of God. They must so be handled, that they may understand how they
have horriblye sinned, and deserved the grievous punishment of eternal
damnation. For there is no place for modesty and meekness to be used where
the glory of God is openly assaulted, and where the gifts of Gods grace are
made subject to the gainefull pleasure of most covetous persons. We read
therefore that Elizaeus used the like zeal toward Giezi his naughty servant,
whom he sodeinly struck with the plague of leprosy, because he required of
Naaman the Assirian, 2. Reg. 5.
a reward for that health that was freelye given him of God. And Jesus Christ
a most perfect pattern of meekness, was so moved with that impious sale of
holiness, that he laid hands on the authors of such wickedness, John. 2.
Math. 21. Mar. 11.
and drove them out of the Church with a whippe like impudent Dogs. We may
therefore justly complain of their injustice in these days, that say we
offend against the rules of Christian modesty and charity, when we accuse
the Antichrist at Rome, and his Creatures, the Cardinals, Bishops, Monks, and
Priests, which by reason of their wicked and profane Fayer or Mart these many
years, have caused Christ's religion to be mocked and scorned of the Jews and
Turks, and yet to this day have no serious or earnest thought, of any
reformation or amendment, notwithstanding they be every where spoken against.
But it is the perpetual and everlasting decree of God, appointed by his
Prophet, that in his house there should be no dwelling for Chanaanites, that
is to say, Zach. 14.
for such kind of merchaunts.

The riches of the wicked are accursed.
Moreover, it is worthy to be noted how Peter by a grave sentence condemns
not only Simon, but also Simons money. Therefore what thing so ever serves the
wicked against the glory of GOD, is accursed as well as they. So, that money
wherewith king Balaac would have hired Balaam, to have hindered Gods appointment,
toward his people, is called the reward of iniquity. 2. Pet. 2.
And the money for the which Judas sold Christ, appears to have been
accursed because Judas could neither long enjoy it, neither served it the
priests, for any other use, than to purchase them a perpetual blot and
memory of their bloody impiety. What need we to speak of the goods and
revenues of Monasteryes, whereof a great part (as appears) was gathered
together by Simonicall sleightes, of such persons as used to sell all things
in Religion. For it is as clear as the day light, that these goods are so
unhappy, that commonly, they are a stumbling stone to them, whom the Gospel
has shined upon, while they are more earnestly busied in getting them into
their hands, than in setting forth of Christ's glory. So unhappy and
unprosperous is this mischievous simonie. And that that is here said of these
goods may justly be understood and verified of all goods unjustly gotten,
of the which, this is the property, that they procure unto the owners of them
the horrible malediction and curse of God. For the saying of the Lord is well
known. Habac. 2.
Woe to him that hourdeth up the things that be none of his.

In the second part of his Oration, Peter exhorts him to repentance, The
end of reprehensions in the Church.
whereby he plainly puts him in comfort of pardon. For to what end should
one repent or convert, which should think his doing therein unprofitable? Here
it appears what the end and mark of all reprehensions in the Congregation
ought to be, truly, that men might turn from their sins, and be reconciled
unto God, which mark, unless it be observed, the liberty of rebuke and
reprehension shall nothing differ, from evil speaking or railing. Wherefore,
least Simon should suspect Peter's words hereof, he adds. Repent of this thy
wickedness, and pray God, that the thought of thine heart may be forgiven
thee. He mencioneth his thought, that the heynousnesse of his fault might
appear the more, the cogitation whereof ought to be far from a christen
man's mind. And here by the way we learn, that men sin not only in
deeds, but also by thoughts and desires. For where men ought to be given unto
God, both in body and soul, it deserves to be called sin, if we swerve
never so little from the obedience of God. Hereunto belong the things which
Christ speaks in Matthew the fifth Chapter, touching the exposition of the
law. Furthermore, for that he would pearce Simons mind the deeper, whom he
perceived to be grievously tempted by the devil, he touches the fountaynes
and roots of sin, thereby showing, that he has need earnestly to repent.
Whereunto this is to be referred, which he said, in a manner doubtingly: If
happily the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee. But now he adds.
For I perceive that thou art full of bitter gall, and wrapped in iniquity. In
the first member or part, he alludeth to that saying of Moses, where the
Israelites are commanded to beware of themselves, least there be among them,
Deuteronomy. 29.
some root that bears gall and wormwood. He notes the inward malice or
corruption of ye mind, which causes whatsoever men do to be bitter and
unpleasant before God. For as the true worshipper of God, out of the good
treasure of his heart, brings out that is good: so the ungodly bring nothing
but that that is wicked out of the evil treasure of their heart, Math. 22.15
such as in deed Christ says polluteth men. And by this wrapping or binding,
is expressed ye state of them, which being entangled, in the snares of sin,
cannot untwine themselves, without much a do, and fervent zeal of repentance.
He teaches us that Simon is in such a condition or case, that he should
think a cold and superfluous show of repentance as not sufficient.

This place teaches us whether sinners ought to be sent: Sinners must be sent
unto God.
verily unto God, with whom unless they be made at one, there can be no hope
of their salvation. Therefore, we see in the Prophets, this one thing still
repeated, that the people should convert, and return unto God, from whom by
sin, they had strayed. But for the more commodious doing hereof, it behooves
to observe two things, both which Peter prescribes unto Simon. The first is
the work of repentance, which as we have elsewhere taught, comprehends
acknowledging of our sin, contricion of heart, and amendment of our whole
life. The other consists in godly prayers, whereby we ask forgiveness of our
sins, because the same is a free gift; and comes not through any merits of
our works. But Christ alone works them both, who by his spirit, both
regenerateth the believing, and by the merit of his death, washes away our
sins, and reconcyleth the father unto us again. Therefore all the order of
our salvation consists in faith, whereby we take hold of him. Therefore
above all things, it behooves to urge or require faith, not a dead faith,
such as Hypocrites brag of, but a lively and effectual power of the spirit,
whereby it comes to pass, that we both live in Christ, and he by his
spirit, works in us. For this only grace of God certifyeth the wavering
conscience of man, and uses to bring forth in us, most plentiful fruits of
true Godliness.

How Simon took Peter's expostulation.
Now, how did Simon take this grave and wholesome expostulation? His words
declare that he was stricken in conscience and mind. For he says: Pray ye
for me unto the Lord, that none of these things, which you have spoken, fall
on me. It seems he commends himself to the prayers of the congregation:
but it is a manifest argument of distrust, that he says nothing of himself,
but thinks he may be helped only with the prayers of other. But in vain are
the prayers of others, unless we return our selves unto the Lord. This the
places of the Prophets teach us, where we are forbidden to pray for them that
are wicked, and will not repent. See Iere. 7.14.15. Ezech. 14. Therefore the
error of them is peeuishe, and noisome, which think they may be relieved with
the hired prayers of Monks and Priests, where they themselves, hold on in
their wickedness, and where the prayers they murmr in a strange tongue, are
many times not understood of the Monks that mumble them. We know that the
prayers of the faithful are effectual, Romans 15. Ephesians. 6.
whereby they commend unto God the traueyles and burdens of their brethren,
seeing that Paul desires to be relieved by them. But these prayers take place
for them, whose selves are mindful of their duty, and with constant faith
watch for their own salvation. Let us therefore be mindful of these things,
and pray earnestly that we be not blinded with the affections of ambition and
covetousness, and so lose our salvation, but that we may serve God in
sincerity of heart, and attain unto salvation, in Jesus Christ our Lord: to
whom be praise, honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.lx. Homely.
AND they when^they had testified and preached the word of God, returned
toward Jerusalem, and preached the Gospel in many Cities of the Samaritanes.
The Angel of the Lord spoke unto Philip saying: Arise and go toward the
South, unto the way that goes down from Jerusalem unto the City of Gaza,
which is in the Desert. And he arose and went on. And behold, a man of
Aethiopia, a Chamberlane, and of great authority with Candace, Queen of the
Aethiopians, and had the rule of all her treasure, came to Jerusalem for to
worship. And as he returned home again, sitting in his Chariot, he read Esaias
the Prophet. Then the Spirit said unto Philip: go near, and join thy self
unto yonder Chariot. And Philip ran to him, and he heard him read the
Prophet Esaye, and said, understand thou what thou read? And he said,
how can I, except I had a guide? And he desired Philip that he would come up,
and sit with him.
Because God has appointed Jesus Christ his son, to be the universal
Savior of the whole world: therefore it behooued that the Gospel also wherein
is contained the way of salvation, purchased by him, should be preached among
all Nations. How this was done, Luke declares in this Chapter. He begins
with the conversion of Samaria, which Christ himself expressly commends
unto the Apostles, as we have seen in the History of his Ascension. And
thither came Philip, and first sowed the seed of Euangelike doctrine and
faith. Shortly after the Apostles being sent thither, gave unto them that were
already baptized in the name of Christ, the gifts of the holy spirit, which
thing was the occasion of the adooe that they had with Simon Magus. The
beginning of this present place appertains to the history of the conversion
of Samaria, whereunto after is joined a new discourse, declaring how the
knowledge of Christ came unto the Aethiopians.

And first Luke meaning to conclude his former narration, What the Apostles did
beside at Samaria.
proposes in few words, what the Apostles did furthermore at Samaria,
saying: When they had testified and preached the word of God, they returned to
Jerusalem, and preached the Gospel in many Cities of the Samaritanes. In the
which words the Apostles are said to have done three things. First, they
bear witness of Christ, whom Philip had preached. John. 15. Acts. 1
Therefore they fulfill the office whereunto Christ appointed them, when he
commanded them to be his witnesses. Then they preached the word of GOD, not
the devises of their own head. Math. 28.
And herein also they have a respect unto Christ's commandment, who charged
them to preach the things which he commanded them. Thirdly, in their return,
they pretermit not the inferior places, but preach Jesus Christ every where in
the Towns and Uillages. This is an argument of a great and fervent zeal,
wherewith they being inflamed, think they ought to let slip no occasion, that
may serve to set forth the kingdom of God. In these things are most fully set
forth the duty of the Ministers of the word, and of the congregation. Let the
Ministers remember that they be not only Preachers, but also witnesses of
Christ. And it is the property of witnesses to say the truth, and boldly and
without fear to speak that they know. And he shall be called no faithful
witness, that for favor of men, or any other affection, shall obscure or hide
the truth. Moreover, let them know, that the word of God is committed unto
them, whereof the Lord has made them Preachers, and not Authors of new
opinions. Therefore let them think that spoken to them, that is said to
Ezechiel, who is commanded to take his words, Ezech. 3.
from the mouth of the Lord. And let them not think it is granted them, to
join their gloses unto Gods word. For what has chafe to do with corn?
Ierem. 23.
Howbeit, in all these things, is required a certain zeal, wherewith if they
be not inflamed, they shall do no great good. Therefore let them imitate
Christ, which we see every where sought occasion to teach and to preach. And
Paul says, he fashioned himself in all things to all men, 1. Cor. 9.
to win many unto Christ.

Now, unto these premises Luke joins a new history, The history of the
converted Eunuche.
as we before said, wherein he tells us how the doctrine of the Gospel
came into Aethiopia by the ministry of one man, but such an one as we shall
think labored not in vain, because he was of great authority among the
people. And here is most manifestly fulfilled that that was long agone
prophesied by the Prophet, touching the subduing and bringing of the
Aethiopians unto the kingdom of Christ. See the Psalms. lxxij.lxviij.
and.lxxxvij. Now, because this history conteyneth an ensample of true
conversion, it grieved not the godly writer to declare all the circumstances
thereof. And first he treats of Philip, whose ministry it pleased God
herein to use. After that, he diligently describes the Aethiopians person, who
was converted unto the faith of Christ. And last of all, he begins to
declare what Philip and he did being together.

The special calling of Philip.
In Philip by whose mean the Ethiopian was converted, we have two things to
note. The special calling whereby God appointed him to this business, and his
obedience in following Gods calling. It was a very singular vocation, forasmuch
as it was a thing of no small importance, which God had appointed to be done.
For the Angel of the Lord appears unto Philip, and instructs him
diligently what to do: Arise (says he) and get thee toward the South, unto
the way that leads from Jerusalem unto Gaza. etc. And although the Angel
does not plainly declare what he should there do, yet it was easy for
Philip to conjecture, that he was appointed to some great and heavenly
business. This place teaches us by the way, the dignity of the Gospel,
forasmuch as we hear, that Philip is called to the preaching thereof by an
Angel. For where God has appointed the Angels as the Apparitories or Bedels
of his majesty, whom he sends out for the salvation of his elect (as Paul
witnesses to the Hebrews the first chapter) it must needs be some great and
excellent matter that is to be done by their ministry and service. We learn
also, that the beginning of our salvation ought to be referred to the mere
grace and favor of God. For as God in this place, appoynteth to the Eunuche,
nothing thinking hereof, a preacher of salvation: so most times, when we
think least of it, he uses to bring unto us the doctrine of salvation. Which
grace of God we ought so to acknowledge, as to attribute nothing over
arrogantly to our selves in that matter, that may any thing blemishe or deface
the majesty of Gods grace.

The obedience of Philip.
The obedience of Philip deserves singular praise, which neither replyeth upon
the Angel, nor curiously enquireth why he so commands him, but without al
delay, goes on to the place he was commanded, committing all the success of
the matter to God which commanded him. Let us think that the like obedience
is required of us, least while we call Gods commandments to the account of
our reason, we first become foolish tryslers and lyngerers, and then after
that, rash and heady transgressors. And as often as the Lord shall simply
command any thing, not rendering any reason why he so commands, so often
let us think he tries our obedience, and let us with his general promises be
encouraged to go about it, where he promises most prosperous success to those
that walk in his commandments. An example of this diligence is to be seen
in Abraham, who being commanded to go out of his country, thought good to
obey the calling of the Lord, Gene. 12*
though he were altogether ignorant what should follow thereof. Which thing as
it most prosperouslye succeeded with him: so we read that Saul was tangled in
horrible calamities, who had rather follow the devises of his own reason, than
the commandments of God. See Samuel, 1.13. and 15. Chapter.

But let us consider the Ethiopian, who is so diligently described. The
description of the Ethiopian Eunuch.
First he declares his state and condition, in that he says he was an Eunuch,
by which name it appears the Courtyers of the Kings and Queens of the East
were called, and specially those that were of their Chamber, although they were
not all gelded. Wherefore it makes for the exposition of this name, that he
calls him ((...), that is to say) a prince, A Prince.
and one that had the charge of all the Queens treasure, whom we may call the
Cofferer, or Lord Treasurer. Whereby it plainly appears, that he was none
of the inferior Courtyers, but one of the chief of the Court. This place
teaches us that Magistrates and officers ought not for their office sake which
they sustain, to be excluded from the Kingdom of Christ, as the seditious
Anabaptists cry. For Paul plainly testifyeth, that such are the Ministers
of God. And there are examples of many, which while they were in office, were
illuminated with the knowledge of Christ, Romans 13.
and for all that, were not commanded to give up their office. Of this number
was Joseph a Senator of Jerusalem, whom the Euaungelistes write was a Disciple
of Christ, and of godly affection buried Christ. Acts. 10.
So Peter bade not Cornelius to give up his Captaineship. And it was lawful
for Sergius Paulus after he was converted unto Christ to continue in the
Proconsulshippe of Cyprus. Therefore most vain are the clamours of the
Anabaptists, Acts. 13.
where they stiffely deny, that Christian men ought to bear any office.

Then he declares the manners and study of the Ethiopian, by two arguments.
For he says he went up to Jerusalem for to worship, His manners, and usage, or
study.
and as he iourneyed, was given to reading of the Scripture. Therefore although
he were an aliant and stranger, yet he had some understanding of that true
God, which before time would chiefly be known in Jury, Psalm. 76.
as the Prophet witnesses. Neither must we say, that he was deceived through
foolish superstition, and so included and tied religion to certain places.
For where he was studious of the Scriptures, he revoked externe worshipping to
the rule of Gods word, which is the only way of true religion, and
undoubtedly he respected the promise of God, who long before had promised in
that Church to hear the prayers as well of Strangers, 1. Reg. 8.
as of Jews. The reason of which promise was founded on Jesus Christ, a figure
of whom as well the Temple was, as the sacrifices made in the same. The example
of this Eunuch teaches us what the studies of Princes and great men ought to
be. Let them remember that they should principally and above all things have
a care of religion. Now, let them not appoint the same after their own brain,
(as we read sometime Jeroboam did, 1. Reg. 12.
for the establishment of his tyranny) but according to Gods word, which it
behooves them both to hear and read most diligently. For it was before
declared, that they be the Ministers of God. He has appointed them to be the
Nourices of his Church, as the prophet says. Esa. 49. Esaias. 49. Psalm. 82.
He himself is in the middle of their Sessions, and judgments. And to him
shall they hereafter give an account of their administration, which they never
can well do, unless they being enflamed with the desire and love of religion,
think that they ought above all things to follow the word of God. For this
cause the king in times past was commanded to have an abridgement of the law,
Deuteronomy. 17.
and to be continually exercised in reading of the same. And surely it
appears, that all those Princes which have deserved any praise before God,
were most studious of these things, such as were David, Solomon, Asa, Ezechias,
Josias, and after the Apostles time, Constantinus. Theodosius, Carolus, and
diverse others, of whose godliness, the foundations of Churches and Colleges,
now a days euerywhere bear witness. If the princes in these days were
occupied in the same studies, and as many as bear rule and authority,
Christian affairs should better prosper and go forward. But because blind
concupiscence, the mad desire of dycing, sumptuous banqueting, immoderate
hunting and hauking, contempt of Gods word and his sacraments, and insatiable
desire of warring and fighting, are comen in their place: nothing can be hoped
for at these Princes, that may serve either for the public weal, or
reformation of the Church, and glory of God.

Unto these things Luke joins what Philip and the Ethiopian did. For Philip
is commanded to join himself near unto the Chariot, Philip is appointed to
teach this Eunuch.
and now the holy spirit offreth an occasion of well doing, although Philip
till this time saw none. For as he drew near, he heard the Eunuch reading
alowde a notable place of Esaye the Prophet, concerning Christ, and straight
way being moved by the spirit, he demands whether he understand the
place. Here some men might think Philip of small civility, which being not
called, would approach so near to a man of authorities Chariot, and would
ask such a question of one whom he knew not, as manifestly vpbrayded him with
ignorance. But whereas he had betaken him self wholly unto God, he diligently
fulfilleth all that God commanded, not regarding the doltish reasons of the
flesh. And that which he does after the commandment of god prosperously
succeeds. For he finds notable tokens of great modesty and humanity, in
the noble man, though he were a stranger, who having just occasion
disdainefully to have rejected Philip, as is the guyse of great and rich men,
yet he modestly confesses his ignorance, and because he was moved by the
secret instinct of the spirit, to think well of Philip, bids him to come
up unto him, and takes him as an expositor of the Scripture which he read.
Uerily this noble man deserves singular praise, while he is neither puffed up
with the affiance of his own wit, neither refuses a strange interpreter,
neither disdayneth the Scriptures, the most part whereof he perceived to be
more difficult than he could easily understand. But God allows such hearers
of his word, Esaias. 66.
as being endued with humble minds, do reverently tremble at his word. In
the mean season we are taug^^ that the Scriptures ought to be opened by
Expositions and interpretation* And God vttreth those interpretations by men,
which being illumina^^ (...) his spirit, by comparing of Scriptures together,
and observing the pr^pertie and proportion of faith, 1. Cor. 12.14. Ephe. 4.
pick out the true meaning and sense of the (...). Which gift Paul numbreth
amongst the chief. Therefore they are (...) pieuish which look for
revelations from heaven, and like Doltes, wickedly despise the ministry of
the Church. Let us follow the godliness of this Eunuch, his modesty,
humility, and fervent desire of salvation. For so it shall come to pass, that
we also shall attain to true salvation in Jesus Christ: to whom be praise,
honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.lxj. Homely.
THE tenor of the Scripture which he read was this: He was led as a sheep
to be slain, and like a Lamb dumb before his shearer, so opened he not his
mouth. Because of his humbleness, he was not esteemed. But who shall declare
his generation? for his life is taken from the earth. The Chamberlane answered
Philip and said: I pray thee of whom speaks the Prophet this, of
himself, or of some other man? Philip opened his mouth, and began at the
same scripture, and preached unto him Jesus.
THe Evangelist Luke diligently descrybeth the history of the Ethiopian
converted unto Christ, as well for many other causes, as for that it conteyneth
an ensample of true conversion, whereby we are taught how God deals with us,
when he minds to receive us into the society of salvation. First, Luke
shows how God is the cause efficient of this conversion, who of his mere
favor sent Philip, through whose ministry, the Eunuch of Aethiopia should
be converted. The same God, as he chose us all before the foundations of the
world were laid, without any respect had to our good works: so by his grace
he ministers unto us, and gives us when we think nothing thereof, all
things belonging to our salvation. Next, Philip is an instrument of this
conversion, whose help God here uses, according to his custom. For where our
infirmity is not able to abide the majesty of God, he ordeyneth that we shall
be taught and led by the ministry of men, which is a special argument of
Gods goodness toward us, and therefore is euerywhere first accounted among
the benefits of God. The instrument that Philip uses, is the word of God,
not such an ineffable and ymaginary word, as certain Seraphicall and
fanaticall smatterers in Divinity suppose, but the very same word that is
contained in the Scriptures. For out of these must all sermons, and the whole
doctrine of salvation be taken, neither must we look for any new kind of
doctrine unheard of until this day. Amongst all these things, the mind of
the Eunuch so well disposed to receive the truth, and doctrine of salvation, is
notable. That he was studious of religion, the long journey that he took, both
full of traueyle and danger, does abundantly declare. His desire to learn,
his diligent reading of the Scripture, and that he would ^ake unto him a man
unknown, of whom he hoped for a more full (...), proves. All which things
it is manifest he had through the (...) of God, because these things use to
appear in no man, unless he (...) with some singular illumination of the
spirit. But let us see what (...) they do while they are together, which Luke
in this place describes, repeating word by word the place of Esaye, which
gave occasion to Philip, to reason with the Aethiop touching Christ and his
salvation.

This place is in the.liij. Chapter, neither is there any other place, that
more evidently comprehends the mysteries of Jesus Christ: The place of Esaias.
53.
so that Jerome not without a cause judges the Prophet Esaias, worthy to be
numbered rather among the Evangelists, In his Preface upon Esaias to Paula and
Eustachium In his first preface to his Commentaries upon Esaias

In his Epistle to Paulinus the priest upon all the books of the Bible.


than the Prophets. In the mean while Gods providence is to be considered,
which governs men's affairs, and suffers nothing by hazard to come to
pass: whereof we have an evident argument, because even at the very same
time, that Philip begins to talk with the Aethiope, Luke says he was
reading of that very place. An Ethnic or Infidel, would impute this thing
unto fortune or chance. But we acknowledge the providence of God, which does
not only give all things their success, but also rules all other things
appertayning to the same. For how should he neglect men's matters, be they never
so small, which numbreth the hears of our heads, feeds the birds of the
air, and singulerly decketh the flowers of the field? Furthermore, touching
the place of Esaye, it comprehends in it the whole sum of our redemption.
For it declares the mystery of Christ's death, and the victory whereby he is
entered in^o the glory of his father, and has gotten an immortal and
everlasting kingdom. It shall be good to consider every thing in the order as
it is declared.

Christ died of his own will.
First, he sets forth the death of Christ in these words. He was led as a
sheep to be slain, and like a lamb dumb before his shearer, so he opened
not his mouth. By these words he does not only set forth the patience of
Christ, which as at many other times, so in his passion and death appeared most
perfect: but also he teaches that he took his death of his own accord and
willingly, so that the counsel or force of his enemies wrought not the same.
In deed the Scribes and Phariseys took counsel against him, Judas sought
all means busily to betraye him. The high Priests in their counsel
pronounced him guilty of death. Pilate caused him after he was whipped, to be
nailed on the Cross. But what could all these have done, if he would have
uttered or showed the strength of his divine power and majesty? Yea, who
pulled him down, from his fathers bosom to the earth? By whose counsel,
took he flesh and manhood, in the Uirgines womb? Who gave them strength to
rise again, which were sent out against him, and fell to the ground at one
word spoken of him? These things therefore teach us, that he dyed, because
it was his pleasure to die, Math. 20.
forasmuch as he came into the world for none other cause, but for that he
would give his life for the life of the world. Therefore where he was able
most valiantly to have resisted the enterprises of his enemies, he would yet be
led to his death like a sheep and a lamb, so that he would not seem, no not
in word, to utter any token of an impatient mind, and unwilling to die.
Hereunto appertains that that is said in the Gospel. Therefore does my
father love me, John. 10.
because I put my life from me, that I might take it again. No man takes it
fro me, but I put it away of my self. I have power to put it from me, and I
have power to take it again. And Paul expounding these sayings, says: He
became obedient to his father, even to the death of the Cross, Phil. 2.
and took upon him the shape of a man, being in the shape of God. Now these
things serve partly for our redemption and salvation, and partlye for our
instruction. For thus it behooued that our sin of disobedience, should be
done away, which made us subject to eternal damnation. Moreover, Christ taught
us by his example, patience and obedience in bearing the Cross, as he
admonishes us often times in the Gospel. 1. Pet. 2.
And Peter writes thus to the same purpose: Christ suffered for us, leaving us
an example, that we should follow his steps, which did no sin, Christ by
death got the victory.
neither was there any guyle found in his mouth, which when he was reuyled,
reuyled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not.

Howbeit, the Prophet joins unto the death of Christ, the victory which he
gate by his death, saying: Because of his humbleness, he was not esteemed. By
the name of humbleness is understood the state of the cross and of death,
whereby it appears that he was outwardly humbled or brought down. This is
therefore the meaning of his words: where he seemed altogyther oppressed and
destitute of help, God of his just judgment revenged his cause, and declared
he was the Conqueror of death and of Satan, although he seemed conquered. This
agrees with the first promise, where it is said, the Serpent should sting
Christ in the heel, Genes. 1.
but that Christ should tread upon his head. The same did David prophecy
should come to pass, where he says: Psalm. 110.
He shall drink of the brook in the way, therefore shall he lift up his head.
For where by the merit of his death he purged our sin, and took it away: 1.
Cor. 15. Colos. 3.
he also spoiled and disarmed death which by reason of sin, had power upon
us. Shortly after, being risen from death, he openly declared, John. 12.13.
and.17.
that death and the Devil had no power upon him: wherefore he most gloriously
tryumphed over all his enemies. And this is that glory which he desires his
father so often to give him. The consideration hereof is very necessary. For
it serves for the confirmation of our faith, that we be not offended neither
at Christ's cross, nor our own. For as Christ by the Cross entered into the
glory of his father, Romans 14.
and dyed, and was raised again from death for our sake, to declare he was a
Lord and savior, as well of the quick as of the dead: so we by death overcome,
and whether we live or dye we be the Lords. And as God revenged Christ's cause,
although he seemed altogyther oppressed: Psalm. 34.
so he uses to defend and preserve the memory of them that be his, that
their godliness, who now are punished by shameful deaths as wicked men, and
malefactors, may be known to them that come after them. Whereunto are to be
referred the examples as well of the Prophets, as the Apostles.

Moreover, after victory follows a kingdom, to the which he attrybuteth an
euerlastingnesse and unspeakable power, saying: Christ's kingdom is eternal
and invincible.
But who shall declare his generation? This word generation, according to the
usage of the Hebrews, is taken as well for the age of a man, as for his
posterity. Both these declare the contynuall enduring of his kingdom. For the
Angel testifyeth that his kingdom is everlasting, where he says unto Mary:
Luke. 1.
Of his kingdom shall be none end. Likewise Christ's posterity is
everlasting. For they which by him are made the children of God, shall never
fail. And as there shall be always upon the earth, such as he shall
acknowledge, for the sons of God, and coheyres with him: so they being taken
out of this world, shall live and reign for ever with him. For this is the
effect and sum of his last will, which before his death, he would have his
father to ratify. Father, I will that they which thou have given me, be with
me where I am, that they may see my glory, which thou have given me. John.
17.14.
Touching them both, the holy ghost teaches us by the Prophet, saying: The
seed of David shall endure for ever, and his seat is like as the Sun before
me. Psalm. 89.
He shall stand fast for evermore as the Moon, and as the faithful witness
in heaven. And this is that thing wherein Christ's kingdom differs from all
the kingdoms of the world. For they all shall perish, neither remains any
of those ancient and rich Monarchies, and they which remain and flourishe
this day, do evidently portend their ruin and decay. Hereof may two things be
gathered, the knowledge whereof is very profitable. First the perpetuity or
everlasting continuance of Christ's church, which being assaulted from the
beginning of the world, endures yet until this present day, Math. 28.
and shall endure even until the end of the world, as he has promised. By
which argument we may comfort our selves, against all the assaults of Tyrannes.
Next, the certainty of eternal life depends hereon, without the which it is
most vain that is written of faith and religion, 1. Cor. 15.
as Paul disputing of the resurrection from death has taught. For if Christ's
posterity be ineffable, and therefore eternal, then must there be an other
life after this, to say an heavenly and an eternal. And so it remains both
firm and stable that Paul says, that neither life, nor death, can separate
us from the love of God. Romans 8.


Death is the entry into Christ's kingdom.
But because the things be of most importance, and weight, which he speaks of
Christ's victory and Kingdom, he repeateth the cause of them again, which
is: For his life is taken from the earth. What can be more absurd, if we
consider the judgment of the flesh? He said Christ should be a conqueror,
and reign for ever. And he alleges the cause of his victory and kingdom to
be, for that his life should be made away upon the earth. But we have
declared before, that this thing agrees with the first promise. And Paul is a
most faithful Interpretour of this place, where he says, Jesus Christ, when
he was in the shape of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God.
Nevertheless he made himself of no reputation, taking on him the shape of a
servant, and becamelyke unto men, and was found in his apparel as a man, he
humbled himself, and became obedient unto the death, even the death of the
Cross. Wherefore God has also exalted him* and given him a name, which is
above all names, that in the name of Jesus, every knee should bow, Phil. 2.
both of things in heaven, and things in earth, and that all tongues should
confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, unto the praise of God the father.
These things serve for our consolation, that we be not offended at death. For
as it behooued Christ should be taken from the earth, to obtain the victory,
and a kingdom in heaven: so is it impossible, that we shall live and reign in
heaven, unless we also change this present life for the eternal. 1. Cor. 15.
For as Paul says: This corruptible body, must put on incorruptiblenesse,
and this mortal^ must put on immortality, And to be short, such is the reason
of our society with (...) that we can enter into life none other way, than by
death, whereby he entered. Whereupon the Apostle says: If we dye with him, 2.
Tim. 2.
we shall live with him* If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him.
For God will have us like to his son, that they that suffer with him, Romans 8.
may also be glorified with him. And thus much touching the exposition of the
place of the Prophet which the Eunuch had in his hands.

Let us now see how upon this occasion, the Aethiope attained unto the
knowledge of Christ. The zeal of the Eunuch being yet ignorante in many things.
For where a little before, he confessed his ignorance, now he enquireth of
the true ^ense of the place. I pray thee (says he) of whom speaks the
Prophet these things? This is an Argument of a great zeal, that he that was
to be honored as a great man of dignity, becomes as it were a suter and a
suppliaunt to a man of no estimation, and hitherto unknown, to the end he
would learn the true meaning of that scripture. In the mean season it is not
to be negligently passed over, that the Eunuch inflamed with such desire of
religion, was as yet ignorant of those things, which comprehend all the manner
of our salvation. God oftentimes permits this, not for that he is either
unmindful of his promises, or enuyeth us the knowledge of his word: but for
that by this delaying, he will kindle in us a more fervent desire, exercise our
faith, and teach us, that the misteryes of his wisdom, be more high than can
be atteyned to, by man's diligence and capacity. Therefore let this delaying
offend no man: but let us rather go on in fervent desire of the truth, and
search out the healthful mysteryes of the divine wisdom, and Christ will not
fail of his promise, which offers himself to be found of them that seek
him. Math. 7.


Also Philips easy entreatance is to be marked, Philips facility and easy
intrea^ance.
who by and by opens his mouth, that is to say, begins a diligent
discourse of the place of the Prophet, wherein he begins to preach Jesus
Christ unto the Aethiop. And it is very like he also diligently expounded all
the other things which are contained in the same Chapter touching Christ, and
declared that they ought to be understood of Jesus Christ, the son of God
and of Marie* Here are two things to be observed. First, what ought to be
preached: Jesus Christ, and he only. Not for that his name should be
oftentimes foolishly repeated and iterated, but whatsoever things belong to our
salvation, must be declared to be in him alone. For the father has given him
only, Acts. 5.
by whom true repentance and remission of sins comes unto us, as Peter
before has taught us. And in him only is life and salvation to be found.
Acts. 4.
Wherefore they are both foolish and false teachers, whosoever teach these
things without Christ, or show them to be in any other beside him. The other
thing that we be taught, is how the doctrine and preaching of Christ may be
taken and learned out of the books of the Prophets. Yea, among all other
things extant beside them, there, whereby it can be proved. Christ himself
confesses the same, Luke. 24.
where he says those things be contained in Moses and the Prophets which he
did and suffered for our salvation. Himself in the school at Nazareth, being
about to teach the knowledge of true salvation, and of himself, takes the
place of Esaye, Luke. 4.
read in the.lxj. chapter to expound. Therefore wicked and execrable is the
ingratitude of them which disdainfully contemn the books of the old
Testament. Let us rather acknowledge the grace of God, which would underset
and bear up the knowledge of his son with so many and so evident
testimonies, let us seek the same with fervent desire, that after thexample
of the Eunuch, being therewith endued, we may reygne with Christ: to whom be
praise, honor, power and glory for ever. Amen.

The.lxij. Homely.
AND as they went on their way, they came unto a certain water, and the
Cha^berlain said, see, here is water, what does let me to be baptized? Philip
said unto him. If thou believe with all thine heart, thou may. And he
answered and said: I believe that Jesus Christ is the son of God. And he
commanded the Chariot to stand still. And they went down both into the
water, both Philip and also the Chamberlain, and he baptized him. And as soon
as they were come out of the water, the spirit of the Lord caught away
Philip, and the Chamberlain saw him no more. And he went on his way
rejoicing. But Philip was found at Azotus. And he walked through the Country
preaching in all the Cities till he came to Caesarea.
YEsterday your charity heard the Sermon of Philip, wherewith he converted the
Eunuch. This he took out of the writings of Esaias. The argument thereof was
Jesus Christ, whose mysteries no doubt he diligently expounded, declaring that
he was the savior of the world, that was promised, in whom God the father
(as Peter before this taught us) gives us both repentance and remission of
our sins. Now follows the effect of this Sermon, which herein appears
that the Eunuch being endued with the knowledge of Christ desires to be
baptized in his name, and to be received into the outward society of the
Church by a visible sign and sacrament, which he would never have done,
unless the spirit of God had marvelously wrought in his mind, which he
promised unto his elect. Now let us see the Eunuchs baptism, the description
whereof Luke diligently sets forth, because every circumstaunce thereof
serves as well for our consolation, as our instruction.

The Eunuch desires to be baptized.
First comes the Eunuch, who after he had heard Philip a good while
entreating of Christ's mysteries, and perceived that his mind was drawn and
illuminated with the power of the spirit, as soon as he saw water, desired to
be baptized: for this is the saying of an ardent desire: Behold, here is
water, what does let, but I may be baptized? Whereof may be gathered, that
Philip among other things had entreated of baptism also, according to the
institution of Christ, whereby he will have those that believe in him, to be
consecrated unto him, and taken into the body of his Church: whereby also he
seals unto us his benefits, Romans 4.
as sometime he used to do in Circumcision, as Paul has taught us. Therefore
where the Eunuch had received Christ with all his heart, he could refrain no
longer, but would testify his belief also, and be numbered in the Church of
Christ, by this solemn ceremony, he would be numbered and taken for one of
Christ's Church. And here we have to consider the property of faith, wherein
two things are to be noted. First, that faith cannot long lie hid, but after
that it has conceived Christ in the mind, and has instructed the whole manne
with the knowledge of Christ, it will show also forth it self, and by
outward profession of name, be separated from others, desiring to be graffed
in Christ, and to be consecrated to him. For it knows that God is a jealous
God, which will not suffer any other religion among his people. It knows
that Jesus Christ chose him a peculiar people out of all the world, whom he
will have to give themself only to him. Therefore it frames it self to his
lore, and desires nothing so much, as to be seen of all men, whereas it
knows it has to rejoice in none but Christ alone. These things reprove the
sluggysh minds of the men of our days, which are ashamed of Christ, and say,
that faith may be dissembled, if there be like to ensue any danger by the
confession thereof. Howbeit there were many things which might have feared
the Aethiop from being baptized, for as much as he knew that both Queen
Candace, and all the people of her Country, were far from the knowledge of
Christ, which thing threatened him manifest peril, both of his estate and
goods. But his mind incensed with the lively faith of Christ, overcomes and
bursteth through all impediments, in whose heart undoubtedly was written by the
suggestion of the holy ghost, that saying of Christ: Marc. 8.
whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words, in this aduouterous and
sinful generation, of him also shall the son of man be ashamed, when he
shall come in the glory of his father with the holy Angels. Moreover, this
also is one other property of faith, that although the Eunuch thinks he has
obtained in Christ all the treasures of Gods grace, and the infallibe
certainty of salvation, yet for all that, he judges not the use of baptism
to be unprofitable or superfluous. For faith knows, that Christ has ordained
nothing unprofitably or in vain, because it knows that he is the eternal
wisdom of God the father, in whom are hidden all the treasures of knowledge.
It knows also that the corruption of our flesh has need of many things,
Col. 1.2.
and that it scarsely can be compelled with many prouocations, to take the way
of salvation. Whereby it appears that they are void as well of the knowledge
of Christ, as of themself, that use to despise and reject the sacraments. For
although by faith in Christ, we attain to whatsoever things are necessary to
our salvation, yet because of the inclination of our flesh, it is profitable
that Gods benefits should be confirmed with outward seals, and that by them
we should be admonished of our duty, whereof oftentimes we are forgetful.

But Luke brings forth the other person of this act, that is to say, Philip
requires the confession of his faith.
Philip, which by and by obeyed not the Eunuch, least he should seem to have
yielded unto him, because of his dignity or humanity, but he requires of him
first the confession of a true faith, saying: If thou beleeuest with all thine
heart, thou may. He has therefore a respect to his faith, and will have it
void of all guyle and dissimulation. By which example we are taught that the
sacraments ought not to be profaned, that is to say, to be given to the
faythlesse. For where they be the badges and cognizaunces of the Church of
Christ, it becomes not them to wear them that are strangers fro the church,
because such for the more part are dogs and hogs, before whom, Christ
forbids us to whoorle pearls. Math. 7.
And if we consider the commandment of Christ, it shall appear, that the
Apostles first ought to teach, and then they that believed their doctrine,
should be baptized. For he says: Teach ye all Nations, baptising them in the
name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost. etc. Math. 28.
Yet let no man think we support or maintain the madness of the
Anabaptists. For they err and keep a pernicious coil, while they draw that
to the infants of Christians, and rashly keep them from baptism, which is
only to be observed in strangers from religion, and those that are of a full
age. For we affirm that such as ^e strangers from the church of christ, (as
were sometime the Jews and Gentyles, and as are at this day, the Jews and
Turks, and other such like) ought not to be baptized, unless we will to
grossly pollute baptism, until they have made profession of their faith. But
the reason of infantes borne of Christians, is of a far other sort and case.
For these are accounted among the children or household of the church, by reason
of the law of covenant. They be holy, and Christ commands them to be
brought unto him. It is also manifest, that they please God, because their
Angels always see the face of the father. And although our capacity cannot
conceive their state and condition: yet Christ testifyeth they have faith. And
that they have the holy ghost, both the examples of John the Baptist, and
others do teach us. Wherefore, to deny baptism unto them, is no small
impiety, and a point of boldness more than monstrous. Howbeit, because we
have entreated hereof in other places, let this little suffice for this present.

Further, let us see the confession that the Eunuch made, which in marvelous
brevity, iij. The confession of the Eunuch.
comprehends things of most importance: I believe (says he) that Jesus
Christ is the son of God. This confession is much like to that that Peter
made in the name of all the Apostles. Math. 6. John. 6.
He attributes unto Christ, whatsoever is spoken of him in holy scripture.
Yea, if the matter be narrowly marked, it comprehends all the articles of our
faith or Creed Apostolical. For he acknowledges him to be God, no doubt,
that God, which the Scriptures say was Creator of heaven and earth. He
confesses no such God, as the Jews and Turks do, but such an one, as has a
son, borne of himself, coeternall and consubstantiall with him. He believes
that this son was incarnated, as may be gathered of the things which he red
in Esaias. Further, he believes, that the son of God is Christ, that is to
say, anointed, wherein he understands his kingdom and Priesthood. Unto the
Priesthood belongs all the passion of Christ, where he offered the sacrifice
of his body and blood for the sins of the whole world. In the name of
Kingdom, is contained his glorious resurrection; whereby he overcame death:
also his ascension, whereby as by a most gorgeous triumph, he entered into
heaven, and is sitting on the right hand of the father, which declares him to
be a most mighty king, to whom all power is given in heaven and in earth, and
which shall come again to give judgment and sentence upon all flesh. But he
that confesses Christ to be a King, must needs also confess that he has a
Church, wherein he reigns and governs. This Church is the Communion or
fellowship of all Saints, to whom Christ has committed his inestimable
treasures, to say* the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the flesh,
and fellowship of eternal life. These mysteries, I say, this short confession
of the Eunuch comprehends. Whereby we are taught what an one, we also should
acknowledge and confess Christ to be. It is well to be considered how
confession of mouth is joined with faith of mind. For we have before this
declared* how these two must of necessity be coupled together, and Paul
expressly teaches the same, where he says: This is the word of faith, which
we preach. For if thou acknowledge with thy mouth* that Jesus is the Lords,
and believe in thine heart, Romans 10.
that God raised him up from death* thou shall be ^a^e. For to believe with the
heart i^stifieth, and to acknowledge with the mouth, makes (...).

Now when Philip had gotten of the Eunuch that he chiefly desired, The Eunuch
is baptized.
by and by without any ^ariaunce, he went down with him into the water, and
there baptiseth him. Where we have to consider, how baptism is ministered in
common water, whether it were river, or fountain, as Jerome thinks I know
not. Neither is there any mention made of new hallowing it, or of salt
sprinkled, or of oil, or of exorcisme, and many such like, as the
superstition of Popes, in the ages following brought in. For Philip knew the
example of John, which had baptized in the river of Iordane. He knew also,
that by the ordinance of Christ, all water was consecrated to the use of
baptism, and had no need of new purging, and coniuring. Away therefore with
the wicked and peevish inventions of most bold merchaunts, which would have
religion to serve for private honor and gain. Yet I would none by these
examples should take occasion every where to baptize in fountaynes, or ryuers.
For as we confess it may be godlily done, if necessity so require: so where
Churches be appointed, all things ought to be done decentlye, and according to
lawful order, 1. Cor. 14.
least liberty bursting out into unbridled license, disturb both discipline
and unity of Churches.

It remains to tell of the end of all this history, The sodeyne departure
of Philip.
which comprehends the departure of Philip, from the Eunuche, which Luke
shows was after a myraculous sort. For when they came out of the water, the
spirit of the Lord caught Philip, and the Eunuch saw him no more. God would
by this miracle confirm the faith of the Eunuch. For after this sort he might
understand, that nothing was done in all this business by chance, but all
things through the providence of God. Let us see what they both did, after they
were separated.

Luke says, the Eunuch held on his way, rejoicing. The Eunuch complayneth not
of Philips absence.
Then he complained not of Philips so sudden departure, neither carefully
enquired after him, and much less detested him, as though he had been some
crafty Apostle, or Iugler. Hereof must be gathered no argument of any
inconstant, or unkind mind. But whereas he was now endued with faith, and
taught by the holy ghost, who according to Christ's promise, brought all things
to his mind, and by his testimony confirmed the doctrine of faith which
Philip had taught him. Therefore he could easily settle and quiet his mind.
By which example we learn that we must not so stick to the ministers, that
when they are gone, we must despair in matters of faith and religion. Let us
acknowledge them as Gods coadiutours, and stewardes of the mysteries of God, by
whom he gives us faith. Again, 1. Cor. 3.4.
let us understand, that the spirit of Christ, truly supplyeth the duty of
a Teacher, and that Christ will not fail us, although he sometime take them
away, to whom we know we are much bounden. John. 3.
For Gods spirit can be bound neither to persons nor places, but blows where
him lyketh.

Moreover, the fruit of faith which the Eunuch received, is declared, The
fruit of faith is the joy of the conscience.
where Luke says: He held on his way greatly rejoicing. So before he wrote
that great joy was made in Samaria, when Philip had preached the Gospel
there. The joy of a faithful mind must hereby be understood, which uses to
spring of the peace and quiet of conscience. For after Christ is received by
faith, then man understands that God the father is reconciled unto him, whose
wrath and horrible judgment he was before afraid of. And as that peace of God
(as Paul bears witness) passes all understanding: so it chaseth from the
mind all the (...) of (...), it ^l^ereth the whole mind, and makes us to be
without all ^ea^e, in the (...) of all afflictions. For this is the saying of
all those that are faithful* If God be with us, who can be against us? Who
shall lay any thing to the (...) of Gods chosen* Romans 8.
It is God that justifies us, who is it that can condemn? For they know that
the gates of hell, are not able to prevail against that liuelye rock, on
whom they are builded. Therefore because the Eunuch had obtained this surety
of a quiet mind, he returns home with greater joy than if he had gotten the
great treasure of kings, or if he had returned to Candace, with the triumph and
victory of the greatest enemies of Aethiopia. For what riches deserve to be
compared with the treasures of the kingdom of heaven? Or what victory is
there so great, as that which the faithful have gotten by Jesus Christ against
the devil, and hell? If princes in these days were as desirous of this
victory, as they are of the Kingdoms and vain glory of this world: then
would they also more rejoice, and the world also should be in better case.

The painful industry of Philip.
But let us return to Philip, which was found at Azotus, and from thence
passing a long by the sea coast, preached the Gospel to all the Cities in
these quarters, unto Caesarea, where it seems he took house to dwell in,
because Paul hosted there, as we may see in the.xxj. Chapter. You shall mark
diligently the fervent and great desire that the men of the primitive Church
had, to set forth the kingdom of Christ. For although Philip had traueyled
greatly, in converting Samaria, and now might greatly have gloried in
converting the great man of Aethiopia, yet he thinks not he had done his
duty, but enioyneth himself fresh labors, and refuses not to undertake
new dangers for Christ's sake. We see the like desire in Paul, who having
labored more than all the Apostles, 1. Cor. 15. 2. Cor. 11. Romans 15.
yet holds on his course with great feruencie. These things reprove the
sloth of our days, where all sorts and states of men, as soon as they have
borne a little brunt, make holyday for any more they will do: as though it
were at our disposition and liberty, to start from the calling of God, and the
duty committed to us. Furthermore these things teach us, how vain the
enterprises of the wicked are against the doctrine of Christ. For the more they
rage, the more the truth shines and overcomes. Yea, in the time of
persecution, by their means and diligence it is most opened and set forth, who
before seemed dastardes and cowardes. Hereof have we an example in Philip, of
whom there was no mention made almost, while the Church was in quiet at
Jerusalem, but that we heard he was numbered among the Deacons. But now being
become an outlaw, and banished man, he wins Samaria unto Christ, he sends
the Eunuch whom he converted, into Aethiopia, to be an Apostle, and spreads
the Gospel over all Jury. Thus uses God to frustrate the attempts of his
enemies. Therefore no man ought to be offended at the manaces of Tyrannes,
which now a days threaten destruction, to the Gospel and to our Churches. But
let us rather trust in God, who is both able to save his elect in this world,
and to make them coheyres with Christ, in the world to come: to whom be
praise, honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The ninth chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The.lxiij. Homely.
AND Saul yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of
the Lord, went unto the high Priest, and desired of him letters to carye to
Damascus to the Sinagoges: that if he found any of this way (whether they
were men or women) he might bring them bound to Jerusalem. And when he
iourneyed, it came to pass, that as he was nygh to Damascus, sodeinly there
shyned round about him a light from heaven, and he fell to the earth, and
heard a voice saying to him: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And he
said what art thou Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou
persecutest. It is hard for thee to kick against the prick.
THat saying of Christ is very notable: John. 6.
No man comes unto me except my father draw him. And it is not unlike unto
that other, where he says to his Disciples: John. 15.
You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. For both o^ them teach us that
salvation, and whatsoever belongs thereto, comes to us through the mere
grace of God, and that nothing is to be ascrybed to our works or merits.
Hereof there are many examples, among which this one is notable, which of late
we saw in the Aethiop, unto whom Philip a Preacher of true salvation, by the
mere benefit of God was sent, when he thought not of it, much less seeking
after it. Yet because it is reported that he was endued with certain singular
gifts, least any man might think that he attained to salvation, through the
merit of them, the history of Saul converted unto Christ, is of purpose
set after his conversion, whom Jesus Christ does not only provoke and draw
against his will unto salvation, but (as it is said in the Parable of certain
guestes, Luke. 14.) compels him to come in. And surely Luke so reports all
this history, yt every man may see, nothing is here attributed to the merit of
man, but that salvation comes unto Saul by the benefit of Gods only grace.
Yea, Paul himself plainly teaches, that this ensample is to be referred
chiefly to this end, where he says that he was therefore called and cut
of, even in the middle of his tyrannical enterprises against the Church, that
Jesus Christ might show on him first all clemency and mercy, for an ensample
unto them that should believe in him. (...). 1.
And in another place he confesses he is unworthy the name of an Apostle, if
we respect his merit or desert, (...). 15.
but that he is by the grace of God whatsoever he is. Howbeit, whereas there
be in this history, many things most worthy to be known and considered, it
shall be profitable for us to examine all the points and circumstances
thereof. And at this present Luke first propounds the description of Saul,
and then he begins the history of his conversion.

The description of Saul being a persecutor.
Luke is very diligent in describing of Saul, because by his description, both
Gods power and goodness is the more evidently known. First he declares his
disposition and nature, where he says: he breaths out threatenings and
slaughter. His mind therefore was inflamed and incensed against the Church, a
sign and note whereof he had given before at the stoning of Steven, and when
he did make havoc of the Church at Jerusalem, as has been declared
heretofore. Yet now seeing he preuayleth nothing, but that the Church
spreads every day further and further, he conceyueth such a fury and rage in
his mind, that he can do nothing now, but breath out and dream of cruel
threats, bloody slaughters, and destructions. For as we said before, such is
the nature of tyrauntes, and the enemies of the Church, that after they have
once tasted the blood of the godly, the more they rage, and like beasts have
cast from them all sense of humanity, and are not able to put away that rage
of mind that they have conceived, unless they be tamed by the mighty hand
of God. Examples of this cruelty is euerywhere so be seen in hystories. The
consideration of them serves us for this purpose, to make us understand what
to hope for of the tyraunts of these days, whom we see now so used unto
blood, that they thirst after it more cruelly than any Tygres. Whom surely
unless the Lord tame, no man's force or reason can mollify or appease.

Saul has power given him from the high priests.
But because rage of mind must be fenced with armor, Saul prouydeth him of
that also. For it is said, he went unto the high Priest, of whom he received
letters to the Sinagoges of Damascus, whereby full power was given him to bind
as many as he could find to be Christians. Whereby we gather that matters of
religion the same time were committed by the Roman Presidentes to the high
Priests. For they being blinded in Gentyle superstition, as it is credible,
that they were soon wearied with the daily controversies about religion: so
they sought all means whereby to rid themselves of such incombrances, and to
lay the envy and hatred of the people upon others necks. This occasion fell
out as the Bishops would wyshe it, whose aduaun^age and honor came in peril,
by preaching of the Gospel. Saul therefore guarded by their authority, and
taking to him accomplices, and ministers of his mischief, goes to Damascus, for
that he understood the kingdom of Christ began to spring and flourishe
marvelously in that place. This thing teaches us that Bishops will always
be the grieuousest enemies of true religion, and Christian doctrine, who by
their study and diligence, ought most to set it forward: For as soon as they
begin, to convert religion into lucre, they can then abide the light of the
truth no longer, which reprooueth their naughtynesse. That these Bishops were
such, is more evident by the history of the Gospel, than needs any long
demonstration. What we may therefore hope for of the Prelates of our days, he
shall easily perceive that well marketh their covetousness and ambicion. In
the mean season we have to consider the profane cowardlynesse and sloth of
Princes and Magistrates, who because they pass little of religion, will get
them no envy or hatred for religion sake. And yet least they should seem
Godless and void of religion, they commit such matters, to Popes, Bishops,
and Cardinals, getting themselves by this pretense, a great estimation of
godliness, and seeking an excuse against them that might say they were
persecutors of the truth. For they say such controversies belong not unto them,
and persuade themselves, that they cannot do more godly, than to commit all
such matters unto the heads of the Church. In which judgment they are
marvelously confirmed, by the counterfayte Bishops. For by this means, they
challenge to themselves all power to judge of religion, whose ambition and
covetousness would fall to the ground, if the doctrine of truth were not
extinguished. But God which will not let this train and craft go unrevenged,
shall full sore punish them, and the Bishops of the Jews together. And this
pretense shall not excuse Princes, forasmuch as the charge of the Church, and
hearing of matters in religion pertayneth unto them. Deuteronomy. 17.
For to this end and purpose was the book of the law delivered to the king.
And the Prophet teaches us that Kings ought to be Nurses of the Church.
Esaias. 49.
And we want not most notable examples of Kings, which because of their
setting forth of the truth, and maintayning of the Church, have purchased to
themselves singular commendation.

But let us also consider what Saules end and purpose was. Saules end and
purpose.
It was this, that whosoever he should find men or women, (...) Christ's
profession, he should bring them bound to Jerusalem* There was therefore no
difference of sex with him. And surely he that was becomme so cruel, spared
no age neither. For he was now purposed to make all the Christians away, and
so utterly to extinguishe the name of Christ. The cause of this cruel attempt,
he declares otherwheres to be the zeal of his old religion, which he thought
by all means was to be retained and defended. For it is manifest, he was a
Pharisey, and himself confesses many times, Acts. 26. Philp. 3. Galat. 1.
that he persecuted the name of Christ and his Church, even for the love that
he bare to the law. Let us here first observe, how much God suffers the
wicked to do. For Luke shows that these things were attempted against the
Disciples, and Christian women. But so the Lord had foreshewed, that it
should be judged a Gods service, John. 16.
to kill any that believed in him. And the Apostles wa^ne us (...) many times,
to the intent that we be not offended at the storms of persecution, and at the
Cross. For why should we in these days wish ourselves a better state or
condition, than was in the time of Christ, his Apostles and the primitive
Church? Moreover, Saules example teaches us how litt^e a preposterous zeal
in religion, which men sometimes conceive of human traditions, without the
prescript of Gods word, avails to attaynement of salvation. For the more
fervent Saul is herein, the farther he recedeth from Christ, which is the only
way of salvation. The more he strives for the righteousness of the law, the
farther he is from the righteousness of Christ, which alone defends us from
the judgment of God. And that that comes to pass in Saul, the same he
testifies came to pass in the Jews. For he says they burn in zeal toward
God, but not according to knowledge. Where they fell into this inconvenience,
that while they would establishe their own righteousness, ^om. 10.
they lost the righteousness that is in God. The same may be affirmed of the
Monks, but that the most part of them are more given to their belly and to
idleness, than to religion. Yet may this most truly be said of Tyrants, that
the more constantly they labor to keep the religion of their forefathers, the
more fervently they persecute the Gospel. Here is that hurtful error of
theirs confuted, which think those things that are done against God and his
true religion, may be excused by zeal of godliness. As though God had given
us the rules of his word in vain, and that they ought not chiefly to be
observed, as we have elsewhere declared. Furthermore, here is to be considered
both the goodness and power of god, who could not only make so cruel a
Woolfe sodeinly tame, but also a most faithful Shepehearde of his flock. Let
no man therefore rashly despair of any man's salvation, or of the Church,
seeing God can both suddenly change the minds of men, and make them defenders
of his Church, who even now it seemed would have destroyed the same.

The history of Saules conversion. The time, and the place.
Let us come to the history of Saules conversion, which Luke sets forth in
lively colors. And beginning with the time and place: And when he iourneyed
(says he) it came to pass, as he was nygh to Damascus. Therefore when Saul
was in most hope of good success, and bringing his matters to pass, then ^oth
Christ withstand his attemptes. Now he beholds Damascus before his face,
and perhaps as a woolfe having espied his pray, casts in his mind terrible
cogitations, how he might soonest rauishe. Christ's sheep. Mark h^^e the
counsel and usage of God, which many times suffers his enemies to raunge so
far, that they seem scarce a nail breadth from the mark of their purpose.
Which thing is the cause that the Christians, whose destruction the tyrants
conspyre, sometime conceive great and horrible terrors of mind. And such
terrors it is like they of Damascus were in, when they heard that Saul came,
and was almost in their necks. But thus uses God to do, both for that he will
the more gloriously show his power against the wicked, and teach the godly not
to be afraid nor fear, when they see themselves beset round about with
their enemies. So he suffered Pharao to go so far, that the Israelites
began to deuyse, not how to escape, but how to be buried. But when with
open mouth like a Woolfe, he would have swallowed up Israel, God sodeinly
destroyed him. Many things of like sort might be rehearsed, if time would
serve. But this ought to be the use of them all, that we prescribe God no time,
who will let no opportunity by any means escape, whereby to bring his doings
to effect. But let us observe that saying of the Prophet: Tarry thou the Lords
leisure, Psalm. 27.
be strong, and he shall comfort thi^e heart.

Furthermore, the evangelist declares the manner of his conversion, saying: The
manner of his conversion.
Suddenly there shone a light round about him from heaven, and he fell to the
ground, and heard a voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me? This is a terrible sight to man's senses, yet such as sufficiently
teaches us, that these things were easily done of the Lord. For he sends a
light from heaven, as it had been a lightning, which was as easy a thing for
him to do, as to send out and call back the son again. He would have
this light suddenly to appear, to the end the cruel Woolfe, might be the
more feared, which in his greedy famine, had after a sort, already devoured
the church of Christ. Unto these flashings of light, was added a voice, in
steed of a thunder, and sodeinly smites him to the ground, when he least
feared any such thing. These things teach us how easy a matter it is for God
to beat down the enterpryses of his enimyes. For where he is the Lord of
hosts, he can arm all things against them, and there is none so dispysed a
creature, but is able to punish those, whom God will have punished. So he once
sent water suddenly, and destroyed all the world. Upon Sodom he rayned fire
and brimstone from heaven. The haughty and stowte stomaked Egyptians, he
brought down, one while by darkness, one other while by swarms of flies,
sometime by the hopping of filthy frogs, sometime by twinging and biting of
Lice. Antiochus and Herod he killed with worms and vermin that bred of their
own flesh. He killed Saul the Tyranne with his own sword. I let pass an
infinite number of like sort, because this fall of Saul, may serve in stead of
many examples. It shall profit us well to behold him. What do the letters
procured from the high Bishop profit him being now sodeinly fallen? What
avails the power granted by his authority, against the Christians? Can he
be held up by the ministry of that guard of his, that he brought with him?
No, with what engines and weapons lies he overthrown that even now seemed an
other Enceladus? Then was no clap of thunder as yet heard, no rattling of
clouds among themselves, no renting or reauing with fall of thunderbolte.
Only a light from heaven flashing in his face, and the voice of Christ
sounding in his ears, so stryketh him both in body and soul, that he lies
wide open and yields to Christ his Conqueror, whom a little before he meant
to put clean away out of all men's remembrance. As these things serve for our
consolation, against the wicked enemies of Christ: so they must be applied to
our instruction. For they teach us how vnprosperously the pride of them
succeeds, which seeing every day the examples of Gods power and Majesty,
dare yet stowte, and wax fierce, against God and his word: which I judge to
be one of the chief arguments of our corruption, when we puffed up in
affiaunce of well fauourednesse, kindred, dignities, or riches, forget God, who
can so easily pull down our proud stomachs. Let us rather acknowledge Gods
power, and humble our selves willingly under his valiant hand, least we
prove to our utter loss and hinderaunce, how much he is able to do.

Now let us behold Saul thus lying prostrate along, The effect.
who hearing a voice from heaven, asks: Who art thou Lord? He heard he was
cast down by him whom he persecuted, and yet he asks who he is. Yet is this
saying a token of an humbled, and assuaged mind. Which would God we might see
in these days, in those whom God uses to cast down, either by sickness, by
poverty, or other affliction, or calamity, and yet acknowledge not the Lord,
nor that God has cast them down.

But because Saul shows himself now to be somewhat meeker, They are
Christ's enemies, that persecute the Church.
the Lord does vouchsafe to make him answer, saying: I am Jesus whom thou
persecutest. It is hard for thee, to kick against the prick. Which answer
stands in two points. In the first, he teaches who he is, and also
reprooueth him of his heinous offense, as though he should say: Thou think
thou go about to persecute men, and such, who as they are hated of all men,
so have they no revenger or defender amongst men. But they are not without a
revenger, neither do thou persecute them alone. For I am that Jesus whom
they profess, I reign in heaven, and diligently observe their condition and
case. I long since promised to be their patron and defender: yea, such
familiarity is between me and them, that I think it done to my self,
whatsoever thou do to the least of them. etc. Hereof may be gathered a
general doctrine: that whatsoever is done to them that worship Christ, the
same is done to Christ. For it is his saying that is read in the Prophets:
zach. 2.
He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye. And Esaias in the.lxiij.
chapter, speaking of the benevolence of God toward his people, amongst other
things says: In all their afflictions, I am afflicted. Let this serve for the
instruction of Tyrannes, that they forget not how they have Christ their
enemy, while they persecute the Church, who shall one day bruyse them with a
rod of iron, Psalm. 2.
and break them in pieces, like a Potters vessel. Again, let the Godly take
comfort hereof, that in tribulation they have Christ a companion, 2. Tim. 2.
with whom if they suffer, they shall one day reign.

In the other part of his answer, he lays a punishment before their eyes,
The punishment of persecutors of the Church.
saying: It is hard for thee to spurn against the prick. He uses a Metaphore
or translation taken from Oxen or Horse, which if they winse against the Goade,
they do not only not prevail in so doing, but also prick themselves the
deeper into the flesh, and are occasion of their further hurt. The Lord
threatens the same shall come to pass in Saul, and in all other, which after
his example persecute the Church, that is to say, that their attemptes shall
not only be in vain, but dangerous and hurtful also for the beginners. For
the Church of Christ is the heavy stone, in lifting up whereof, zach. 12.
no man shall try maystryes without some hurt, as God promises by his
Prophet. And there want not examples whereby to prove the same. For hereto
belongs the story of Pharao, which spurning against the prick, has
renowned the waves of the red sea, with his, and his peoples destruction. The
same judgment tried Sanheribe, who warring with God, and the people of
Israel, by the hand of one Angel, lost his whole army, bags and baggage.
Of Antiochus, and Herod, we spoke ere while. To whom may be joined the
Emperors of Rome, as many as after Christ's time persecuted the Church, and
within short space bought their cruelty full dear. To these if we join the
examples of Gods judgments, in our days, against the enemies of the Church,
we shall say, that the truth of this sentence which Christ here pronounces is
infallible. To us this must be the use of all these things, that we fear not
the power of the world, and persecution of Tyrannes, nor be not therewith
discouraged. For that very Christ lives still, and will not forsake his
Church, which he has promised to be with, unto the end of the world: to him
be blessing, honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.lxiiij. Homely.
AND he both trembling and astonyed said: Lord, what will thou have me to do?
And the Lord said unto him* Arise, and go into the City, and it shall be
told thee what thou must do. The men which iourneyed with him stood amazed,
hearing a voice, but seeing no man. And Saul arose from the earth, and when he
opened his eyes, he saw no man. But they led him by the hand, and brought him
into Damascus. And he was three days without sight, and did neither eat nor
drink.
AS Saul before he was converted unto Jesus Christ, with great cruelty
persecuted the name and Church of Christ: so God chose him, to set forth in him
a peculiar ensample of his grace and goodness, teaching us hereby that we have
nothing that we may glory in before God, but that both our salvation, and
whatsoever things else, help us to the attayning thereof, ought to be referred
to Gods mere goodness and grace. For although all men bear not like hatred
against Christ's Church as Paul did, and that God compels not all men by
open force, to take the way of salvation: yet are all men in one state and
condition, so that they must be drawn and converted by the mighty power of
God. For if we consider man, as he is ruled and led by natural lore and reed,
1. Cor. 2.
we shall well perceive he understands not the things belonging to the
spirit of God. Wherefore where the understanding is corrupt, the will must
needs be evil and corrupted, which brings forth the impure and wicked
desires of the flesh: so that God truly said in the beginning. Gene. 8.
The inventions of man's heart, are evil even from his childehoode. But where
by reason of sin, all our power is so weakened, that of our selves we be not
able to think well: It well appears, that no man either would or could
earnestly think of his salvation, except he were illuminated, drawn, and
molified by God, although some men's corruption is more manifest and notorious
than others. But because in Saules conversion, there are many other things,
which serve for our information, Luke stands diligently upon the description
thereof. And at this time, because he has declared the first act or doing, he
rehearses the effect of this hard encounter, and diverse other things incident
to the same.

He comprehends in few words a marvelous effect of gods punishment in Paul.
For (says he) trembling and astonyed, he said: Lord, The effect of Gods
chastyning.
what will thou have me to do? And the Lord said unto him, arise, and go
into the City. etc. We have in this place diligently to consider, both Gods
person, and Paul's. And first in Paul, we may see a token of a mind greatly
humbled, and ready to all kind of obsequie and serviceableness. For now he
does vouchsafe to call him Lord, whom before, he hated worse than a dog,
or Tode. And of his own accord, enquireth what his will and pleasure is,
following those servant, which of a dutiful, and diligent readiness to
please, use to prevent their masters commandment, before they hear it.
Hereout we may gather two things belonging to our instruction. First,
whosoever feel Gods hand chastyning them, The duty of them whom God
chasteneth.
are admonished of their duty. Let them acknowledge that God like a father
punishes and beats them, to the intent to amend them, and corrects those
that be his, least they should be condemned with the world, 1. Cor. 11. Psalm.
94.
that will not repent. Which is the cause that the Prophet pronounces him
happy or blessed whom the Lord chasteneth. Again, let them acknowledge him
to be their Lord, and earnestly enserch after his will, that they may know
how to get his favor and good will. This is the property of Gods elect, who
think nothing more grievous and intolerable, than to perceive God to be
offended with them. But the reprobate be of a far other opinion, who although
sometime they be compelled to obey and yield unto God, yet they frette and
fume, and by many a^guments, declare they do it against their wills.
Wherefore they by and by ^eturne again to their nature, and to their old
wont, scarcely intermitted. The Scripture shows examples hereof in Pharao,
and Saul the king. With whom may be numbered the Bishops servant that were
sent to apprehende Christ, who though they were smitten to the ground, by the
power of his word, yet they by and by rose again, John. 18.
and laid wicked hands on him* whom they ought to have acknowledged for
their Lord. Let us therefore do as Paul did, as often as we be cast down by
sickness, oppressed with poverty, or become prays to our enemies, or be any
other ways troubled or molested, and let us say with the heart: Lord what
will thou have us to do? And so shall those things turn to our health, which
seemed to us to be very hurtful.

Chastisement has place in matters of religion.
Secondly, this example teaches us how necessary a severe kind of correction,
is sometime in matters of faith and religion. For we see many of such a
property and condition, that unless they be constrained by force, they will
not yield unto the word of God. Wherefore Christ, commanded that some
should be compelled to come to the heavenly marriage. Of which number it is
more evident that Paul is one, Luke. 14.
than needs great declaration. Therefore it is no small error they hold,
which cry out that no man ought to be compelled in matters of faith and
religion, because God only has power and authority over the mind of man.
For to grant that it belongs to God alone, to inspire, to draw, and to give
faith, yet we know again that God commands false teachers to be convinced
both by arguments and Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 1^.
and also to be bridled by the sword of the Magistrate, if they wax obstinate
and incurable. By the same reason superstition, false worship, and blasphemy
is commanded to be made away. For it were an absurd thing to punish them
which lie in wait for our bodies and goods, and let them escape free, which
wickedlye deface the glory of God, and lay snares of damnation for men's
souls. There are examples euerywhere of them, which being restrained through
severe chastisement, have ceased after that from their blasphemy, and have
been brought to knowledge of the truth. But as in all other things, so herein
chiefly we wish all wisdom and moderation to be used.

But let us hear Christ, who by and by shows himself courteous and friendly
to him, Christ turns not from him that hu^bleth himself.
whom he sees so ready to do his commandment. For as the father in the
Prophets cries: Return unto me, and I will return unto you: so we read in
the Gospel, that he calls all unto him that are heavy laden, Math. 11.
John. 6.
and openly testifyeth, that he will refuse none that comes unto him. He
commands him to go into the City, that he may there learn of Ananias,
what he has to do. Two causes may be rendered of this commandment. For God
by this means tries Paul's modesty, while he sends him to them, whom not
long before he meant violently to lay hold on. And also procures hereby an
authority and dignity to the ministerye of his word. For where he knows
that men oftentimes contemn it, he teaches us therefore that the use thereof
is necessary to the attayning of salvation. This we saw in the history of
the Aethiop, whose heart where (...) illuminated by the secret working of his
spirit, yet would he use the ministry of Philip to do the same. And now
although he vouchsafe to talk with Saul, yet he sends him to Ananias, to
learn the mysteries of faith and salvation, and by his ministry to be
baptized and taken into the fellowship of the Church. Whereunto that also is
like, that hereafter we shall hear told of Cornelius the Centurion, whom God
admonishes by an Angel sent unto him, to send for Peter, and to be taught
of him. These things teach us, that we must not think the ministry of the
word unprofitable and superfluous, and that we must look for no Angelical or
heavenly revelations to instruct and teach us. For where the Lord will have
us to be taught by the Scriptures, and preaching of the word, whosoever
contemns the same, declares plainly that he is unworthy of his kingdom,
and shall never come to the knowledge o^ the says. For why should God
vouchsafe to teach a despiser of his order after a new sort? Therefore this
saying of Paul stands sure: Romans 10.
how shall they believe if they have not heard? how shall they hear, without
a Preacher? Again, that saying of Christ: They have Moses and the Prophets,
Luke. 16.
whom if they will not hear, neither will they hear those that rise from the
dead, to declare their salvation. We are admonished also, that none be he
never so simple a Minister of Christ and his word, ought to be despised so he
be lawfully ordained, seeing that singular vessel of God, Paul, is sent to
Ananias, of whom till this time, no mention has been made. For the authority
of Gods word depends not upon the dignity of man, but stands in his full
strength and force, whatsoever he be whom God sends to us, to teach and
preach his will.

Furthermore, Paul's companions.
Luke enterlaceth among these premises a short treatise of Paul's companions,
whom he says to stand amazed, and to have heard a voice, but to have seen
no man. But if we hearken to Paul declaring these things before Agrippa, it
shall appear that they also in the beginning fell down, and albeit they first
ro^e again, yet they stood as men amazed in their mind, by reason of the
great fear they were put in. Luke seems somewhat to vary from Paul's
narration, whereas he says they neither heard the voice, nor saw any man. But
here is no contradiction in these things. For here they are said to hear a
voice, because they heard a sound and noise. And it is said, they heard it
not, because they understood not what was said, and God would not have them
understand the things that belonged not to them. Or else that that is spoken
here of the voice, must be referred to Paul's voice only, which his companions
heard, where they heard not the voice of Christ talking with Paul, as which
pertayned not to them. And thus seems Paul's words to mean, which are thus
written in the.xij. Chapter following: And they that were with me, saw verily a
light, and were afraid, but they heard not the voice of him that spoke with
me. In this place is chiefly to be considered what remains for all them
which join with the open enemies of Christ, The companions of the wicked are
punished with the wicked.
and are partakers of their deuyses. For they are punyshed with them, whether
they be servants, subjects or children. For all privileges of men must give
place to that obedience, wherewyth God has bound us to him: and the
authority of this saying shall remain firm and sure for ever: we must obey
God rather than men. Therefore as many as for favor of men forget the duty
they owe unto God, deserve to perish with them whom they have looued more
than God. These things teach us to avoid the company of the wicked, and if we
cannot so do, at leastwyse to take heed that we allow not their wicked
enterprises with our consent, nor defend them with our authority. The fable
of the Storke taken among the Cranes, is well known in the writings of the
Heathen, which the Husbandman killed, pleading her innocence all in vain,
because she was taken among the Cranes that cropped and eat down his corn.
And Paul in another place pronounces them worthy of punishment, that not
only do evil, but which also consent to evil. Romans 1.
Which things if we in these days would consider, we should less marueyle
at the manifold miseries of our time, for all men are faulty in contemning
and oppressing the Gospel, whereas one sort cruellye persecute it, another
sort busily seek the friendship and league of the persecutors, and others
stand ydlely looking on, and suffer those to be punished and oppressed, whom
they ought to maintain and defend.

But let us return to Paul, whose state Luke now descrybeth. And first he
says he rose up, Paul's state and condition
whereas Christ the Lord had given him power so to do. He adds that when he
had opened his eyes, he saw nothing, being blinded with the brightness of the
light that came from heaven. Wherefore he comes to Damascus, led by his
companions, where he remained whole three days, and neither eat nor drank
all the while. All these are no small tokens of a great fear he was stricken
in, both in body and mind. That that some tell here of Paul's being taken
into Paradyse, we leave as uncertain, because we will not seem over boldly
to affirm any thing.

God turns the enterprises of the wicked upon the deuysers. Galat. 1.
In the mean season it shall suffyse that we mark how God uses to defeat
the devises of his enemies, and turns upon their own heads the things they
procure against his faithful servants. Paul unto diverse other seemed till
this time, to see more than other, as who had profited more than many of his
fellows, as himself testifies otherwheres. But now he is blind both in
body and mind, until he be illuminated of God. He comes accompanied with
his train of companions and servant, whom he had picked out to the end to
bring the Christians bound to Jerusalem. But himself is led by them more
than captive and bound. Al so it is very like he would have brought many to
famine and poverty, but now he suffers famine three days together, and
knows not what to do. There are like ensamples euerywhere in the Scryptures.
So we see Balaam and Balaac deluded, while they heap blessings upon the
Israelites, whom they minded with curses to ouerwhelme. So the Egyptians
thrust them out of their country laden with their own treasures, whom they
meant to oppress with perpetual bondage. So Saul ministered unto David every
day matter of greater glory, while he seeks his destruction. Hereunto is the
story of Haman and Mardocheus to be referred, with infinite others, which
confirm the saying of David, where he declares that God from heaven laugheth
at his enemies devises. Psalm. 2.
Let us therefore learn to acknowledge the power of our Savior Jesus Christ,
and let us not fear the threatenings and enterprises of any of his enemies. Let
us submit our selves to him by faithful obedience, that we may hereafter be
heirs with him in heaven, of the glory that he has promised us: to whom be
praise, honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.lxv. Homely.
AND there was a certain Disciple at Damasco named Ananias, and the Lord
said to him in a vision, Ananias? And he said, behold I am here Lord. And
the Lord said unto him, arise, and go into the street which is called
straight, and seek in the house of Judas after one called Saul of Tharsus:
for behold he prays, and has seen in a vision a man named Ananias coming
unto him, and putting his hands on him, that he might receive his sight. Then
Ananias answered: Lord, I have heard by many of this man how much evil he
has done to thy Saints at Jerusalem: and here he has authority of the high
Priests to bind all that call on thy name. The Lord said unto him: Go thy
way, for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to carry my name before the Gentyles,
and Kings, and the children of Israel. For I will show him how great things
he must suffer for my names sake.
ALthough we ought diligently to consider the conuersions and callinges of all
the Apostles, yet Paul's conversion of all others deserves singulerly to be
marked: partly because it contains in it a rare example of Gods mercy
toward sinners, and partly for that Paul labored more than al^ the Apostles,
neither is there any other whose writings are more often alleged, either of
the old writers or new, in matters of faith and religion. It is therefore
necessary that we know who he was, how God called him and converted him, that
we may have his doctrine in the more authority, which thing is the cause that
Luke writes his history so diligently. And hitherto he has declared, how
the Lord interrupted his fierceness, and horrible attempts, in the middle of
his race and business, and that so forceably, that he was feign to offer
himself to the Lord, to be obedient and to be taught, being a while before,
his grievous enemy. Hereunto he conveniently adds how he is appointed to
the office of an Apostle, which contains a notable discourse between the
Lord Jesus Christ and Ananias, by whose ministry Paul was to be ordered.
Every part whereof we will declare as far forth as God shall permit.

First the Lord calls Ananias, Ananias is called to give Paul his orders.
Acts. 22.
that Paul may take orders by his ministry. And of Ananias Luke speaks but
little in this place, but Paul at large, where he commends him of his
godliness, and says he deserved among the Jews, the testimony of a good,
and an innocent man. Him the Lord certifyeth of his will, by a vision, and
likewise prepares Paul being in his prayers, by an other vision, worthily to
receive Ananias. Here our Savior Christ is well to be marked, which
instructs them both by evident visions. For hereby is perceived the ardent
desire that Christ has to the salvation of mankind, showed and declared
ingenerall toward all men, and especially in seeking the lost sheep, Luke.
15.
as himself elsewhere testifyeth. Which thing as it is for our comfort, so it
also serves for our instruction, that we should traueyle rather to save
sinners, than to destroy them, and not follow those, which glorying in their
fervent zeal of Gods glory, rashly reject and condemn all those, whom they
see once to have swarued from the way of truth. Moreover we are taught, how
expedient it is, that all things be done rightly and duly in the outward
ministry of the word. For except the ministers be duly called, and well
assured of their calling, and the hearers well prepared to receive their
sayings, there can follow no worthy fruit and avail of their doing. For
how shall they preach, except they be sent? Romans 10.
Or with what arguments shall they be emboldened against the threats and
enterprises of the wicked, which craftily have usurped and intruded upon the
office of teaching? Again, if the hearers come not well minded, and prepared
to hear the word of the Lord, then shall they receive that wholesome seed,
either into the way, either into stony places, or among thorns, and there
shall be many impediments that shall cause that they shall bring forth no
worthy fruits. Wherefore Christ requires honest minds, which will hold fast
the seed they have once received, and being armed against all suggestions of
Satan, Luke. 8.
the world and the flesh, bring forth worthy fruits with patience. And that
we have need of diligent preparation hereto, every man may easily understand,
that well considers the corrupt nature of man. These things if we will well
weigh and expend, it shall easily appear, why there is so much preaching in
these days, with so little profit. For most part of the Ministers, without
waiting for the lawful calling of the Lord, get into the ministry by
unlawful means, for the belly sake: and they that will not seem the
vngodlyest of the hearers of the word, come unto it, more for custom sake,
than of any earnest desire of amendment, being altogether like unto those,
which in the Prophet, Ezech. 33.
said: Come I pray you, let us hear what word is gonefoorth from the Lord.

Paul prays
Furthermore, we have also to consider Paul, whom the Lord speaking to Ananias,
witnesses to be in his prayer. This is to be understood of the continual
prayers he made, all the three days long, as easily appears by the
circumstaunces, because there were many things, which might move Paul unto
prayer. For he felt the horrible hand of God, which threw him down. He heard
how he was accused from heaven, to be the professed enemy of the son of
God. Then came to his mind the wicked enterprises, and cruelty that he had
used against the name of Christ and his Church, also the banishments, chains,
imprisonment, and torments, with the lamentation and crying of women and
children, whereofhe had been the author. Yea, his guilty conscience, as yet
troubled him. Then again the waiting for the promise of revelation and
instruction, was able to stir him up to earnest prayer, and yet in this
earnestness and diligence of praying, God disappoynteth him (as I might say)
whole three days together. These things commend unto us an incessant
earnestness of prayer, because there are as many and as urgent causes, to
stir us up also theretoo. For if we discende into our selves, we shall find
they are no tryfling sins, whereby we have deserved Gods wrath. We many times
feel the hand of Gods anger. The conscience of our wickedness oftentimes
molesteth us. We are still in danger of all kinds of adversity. And if the
thinking hereof be not able to kindle in us hearty and ardent prayer, then
shall we worthily be called colder than iron or ice. 1. These. 5.
Paul for these causes commands us continually to pray. And let us so
remember to continue in prayer, that we be not overcome with distrust or
impaciencie, and rashely prescribe God any time to hear or help us in. For he
sometime deferreth the help he promises us, not because he means to
disappoynt them, that trust in him, but because he will exercise and try our
faith: Examples whereof we have both in Paul, in Abraham, in the woman of
Chanaan, and in many others. Here therefore let us bend the force of our
faith, and follow the example of that Widow, by whose importunatenesse, Luke.
18.
Christ says the wicked Judge was overcome. But, O miserable and unhappy
wretches that we be, which as we scarce, take us unto prayer, in extreme
necessity: so we by and by faint and give over, if God do not grant our
peticions at the first, being very little mindful of our state who being
servants, ought patiently to abide our Lords leisure, and not imperiously to
appoint him.

But let us consider Ananias, Ananias fearfully draws back.
which being overcome with fear of danger, puts of the express and
evident commandment of the Lord. For he says: Lord, I have heard of this
man by many, how great evil he has done to thy saints at Jerusalem, and
here he has power from the high priests, to bind all that call upon thy
name. He alleges the testimony of others, least he might seem to fear in
vain. But it is a ridiculous matter to stand more upon the testimony of man,
than upon the word of God. It is also ridiculous to rehearse Saules doings of
others mouths before the Lord, as though he had hitherto been ignorant of
them. But hereunto fear, a naughty and foolish Counsaylor, uses to bring us,
if we once take him to consult with, in discussing of Gods commandments. Yet
it appears by this example, that it takes hold many times even of holy men,
and faithful worshippers of God. Gene. 12.20
With this fear we read Abraham was so overcome, that he denied Sara to be
his wife. Moses stricken with like fear, Exodus 3.4.
can scarcely be induced to take upon him the conduct and leading of the people
of Israel. Elias the Prophet tasted of this fear, when after the slaughter of
Baals Priests, he wi^t not whither to fly for fear of Iesabell the Queens
manaces and threats. Jonas also deceived through fear, 1. Reg. 19.
promised himself more safety among the floods of the sea, and barbarous
shipmen, than in the aid and vocation of the Lord. Here might also be brought
forth the examples of others, both Prophets and Apostles. But this is man's
infirmity, for the which, no man is rashely to be condemned, because we see
many tokens hereof appeared in Christ also, when the hour of his death drew
nigh. We must take heed that we be not so overcome herewith, that we leave the
charge enjoined us of the Lord. But rather having a respect to the providence
of God, Math. 10.
commit our selves wholly to the will of God, as Christ teaches his Apostles.
Whereunto also are to be referred the general promises of Gods help, which
promise them that walk in his vocation, sure and certain aid and succor.
And herewith I believe Ananias also was confirmed, who although at the first,
seemed somewhat timorous, yet he yields to God being instant upon him, and
the second time of commanding, he faithfully obeys him. The Lord
comfort Ananias.


It is a singular consolation, wherewith the Lord comfort Ananias wavering
and fearful mind. Go (says he) for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to
bear my name before the Gentiles, and kings, and children of Israel. For I
will show him, how great things he must suffer for my names sake. It seems
there are two reasons alleged, wherefore Ananias ought not to fear, and both
of them are taken of Paul's person. First he says he is not a Tyranne and
persecutor, as he was heretofore, but of the number of the elect, and hereafter
should be a most valiant and faithful defender of Christ's name. Then that
there is so little fear to be had of any persecution to be made by Paul, that
rather he had to suffer many things for ye name of Christ.

The praise of Paul.
These words contain a singular and worthy praise of Paul, which we ought
diligently to consider, both for that the excellency of Gods goodness may the
better be known, and also that we may understand how great authority Paul's
doctrine is of.

A chosen vessel.
First he is called after an Hebrew phrase, the vessel of election, that is to
say, a chosen, picked, or culled instrument. For the Hebrews by this name
vessel, understand all kind of instruments, vtensiles, or implements. And
they use the Genitive case of the Substantive, for the Adjective. Men are
called the vessels or instruments of God, because God executes his
judgments by them. So Paul otherwheres calls the elect, the vessels of
glory and mercy, Romans 9.
and again the reprobates the vessels of wrath. And Senacherib, Esaias. 1^.
by the same reason is called the rod of Gods fury. Christ calls Paul, a
chosen vessel, because he executed many things by him, yea, most wholesome
works in setting forth the Gospel and the faith. In the mean season this
word vessel or instrument teaches us to remember our state and condition,
that if we have any thing in us that is excellent, we should not think it to
be ours, but learn to give all the praise and glory unto God, who has
vouchsafed to use their help. The reprobates and such, as want the knowledge
of God, understand not this: therefore they attribute to their own power and
wit, whatsoever is of any excellency in them. Esaias. 1^. Dan. 4.
But how much such doing displeases the Lord, Senacherib the Assirian, and
Nabuchodonosor the Babilonian, aboundauntly testify. Paul much better weighed
these things, which plainly confesses, that he is by the grace of God, 1.
Cor. 3.
whatsoever he is. The same teaches all Ministers, that they must arrogate
nothing to themselves, or to others, but that they remember all effect and
success of Ministry comes of the Lord, which gives the increase. The
consideration hereof, serves very much to make men humble in heart and mind.
For it makes them to take heed, that they exceed not in pride or security,
and so become the vessels and instruments of wrath.

Paul appointed to preach the Gospel.
Secondlye, Christ declares the end and use of this instrument, and shows
that Paul is appointed to bear his name, that is to advance and extol his
name before the Gentyles, and Kings, and people of Israel. He understands the
preaching of the Gospel, whereby Christ's name uses to be extolled and
celebrated, when repentance and remission of sins is preached in him. Here
all Ministers are admonyshed of their duty. To them it belongs to bear the
name of Christ, that is to preach him to be a Savior, King and Priest, and to
declare that all things that appertain to our salvation, 1. Cor. 2. Gala^. 6.
are in him. So Paul says, he knows nothing but Jesus Christ, and him
crucified. The same, says he, rejoices only in the cross of Christ. The
same name did Peter carry, where he said there was none other name under heaven
given unto manne, Acts. 4.
in which he could be saved. Whereby we gather that they be not the ministers
of Christ, but led with the spirit of Antichrist, that declare any other
name wherein repentance and forgiveness of sins is preached. See concerning
these men. 1. John. 4. Let Ministers remember also, that they must not carry
this name into corners, but before Nations, Kings, and Jews. For although we
be not all Apostles, yet it appertains to all Ministers not to be ashamed of
Christ, but to speak of the testimonies of the Lord (as David says) before
Kings and Princes: 1. Pet. 2.
being ready to give an account of our faith to every one that asks us. And
with how great trust and diligence, Paul discharged the office committed to
him of Christ, the Text shall declare. For he confesses that from Jerusalem
and the coasts round about to Illyricum, Romans 15.
he filled all Countries with the Gospel.

Thirdly, Paul is most strong in bearing of the cross.
least any man might think that so great a Minister of Christ was endued with
any privilege of immunitie, to escape always free, he makes mention also of
his afflictions. I (says he) will show unto him how great things he shall
suffer for my sake. Which words have in them no commination, but a promise.
For first we know that Christ makes them partakers of his glory, whom he
does vouchsafe to have parteners of his cross. Insomuch that Paul afterward
commends the Philippians for this cause, that it was given them not only to
believe in the* Lord, but also to suffer for his sake. Further, he says he
shall be invincible, and promises him his succor and aid in bearing the
cross. Paul himself shall be the best expositor of this saying, which
writing unto the Corinthians says: Of the Jews, five times, received I every
time forty stripes save one. Thryse was I beaten with rods: I was once
stoned: I suffered thryse shipwreck: Night and day have I been in the deep
sea: in iourneying often: in perils of waters: in perils of robbers: in
ieoperdies of mine own Nation: in ieoperdies among the heathen: in perils in
the City, in perils in wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among
false brethren. etc. See the place* 2. Cor. 11. and.12. Furthermore, these
things teach us, that the Gospel can not be preached without the cross and
tribulation. For this world cannot abide the light thereof, because the works
thereof be naught. Therefore even as Paul in this place, John. 3
so Christ in every place admonishes those that be his to bear the Cross.
Therefore they be most foolish of all other men, which think that in the
ministerye of the Gospel, the matter may be brought to pass without danger,
and go about to please the world. Nay, he shall be little meet for this
office and function, except he well have prepared himself to bear the cross,
and all kind of adversities. Touching which point, see Luke. xiiij. Let us
remember that God only gives us power and strength, whose love wherewyth he
looued us, if we well perceive, we shall be prepared and ready to all assayes,
as Paul afterward teaches. Roma. 8
Let us therefore make our continual prayers unto him, that he will grant
unto us to be able both to suffer for the name of Christ, and also to come to
the inheritance of heaven with him: to whom all praise, honor, power, and
glory, is due for ever. Amen.

The.lxvj. Homely.
And Ananias went his way, and entered into the house, and put his hands on him
and said: Brother Saul, the Lord that appeared to thee in the way as thou
came, has sent me, that thou may receive thy sight, and be filled with the
holy ghost. And immediately there fell from his eyes, as it had been scales,
and he received sight, and arose and was baptized, and received meat and was
comforted. Then was Saul a certain days with the Disciples which were at
Damasco. And streyghtwayes he preached Christ in the Sinagoges, how that he
was the son of God. But all that heard him were amazed and said: Is not this
he that spoiled them which called on this name in Jerusalem, and came hither
for that intent, that he might bring them bound unto the high Priests? But
Saul increased the more in strength, and confounded the Jews which dwelt at
Damasco, affirming that this was very Christ
THe Evangelist Luke descrybeth the conversion of the Apostle Paul very
diligently, partly, for that we might understand thereby what grace and
goodness God shows unto sinners, and partly for that Paul's doctrine might
be of the more authority with us, as which he commends unto us with so
earnest protestation, that he says, an Angel of heaven is not to be
believed, that would teach the contrary. To both these appertain that
singular and notable testimony, wherewith Christ, as we heard yesterday, set
forth Paul. For he calls him a chosen vessel, who a little before seemed to
be the vessel of wrath. Furthermore, he attributes to him in handling of his
affairs, faith, dexterity, constancy and paciency of mind. Whereby we
gather, that the goodness of God toward sinners is great, and that we may
not contemn the doctrine of Paul, unless we will contumeliously sin
against Christ, and accuse his testimony of falshoode. But let us see this
present place, which comprehends the restitution of Paul, and the first
thing he did in his Apostleship or ministerye of the Gospel.

Concerning Paul's restitution, which was three days blind, and at length
received his sight again, Paul is restored and baptized.
and was by baptism received into the Church of Christ, the persons both of
Ananias and Paul are to be considered, with the marvelous effect which the
Euangelyst says by and by followed. The obedience of Ananias.
But first we will speak of Ananias, whose ministry it pleased God herein to
use. He as it is said, went his way, and entered into the house of Judas,
where he heard that Paul was lodged. The earnest repeating of Gods
commandment did put from him the stupiditie that he was in before, neither
alleges he any more the talk of the people, or the reasons of fleshlye
wisdom against the commandments of the Lord, which mind we may see in all
the true worshippers of God, which have this special care, that no fear
withholdeth them from the duty of obedience which they owe unto God. Let us
also imitate these people, and know that they are unworthy of all pardon and
excuse, who are so overcome of the infirmity of the flesh, and fea^e of
danger, that they forget and deny God, and the duty they owe unto him.
Further, The impos^tion or laying on of hands.
Ananias lays his hands upon Saul, which ceremony is for good purpose
borrowed of the old testament, in the ordering and making of our Ministers. For
in times past the priests laid their hands upon the sacrifices, whereby
declaring that the thing which they did, was in the behalf of all the people,
and so consecrated the beasts standing at the altar unto God. By a like
reason the public cure and charge of the Church, is commended unto the
Ministers, by imposition of hands, and they are thereby admonished to remember
how they be consecrated unto God, and that therefore they must apply all their
study, care, labor, and watching, to set forth the glory of God. Preaching of
the word.
But because there is no use or profit of a bare ceremony, Ananias joins
the word thereto, whereby he declares to him whatsoever Christ commanded him
to say. Wherein the bold courage of Ananias is to be considered, who plainly
professes the name of Jesus Christ, and acknowledges himself to be his
servant, before him, whom he knew hitherto to be Christ's mortal enemy.
Again, because he had heard what testimony Christ gave of Paul, he
disdayneth not to call him brother. Therefore in Ministers a strong and bold
courage of mind must be joined with a gentle and mild facility of speech:
least either they suffer themselves to be beaten from the confession of Christ,
and his due obedience, or else through their hawtie port and overmuch
severity, drive them away whom they ought to embrace as brethren, and by all
means to win unto Christ.

Unto these premises Luke joins a marvelous success. Scales fall from
Paul's eyes.
For he writes that there fell from the eyes of Paul, a thing as it had been
scales, and that then by and by he had his sight again. He makes mention of
scales, to the end we might understand, that his eyes were not lightly blasted,
as uses to be in lightning, but that he was stricken into a great and
marvelous blindness. And it is not without a great marueyle, that within so
few days, scales could gather on his eyes, so to take his sight from him.
And it is no less marvelous, to see, that he is so soon again restored to
the sight which he had lost. In the mean season it appears that Christ would
after a sort admonish Paul of the state he lived in, being in his Iudaisme or
Phariseyisme. For when he was Gamaliel his scholar, he profited so incredibly
among his fellows, that he seemed to be wyser, and to see more than all they.
But that wisdom which so highly pleased him, was mere blyndenesse. For the
veil was yet drawn before his eyes, whereby the Jews were hindered that they
could not see Moses face: 2. Cor. 3.
because they wanted the knowledge of Christ, in whom God the father has
given us that heavenly light, which is able to put away all darkness of
ignorance and carnal zeal. Because this light began to shine on Paul, scales
fell from his eyes, and he sees that hitherto he had been fowly and miserably
beguyled with the blind zeal of ignorance. Therefore whosoever will continue
in faith and salvation without falling, let him follow that light which is
Christ, and walk in him. See John. 1.8. and.12. Chapters.

But what does Paul after he had received his sight? He aryseth, Paul is
baptized.
is baptized, eats, and is made whole. First he says he was baptized,
because he was hereof admonished by Ananias, as himself witnesses in
the.xxij. of the Acts. Howbeit, some will say, baptism was superfluous in
him, who Christ knew was a c^osen vessel* who had felt the marvelous power
of Christ, who was now endued with the holy ghost, and whose eyes as well of
the mind, as of the body, the Lord had lyghtened. But the Saints judge
nothing superfluous and unprofitable, which they know is ordained of God. And
because they read that the observing of the things that were ordained in the
old Testament, till the time of correction was commanded, with such severity
that it was death to transgress them, they would never take upon them to
neglect any of the things which Christ delivered, to be observed till the end
of the world. Therefore the impudency and rashness of those which now a
days contemn the use of baptism and the Lords supper, is execrable, and
herein they declare, what perfection of faith they are of, in that they dare
wickedlye despise the ordinances of the Lord.

Paul refreshes himself with meat.
Moreover, Paul takes meat, and refreshes and cheereth his decayed strength
of body. The Saints therefore use the things which serve for preservation of
their health, and which God has given us for that use: such as are meat and
drink, clothing, and all kinds of such like. So Paul admonishes Timothy, 1.
Tim. 5.
to use Wine now and then because of the cruditie and rawnesse of his stomach.
By these examples is the pieuish superstition of them confuted, which because
they abstain from things necessary, attribute to themselves the title of
singular holiness. For although we condemn not fasting, whereby the pride of
our wanton flesh is subdued and tamed, the rather to obey Christ: so we allow
not those which set merit in that, that by Gods word is no where commanded.
For to such men agrees that saying of the Lord: when ye eat and drink, do
ye not eat and drink for your own selves? zach. 7.
By the which reason may be said to these also: when ye fast, ye fast for your
selves. Yea, Paul teaches us to beware of those, which bid us after a
superstitious sort to abstain from certain things, Colos. 2. 1. Tim. 4
and says they bring the doctrine of Devils, which command us to abstain
from meats created of God, for man's use.

The first thing that Paul did in his Apostleship.
But let us go on in the treatise of this present place, and consider the first
thing that Paul does in the ministry of the Gospel, of whom two things are
reported. First it is said he was conversant with the Disciples, that is to
say, the Christians that were at Damascus. Then he joined not himself to the
Jews or Gentyles, which were the public enemies of Christ, but unto the
faithful and such as professed the name of Christ. We are hereby taught, that
they that will be taken for Christians, ought to use the company of the godly,
and to abstain from them whom they know to be the professed enemies of
Christ. For although the godly are permitted to keep company with infidels as
far forth as necessity requires: yet the faithful find that the company
they keep with them without necessity, for worldly friendship and pleasures
sake, is to their hurt and hinderance. We read that Jesus Christ was diverse
times at the Phariseyes tables, and at publyke feasts. But it is evident it
was not for the satisfying of his own pleasure, but to win them to
salvation. For he never was so forgetful of his duty, to wynke at their
errors, but he would powder their table talk with wholesome precepts, and
the mysteries of the kingdom of God. And if any seek the company of the
ungodly for this end, we allow their purpose and endeavor. But they that
wink at the blasphemies of the wicked, their abominable ydolatrie, their
foolish superstition, most corrupt manners, and filthy desires of a dastardly
and sluggish mind, to seem trim companions, and enjoy their friendship and
favor, we allege to them that saying of David, which accounts them among the
citizens of heaven, that d^spyse the wicked, Psalm. 15. Psalm. 16.
and make much of them that fear the Lord. The same says: all his delyght is
in the Saints that are in the earth. For why should we see Christ's soldier
in Antichrists tents sitting idle? why should he suffer their doings and
sayings which he knows to deface the honor and glory of Christ?

Secondly, he speaks of Paul's doctrine, Paul preaches Jesus.
which worthily is placed first in this doing: he says he preached openly in
the Synagoges. And what did this new Apostle preach? Uerily Jesus to be the
son of God and Christ. These things he taught not after a slender and cold
sort, but so confirmed them with Scriptures and arguments, that he utterly
confounded the Jews, that were Christ's greatest enemies, and made them in a
doubt of their religion.

In these things we have a compendious abridgement of Paul's docdoctrine,
which ought to be of great authority with us. The sum of the Apostles
doctrine
He confesses otherwheres, that he knows nothing but Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 2.
Therefore him whom he only knew, he thought best only to preach. He
comprehends in few, yea in two points, whatsoever is at large said of him,
both in the Prophets and Apostles writings. For first he teaches, that Jesus
which was borne of the Uirgin Marie, was the son of God. So he has herein
comprised whatsoever belongs to the knowledge of Christ's person. Wherein if
we acknowledge not the human and divine nature together, the reason of our
salvation cannot stand safe and sure, which all the Scripture says depends
on Christ only. Paul acknowledges both these natures. For how can he but
acknowledge his human nature, which entreats of him that was taken and
crucified by the Jews, and who he knew dyed, and who elsewhere he testifyeth
was borne of the Jews, Roma. 9.
concerning his manhood? But where he says, he is the son of God, he cannot
deny his divinity. For what other thing should be borne of God, than God? So
he taught that Jesus was both God and man: God from everlasting, Gala. 4.
and in a time thereunto ordained made man, as otherwhere he shows.
Furthermore, he declared his office, and shows that he was Christ, that is,
the anointed of God. Kings and Priests in time past were anointed,
according to an ancient and old usage. And because the savior promised to
mankind must be both a King, and a Priest, therefore God would have him
called by the name of Messiah, or Christ, that is to say, anointed. The other
point of Paul's doctrine is, that this Jesus, which is true God and man, was
also that promised Savior of the world, whom the ceremonies of the law did
shadow, and the oracles of the Prophets said was to come. And this is that
doctrine, that deserves only to be called Apostolic. For it agrees with
that confession, that Peter being demanded of Christ, made in the name of all
the Apostles, saying: Thou art Christ, Math. 16. John. 6.
that son of the living God. And thou have the words of eternal life. And
this is that faith, which is buylt upon Christ, that is, the rock which cannot
swerve, and against which the gates of Hell cannot prevail. Therefore
whosoever will be taken for the true worshipper of Christ, and rejoice in the
Apostolic faith, let them constantly keep this doctrine. For it is plain,
that Paul pronounced of this doctrine, that if an Angel from heaven preach
any other Gospel than this, Galat. 1.
he is to be held accursed.

But did Paul superficially, and by the way propose this doctrine? No, But
because there were at Damascus schools of the Jews, Paul confuteth y^ Jews
through whose dotages the knowledge of Jesus Christ was defaced, he thought
good to confute them, and to confirm the true doctrine of Christ with
authority of the scriptures. For it is evident that the Jews did acknowledge
the ancient promises of the Messiah. But because they imagined he should be
an earthly Prince only, which should restore that ancient kingdom of the
Iewishe Nation, and the majesty thereof, and deliver them from the yoke of the
Roman bondage: they could never find in their heart to acknowledge Jesus,
whose coming to them was so poor, his conversation so humble, and his death
so reproachful, to be their Messiah. The errors of these men Paul stoutlye
wythstandeth, and affirms this Jesus to be the son of God and the Messiah,
with such authority of Scripture, and number of arguments, that he greatly
molested and shamed the best learned of them, which hitherto used to deny the
same. Which thing comes to pass to all them who think it a shame to yield
unto Christ, and to the truth.

How the gospel ought to be preached.
This place teaches us how the doctrine of the Gospel should be preached,
wherein some be of this opinion, that they think a plain and simple
exposition of the mysteries of salvation, is sufficient, and that they which
reprove the tyranny of Antichrist and his superstition, labor in vain, and
are authors of intolerable discention. And in deed a plain and simple
teaching of our salvation would suffyse, if there were not such as would
obscure and deface it with errors, and labored to pull away the vnwarye from
the right way. But where both there have been such, and euerywhere at this
day be such, the faithful must be admonished that they give no ear to them.
And this shall a man never be able to do, unless he show how they are
altogether deceived. Again, where some are grown so impudent, that they dare
openly speak against the truth, they must be also openly confuted, least by
their boldness they cause the truth to come in suspicion. We read that both
Christ and his Apostles used both these ways, whose example they ought of
duty to follow, which will be called and taken for Ministers of his Church,
which is the cause that Paul will have such to be teachers, as are able not
only to instruct the rawer sort in sound doctrine, Titus. 1.
but also to refell and convince them that speak against it. 2. Tim. 3.
And he says the Scriptures are given us to that end, to confute the
adversaries thereof. Which thing seemed of such importance to the holy ghost,
that he would have the Apostles not only to reprove the deceyuers in those
days, but also would have us warned of those which should disturb the
Church in the later days. With what right therefore can they which will have
no man's impiety detected, command the Ministers to silence, where such
men as these now a days bear swing in the Church.

The effect of Paul's preaching.
Now let us see the effect or success of this meeting together. All they
(says Luke) that heard him were amazed and said: Is not this he that made
havoc at Jerusalem of them. etc. Here he speaks of the godly, having
hereafter to entreat of the wicked attemptes of the ungodly. They compare
Paul's doing now with those things that were past, and so they find the
greater cause to wonder: Galat. 1.
Paul says in another place that they glorified God in him. By which example
we are by the way taught, that we so ought to reverence the Saints, that we
must yet give all the glory and praise unto God, who has vouchsafed so to
endue them with his grace. Furthermore Paul's ensample teaches us, that no man
should be ashamed to forsake and improoue his known errors. For although this
seem to many men a sign of an inconstant and impudent mind: yet is it our
duty so to do, both for Gods cause and our neyghbors. He commands us
willingly to yield unto the truth, and to bring our neighbor out of error.
Therefore it is the heynousest impiety and impudency in the world, for a man
stiffely to hold and continue in known errors, and (as God accuses them by
his Prophet) to wink when they may plainly see. It is our duties to
acknowledge Jesus whom Paul preached to be the son of God and Christ, and
to trust in him, and serve him, that we may hereafter live in heaven with him:
to whom be all praise, honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.lxvij. Homely.
AND after a good while, the Jews took counsel together, to kill him, but
Saul knew of their laying awayte. And they watched the gates day and night
to kill him. Then the Disciples took him by night, and let him down in a
basket over the wall. And when Saul was come to Jerusalem, he assayed to join
himself to the Disciples, but they were all afraid of him, and believed not
that he was a Disciple. But Barnabas took him and brought him to the Apostles,
and declared to them how he had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had
spoken to him, and how he had done boldly at Damasco in the name of Jesus. And
he had his conversation with them at Jerusalem, speaking boldly in the name of
the Lord Jesus. And he spoke and disputed against the Greeks, but they went
about to s^ea him, which when the brethren knew, they brought him to Caesarea,
and sent him forth to Tharsus.
AS Luke has been very diligent in describing Paul's conversion: so has he
(as you have heard) declared his doctrine with no less diligence. The sum
whereof was, that Jesus which was borne of Marie* the Uirgin, was also the
Son of God, and Christ, that is to say, our King and our Priest, and that
Redeemer that once was promised unto mankind. This agrees with the confession
of the Apostles, which we read Peter made in the name of them all, and
comprehends also in it the whole order of our salvation, as was said in the
last sermon. Wherefore as Paul otherwheres teaches, it becomes us to use
such constancy in retayning and keeping this doctrine, that we be not drawn
from it by the authority of any man, no not of an Angel. And because Christ
said Paul should be a chosen vessel, the Euangelyst in this place rehearses
a brief declaration of the things done about the beginnning of his
Apostleshippe, to declare thereby what faith and industry he used in
aunswering to so great a commendation of Christ. This narration is the
diligentlyer to be considered, because it plainly teaches how variable and
grievous the misfortunes of the faithful ministers of Christ be in this life,
and how faithfully he aydeth them being in danger for the glory of his name,
according to his promise.

And Luke begins his discourse with the things that came to pass unto
Paul at Damascus. The order of the hystory is opened.
But before we report his words, the course of the history must be set in
order, which, it appears Luke observed not very greatly, as who was not
purposed particulerly to rehearse all the things that were done, but only to
declare such things as might suffyse for the instruction of the Church. And he
plainly declares that he has wittinglye and willingly pretermitted many
things, forasmuch as he confesses that the things which he here rehearses
came to pass many days after Paul's conversion. Wherefore we must perclose and
make up the order of the history, out of the things which Paul himself
rehearses of his own doings. Writing unto the Galathians, first he says, he
went from Damascus into Arabia, before he came to Jerusalem. As he returned out
of Arabia (where it is credible he preached Christ's gospel) to Damascus, he
then fell into this danger which he here speaks of. The authors whereof, as
it is here said, the Jews were. But in his later Epistle to the Corinthians
the.xij. Chap. he says this ambushe to take him was laid, by king Aretas his
Lieuetenant. Whereby we gather, that the Jews suborned him thus to do,
whereunto for this cause they might the more easily persuade him, for that Paul
had adventured to preach the Gospel in Arabia, which was under the king Aretas
his obeisance. Therefore Luke has omitted Paul's voyage into Arabia, which of
force must be ended, before he was in this hazard, forasmuch as shortly after
his escape, it is said he came to Jerusalem.

Christ's ministers abide persecution.
Furthermore, touching the present history, the chief point thereof is, to
note what men may look for of the world, as soon as they join themself
unto Christ. For where Christ consecrateth to himself only those whom he
chooses out of the world, the world afterward cannot abide them, John. 15.
as he teaches. And there are euerywhere so many examples to prove this
true, that it is marvel to see how so many at this day are offended with
those adversities which the Scripture gives us warning of so often, and
wherewith all the faithful of Christ have been so invred from the first
beginning of the world. In the mean season let us observe that Luke says
these things came to pass a good while after, Persecutors are bridled by the
hand of God.
or after a certain days. Therefore Paul had a time given him to preach in,
and in the mean while God stayed the rage of his enemies, which undoubtedly
would have stopped him at the beginning, but that they were kept back with
the bridle that he laid on them. Whereby we learn that the wicked cannot
always do what they list, nor that they seemed chiefly most able to do. For
the like reason may be made of them as is of their head. For as Satan is under
the power of Gods providence, and can do nothing against man, but by Gods
sufferance: so the Lord brydleth tyrants, manger all their might, and will
they, nill they, and that many times in such unknown wise, that they
themselves marueyle how their devises come no better to pass, which they see
no man is able to withstand, but yet see not God, Psalm. 33.
which uses to bring them to naught. Therefore let us always set Gods providence
before our eyes, as often as we hear the enterprises of the enemies of the
word, and let us remember that the hears of our head be numbered in his sight.
Math. 10.


But what did the faithful at Damascus, The brethren at Damasco set Paul at
liberty.
while the wicked enemies lay wait for Paul? Do they forsake him or leave
him su^courlesse? Or use they that saying of the Lord, resist not against
evil? Or be they so careless, that they look for help from the Lord, doing
nor daring to do nothing themselves for Paul in the mean season? Here is no
such thing said of them. Nay, they adventure to deliver Paul, with the
danger of their own lives, yea, transgressing the common law which
commands the walls to be inviolable. For it appears that our ancestors
counted the walls and gates of Cities amongst things that were holy, and
consecrated their walls unto the Gods, verily, for that they knew (as the
Lawyer says) that man's affairs could by man's industry be sufficiently
governed and ordered of any one, in so great falsehood of men, the citizens
somewhiles being so negligent, and the borderers about them being so malicious
and envious. Therefore to leap over the walls, or to break open ye gates of a
city, was death although no other trespass had been committed. Yet these
brethren used a godly and holy ordering of the matter without contempt of the
civil laws, and therefore deserve to be excused. For they saw that more regard
was to be had of Gods law, which bids us to succor them that be in peril,
and commands us so to observe man's law, that we displace not Gods law, or
prejudice the good and godly. Therefore, to the intent he might escape this
present danger, they let him down over the wall in a basket, and Paul
refuses not the benefit thus offered him. By the which example first we are
taught that sometime Christian men, yea, Ministers of the word may by flying,
provide for themselves, and not rashly put themselves in ieoperdie of death.
For we both read that Christ oftentimes fled, when he conveyed himself from
the Jews lying in wait* and from the rage of Herod, and also warned his
Disciples, to take heed of men, Math. 10.
and when persecution arises, to fly from one City to another. In deed we
must be well advised that we fly not when our tarying may set forth the
glory of God, and does not pull us from the office and duty wherein the Lord
has appointed us. For unless we have a diligent eye to these two things when
we fly, we shall shamefully betray the glory of God* and forgetting our duty,
neglect the salvation of them* whom we ought to hold most dear. Paul had a
consideration of both these things, forasmuch as when he fled, there were
notwithstanding at Damascus, which set forth Christ's quarrel, and Paul gave
not himself to shameful idleness, but both at Jerusalem, and elsewhere set
forth the doctrine of salvation with great fruit and utility, as the history
following shows.

Moreover, the faithful are admonished of that duty, The godly must defend
and deliver their Ministers. 1. Cor. 4. Galat* 4.
that the Lord has bound them in, to their teachers. He requires that they
shall provide for the safety of their Ministers, with the peril of their own
life. For it is plain, they are to be accounted as our parents, because
through their ministry (as Paul says) we are borne again to eternal life.
Therefore the ingratitude and falshoode of those, which as soon as persecution
arises, let go their unbridled tongues, against the ministers of Gods word,
and redeem and purchase to themselves peace with their lives is most
shameful. But if it be the duty of a private person to defend the Ministers
with the peril of his own life, how much more is it to be required of the
civil magistrates, Esaias. 49.
whom Christ once promised should be the Nurses and defenders of his Church?
Wherefore their opinion is plain foolish, which say the Magistrates ought
not to defend religion by walls and fight, whereas the brethren at Damascus
brake the religion of walls with great commendation, in the defense of Paul
only.

Paul comes to Jerusalem.
Furthermore, Luke declares what Paul did after his prosperous escape out of
Damascus, saying he came to Jerusalem, which came to pass in the iii^. year
after his conversion, as himself writes. Where when he would have joined
himself to the Disciples, Galat. 1.
and chiefly to Peter, they mistrusted him because of his former tyranny used
against those that believed in Christ. But Barnabas (of whom mention was made
in the end of the fourth Chapter) having better intelligence of his doings,
commended his ministry with great praise unto the Apostles, namely to Peter
and James, whom only Paul says he saw of all the Apostles beside, writing
to the Galathians. Therefore remaining with them fifteen days space, he
boldly maintained Christ's religion, till he was again laid wait for, and
compelled to fly.

The Disciples are afraid of Paul. Math. 10.
Here we have to consider the Disciples at Jerusalem, who Luke writes were
afraid of Paul. This was no dastardly fear, but such a fear as Christ
commends, where he requires of his people the wisdom of Serpents. For
where it was scarce credible that so cruel a tyrant could so sodeinly be
changed, they thought they had good cause to beware, least he might beguyle
them unawares. For they knew that saying of Christ, which testifies that the
children of this world are wyser in their generation, than the children of
light. Luke. 16.
But afterward being informed of the truth, they embrace him courteously, as a
brother and fellow. In these things we have an example both of Christian
prudence and charity, whereby we are taught how both these virtues must be
coupled together. For where all men are liars, they knew that they ought not
rashlye to believe every one, that could egregiously counterfeyte godliness.
For what great harm false brethren do, 2. Cor. 11.
Paul himself confesses, that he had proved to his great peril. And for
that cause he bids us to beware of new brethren or young scholars, 1. Tim. 3.
and will have him that desires to be a Bishop, to have the commendation of
them that be abroad and without. Again, we must take heed of that over great
rigor, wherewith many are so stiff hardened, that they think all strangers
and unknown persons ought at once to be rejected. For as it is the duty of
Christian charity to think well of all men: so it easily admits the honest
and credible testimony, given of unknown brethren. Let us therefore use this
moderation at these days, seeing the banished for Christ's sake wander up and
down euerywhere, and let us not yield to their sentences, which on both sides
being to extreme, either through their overmuch facility cause all men to
laugh at them, or by their to great austeritie, reject all men without any
difference.

Moreover, Barnabas is to be considered, who as before of his liberality he
relieved the needye of the whole Church, Barnabas commends Saul.
and therefore was called the child of Consolation, so now by his testimony
he maintains Paul's good name being in danger, and is not ashamed of him
whom he knew every body suspected. This deed of charity is singular and
very necessary, because there is scarce anything amongst men more ryfe, than
sinister and wrong suspicion. For as being blinded with selfeloue, we flatter
our selves: so we diligently note other men's manners, and seek every little
occasion how to backbite their good name. Therefore great is their offense
which aggrauate the faults of them that are wrongfully suspected, whose good
name and fame they rather ought to tender and defend.

Thirdly, let us consider Paul, who Luke writes, Paul des^reth to be joined
unto the congregation
declared his faith at Jerusalem, by many and singular virtues. And first he
writes how he sought the familiarity and company of the Church, and of
Christ's Disciples. This is worthy of singular praise, if a man consider how
Paul not long before was accounted amongst the chief of that City. But he
judging all worldly dignities worthy now to be stamped under his feet, is
desirous to get Christ, and to be joined unto his Church. See the third to the
Philippians. Let us lay this example before our eyes, when the glory and
friendship of this world inuegleth us to forsake Christ. For although Christ's
flock be but little, and the state of the Church seems but miserable and
unhappy: yet is this the common saying of all that are godly, One day in thy
Courts is better than a thousand. Psalm. 84.
I had rather be a door keeper in the house of the Lord, than to dwell in the
tents of the ungodly. Also Paul gives us a great argument of Christian
modesty, Paul takes his repulse in good part.
while being suspected and rejected of the godly, he does not stubbornely
murmr against them, nor immodestly sets out his own praise, nor forsakes
the Church disdainfully, but patiently abides all this doing. For remembering
his former life, he marueyleth nothing at the matter. Yea, he acknowledges the
judgment of God, who would have him so humbled and exercised, that he should
as it were, in humble and lowly wise, seek their society, whom before he had
disdainefully contemned, and cruelly persecuted. Let us follow this example,
as often as the injury that other does unto us, grieueth us. And although we
know our selves unjustly iniuried by them, yet let us think we are not
unworthy of this injury, but that we have deserved more than this, if God
would deal with us according to our deserts. Finally, when he sees himself
reconciled to the brethren, he proves himself in deed to be a true Disciple
of Christ. He preaches boldly.
For he speaks freely and boldly in the name of Jesus Christ. This is a
description of the Gospel, which preaches to us repentance and forgiveness
of sins, in the name of Jesus Christ only, as we have oftentimes declared.
He disputes also with the Greeks, Acts. 6.
who we saw heretofore were the authors of a murmr and grutch that greatly
disquieted the Church. These men used to mingle the law with the Gospel, and
to overthrow the faith in Christ, with the justification of works. To the
confutation of whom, Paul was appointed, by the peculiar counsel of God, as
his Epistles declare. This place teaches us, that salvation must so be
preached in the name of Christ only, that therewithal we must also earnestly
withstand all those things that may overthrow the same. Touching which
point, because we have entreated in the last Sermon, it shall suffyse by the
way to have noted thus much.

But in the end it is said, that Paul had no better success at Jerusalem
than he had before at Damascus. Paul has persecutors at Jerusalem also.
For the Jews made a new conspiracy against him, and would have killed him.
And these are the arguments of hypocrites, which most egerly contending about
the righteousness of works, think it but a tryfle to slay innocents, and to
shed guiltless blood. But here again appears the faith and love of the
Disciples, which accompany him to Caesarea, and so send him to Tharsus in
Cilicia, which was Paul's native country. And here Paul's constancy is worthy
of singular commendation, who being on every side still in danger, yet
forsakes not Christ and his faith. For he knew by reading of the Prophets,
that many were the tribulations of the just. He knew that all they which
professed Christ, were called to bear the cross. He knew also, that he had
deserved much grieuouser punishmente, because he had procured the like unto the
christians before. Wherefore he thought he ought rather to rejoice, seeing he
suffered that for Christ's sake* which God might have laid on him as a
punishment for his own sins. Which consideration, if it were in our minds,
it would easily cause us also not to be offended at any adversity. In the
mean season Paul deserves great praise, for that according to Gods
commandment, when hehad escaped, he preached the Gospel in Tharsus, being
his own country, as appears hereafter in the xxij. Chapter, following the
example of Christ, who had a regard of his own country, though it were
ungrateful and unkind. Let us imitate Paul's faith, godliness, and
constancy. So shall it come to pass, that God being our protector and
defender, we shall be delivered from all the troubles of this life present, and
live hereafter in heaven with Jesus Christ, the son of God, our only Savior:
to whom be praise, honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.lxviij. Homely.
THEN had the congregation rest throughout all Jury, Galiley and Samarie, and
were edified and walked in the fear of the Lord, and multiplied by the comfort
of the holy ghost. And it came to pass as Peter walked throughout all
quarters, he came also to the Saints which dwelt at Lidda. And there he found
a certain man named Aeneas, which had kept his bed eight years, and was sick
of the palseye. And Peter said unto him, Aeneas? The Lord Jesus Christ make
thee whole. Arise, and make thy bed. And he arose immediately. And all that
dwelt at Lidda and Assaron saw him, and turned unto the Lord.
WE have hitherto seen the beginninges of the Apostle Paul, how he entered
his Apostleshippe with great labors and dangers. For he was twyse in ieoperdie
of his life, and twyse he escaped through the faithful help and industry of
the Disciples, though not without their danger. These things teach us what
troubles are ordained for the faithful servants of Christ, whom yet it
becomes to follow the constancy and faith of Paul, that they suffer not
themselves to be drawn from Christ, with any perils or adversity. For blessed
is he which abides unto the end. But he that puts his hand to the plough
and looks back, Luke. 9.
thereby declares sufficiently that he is not worthy and meet for the
kingdom of heaven. But whereas the things hitherto declared, may seem such,
as threaten the universal ruin and destruction of the Church: the godly
writer breaks of the story of Paul, and not without the instinct of the
holy spirit, passes to Peter the Apostle, and describes the cheerefuller
successes of the Church, which shortly followed. In the consideration whereof,
we ought to be the more diligent, the more comfort they be able to minister
unto us, wading in the waves of these tempestuous days.

He begins with the general state and condition of all the Churches
gathered together and founded in Jury, Galiley, and Samarie, The Church has
rest.
and he declares that there was a most ioiful and prosperous end of all the
troubles and turmoyles which the enemies of the truth began. The Churches
(says he) were at rest. This may seem a sodeyne change of things, and
passing all expectation, if we consider the state of the Church before, and
compare the fierce minds of the enemies, their devises and power, with the
Church as it now was. But this is Gods usage, who having regard to our
infirmity, intermedleth prosperity with adversity, 1. Co^. ^^. 2. Cor. 1.
Psalm. 94.
and suffers us not to be tempted above our strength. And where afflictions
abound, there gives most comfort. And this is no difficult thing for him to
do, which every day shows like examples in things natural. So, after Winter,
being grievous to us with frost and cold, comes the delectable and pleasant
Spring, the cheerful and merry Summer, and fruitful Harvest. So, after
continual showers, and horrible storms of hayle, comes comfortable Phoebus,
and chaseth away the Clouds. And Mariners when the terrors of tempests be
ouerpast, have afterward clear weather, and prosperous winds. And that the
state of the Church is ruled by like interchaungeablenesse, the examples of all
ages testify. But the only book of Judges may abundantly suffyce to approve
the same. Let no man therefore be so abashed at the countenance of present
calamity, to think he must utterly perish. For either God will cheer them
in this life with better success of things, or else of his mercy, he will
take them out of all the storms of this world, into the inheritance of his
heavenly kingdom. In the mean season, this place teaches us that the cross
is not always such a mark of the Church, that it can never be without it:
because we hear in this place, that the primitive Church had universal peace,
and the same came to pass also oftentimes in the years following. Therefore
their judgment is most vain, who rashly condemn every Church, which through
the benefit of God enjoys rest, and will grant unto Christians no time of
breathing nor rest from the cross. Again, we are admonished, that for the
attayning of peace, there needs neither dastardly dissimulation, nor false
abnegation of the faith, but rather constancy and boldness to keep the word
and doctrine of faith. For Luke says that then peace ensued, after Paul had
stirred the enemies of the truth, both at Damascus and at Jerusalem, with
earnest preaching and disputation against them. Therefore they that now a
days would have us to dissemble the truth, and say that by our vehement
inueyghing against errors and superstitions, we more exasperate and kindle the
enemies minds, talk altogether in vain, as though God were not able to
bridle and keep under them, which in their rage do nothing but threaten fire
and sword. Nay, we are taught by examples, that they which for such men's
sake, can find in their heart to deny the faith and truth, do seldom find
them faithful in friendship.

Next, Luke declares the fruit of the peace ensuing, forasmuch as he says
the congregations were edifyed. The fruit of Ecclesiastical pe^ce.
This may be understood two manner of ways. For the Church is said to be
edifyed, either when new believers be added thereunto, or else when they which
before believed, through more plentiful gifts of the holy ghost profit in
the faith. And the holy ghost does not without a cause use this Metaphore of
building, forasmuch as the Church is ye house of god, which is builded of
lively stones, that is to say, of such as believe in Christ (1. Timoth. 3. and.
1. Peter. 2.) and all the faithful are called otherwheres, ye Temple of the
holy ghost. For the which cause, the teachers are called builders, and the
building of ye church is called the building of God. 1. Cor. 3.
Furthermore, beside that by this example, it appears how the enterprises of
Christ's enemies in pulling down the church are in vain, we are also taught
what ought to be the end and mark of all them which bear office in the
Church. Paul diligently inculcateth the same speaking of the public exercises
of the Church, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians and.xiiij. Chapter.
Hereunto let all Ministers apply themselves with all their power, both with
teaching and reproouing, and let them always remember this saying of Paul, 2.
Cor. 10.
that they have power given them to edify and not to destroy. Let them
therefore suffer nothing in the Church, that serves to the destruction
thereof. Let Kings and Magistrates have the same end before them, whom the
Lord has appointed to be the Nurses of his Church, as we have already
oftentimes declared. The Elders to whom the discipline of the Church belongs,
let them look upon the same. Let parents and teachers of youth direct all
their doings to this end. This care should every day stir up private men
also. For whosoever brings any thing to the spiritual building up of this
Church, and shall build but one man as a lively stone upon Christ, which is
the foundation, surely he deserves more praise than they which with great
costs build Churches of Marble.

Last of all is declared, how the faithful used this peace and tranquillity.
They walked (says he) in the fear of the Lord, How the godly used the rest
wherein they lived.
and were filled with the comfort of the holy ghost. He attributes to them
fear of the Lord, whereby he understands all things belonging to true
religion, the knowledge of god, sincere faith, love of God, fulfilling of his
word, and faithful obedience unto him. For how shall he fear god, which
knows him not? how shall ye knowledge of God lack faith? and how shall faith
want the love of God? And where these things be, there must needs be the love
of the word, and obedience to the same. He says also that they were filled
with the comfort of the holy ghost. By this we may understand both the
preaching of the Gospel, and the inward suggestion of the spirit, John. 14.16
which Christ promises to those that be his. Surely both these, marvelously
comfort the minds and afflicted consciences of men, in that they teach us,
that God is made at one with us, and reconcyled to us, through the merit of
Christ, and in the middle of the broyle of afflictions, besprinkle us with the
promises of Gods help, as with the most wholesome water of a lively fountain.
And in these things, Luke says the primitive Church sought the recreation of
their minds, their joys and delights. Whereby we gather what their exercises
ought to be, which are at rest and peace. Therefore execrable is the
wickedness and ingratitude of such, which abuse quietness and peace, to the
license of the flesh, and in the mean season will neither by help,
counsel, nor at least by comfort, ease them whom they see many ways
afflicted for the testimony of Jesus Christ. This sin, as it is heinous, so
it is to common in these days, whereby it comes to pass, that as we abuse
peace, so we be easily offended and utterly dismayde at every light affliction.

These things being thus premised, he passes to Peter's acts or doings, Peter
traueyleth from Church to Church.
out of which he picketh two miracles, done orderly one after the other: the
one done at Lidda, the other at Ioppe. The occasion of these miracles is said
to be Peter's traueyling from Church to Church, according to his Apostolyke
office, not for that he usurped upon them as a Lord and ruler, but as to
succor where need was, such as were heavy laden and in distress, to confirm
the weak, to pull up errors where any were grown, and to bestow benefits upon
all men. For that these were the duties of the Apostles, it appears by many
other places, and the very name of an Apostle teaches the same, which
forbids them to have any certain or fixed sea or dwelling place, we read
euerywhere that Paul afterward observed the same trade, and confirmed
Churches in every place. 2. Cor. 11.
He says that he took care for all Churches. Therefore the Bishops of Rome go
about foolishly and ridiculously to defend their supremacy by this place. For
first they attribute to Peter only, that which it is evident was also
commanded to the other Apostles. Next, they impudently challenge to themselves,
the office of Peter, being altogether unlike Peter. Besides this, while they
catch unto themselves the cure over all Churches, they discharge not the duty
belonging to a faithful Apostle and shepehearde over one Church. We are
furthermore taught, that the Churches have then most need of faithful
overseers, when all things seem to be at peace and in safety. For as through
idleness and ease, men easily fall into licentiousness of the flesh: so
being at ease, in peace and quietness, Math. 12.
they be most in danger of the snares of the devil, as Christ has taught us.

But by this means it came to pass that Peter came to the Saints (that is, to
the faithful sanctified by the merit of Christ) which dwelt at Lidda, The
miracle of Aeneas healed of the pa^s^e.
where he restored one Aeneas a man sick of the palsy, and which had live
bedrid the space of eight years together, to his health again in the name of
Jesus Christ. In this miracle the circumstances of persons are diligently to be
considered. And in Aeneas certain things be reported which make for the
setting forth of the miracle. For he was sick of the palsy, which as it is
hardly cured even at the beginning, so being let long to run, it becomes
incurable. The same is a figure of the corruption of man. For sin has
brought us all to be weak, so that being bereaved of the strength of our first
state at the beginning, we be not able to think well. And this sickness
could be cured by no man's art or counsel, 2. Cor. 3.
which being derived from our first father into us, is conceived and borne with
us, and grows with us, as David testifies of himself. Psalm. 51. Wherefore
except we be borne again from above, there is no help for us in any other
thing. And this Peter plainly teaches us in this place, John. 3.
whereas being moved by the holy ghost, he comes to him, and with great
boldness says: Aeneas? The Lord Jesus Christ make thee whole. Arise and make
thy bed. For he so speaks these words, that he manifestly confesses all
the effect and praise of the miracle is due unto Christ only, and that to
himself belongs only but the ministry thereof. And that the Apostles
euerywhere did on this wise, is declared before in the restitution of the man
that was lame and hault in the third Chapter. The faithful that were at Lydda
acknowledged the same, who perceiving that Aeneas was made whole, by the name
of Jesus Christ, by and by were converted unto the Lord Jesus. And this is the
use of all miracles, to bear witness of the Apostles doctrine, and to bring
men unto Jesus Christ, by whose power they are done. They are therefore pieuish
and foolish, that so set forth the miracles wrought by the ministry of the
Saints, that they teach the people to run unto them, and worship them. But
it is plain, that they be false miracles which are done to that end, to
establishe the worship of any creature, and to call men from God the creator of
all things. Here might many things more be said. But because the same matter is
entreated otherwheres, and falls out oftener to be entreated of, we will of
purpose now be brief. Let it be sufficient to be hereof admonished, that
Jesus Christ is the only Physician both of body and soul, and the most
faithful defender and protector of his Church, who only is able to preserve
her amiddes the floudes of persecution, and sodeinly to grant her rest in her
affliction: To him be praise, honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.lxix. Homely.
THERE was at Ioppa, a certain woman a Disciple named Tabitha, (which by
interpretation is called Dorcas) the same was full of good works and alms
deeds, which she did. And it came to pass in those days that she was sick
and dyed. Whom when they had washed, they laid her in a Chamber. But forasmuch
as Lydda was nigh to Ioppa, and the Disciples had heard that Peter was there,
they sent unto him desiring him that he would not be grieved to come unto
them. Peter arose, and came with them. And when he was come, they brought him
into the chamber, and all the wydowes stood round about him, weeping and
showing the coats and garments which Dorcas made while she was with them. And
Peter put them all forth, and kneeled down and prayde, and turned him to the
body and said, Tabitha? arise. And she opened her eyes, and when she saw
Peter, she sat up. And he gave her the hand and lift her up. And when he had
called the Saints and widows, he showed her alive. And it was known through
all Ioppa, and many believed on the Lord. And it came to pass that he tarried
many days at Ioppa with one Simon a Tanner.
AS the son of God our Savior Jesus Christ sent his Disciples to preach the
Gospel: so he furnished them with miracles, whereby to purchase a credit to
their doctrine, and to declare the force or fruit of the merit of Jesus
Christ. To this end must those two miracles principally be referred, which
Luke reports were done by the ministry of Peter, in the end of the
Chapter. The first is the restitution of Aeneas, who lay bedred eight years
of the Palsy, but by calling on the name of Christ, was healed. Whereby we are
taught that the strength of our decayed nature is restored by Christ our
Physician, and that we which are not able otherwise to think a good thought,
are able in him, to do all things. To this is joined another miracle, which as
it is in deed greater, and more wonderful: so it more comfort us. For
Peter rayseth Thabita or Dorcas which was dead, to life again, thereby
declaring that Jesus Christ is Lord also over death, and therefore that they
ought not to fear death, which through faith be grafted in him. The
consideration hereof shall be very profitable, if in order we mark the
persons, of whom Luke here entreats.

He begins the description of the miracle with her, The description of
Thabita.
on whom the miracle was showed. And although it seem to be a matter of no
great importance, by what name she was called, yet he thought good to make
mention thereof, for the more troth of the story. He says that she was
called Thabita in the Assirian tongue, Dorcas in the Greek tongue, which word
in the Latin tongue, is as much to say, as a Kydde. But it is more
behoofefull to consider the things reported of her.

The first is the profession of faith and religion, A Disciple.
because he writes she was a Disciple, that is to say, a Christian. For they
that believed, in the primitive Church, were called Disciples, until at
Antioche they were called Christians, as we shall afterward perceive in the
eleventh Chapter. And this name was not without a mystery. For it did
admonish us, that Christ is our teacher, and declared that christianity
consisted not in the bare profession of the name, but rather in doctrine and
precepts, and in the diligent observation of the same. Whereunto Paul seems
to have had respect, 2. Cor. 10. Romans 1.16.
where he appoints obedience to be the end of preaching the Gospel, and of
all Apostolical ministry. As therefore by the consideration of this name, we
are taught that the profession of a Christian name, is in vain and
unprofitable, unless we faithfully obey Christ, whom we have professed: so we
are also taught, that the first step or greeste of our salvation is to be ye
Disciples of Christ. For he is the foundation of all doctrine, Ephesians. 2. 1.
Cor. 3.
as well of the Prophets as the Apostles, upon whom as many as will be
saved, must be builded. Which is the cause that this thing is first placed in
the commendation of Dorcas. This reprooueth the superstition of all them which
ascribing to them self a title of godliness and religion, forsake the name of
Christ whom they professed in their baptism, and choose rather to be called
the Disciples of men. 1. Cor. 1.3.
Whose vanity long since has been grievously reprehended and confuted by the
Apostle.

Furthermore, he says she was full of good works. Full of good works.
And that it might appear what works he meant, by exposition he calls them
alms deeds. This word comprehends all the works of mercy and charity,
whereby our neighbor is relieved, while either the hungry is fed, the
thirsty have drink, the naked is clothed, the captive redeemed, the sick
visited, or else whenever any afflicted is by our counsel or comfort helped
and refreshed. For this word alms in the Greek, takes his name of mercy.
And least any man might think there was in her but some vain affectation
only, he says, she did alms deeds or mercy. This example teaches us that
faith which makes us the Disciples of Christ, is not idle, nor consists not
in the sluggysh and slothful contemplation of heavenly things. For where it
possesses the mind, which is the chief part of man, and truly believes from
the heart, it cannot be, but that it must draw man wholly to the obedience of
God, and bring forth much fruit. Therefore Jesus Christ says: John. 15.
He that abides in me and I in him, he brings forth much fruit. And James
the Apostle exacteth chiefly of the vain vaunters of faith, that they will by
their works declare that faith which is so much in their mouth. Jacob. 2.
Therefore we may worthily complain that we have much injury done unto us,
when they that glory in the merits of their own righteousness, say we be
the enemies of good works, seeing we confess that it is no faith, except it
show it self by works, and that none can do good works, except he be
joined unto Christ by faith. For he says: As the branch cannot bear fruit
of it self, John. 15.
except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye, except you abide in me. Again,
this example teaches us, which be in deed good works. For we have heard she
was a Disciple of Christ, and now the works of charity are attributed unto
her. Therefore they be good works, which the Christians do through faith,
according to the rule of charity. For where of our selves we be not able to
think well, whatsoever we do without faith, it must needs be sin, as Paul
says, Romans 14. Furthermore, it cannot be called good, that serves for the
commodity of none, because god himself is for this cause called good, for
that he most liberally pours his treasures of grace upon all his creatures.
Therefore Christ has taught us that the law is fulfilled by love or charity,
and in the Prophets he euerywhere exacteth love of them, which puffed up in
confidence of the ceremonies of the law, Esaias. 58. Hoseas. 6.
thought that men were saved by the observing thereof. Yea, he teaches us that
charity or love is the cognizaunce whereby his people and servants may be
known, and he says that in the day of judgment he will have most respect
hereunto. John. 13. Math. 25.
By this place are confuted all those things that men feign of their own
heads, whiles they attribute salvation to most trifling ceremonies void of
faith and charity, the observing whereof all the Scripture with one consent
says, is altogether unprofitable. See Esaias. 29. Math. 15. Colos. 2. etc.

She sickneth and dies.
It follows in the description of Dorcas, that she fell deadly sick and dyed,
what time, as God would, Peter the Apostle should be at Lydda. Howbeit god
could easily have provided she should neither have fallen sick, nor yet have
died, forasmuch as it appears he prolonged the days of Ezechias, and that
Christ healed many of mortal diseases. But he suffers her being overcome of
the sorrows of sickness, to die. Whereupon we gather that the elect are not
free from common calamities, wherewith mankind uses to be afflicted. For both
they are punished with sickness, suffer penury and hunger, feel the smarte
of banishment, and have experience of whatsoever other adversities. But as
Paul testifyeth, all things work to their commodity. Roma. 8.
For so through them is Gods glory declared, and their faith exercised and
tried, and always there appear in them evident arguments of Gods goodness.
This thing the example of the blind man teaches us, who, Christ says was
borne blind, to the end the works of God might be showed in him. John 9.
And when he heard that Lazarus was sick, he said: This infirmity is not
unto death, but for the glory of God, John. 11.
that the son of God may be glorified by it* And the joyful and prosperous
success of the matter declares that the example of Dorcas ought to be
referred to the same end. For both she is restored unto life, and by her
means many are won unto Christ. These things teach us that we neither
should be offended at the adversities falling out unto us, nor that we should
over hastily give judgment of them, who fall into adversity and misery. For
many times they be the excellent vessels of Gods mercy and grace, which by
reason of continual adversity, seem in the judgment of the world to be the
vessels of wrath.

Moreover, he adds unto the things spoken of Dorcas, What they did with
Dorcas when she was dead. They wash her corpse.
what they of her household and certain widows of Ioppa did, when she was
dead. And first he says they washed her body, and laid it in a chamber. For
corses in old time used to be washed, both because of the hope of
resurrection, and also for that they knew, that those which after this life
should appear before the judgment seat of god, should need to be purified.
Hereby was prefigured the purification which is given us in the blood of
Christ. The same was also the meaning of the spices and ointments, wherewith the
dead bodies were dressed before they were buried. And these ceremonies might be
suffered for a while in the primitive Church, until they were become so
perfect, to renounce them altogether. In the mean season we are taught, that
Christian people should deal decently with their corses. For although there
ought to be no mourning after the manner of the Heathen, among them which know
there shall be a resurrection (1. These. 4.) nor no need of Iewishe ceremonies,
because all things belonging to our salvation, are abundantly fulfilled in
Christ: yet a diligent consideration must be had both of honesty and
godliness, which both the law of charity and Christian religion commands
us to observe, by reason that our bodies be the Temples of the holy ghost. Why
therefore should those bodies ungently be rejected, which the spirit of
Christ, not long before, did vouchsafe to dwell in? Surely the Prophet does
chiefly vpbrayde the Moabites, for that they forgetting all humanity, burned
the bones of the king of the Edomites. Amos. 2.
Therefore their offense is grievous in these days, which like brute beasts
use cruelty against the dead, and unmannerly throw and cast their carcasses
round about.

But they yet use one other courtesy. For they send messengers for Peter, They
send for Peter.
whom they heard was at Lydda, and was so famous a man by reason of his
miracles, which was no small deed of faith and charity. For they hope that the
Minister of Christ was able to restore her to life again, and that they
greatly desired, because they knew the Church of Christ, had need as yet of
such a member. This is also the property of faith, that despaireth not, no not
in death, because it knows that Christ has overcome death, and who once
embrace faith with sincere affection of love, them she casts not of, no not
after death. Here also appears a singular reward of christian godliness and
liberality. For where Dorcas while she lived, was much given hereunto, there
wanted not that faithfully cared for her, when she was dead. Thus God uses
to preserve the memory of those that be his. And oftentimes it comes to
pass, that they which seemed to be hated of all men, because of their
godliness: after they are dead, they find many defenders of their good name,
whereof we have example in our head, Jesus Christ. For after he was put unto
the shameful death of the cross, Joseph and Nichodemus, which before that,
were but secret Disciples, buried him honorably. Let no man therefore shun to
suffer shameful death for Christ's sake, Psalm. 34.
since that God so faithfully preserves the remembrance of those that be his.

They show the garments that she made
Over and beside all this, they declare in the presence of Peter, the grief
they had conceived by her death through weeping, and they show unto the
Apostle the garments, which she caused to be made for the poor, while she
lived. Where beside the duty of charity, whereof we have spoken, may be seen
what be the true relics of the Saints, and faithful of Christ, which the
godly ought both openly to show, and to worship and kiss, that is to say,
The relikes of the dead.
the works of their charity, and steps of their life. Of these it is said,
that they follow the dead, and remain when they be rotten. These things
Christ commended in Marie, Apoc. 14.
and because of that last annoynting of him, that she bestowed upon him, he
promised the remembrance thereof should always remain in his Church. Marc.
14.
The Ecclesiastical hystories show us euerywhere such Relics as these.
These it becomes us of duty to praise, and by diligent imitation of them, to
worship. But to worship their bones, after a superstitious sort, we are
commanded by no testimony, or example of Scripture. Moreover, as it is a
great praise of the godly, to leave behind them for posterity, examples and
presidentes of charity, so is it a dishonest and shameful thing to leave
after them, when they are gone, the tokens of covetousness, lechery,
unrighteousness, and intemperancie. Such as are hourdes and heaps of
treasure, and whatsoever instruments else of wickedness are thereby gotten,
which the Apostle says shall be hereafter, Jacob. 5.
the testimony of just condemnation. O wretched state shall theirs be, the
memory whereof, widows and fatherless children by reason of their goods
taken from them, shall testifye with weeping tears. But more wretched shall
they be, who as though they had committed small offense in their life time,
hang over their Sepulchers, swords and shieldes, and stand in complete
harness, that the remembrance of their life led in robbery and murdering,
may remain the longer. O hard heart which the remembrance of bitter death
is not able to mollify.

How Peter rayseth up Dorcas.
But let us see at length what Peter did, being sent for of them. It is said
that he straightwaies went with them that were sent unto him. Which is a great
argument of readiness and zeal in promoting the kingdom of Christ. Whereby we
may easily gather with what spirit they are led that show themselves
dangerous in going about the things which serve to the setting forth of
Christ's glory, and the salvation of others. Further, when he came to Ioppa,
and was brought into the chamber where the corpse was laid, not much regarding
the weeping of the Wyddowes, because by instinct of the holy ghost working in
him, he minded another matter, he put them all out of the Chamber, falls on
his knees, and turns him unto fervent prayer. The holy Apostle truly
follows old presidentes and examples, forasmuch as it appears that
Elizaeus the Prophet, 2. Reg. 4. Math. 9.
and Jesus Christ used the like trade in raising up of the dead. For as
prayers require a certain going aside and solitariness: so it seems to be a
point of modesty, that he would not show a thing of such importance among
so many, to seek praise thereby, but would do it by himself alone. And
while he makes such earnest prayer, he evidently declares that all the
success and praise of the miracle ought to be referred to Christ, as unto God,
whereof has been already many times entreated. When he had done his prayers,
he speaks unto the dead, and bids her arise. Which might seem a
ridiculous thing, if Christ had not done the like when he raised up Iairus
daughter and Lazarus. Such sayings as these, are the Preambles of that
terrible and loud voice, whereby at the later day all the dead shall be
raised up, as Christ himself teaches, John. 5. Yea, this is an infallible
argument of the resurrection that shall be, that at the voice of a man
pronounced by the spirit and name of Christ, we read how the dead are
raised again. For the effect of the matter declares, that Peter's speaking was
not in vain. For forthwith Dorcas opened her eyes and looked on Peter, then
she sits up, last of all, Peter reareth her up by the hand, and shows
her alive to all them that were called in. By the which miracle is proved,
that the doctrine that Peter taught was a lively doctrine, and that Jesus
Christ the author thereof, was Lord both of life and death. And the elect
acknowledged the same, which straight way when they had seen the miracle,
believed in the Lord.

Unto this narration Luke adds a few other things which serve for a
preparation to that that follows. Peter lodges at Simon the Tanners.
For he says that Peter remained at Ioppe certain days in the house of one
Simon a Tanner, in whose house he was admonished by a vision from heaven, to
call the Gentiles into the Communion of the church, and was sent for by
Cornelius the Centurion, as shall be showed in the Chapter following. Here let
us observe, of what manner of people, the Primitive Church was collected, seeing
Peter had none other host, but such an one, as got his living by an
handycraft, and that not one of the fynest. Hereof Paul teaches us, that we
should rejoice in the Lord alone. Furthermore, the modesty of Peter is
declared, 1. Cor. 1.
who disdayned not such an harbor, where as now adays kings palaces, are
scarce able to receive his counterfeyt successor. Let us follow the modesty of
the Apostle, and therein believe and serve Jesus Christ: to whom be praise,
honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The tenth chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The.lxx. Homely.
THERE was a certain man in Caesarea called Cornelius, a Captain of the
soldiers of Italy, a devout man, and one that feared God with all his
household, which gave much alms to the people, and was always in prayers unto
God. The same saw by a vision evidently (about the.ix. hour of the day) an
Angel of God coming in to him, and saying to him Cornelius? When he looked on
him, he was afraid, and said, what is it Lord? He said unto him: Thy
prayers and thy almesses are come up into remembrance before God. And now
send men to Ioppa, and call for one Simon whose surname is Peter. He lodges
with one Simon a Tanner, whose house is by the sea side. He shall tell thee
what thou ought to do.
HItherto the first part of this story has been declared, wherein has been
showed how the Apostles according to the commandment of Christ, preached the
wholesome word of the Gospel euerywhere to the Jews. And a great many
believed, and Luke declares a marvelous increase of Christian faith in the
Church. Yet the greater part and specially those that were of most authority
withstoode the truth. For both they laid hands on the Apostles, and stoned
Steven, and made havoc of the whole Church at Jerusalem, by horrible
persecution, and sent Saul with public commandments, as far as Damascus,
to oppress the growth of Christ's Church, being even in the blade as we
commonly use to say. And it is not unlike but many others did as it is here
written Saul did. Therefore the incurable and stubborn contempt of so
wholesome a doctrine, deserved that at length the kingdom of God should be
taken from the Jews, Math. 21.
and brought to the Gentiles, as Christ prophesied should come to pass. How
this thing began to be put in effect, Luke rehearses in this Chapter, The
calling of the Gentyles.
and declares the story of Cornelius, which we may aptly name the first
fruits of the Gentiles that were called, seeing he was chosen of God, to be
the beginning of so weighty a matter. Above all things, the principal use of
this history must be observed, which consists herein: how God uses to cast
of the unthankful and wicked enemies of the Gospel, by his just judgment,
and is not so bound to any Nation, that he is compelled to bear with it, if
it be unworthy. Hereunto is to be added an other thing, that is to say, how
the salvation contained in Christ, belongs not to the Jews only, but also
to the Gentyles. Which as it is no small comfort to us which come of the
Gentyles: so, it behooves that we stand always in fear, because the Jews
were cast of and forsaken, least we by like unthankfulness and disobedience,
deserve also to be refused. For Paul's saying shall always stand in his full
strength and force, Romans 11.
If God spared not the natural branches, take heed least it come to pass,
that he spare not thee also. And this is the sentence of Christ long agone
pronounced, that every branch that brings not forth fruit, John. 15.
shall be hewn down and cast into the fire. But because the vocation and
adoption of the uncircumcised Gentiles, seemed to the Jews a foolysh and an
absurd thing (for that they only so many years together, were thought
worthy of that name and title, and therefore abhorred all other Nations, as we
do the Turks and them at this day:) First God would have the vocation of the
Gentyles to be preached by the Prophets, whereof we may see singular
testimonies in them, Psalm. 2. and.27. Esaias. 2. and.19. Again, 42. and.49.
Zach. 9. etc. Then declares he a notable beginning hereof in Cornelius, whom
he so called, that any man might see therein the counsel and deuyse of Gods
providence. For he does vouchsafe to send his Angel from heaven to
Cornelius, and instructs Peter by an heavenly vision, whereby he declares
that he will have the Gentyles called into his Church, as we shall see when we
come to the place. At this time we have to consider what God did vouchsafe to
do by Cornelius.

For Luke begins with the description of Cornelius, The description of
Cornelius. A Captain.
which he knitteth up in marvelous brevity and playnenesse. First declaring
his state and kind of life, he says he was a Captain of the Italian
Soldiers. For the Romans used to entertayne diverse bands of men, of diverse
Nati^ons, according to the which they gave them their names. And because among
all nations, they esteemed none more than the Italians, the Italian garrisons
were preferred above others. And there is no doubt but that Cornelius was an
Italian, forasmuch as he was one of the chief of that band. But because he
dwelt at Ca^sarea, which the ancient writers call Turris Stratonis, the tower
or castle of Straton, the manner or state of the soldiers in those days must
be considered, that we may the easilyer understand the state of Cornelius.
Thus write the Roman Hystoriographers. After the victories that Pompey
(called ye great) had gotten, who was the first that subdued Syria and Jury
unto the Roman Empire, the people of Rome had no more grievous enemies, than
the Parthians, who were greatly encouraged with the death of Crassus, and with
the overthrow of the Romayne Legions, and number of ensigns and standerdes
which they had taken, wherein were the pictures of splayed Eagles painted. With
whose incursions and roades, because they were continually molested, they
thought good to place in the Cities bordering upon them, certain garrisons of
soldiers, which within a short warning being mustred, might make a complete
army, if need so required, whereby to repulse and beat back the enemy. And
those soldiers also were a defense and safegarde for the Cities of Jury, to
tame and keep under the courage of the Jews, which were very prone and ready
to make tumults and insurrection. Hence comes it, that we hear so often
mention made of the Captains and soldiers in the writings of the Evangelists,
Pomponius Mela in his first book of the situation of the world, and.16. chap
whereof diverse dwelled and kept house in Jury, and wandered not from place to
place, as the sold or hired Nation of Caria did. And it pleased God of this
kind of men, to gather together the first fruits of the Gentyles in the
Church of Christ, that his grace and goodness might appear the greater,
seeing it is evident, that in the life of soldiers there is great
licenciousnesse, much corruption of manners, and all kind of vnrulynesse. In
the mean season, of the things which we have spoken of the soldiers of those
days, may be gathered what the state of that people is, which sometime were
free, and after that, through ingratitude and disobedience, lost their
privilege of freedom. For it is manifest, that the Jews whom God brought out
of Egypt, and set at liberty, were such people as obeyed their own lawful
Magistrates, being subject under no foreign Princes power. But by abusing of
this benefit, they lost both their liberty and goods for the most part. So
that now they are not only in subjection to the commandment and
covetousness of the Roman Presidents, but have in every of their Cities,
garrisons of foreign soldiers, among whom, though there were some to be
commended for their equity and godliness, yet many examples teach us that
the most part of them were souldierlike, that is to say, fierce and
presumpteous. Yea, God in time past threatened such infelicitie to the
disobedient. Therefore let as many as enjoy the benefit of freedom in these
days, learn by example of the Jews, to obey their lawful Magistrates, and
their wholesome laws, least hereafter they taste of the like tyranny and
bondage.

Devout and fearing God.
But let us return to Cornelius, whose conversation and manners are marvelously
commended. For Luke attributes to him devotion and fear of God. Whereby it
appears he was free from that ydolatrie of the Gentyles, which wickedly and
foolishly worshipped many Gods. And this shall appear to have been a great and
singular enterprise, if we consider the state of those times, when all Nations
were under the rule of the Romans, by whose laws it was enacted, that no man
should profess any strange religion. In his Apology, cap. 5.
For as Tertullian writes, none might be worshipped as a God, but such as the
Senate would allow as Gods, in so much that they refused to take Christ for a
God, because Tiberius had moved the Senate to have him so taken, with the
prerogatyue of his suffrage and voice. Therefore it must needs proceed of
great constancy of mind in Cornelius that he durst being an Officer, and
therefore knowing he could not go vnespyde, refuse the Gods of the Gentyles,
and worship the true God. By this example are the men of these days confuted,
which in matters of religion, think inferior Officers must attempt nothing,
without the consent of the highest Magistrate, but that men must simply obey ye
higher powers. But as we deny not but whatsoever duties belong to the
Emperors and Kings, we must perform and fulfill them: so, we keep and
appoint our religion for God only, and affirm that religion must not be
violated or broken for any Princes pleasure. And we know that Daniel and his
fellows long sithence, thought as we do, which chose rather to be cast into
an hot furnace, and into a cave of Lions, than to violate or break Gods true
religion. And this is the greatest commendation of Cornelius, that he openly
worshipped the true God, not tarying for the Princes law to establish the
same. Yea, and Christ commended the faith of the Centurion, which plainlye
confessed he was under the commandment of another, Luke 7.
by a singular testimony and also miracle.

But where the Evangelist attributes to Cornelius praise of devotion and fear
of God, he declares also his outward exercises, The exercises of true
godliness.
whereby he vttred and declared his religious mind. Among which, this is the
first, where he says, he feared not God himself only, The instructing of
the family or household.
but that his family also was well instructed in true devotion and fear of
God. For this is the property of the godly, that as their selves be given unto
God, so wyshe they them also to be which belong unto them. For why should they
suffer them to straye from God, whom they know, he has committed to their
charge? Surely Abraham is commended, because he was both godly himself, and
did teach his family the true worship and religion of God. Gene. 18.
And because there be commandments of God to that end and purpose, (as is
to be seen Deuter. 6. and Psalm. 78.) the ungodliness of the household is
worthilye imputed to the householder, if through his negligence they wax
ungodly. The Scripture sets out to us a notable example hereof in Heli. 1.
Sam. 2.3. 1. Reg. 10.11.
And the Queen of Saba prayseth Solomon because of his well ordered Countries,
but afterward he is blamed for the ungodliness of his wives. As many
therefore as will be praised for religion, let them not think they have done
their duty, if their selves be worshippers of God, but let them labor to
bring all those they have charge of, unto God likewise.

Moreover, Cornelius did alms, that is to say, Almesses.
exercised the works of mercy. Whereby it appears that religion had taken
such root in his heart, that being enflamed therewith, he showed all kind of
duty unto men also. And it is like he was not ignorant of that rule, which the
Baptist had given unto the soldiers, which came to ask him counsel, saying:
Hurt no man, neither trouble any man wrongfully, Luke. 3.
and be contented with your pays or wages But as though he had done but
little in perfourming hereof, he thinks it his duty, to relieve other men's
necessities also. And truly he that feels not his mind as yet so affected,
let him cease to glory in religion, because Paul counts the things of
greatest importance, 1. Cor. 3.
as unprofitable, if we be void of charity. Unto these, as a third thing,
Continual prayers.
is added continuance in prayer, which I judge was stirred up in him, of a
desire that he had to know the truth. For me thinks he is to be counted in
the number of those, which having long agone attained to the true knowledge of
God, think it is true that God had promised a Savior, but were ignorant who
it was. Him therefore he desired to have revealed unto him, least it should
come to pass that following his own reason, he might err in the way of
salvation. This sense may be gathered afterward of the words of the Angel,
which says that Peter should show him what he had to do.

Let us compare the Soldiers of our days with this Captain, A comparison
between Cornelius and the soldiers of our days.
which use to defend themselves as well by his example, as by others of his
calling, and it shall easily appear, how little these examples serve them.
Cornelius is commended for his devotion. But these men think, devotion
belongs not unto soldiers, but unto religious men. Cornelius fears God
with all his household, but these men think those minds most souldierlike,
that have least fear both of God and man. Cornelius (says Luke) help and
relieved the poor with alms, but these men live by stealth, refrayning
neither profane nor Church goods. Cornelius was continuallye in prayers, and
desired to have the knowledge of the promised Savior revealed to him, but
these men's tongues used to swearing, cursing, and blasphemy, with wicked
audacitie, pollute the cross of our savior Christ, his passion, his wounds,
and whatsoever else. I speak not now how Cornelius warred under his lawful
Magistrate, to keep out foreign force of the enemy, to suppress sedition, and
maintain public tranquillity: but our soldiers like the people of Caria,
hired for money, entermedle, and busy themselves in wars pertaining nothing to
them, and hate the name of peace, worse than the devil. But what speak I of
soldiers, seeing they are not to be compared with Cornelius, which think
themselves now a days the perfitest men in Christendom? So dead is devotion
in the minds of men: so great is the desire of private lucre in all sorts of
men. And all men's minds almost, are so cold in prayers unto God, that
though adversity on every side urge them, they cannot shake of this
carelessness.

The calling of Cornelius.
Now, after the description of Cornelius, follows his vocation, the beginning
whereof proceeds of the Angels apparition, where appears a great token of
Gods goodness. For God might have thought us unworthy the service of the most
basest Creature. But not contented to have appointed all other things to serve
our use, he sends out his Angels also, (as Paul teaches) for the
mynisterie of those that be his. Hebrews. 1.
And such is the manner of this apparition, that it is void of al suspicion of
craft or subtletie. For in the clear light, about the.ix. hour of the day,
does the Angel come in unto him, in a visible form, (yet representing some
more majesty, than is in man) and calls Cornelius by his propre name,
thereby to make him the more attent to receive the commandments of God. For
God uses so plainly to deal with us, that we need suspect no guyle, such,
as commonly uses to be in apparitions of Devils, which are always dark and
doubtful. And yet notwithstanding Cornelius his great and fervent study of
religion, he is abashed, at the sight of the angel. Which thing as it may be
attributed to the infirmity of man, so is it the property of the godly, to be
afraid at the presence of godly majesty. For this, we read came to pass
unto Daniel, and afterward to Christ's three Disciples in the mount of Thabor.
And we ought thus reverently to be affected toward the word of God,
forasmuch as God no way so much shows him self present unto us. Therefore let
us with Cornelius acknowledge God speaking to us in his word, and offer our
selves prompt and ready to fulfill his commandments. The chief thing in this
business is the message of the Angel, which appears to consist of two
parts. Therefore we will speak of each of them, in their order.

The saying or message of the Angel.
The first part conteyneth a consolation, whereby he cheereth up Cornelius
mind, having been long in perplexity. For he says: Thy prayers and thy
almesses are come up into remembrance before God. Which words are not
negligently to be passed over, because the Papists abuse them two manner of
ways, while they strive for the glory of man's righteousness, against the
merit of Christ. Against the mainte^ners of merits.
For first they hereof gather that men be prepared by their own power and
works to be afterward judged worthy to receive greater grace and salvation
in Christ. Next, they simply and absolutely, attribute the praise of merit,
unto works, as though we were justified and saved by them. But the thing it
self declares they are deceived in them both. For touching the first, it is
most vain that they dream of this place concerning their preparations,
forasmuch as it sufficiently appears, that Cornelius had nor did of him self
none of those things which before was rehearced of him. For how should one of
the Gentyles, borne and brought up in superstition from his childehode, know
and fear the true God, of his own industry, 1. Cor. 2.
considering that the natural man perceyueth not the things belonging unto
the spirit of God? How should he also make his prayers to be acceptable unto
God, without faith, Heb. 11.
seeing that without faith it is impossible to please God? And if he had faith
(as it can not be denied) it must needs be that he had it of the gift of God.
Ephe. 2.
And faith is not without the spirit of regeneration, which brought forth in
him both the fear of God, the desire to be almesfull, and what soever good
quality else was in him. And we all stand in the case that Cornelius did, and
no man is able of him self, to make ready him self, to receive the grace of
God, 2. Cor. 3.
forasmuch as we be not able of our selves to think well. Furthermore, it is
ridiculous, to attribute the name of merit unto works, and to glory of them,
in the judgment of God. For who is able to say, that he did them of himself?
And have we forgotten that saying of Paul, What have thou, that thou have not
received? 1. Cor. 4.
And if thou have received it, why boaste^t thou, as though thou had not
received it? Moreover, we must needs acknowledge whether we will, or nyll,
that whatsoever works come from us, be imperfite, although we do them by the
grace of God working in us, according to the appointment of Gods word. For the
concurrence of our carnal affections, and wicked lus^es and desires infect the
same. In so much that the holy men in the Prophet say: Esaias. 64.
that our righteousness is as a ragged cloth arrayed or distayned with a
woman's disease. To conclude, whereas all things in us are corrupt, whatsoever
is in us, that pleases God, it pleases him because of our faith only in Jesus
Christ. For in him is he well pleased. Math. 3 17.
Yet we deny not but that the Scripture uses many times this word reward.
But that reward is the gift of Gods grace, Luke. 17.
who (as Augustine says) crowns or rewards his gifts in us, who
otherwise deserve to be called unprofitable servants* Therefore the words of
the Angel have a far other meaning. For his purpose is to teach us, that
God had a consideration of Cornelius doing before this, and that he despised
not his prayers, and whatsoever other deeds of devotion else he did. And he
calls to his remembrance the promise of Christ, saying: To every one that
has shall be given. For they are said to have, which use to bestow the
gifts given them of Gods liberality, as meet is. Hereof may be taken a
general comfort, that earnest prayer and devotion is not unprofitable or in
vain, and out of doubt we shall perceive great increase of Gods gifts, if we
will lend unto the Lord. Apply the Parable of Talents, which is written Math.
25. to this place.

In the other part he teaches him what he should do. Cornelius is appointed
to send for Peter.
The chief point of the commandment is, that he should send for Simon
Peter, who should teach and instruct him what to do. And this is an evident
argument of the goodness of God, that he puts Peter rather than Cornelius,
to pain, to take the journey. For thus he uses to offer unto us grace and
salvation, when we seek not for it, not because he would favor the sloth of
our flesh, but for that by his diligence he would inflame us, to the like
diligence in seeking for our salvation and his glory. We have an example hereof
in our first parents, who because they would not first seek God, and call
upon him, were sought for and called of him. Furthermore, this place makes for
the setting forth of the outward word and Ecclesiastical ministerye. For as
before, he sent Paul to Ananias: so now he appoynteth Peter to be Cornelius
teacher, whom he might have instructed by ministry of the Angel. For it is
evident that none comes unto Christ, but such as the father draws: and
faith is the gift of God, but yet the order of God abides inviolable, Romans 10.
that faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. As many
therefore as disdain to hear the word of God at the mouth of man, declare
thereby that they be unworthy of the kingdom of God, because they contemn
his ordinance, and desire the order of salvation by him instituted, to be
destroyed. Let us also use the doctrine of the Apostles, that we being thereby
instructed, may do those things which be acceptable unto God, and may obtain
salvation through Jesus Christ our only Savior: to whom be praise, honor,
power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.lxxj. Homely.
AND when the Angel which spoke unto him was departed, he called two of his
household servants, and a devout soldier of them that waited on him, and
told them all the matter, and sent them to Ioppa. On the morrow as they went
on their journey, and drew nigh unto the city, Peter went up upon the top of
the house to pray, about the sixth hour. And when he waxed an hungered, he
would have eaten. But while they made ready, he fell into a trance, and saw
heaven opened, and a certain vessel come down unto him, as it had been a
great sheet knit at the four corners, and was let down to the earth: wherein
were all manner of fowerfooted beasts of the earth, and vermin and worms, and
fowls of the air. And there came a voice to him: Rise Peter, kill and eat
But Peter said, not so Lord. For I have never eaten thing that is common or
unclean. And the voice spoke unto him.
AS GOD in electing the people of the Jews, used his singular favor and
goodness, the which Moses and the Prophets euerywhere set forth: so when he
cast them of, and took the Gentyles into their place, he declared a singular
example of his wrath and justice: which thing it behooves us the more
diligently to consider, because Paul deduceth a general doctrine thereof,
showing that no man shall escape unpunished, which contemns the mercy and
goodness of God, considering that God has used so great severity in lopping
of the natural branches. Romans 11.
But because this seemed to the Jews a thing unmeet to be said, or to be
believed, insomuch that the Apostles for a good space were not resolved in that
point, and the Gentyles also had no little doubt thereof, in consideration of
the life which they had led aforetymes, it was therefore requisite, that there
should be some notable entry and beginning hereof. Therefore is Cornelius the
Centurion chosen, even from among the number and vocation of warriers, that the
mercy of God might appear the more plain and manifest. He is advertised by an
Angel sent from heaven, to call Peter unto him: by the which argument only,
it did evidently appear, that all things in this business came to pass by
Gods working. Yet shall the same appear in the things following more fully and
evidently, and for the declaration hereof, this present place makes not a
little, which shows the faithful obedience of Cornelius being thus
admonished by the Angel, and also teaches us how Peter was advertised by a
vision from heaven, that he should not refuse to go preach the Gospel to
Cornelius.

Luke is very diligent in describing of Cornelius obedience, The obedience of
Cornelius.
because it gives us an evident testimony of his faith, which shall appear
the more plain and manifest, if we expende, how many impediments there were,
to have kept him from believing and obeying the Angels words. It was a
dangerous matter for him to change religion, whose duty it was chiefly to
see that no tumults or business should be made in Syria, through the change
or alteration of any thing. And there was no help or aid for him in man,
whereby he might hope to defend himself against the power of the Emperor of
Rome. Moreover, it was to be suspected, that in a Tanners house there should
be any which could teach a man the way to life and salvation. For who would
look for such a teacher out of such a school? Who would not also suspect
him, that (as it were) lay lurking in such an obscure corner? But faith only
overcomes all these things, which to obey, Cornelius had long before
submitted himself. And this example may worthily be joined to those which
Paul repeateth Heb. 11. We are taught, that we must not for any dangers be
feared, or drawn from the doctrine of truth, nor suspect the faith any manner
of way, for any slender or base appearance outwardly, but let us follow
Cornelius, and without all delay fulfill the commandments of God. For he by
and by called unto him two of his servants, and a devout soldier, and sends
them to Ioppa to bring Peter unto him. Where appears a singular commodity
which Cornelius had by the godly ordering of his family. The commodity of a
well instructed family.
For now has he faithful servant, to whom he may safely commit a
business of such credit and importance. An example whereof, Moses shows us
in Abraham and his servant. But their case is far otherwise, which so neglect
their family, Genesis 24.
as though their instruction appertayned nothing unto them. For where they will
not bring them up in their duty to God, they be for the most part untrusty
and unfaithful to them, as who through their negligence was void of religion.
This, Nero the tyrant found true, who, as the Hystoriographers write,
complained that he had never a faithful friend, no not at the last hour of
his death. For why should he find them trustye, whom he wickedly had armed
and set against God and his Christ? Hereof ought all men in authority to
learn a general doctrine to use them that belong unto them, to the true
religion and worshipping of God. For it cannot be that they will be faithful
to their Magistrates, Eusebius in the first book of the life of Constantius.
Sozomenus in the Tripartite hystorye, 1. book. 7. chapter
which have denied their faith unto God. This, Constantius father to
Constantine the great, well perceived in time past, which thought good to
thrust them out of his Court which had at his bidding burnt sacrifice to the
Gods, thinking that they would do him little true service, which would be
unthankful to God, and betray his true religion.

Furthermore, it is not to be omitted how again he attributes a praise of
godliness to the soldier which used to wait upon Cornelius. For besides that
it appears hereby how much the conversion of the godly makes to the
attayning to godliness and salvation: Religion has place also a^onge
soldiers.
We are also taught that there is no state or kind of life utterly void of
religion, since that it has place among soldiers in warfare which in many
men's opinion does then best brook her name, when she has cast from her all
religion. Howbeit, the scripture teaches us, that God is the most prosperous
Captain of wars. 2. Sam. 10.
By his conduct and leading, Ioab encountering with a great band of Assirians,
had a notable victory. David being ready to darren battle with Goliath, 1.
Sam. 17. Psa. 18.144
calls upon God for help. David attributes unto God all the victories and
praise that ever he gate by war, where he says that God teaches his hands
to fight. Eusebius in the Eccl^s^asticall hystory the.ix. book and.ix. chap.
Ruffinus in the same history. ^1. book, and 33. chap.
Yea, Constantinus being admonished by an Oracle, caused the sign of the holy
cross to be borne before his armies, as finding better success under it, than
under the ensigns of the Romans Eagles. And when Theodosius in the
dangerous war against Eugenius and Arbogastus, had spent an whole night in
prayers, and was encouraged to the fight by a sight of Angels cheering and
exhorting him thereunto, we read how the next day he had the victory with the
aid and help as it were of the winds that blewe that day. Therefore their
sayings are most to be discommended, who, as the Roman Orator says, there
is no rowme or place for law or right whiles wars are in hand: Cicero in his
Oration for Luc. Muraena.
so, they think wars may be made and followed without any religion. But take
away religion, and they shall nothing differ from the rage of savage beasts,
nor cannot be defended with any honest color, yea, they shall most cruelly
rage beyond all right and reason. These things teach us, that the furiousness
of the Anabaptists is not to be suffered, Against the Anabaptists.
which hold opinion, that it is not lawful for a Christian man to wear a
weapon, considering that these Captains and diverse other soldiers in the
Scripture, are commended for their faith and religion. And surely their opinion
is so absurd, that rather they ought to say, that no man can worthily wear
his weapon, but he that is a Christian.

Peter by a vision is enstructed concerning the calling of the Gentyles.
Now, let us come to Peter the Apostle, whom God instructs by a peculiar
vision, that being deceived with the common error of the Jews, he should not
reject the message of Cornelius. And that that is here done, is not much unlike
to that we heard before, came to pass between Ananias and Saul. For even as
there, so here also is Cornelius first admonished to send for Peter. After
this, Peter is certifyed of his vocation, not to deny his duty of love,
either to Christ, or to Cornelius. This is a peculiar and singular argument of
Gods goodness, which is desirous that men should be saved, and come unto the
knowledge of the truth. It is good to examine all the circumstances of this
vision, that the knowledge of the things belonging to our salvation, may
appear the playner.

Peter goth to his prayers fasting.
First, Peter is to be considered, who as it is said, was gone up fasting
into the upper story of the house, about the sixth hour of the day, while in
the mean while his dinner was a preparing. For we have declared before in the
third Chapter, how in times passed, certain hours were appointed for prayers.
For although the effect of prayers be bound neither to time nor place, yet
must we observe a certain opportunity in them, and certain times must needs
be prescribed for prayer, least being occupied in other businesses, we neglect
a thing most necessary of all other. Peter's example also teaches us, that
prayers require as well a secret going apart, and aside, as also a certain
sobriety, in body and mind, that the devotion of them be not extinguished by
surfeit and pampering of the body. For the which cause the Scriptures both of
the old and new Testament, many times join praying and fasting together.
This thing reprooueth the foolishness of the hypocrites, who as they order
their praying for ostentation sake, so they ascribe the praise of merit
absolutely unto their fasting, whereas the use thereof serves for none other
cause, but to tame and keep under the flesh, that it wax not to proud and
malapert, and so disturb and ouerturne as well prayer, as all other exercises
of true godliness. See Matthew. 9. Esaias. 58. chap.

Moreover, it is written, that he fell into a trance, Peter's trau^ce.
to the end we should understand, that in this matter nothing is to be
attributed to natural sight, nor that Peter was deceived through defect or
want of his natural senses. For being rapt and taken as it were, out of
himself, he perceived these things with the eyes of his mind^. For where the
natural man (as Paul says) perceyueth not the things that appertain unto
God, it follows that his mind must be rapt by the spirit of God, out of the
world, to perceive the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven. This thing Paul
teaches us by his own example, whereas writing how he was rapt into the
third heaven, he plainly confesses, 2. Cor. 12.
that he was ignorant whether this came to pass unto him in the body or out of
the body. And this thing is the more certain to be believed, because he saw
not these things with his corporal senses, which use for the most part to be
deceived.

After these things, follows a diligent description of the vision. The
description and scope of the vision.
He sees the heavens opened, he sees a great vessel, let down like unto a
sheet, bound at the four corners. There seemed to be in the same all kind of
beasts, as well fourefooted, as creeping, and flying fowls, but specially
such as in the law are called unclean, concerning which, we may read Leuit.
11. Deuteronomy. 14. Hereunto is added a voice bidding Peter arise, kill, and eat.
Above all things it behooves us to mark the end and scope of the vision,
which by the things that follow, appears to have been none other, but that
God would thereby teach us, that all the difference which hitherto had been
between the Jews and Gentyles, by reason of the ceremonies of the law, was
now taken away, and that there was no impediment or let, but that the Gentyles
also might be admitted into the fellowship of the Gospel and salvation gotten
by Christ.

It shall appear that this vision makes marvelously for this present
business, if all the mysteries in the same be thoroughly considered. An
allegorical exposition of the vision.
For it confirms Peter's wavering mind, and notably declares the state of
the whole Church. It is said that Peter was an hungered at that time. But it is
plain, that he was altogether enflamed with the desire to have Christ's
kingdom increased, and the Church enlarged, hungered not so much* in body as
in mind. For there fell out things which might marvelously vex his mind.
For the Jews, to whom it seemed salvation chiefly was due, had very
unworthily rejected it, yea, and persecuted it. And he thought the Gentyles,
unworthy to be partakers thereof: forasmuch as he knew that Christ had once
commanded that they should not go into the way of the Gentyles, but preach the
Gospel unto the lost sheep of Israel. He remembered also that Christ took the
Gentyles but as Dogs, because he said to the woman of Cananie. Math. 15.
It becomes not to cast the childrens bread unto dogs. For although Christ
afterward commanded the Gospel should be preached to all creatures, yet it
seemed to him, that it was to be understood of such Gentyles, as should
forsake their heathen superstitions, and turn to the Jews religion, and
would use the iustifications of the law of Circumcision. Therefore what other
thing could Peter do in this case, but stand amazed in great doubt and
perplexity of mind? For he saw not of whom that Church should be gathered,
in the which he had so often heard that Christ should reign. Now, God in
this place puts him commodiously in mind hereof, and declares the whole
manner of the gathering of his Church together, and shows a most evident
figure of his Church. For there was let down from heaven, which he saw open
and part in sunder, after an unwonted wise, a great linen cloth, tied at the
four corners, which did represent a figure of the Church. So Peter was taught
that the Church was to be looked for from heaven, which is called the new
Jerusalem. Apoc. 21. and not of the iustifyings of the law. For except a man
be borne from above, John. 3.
he shall not see the kingdom of God. And the cloth tied at the four corners,
signified that this Church should be gathered out of all the coasts of the
world. There were beasts within it, which the law pronounced to be unclean,
these Peter was commanded to kill, and to eat his fill. This taught us that
ye Gentlies which hitherto were taken for foul people, and strangers from the
public weal of the people of god, should be killed and mortified with the
spiritual sword, that is to say, with the preaching of the Gospel, without
respect of the Iewyshe law and ceremonies, and so should be received into the
fellowship of Christ and his Church. For now was come the time of correction,
in which the veil of the Temple was rent, and the wall broken down by Christ,
which joined both Nations into one faith, Ephe. 2.
and inheritance of one kingdom. And that this was the meaning of the vision,
the effect of the matter shall hereafter declare.

What God has cleansed, that call not thou foul.
Howbeit, Peter as yet understands not the meaning of the Lord, but being as
yet holden in overmuch observation of the law, answers: Not so Lord: for I
never eat thing that was common or unclean. And straight way the Lord
confuted his judgment with a grave sentence, saying: what God has cleansed,
that call not thou common. Which sentence appertains to this present purpose,
and teaches us, that neither the meats which were forbidden by the law, nor
the Gentyles which were signified by them, are to be taken henceforth as
unclean. It also contains a general doctrine, whereby we are taught, that
we ought to establish nothing of our own head against Gods judgment and
decree. And they offend against this sentence, which think that unlawful and
unholy, which God has sanctified and made lawful. They are here confuted,
that since the abrogation of the law, have brought in new differences of
meats, whereas it is evident, that all meats are sanctified by the word of
God, and that the things that enter in at the mouth, defyle not a man. 1. Tim.
4. Math. 15.
And we admit not their cauillation, which say these things are appointed for
the keeping our flesh under, not for that they think meats to be unclean of
their own nature. For if this be their meaning, why do they snarle men's
consciences, by this precept? Why appoint they certain days for such
abstinence? Why bind they poor men thereunto, whom it is manifest are
attenuated enough by reason of continual labor and penury? Why permit they
the richer sort, in the mean while to fraunche and eat fyshe, and far fette
iunkets, and spyced cates, most meet to provoke and stir up the flesh unto
lust? Why grant they them the use of Wine, wherein is lecherye or riot, as the
Apostle says, and which is of most force to kindle the rage of the flesh.
They are also confuted, that teach men to abstain from Matrimony, as though
it were an impediment unto them that haste unto the kingdom of God, whereas
God ordained it, and therefore must needs be lawful and holy, yea, most
necessary for a man that will live godly. 1. Tim. 4.
And Paul did not without a cause number these articles among the doctrines of
the devil. For it is more than deuilishe audacitie, with open mouth to
condemn that, that God has made holy. They are again like faulty, which
teach men how that is lawful that is forbidden by Gods law, or which dare
dispense with men for money, in those things which are committed against the
law of God. Both these things are in Poperye so ryfe, that by this one note a
man may know Antichrist, to whom Daniel attributes, that he shall have power
to alter and change laws and times. Let us learn therefore to depend upon
Gods mouth, and to admit no constitutions, contrary unto Gods ordinances.

Furthermore, Luke says this was done three times, The cloth is taken up into
heaven again.
and that at length the sheet or cloth was taken up again, to the place from
whence it came. God would have this done thryse, because he would have Peter
thereby the more assured and persuaded. And the cloth and beasts are taken up
again, both that Peter should be certifyed that all this was done by the
providence of God, and also that it might appear, there was a place in heaven
for them also that hitherto seemed to be excluded from thence by reason of the
difference of the law. And this is a general consolation. For the merit of
Christ has opened unto us heaven again, which the fall of Adam had locked
against us, and has prepared there a place for us, as oftentimes already has
been declared. Therefore embracing him with true faith, let us mortify the old
man with the sword of the spirit, that being borne again from above, we may
be brought thither to the society of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: to
whom be praise, honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.lxxij. Homely.
WHILE Peter mused in himself what this vision (which he had seen) meant,
behold, the men which were sent from Cornelius, had made enquirance for Simons
house, and stood before the door, and called out one, and asked whether Simon
which was surnamed Peter was lodged there? while Peter thought on the vision,
the spirit said unto him: Behold, men seek thee: Arise therefore and get
thee down, and go with them, and doubt not, for I have sent them. Peter went
down to the men, which were sent unto him from Cornelius and said: behold, I
am he whom ye seek, what is the cause wherefore you are come? They said,
Cornelius the Captain, a just man, and one that fears God, and of good
report among all the people of the Jews, was warned by an holy Angel to
send for thee into his house, and to hear words of thee. Then called he them
in, and lodged them. And on the morrow Peter went away with them, and certain
brethren from Ioppa accompanied him. And the third day entered they into
Caesarea. And Cornelius waited for them, and had called together his kinsmen
and special friends. And as Peter came in, Cornelius met him, and fell
down at his feet, and worshipped him. But Peter took him up saying: Stand
up, I my self also am a man.
AMongst the many and singular works of God, whereby he has declared his great
bounty and goodness, the calling of the Gentyles is not last to be placed.
This shall well appear* if we expende what ^hey were before God called them,
that is to say, strangers from the common weal of the people of God, without
God, without Christ, dead through sin, children of wrath, and to be brief,
the very bondslaues of sin, as in many places Paul teaches, and the
hystories of the Gentyles abundantly declare. It must therefore needs be a
great goodness of God, that would take such out of the kingdom of
darkness, into the fellowship of his son, and eternal salvation. But
because it seemed to the Jews, puffed up with the affiance that they had in
the righteousness of the law, and contemning the Gentyles, because they
neglected Circumcision, and the other Ceremonies of the law, a thing to
absurd, that such should be adopted and received: It was needful there
should be some evident demonstration, to prove that this was the very will of
God. This did God set forth in Cornelius whom by the ministry of an Angel,
he stirred up to seek the salvation that comes by the Gospel, and also
instructs Peter the Apostle with a peculier vision, that he should not after
the common error of the Jews; think Cornelius and other Nations unworthy to
be taught the doctrine of salvation. But of these things we have entreated in
the Homelies before going. Now let us vewe the proceeding of the whole matter,
which Luke here rehearses in ample wise, and at large.

He begins with Peter, showing how he was affected in mind with this
heavenly vision, How Peter was aff^cted in mind with the heavenly vision.
and how even at that very stounde when the messengers came from Cornelius, he
was more fullye certified by the holy ghost. And he says that Peter sat
doubting, and had many and diverse cogitations arising in his mind. For he
easilye perceived that so strange and so often repeated a vision, could not
be without some mysterye: howbeit, he saw not the use and end thereof. But as
he was pondering these things in his mind, the messengers were come, they
enquired for Peter, and he in the mean while is certified by the spirit what
he shall do. We have in Peter to consider the dullness of man's nature, which
lets us that we cannot see the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, The
dul^^^^e of man's natu^^.
unless we be illuminated with the spirit of God. The consideration whereof
serves us to this end, that we trusting in the dexterity of our wit, seek
not to deep in Gods secrets, and so entangle our selves in infinite errors.
Yet in this he is to be commended, that he does not deride or contemn the
vision showed him* although he understand not the meaning of the same, but is
very pe^siue, and careful for the finding out of it, and as it is credible,
went about by prayers to attain to the knowledge of it. For God so commands
us, and he deceyueth not them which by godly meditation, desire to be inspired
from above. For this is his promise: Seek, and you shall find* ask, Math. 7.
and it shall be given you.

And even at that moment, The modesty of Cornelius messengers.
that Peter was in this doubt and perplexity, the messengers were at the
door, and enquiring for Simon the Tanners house, one comes forth, of whom
they demand whether Peter lodged there yea or no. And they seem to abstain
from going in, because they were not ignorant, that the Jews thought it
abominable, to be conversant with the Gentyles. Therefore they would not over
hastily trouble them, to whom they were sent. This is a great argument of
civil modesty, and that nurture that Cornelius used in his family. But if a
man would compare the soldiers of these days, placed in Cities for their
safegarde, with these men, he should perceive such inciuilitie and rigor in
them, that they shall differ little or nothing from enemies. Cornelius servants
and soldiers would not enter into an other man's house, because they would
disturb no man against his will. But our men think they are then most like
soldiers, when they burst open men's doors, search the secretest parts of
their house, bereave householders of their right in their own house, beat them
that speak against them, and satisfy their raging lust in whoredom, upon
matrones and virgins. The providence of God
Here appears also the marvelous providence of God, which does not only
woonderfully govern the proceeding of this matter, but also every part and
parcel thereof. For by his providence it comes to pass, that the messengers
should even then be at the door, when Peter was in that meditation and study,
which concerned the end and effect of this matter. Some one of little
understanding, standing in the conceyt ofmans wisdom, would say, this thing
happened by chance, and at all adventures. But we reverence the providence of
God, which works in all things, has the number of the hears of our head, In
his books against the Academites, and in his first book of Retractations. 1.
chap.
and suffers nothing to come to pass by hazard or peradventure. And we allow
rather the judgment of Augustine, who was not ashamed to confess the common
error that he used among other, though in no wicked sense, being deceived with
these vain words of fortune and chance.

Furthermore, to return again to Peter, the holy ghost teaches him, as he
was musing of the meaning and end of the vision, Peter is aduertysed by the
holy ghost.
what he should do. For he shows him that there were men come which would
speak with him: therefore he commands him by and by to go down, and to go
with them. And he renders none other cause hereof, than that he says, he sent
them: speaking nothing of the success and effect of the thing. Nay, he
commands him not to doubt, or to reason, or to debate the matter to and fro
with himself. Hereof may be gathered a general rule, whereby we are taught
that we must simply obey God, and not take our reason to counsel, when we have
heard the express commandment of God. For as God has this authority over
us, to command us what it pleases him: so is it the property of faith, as
it were, to captiuate all reasons understanding, and to subdue it unto the word
of God, and not to suffer it to reason against the manifest commandments of
God. For that is an over wicked audacitie, to go about to make the authority
of Gods precepts to give place to our reasons. Therefore that that the old
Testament shows that Abraham sometime did, who neither doubted of Gods
promise, although he saw it to be against the course of nature, nor
disobedientlye gaynesayde his commandments, though absurd and unreasonable
to see to, the same does the holy ghost in this place, require of Peter. We
are admonished also, that it ought to suffice us when we understand, that God
has appointed or spoken any thing: forasmuch as it is evident, he ordreth all
things both wisely, and for our salvation. And this is that wrestling of faith,
wherein all such ought to be exercised, as will be taken for the true and
faithful worshippers of God. In the which if now a days we were more
obediently and diligently occupied, we should be much less troubled than we
be, and find better success in our doings.

Peter obeys the commandment of God.
But let us see the obedience of Peter, which he declared, when he had heard
the commandment of the holy ghost. First without all delay, he went down to
them, and did nothing mutter (as the wayward do use) either that he was
interrupted of his prayers, or let from his dinner. Then when he saw the
messengers, whom by their apparel, he might easilye judge were Gentyles and
soldiers, he friendly tells them, that it is he they seek for, and asks
them what the cause of their coming is. And streightway the messengers
courteously answer him, and faithfullye declare unto him, all that their
master had commanded them. For both they singulerly commend their master,
and diligently report the Oracle uttered by the Angel, to the intent they
might the easilier obtain the purpose, for the which they came. And by the
way may be seen, with what diligence and trust, Christian servants ought
to go about their masters business, that they only serve them not in their
sight, as Paul says, but as much as in them is, labor when they are absent,
to set forth their honesty, and to work for their commodity. Ephe. 6. By and
by, as Peter had heard their message, he understood the mystery and secret of
the vision, and perceived that the Gentyles were signified by the unclean
beasts, whom God would now have brought by preaching of the Gospel, into
the fellowship of Christ, and to salvation. Wherefore, he brings them into
the house, and the next day goes with them, being accompanied by certain
brethren of Ioppa, who both would this way declare their good affection unto
Peter, and also were chosen of God to be witnesses of so weighty a matter.
Moreover, as in all these things, there appears a faithful obedience, such
as erewhyle we heard the spirit of God commanded unto Peter: so Peter is a
notable example of hospitality, which as it is in all men a thing most
commendable: so it most becomes Bishops and Ministers of the word, that
while herein they give others good ensample, they cause their doctrine to be
the better spoken of, which is the cause, that among the properties of a
Bishop, 1. Tim. 3.
Paul thinks this also worthy to be rehearsed. Therefore by Peter's example
the waywardness of them is reproved, who for that they will be taken to be of
authority, bear themself very strange, and will show no manner of friendly
familiarity, either to strangers, or those of their own house. Whom if the
example of Peter cannot, yet the authority of Christ ought to move, who even
then as Mark writes, did friendlye receive all men, Marc. 6.
when by reason of the peoples importunity preasing upon him, he had scarce
leisure to eat his meat.

After these things, Luke declares the meeting of Cornelius and Peter. The
meeting of Peter and Cornelius.
And of Cornelius he tells two things. First, that he called together his
kinsfolk and alliance, and all other which he was acquaynted with, who all
waited for Peter's coming. These things express the property of a true
faith. For where faith stays only upon the word of God, she seeks and
wayteth carefully for the same. Again, where it burns in desire of Gods
glory, and love of her neighbor, she is desirous to communicate salvation also
unto many others. Both these properties does Cornelius perform, and that not
without his great peril. For we have already oftentimes declared, that it was
a dangerous matter among the Romans, to alter or change religion. Therefore
it could not be but dangerous, to have so many witnesses thereof. But that
faith stands in no fear of danger, as well the Scriptures as many other
examples, euerywhere declare. Let us follow this endeavor and desire, least
while we make provision for our selves, we betraye the glory of God, and
neglect the salvation of them which ought to be most dear unto us, according
to the law of nature. But Cornelius does yet another thing. For as soon as he
sees Peter the Apostle, by and by he runs to meet him, falls down at
his feet, and worshippeth him. These are tokens of a devout mind, and that
has a very good opinion of the word of God and his minister. Yet Cornelius
exceeds herein, and offends in overmuch veneration, whiles (as may be
gathered of Peter's words) he attributes more unto him than belongs to a man.
This many times comes to pass, when we use ye unadvised zeal of our reason
in reuerencing Gods Ministers. And of none other beginning sprung that
superstitious worshipping of Saints, pilgrimages, for devotion sake, kissing
of relics, and infinite other such like things, then because men being
beguyled with an inconsiderate zeal of religion, thought there was some spark
of godheade in them whom God had used sometime to the enlargement of his
glory, and the salvation of others. It behooves us therefore to lift up our
eyes to God himself, least while we will seem to be to religious we defraude
God, of his due honor.

To this purpose belongs the answer of Peter, who does not dissemble
Cornelius error, but friendly reprehendeth him, saying: Arise, Peter refuses
godly honor.
for I also am a man, as though he should say: I perceive you have an opinion
of me, far above that I am. And because you think there is in me some
godheade, therefore you do vouchsafe to give me this honor, but you are far
deceived. For although the grace of God has made me an Apostle, yet as
touching my essence and nature, I am nothing but a man, that is to say,
mortal, frail, and sinful, which had need my self also of Gods grace, and
Christ's merit. Therefore give me no divine honor, but bestow it on him
whose ministers and servants as well I am as you. This is the meaning of Peter's
words, which Paul also expressed, when he saw the men of Lystra, in like
sort deceived, saying: ye men and brethren why do you thus? Acts. 14.
we be men subject to such infirmities as you be. Thus the Apostles put from
them overmuch honor, which they might yet have excused, under this pretense,
that it made for the authority of the gospel. But they thought it unmeet,
that any man should abuse the zeal of men, and by craft go about to purchase
authority unto their doctrine. These things teach us, that all such honor is
overmuch as is given unto creatures under pretense of godly worship. Paul
prescribes duties of civility, and commands that one go before another in
honor. Romans 12.
It is a wicked blaspheming of Gods honor, if we apply unto Creatures, that
that is due to God alone. Here is also reproved the outrageous pride of the
Bishop of Rome, which chalengeth to him the supremacy, under pretense of
Peter, and suffers all that come before him, not only to fall down at his
feet, but also compels Kings and Emperors to kiss his feet, and is not
afeard to tread on their necks with his foul feet: wherein he follows not
the faithful Minister of Christ, but Caligula and Dioclesian, the monsters of
mankind, which heinousness is so much the more grievous and intolerable,
because it is admitted under this pretense, as though there were some piece of
godhead in so wicked a creature. But to let pass the adversary of Christ, and
our salvation, let us acknowledge the mercy of God, whereby he did witsafe to
call the Gentyles, let us remember our duty, and serve him, who has made us
heirs of his kingdom, and coheyres with Jesus Christ, his son and our
Savior: to whom be praise, honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.lxxiij. Homely.
AND as he talked with him he came in, and found many that were come
together. And he said unto them: you know how that it is an unlawful thing
for a man that is a Jew to company or come unto an Aliant: But God has showed
me, that I should not call any man common or unclean. Therefore came I unto
you without delay, as soon as I was sent for. I ask therefore for what
intent have you sent for me? And Cornelius said: This day now.iiij. days,
about this hour, I sat fasting, and at the.ix. hour I prayed in my house,
and behold, a man stood before me in bright clothing, and said, Cornelius,
thy prayer is heard, and thine alms deeds are had in remembrance in the
sight of God. Send men therefore to go to Ioppa, and call for Simon, whose
surname is Peter. He is lodged in the house of one Simon a Tanner by the sea
side, which as soon as he is come, shall speak unto thee. Then sent I for
thee immediately, and thou have well done that thou art come. Now therefore are
we all here present before God, to hear all things that are commanded unto
thee of God.
Because the calling of the Gentyles seemed to the Jews, who were puffed up in
the confidence of their ceremonies of the law, a thing not only absurd, but
also unjust, the holy ghost uses a singular diligence in setting forth the
conversion of Cornelius, which was received into the Church without
Circumcision, and such other Ceremonies, that it may appear to all men, how
nothing is here done, by man's advise, but all by Gods ordinance and
appointment. The chief use of this history is as well to repress the proud
boasting of the Jews, as to confirm our minds in the faith, which be all
come of the Gentyles, seeing we perceive the preachinge of salvation belongs
as well to us, as to the Jews. An evident and an infallible argument whereof is
this, that we hear how Peter comes to Caesarea by Gods leading and
appointment, to preach salvation unto Cornelius. The same shall here appear
more plain, if we consider Peter's first communication with Cornelius: wherein
he excuses his coming to the Gentyles, and Cornelius declares his purpose
why he sent for him.

Peter therefore begins with his excuse, Peter excuses his going to the
Gentyles
partly because of the Jews his brethren, who came with him from Ioppa, as we
heard before, leas^ they mght be offended at this strange and unaccustomed
doing: and partly because of Cornelius friends and kinsefolkes, which were
Gentyles, least they should suspect him of lightness, if he had rashly
transgressed the ancient usage of his people, without a just cause. He
confesses therefore the custom of the Jews, least he should seem rashly to
have forgotten the same. And he lays against the same, the oracle or will of
God, whose only authority was sufficient to excuse his doing. We must entreat
of both these points particulerly.

Speaking of the custom of the Jews, Let them eschew the company of the
wicked that will honor God.
he calls his hearers to witness: you know (says he) that it is not
lawful for a man that is a Jew, to company with, or to come unto an aliaunt.
And although there be no law of God extant, which expressly does inhibite it,
yet the custom seems to take his beginning of this, because God forbade them
to marie, or make league with the Gentiles, and specially the Chanaanites,
Deuteronomy. 7. Iosue. 23.
least through companying with them, they might fall from the true God, and the
right worshipping of him. And it is very credible, that many under the
pretense of such affairs, as of necessity fall out amongst men, were
therefore the more familiar with the Gentyles, and so become the slacker in
honoring of God. Which thing was the cause that the devout and godly fathers
made the bounds of this law yet straighter, willing to take away all
occasion of falling from God. Hereof may be taken a general and perpetual
precept, that they which will be called and accounted the honorers of God, must
avoid the company of them, who they know are swarued and fallen from God,
either by false religion, or else by corrupt manners and conversation of life.
For where, of nature we be prone unto evil, we are easily infected with the
custom of other men's ungodliness, and daily examples declare of what force
companying with the evil is, in this case, and wicked talk, whereby Paul
says, good manners are corrupted. 1. Cor. 15.
Beside this, they are also partakers of their punishments, that delight in the
company of the ungodly. Whereof the Scripture shows us an example in Lot, who
dwelling among the Sodomites, was first vexed with cruel war, after that,
lost his wife and all his goods, and at length by his daughters company
proved how much the company of a wicked Nation had hurt him, whereas by
crafty and subtle means, they committed incest by lying with their father.
Therefore it is not without a cause that Paul warns them that are consecrated
unto Christ, 2. Cor. 6.
not to bear the yoke with unbelievers. And our master Christ speaking of the
punishment of Antichrist, and that wicked Babylon, warns his people earnestly
to come out from among them least they be partakers of her plagues. Apoc. 18.
And if the company of the common people do so entrappe and beguyle the
godly, then must false teachers be much more diligently avoided, which use
craftily to creep into men's bosoms, and to instill the deadly poison of
false doctrine into their hearts, unawares. See Math. 7. and.15. 2. John. 1.
chap.

No man must be judged unworthy the doctrine of salvation.
Howbeit, the Apostle lays the late oracle of God against the received custom
of the Jews, saying: But God has showed me, that I should not call any man
common or unclean. He calls them unclean in this place, that be unworthy
the doctrine of the Gospel, and of salvation. For else it is evident, that all
men are and ought to be counted unclean, forasmuch as we be conceived and
borne in sin: the thoughts of our hearts be wicked from our childehoode, Psalm.
51. Genes. 8. Esaias. 64.
and our righteousness is like filthye and arrayed clowtes and rags, as the
Scriptures testifye. But because the blood of Christ has cleansed us from our
sins (1. John. 1. cap.) and our hearts are purged by faith in him: no man
ought rashly to be judged unworthy of that purification which Christ of his
exceeding liberality offreth to all men, and most lovingly gives to as many
as believe in him: except we find any men to be of that kind of dogs and
hogs, before whom Christ forbids us to throw the pearls and holy
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven. They are therefore greatly deceived, Math.
7.
which enuiously hide the secrets of salvation, and use to keep those that
have professed Christ, from the knowledge of them.

It is chiefly to be considered how the Apostle lays the oracle of God
against an old received custom. Customs must yield unto the word of God.
We are taught by this example, that such is the authority of Gods word, that
unto it the things which were instituted by men of a godly zeal, and holy
intent, ought to give place, as soon as they seem any ways to make against
the will of God. Therefore their obstinacy is very pieuish and pernicious,
which go about to retain those ceremonies in the Church, which it appears,
have been devised by foolish men, for the confirmation of superstition, and
are very derogatory unto the merit of Christ. They think it a dangerous
matter to alter or change any thing. But it is much more dangerous to stick
to the observation of old errors with the loss of salvation. And we ought to
remember that the obedience of faith is the end of true Christianity, 2. Cor.
10. Math. 16. Luke. 8.
which requires of us to deny our selves, and to resign and yield up all
our thoughts and judgments unto the will and power of God.

Moreover, Peter after his apology and defense, demands a question, to
say, for what intent they had sent for him? And this demand seems not
superfluous, although Peter was both instructed before by the heavenly vision,
and also by them that were sent unto him. For by this mean he thought he
would stir up in the minds of his hearers, a diligent and an attentive
heed to hearken to him, which thing if it be wanting, the Word cannot be
preached with any profit. And it does not a little provoke the mind and zeal
of the teacher when he sees those men desirous to hear him, whom God has
appointed him to teach and instruct.

Cornelius answer unto Peter.
Now follows the answer of Cornelius, which as it is simple and without
color, so it has in it diverse things, which serve for the instruction of all
men. For he declares the cause of his counsel, He declares the cause of his
sending.
and gives thanks unto Peter, that he would vouchsafe to come unto him, and
also promises to give good ear unto him, wherein he plainly admonishes
Peter of his duty, all which we will pervse in order. He begins with the
cause wherefore he sent for Peter, least he should seem to any man, either
negligent about his salvation, or else arrogant, in that he went not to Ioppa
himself. Therefore he repeateth the things before mentioned, touching the
appearing of the Angel, and it grieueth not Luke oftentimes to rehearse one
thing, to the end the truth and certainty of the history might appear the
more. The sum of all the matter is, that he was admonished by an evident
Oracle and commandment of God, to send for Peter. Let us here mark how he
says, he abode fasting and in prayer until the.ix. hour of the day, which is
three a clock at after noone with us. This thing expresses an ardent desire
of the truth, wherabout it is like he was greatly troubled by reason of the
diversity of religions, forasmuch as he saw the Jews differed from the
Gentyles, and that there begone a new religion among the Christians. Therefore
being very careful, least he should swerve from the truth, he made continual
prayer unto God, adding unto his prayers, holy fastes: that a man may plainly
perceive that he trusted not in the merit of his fastings, but sought by them
only the understanding of a truth. Compare now this soldier with the Monks
of these days, that thou may perceive how far he passed them, both in
godliness and discipline of the flesh. And being a public Officer, he gave
himself to these exercises, whereby their error may appear unto all men,
which deny that perfect study of godliness can consist without solitary
life. It appears also in this place, what the cause is, that men profit so
little now a days in the study of godliness. God will be incessantly called
on by prayers, which then are most fervent, when they proceed of a sober
subduing of the flesh. But now a days there is small regard of prayers, and
the study of sobriety is changed into surfeiting and ebrietie, which things
use to make men unapt, either to serve God or man. This drunkenness reigns
in many places, even among the Ministers of the word, so that a man may mark
in them such manners as Esaye attributes to false teachers, Chap. lvj. The
Princes and those that are in office, are commonly at their banquets betimes
in the morning, and are given to surfeiting: altogether unmindful of that
saying of Solomon: Woe be unto thee, o thou land, Eccle. 10.
whose king is but a child, and whose Princes are early at their banquettes.
In the Commons a man may see the days of Noah and Loath, Math. 24. Luke. 17.
as Christ in times passed, taught. Why marueyle we therefore that there is so
little knowledge of the truth, since those desires reign among us, that use to
styfle Truth, and utterly to suppress her.

Secondlye, He gives thanks unto Peter.
Cornelius gives Peter thanks that he would witsafe to come unto him. For so
means that kind of speech which he uses: Thou have done well that thou art
come. For where he acknowledges that he has done well herein, he plainly
confesses that he is beholding to him therefore. By which example we are
taught, that we must be thankful to the Ministers of the word. For they
bring unto us peace and salvation, according to that saying of the Prophet,
Psalm. 107.
He sent out his word and healed them They be also to us in stead of fathers,
because through their ministerye, we be borne again, 1. Cor. 4. Galat. 4.
and made the sons and heirs of God, as we read Paul has oftentimes
inculcated. And the Philosophers have taught, even by the law of nature, that
children are never able to make their parents amends. Who then is able to
recompense him, through whose labor and traueyle, he is made the son of God,
and heir of the kingdom of heaven? For the which cause, the Prophets use to
account faithful teachers, among the chief benefits of God, as may be seen,
Psalm. 147. Esaias. 30. Amos. 2. Mich. 6. etc. And Paul among the gifts of the
holy ghost, wherewith from above he adorneth his Church, Ephesians. 4.
makes mention chiefly of Pastors, Teachers, Prophets, Apostles and
Evangelists. But now a days men are grown to such unthankfulness, that they
dare say Ministers are sent of the devil, and are the public authors of all
evil. But they shall one day have teachers meet for them, since they so
vnthankfullye reject the preaching of salvation. 2. These. 2.


Thirdly, Cornelius promises Peter obedience and attention, where he says: He
promises attention
Now therefore we are all here present before God, to hear all things that
are commanded thee of God. These words are worthy of singular consideration.
For they teach us what manner of persons, the hearers of the word should be.
First he says they are present before God. Therefore it behooves all men that
hear the word of God in the Church, to remember above all things, that they
stand in the presence of God. For this is the saying of Christ: Luke. 10.
Math. 28.
He that hears you, hears me. And he promises that he will be in the
middle of them that are gathered together in his name. Moreover, he says he
is present with those that belong unto him. This is one other thing which the
hearers should remember, namely, that they have need of teaching and
instruction, and therefore it is unmeet that they should suffer their wits
at the Sermon time to be a wool gathering. For they that so do, receive the
word (as Christ says) into the way, where it is destroyed of the birds, and
can bring forth no fruit. Finally, Cornelius is ready to hear all the things
that Peter has to say from God. Let us think that the very same is required
of us also, and let us not be so bold as to hear and embrace some things, and
to let pass other some, which like not our appetites and fantasy. If a man
would compare these things with the usage of our days, alas, what an
horrible corruption shall he find? Many come together, but not as in the sight
of God, but much like unto those, of whom we read in Ezechiel. 33. chap.
Further, a man shall euerywhere hear such busy bodies, who when they have
heard the word, brag that they have no need of teaching and instruction. But
what a number is there of those, which dare to controlle the word of God, and
will have such things preached, whereof they hope to have gain, and will
command the Ministers to silence, if they speak any thing that dislyketh
their affections, or which the world cannot brook. Howbeit, it were better
the word were not preached to them, and they shall one day feel that their
wicked contempt shall bear witness against them.

The duty of Ministers.
These things also admonish Peter of his duty, that he should only and freely
preach the things which God had committed to him, without any inventions of his
own brain. In the which the duty of Ministers specially consists, as has
already oftentimes been declared. Let us set Cornelius before us to imitate and
follow, that being enflamed with like desire of the word, we may worthilye
receive the doctrine of salvation, and being thereby regenerated, may live a
godly life in Jesus Christ: to whom be praise, honor, power, and glory for
ever. Amen.

The.lxxiiij. Homely.
THEN Peter opened his mouth and said: Of a truth, I perceive that there is no
respect of persons with God, but in all people, he that fears him, and
works righteousness, is accepted with him: you know the preaching that God
sent unto the children of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ, which is
Lord over all things.
ALthough Cornelius has sufficientlye heretofore declared his great desire to
know the truth, by godly prayer, and holy fast, yet he more evidently shows
the same, when he heard that Peter the Apostle was come unto him, and was ready
to teach him. For he confesses that the Apostle is welcome unto him, and
promises him that he will faithfully and obediently hear all that he had to
say unto him, on Gods behalf. Which place teaches us what all they have to
do, which mean to hear the word of God profitably. Furthermore, as
Cornelius shows us an example of a godly and diligent hearer: so in him also
it appears, that a godly and fervent desire unto the word, cannot be without
profit and good success, but according to the promise of Christ, whosoever
shall unfeignedly seek, shall find out the will of God. For he that a little
before, stirred up Peter by the oracle of an heavenly vision, to go unto
Cornelius: even the same now also by the secret inspiration of his spirit,
stirs up his mind to prepare himself with great gravity and diligence
to teach. For so is meant by the opening of his mouth, as already has been
declared. The argument of his Sermon is, that men are purged and saved through
Jesus Christ alone. He uses a very commodious order. The argument and order of
Peter's sermon.
For it has a beginning very apt and meet to get good will and benevolence,
because that he shows how the doctrine of salvation belongs also unto the
Gentyles. Then in few words he comprehends the sum of the whole Gospel,
which shortly after he prosecuteth more at large, by hystoricall narration,
confirming the same with testimonies both of the Prophets and Apostles. At
length he declares the mark and end of all these things, teaching us that we
become partakers as well of Christ, as of the salvation given us in him by
faith only. But at this time we mean to entreat but of the two first parts
only, minding to speak of the other when time and opportunity shall serve.

He frames his beginning with an exclamation, saying: Of a truth, The doctrine
of salvation belongs to the Gentyles also.
I perceive that with God there is no respect of persons. etc. The sense is,
that the Gospel and doctrine of salvation belongs as well to the Gentyles, as
to the Jews. Heretofore there was a great space, and an high wall between the
Jews and the Gentyles. For Paul writes that the Gentyles were strangers
from the common weal of Israel, aliauntes from the testaments and couenantes,
without hope, without Christ, and without God. And he adds that that makes
for the explication of this place: but now by the means of Christ Jesus, Ephesians.
2.
you which were sometime far of, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. For he
is our peace which has made of both, one, and has broken down the wall that
was a stop between us. This, Peter affirms with great gravity, partly to
make the hearers think well of him, at whose salvation he envied not, after
the manner of other Jews, and partly because they should be the more diligent
to hear those things which belonged to their salvation. It shall be good to
examine the words particulerly, for our more comfort and instruction.

The holy men are ignorant of some things.
First, by way of an exclamation (as we declared even now) he says of a
truth, or in deed, I find. Which word declares that he was before ignorant of
this mystery. For being heretofore beguiled with the common error of the
Jews, and bewitched with the blind prejudice of the flesh, he used to abhor
the Gentyles, as men profane and abominable before God. But now by the
heavenly vision, the appearing of the Angel, and words of Cornelius, he is
taught another thing, because he finds in Cornelius words, apparent tokens of
a very Christian, and regenerated mind. Peter's example teaches us, that the
Saints sometime are ignorant of some things, and therefore that we should
not believe the prejudice of our reason, but that we should diligently examine
all things according to the rule of Gods word.

God regards no man's person.
Secondly, he teaches what he found, verily, that God is no accepter of
persons. This word person declares the outward show or appearance of man,
whereby he uses either to be commended or contemned: such as is Nobility,
high parentage, riches, honors, Nation, or Country: baseness of birth, Deuteronomy.
1. Exodus 23. Psalm. 82.
poverty, bondage, and infinite such like. The consideration whereof God
commands to be far of from all Judges, because where these things take
place, there can be no upright judgment. It can not be therefore, that that
thing is to be found in God, which he uses to detest in men. And surely the
Scriptures euerywhere attribute this unto God, that he is moved with no man's
kindred or stock, with no riches, no poverty, no outward appearance, no
consideration of Country, but shows himself just and merciful to all men
alyke. This thing is of great avail in the cause of salvation. For it serves
to our instruction, that we contemn no man by reason of these outward
things, forasmuch as it appears that God is not moved herwith, whose
children we be, and it comfort men that are in affliction, and of low
degree, when they hear that in Christ there is neither bond nor free, Jew
nor Gentyle, Scythian not Barbarous, man nor woman, rich nor poor. See Galat.
3. Colos. 3. etc.

The studies and exercises of them that please God.
It makes for the explication hereof, that he straight way adds what manner
of men God accepts in all kind of men, least any man might think he governed
things at all auentures. For he adds: but in all people, he that fears him,
and works righteousness, is accepted with him. He comprehends in two
points the whole life of man, such as God requires of them that honor him.
For he percloseth all religion under the fear of God, forasmuch as it is
manifest that this fear cannot be without the knowledge of God, nor without
faith and obedience. By this word righteousness he understands that
excellent virtue, that gives to every man that that is his, which is the best
governor of man's whole life, and springs out of the fountaynes of Christian
charity. But if thou compare the corrupt nature of man with these things,
thou shall perceive that these things are not found, but in those people that
are regenerate, and that they cannot be attained to without the grace of God,
and faith in Christ. For how should they that are aliauntes from Christ,
please God by their outward works? seeing he is that only mediator, in
whom the father is well pleased. Therefore they are greatly deceived, which of
these words of Peter, think the merit of man's righteousness, may be
established: forasmuch as the grace of God only is the cause efficient of
those things that are here so highly commended. Their error also is to be
confuted, which abusing this place, affirm that every man may be saved in the
religion of his Nation, whether he be Jew or Turk, so that being illuminated
with some reverence of God, he seek to accomplish this common righteousness.
But Peter's meaning in this place is far other, who rather goes about to
prove, that the doctrine of the Gospel, whereby salvation in Christ is
preached, appertains to all men indifferently. But I pray you what needs
it to be pub^ished to all men, if salvation may be had without Christ? This
kind of people of all other is most pernicious, who under the pretense of
christian modesty, because they will not seem to boldly to condemn any man,
do plainly extenuate the merit of Christ: yea, they call in doubt the
righteousness of god, his goodness, wisdom, truth, and whatsoever virtues
besides are in God. For if any man may be saved without Christ, then it
appears salvation must depend upon our free will and zeal. Then came Christ
into the world in vayn: then was he incarnated, suffered, and died in vain:
then rose he from the dead, and ascended into heaven in vain. And he shall be
convinced of a lie, in yt he said: No man comes to the father but by me.
John. 14.
Peter also shall be reproved as a liar, who according as the spirit of Christ
did prompt him, said: there was no other name under heaven given unto men, in
which they could be saved. Furthermore, who I pray you shall say that god ye
father is either just or wise, or true, or merciful, which without very great
cause would put his son to such bitter sorrows and afflictions? Away
therefore with these men, which while they will seem modest, adnihilate the
mysteries of our religion. Let us observe the end and mark of Peter's words,
and leave them to whom the light of the Gospel has not yet shined, to the
judgment of God: who if they be saved, must needs be saved, through the merit
of Christ, unless we will be contumelious, both against Christ and God.

Let us come to the second part of this Sermon, which in these words
conteyneth the proposition or declaration of the whole matter: The proposition.
ye know the preaching that God sent unto the children of Israel, preaching
peace by Jesus Christ, which is Lord over all things Which words seem unto me
thus to signify: I would not have you (O brethren) to look for any new or
strange matter. For I purpose to entreat of such a matter, as is now in
every man's mouth, the report whereof, is undoubtedly come even unto you, that
is, how God sent his son Jesus Christ, which is coeternall with him, and
Lord of all things, unto the children of Israel, being made man of the Uirgin
Marie, and by him has preached peace unto them. In these words does Peter
comprehend all the mysteries of Christ Jesus, and of his Gospel, which shortly
after he dilateth more at large by narration. Wherefore, in all these things we
will briefly touch those things only, which serve for this present place.

Christ is god
First, he plainly teaches what this Christ is, where he calls hi m Lord of
all things. This is an evident testimony of his divinity. For it is manifest
that the rule of all things pertayneth unto God alone, because he alone is the
creator of all things. John. 1.3. and.5.
And it is plain, that all things were made by that eternal word, and that
all power is given him of the father. He must needs therefore be true God. And
let no man here object unto us this word ( of giving) as though he were
therefore the less, because he receives of another. For this is to be referred
to the nature of man, which he took upon him, to the which, in a certain
time appointed, God the father gave that, which Christ according to his
Godheade, had from everlasting. For thus he speaks himself a little before
he went to his death: Now glorify me (o father) with thine own self, with
the glory which I had with thee ere the world was. John. 17.
The Arrians are hereby confuted, and the Seruetanes which now a days follow
their steps, and the dignity of Christian faith is defended against the
Jews and Turks, which say we glory and trust in one that is no more but a
man.

Christ incarnate.
Then Peter touches by the way, the mean of our salvation, where he says
that that eternal word of God Jesus Christ, was sent from God the father. For
in this word sent, he comprehends all the mystery of his incarnation, even
as Paul also, where he says: when the fullness of time came, Galat. 4.
God sent his son made of a woman. etc. In his incarnation are comprised
whatsoever things Christ did or suffered in the flesh, for our salvation sake,
of the which things we shall hereafter entreat. Furthermore, he says he was
sent to the children of Israel, not that he belonged to them alone, but for
that he took flesh, and was borne of them, and should first show himself
to them until through their unbelief, he should be carried unto the gentiles.
Thou shall observe in these things, that al these affairs of Christ, which are
preached in the gospel, are not of man, but of Gods ordering and appointment.
For this word was sent from God. And it is evident, that this is the eternal
decree of God, that Jesus Christ should be the King and Priest of his people.
Psalm. 2.110. Whereupon we gather, that men strive in vain, by their own power
against his Gospel, which thing before this, we heard that Gamaliel saw, and
is abundantly declared by the examples of all ages. Christ is the author of
peace between God and man.


Last of all, he comes to the end and mark of all this matter, which is,
that peace should be preached by Christ Jesus. So Esaias cap. 52. speaking of
the Preachers of the Gospel says: O how bewtifull are the feet of the
Ambassador that brings the message from the mountain and proclaymeth peace.
etc. Peter makes mention of preaching, not for that Christ is the Minister
thereof only, but because that peace whereof he is ye author, is offered to us by
preaching of the Gospel, and received by hearts of faith. He specially
speaks of that peace which is between god and us, by the mean of Jesus
Christ. For before times, by reason of our sins, we were separated from god,
and reputed as his enemies. And Paul writes that the wrath of God was
declared from heaven against all ungodliness, Romans 1.
and unrighteousness of men. Therefore there was need of a peacemaker and
reconcyler, which the scriptures declare God the father has given us, even
Jesus Christ. For he has taken upon him our sins, which were cause of the
separation between God and us: he has purged them by the merit of his death,
and satisfied the rigor of Gods justice. And he being made ours by faith, does
clothe us with his righteousness, and does defend and shield us, that we be
able to abide the judgment seat of God, who otherwise had deserved by reason
of our sins, to be damned for ever. Thus it comes to pass, that according
to Paul's doctrine, we being justified by faith, Romans 5.
are at peace with God through Jesus Christ our Lord. This the father himself
confesses, when from heaven he sounded that joyful and comfortable voice:
This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased. Math. 3.17.
And this is that peace which passes all understanding, and which can by no
manner of afflictions be disturbed, because it makes them seem light and easy
to them which understand, that God is become merciful to them in Christ, and
that they are made the children of God. This peace also breeds civil and
brotherly concord amongst men, because that by mean of Christ, all that
respect of persons among the faithful, whereby mutual concord among men is
chiefly broken, is taken away. And because it kindles men's minds with the
fire of charity, it so graffeth in them the desire of peace, that they hate no
things more deadly, than such as they know, hinder it. Great therefore and
very execrable is the ingratitude, and iniquity of those men, which exclame
and cry out, saying: the preaching of the gospel is the disturbaunce of
publyke peace and policy. For thus they make Jesus Christ, the Prince of true
and everlasting peace, the author of those offenses, which they may thank the
wicked world of, who therefore makes tumultes and businesses against Christ
and his word, because they can not suffer the light thereof, whereby their
naughty works are reproved. John. 3.
Let us acknowledge the goodness of God, which does vouchsafe to offer the
doctrine of salvation unto all men, and let us with true faith embrace Jesus
Christ the only author of salvation and peace: to whom be praise, honor,
power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.lxxv. Homely.
YOU (I say) know that word, which was published throughout all Jury, and
began in Galiley, after the baptism which John preached: how GOD anointed
Jesus of Nazareth with the holy ghost, and with power. Which Jesus went about,
doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil. For God was with
him.
ALthough Peter made this Sermon at Caesarea, in the house of Cornelius the
Captain: yet the same apperteyneth to all men, and is meet at this day to be
most diligently considered of us. For beside that many things are gone
before, which teach us that the spirit of God was the author hereof: in this
part Peter fully includes the whole order of our justification and salvation.
And hereof he admonished his hearers in the proposition, as erewhile we saw,
whereas he promised them to speak of the eternal word of God, which is Jesus
Christ, who being Lord of all things, and therefore very God, did yet
vouchsafe to come into the world, to reconcyle mankind unto God the father,
and to be the author and preacher of that most wholesome peace. Now, because
by these words, he plainly testified, that our salvation is contained in
Jesus Christ alone, he now begins by narration of the history, more at
large to explicate and dilate the same, and that in such sort, that it may
easilye appear how all the things that belong to the redeeming of mankind,
are performed by Christ.

When and where Christ began to be known.
He begins his narration with the time and place, showing where and when
Christ began to be known. Also he cites them for witnesses of ye things,
which fame long before had bruted so far abroad, least any man might judge
the history to be uncertain or doubtful: you (says he) know that word which
was published over all Jury, and began in Galiley, after the baptism which
John preached. It is not without a cause that he makes mention of the place,
forasmuch as Esaias sometime prophesied, that Christ should begin to preach in
Galiley, as Matthew also has noted in his.iiij. Chapter, and Esaias. 9. And it
seems he alleges the time for none other cause, saying: this preaching
began after the baptism of John, because the Prophets foreshewed, that he
should be the first Minister of the new Testament, and the forerunner of the
promised Savior. For that those things belong unto him, which are read in
Esaias. 40. of a voice crying in the wilderness, and in Malachie of Elias,
appears by the writings of the Evangelists, and by the testimony of Christ
himself in Mathewe the.xj. Chapter more manifest, than needs long
demonstration. They are therefore by this place confuted, which deny that John
ought to be accounted among the Ministers of the Gospel. Whereas it is plain,
that he bare witness of Christ, and sent his Disciples of faith and good zeal
unto Christ. John. 1.3.
And prepared all the people as well by his doctrine, as by baptism, to embrace
and receive Christ, which office of his, his father Zachary by inspiration of
the holy spirit acknowledged in him, as soon as he was borne. We have here
rather to mark diligently, that the business of Christ Jesus and his
Gospel, The Gospel began to be preached by John.
began by John, whose duty it was to prepare their minds that should be
the Disciples of Christ, by the doctrine of repentance and baptism. For this
way Christ thought good to declare, that he would have no man to seek how
to live licentiouslye and fleshly under the pretense of him: which thing it is
evident, both many did in times past, and many do the same in these days
also, and even those which glory in the name of the Gospel. For the which
cause Christ himself thought good to begin his teaching with repentance, and
bade the Apostles afterward to begin with the same. Math. 4. and.10. Luc. 24.
And they are not to be heard which separate the doctrine of repentance from
the Gospel, whereas without repentance we cannot be partakers of the salvation
which is in Christ. And yet for all this we attribute not salvation to man's
merit or righteousness, because we are commanded to preach repentance in the
name of Christ. And Peter before, Act. 5. has taught us that God the father
has appointed Christ, to be the author and giver thereof unto us. In the mean
season they are reproved also, which slanderously say, that we open gappes to
the flesh, whereby to sin, by preaching of the Gospel, whereas these men
for none other cause more hate and persecute the Gospel, than for that it
grievously accuses and inueyeth against their open wickedness, and the cloked
hypocrisy of a great many.

Furthermore, Doctrine must be joined unto the sacraments.
it behooves us to mark how the Apostle speaks of the ministry of John.
For he says, he preached Baptism. He joins preaching with Baptism, to
declare he was a minister both of doctrine, and the sacrament. For as by
Baptism he admonished men that they were purged and made clean: so expounding
the mysteries thereof by words, he taught us yt purification is to be had in
Christ only, and that worthy fruits of repentance are required of them that are
purified. Whereby it appears, it is necessary, that teaching be joined with
the sacraments, forasmuch as without it ye mysteries of the sacraments cannot
be understood. So God in ye beginning commanded that the meaning of the
feast of Passover should be declared unto the children. And we see that the
sermons of ye prophets are chiefly busied in declaring the mysteries of the
sacrifices, and ceremonies of the law, while they most grievously reprehende
them, which carefully observed the sacrifices, neglecting in the mean season
the duties of life, by them signified And Christ a little before he departed
from his Disciples, commanded them not only to baptize, but chiefly commended
unto them the preaching of the Gospel. Which thing Paul so diligently
observed, 1. Cor. 1.
that he confesses how he preached euerywhere, but baptized very few. These
things serve to confute them, which tying grace to the outward signs, think
the use of them alone sufficient unto salvation, and use no doctrine whereby to
declare the use of them: yea, they use a strange tongue in the administration
of them. But how absurd a thing this ought to be judged, Paul shows at
large, in the first to the Corinthians and.xiiij. chapter.

Having now declared the beginning of the Gospel, Jesus is anointed of God.
he shows that Jesus Christ is the author thereof, to the end he would
notify unto us, what and what manner of one we ought to believe he is. He
expressly calls him Jesus of Nazareth, for that we should acknowledge it is
he, whom by reason of the baseness of his country, and because of his poor
and lowly conversation outwardly, all men contemned. Him he testifyeth that God
anointed, teaching by these words, that he is the Savior of mankind, which
God had long before ordained. For he makes mention of annoynting, because of
the old figure. For of old time the Priests and Kings of Israel used to be
anointed, who it is manifest, 1. Sam. 2. Daniel. 9. Psalm. 94..
were figures of the Savior promised. And it was a received opinion that the
promised Savior was called by the name of the Messiah or Christ, that is to
say, anointed, because this denomination did declare his Priesthood and
kingdom, and all the whole order of our redemption, whereupon the Disciples
being asked in the gospel, whom they said Jesus was, Math. 16. Luke. 9.
they confessed he was Christ, that anointed of God. Moreover, least some man
might think him to be of no more excellency than other Priests and Kings, who
by reason of their outward anointing were called by the same name: Peter
teaches that he was anointed with the holy ghost, and with power, alluding no
doubt to that verse of David, who prophesying of the kingdom of that promised
Savior, says: Psalm. 44.
God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. Thus he
calls the holy ghost, by whose guyding the son of God became man, and so
administered his kingdom and Priesthood, that there is perceived no grief or
sorrow therein, but all kind of pleasantness and delyght. For so he
interprets the same in the Prophet, saying: The spirit of the Lord God is
upon me, for the Lord has anointed m^e, and sent me to preach good tidings
unto the poor, Esaias. 61.
that I might bind up the wounded hearts, that I might preach deliverance to
the captive, and open the prison to them that are bound, to restore sight unto
the blind, and to declare the acceptable year of the Lord. He is said to be
anointed above his fellows, John. 1.3.
because God has not given unto him his spirit by measure, but so abundantly
that we all receive of his fullness. See Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical
hystorye, lib. 1. cap. 1.
For he came down upon him in the visible form of a Dove, when he was
baptized of John, so that John thereby knew, that he was that Savior that God
did declare and manifest unto mankind. See John the first Chap. There be also
other arguments, which prove he passed all other anointed of the old
Testament, whether they were Kings or Priests. For although they were called
Christ's or anointed, yet had none of them power so to annoint their
subjects, that they could call them after their anointing, Christians, that
is, anointed. Apoc. 1.
But this the son of God has performed, who has anointed us, and made us
Kings and Priests to God his father. Also none of the anointed in the old
Testament, was worthy of divine honor and worship. None other has reformed
the whole world. None has been had in such estimation among his scholars,
that after his Masters death he could find in his heart to die for his
masters namesake. Moreover, no man's kingdom or priesthood has endured
from ever unto this day. And because they were mortal men, they had need of
Uicares and successors, to administer the office whereunto they were called.
But the son of God, being made the administrator of the everlasting kingdom,
has received all power in heaven and in earth. Math. 28.
And because he is present with his Church, he has need neither of Uicar nor
Successor. The same is a king for ever, Psalm. 110 Ephesians. 1.
after the order of Melchisedech. For he blesses us with all spiritual
benediction. He teaches us by the outward word, and inspiration of his holy
spirit, and he gives unto his Church some Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, Ephe. 4.
some Pastors and Teachers. The same has with one offering, Heb. 9.10
that is to say, with the price of his body and blood, purged the sins of all
the world, and has made perfect for ever, them that are sanctified.
Furthermore, being gone up into heaven, he makes intercession for us, and is a
faithful Bishop for us, Heb. 2.4.
in all those things that are to be done for us with God. Therefore it is truly
said of Peter, that he is the anointed of God, that is to say, appointed to
be the King and Priest of his people. Whereupon we gather that all they sin
against the eternal decree of God, which make to themselves any other patrones
of salvation, any other Saviors of their souls, any other Priests or
intercessours. For in so doing, they rob the son of God of his honor, which
he constantly affirms in the Prophet, he will give to none other. Esaias. 42.
Again, because it is manifest, that he is anointed of God, we must believe
that his power is invincible, and that they need not fear the force of the
world, or of hell, which acknowledge this king. But because we have
otherwheres entreated of this argument, let these few things for this time
suffice.

How Christ accomplyshed the office of a King and priest
Furthermore, least any man might think that Jesus the son of God, is delyted
with a bare name and title after the manner of men, Peter declares that he has
and does faithfully perform the office of a king and priest. At this present,
he premyseth certain generalities, declaring his benefits t^^arde us, meaning
hereafter to entreat of the manner of our redemption, as the Sermon following
shall declare.

And first he says, he went about doing good unto all men. Christ goes about
doing good.
This is the duty of a faithful king and Priest, not only to help them with
aid and counsel that seek for it at his hand, but also diligently to
provide and look about who have need of a tutor and benefactor. This the
Evangelists teach us that Jesus Christ the son of God, has most faithfully
performed. For, as for our salvation sake, he came into the world: so he
carried the doctrine of salvation, and miracles wherewith he confirmed the same
over all Jury and Galiley, and remained no long while anywhere, but plainly
confessed that he must preach to all men euerywhere. Marc. 1. Luke. 4.
And he did not only courteously receive them that came to him, but also
friendly invited and called to him all that labored and were heavy laden,
promising all them that would come unto him reast and refreshing. Math. 11.
And that which it appears he did in times passed, the same he does also at
this day, while he spreads the preaching of his Gospel wide over, that it
enricheth like a shower of rain, now one nation, now an other, with the seed
of his heavenly word, Esaias. 55.
so that not without a cause it may be said, now adays also he goes up and
down, bestowing his benefits on every man. For, he faithfully teaches them
that be in error, he brings the deceived and wandering Pilgrims into the
way, he friendly corrects the corrupted with vice, he gently comfort the
afflicted consciences, and with his righteousness and satisfaction defends
them that are feared with the rigor of Gods judgment. Therefore, great and
hydeous is the ingratitude of them, which abhor such a benefactour, as cruel
and unmerciful, and use to seek help and counsel at others. Yet is their
iniquity more horrible, which wickedly reject his word, and will not witsafe
to hear it, and so cast from them that salvation, which they ought to seek
and embrace with open arms, and all kind of diligence. Both these vices are
to common in our days, the indignity whereof if we would diligently expende,
we should less marueyle at the causes of so many evils, as on every side
compass us.

The other benefit of Jesus Christ is, says he, that all they that were
oppressed of the Devil, were healed by him. Christ heals those that are
oppressed of the Devil.
This appertains peculiarlye to the office of a King, whereof also mention is
made Psalm. 72. He shall keep the simple folk by their right, defend the
children of the poor, and punish the wrong dooer etc. But because Christ was
the author of our spiritual redemption, Peter makes mention of a spiritual
Tyrant, to say, of the Devil, who after he had made our first parents
guilty of transgression, by them brought in all kind of calamity, and death
it self into the world, and by the permission of God so oppressed all mankind
with his exceeding tyranny, that he is thereof called the Prince of the
world. For he brought to pass by sin, that they whom God had created unto
life, fell into death: that they whom God above all other Creatures had endued
with reason, sinned against the law of nature, that they which ought wholly to
have depended on the word of God, suffered themselves to be seduced with the
lying Oracles of the devil, that they whom it became to have worshipped God
only, worshipped wood and stone, and did abominable sacrifice unto Devils.
And for because few acknowledged the great tyranny of the devil, God suffered
also, that many were corporallye possessed of him, and raged as well against
themselves, as against others, as we may learn in the history of the Gospel.
But for all these maladies, Jesus Christ is given to be our Physician, who
according to the promise made in the beginning, 1. John. 3.
should break the Serpents head, and (as the Apostle says) destroy the
works of the Devil. This thing he abundantly declares, he was both able and
willing to do, while by his word he heals them which were scourged with the
horrible whippes of sicknesses, while he drove forth of men, devils and
unclean spirits, and would not suffer them which before seemed Lords over
all things, once to hysse. Heereto are to be referred whatsoever miracles of
like sort, the Evangelists write: whereby is declared unto us, that that
strong man is come, which has entered the Devils house, that is to say, the
world, has bound him, and taken away all his armor and harness, Luke. 11.
as Christ teaches us in the Gospel. Peter testifyeth that all these things
were done by the power of God, to answer the Scribes, which said, that he
cast forth Devils by the help of Beelzebub. There are examples in hystories,
which declare that the kingdom of the Devil is destroyed by the power of
Christ. For it is evident, that all Oracles ceased and kept silence when
Christ died. And Constantinus writes that when Dioclesian reigned, See
Eusebius in the life of Constantine lib. 2. See also a like answer of the
Devil in the coniurers co^spiring against Athanasius in Ruffinus.x. book of
the Eccles. history. 33. ca
the Devil complained out of Apollos cave or den, that the Christians whom
he called just, did let that he could not give true Oracles, as before he used.
Howbeit, we shall a little hereafter see more evident proofs of Christ's
victory against the Devil, where Peter disputes of his death and
resurrection. In the mean while it becomes us to remember our duty, which
is, that being taken from the power of darkness into the kingdom of the
son of God, we defend our liberty, and fight continually against Satan our
common enimye, that we be not at any time found unthankful to Jesus Christ
our deliverer: to whom be praise, honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.lxxvj. Homely.
AND we are witness of all things which he did in the land of the Jews,
and at Jerusalem, whom they slew and hanged on tree. Him God raised up the
third day, and showed him openly, not to all the people, but unto us
witnesses, chosen before of God for the same intent, which did eat and drink
with him after he arose from death. And he commanded us to preach unto the
people, and to testify that it is he which was ordained of God, to be the
judge of quick and dead. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through
his name, whosoever believes in hm, shall receive remission of sins.
THe Apostle Peter has taught Cornelius the Centurion, being appointed
thereunto of God in such wise, that he has also set out before all men a
general and most absolute doctrine of salvation. For he preaches unto him
Jesus Christ the only savior of mankind, in whom all the Scripture
testifyeth, that all the mean of our salvation is contained. And hereof in the
discourse before ^o^e, he said two things. First that God anointed him, that
is, ordained him to be the King and Priest of his people. Whereupon we gather
that all those which appoint to themselves any other mediators or patrones of
salvation, do sin against the eternal purpose of God. Next, he teaches
how diligently and faithfully Jesus Christ used himself in his office. For he
says he went about, and of his exceeding liberality offered the benefit of
salvation to them that sought it not. And this was the end and purpose of all
his doing, to bring all those that were oppressed of the devil, into the
kingdom and liberty of the sons of god, which delivery he declared and
showed by miracles, through the which he most faithfully relieved those that
were vexed and troubled as well with incurable diseases, as with rage of
devils, by the wholesome help and power of his word. Now, unto these things
Peter in this place adds that which perfyteth and makes up the doctrine of
salvation. For first he declares the order and manner that Christ used in the
redeeming of mankind, then he shows what vtilitye and profit comes to us
thereby. Therefore this place is worthy to be considered of us very
diligently.

Before he declares the order and manner of man's redemption, The Apostles are
witnesses of Christ.
he confirms his doctrine by witnesses, saying: And we are witnesses of all
the things which he did in the land of the Jews, and at Jerusalem. And it
ought to seem no absurd or strange thing to any man, that Peter so boldlye
produces himself among his fellows, as witnesses of his sayings. For we
have already oftentimes heard, how Christ appointed them to that charge, and
a little hereafter, it shall be declared, that they were chosen of God, to
bear witness of Jesus Christ, and of those things that he did concerning our
salvation. These things teach us how grievously they offend, which disdain
to believe the Gospel. For where the narration of the things that Christ did,
is not bare and emptye, but has the testimony of God: it easily appears
that this contumely or reproach must needs redounde unto God, as has been
otherwhere, at large declared.

Howbeit, as concerning the manner of our redemption, The manner how mankind
was redeemed.
which we said is chiefly entreated of in this place, there are three things
said of Christ, in the which all those things are contained, that was
needful to be done in this behalf. Among which, the first is the death of
Christ, the which he touches but briefly, because it was well known. Our
sins are purged by the sacrifyce of Christ
He says he was by ye Jews hanged on a tree and killed. He makes mention of
a tree, not so much because he would express his cruel and horrible kind of
death, as to put the hearers in remembrance of the mystery of that sacrifice,
that Christ offered when he dyed for our sins. For it appears that
sacrifices were wont to be offered and burned upon bundels of wood. And thus
does Peter himself see me to interpretate this place, where as in the second
chapter of his first epistle, he writes, that Christ bare our sins in his
body, on the tree, that is, purged them by the sacrifice of his body, upon the
altar of the cross. Christ teaches us the very same, where he says, John. 6.
that he will give his flesh for the life of the world, which it is plain, he
did no where but on the cross. Esaias the Prophet is a copious expositor of
these things, who says, Chap. liij. He was wounded for our offenses, and
smitten for our wickedness. For the chastisement of our peace was laid upon
him, and with his stripes are we healed. We have all gone astraye like sheep,
every one has turned his own way. But the Lord has heaped together upon hm,
the iniquity of us all. etc. All this pertayned unto the Priesthood of
Christ, whom it behooued after this sort (as Paul says) to enter into
heaven, Heb. 9.10.
not by the blood of Oxen and Gotes, but by his own blood, and offering up
himself to put sin to flight, and to take away the sins of many. And of
him it behooued our redemption should take beginning, forasmuch as God being
angry with us, because of our sins, it was not lawful for us to come before
his presence. And this is that profitable consideration of Christ's death, if
we think upon the sacrifice of his body, which he offered for our sins. In
the mean season, let us not think it in vain, that where Peter might have
made mention of his death only, he says also he was s^ayne of the Jews. For
herein he accuses the great unkindness of his Nation, especially seeing a
little before, he had made so diligent a mention of Christ's benefits. Let us
therefore consider the continual ingratitude of the world, that we offend
not in woondering at the afflictions and persecutions of the godly, wherewith
the doctrine of the Gospel is assaulted.

Death is overcome by the resurrection of Christ.
The second thing in the order of our redemption is, the glorious resurrection
of Christ, of the which Peter entreats the more diligently, because it is
the chief foundation of our religion. For these sayings of Paul are well
known: If Christ be not risen again, our preaching is in vain, and your
faith is in vain. 1. Cor. 15.
You be yet in your sins, and they are perished which are fallen a sleep in
Christ. For that we might be sure of our salvation, it was needful that
death, which hitherto had power over us, by reason of sin, should be
vanquished and overcome. Which if it should have held Christ as fast as other
men, then no man could have had any hope, that his salvation had been obtained.
Wherefore as Christ before that, had declared himself to be the Lord both of
life and death, by raising again Lazarus and certain others: even so when he
had suffered death himself, and had been buried the third day, like a
valiant Conqueror, he burst in pieces the bands of death, and breaking open
the gates of hell, returned into life again. And this was an evident and
infallible argument, that both sin and death was vanquished. And for because
the Jews did deny and cavil at the resurrection of Christ, and to that end,
as Matthew says, had brybed the soldiers with money, therefore Peter constantly
now defends the same. God (says he) raised Jesus the third day, and showed
him openly, not to all the people. (For they were unworthy to whom Christ,
whom they deadly hated, should so familierly declare himself) but unto us
witnesses, chosen of God before, for the same intent, which did eat and drink
with him, after he arose from death. And whereas he might have alleged diverse
other arguments of his true resurrection, he is content with that whereby
Christ himself declared chiefly the truth thereof, Luke. 24 John. 21.
that is, how he did once or twyse eat such meat as the disciples offered
him, in their sight. This is a great gentleness and goodness of Christ, who
to confirm us in his resurrection, whose dullness he was well acquaynted with,
would abase himself so low, as to eat meat also (whereof his glorified
body had no need) because no man hereafter should doubt, but that he was risen
again, in the same true and natural body, which he went in, upon the earth
before. Whereby their improbitie and wickedness is the greater, which yet
cease not, scoffingly to deride the resurrection of the dead, who because they
are like unto the Jews, shall also be judged unworthy, to have salvation by
Christ's resurrection.

Furthermore, Christ judges both the quick and the dead.
although Jesus Christ the son of God by his death and resurrection (wherein
may also be included his ascension into heaven) has accomplished our whole
redemption and salvation, and therewithal has purged our sin, and taken
away all the power of hell: yet Peter joins a third thing hereunto, that is
to say, his last coming, when he shall return to judge the quick and the
dead. For in this article, he declares a very evident argument of Christ's
divinity, and of his kingdom. For as it is ye office of a king to give
judgment, even so Christ by this argument proves his godhead, because he
testifyeth, John. 5.
that all judgment is given him of his father. The consideration of this
article is very profitable and necessary. For if a man consider the course of
things in this world, he shall happen upon many things which may persuade him
that Jesus Christ takes no care for this world. For we see the true
worshippers of Christ vexed with diverse afflictions, to be in need, to toil
and traueile, and to be in subjection to the wicked. Again, the wicked enjoy
all kind of prosperity, and use cruelty toward others without comptrolment.
Which thing of what force it is to kill faith, the examples of the Prophets
declare, whom we read have been sometime so moved, that they have thought
they have had just occasion to complain of God. And surely, who should
acknowledge Christ to be a king, if he consider somtymes the uncertain and
unworthy variety and alteracion of worldly things? But here let us remember
that our king and revenger Jesus Christ sleeps not, and that there shall be
one day, a day of general judgment, in which they that are alive, as well as
they that are dead, must come before the judgment seat of Christ, 2. Cor. 5.
to receive in their bodies, according as they have done, whether it he good or
badde. For as Paul teaches us, when the Archangell sounds the Trompe, 1.
Cor. 15. 1. These. 4.
the dead shall rise again, and they that be then alive, shall be changed in
a moment. And Peter confesses that the Apostles were straightly commanded to
preach this article. He commanded us (says he) that we should preach unto
the people, and testify, that it is he that was ordained of God, to be the
judge both of the quick and of the dead. For to let pass that which was
said erewhyle, of the divinity and kingdom of Christ, the consideration of
this article serves much both for the instruction of life, and comfort of the
godly. For whereas we see diverse for this cause chieflye entysed to sin,
because they have persuaded themselves, that death makes an end of all
things, and that there is no judgment after this life, or else think little
thereof: it can not be but a most sharp spur unto all virtue, if a man
consider how he shall once be called to judgment before Christ, and how he
shall there give an account of all his sayings and doings. Surely, the thinking
hereof does most effectuously keep under the affections of wanton flesh, and
entycements of the world. Again, there can be no more strong and effectual
comfort for the godly, than to understand there shall be a day of judgment,
wherein Christ shall declare their innocence, and give unto them the reward of
life which he promised them. Therefore Christ reasoning of the signs which
shall go before the later day, says: Luke. 21.
when these things begin to come to pass, lift up your heads, for your
redemption draws nigh. And Paul teaches us to look for a savior from
heaven, Phil. 3.
which shall change our vile body, that he may make it like unto his
glorious body. He teaches also that the faithful should comfort one another
with the meditation of Christ's last coming. 1. These. 4.
This is a great glory of our faith, that makes that day merry and joyful
unto us, whereof the wicked children of this world cannot think without great
fear and sorrow of heart.

How we be made partakers of christ and of salvation.
Now let us pass to the second part of this place, wherein we are taught,
how we be made partakers of the salvation which is in Christ. This thing Peter
sets forth with great gravity of words, saying: To him give all the
Prophets witness, that through his name whosoever believes in him, Remission
of sins is in the name of Christ.
shall receive remission of sins. Here must every thing be distinguished,
that this doctrine being so necessary, may seem the more evident. For first,
showing the utility of the things which he has hitherto declared, he
teaches us, that we have forgiveness of our sins, in the name of Christ.
And while he makes mention thereof, he plainly testifies that we be sinners,
in that we have need thereof. And while he teaches that the same is given in
Christ, he shows, that it is free, as proceeding of the mere grace of God,
without our desert: so that here we may hear that saying of Paul: All men
have sinned, Romans 3.
and are destitute of the glory of God, but are justified freely by his grace,
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. And hereunto is to be referred
that that was said before of the clensing of our sins, made on the altar of
the Cross. For there the son of God was made sin for us, 2. Cor. 5.
that we by his means should be that righteousness which is allowed before
God. By this saying are all manner sects of other religion taken clean away.
For where Peter shows us that we have forgiveness of our sins in the name
of Christ only, he teaches us, that they lose all their labor, that seek it
any otherwhere, and so with a new argument he confirms that grave sentence
that he uttered before the Senate at Jerusalem, that there was none other name
under heaven given unto man, in which he could be saved. The same, Christ
himself affirms, where he says: I am the way, the truth, John. 14.
and the life. No man comes unto the father, but by me.

Remission of sins is taken hold of by faith.
Secondarily, Peter declares to us by this sentence, the mean whereby we take
hold of the remission of sins offered us by Christ. For he says, every one
that believes in him obtayneth the same. Then by faith we obtain forgiveness
of our sins. The reason of which doctrine is, that faith only grafteth us
into Christ, as he says himself. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood (that is to say, whosoever believes in me) dwells in me and I in him.
And forasmuch as forgiveness of sins, depends upon Gods free promise, it
can none other way be taken hold of, than by faith. For faith takes hold of
Christ, as he is set forth in the Gospel, and cleaves altogether unto the
promise of God. For the which cause, Christ euerywhere attributes salvation
unto faith, and euerywhere repeateth that general sentence: Marc. 16. Math.
15. Math. 9.
He that believes in me, has life everlasting. Again, He that believes and
is baptized, shall be saved. And he says to the woman: Great is thy faith, be
it unto thee as thou will. And again: Thy faith has made thee whole. And from
hence took the Apostles their opinion, where they teach that men are justified
by faith only in Christ, that is to say, delivered and purged from their
sins. By the which opinion, justification of works is plainly excluded. For
where justification (as even now was declared) is to be had in Christ only,
which we can take hold of, none other way than by faith, it must needs
follow, that by faith only we are justified. And yet we condemn not the
exercise of good works, but take from them the insolent title of merit and
justification, the glory whereof is due only to Christ, that Christ may have
his glory wholye to himself. For otherwise we be not ignorant, that all kind
of innocence and righteousness is required of them, whom Jesus Christ has
restored to the liberty of the children of God, through the merit of his
blood.

But whereas Peter a little before had confirmed his doctrine by the testimony
of the Apostles, The Prophets teach the justification of faith.
because no man should think there was any collusion or craft among them, he
defends this cause yet by grauer authority, telling us that all the
Prophets testifye the same of Christ. And there is no doubt but he stood some
pretty while in reciting their testimonies, albeit that Luke, who thought it
enough to touch but the chief points of his Sermon only, for breuities sake
has passed them over. But it is a very easy matter to prove that which Peter
here says out of the writings of the Prophets. For to begin with Moses, and
yet not to rehearse the first promises, he writes that Abraham believed God,
Gene. 15.
and that faith was imputed to him for righteousness. And it is plain, that
Abraham had none other faith, than the waiting for that seed, in which all
Nations should be blessed. Gene. 22. John. 8.
And Jesus Christ says that he desired to see his day, and that he rejoiced
therein. Moses also sets out unto us figures of the law, all which no man
will deny, but to have been shadows of Christ, especially, if he have
diligently read but that one Epistle to the Hebrews. Romans 4.
And Paul plainly proves the justification of faith, out of the.xxxij.
Psalm. Of Esaye what need we to speak, whereas we have heard his testimony
before, where unto he adds this also? by the knowledge of him which is my
righteous servant, he shall justify the multitude, for he shall bear away
their sins. Esaias. 53.


And Ierem^e speaking of our Savior Christ says: This shall be his name,
whereby they shall call him, the Lord, Ierem. 23.
our righteousness I omit diverse other testimonies which might be alleged,
because I would not be to long, and for that it is good to leave occasion to
the studious, to seek them. In the mean season let us mark how Peter
groundeth upon none other testimonies, than the Prophets and Apostles. Whereby
we learn what consent and what manner authority of men should prevail in
matters of faith and religion: even theirs doubtless, whom it appears did
speak by the holy ghost. Those are they by whose ministerye God would have
the books of the old and new Testamentes written. If therefore any thing be
brought forth contrary to their doctrine, let us know that it comes from
man, Math. 15.
whose tradicions long since are beaten down by the sentence of God.

We have therefore a notable and wholesome sermon of Peter's, whereby the first
of the Gentyles are converted unto Christ. This sermon, if it be well expended,
conteyneth in it, all the articles of our faith concerning God the father,
Jesus Christ his son, and the holy ghost. The same comprehends in it a
perfect order of the salvation of man, which as it is set forth to us in
Christ, so is it to be taken hold of, by faith only in him. Which because it
is the gift of God, it becomes us by continual prayer to ask it of him,
that being truly graffed into Jesus Christ, and justified by his merit, we may
be saved. To him be all praise, honor, power and glory for ever. Ame^.

The.lxxvij. Homely.
While Peter yet spoke these words, the holy ghost fell on all them which
heard the preaching. And they of the Circumcision which believed, were
astonished, as many as came with Peter, because that on the Gentyles also was
shed out the gift of the holy ghost. For they heard them speak with
tongues, and magnify God. Then answered Peter, can any man forbydde water,
that these should not be baptized, which have received the holy ghost as well
as we? And he commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord. Then
prayed they him to tarry a few days.
AS God the father has included all the mean of our salvation in Jesus Christ
his son: so he would that he should be the savior and Redemer of all
Nations, and not of one people only. Whereof may be gathered evident
arguments, both of the first promises and oracles of the Prophets, and also of
the last commandment of Christ, when he sent forth his Apostles into all the
world, to preach the Gospel. But whereas the Jews being puffed up with the
prerogative of the law and ceremonies thereof, used to despise other Nations,
and would not vouchsafe to admit them into their congregation: it was need
there should be some peculiar demonstration, to declare that the stop of the
law was broken down by Christ, and that the grace of God was offered unto the
Gentyles also without the righteousness of the law. This does the holy ghost
most lively set forth in this history. For as God did vouchsafe to send his
Angel to Cornelius a Gentyle, and one uncircumcised, and to awake Peter by an
heavenly vision to instruct him: so Peter the Apostle preaches unto the same
Cornelius by instinct of the holy spirit, the whole order of salvation, with
marvelous brevity and playnenesse, and without any mention making of the
ceremonies of the law, teaches us that Jesus Christ is appointed us of God, in
whom to have the forgiveness of our sins. But least any man might think
that Peter had over rashly, and without advise blabbed out these sayings, the
effect of the matter proves the same, which Luke for this cause the more
diligently describes, because he would stir us up to the more diligent
consideration of the matter.

First, while Peter as yet was speaking, it is said, the holy ghost fell on
all them which heard the preaching. Peter's doctrine is confirmed by the
sending of the holy ghost.
And not long after it is said likewise that they spoke with diverse tongues,
and declared the great grace of God. The same therefore comes here to pass,
that fell out in the day of Pentecost: and God thought good to confirm Peter's
doctrine which Cornelius and his kin had received, by the visible sending of
his holy spirit, and to declare in deed that the grace of salvation, was
alyke belonging to all believers, whether they were Jews or Gentiles, and that
from henceforth the ceremonies of the law were no more to be observed. This is
evident that in the Apostles times it was a common thing to have the visible
sending of the holy ghost, to be joined with the preaching of the Gospel,
which God did vouchsafe to give unto them that believed in him. By the which
argument Paul proves the iustifycation of faith, against them, which affirm
that men are justified by the works of the law. For he says: This only
would I learn of you, whether you received the spirit by the deeds of the
law; or by the preaching of the faith? Are you such fools, Gala. 3.
that after you have begone in the spirit, you now end in the flesh? He
that ministers to you the spirit, and works miracles among you* does he it
through the deeds of the law, or by the preaching of the faith? We have in
this place to consider the dignity and efficacy of the working of the
Gospel. The dignity and efficacy of the gospel.
For we see this is the instrument, whereby God uses to give his spirit, and
to work effectuously in the mind of man: so that it is not without a cause
that Paul says: the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation, Romans 1.
to all that believe it. And for the same cause he calls the Preachers of the
Gospel the ministers of the spirit. 2. Cor. 3.
For although all they that hear the Gospel in these days, have not the gift
of tongues given unto them, Eusebius in the history Ecclesiastical v. book,
and vij. chap.

Look ^raeneus his own words in his second book against heres^es, cap. 57.


and such other gifts (as is evident remained in the Church until the time of
Iraeneus and after) be for the most part ceased: yet it is manifest, that all
they are endued with the spirit of adoption and regeneration, which duly hear
the Gospel, and embrace it by faith, whereby they cry Abba father, and which
Paul calls the earnest or pledge of our salvation. 2. Cor. 1. and.5. And the
effects of this spirit are manifest, while it mortifyeth the flesh with the
earthly members thereof in the believers, regenerateth men, illuminateth the
mind, and causes that they which by nature are apt and meet to no goodness,
are able to do all things in Christ. Whereupon we gather again, that they
are not to be taken for the members of Christ, i^ whom there appear no
effects of the holy spirit. For that spirit is not idle and ^luggysh. Romans 8.
And Paul says that they which are destitute of the spirit of Christ are not
his.

Again, this place teaches us what the exercises of them that believe, The
exercyses of the faithful.
are, after they have received the holy ghost. They speak with strange and
new tongues: which although it come not to pass to every man as we said even
now: yet the holy ghost ordreth the tongues of all them that believe, to
speak those things which serve to the glory of God, and the edifying of
other, whereof has been sufficiently said in the second Chapter. Then it is
said, that they greatly praised God. So do they that truly acknowledge the
grace of God, which he offreth us in Christ: whereas contrarywyse, whosoever
believe to be justified by their works, praise themselves. And this giving of
thanks is a sacrifyce most acceptable unto God, which he both often requires,
and the godly euerywhere vow and promise. For hereunto appertains it where
they promise him the bullocks of their lips David speaking hereof, says: what
reward shall I give unto the Lord, Hos. 14.
for all the benefits that he has done unto me? I will receive the cup of
salvation, Psa. 116.
and call upon the name of the Lorde^ I will pay my vows now in the presence
of all his people. And he testifyeth that this shall please the Lord better
than a bullock that has horns and hoofes. Psa. 69.
These things teach us what to think of the unkind and wicked raylers
against Gods word, who have a pleasure with bitterness of tongue, to ca^pe at
it, and say it is the cause of all calamity, where it were their duty to
acknowledge and celebrate the grace of God for it.

How the beholders were affected with the miracle of sending the holy ghost.
Furthermore, let us see how the beholders were affected with this miracle.
Amongst whom, some were Jews, which accompanied Peter from Ioppe^ Luke says
that they were amazed, seeing the gift of the holy ghost was poured upon ye
Gentyles also. For although they were not ignorant what came to pass unto
Peter, yet the common error of the Jews still bewitched them, who thought all
Nations unholy, and strangers from God, but such as were circumcised and had
received the other ceremonies of the Jews law. Even in the faithful sometime
are errors to be found.
It is very notable, that they which are of the faithful, are so deceived. For
hereby it appears, that even to the godly sometime the spots of error
cleave, and therefore all things that they do, must not be drawn to
imitation. Which thing it appears Paul observed, who bids the Corinthians
to follow him, as far forth as they see him to follow Christ. 1. Cor. 11.
For there is nothing so appropriate unto man, as to err and be deceived. Nor
nothing so difficult and laborious, as to pluck up old rooted errors out of
men's minds: example whereof we have seen in the Apostles, Acts. 1.
still stumbling at the expectation and looking for, of a carnal and earthly
kingdom. Therefore they are greatly deceived, which judge continual teaching
and admonition to be superfluous and unprofitable, seeing that blindness and
frowardness of man's wit, is such, that he takes occasion of stumbling at
every thing, and hardlye can be brought into the way again. Wherefore Paul
was of a far better judgment, when he commanded Timothy to preach in
season and out of season. 2. Tim. 4.


But to return to the exposition of the hystory: Peter has a much better
judgment, Peter understands the end of the miracle.
who of the premises gathers the end of the miracle. For where by an
heavenly vision, he was commanded to go to Cornelius, and to preach the
Gospel unto him, and sees now the gift of the holy spirit given to them
that hear and believe it: he easilye acknowledges that the grace of the
Gospel belongs to the Gentyles also, and that the uncircumcised also, so
that they believe in Christ, ought to be received into the fellowship of the
Church, forasmuch as God does vouchsafe to give them his holy spirit. For
drawing an argument from the thing, unto the sign thereof, he says: Can any
man forbid water, that these should not be baptized, which have received the
holy ghost as well as we? Which is as much as if he should say: As many as
are the members of Christ, must be received by baptism into the fellowship of
Christ's Church. But no man can doubt but these men are the members of Christ,
seeing they have received the spirit of Christ as well as we. Ergo, it is
reason they should be baptized. And forthwith he commands them to be
baptized in the name of the Lord, that is to say, to be consecrated to Christ
the Lord, and numbered with his Church. For Peter's commandment must not so
much be understood of the form of baptism, as of the end and use thereof.

Of these things it is easy to gather all the meaning of baptism. Peter
surely acknowledges baptism to be the first sacrament of Gods people and
Church, The reason of baptism.
whereby outwardly the benefits of regeneration and adoption, and whatsoever
else is given us in Christ, are sealed unto us, and thereby as many as are
partakers of them, are admonished of their duty. Whereupon we gather, that as
many as it appears, are of the people of God, have need thereof. By these
things are many errors confuted, that we see, have crept in, these many years
about baptism, and yet reign euerywhere. And first this place confuteth the
unholy deprauers of the Sacraments, which think they are superfluous,
Contemners of sacraments.
for them that believe and are regenerate by faith. Which kind of men, while
they greatly extol faith, and the grace of God, do wickedly contemn the
wisdom of God and his ordinances. Howbeit, Peter saw that Cornelius and his
family truly believed, and that they were endued with the holy ghost, and
adopted into the number of the children of God: and yet for all that, he
commands them to be baptized, because he would not seem to contemn
Christ's commandment. For why should he contemn the sacraments of Christ,
which knew that God in the old Testament had made it death for them that
contemned his sacraments? Again, this place confuteth the boldness of the
Anabaptists, Anabaptists.
which use to keep the children of the Christians from their baptism. But
Peter proves that they are to be baptized for none other cause, but for that
he saw they were endued with the spirit of Christ, and therefore were members
of his Church. Why then should not infants be baptized, by as good right,
Marc. 10.
who we know are borne members of the Church, and who Christ testifyeth,
appertain to the kingdom of God? Moreover, Papists.
the example of this place makes against the error of the Papists, which use
to tie the grace of God unto Sacraments, and use to bring it and put it in
their sacraments, by exorcismes and coniuring, whereas it is evident that they
are but the cognizances and tokens of the grace that is given us in Christ. And
if thou well examine this place, it shall appear ye same came to pass unto
Cornelius, that sometime was to be seen in Abraham, so that thou may see the
sacraments of both the Testaments, had all but one reason. For Paul witnesses
that Abraham was justified by faith, and that he afterward received
Circumcision, Romans 4.
which was a seal of the righteousness of faith. So we hear that Cornelius
believed, and was endued with the spirit of God, which was an infallible
argument of his regeneration and justification: and now at length comes
baptism, where by all these benefytes of God are sealed and confirmed.
Therefore it is evident that the grace of God is not tied unto baptism,
neither that it is by baptism, poured into us as by a Pype or Conduite,
forasmuch as if we receive the Sacraments without faith, they be utterly
super^luous, yea, we know they indammage the contemners of them, as may be
seen in the examples of Judas the Traitor, and Simon the Sorcerer.

Before we leave this place, The order of salvation.
it is good to observe the order of justification and salvation in the example
of Cornelius. We see that he was helped and stirred up by the grace of God, to
do that that was good and acceptable unto God, whereas before that, he had
been a Gentyle, and estraunged from the people of God. But being received into
favor, Peter the Apostle was appointed to be his teacher, to preach to him the
doctrine of salvation. Cornelius believes the word being preached. The holy
ghost follows after his belief, which both regenerateth the mind, and also
brings forth diverse marvelous virtues. Being illuminated with this spirit,
he is given wholly to praise God, and at length being baptized, he is received
into the fellowship of Christ's Church. This order we see observed euerywhere.
For the beginning of our salvation springs of the grace of God, who chose us
before the foundations of the world were laid. He having chosen us, Ephesians. 1.
instructs us by his outward word, gives us faith, illuminateth us being
regenerate with his spirit, and makes us meet unto every good work. And that
which he promises by his word, and offreth by his spirit unto the faithful
mind: the same he confirms by outward Sacraments also. See Romans 9.10.

Cornelius is an example of a kind and thankful hearer.
Finally, it is declared how Cornelius behaved himself after all these things.
They besought Peter (says Luke) to abide with them a few days. And there was
none other cause of this desire, but for that they were enflamed with the love
of the Gospel, and desired to hear him every day, because they would be the
more confirmed in the knowledge of true salvation. Furthermore, they could not
be so soon satisfied with the presence of their very friend, who they
perceived had ministered so great grace unto them. And here is truly expressed
the property of those that faithfully believe. They loathe not the teaching of
that word, nor attribute not so much to themselves, to think that they shall
have hereafter no more need of it. Yea, they acknowledge themselves to be men,
and because they will be taken for the children of God, they can not be filled
with the voice of their father, John. 8.
but desire to have him still speak unto them. Moreover, they show themselves
thankful and kind toward the Ministers of God, by whose diligence they are
taught in matters of faith and salvation. For they think it a matter of no
great weight, to requite them with carnal benefits which give unto them
spiritual riches. For they understand that their salvation depends chiefly
on them. For the which cause they can suffer themselves to be rebuked and
chidden, as we may see in David and Ezechias. But the wicked be of a far
other mind, which use to condemn the Ministers as molesters of their ungodly
desires, and public enemies, whereof the scripture shows examples in Pharao,
Achab, the Phariseys, and infinite others. Whose ungodliness deserves to
feel the vengeance of Gods justice, because they would not suffer to be
faithfully admonished. Let us therefore acknowledge the grace of God, and
embrace his word with thankful minds, studying to frame our selves
thereafter, that we may hereafter be made partakers and heirs of the
salvation promised in Jesus Christ our savior: to whom be praise, honor,
power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The eleventh chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The.lxxviij. Homely.
AND the Apostles and brethren that were in Jury, heard that the Heathen also
had received the word of God. And when Peter was come up to Jerusalem, they
that were of the Circumcision, contended against him, saying. Thou wentest in
to men uncircumcised, and did eat with them. But Peter rehearsed the
matter from the beginning, and expounded it by order unto them, saying: I was
in the City of Ioppa praying: and in a trance I saw in a vision, a certain
vessel descend, as it had been a great sheet, let down from heaven by the
four corners, and it came to me* into the which when I had fastened mine
eyes, I considered and saw fowerfooted beasts of the earth, and vermin, and
worms, and fowls of the air* And I heard a voice saying unto me: Arise
Peter, slay, and eat. And I said, not so Lord: for nothing common or unclean
has at any time entered into my mouth. But the voice answered me again from
heaven: Count not thou those things common, which God has cleansed. And this
was done three times. And all were taken up again into heaven. And behold,
immediatlye there were three men already come into the house where I was, sent
from Caesarea unto me. And the spirit said unto me, that I should go with
them without doubting. Moreover, these six brethren ac^ompanyed me, and we
entered into the man's house. And he showed us how he had seen an Angel in
his house, which stood and said to him: Send men to Ioppa, and call for
Simon whose surname is Peter. He shall tell thee words, whereby both thou, and
all thine house shall be saved. And as I began to preach, the holy ghost fell
on them, as he did on us at the beginning. Then came it to my remembrance how
that the Lord said: John baptized with water, but you shall be baptized with
the holy ghost. Forasmuch then as God gave them like gifts as he gave unto
us, when we believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, what was I that I should have
withstanded God?
ALthough the blessed Euaungelyst Luke has both abundantlye and diligently
described the history of Cornelius, which was converted unto the faith in the
Chapter before going: yet in this Chapter he repeateth the same again after
another sort and manner of narration. The cause of which his doing was, for that
it might appear to all men, that the Gentyles were undoubtedly called,
according to Gods appointment, by preaching of the Gospel, and received into
the communion of the Church, by the sacrament of baptism. That the declaration
hereof was necessary, because of the Jews, has already oftentimes been
showed. And the same serves very much for our instruction, both because the
grace of Gods goodness, is thereby marueylouslye set forth, and the certainty
of all our salvation (which springs of the Jews) is most firmly proved.
Therefore no man must accuse the holy writer, for to often repeating of one
thing, or of needelesse loquacitie or babbling, but rather they ought to be
provoked by his diligence, the more earnestly to weygh and consider a matter of
such importance. Furthermore, Luke takes occasion to rehearse again the same
history by reason of the unjust judgment of a certain sort of persons, who
being deceived, accuse Peter, whereby he is enforced thus to declare, and open
the meaning of his doing unto them.

How the Church judges of Peter's deed.
First therefore let us see how the Church which was here and there dispersed
through Jury, judged, concerning the vocation of the Gentyles. For this thing
could not long lie hidden, both because of the notable worthynesse of the
persons, and also for that it was a strange thing, and not seen before.
Therefore he says the fame hereof was straight way published over all Jury.
Here are two sorts of men, uttering and bewraying themselves. The first are
the Apostles and brethren, by which name I suppose, the Ministers of the word,
and their fellows are here meant. Of these the Euaungelist says but this one
thing, and no more, that they heard the Gentyles had received the word of God
also. Whereupon may be gathered, that although they yet understood not very
well the mystery of this matter: yet being mindful of Christian modesty,
they would not blame or accuse Peter over hastily, whose credit and diligence
they had by many proofs tried. Whose modesty the holy ghost has set before
us to imitate, least in judging other men's doings, we be led with
unadvised zeal, and so break the rules of Christian charity. Here is also to
be considered the phrase or manner of speaking, where he says the Gentyles
received the word of God, What it is to receive the word of God.
whereas he might have said, they received Christendom, and were made
partakers of Christ and his Church. But this way he thought to say somewhat
more, and to make a difference between the true Christianity, and
counterfayte dissembling of some kind of persons. For they receive the word
of God, which acknowledge it to be the word of God, and therefore labor to be
transfourmed into it, and to become followers of God. So Paul writes that the
Thessalonians received the word, where he says: when you received of us the
word, whereby you learned to know God, 1. These. 2.
you received it not as the word of man, but as it was in deed, the word of
God. Again: And you became followers of us, and of the Lord, receiving the
word with much affliction. 1. These. 1.
They that receive the word of God after this sort, bring forth marvelous
fruits by the same. For denying themselves, and mortifying the affections of
the flesh, they forsake their old ungodliness, and as children of light,
follow innocence. For they know that God is light, 1. John. 2.
and that they which will have fellowship with him, must walk in the light.
And they which brag of the Gospel, had need oftentimes to consider this
thing, least while they cry with open mouth, that they have received the word
of God, they accuse themselves of lying, showing forth no fruits agreeable to
the word.

But let us come to the other kind of men, which were not so indifferent
judges of Peter's singular doing. Peter is reprehe^ded for his well doing.
Luke says these were of the Circumcision. But whereas the first sort also
were circumcised and Jews, I suppose he means not here the people of the
Jews only, but those rather which would be taken for Christians, and yet did
cleave to fast unto Circumcision, and the Ceremonies of the law, as necessary
unto salvation. These men (says Luke) over boldly reprehended Peter's doing,
and openly contended with him. And this they lay to his charge as a matter of
life and death, that he went in, to men uncircumcised, that is, to Gentyles and
Heathen men, and did eat with them. For thus doing, they accuse him of
breaking the traditions of the Elders, and of custom, the origin whereof, we
have otherwheres declared to have sproong of the law of God, being over
straightly strayned. By this example we are taught, how hurtful a thing it is,
once to be bletched with error, and to continue long in the same. For commonly
a certain froward feruencie to defend error, is joined thereunto, because
such is the inclination of man's nature, that none will seem to have erred.
With which vice these men were also blinded, which would not admit the
Gentyles into the congregation, albeit it was manifest by the plain testimony
of God, that they were admitted thereinto. So great and so tough is the
corruption of man's nature, and so invincible is his stubbornness in the
defense of errors once received. And would God there were not at this day
infinite examples of this kind in those men, who being the heads of the
Church, think it but a tryfle, to defend those things which they know to be
contrary to the express Oracles of Gods word.

Furthermore, this place teaches us, No man can please all parties.
that no man can so prosperously and godlily do any thing, that he shall
satisfy all men. For this rather is the state of the world, that they that
should be commended, are accused and blamed. This the Scripture teaches us,
came to pass unto Moses, both amongst the Egyptians and the Israelites. We
read how the Prophets had experience of the same, who while they watched and
labored for all men's salvation, were called disturbers of the Realm,
enemies of their country, and authors of all evil. And it appears the
world had none other judgment of Jesus Christ. For one while he is accused
for neglecting washing of the hands, another while, for being conversant with
sinners: by and by again, as a breaker of the Sabbath: after that, they cry
out he is a Samaritane, and possessed of ye devil. Therefore Peter now suffers
the same yt his master did, and where he was worthy of singular praise, for
bringing the kingdom of God so prosperously unto the gentiles, he is feign
rather to abide ye venymous bitings of slaunderers. And they only which are
manifest enemies of Christ, do not thus unjustly control him, but they also
which would be taken for Christians and brethren: yea, the scholars take the
fetula and rod against the Master. The consideration hereof ought to make us
pacient if the like at any time do fall out unto us. It also teaches us, that
we must labor rather to approve our doings to God, than to the world, which
many times is both unkind to his benefactours, and for the most part deceived
in his judgment. Again, let us learn that it is a great offense dishonestly
to defame and slander the well doings of our brethren. For they that so do,
declare the Devils disposition, whom the Greeks therefore have called
Diabolum, that is to say, Devil, because he uses to slander, misreport, and
misconstrue all our doing and sayings. And they also break the rules of
charity, 1. Cor. 23. Prouer. 10. 1. Pet. 4.
whose property it is always to hope well of the brethren, and rather to
cover the multitude of sins, than to disclose and open them.

But after the unjust accusation of these waywarde men* follows Peter's
Apology or defense deuoyde of all bitterness: The apology or defense of Peter.
the only end and scope whereof is, to show that nothing is herein done* of
private divise, but all things by the commandment of God, who would have the
Gentyles to be received into the communion of Christ and his Church. And
because he saw his adversaries minds greatly exasperated, he frames a
diligent narration of all things, done even from the beginning, and confirms
the same with sound arguments. The which narration before I touch, the
modesty of the Apostle is to be considered, who thought good so humblye and
carefully to excuse himself to those, whom (having so just a cause as he had)
he might either have set light, and given no answer to, or at least he might
snappishly have put them back, and rebuked them. But he knew that the same
law as well belonged to himself, as to other, where he commanded all
Christian men to be ready to give a reason or answer of their doing to every
man. 1. Pet. 3.
And as in this place he patiently suffers the unjust censure and check of
men, in a just quarrel: so when he was accused of Paul before all men, for
his dissimulation and inconstancy, we read he answered nothing
disdainefully. Galat. 1.
And this we read was always the custom in the primitive Church, that
Bishops could suffer and bear to be judged and corrected by other
Bishops. Eusebius in the storye of ye Church, v. book, chap. 24.25. and. 26.
Thus it appears Victor the Bishop of Rome was reprehended and admonished of
his duty by Iraeneus, and certain other Bishops of less famous Churches, for
his over hasty sentence of excommunication, given against the Bishops of
Asia. These things reprove the pride of the bishops of Rome, that followed, who
are not only not ashamed, to make themselves Judges over all the world, but
also refuse the judgment of all men. My heart quaketh, as often as I remember
that blasphemous Canone, which will not have the Pope condemned, Distinct. 40.
Cap. If the Pope. etc.
no not though he forget his own and other men's salvation, and lead with
him headlong into hell, whole heaps of men's souls. Howbeit, he could no
manner of way more evidently have proved himself to be Antichrist, than in
that he refuses the judgment of the Church, and Bishops, challenging to
themselves the supremacy over them all. But to let this pass, let us hearken
to Peter, entreating his cause and matter.

Peter in his Apology uses a diligent narration or discourse, as even now we
declared, the which he so orders, that he reports not only what was done,
but shows also that it was well done and lawfully. And this narration
consists of five parts or members, of all which we will speak as much as
appertains to this present matter, letting pass that that has been said in
the Chapter before going.

The vis^on of the sheet.
In the first part is contained the vision of a great vessel or sheet, let
down to him from heaven, by which God taught him, that no man from thenceforth
should be judged unworthy of the Gospel and fellowship of the people of God,
for neglecting the ceremonies of the law: forasmuch as the stop of the law
was broken down by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2.
who had made one people of both. Peter thought it good to begin his
narration with this, that it might appear to all men, that he did nothing of
his own head, but according as God appointed.

In the second part he alleges the sure commandment of God* The
commandment of God.
least he might be thought to have been beguyled by some dream or idle
fantasy. For even at the same time he says (by the providence of God) they
stood at his Hostess door, that were sent from Cornelius, and he adds: The
spirit said, that I should go with them nothing doubting. And this is the
strength of his whole defense, which he sets against his adversaries
accusation. For they said: Thou wentest in to men that are vncircumised, and
have eaten with them. Therefore Peter answers them: The spirit of the Lord
bade me so to do, And being with this simplicity of words content, he lets
pass all Rhetorical colors, wherewith he might have confirmed and garnished
this argument. Which example teaches us, that they are not to be accused, or
if they be accused, they may easily be defended before Christian men, which
cast of the traditions and customs of men, at Gods appoy^tment. For the
authority of this saying of the Apostles shall remain in force for ever: we
must obey God more than men. Let us also in these days, with this argument
defend our selves against the Papists, which with like frowardness accuse
us, for having broken the traditions of men, and take occasion of offense on
every side, without any given on our behalf. It offends them, that we deny
Christ is offered in the sacrament of the altar, for the sins of the quick
and the dead. But we lay against them the word of Christ, who yielding up his
life upon the cross, declared that all manner of expiation for sin, and our
redemption, was now accomplished. Furthermore, we hear Paul say, that Christ
being once offered, can be offered no more. They are offended, because they see
we have put the image of Christ and the Saints out of our Churches. But we
lay for our selves against them, the authority of God forbidding images to be
made, and commanding those that are made, to be made out of the way and
destroyed. They are offended, because we have taken away the differences of
meats. But the Apostle defends us, which says, it is a doctrine of the
Devil to bring it up. The like reason there is of all other things in
controversy between us. These we have alleged only for example sake. And
if our adversaries will not yield unto the word of God, but will hold on, and
set the customs and traditions of men against the authority of the same, then
shall it easily appear, that they are not the servants of God, but of men.

The third part of the narration contains the vision of the Angel, The
appearing of the Angel.
which we heard was sent from God unto Cornelius. Hereof Peter thought to make
mention, to declare that Cornelius did nothing unadvisedly, but was moved by
God, to send for him to teach him. Here is diligently to be observed, how the
Angel speaks of the ministry, or preaching of the Gospel. Peter (says
he) shall speak words, whereby thou and all thy house shall be saved. Then he
testifyeth that salvation comes by preaching of the Gospel. This the holy
Psalmist saw, when he said: Psalm. 107.
God sent his word, and they were healed. And Paul says, that the Gospel is
the power of God unto salvation to all believers. It is not thus said, because
the sound of words brings salvation, as the supersticious think of their
exorcismes, but because through the preaching of the Gospel, Christ is offered
to us, 2. Cor. 5.
and they that preach the Gospel, be messengers in the room of Christ, that
by their ministry men might be reconcyled to God the father through Christ.
Therefore no commonweals nor familyes, can have any sound health or
salvation, without they receive the gospel of Jesus Christ. Therefore their
ingratitude that say the word of salvation is the cause of all evils, as well
private as public, is most execrable, as we read was sometime objected to
Jeremy. Ierem. 44.
These men are led with the spirit of Caiphas, who also said, that Christ
would be the author and cause of their destruction, unless he were made away
by the wicked conspiracy of the priests.

Fourthly, he declares the marvelous sending of the holy ghost. The expositor
whereof he alleges Jesus Christ to be. I remember (says he) the word of
the Lord, how he said: John baptized with water, but you shall be baptized
with the holy ghost. It seems that Peter reasons on this wise: Christ our
Lord promised to his elect, his spirit, which the world could not receive,
and he said, that he alone was the giver thereof. Therefore, whereas he has sent
the same spirit unto the Gentiles, and has vouchsafed to baptize them with his
holy ghost: I could not choose but follow the example of such a guide, nor
judge them unworthy the baptism of water, whom God had judged worthy of his
spirit. And Peter makes a trim difference between Christ and the Minister,
because he would not have that wrongfully attributed to the externe
ministry, that belongs only unto Christ. But because we have otherwheres
entreated hereof, it shall suffice for this time, to have noted thus much by
the way.

The fifth part conteyneth a very grave conclusion, as well in words as
arguments. The sending of the holy ghost.
For he says: If God therefore gave unto them like gifts, as he gave unto us
which believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, what was I that I should withstand
God? It should have been a wicked part to have said, they had been unlike,
whom God had vouchsafed to make like. But how much more greater impiety had
it been, to have shut out from the communion of the Church, those whom God by
so evident an argument had declared to have pertayned to his Church? Yea, whom
he had openly chosen and adopted? Therefore Peter confesses that he should
have been an adversary of God, if he had gone about any such thing. And if they
be the adversaries of God, which keep those men from the fellowship that is in
him, whom he does vouchsafe to make members of his Church, because they think
them unworthy of so great favor and grace: what shall we say of them, which by
false doctrine, deceive Christ's sheep, or else rage against them with plain
force and tyranny, because of their confession of Christ? They shall one day
feel his mighty and heavy hand, whose enemies they chose rather to be than
his friends and followers. It is our part so to acknowledge and embrace the
grace of God, as also to bring and train all other to the fellowship of
salvation, the which God the father has set out to his elect in his beloved
son Jesus Christ: to whom be praise, honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.lxxix. Homely.
WHEN they heard this, they held their peace, and glorified God, saying: Then
has God also to the Gentyles granted repentance unto life. They also which
were scattered abroad, through the affliction that rose about Steven, walked
throughout unto Phoenicia, and Cyprus, and Antioche, preaching the word to no
man, but unto the Jews only. Some of them were men of Cyprus and Cyrene,
which when they were come to Antioche, spoke unto the Greeks, and preached the
Lord Jesus. And the hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number
believed, and turned unto the Lord.
AS the Apostle Peter in converting of Cornelius, did the duty of a godly and
faithful Apostle, while he thought it good to obey the express commandment
of God, without any lyngering: so when his doing was of some persons unjustly
reproved, he showed an excellent example of a christian and Apostolyke
modesty. For he declared the reason of his doing most friendly and diligently
unto them, of whom he might most justly have required what authority they had
so to do. But leaving all other arguments apart, he urges this one thing,
that he did nothing of his own deuyse, but according to Gods appointment and
commandment. By which example we have learned with what arguments we should
arm our selves against those, which now a days accuse us with like
frowardness for breaking the traditions and customs of men. Let the authority
of Gods word suffice us, which whosoever despyseth, he is unworthy of whom
the Church of Christ should make any account.

It remains in this history to entreat how those men which erewhile were
such knapped Comptrollers, How the brethren did acc^pt Peter's Apology.
accepted Peter's Apology or defense. He says, they held their peace, and
gloryfied God, saying: Then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance
unto life. Moreover, they were whysted and did not with man's reason argue or
replye against the commandment and will of God. By which argument is
abundantly declared, that they strove not against it of malice or envy, but
rather of an inconsiderate and blind zeal of godliness, which Paul also
otherwheres lays to their charge. And because Peter easily espied the same
affection in them, for this cause he thought to deal with them herein the more
gently. For they which are led with a zeal of the glory of God, and use to
credyt and yield unto reasons showed them, must not be cast of as incurable,
or be over bytterlye dealt withal. The godly yield unto reason.
And (...) is the property of those that be truly faithful, that they will
willing^^ yield unto arguments, brought out of the word of God, although they
^^lly perceive not the reason of the things that are said. For this is the
true and right exercise of faith, when we submit our reason unto the
commandments and word of God, which thing Paul euerywhere teaches under
the obedience of faith, 2. Cor. 10. Romans 1.16.
which he shows to be the end and scope of preaching the gospel, whereby it
easily appears, that they are not to be taken for faithful, which are not
ashamed stiffely to contend against the manifest Oracles of Gods word.

Furthermore, it is said, they glorified God: We must rejoice in the salvation
of other.
which is a mere evident sign, that they received Peter's excuse, and admitted
it with good will. For there be some that being subdued by force of reason,
hold their peace, because they have not what to answer, yet as the Poet
says, they hyde their grief in the bottom of their heart. But he that
glorifyeth God, testifies by an infallible argument, that he is fully
satisfied. We are taught that we must rejoice and be glad at those, whom God
does illuminate with the light of his truth. This we ought to do both by
reason of the desire that every christian man is bound to have of the glory
of God and also because of the love which we ought to bear to the furtheraunce
and profit of our neighbor. And surely, there is nothing that so rejoices a
faithful soul, as to see the light of truth to spread it self abroad to
the increase of Gods glory, and the salvation of many. Again, we ought to
mourn from the heart, when we see any neglect, or fall from the way of
salvation. So we read that Samuel contynually mourned, because of Saules most
wretched fall. And Paul contynueth in prayers for the Jews, Romans 9.10.
and desires to be accursed from Christ for them, that they might be saved.
But now a days we be a cold in both these points, which thing is the chief
cause, that the Gospel proceeds no better.

How God gives repentance.
But let us see the words, wherewith they declare the affection of their mind:
Then has God also granted to the Gentyles (say they) repentance unto life.
God gives repentance after two sorts, either when he grants time and
place to repent: or else when he mollifyeth and conuerteth men's minds by his
spirit and word, by repentance to frame themselves to a better trade of life.
In this place it appears that God did both, although the later sense be more
agreeing to this present argument. It is most worthy to be observed, where they
say repentance unto life is given unto the Gentiles, by preaching of the
Gospel. For in so saying, they testify that they speak of that repentance,
which through faith in Christ brings salvation, and which we may call the
scope and mark of all the Gospel, which is, that we being reconcyled unto God
through Christ, should turn unto him with all our hearts, and live in him.
For so Paul writes: God has reconcyled us unto himself by Jesus Christ, and
has given to us the office to preach the atonement. Now then are we
messengers in the rowme of Christ, 2. Cor. 5.
even as though God did beseech you through us. So pray we you in Christ's
steed to be reconcyled unto God. They name repentance expreslye, having
respect unto that saying of Christ, which commands both repentance, and
forgiveness of sins to be preached in his name. Neither must these two be at
any time separated, least men take occasion under pretense of the Gospel, to
live carnally. Again, this has in it a singular comfort, that he says
repentance is given unto life. Therefore repentance in the faithful is never
in vain or unfruitful, but makes them partakers of salvation through
Christ. There are apparaunt promises of God, wherein he euerywhere promises
life unto them, which turn unto him with all their heart. Where he says: I
will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he convert and live. Ezech. 18.
And we must not think that God flattereth or deludeth any man with vain
promises. Hereto belongs the whole book almost of the Judges, which proves
by many examples, that the Israelites never returned to God, by true
repentance in vain. And it is manifest that the Ninevites through faithful
repentance caused God to revoke his sentence passed against them. What shall I
speak of these, seeing we read that the repentance that Achab had but for a
season, and little time, was by the mouth of God commended? 1. Reg. 21.
These things ought to encourage them, which stand upon the pytbrinke of
desperation, thinking that God is so offended with them for their former
wickedness, that their repentance is not acceptable unto him. Which men
would be comforted with these sayings of the Prophet. If your sins were as
red as Scarlet, Esaias. 1.
they shall be as white as snow: And though they were like purple, they shall
be as white as woolle. Again: The Lord is full of compassion and mercy,
Psalm. 103.
long suffering, and of great goodness. He will not always be chyding. etc.

Now after Luke has made an end of the storye of Cornelius, The spreading of
Christ's kingdom unto the Ge^tyles.
which contains the beginning and first fruits as it were of the vocation of
the Gentiles, he returns to the discourse of the things belonging to the
whole Church, which he had intermytted, and declares how the kingdom of
Christ began to be stretched and enlarged unto the Gentyles. And first he
tells how Antioch was converted unto Christ, and how men were there first
called Christians. And principally he notes ye occasion thereof, saying it was
because of the persecution that was raised against Steven. The occasion of the
spreading of the Church, arose by reason of the persecution.
And it is very worthy to be considered, where he says the beginning of such
a benefit sproong of so doleful a cause. For how pitiful a case the Church
stood in, in the time of that persecution, we heard in the.viij. Chapter,
when the rage of persecutours went so far, that it was not safe for a man in
secret ^o be a christian, when both men and women were haled out of their
doors as to a slaughterhouse, which thing was the cause that the Church being
scattered hither and thither, seemed like a scratched and torn body, that had
be^ne incurable. But by the grace and goodness of God, it comes to pass,
that of every member of this scattered Church, springs a new body. For they
whom this cruel tempest had thus scattered, remembering their office and
duty, began to preach euerywhere the name of Christ, and many of them going
as far as Phenicia and Cyprus, did illustrate those countries with the light
of the Gospel. By which example the primitive Church, and faith full of all
ages might be confirmed, not to be offended with ye cruel attempts of enemies,
forasmuch as it appears by these men, that the kingdom of Christ can not be
overthrown, nor driven into straightes, but is rather thereby builded up and
enlarged. For that that Luke reports here to have come to pass, the same the
writers of the Ecclesiastical history report to have come to pass in all
persecutions. And as after horrible tempests, clear weather commonly
follows: so it appears that after persecutions, the Church always looked
more bright and cheerful. For God scatters the devises of Nations, but his
purpose stands fast for ever, whereby he has made his son king and Ruler
of all the world. See the Psalms. 33.2. and. 110

But Luke diligently entreats of those, The Ministers be they never so godly,
do sometime disagree
by whose ministry God brought to pass a matter of such weight and
importance. All which were dispersed because of the faith and doctrine of
Christ, and yet they agreed not in all points, touching the order and
ministry of the gospel. For some of them preached to the Jews only, who it
is like were ignorant of the things done between Peter and Cornelius. Other
some which he writes were of Cyprus and Cyrene, came to Antioch, and preached
to the Greeks, that is, to the Gentyles. So it oftentimes comes to pass,
that in some things they which are counted the most faithful servants of Jesus
Christ, do disagree, God so disposing his gifts, that his word may be of
the more authority, and that the success thereof should not seem to depend
of a certain conspiracy, and consent of men among themselves. Whereunto also
is to be referred that that is hereafter reported of the contention that fell
between Paul and Barnabas, which wexed so hot that those singular and chosen
instruments of Christ, departed one from another. Therefore let it offend no
man, if now a days he see any like matter to fall out in the Church. For
Paul writes, 1. Cor. 11.
that there must be sects, that the elect may be tried. Howbeit, in all this
adooe, the fervent desire of spreading abroad the kingdom of Christ, is
greatly to be praised, wherewith they all being enflamed, have utterly
forgotten the dangers that they were in a little before, and euerywhere
publishe the word of God. Such constancy ought all faithful Ministers of
Christ to have, to the end they must not think they have done all their duty,
when they have been once in danger for the name of Christ. And they must not
think they are for none other cause granted to fly, but for that they
should after such danger escaped, turn unto doing their duty again, and to
bestow all their life after in setting forth the glory of Christ.

Howbeit, Luke makes a diligent mention also of the places where these men
preached. Phaenicia, Cyprus, Antioch, are illuminated with the Gospel.
And first he names Phaenicia which is near unto Jury, famous by reason of
the Cities and people therein, and is accounted notable, even among the profane
writers. After that, he names Cyprus, an Islande of great fame in the Poets
writings, which they say by reason as well of the pleasantness of ye soil, as
of the dissolute manners of the inhabitants is consecrated unto Venus. And here
appears partlye the great goodness of God, which would vouchsafe to endue
such people with the knowledge of his son, and partly the wonderful and
invincible power of the Gospel, through the preaching whereof, the bounds of
Christ's kingdom, were in short time so enlarged, that from the main land it
passed over sea, and began to come into the Islandes, as was long before
foretold of the Prophets. See Psalm. 72. Esaias. 60.66. etc. He chiefly
makes mention of Antioch, which was the most famous City of all the Cities
of Syria. For as it was notable, by reason of Seleucus the builder thereof, and
of great renown, because of their wonderful glory and riches, so (as we
shall herafter hear) the first Church among the Gentyles, was there assembled,
and flourished in such number, that they which before were called only but
Disciples of Christ, began now to be called by a more worthy name
Christians. This City has had Bishops notable both in life and learning. It
has also so abounded in Martyrs, that scarce any other can be compared
therewith. It is therefore wonderful, and much to be observed, that God
would have so great a City converted, by the ministry of those men whose
names be not extant. For this only is written of them, that they were of
Ciprus and Cyrene. Howbeit, it might have pleased God, as well to have used the
help of notable Apostles. But by the vile and contemned things of this
world, after his manner, he would bring to pass a thing of most importance,
that we might know how we ought to rejoice and glory in him, and not in man.

1. Cor. 1. Jesus Christ is the theme and argument of the Apostles doctrine
Now let us see what they preached, that laid the foundations of ye Church at
Antioch. They preached (says Luke) the Lord Jesus. He was then the argument
and theme of their doctrine, whom Paul also says, he only acknowledges. He
makes mention only of Jesus Christ, because in him is contained whatsoever
things make for our salvation. For he is given unto us of God, to be the
author of repentance and remission of sins to all mankind, as has been
declared in the fyft Chapter. For as in him only remission of sins is to be
found, so that repentance that is made without faith in Christ, cannot please
God. We have here therefore what to answer them, which reprehende us, and
scorn us, because in our Sermons we inculcate and often repeat Christ only.
Thus we do, following the example of the Apostles, and we can not do
otherwise, forasmuch as we can find no salvation without Christ.

Last of all, Luke declares a notable success of the Gospel, saying: The
success of the gospel.
And a great number believed, and turned unto the Lord. He first declares the
cause efficient, least any man might ascribe it unto the ministry of men. For
he says: the hand of the Lord was with them. Whereby we gather, that all
success of faith and salvation depends upon God, and that nothing is to be
attributed to man, more than the outward ministry. This thing Paul
declares at large in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, the third Chap.
And it is good oftentimes to have the same in remembrance, both because
Ministers should not wax to proud, and also for that they whom God has
illuminated with true faith, might learn to be thankful unto him. Also the
Evangelist expresses the proper end of Christian faith, which is, that they
which through ignorance or superstition, or sin, have turned from God, might
convert and turn again unto him. Therefore faith is not occupied in vain
speculation, but is a lively knowledge of Jesus Christ, which draws whole man
unto the obedience of God. And they are not to be taken for Christians, which
being drowned in superstition and sin, will not convert unto the Lord. Let
us therefore set before us this mark, that we turning by true faith unto God,
may attain to salvation in Jesus Christ our only Savior: to whom be praise,
honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.lxxx. Homely.
Tidings of these things came unto the ears of the congregation, which was in
Jerusalem And they sent forth Barnabas that he should go unto Antioch, which
when he came, and had seen the grace of God, was glad, and exhorted them all,
that with purpose of heart, they would continually cleave unto the Lord. For
he was a good man, and full of the holy ghost, and of faith: and much people
was added unto the Lord. Then departed Barnabas unto Tharsus, for to seek
Saul. And when he had found him, he brought him unto Antioch. And it came
to pass, that a whole year they had their conversation with the congregation,
and taught much people, insomuch that the Disciples of Antioche were the first
that were called Christians.
Because God had appointed Jesus Christ his son, to be the Savior of all the
world: therefore it was requisite that all nations should be brought unto him
by preaching of the Gospel, as it appears by the Oracles of the Prophets,
and by the commandment of Christ, where he bade the Apostles to go into all
the world, and to bring him Disciples out of all Nations. And how this thing
began to come to pass, Luke declares in this chapter. For although it be
described before in the story of Cornelius conversion to ye faith of Christ:
yet because it might seem he was called upon some special favor or
privilege: the conversion of the notable city of Antioch is joined thereunto,
in the which a Church of the Gentyles, for many causes notable is gathered
together. The beginners whereof were certain men that came from Cyprus and
Cyrene, as was yesterday declared, of small or no name, yet whose names
undoubtedly are written before God in the book of life. These men coming into
the City preached Jesus Christ only unto the Gentyles, teaching them that he
was sent from God the father, to give repentance and forgiveness of sins to
them that believe in him. And their godly enterprise wanted not a most
prosperous success. For Gods power working most effectually by their
ministry, an innumerable sort of men learned the faith, and turned unto the
Lord. Now unto these premises Luke joins certain things, touching the
confirming of the Church at Antioch. And first he declares the kindness of
those of Jerusalem toward this new Church of Christ, which sent Barnabas to
them, as it were to help them. After that, he shows the singular diligence
that Barnabas used in accomplishing the charge committed unto him, and last of
all, his prosperous success.

And touching the Ierosolymites, amongst whom it seems he numbreth the
Apostles, The good will of the Church at Jerusalem, toward the Church at
Antioch.
he says but little, because their meaning may easily be perceived by Barnabas
doing. This is it therefore that he says, that when word was brought to
Jerusalem, how Antioch was converted unto Christ, they that by reason of their
office were the chief among them, and watched for the salvation of all men,
sent Barnabas thither to confirm the belief of the new Disciples, and to
nourishe mutual good will among the congregations. The like whereof we saw
done before, when they sent Peter and John to Samaria, which being won by the
preaching of Philip, set open her gates unto the word of God. This is a very
notable example whereby we are taught, that congregations far distant, when
need so requires, should be helped both with counsel and trusty diligence
of Ministers, and that they are greatly to be praised, that in this case use
most diligence. For if Christ so greatly commend the benefit that is done,
but to one of his least Disciples, that he will at the later day testifye, it
was done to himself, and promises a sure reward to him that gives but a cup
of cold water to him that he sends: with how much more glory will he
reward those which confirm or save whole congregations, by their help and
counsel. Let Bishops and Christian Magistrates remember this well, that they
suffer not themselves to be plucked from doing their duty, by such as say
they are authors of sedition, which use to prescribe or give counsel to
strangers in matters of religion.

But let us see Barnabas, of whom Luke diligently speaks. For he declares
what manner of man he was, Of Barnabas.

Barnabas is a good man.


and what he did in these affairs of the Antiochianes. And although his person
is sufficiently described by the things which he did at Antioch: yet have we
first to consider ye same, that we may be the better able to judge of the cause
of so excellent virtues as shined in him, specially, because Luke for that end
and intent, describes his property and condition. He says, he was a good
man, and full of the holy ghost, and of faith. This is so singular a
commendation of this holy man, as Demosthenes and Cicero could have devised no
greater. For what greater praise can there be, than to be called of the holy
ghost good, whereas by the testimony of Christ, there is not one good but
only God? But least any man might think that Luke had forgotten that saying:
he shows straight way, while he was bold to call him a good man,
doubtless, because he was full of the holy ghost, and of faith. For although
God only be of himself good in deed: yet because he does vouchsafe to give
unto men his spirit, and by him his other virtues: there is no let, but we may
call them good, in whom appear any arguments of Gods goodness, by reason of
Gods spirit dwelling in them. And where faith only makes us partakers both
of the spirit of God, and all other goodness, the same does Luke attribute to
Barnabas, saying: he was full of faith. For by faith are men justified, because
thereby they take hold of Christ, through whose desert they are purifyed from
all iniquity, and made meet for all good works, to perform faithfully both
toward God and man, whatsoever duties they owe unto them. It is very good
that we remember this definition of a good man, to lay it against the fond
judgment of the world, which uses to call them that are hypocrytes, and
given to the pleasures and desires of the flesh, good men. Furthermore, we are
taught by this place, what manner of men should be called to bear office in
the Common weal, and specially in Ecclesiastical affairs. Even good men
surely, who it is evident are governed by the holy ghost, and endued with
faith. For unto such men may any thing safely be committed. And whosoever
commit unto wicked men, and void of Gods spirit, either public or private
matters, to them it falls out for the most part, as we read, it did unto
Noah, which sent the Raven out of the Arc. And Solomon says very wisely, as
he does all things. He is lame of his feet, yea, drunken he is in vanity that
commits his message to a fool. Prou. 26.
For both they are deceived of their hope, and many times pay for their
follye and lightness.

Moreover, we must see what Barnabas did in the Church at Antioch, Barnabas
rejoices at other men's profit.
all which, Luke comprehends in four articles. First he says: when he came
and had seen the grace of God, he was glad. He understands by the grace of
God, the profit of faith, and the gifts of the holy ghost which follow it.
And he uses this word grace, to teach us that all these things are given of
Gods goodness. This is a notable argument of a good man, and faithful
Minister of Christ, that Barnabas rejoices in the profit of other men. For
they which lack faith and the lightning of the holy ghost, they envy other
for the most part, seeking their own glory. And all men follow not the
modesty of Moses, which desired that all the Israelites might be filled with
the holy ghost, and be instructed with the gift of prophesying. Yea there are
euerywhere (the more pity) many examples of ambicious men, which while they go
about to take from other their due honor, breed great contentions in
Congregations. But they which are governed by the spirit of Christ, and
illuminated with true faith, they easilye despise the loss of private glory,
so that they perceive they may advance the glory of GOD.

After this, Barnabas exhorts the Antiochianes, Barnabas exhorts to
perseverance.
that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord. For as in all
other exercises and studies: so chiefly in religion is perseueraunce and
continuation needful. For he that wrastleth, is not crowned or rewarded,
except he wrestle or strive lawfully. Luke. 9.
And Christ allows not them, which have once laid their hand to the plough,
and look behind them. Therefore Barnabas does well in requiring perseverance
of the Antiochians. But least he might seem to require only an outward show
and bare brag of words, he exacteth purpose of heart. For that is a true
perseverance and joining with our savior Christ, when we have dedicated and
given our hearts to his service. And those which have so done, no terror of
perils can fear them from the Lord. For they esteem all things but loss
and damage, so that they may win Christ. But because Barnabas was not
ignorant, that there were many things, which used to call men from Christ, he
thought that exhortation also was needful for them, notwithstanding there
appeared notable tokens of Gods grace in them, which thing caused Paul to
command Timothy, 2. Tim. 4.
continually to exhort those that were committed to his charge, and by all
means to be always instant upon them. Therefore their error is most absurd,
which think all doctrine unprofitable and superfluous for those which have
already once attained to the knowledge of truth.

Barnabas brings Paul to Antioch.
Thirdly, Barnabas goes to Tharsus, from thence he brings Paul to Antioch,
to the intent the congregation through his ministry might the more be
strengthened. This is an other argument of a true faithful mind, and fervent
in love toward Christ. For Barnabas could not be ignorant how great gifts
of the spirit were in Paul's breast, and how much authority he should lose if
Paul came to Antioch, who was ye singularest instrument that Christ had. But
we have before showed, that they which are fervent in faith, seek not to be
glorified of men, but desire to promote the glory of god. Yea, it is certain
that all they lack faith, which are led with the desire of their own glory
and praise: which argument Christ uses against the Scribes of the Jews. John.
5.
In ye mean season, Barnabas example teaches us, that in well ordered
congregations, the chief care is, to have fit Ministers of the word, and that
they should be sought for, and brought from all places. Christ teaches the
same, Math. 9.
where he bids us to pray unto the Lord of the harvest, that he will send
forth laborers. Hereof we see it came to pass, that the chief of the
Prophets and most noble Kings had so diligent a care and consideration of
schools, because without them, they perceived the Church could not stand,
nor the pure doctrine of faith be maintained. Wherefore their ingratitude is
very gross, which do not only contemn the Ministers as persons unprofitable,
whom the Lord of his mercy offreth, but also hate them as the greatest
malefactors that can be, and worse than Toades.

Last of all is adjoined how Barnabas and Paul continued a whole year
together at Antioch. For this cause undoubtedly, for that they saw the
congregation had need of their help. For Luke writes not that they sat
ydelie there like sluggards, but declares yt they instructed there a great
company of men, in the true faith and religion of Christ. Let ministers of the
Church follow this example, and while they persuade other men to perseverance,
let them constantly persevere in their duty, and not boaste themselves of the
bare name of Pastors, but let them do that that belongs to true Pastors,
least they become followers and successors of that foolish shepeherde which is
described in Zachary.xj. Chapter.

Now remains the profit and success of this godly and fervent diligence,
which Luke says was notable. For first he says: The success of godly study
and zeal.

Many are brought unto the Lord.


a great company was added unto the Lord. Whereby it is evident, that the
traueyles of the godly Ministers was not without effect. For as the word of
God, like unto a fruitful seed, has power or virtue in it self to bring
forth fruit: so it always falls upon some, which being well disposed to
receive it, bring forth worthy fruits. And although some bring stony hearts,
and some thorny, and given to all kind of pleasures: yet has God his people
euerywhere, Luc. 8.
which receive his seed into good hearts, and there keep it, till it bring
forth much fruit. And the Prophet bears witness that the word of God
returns not without fruit, or in vain, but is like unto a shower of rain,
Esaias. 55.
which waters the ground, and makes it fruitful.

Moreover, God blesses the studies of his Ministers, so that they shall not
labor in vain. This ought to encourage those, that labor in the Church of
Christ, to think their traueyles can not be lost. For if they deliver but a
few souls from destruction, let them think they have gotten great treasure,
Math. 16.
because Christ witnesses that the salvation of one soul, cannot be redeemed
with all the substance of the world. In the mean while, mark how he says,
this compa^ye was added unto the Lord. Then Paul and Barnabas gathered not
scholars to themselves, but unto the Lord. For they knew well that they must
glory in Christ alone, Math. 23. Math. 28.
as their teacher and master. And they knew Christ commanded them to bring
scholars unto him. Therefore great is their insolency which be authors of
sects among Christians, and make them the servants of men, whom Christ has
purchased to himself, with the price of his blood. See what Paul says
against this doing in the first epistle to the Corinthians. 1.3.7 etc

There ensues yet another commodity, The Disciples are called Christi^ns.
which has gotten perpetual and immortal glory to the City of Antioche. For
where in that City the first Church of the Gentyles was gathered together, it
came to pass, that they which hitherto were called but Disciples, are now
first adourned with the name of Christians. And this is that new name which
God long before promised he would give unto his elect. Esaias. 62.
And what greater glory could comme unto the Antiochianes? Let the Bishops
of proud and haultie Rome, be compared with these men, and they shall (whether
they will or nill) be enforced to give place. And yet we never read that that
proud title was given to Antioch, to be called the head of the Church. But to
let pass these matters, let us rather expende the force of this name, because
it is not given us without the providence of God. It is evident that we be so
called of the son of God, which according to the figure of the old*
Testament wherewith Kings and Priests were anointed, is of the Greeks for
excellency sake called Christ, of the Hebrews Meschias, and of us anointed,
because God has appointed him the universal and everlasting King and Priest
of his people, as may be seen Psalm. 2. and.110. And where he gives himself
and all that is his, wholye to his people, therefore he would have them to be
called Christians, after his own name. And he has not given us a naked and an
empty name, but as the Apostle says: he has anointed us, and made us Kings
and Priests to God his father. Apoc. 1. The use of this name Christian.
Therefore the use of this name is manifold. For first it admonishes us of the
dignity which we have in Christ, whereunto there is none like, as they shall
confess which thoroughly weigh the matter. For it is plain that there was
never King which was able to make all the subjects of his Realm Kings, no not
his Courtyers, or those that were of his counsel. But such is the virtue and
power of Jesus Christ, that he is able to make them Kings for ever, that
acknowledge him to be their king. Then this name serves to confirm the
belief and certainty of our salvation. For in Jesus Christ is God the father
well pleased. Therefore he can not be angrye with us, nor forsake us, whom he
has vouchsafed to call after the name of his belooued son. Hence therefore
may we fett arguments of consolation in adversity, especially in the
temptations of our conscience. Finally, this title admonishes us of our duty,
that we should not forget that we be made Kings and Priests by Christ, and
that we should valiauntly maintain the dignity of our name. It is the
property of a King to be at his liberty, and not to be in subjection and
under the rule of another. Let us therefore abide in the liberty, whereunto the
son of God has called us, and not suffer our selves to be oppressed
hereafter with the servitude of sin, which is the fylthiest and miserablest
thing that can be. It is the property of a King to vanquish and overcome his
enemies. Let us therefore subdue and vanquishe the most cruel enemies of our
salvation, Satan, the world, and the flesh, with all the concupiscences
thereof. It is the part of a king to command and bear rule. Let us therefore
rule our selves and mightily overcome al those things, which lead us cross
the way of salvation. So let us likewise perform the duty of Priests, to
teach, to pray, to consecrate, and offer. Wherefore it shall be our duty, to
teach those that belong unto us, both by word and example of life, as far
forth as the duty of our calling binds us. It shall be our parts, to pray,
both in secret, and openly, and to make intercession to God, not only for our
own necessities, but also for our neyghbors. It shall also be our duties, to
consecrate our selves for lively sacrifyce unto God, and to offer to him every
day, the bullockes of our lips, that is to say, giving of thanks, which is
the most acceptable and thankful sacrifyce that we can give unto him. These
things might at large be drawn through the whole life of man, but it shall
suffyse to give the unlearned an occasion to expende and consider better of
them. Whosoever perfourmeth these things is worthy to be called a Christian.
And such it appears the Patriarchs were in times past, See Eusebius
ecclesiastical hystory first book and first chap.
whom God in the hundredth and fyft Psalm, calls his anointed, that is to
say, Christians. Such it is credible those men of Antiochia were, which first
enjoyed that name. And if any will presumptuously brag of the name, they
shall surely deceive themself, but God they cannot deceive. Let us therefore
diligently think of these things, that remembering both our dignity and
duty, we may answer to so notable and excellent a name, and being taken from
this life, may reign in heaven with Jesus Christ: to whom be praise, honor,
power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.lxxxj. Homely.
IN those days came Prophets from the City of Jerusalem, unto Antioch. And
there stood up one of them named Agabus, and signified by the spirit, that
there should be great dearth throughout all the world, which came to pass in
the Emperor Claudius days. Then the Disciples every man according to his
ability, purposed to send succor unto the brethren which dwelt in Jury,
which thing they also did, and sent it to the Elders by the hands of Barnabas
and Saul.
ALthough our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is always present with his Church,
yet he suffers it as he foretold diversely and many ways to be troubled,
having adversity, as it were, by continual enterchaunge, still following
prosperity. The principal cause whereof is, partly for that he would bridle
the lustynesse of our flesh, and partlye because he would teach us, that he
is as well able to deliver his people in adversity, as to maintain them in
prosperity. We have heretofore seen certain notable examples hereof. For the
Gospel in the beginning being prosperouslye preached at Jerusalem, brought a
great number of Disciples unto Christ: shortly after rises a tempest of
persecution, that drives down the flourishing of the Church flat to the
ground. By and by again when Saul was converted unto Christ, sodeinly the
Church was quiet, and the doctrine of Christ being carried unto the Gentyles,
gave likelyhoode of great increase, seeing that at Antioch the noblest City in
all Syria, there was a Church of Gentyles assembled together, and were there
first called after that noble name of Christians. But behold, a great and
strange adversity following, namely a dearth, which as it troubled the whole
world, so it most miserablye afflicted the faithful, whose goods were spent
partlye in finding the poor of the Church, and partly were taken from them in
the rage of persecution. The consideration hereof is most profitable for us, for
herby we may learn the less to be offended, if the like adversity betide us
in these days. And of all other, this present place is worthy to be diligently
considered, as well for the manifold comfort, as also the instruction which
the holy ghost here sets forth. For it declares the dearth that was in the
Church, and it sets out the fatherly providence of God, having a care for
the same, and also shows what way and counsel the faithful took, seeing
the public calamity like to ensue. And of all these, we mean orderly to
entreat.

First, we will speak of the dearth whereof profane writers, The dearth in the
days of Claudius.
but chieflye Josephus and Suetonius make mention. This dearth no man will deny
but was sent by the judgment of God, except such an one as will deny God to be
the governor of the whole world. For the Prophet witnesses, that there is no
plague in a City without the Lords doing. Amos. 3.
And in the law among the punishments, wherewith God revenged the contempt of
his word, barrenness of ground, and scarcity of victuals ar^ chiefly
reckoned. See Leuiticus. 26. Deuter. 28. And we must not think that any thing
comes unto man by fortune, forasmuch as it appears that the care of Gods
providence, extends it self even to the sparrowes and flowers of the field.
It shall be good, when such things come to pass, Math. 6.10.
to search the causes of Gods judgments, which can be found no where sooner,
than in men's conversation. And surely Luke seems to point, as it were with
his finger, the causes of this dearth, where he writes it was in the days of
Claudius Caesar. For he therefore named the Prince of the world, who had then
all authority and rule in his hand, that by him we might judge of the whole
state of the world, and the conditions of those days. For it appears that
the vices of Princes first infect with their contagiousnesse the Nobility, and
then their corrupt example poysoneth the Comminaltie. And even profane writers
report, that Claudius was in all points a most naughtye Prince. For from his
childehoode he was cumbred with diverse and continual diseases, so that being
dulled and made lumpish both in body and spirit, growing further in age, he
was thought unable to discharge any office public or private. Insomuch that
Antonia his mother used to say: he was a monster, and a work of nature
begun, but not fynished: and when she would note any body of blockishnesse
or dullness, she would say, he was more fool than her son Claudius. And his
sister Liuulla hearing on a time that he should be chosen Emperor, did openly
and alowde detest the unworthy and unprosperous state of the people of Rome.
For he declared his corrupt nature many ways. First he wan the good will of
the soldiers with money, whereby he came to be Emperor, during which time, he
so used himself, that he had much more care of his belly, and that under his
belly, than he had of the Empire, as who would never rise from banqueting, as
long as his paunche would hold, and till he had well whittled himself,
always burning in insatiable desire and lust after women. And it is not like
that such a Prince could delight in other Nobles and Counsaylers, than such as
were like to himself, what public corruption of manners was in all degrees, at
that time, may easilye be coniectured by the writers of those days, and by
the continual sermons of John, of Christ, and his Apostles, concerning
repentance, whereof there had been no such need, if all had not been naught.
And for an accomplishment of all vice, there was the contempt and hatred of God
and his word. For where God had sent his son into the world, and by him had
appointed to reconcyle mankind again unto himself, and had euerywhere
published the healthful word of grace, a great many were bold, not only to
contemn and hate it, but also most cruellye to persecute it: insomuch that
even among the Jews, which gloryed in the name of God above all other Nations,
the word of God could not be brooked. Is it then any marueyle, if God denied
the fruits of the earth to this drunken and corrupt world, despising the
wholesome food of the heavenly word, and would tame and bring under with
famine, those that would so rage against his Christ? verily, the
Hystoriographers testifye, that by reason of continual drowthes, and scarcity
of victuals, reygning as well euerywhere, as at Rome, Claudius Caesar was once
in danger of his life, hardly escaping, but that the people being wearye of
that dearth, had like to have stoned him. Such examples as these, teach us what
the cause of public calamities is, verily, public vices and contempt of Gods
word. And this cause God alleges, both in the law and in the Prophets. And
they are here confuted, which say these things grow of the doctrine of the
Gospel. For although the godly also feel and taste of these afflictions, yet
are they in far other case than the untoward world is. For they acknowledge
the chastysement and discipline of God the father, they overcome adversity by
faith and patience, and because they can rightly use adversity to the
amendment of their life, it comes to pass for the more part, that they are
most prosperously delivered from all adversity by the merciful hand of God.
For God is faithful, 1. Cor. 10.
and will not suffer his people to be tempted above their strength. And the
things following will teach us, how faithfullye the Lord provided for his
Church in those days. And that that we read came to pass in the years after
following, is not much unlike hereunto. In the.ix. book of the Ecclesiastical
history viij. ch
For Eusebius writes that in the reygne of Maximinus, who did cruellye
persecute the Christians, God sent forth such dearth of victuals, that the rich
men and welthy died openly in the streets, and that they which not long before
had caused the Christians to be devoured of wild beasts, to satiate their
cruel eyes with their miserable death, were openly eaten up and devoured of
Dogs. And while they miserably perished, the Christians had not only
sufficient to live by, but also charitably relieved a great many ready to
sterue for hunger. These things would be considered of us now a days, where
one Claudius alone reigns not, but drunkenness bears swinge in every
place, and so little preuayleth godly admonition, that men rather join unto
their dissoluteness of life, most wicked contempt, and deadly hatred of Gods
word. And surely there want not also in these days examples of Gods
judgments: but we want both eyes and ears to perceive that, which might serve
to our salvation. See Esaias* 5. Eccles. 10. Amos. 6. Math. 24.

But let us see how God provided for his Church in this dangerous time of
calamity. He raised up Prophets, God provides for his Church by Prophets.
and some of them he sent from Jerusalem to Antioche, to lighten the late
sproong Church of the Gentyles, with the gift of prophecy. Among these, one
Agabus, stirred up by the instinct of the holy ghost, gave the Christians
warning of this famine to ensue, and was the cause that they made provision
as well for themselves, as other. Here we have to consider the fatherly
goodness of God, who being provoked through our sins, to send punishment:
yet uses first to admonish us of the same, both for that all men might see,
that nothing comes to pass in this life by chance, and that also when we
are admonished, we might convert and be saved. The which thing he has so
constantly observed ever since the beginning of the world, that the Prophet
Amos durst say: the Lord God does no manner of thing, Amos. 3.
but he tells his secrets before unto his servants the Prophets. This
appears in the men of the first age, to whom God sent Noah the preacher of
righteousness, and granted them an hundred years space to repent in, before
he would send the floude to destroy them. He sent Lot also to the Sodomytes,
by whose doctrine and example of life, they might be provoked to amendment. By
Joseph he warned the Egyptians of the dearth to come, whereby he succored the
life of a great many. He afterward provoked them by Moses, not only by
words, but also by horrible woonders to do their duty. What needs it to
speak of the captivity of Babylon, which it is manifest was foreshewed by the
Prophets many years or ever it came? And Christ did not only foretell the
last destruction of the Jews, but also Josephus declares, In his.vij. book,
and.xij chap. of the wars of the Jews.
that they were warned thereof by many woonders. And though God should never
call sinners back by any aduertisements, yet are there general warnings
confirmed with innumerable examples of Gods judgments, which are sufficient to
teach us, what all they may trust too, that rashlye transgress the laws of
God, and dare without repentance live dissolutely. See Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.
Ierem. 5. Let us I beseech you, acknowledge this goodness of the Lord in
these days, least while we despise his faithful admonitions, he punish us
the more grievously.

The holy ghost is author of prophecy.
But before we pass from this place, this also is to be considered, that
Agabus is said by the spirit to signifye this dearth to come. For here is
declared the manner and order how the Prophets in those days used to
prophecy, least any might think they coniectured by the Planets, or else were
given to the study of other unlawful sciences. For the holy ghost was the
author of their prophesying, as the Lord before had promised by Joel. And
Paul reckons prophesying among the gifts of the holy ghost. Therefore the
example of Agabus nothing defends the deceyuers of our days, which being
given to curious arts, contrary to the prescript word of God, dare prophecy
of wars to come, of plenty, of sickenesses, and such like things. Whose
boldness and impiety, I have before declared to be forbidden by the laws of
God. See the fourth Homely, and also our Commentaries upon Micheas, homil 20.

What the Antiochians did before the dearth came.
It remains, that we declare what the Christians at Antioch did, after the
Prophet had thus admonished them. Where chiefly appears their faith, which
was the ground of all their well doing. For by their doings it may easily be
gathered yt they believed Agabus prophecy. For they could not suspect him,
whom they saw threatened but such things, as the public corruption of all
states and degrees deserved. This is the beginning of salvation, when men can
find in their hearts to believe the word of God. This thing in time past put
away the destruction which god threatened unto the Ninevites. Contrariwise, it
appears that diverse men have been the occasion of their own utter undoing,
because they rather would with their hinderaunce and loss prove the verity
of Gods word, than believe it. And our Savior Christ teaches this to be the
only cause of the destruction of Jerusalem, Luc. 19.
that they knew not the day of their visitation. So likewise he calls that
the time of grace, when the father of heaven did vouchsafe to admonish the
Jews of the wrath to come, first by John the Baptist, then by his son and
the Apostles, and did exhort them to amendment of life, and a new
conversation. And if we list to apply these things to our days, we shall be
constrained to confess that this is the chief cause of our miseries, in that
there be so few, which use to believe the word of God, and to fear the
predictions or warnings of punishment to come.

Moreover, after the people of Antiochia had believed Agabus thus prophesying,
The Antiochianes prepare themselves to provide for the poor.
they called to mind the state of their needye brethren, and weighing with
themselves diligently, what a dearth was like to be at that time, they prepared
themselves to the deeds of Christian charity and devotion, a thing not used of
the children of this world. For when they perceive a dearth like to follow, they
apply themself to their gainful devises, they heap up corn, and hoorde in
their Garners to make of a public calamity, their private lucre and
advantage: yea, by these fellows subtelties, it comes to pass, that they
which are in need are the more distressed with penury, and the dearth holds
the longer, because they still greedily gape after more advantage. But the
Christians at Antioche did far otherwise, whom Christ did vouchsafe first to
have called after his own name: For their chief care was how to succor their
poor and needye brethren. And in this case they think their brethren the
Jews to have most need, partly for that they knew their goods were taken
from them (as Paul testifyeth Heb. 10.) and partly for that they knew they
were bound to them, in that they had received from them the wholesome doctrine
of the Gospel, and knowledge of Christ their savior. For being godly and wise
people, they did easilye perceive that it was not without the providence of
God, that they whose goods as yet were not consumed, should for this end be
admonished of the dearth to ensue. For after this sort, they thought that god
in this public scarcity did in their brethrens behalf, require this deed of
charity of them. This is a very notable example of Christian gratitude,
whereby we are taught, what duty, learners owe to their teachers, seeing the
Antiochians, acknowledge themselves to be debtors to all the Jews, because
they had learned the truth of some of the Jews. For by common reason, they
understand that saying of Paul to be most just, that it is but a small
matter, 1. Cor. 9.
if they reap their temporal goods, which have sowed them spiritual goods.
But now a days we be most unkind, for having received great profit by the
doctrine of the Gospel, men envy the teachers themselves a necessary living,
much more their other neighbors and country men. Thus they declare they make
no great account of the Gospel, when they make so much a do to pay the
Ministers of the Gospel, but their bare stipende and pension.

Howbeit, The mane^ of contributing to the poor.
Luke diligently declares the order that the Antiochians took about this
matter. First, every man of the Disciples purposed to send succor unto the
brethren which dwelt at Jury. And where he declares that this was the
purpose of every one, he shows it was a voluntary benefyte, and not enforced.
Such ought they to be which will have their charity accepted of God. For as
Paul teaches, the Lord looueth a cheerful giver. 2. Cor. 9.
It shall much make for the stirring up of liberality in us, if we consider,
that the richer sort owe this service and duty to the poor. Which thing is
the cause that Paul reasoning of this matter, uses so often this word (...)
which signifies the duty of ministry and dispensation. Whereunto is to be
referred that saying of Christ, admonishing us to make us friends of the
unjust Mammon, which when we depart hence, Luc. 16.
may receive us into everlasting Tabernacles. These done, he says, they
purposed to send, every one according to his a bilitie. For God did so
moderate our Christian liberality, that he would no man should be charged
above his possibility. For it is well known what Paul says: if there be
first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not
according to that he has not. 2. Cor. 8.
Not that other be set at liberty, and you brought into combraunce, but that
there be egalnesse now at this time, and that your abundance may succor their
lack. And we read that the widdowe that cast but two Mytes into the Corban,
Marc. 12.
was praised of Christ because she was able to give no more. And here is the
niggishnesse of them greatly reproved, which neglect the works of
liberality, under pretense that they think it unjust to bestow the goods
that they have gotten with their labor and traueyle upon other: whereas God
requires nothing of them, more than that they be able to spare. Last of all,
they are very circumspect, that their so godly and necessary a devise be not
by craft and subtlety hindered or disappoynted. For when they had gathered this
money, they committed it not at all adventures, to every one to be carried, but
to Paul and Barnabas, whose credit they had tried diverse ways. And surely to
let all this gear pass, it appears in Paul's writings, what great truth he
used in this behalf, and how carefully he procured the relief of his needye
brethren in Jury. See.1. Corint. 16. 2. Cor. 8. and.9. and Romans 15. Moreover,
they send it to the Elders, that it might duly be distributed, according to
their discretion. We have therefore in this place to learn, what Christians
have to do in times of publyke distress. And if we compare the proceedings of
these days herewith, we shall find but a few tokens of the primitive
Church. For a great number conueye away the goods of the Church, and
dishonestly make hauock of them, and there are very few or none, which of
their own goods will exercise christian contribution. But there is a great
number of them which will abuse public calamity to their private commodity.
And they that be the best men, will not relieve the need of ye poor, before
he see him brought to extreme beggary, and be compelled to go from door to
door. God grant that we may be enflamed with true faith and charity, that
we may by our works be known for Christians, at that day, when Christ our
Lord and Savior shall come to judgment in the glory of his father: to whom
be praise, honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.xij. chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The.lxxxij. Homely.
AT the same time Herod the King stretched for^h his hands to vex certain
of the Congregation. And he killed James the brother of John with the sword.
And because he saw that it pleased the Jews, he proceeded farther, and took
Peter also. Then were the days of sweet bread. And when he had caught him,
he put him in prison also, and delivered him to four quaternions of soldiers
to be kept, entending after Easter to bring him forth to the people. And Peter
was kept in prison But prayer was made without ceasing of the congregation unto
God for him.
BEfore this, the Evangelist Luke described to us the persecutions, raised by
the Priests against the congregation, which though they might seem grievous
and horrible: yet the persecution here reported, was much grieuouser. For a
king of great power, and one which had the ruling of all the Iewishe Nation,
was the beginner and procurer thereof. And whereas till this time, the Apostles
abode safe and untouched, now has this wicked Tyrant such power, that by
cruel death he makes away one of the chief among them. The end of all this
hystorye is, that hereby we should learn the state of the Church, and being
myndefull of Christ's admonitions, prepare our selves to the like. Howbeit,
where in these things there appears always a great dullness of our nature,
all the circumstaunces of this place, must be the more diligently considered.

And first Luke coupleth this present history, Persecution r^geth in time of
derth
with the end of the Chapter before going, and begins his narration or
discourse of the time. For where he had entreated of the dearth foreshewed by
Agabus, he writes that the same time Herod begun to persecute the Church.
And if you confer this place with the end of the Chapter, it shall appear
this was done in the last year of Herod, a little before he ended his life at
Caesarea, by the horrible judgment of God. And if we cast the time according
to hystories, we shall find that this last year of Herod fell in the fourth
year of Claudius ye Emperor, what time the Hystoriens say that this dearth
reigned. There came two most grievous calamities, dearth, and persecution
together, each of which seemed intolerable to the congregation. This state of
the Church is to be diligently considered of us, because God suffers his
Church with so many afflictions to be tried and exercised. For God which a
little before had stirred up the minds of those at Antiochia and others, to
relieve the necessity of the Jews with their liberality, suffers now the
furious blasts of this wicked king to rise against them. But it is no strange
thing that here comes to pass. For there are infynit examples of this sort.
We read of Abraham how when at Gods calling he had forsook his native
Country, and was come into the land of Chanaan, Gene. 12.
he was driven from thence by famine, and enforced to fly into Egypt. Isaac
his son fynding the like trouble, sustained great want of victuals, Gene. 26.
among the envious Nation of the Chanaanites So we read that Joseph having
lost his liberty, was put in prison, and like also to lose his life. Gene.
37.39
What shall I speak of Jacob his father? which was still invred with troubles
and vexation, insomuch that even in his extreme age, Gene. 47.
he confessed before Pharao that he had led the more part of the days of his
life in trouble and cares. And if a man would consider and weigh the people of
Isreal's estate, as well in Egypt, as in the wilderness, he shall see
continual traueyles, and as it were, fresh floudes of afflictions flowing by
course. And that which the Primitive Church now proves, came to pass also
in the years following. Neither is there any cause why we should look for
any better in these days, Math. 24. Luke. 21.
than the Oracles of Christ declare shall be about the last days, where we are
taught that the Church shall be exercised with famine, plague, wars, and
persecutions in all parts. Wherefore it behooves us to prepare our selves unto
patience, that when these things come to pass, we may consider how judgment
must begin at the house of God, and that we be judged of God, 1. Pet. 4. 1.
Cor. 11.
to the end we should not be condemned with the irrepentaunt world. Here also
is the error of them confuted, which judge of religion and faith, according to
the things that fall out in this world, as though the City of the godly were
on earth, whereas the Scripture euerywhere shows how it is prepared for us
in heaven.

Secondlye, Luke names the author of this persecution, Herodes Agrippa is
author of this persecu^ion.
and writes that it was Herod. By this place it appears that the Kings of
Galiley and Jury were commonly called Herodes, verily of that famous and great
Herod, which being an aliaunt, first obtained to be king of Jury. For it is
plain, that this of whom Luke speaks in this place was Agrippa, Nephewe to
this great Herod, by Aristobulus his son, whose death Josephus in all
points agreeing with Luke, describes in the.xxix. book of his antiquities
and.vij. Chapter. This Herod was both a most mighty Prince and a crafty.
For after he was let out of prison by Caius Caesar, where Tiberius had put him,
A Tetrarchy is one part of a kingdom or province divided in four parts.
because of his overmuch familiarity with Caius, and was declared king of the
Tetrarchies, of Philip and Lysanias, a little after he took from Herodes
Antipas, his uncle by the fathers side, and sisters husband, the kingdom of
Galiley, procuring him to be banished by Caius, to whom by his letters he had
accused him. And after the decease of Caius Caesar, Claudius being Emperor, he
gave him the Provinces both of Jury and Samarie. And thus Agrippa obtained
almost the whole kingdom of Herod the great his grandfather. It shall
behooue us diligently to consider the power of this king, that the power of
Christ may appear the greater, which so easily subdued so mighty an enemy.
For God would set Christ and his Church together with such an one as this, to
show a singular example, and to declare that all the power of this world is
but vain, if it be compared with Christ. For this Agrippa that in short space,
had clymed by prosperous success, to such heyght of power and dignity, which
had escaped the cruel hands of Tyberius, and marvelously defeated the
crafts of Herodes Antipas, as soon as he began to encounter with Christ,
dyed most miserably, as we shall hear in the end of the Chapter. The like was
seen in Julian, who where he had been a most prosperous warryer, sodeinly lost
both his Empire and his life, when he begun once to set on Christ, whom he used
in scorn to call Galileyan. We have like examples in our days, which we ought
diligently to consider, that we be not offended at the power and force of
Christ's enemies. For he is stronger and of more power that is on our side.
Psalm. 2. etc.
And they shall in all ages feel the iron scepter of Christ, that will not be
ruled by his wholesome read and discipline.

The causes of this persecution.
Thirdly, it behooves us to search out the causes of this devised persecution,
whereof Luke touches the one after a dark sort, but the other he declares
plainly. First he says, that Herod stretched out his hands to vex certain
of the congregation. And because he makes mention of the Church, which in
points of religion had divided themselves from the residue of the Jews, i.
Schism.
it seems that Agrippa was incensed against them, as authors of schism. For
tyrants can away with no likelyhoode of schism be it never so little among
their subjects, not for that they delight so much in peace, but for yt they
fear their state, which they know stands in great hazard through schism and
discention. Which is the cause that though they be void of all religion, yet
they seek to have in their Realms an uniform consent in religion. For the
crafty men well know, that there is nothing of more efficacy to deuyde the
minds of men, than diversity and unlikeness of religion. There be examples
of both these in the Scriptures. Jeroboam to the intent that the ten Trybes,
over whom he had gotten to be King, should not be reconciled again to the
house of David, 1. Reg. 13.
devised new manners of religion. And Antiochus because he would stablishe his
Empire, commanded one form of religion to be used over all his Provinces. 1.
Match. 1.
In the mean season we have to note diligently, how the only worshippers of
truth most commonly are counted for schismatykes, where as yet there are none
other people more led with the desire of true unity, and whereas there
springs no ranker increase of sects, than of superstition. Among the Jews
were the sects of Phariseys, Sadduceys, Essenes, and others of like hear. And
yet Agrippa laid hands on none of these. Only ye Church of Christ, as the
mother of division suffers persecution. We have seen the like even in our
days. For who is ignorant of the innumerable and most diverse sects of Monks,
whereby Christendom now many ages has been divided? But which of the Popes, or
Emperors, or kings, has called them schismatikes, although they both professed
a diverse name, and also diffred from other men in apparel, rytes, and other
ceremonies? Yea, such were defended by the Popes authority, and made of Kings
privy counsayles. But as soon as the right faith set forth by the sincere
doctrine of the Gospel, put up her head, by and by were heard euerywhere the
horrible names of Heretics, sectaries, and schismatikes. For where truth only
most strongly overthrows the kingdom of Satan, he cannot abide that they
which have heretofore lived in darkness, and yielded them to his government,
should embrace her. In the mean while they cry out and say, peace and
tranquillity is disturbed, and can suffer any thing in their Realms, rather
than the peace of Christ.

The other cause which more provoked Herod, Desire to please the people.
raging of his own self, Luke plainly expresses, where he says: Seeing
that it pleased the Jews, he took Peter also* This new king therefore thought
to pick a thank of the Jews, who he knew of nature could not away with
servitude, and yet bare great hatred unto Christ's religion. In this example
are the conditions of tyrants trimly declared, whose property it is to
establishe their tyranny with the blood of harmless men. For the blood
of the poor is not dear in their sight, as the Prophet testifyeth of the
good King. Psalm. 72.
But they play for men's heads, as it were at the dyce, if they think any
gain like to come by their deaths. So we read that Augustus sometime
purchased Antonius favor with Cicero his head. And Pylate because he would
gratifye Herodes Antipas, sent Christ unto him, and to get the good will of the
people of Jews, adjudged him to dye on the cross, whose innocence he had
tried by many arguments, by this means purposing to win their good wills
again, whom he had many ways grieuouslye offended. And there want not like
examples in these days. For they which persecute the doctrine of Christ and his
Disciples, to have the friendship of the Popes and Bishops, do rightly imitate
Agrippa. And that that we read L. Flamineus did sometime, beheadding a
certain man for his Concubines sake and pleasure, the same now a days among
Princes is a common thing, for the whore of Babylons sake, not only to behead
and burn, but also to make horible wars against the professors of Christian
doctrine. Here let it comfort us, that we have God the revenger of our cause,
who as he destroyed the Jews burning in deadly hatred against Christ, so has
he after horrible sorts revenged their unrighteousness, which went about to
redeem the good will of a wicked Nation with the blood of his saints. They
shall find the like judgment, that at this day dare persecute Christ for this
most wicked worlds sake. We shall have more commodity to speak of these
things in the end of the Chapter, where Luke reports the horrible end of
Herod.

What Herod did in persecuting the Church.
Fourthly is declared, what this great king attempted and did against the Church
of Christ. And there are two wicked deeds of his declared, whereby he has
purchased himself a perpetual ignominy and blot of name. First is his
beheading of James the brother of John the Apostle and Evangelist. James is
killed with the sword.
He was one of the chief among the Apostles. For him and John his brother, and
Peter, did Christ use more familiarly than the other, when he took him as a
witness of the miracle of Iairus daughter raised again, and would have him a
beholder of his glorification. He was for his fervent zeal of godliness and
vehemency of speech, Marc. 3.
called the son of thunder. Yet God by his secret judgment suffers one of
the chief of the number of the Apostles to be killed, and such a worshipper of
Christ, to become a pray to a most cruel tyrant. By which example is
evidently declared that tribulations and shameful deaths are not arguments of
Gods wrath, as the wicked use to say, which think it an high point of wisdom
to judge of faith and religion according to the success thereof. But if we
shall believe them, we shall condemn Abell one of the first true worshippers
of God, the Prophets, and all the Apostles, and Jesus Christ the very son of
God: because it is evident, that all these were circumuented and murdered by
the subtlety of the wicked. Let us rather harken unto Christ, saying: Blessed
are they which suffer persecution for righteousness sake. For theirs is the
kingdom of heaven. Blessed are you when men revile you and persecute you,
Math. 5.
and shall falsely say all manner of evil sayings against you for my sake.
Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven. For so persecuted
they the Prophets which were before you. For the which cause Paul teaches us
to rejoice in afflictions. Romans 5.
For so it behooves we become like to the son of God, Romans 8. 2. Tim. 2.
that when we have suffered with him, we may also be glorified with him, and
reign with him.

Peter is appreh^nded
The other heynousnesse of Herod is, that perceiving his enterprise lyked the
Jews, and therefore purposing to hold on, he also apprehended Peter. For
because he would seem the more terrible to the people, he set not upon the
rascal comminaltie, but upon the chief. And there was no let in him, but
Peter also should by and by have been executed: but because it was the days
of sweet bread, he was through observation of the feast prohibited, least he
should by unhallowing the feast, turn the good will of the Jews from him,
which by all means he sought to win. So the most cruel caytife plays the
notable hypocrite, and counterfeyteth a love unto religion, having long before
cast out of his mind all feeling of God, as in his end it shall appear. In
the mean while, this is a work of Gods providence, that he uses his
counterfeyte holiness to deliver his Apostle by. So knows God how to
defeat and disappoynt tyrants enterprises, even by those means, whereby they
think chieflyest to bring their matters to pass. Mark how great diligence
the tyrant uses in keeping Peter. For he commits him to four quaternions
of soldiers to be kept, he commanded him to be fettred in chains, and to
have two soldiers, one to lie at each side of him, as afterward we shall see
in the story of his delivery. But how many thieves, robbers, murderers,
periurers, blasphemers, and wicked malefactors, I pray you, went in the mean
seaon up and down Herodes kingdom, without any thing said unto the^? and
Christ's innocent Apostle in the mean time, is fast kept, as it were some
heinous thief or murderer? But this is it that Christ charge them with,
that were sent to take him, saying: Luc. 22.
you be come out with sworde^ and staves, as to a murderer. etc. Mark this
also how this Apostle lies fast bound in prison, while other men keep
feast, and looks every hour to hear sentence of death, whiles other make
merry and frollicke. Let us with patience follow this example, if it come to
pass at any time that our feast days be turned to mourning, either by reason
of sickness, imprisonment, or other such like adversity. For they keep not
holy day so much, that are present at solemn ceremonies and feasts, as they
that being comforted with Christ's spirit, rejoice in him, although they be on
every side besette with troubles.

Howbeit at the last, What the congregation did during the persecution.
he shows what the congregation did in the mean while. The Church in the
mean time gave not her self to idleness and pleasures, but understanding
Peter's case to be their own, made their continual prayers unto God for him.
This is a token both of thankfulness and fydelitie. For they acknowledge how
much beholding they are to Peter, which till this time had taught them the
doctrine of salvation. And they trust he may be delivered out of danger by
Gods help. This place teaches what Christians ought to do, when their
brethren be in danger for Christ's quarrel, and for the faythes sake, verily
even as much as in them lies, according to ye vocation that God has called
them unto. And if any perceive that they can no manner of way succor them, at
least let them by prayer commend their cause unto God. This both the glory of
Christ teaches us, which we are all bound to set forth, and also the rule of
charity, and Christian society, which looks and commands us that we
should think our brethrens troubles our own. And hereunto belongs that
saying of the Apostle: Remember them that are in bonds, ^eb. 13.
even as though you were bound with them your selves. Again: Rejoice with
them that rejoice, weep with them that weep. Be of like affection one
toward another. Roma. 12.
And if a man would compare these things with the manners of this world, it
should easily appear how cold we be in a matter of most importance. The
godly Martyrs of Jesus Christ do euerywhere mourn and groan, not only in
chains and prison, but also between the tormentors hands in the middle of
the fire. But how many are there which are any thing touched with their
vexation and griefs? Yea, while whole Cities and nations strive for the faith
and for Christ, till their blood be shed: a great many in the mean while
being given to their pleasures, behold their brethrens shipwreck as a
passetime a far off out of the haven. To speak nothing of them that say it
is Priests matters, and therefore think it is well done, when they are so
rewarded for their godliness. These men testify that they are not of the body
of Christ, 1. Cor. 12.
having no feeling or compassion with Christ's members. In the mean while,
this place teaches us* with what weapons the Church chiefly fyghteth: verily
with prayers, wherewith it knows that God after a sort will be won and
overcome. Therefore they pour out their prayers still unto God, and in them
they find present help against the menaces, halters, and swords of tyrants,
and against all other torments. But hereof shall be entreated in the Sermon
following* where it shall appear how the soldiers watch was overcome, and
the prison doors opened at the prayers of the congregation. Let it for this
time suffyce us to acknowledge the state and condition of the Church, which is
invred with continual troubles. Let us prepare and make ready our self
thereto, that we may possess our souls in peace, through Jesus Christ: to
whom be praise, honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.lxxxiij. Homely.
AND when Herod would have brought him out unto the people, the same night
slept Peter between two soldiers bound with two chains, and the keepers
before the door kept the prison. And behold, the Angel of the Lord was
there present, and a light shined in the habitation. And he smote Peter on the
side, and stirred him up saying: arise up quickly. And his chains fell of from
his hands. And the Angel said unto him, gyrde thy self, and bind on thy
sandales. And so he did. And he says unto him: cast thy garment about thee,
and follow me. And he came out and followed him. And wist not that it was truth
which was done by the Angel, but thought he had seen a vision. When they
were past the first and the second watch, they came unto the iron gate that
leads unto the City, which opened to them by the own accord. And they went
out and passed through one street, and forthwith the Angel departed from him.
And when Peter was come to himself he said: Now I know of a surety that
the Lord has sent his Angel, and has delivered me out of the hands of
Herod, and from all the waiting for of the people of the Jews.
THe Evangelist Luke in the description of this present history, compriseth
three things very worthy to be remembered. First he shows, as it were in a
glass, the state and condition of the Church of Christ, which God suffers to
be tried with diverse troubles and afflictions. Secondly, he teaches what the
duty of every Christian is, when the tempest of persecution arises, that is
to say, that every one should remember the fellowship which they have together
in Christ, and think that their brethrens case is their own, and when they can
none otherways help them being so afflicted, at the least to make their hearty
and continual prayers to God for them. For this he says the congregation did,
when Herod did cast Peter in prison. Thirdly, he sets forth unto us, an
example of the kindness and favor of God, whereby he teaches us, that God
has then most care of his people, when they seem most destitute both of Gods
help and man's. And in this part may be perceived the effect of godly
prayers, which the believers in those days found in all points agreeable to
Gods promises. For the holy Ayostle of Christ is myraculously delivered, and
all the power and policy of Herod is feign to give place to the prayers of
the Church, seeing that neither watch, nor iron chains, nor fast locked
doors, nor iron barred gates, were able to hold him, whom God would deliver
at the intercession of his people. It shall behooue us diligently to consider
this place, because Luke is so diligent in describing every circumstance, that
he leaves out nothing, be it never so little, for that every point thereof
serves much both for our comfort and instruction.

He begins with the time, The time when Peter was delivered.
not so much after the common usage of Hystoriographers, as for that it serves
greatly for the better setting forth of Gods benefyte. For he writes that
Peter was set at liberty that night, after that Herod had purposed to put him
to death. Whereby it appears that this delivery was suspended for certain
days, in the which time Peter abode the annoyance of imprisonment, and the
congregation continued in fervent prayer, and the Jews burning in hatred
against Christ, like gaping Cormorants greedily waited for so excellent a
man's death. But even in a moment of time, when the space but of one night
seemed to let their expectation, the Lord egregiously deluded them, and
delivered his servant from the sword hanging over his neck. Whereby we are
taught that God uses sometime to defer his help, but yet not utterly to
forget and forsake us, but rather means thereby to try and prove us, and to
make his benefit seem the more notable, when we see it comes to pass,
beyond all hope and help of man. This was the cause that long agone he then
delivered the people of Israel when they were constrained to make away their
infantes, and to man's thinking were past all hope of recovering their
liberty again. And he brought them through the middle of the red sea, when
the Egyptians were almost on their backs, and ready to set upon them. Hereto
also is Ezechias to be referred, whom God even then helped, Esaias. 37.
when Sannecherib was ready (as it seemed) to have taken the City. The use of
all these things is, that we should learn patiently to abide Gods leisure, and
to prescribe him no mean or time how to appoint his affairs. For although
Christ seem sometime to be a sleep in the stern of the ship, yet he uses
in time convenient to help our afflictions, Marc. 4.
and to calm and cease all storms and tempests.

After this, he describes how Peter was minded and affected in such a present
danger. How Peter was affected in his mind being in prison.
And verilye if a man consider the common course of the world, it would seem
he should have been ready to die for fear, seeing by reason of James late
putting to death, and his straight watching, there was no hope of any better
help. Therefore what should he do but cry out and lament his own state and
case? But this glorious soldier of Christ is set out to us, to be of a far
other mind. For Luke writes, that he lay a sleep fast bound with two
chains, between the two soldiers. That this was no token of sloth or
sluggishnesse, but rather an argument of true faith and sure confidence, may be
gathered hereby, for that we heard before, when the Apostles were scourged
with rods, they went out rejoicing and being glad, that they were judged worthy
to suffer for Christ's sake. Let us here compare Herod and Peter together, and
it shall easily appear how great difference is between the wicked and the
true worshippers of God. That Herod was careful and much troubled how he
might handsomely compass his intended persecution against Christ, may hereby
appear, in that he causes Peter, who had neither will nor power to do any
hurt, to be bound with chains, as it had been a fierce and savage beast, and
to be kept with soldiers lying at each side of him, and before the prison
doors, and to have iron gates to be barred against him. What troubles and
vexations of mind felt he, think you, in other things, that was so careful
only for Peter's keeping. But in how much better case is Peter, which sleeps
soundlye, while the tyrant can take no rest all the night long. And that that
is in this example declared, may be applied to all such as he is. For such is
the state of all the wicked, that they procure themselves traueyles and cares,
while they think to bring their matters to pass, by their own devises and
strength. And because they have to do with Christ, whose invincible power,
they feel both in outward affairs, and also in their consciences, even
against their wills: therefore they never rest, devising how to shake of his
yoke, and to break his bridle. See the image of these men, painted out by
David. Psalm. 2.
And therefore the Lord says, the wicked have no peace, but rage and boil in
mind, like the restless sea, Esa. 48. and.57. But the godly, because they
hope in the equity of their cause, repose themself in the providence of God,
whereupon they know that both themselves and all their doings depend, Phil. 4.
John. 14.
and so expulse all fear and care out of their minds, and enjoy such peace,
as Paul says, passes all understanding. For the nearer distress and
adversity approaches, the more feeling they have of Gods present spirit, whom
Christ has promised to comfort those that be his. These things we ought to
have still in our remembrance, that being confirmed in consolation of the
spirit* we may be able to bear and overcome valiantly all dangers for
Christ's namesake.

The manner of his delivery.
But let us see the manner of his deliverance, which is the chiefest part of
this place: wherefore Luke uses a marvelous diligence in describing it,
rehearsing every thing that came to pass about the same. And first he says
expresselye, The ministerye of an Angel.
that God used the ministry of an Angel, so that even here also it may
appear, how that is fulfilled which the Scripture promises, where it says
that God has appointed and prepared the Angels to serve his elect. But the
things pertaining to the explication of this place, may be supplied of that
which was said in a like hystory, in ye.xxxiiij. homily. It shall suffice to
add this one thing, that men ought to have great consideration of their
dignity, remembering that the Angels are present, and to give themselves to
innocence and purity of manners, least they bereave themselves through their
own default, of so holy a succor and safegarde. Whereunto it seems Paul
had a respect, when he gave warning, that if women could none otherwise be
provoked to shamefastness and comeliness in their apparel, yet for fear of
the Angels which are conuersaunt among the godly, 1. Cor. 11.
they should use it.

After this, it is said, a certain light shyned in the prison, being
otherwise dark and horrible, A light shyneth.
which me thinks, served partly for that it might appear this was an Angel
of light, and partlye that Peter might see what he had to do. And it is very
often seen in Scripture, that good Angels have appeared in bright and shyning
wise, as may be gathered by the story of the resurrection and ascension of
Christ. This place teaches us, that Christ is able to lighten and give
effectual comfort to those that be his, even in the midst of darkness, so
that he can make those things pleasant and comfortable, that otherwise seem
unto us fearful and horrible. For he is the light of the world, John. 8.12.
which whosoever follows, walks not in darkness.

The Angel awaketh him.
Thirdly, an Angel puncheth Peter on the side as he sleeps, waketh him, and
bids him arise quickly, whereas he once thinks not of any manner of
deliuerye. This is an argument of the goodness of God, which always waketh for
us, that our cruel enemy devour us not. And that that here comes to pass
unto Peter, each one of us every day fyndeth true, but such is our
blindness, that we acknowledge not the present goodness of God. For it is
evident, that Satan lies still in wait to catch us, and wandreth up and down
like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. How then comes it to
pass, that in our sleep he destroys us not, when we are not able by prayer
to keep him of, nor to do or think any thing for our own safeguard? Can
there be here any other reason alleged, than that we dwell safe under the
defense of the most highest, and under the shadow of the almighty, as ye
Prophet says Psalm. 91. Whereby we also leearne with what diligence we ought at
all times to commend our selves unto the tuition and protection of God. These
things may also comfort us against the terrors of death. For where it
appears that God takes care for us in our sleep (which is an image or
counterfeyte of death) we shall think that by death we are not excluded from
his providence. Example whereof Christ sets out in Lazarus, whom being
dead, and lying buried in his grave, he does vouchsafe to call his friend.
John. 11.
Which is the cause that the Saints being ready to give up their life, use to
commend themselves unto God the father, like as though they would lay
themself down to sleep or to rest.

Fourthly, the chains fell of from Peter's hands at the voice of the Angel,
and all things touching his delivery, The impediments of delivery are castly
taken away.
were done without any difficulty. For the soldiers (whether they were
through Gods power fast on sleep, or whether they were amazed with the
brightness of the Angel, as we read came to pass in the resurrection of
the Lord) neither stay Peter araying himself, nor going out: and without any
let or stop. Peter passes the first and second watch, being led by the
Angel. Moreover, the iron gate which alone was able to keep out and in, all
persons, opened of it own accord. And the Angel leaves not Peter, before
he had set him safe out of all danger. It pleased God thus by steps and
degrees to set him at liberty, that his benefit might seem the more notable.
For otherwise he could by some strange miracle have set him safe sodeinly in
Mary's house. Here is the invincible power of God to be considered, and how
easy a thing it is for him to set his people at liberty, to whom things
otherwise invincible, use to obey and give place. For it has not only come
to pass in Peter's delivery, but also at diverse other times, that nature has
been feign to yield unto Gods pleasure, that a way of escape might be opened
to his elected. For hereto may be referred the passage through the red sea,
and the dividing or parting a sunder of the river Iordane. Likewise we read,
that the fire touched not Daniels fellows, no not so much as their garments or
hear, beyond the course of nature. And the Lions chose rather to lay aside
their natural fierceness, Daniel. 6.
than to hurt the servant of God contrary to Gods pleasure. Which thing the
Ecclesiastical history reports oftentimes to have come to pass in the
Martyrs. Hereunto belongs the falling of the walls of Jericho, at the
blasting of Trumpettes: that the army of the Assyrians, were slain all in one
night, and diverse other examples are to be seen of them that read either
profane or Ecclesiastical hystories. With these things therefore let us
strength our faith against the threats of tyrants. For it is most certain
that God is able to deliver those that be his, out of any danger, so it be his
good pleasure. And if at any time he refuse so to do, it is because he knows
it is so needful for our salvation. In the mean season he remains
faithful, and suffers us not to be tempted further than we be able to bear.
1. Cor. 18.


To conclude, the Evangelist shows what Peter did in all this mean while.
what Peter does after he is delivered.
First he says that Peter wyste not whether this gear was done of a truth or
not. For he thought it was a vision, such as was showed him before in the
hystory of Cornelius. And this is an argument of man's infirmity, wherewith he
is so encombred, that he cannot perceive the manifest works of God, specially
if they be ouershadowed with any majesty of Godheade. So when Peter saw Christ
glorified in the mount with Moses and Helias, Luke. 9.
he uttered certain unfit sayings, being ignorant what he said. Yet are they
more daungerously deceived, which mark not the manifest judgments of God,
whereby they are provoked to repentance: which is a thing to common in these
days. In the mean while Peter's obedience deserves no small praise, which
though he were ignorant what this thing meant, yet obeyed the Angels
admonition, teaching us by his example, how we should use our selves to obey
faith, as has been oftentimes declared. But when he was come to himself, and
perceived he was at liberty, then he greatly magnifyed God, the author of so
great a benefyte. Now (says he) I know for a surety, that the Lord has
sent his Angel, and delivered me from the hand of Herod* etc. By which
example we are taught that we must give God only, all the thanks for any our
deliueries. For although he use the ministry of angels or men, he must yet
have the whole praise, which uses his creatures only according to his
pleasure. This thing himself teaches by the Prophet, Psalm. 50.
saying: Call upon me in the time of trouble: so will I hear thee, and thou
shall praise me. Whereunto appertains this saying of David: Psalm. 107.
Let them give thanks whom the Lord has redeemed and delivered from the
hand of the enemy. Therefore Peter truly acknowledges God only to be his
revenger, which thing Paul also does, where he confesses himself to be
delivered from the mouth of the Lion, 2. Tim. 4.
by Gods power. Wherefore their error is intolerable, which being delivered
out of prison, from sickness, or other like kind of dangers, ascribe the
praise of their deliuerye unto Saints. How much more ought the redeeming of
mankind from the tyranny of h^ll, to be ascribed to God as the only author?
Let us acknowledge these things, O brethren, and with thankful minds praise
God, which has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has brought us
unto the fellowship of his kingdom, by his son Jesus Christ: to whom be
praise, honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.lxxxiiij. Homely.
AND as he considered the thing, he came to the house of Marye the mother of
one John, whose surname was Mark, where many were gathered together in prayer.
As Peter knocked at the entry door, a Damsel came forth to harken named
Rhoda. And when she knew Peter's voice, she opened not the entry for gladness,
but ran in, and told how Peter stood before the entry. And they said unto
her thou art mad. But she affirmed that it was even so. Then said they, it
is his Angel. But Peter continued knocking, and when they had opened the
door, and saw him, they were astonished. And when he had beckened to them with
the hand, that they might hold their peace, he told them by what means the
Lord had brought him out of prison. And he said, go show these things unto
James, and to the brethren. And he departed and went into another place.
As Soon as it was day, there was no little ado among the Soldiers, what was
become of Peter. When Herod had sought for him, and found him not, he
examined the keepers, and commanded them to be carried away. And he descended
from Jury to Caesarea, and there abode.
AS the Evangelist Luke by suggestion of the holy spirit, has described in
this Chapter a most grievous persecution of the Church of Christ, by the
example whereof we are taught what state the Church is in here upon earth: so
likewise he sets forth a notable example of the goodness and providence of
God, which defends the faithful in their distress, and most faithfully
perfourmeth the help which long agone he promised. For as we saw erewhyle,
then the Lord was at hand with Peter the Apostle, when he seemed destitute
as well of Gods help as man's. And he did not only show a semblant and token
of good will, but used his invincible power to deliver him. For he sent his
Angel to unloose the iron chains, he opens the doors in wonderful wise,
he defeateth the watch of the soldiers, and brings Peter out of all
danger, and sets him at liberty when sentence of death was already given
against him. And albeit all they that are imprisoned, and in bands for Christ's
sake, are not delivered in such wonderful wise: yet there are general
promises, that all they that give themselves to Gods service, are under his
protection. For David affirms that the eyes of the Lord are over the
righteous, Psalm. 34. Math. 10.
and his ears are open unto their prayers. And the son of God testifyeth,
that the hears of our head be numbered. But to let these things pass, as is
already sufficientlye entreated of, let us consider this present place, where
we are taught what Peter did after he was delivered out of his bands and
prison, what the exercise of the Church was in the mean season, and how
Herod the tyrant took this judgment of God.

Peter after he perceived the Angel gone, and himself at liberty, Peter
desires to be io^ned (...) ga^e.
weyghing and expending diligently with himself, all things that recoursed in
his mind, gets him to the house of Mary, which by all likelyhoode was not
far of, and where he supposed some of the faithful were assembled, as the
custom was. This Mary was ye mother of John Mark, which of diverse, both of
the old and later writers, is thought to be Mark the Evangelist. Which
opinion as it is not altogether certain, so it appears that this Marie was a
woman of a rare faith and godliness, even by this one argument, that while
Agrippa did so cruellye persecute the Disciples of Christ, yet would she let
them resort to her house, as to a public Temple, where they did meet
together, and exercise themself in the word of God, and in prayers, which she
could not do without apparaunt and manifest peril. Here the Lord thought
good to teach us by the example of this weak vessel, how boldly Christians
ought to stand by their tackle, and defend their cause, even in the middle of
dangers and troubles. But when Peter came thither, the doors opened not
myraculously, as before, the iron gate did, because now there was no need of
any strange miracle, but he knocks to have some body to come open the door.
Peter's example is to be well considered of us which having escaped the danger
of death, is desirous above all things, to be joined to the congregation
again, against whom yet he knew the tyrant still raged. Hereby we be taught
what care we ought to have of Ecclesiastical unity or fellowship, and how
the spirit of Christ scatters not the faithful in sunder, but joins them
together, as well inwardly as outwardly. And they cannot find in their heart,
easilye to contemn this conjunction. For as they know that all salvation is
contained in Christ alone, so they understand the same is derived from Christ
their head, upon them which are members of Christ, that is to say, of the
Church. Therefore absurd and pernicious is the error of them, which when
persecution arises, forsake the congregation, or else if they once have been
in danger, think they have done enough for their part, and will be joined to
them no longer, for fear of new dangers. And thus they alienate themselves
from Christ, for whose name sake they abode the first bruntes, and while they
will keep their bodies out of danger, destroy their souls.

The exercises of the Primitive Church.
Let us also see what manner of Christians Peter found in the house of Mary,
Luke comprehends a great matter in few words, and says there were many
there gathered together, and praying. And yet it is not to be thought that all
the faithful of the whole City were gathered into one house, but it is likely
that there were other assembles also in other places, and that in the night
season, because they might not meet together in the day time. And hereof it
seems that those meetinges of Christians in the night, Pliny the younger in
his Epistle to T^^iane the Emperor.
and early in the morning, took their beginnings. Whereof the profane writers
make mention, not that they thought any more religion or effect of prayers in
one time than another, but for that in the time of persecutions, and lying in
wait of their enemies, they could not otherwise scarce come together. Now a
days such kind of meetinges are of many utterly condemned, thinking that all
men ought to abstain from them, least the godly might give some suspicion of
sedicion, or of some other more dishonest misdemeanour. But why do not these
notable comptrollers consider the example of the Primitive Church, and suffer
the brethren that be under the cross, See what the (...) repo^^^^ of these
assembles in Tertullians Apology. cap.
to do as they did in times passed, seeing both their cases be a like? In the
mean while we deny not, but that there ought to be had herein great diligence
and circumspection. For as it was in times passed a great occasion to the
enemies of Christ, to rail and deprave the Christian religion, even so in the
ages following, it was cause of superstition, while certain foolish men
thought they might here upon ground their Mattens and singing before day.
This place in the mean while yet teaches us what manner of exercises the
Christians should have at all times, but specially when persecutions are
stirring, or any other kind of public calamity. And here ought to be
diligent heed had of these holy meetings. For as Christ desires to have his
to be one: so it becomes them to testifye publicly, the desire of their
unity and fellowship. Which thing was cause that in the old Testament Moses
gave such diligent advertisement concerning their festival days, in all which
the chief matter was, Leuit. 23.
the holy convocation or assembly. And Joel the Prophet admonishing the people
of their duty, in the time of the Assyrian wars, commands them oftentimes
to proclayme an holy assembly. And it is not without a cause that Paul writing
to the Corinthians, reasons in diverse Chapters, of the good order to be had
and used when the congregation meet together. For he knew that Christ had
adourned such as were gathered together in his name, Math. 18.
with a peculiar promise, testifying that he is in the middle of them. And yet
shall not those assemblies be allowed, be they never so great, except those
things be done in them, which God commands. He will have his word openly
taught. Therefore we must come together to hear it. He will have us to pray
unto him. Therefore when we meet, we must join together in prayer, Tertullian
in his Apology cap. 39.
that we may even in a troop together (I will use Tertullians words)
compass and beset God about with prayers. For this kind of violence is
acceptable unto him, as Christ has taught us, Luke. 18.
by the example of the wydowe. It is evident that these men observed both these
things. For although Luke make mention in this place but of prayers only, yet
forasmuch as they be ordered according to Gods word, and take their force of
the promises of God, it is not like they were slack herein. See Tertullian in
his Apology. ca. ^9
Of such assemblies as these, the most ancient writers make plentiful
mention. And if we would compare these things with the usage of our days, it
should easily appear, how far we have swarued from the integrity of the
Primitive Church. For it pleased God that these companies should come together
in the night time, because of perilles on every side at hand: but we will not
come together in the day time, when we may so do without any danger. And
they that come to the Church, do as they did, whose vanity and wickedness
Ezechiel accuses cap. 33. And again, they that meet in the night time,
either they strive who shall quaffe best, or they play at the defamed dyce, or
else run up and down the streets with their noyses, in too dissolute a
wise. To speak nothing in the mean while of those, that if any persecution
arise, turn to cursing and railing, using all unseemly speech against the
harmless Ministers, as though the matter touched not the whole congregation,
but them alone. And hereof comes it, that we perceive such continual
calamities in our days. For why should God spare to strike them, which whilste
they are laid on, Esaias. 9. Amos. 4.
will not acknowledge his hand, nor turn unto him, correcting them like a
father.

Luke now proceeds in his Oration begun, How the faithful we^e affected at
Peter's coming
and declares how the faithful were affected at this sodeine and unlooked for
coming of Peter. And first it appears they were somewhat troubled at the
knocking at the door, because Rhoda the maid runs not forthwith to open
the door, but stands harkening who it should be that was at the door. For
whereas they were not ignorant how greatly Herod burned in hatred against the
church, there was nothing so sure, but they had some suspicion and fear in it.
But Rhoda knowing it was Peter by his voice, surprised with exceeding joy, and
desirous to be the messenger of such gladsome tidings, before she would open
the door, goes and tells it within. They which scarce thought of any such
thing, much less hoped therefore, first said she was mad, and afterward
hearing that she constantly affirmed it to be true, supposed yet that it was
not Peter, but his Angel that was at the door, and did counterfeyte his
voice. So a man may see the notable servants of Christ, bewtifyed with all
kind of virtues, tossed with diverse affections, and between hope, fear, and
joy, standing in a doubt. Hence therefore with the madness of the Stoykes,
who while they teach that a good and perfect man must be void of all
affections of the mind, go about to make of men blocks and mushroomes. And
yet Paul witnesses that Jesus Christ was subject to such infirmities, Heb. 2.
and was many ways tempted like a very true man, so that he could have
compassion on us. Yet here are two things to be diligently considered, before
we go any further. The first is for our consolation, The prayers of the godly
are not in vain.
where we are taught that the prayers of the godly are so accepted with God,
that many times his goodness far exceeds them, by granting more than they
dare presume to ask. For although these people made continual intercession to
him for Peter, yet it appears by this place, that they had no hope in his
delivery. They knew well enough that nothing was impossible unto God. But they
perceived not why God would save Peter, seeing he suffered James to die so
unworthy a death. Therefore I suppose they desired God in their prayers, that
Peter by his grace might be strengthened in the confession of the truth, and
that for Christ's sake he might stoutely overcome the terrors of death. And
beyond all hope, they see Peter by the help of God restored to them again,
which was an infallible argument of Gods goodness, whereby they were taught
that God would not suffer his Church to be torn in sunder of Tyrants, seeing
he so faithfully defended the Ministers thereof. There are infynite examples of
like kind, which every one may euerywhere see that reads either the
Scriptures or other writers. And if we would but a little diligentlyer mark
the judgments of God, we should see the like fall out in our own affairs.
Let us learn therefore constantly to hope in the Lord, and to commit our
matters and our selves unto his care and providence. The apparitions of angels.
The other thing to be here observed is, that they suppose it was Peter's
Angel that appeared. For the godly people acknowledged what is said in the
Scriptures, touching the defense and aid of the Angels. For no man ought to
think that they ymagined any superstition, deuoyde of sincere religion. For
there are Oracles of Scripture, whereby we are taught that God has appointed
the Angels to be the Tutors and Ministers of man, as may be seen Psalm. 54.
and 91. And we have examples, whereby it is manifest they have appeared in
visible form. Therefore they neither in foolish sort, nor wicked, uttered
these words at Peter's sodeyne coming. Yet are we not ignorant that hereof
sprang the common error that the superstitious had, of the two Angels
appointed to every man: which error we reject for good considerations, because
the Scripture defyneth not for certain any thing touching the number of
Angels, Genesis 28.32. 2. Reg. 6.
whether it is one, two, or three, or whole armies of Angels that defend one
man, as we read of Jacob and Helisaeus. Much less think we them to be
heard, which say that the souls of those that be dead, walk up and down,
and appear. For that opinion repugneth against the doctrine of Christ, and the
verity of our faith, whereby we are taught that the souls of the godly pass
from death unto life, and that the souls of the wicked are carried into hell,
and can not return from thence again. See Christ reasoning of these points in
John. 5. and Luc. 16. Let it be sufficient for us, that the Angels are the
Ministers of God, which uses them at his pleasure, for the safegarde of his
elect, and let us acknowledge the worthynesse and dignity of man, which ought
to be no small provocation for us unto godliness.

Now is it time to turn again unto Peter. Peter will have Gods benefit to
be declared.
He beckoneth with his hand unto the brethren, being partly surprised with
joy, and partly with amazedness, to keep silence, and rehearses all thing
in order as it was done, declaring that God was the only worker of this
benefit. And further, he warns them to signify these things to the residue
of the brethren; but chiefly unto James the son of Alphaeus, which the old
writers affirm was Bishop of Jerusalem. Of which commandment it seems
there was two causes. For he would have the glory of God hereby the more
thankefully spredde abroad, and his brethren, whom he knew were sad for his
sake, to be quitte of their cares. Therefore Peter by his example teaches us,
that we must not hide the benefytes of God in unthankful and unkind hearts.
For then Gods benefytes are best declared, when others provoked by our means,
learn to hope in God, and to call upon him in their distress, as their
defender and revenger. David being delivered out of the hands of the
Philistynes, makethmention hereof in the beginning of the Psalm. xxxiiij.

Further, it is declared that Peter went to another place. Peter prouydeth for
himself by flying
For he easilye perceived that he should do no good to remain in Herodes
kingdom. And the present benefyte of his delivery, did sufficiently declare,
that God would not have him dye under the hand of Herod, but to execute his
Apostleship otherwheres. Therefore he uses the counsel of Christ, saying: If
they persecure you in one city, fly unto another. Math. 10.
Here have thou therefore what answer to make unto those, which would have
the Ministers of the word put into the Woolues hands, and say that they truly
follow the Apostles, when without hope of doing any good, they suffer the
wicked, not only to condemn their doctrine, and the truth of Christ, but also
themselves. But it easily appears what causes these men thus to say. They
would have all the Ministers of the Gospel gone at once, that Antichrists
superstition might be brought in again. Wherefore we must use the wisdom of
serpents against these men, according as Christ has commanded us, that
through our temerity and rashness, we do not indammage Christ's quarrel.

Now remains the last part of this place, How Herod took the miracle of
God.
whereby we are taught how Herod was affected in mind at this work and
miracle of God. And first after it was known that Peter had escaped his bands
and imprisonment, there arose a great fear and trouble among the soldiers.
For where they were well acquainted with the fierce nature of Herod, they
looked for no goodness at his hand. And they were not beguiled. For where
Herod had appointed to put Peter to death, and understood afterward that he
was escaped, like one beside himself, he commands the keepers to be
racked, insomuch that although he heard they were in no fault, yet he
commands them to be had to prison, or else (which is the liker) to their
deaths. This is a very notable example whereby we are taught that the wicked
wax the worse and not better by the judgments of God. For where they are so
bold to strive against God, through his just judgment they are so blinded and
hardened, that in the open light they are not able to see, nor to submit
themself under the mighty hand of God. And there is no cause why we should
hope for any better of the tyrants of these days, which have begun to make
war against God, and maintain the same with such deadly hatred. Here
appears also an example of Gods providence, whereby Herodes craft is deluded,
while he hears the work of God set forth by them, whose help he
accustomed to use against God. And that example is not unlike hereunto, where
the soldiers appointed by ye Priests to watch the sepulcher of Christ, Math.
28.
were the first that published his resurrection abroad in the City.
Furthermore, the unprosperous end of these soldiers teach us, what they may
look for which serve tyrants turns against the truth. They fall commonly
into the pit which they dug for other. Psalm. 7.
And they find them to be their enemies, whose good will they go about to get,
by killing the godly. Whereby it comes to pass, that although men do them
no injury, yet are they punished by the just judgment of God, because they
had liefer please men than God. Let such as either themselves do any thing
against the faithful of Christ, for men's sakes, or else suffer other to do,
Psalm. 105. Zach. 2.
bear this well in mind. It is Christ's saying: Touch not mine anointed. And
he that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye. These sayings threaten
present destruction to the persecutours of the Church. Therefore they that will
be taken for the sincere loouers of true faith, let them abstain from these
men's company and counsel, least they perish with them. In the mean season
let us acknowledge the power of Christ our king and savior, which so luckily
deludeth the enterprises of his enemies, and so valiauntly defends his
chosen. To him be all praise, honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.lxxxv. Homely.
HEROD was displeased with them of Tire and Sydon. But they came all with one
accord, and made intercession unto Blastus the kings chamberlain, and desired
peace, because their Country was nourished by the Kings provision. And upon a
day appointed, Herod arrayed him in royal apparel, and set him in his seat,
and made an Oration unto them. And the people gave a showte, saying: It is the
voice of a God and not of a man. And immediately the Angel of the Lord smote
him, because he gave not God the honor, and he was eaten of worms, and gave
up the ghost. And the word of God grew and multiplied. And Barnabas and
Paul returned from Jerusalem to Antioch when they had fulfilled their office,
and took with them John whose surname was Mark.
ALthough God suffers his Church to be exercised and tried with continual
persecutions: yet he appoints for the persecutors thereof grievous and
horrible punishments. For in the Prophet Zachary he is compared to a weighty
stone, wherewith every one uses to try maisteries, and to prove his
strength. But none scapeth scotfree or without some hurt. Hereof is set forth
unto us a notable example in Herodes Agrippa, who as was declared in the
beginning of this Chapter, intended and begun a grievous persecution against
the Church, both for that he would not have the people of his jurisdiction
divided in diverse religions, and also for that he meant thereby to get the
favor and good will of the Jews. And at the first his enterprise seemed
luckilye to succeed. For where he had set on two of the chief Apostles, he
put James unto death, and Peter he took and laid in yrons, appoyinting
sixteen soldiers to watch him. At which time how greatly all men's minds
were amazed, and stricken with fear, their continual prayers testifye. But
even in a moment when all things seemed past hope, Christ declares himself to
be the protector of his Church. And first of all he delivers Peter in
woonderous wise. Next, he causes the punishment to light on the soldiers,
that they meant unto Peter. And because none should think that Herod should
always prosper, God catches him also with an horrible revenge, the which Luke
now in this place diligently describes.

He begins with rehearsal of a new hystory, Herod is offended with those
that border upon him.
which more manifestly yet shows the nature of Herod, that hereby we may the
better know the cause of so grievous a punishment. The sum and chief point
hereof is, that he had conceived in his mind displeasure against those of Tire
and Sidon, whom when he had compelled through public necessity, that is say,
by famine, humbly to sue for peace, waxing hereby the prowder, he did hasten
the vengeance of God. And although Luke declares not the causes of his
enmity, yet is it not hard to perceive what they were. For it seldom comes
to pass, that Monarchs and free Cities agree together in one, because they
take against their ambition and licentiousness, and by their example allure
kings subjects to the desire of liberty. Furthermore, it is credible that the
Tyrians and Sydonians did not well like of Agrippa his pride, as being an
vpstart, and advanced to such great power by Caligula and Claudius, and but
newly come out of prison. And peradventure their great riches and power by the
sea, which they had many years gotten by their merchaundise, encouraged them
and set them the more a gogge. For that they were hereof the prowder, appears
by the writings of the Prophets. See Esaias. 23. Ezech. 26.27. and.28. And it
may be that the crafty tyrant cloked this lurking hatred in his mind, until
penury and dearth of victuals gave him occasion to stir against them. They
again perceiving that their Cities could from none other place be so
commodiously maintained as by nighnesse of Herodes kingdom, and that therefore
his friendship was necessary, became humble suitors unto him, and that they
might obtain peace the sooner at his hands, they make Blastus of his privy
chamber their friend, which thing could not be compassed without many bribes
and rewards.

In these things the holy Ghost has set out unto us to behold as in a glass
the conditions of tyrauntes. The conditions of Tyrants.
For as Herod is not here content with the wide bounds of his kingdom, but
desires to have the borderers also under his obeysaunce: so if the insatiable
desire of the flesh be not brydled in the hearts of Princes, there is none so
large and wide a kingdom, that can content their mind, or suffyse their
ambition. For as covetous men heap and mass up money, and join house unto
house, and fyelde unto fyelde with all greedye desire: so Kings labor to
join Realm unto Realm, and still to extend their power over them that border
upon them: little regarding in the mean season how they may prudently govern
those people which God has given them the rule of. And this is the cause of
continual wars, whereby the miserable subjects are wasted and consumed, who
find them that ought to be as shepeheardes and fathers unto them, to be their
destroyers. Again, where kings puffed up with insatiable ambition, desire to
have all men in subjection under them, their selves most commonly are ruled by
vile slaves, which by craft can creep into their bosoms, and know well
enough how to use their foolishness and blockeheadnesse, to their own
advantage. Of which kind of men, it appears this Blastus was, upon whom
this one place easily declares, the whole rule of ye realm depended. So with
some Emperors we read that such were of most authority about them, as they
of bondmen and villains had made free, to say nothing of those, which were
led and ruled by players, ^esters, harlots, and abused young Springalles. And
hereof it has come to pass, that they which have had any thing to do with
great Princes, have been compelled to become suitors to most wicked men. For
unless they had made them their friends, they should never have been able to
come to the speech of the Prince. And forbicause they gaped after money, whereby
to maintain their coueted dignity, it came to pass, that in kings Courts,
all things went for money, and according to the Poets saying: there was most
right where most money was stirring. These things are said, to the end that
Princes may understand what vices they had need to beware of, and that all
men may acknowledge the goodness of God, which so diligently dissuaded his
people from a King, as we read in the first book of Samuel cap. 8. And those
to whom God has given to live in liberty, may learn to make much of such a
benefyte, and worthily to use it, least loosing it, and coming to be subject
to the pleasure of unruly men, they then desire in vain, with careful sighs
and groans, The success of the wicked is a preamble of ruin.
their liberty once lost. Further more, here is to be observed what good
success Herod has, after his persecuting of the Church, and embruing
himself with the blood of the guiltless saints. And yet was he worthy,
either to have been destroyed with a thunderbolt from heaven, or else to have
lost his kingdom, and wander up and down like a beggar. And behold, most
rich Cities of their own accord, fall down at his feet, and are glad to
receive such conditions of peace as he prescribes. This is that thing that
offends those that are weak in faith, because they see the wicked so
prosper, and feel none of the plagues or punishments that other men do, as
the Prophet says, Psalm. 73. And therefore Jeremy cries out: How comes it
that the way of the ungodly is so prosperous, Ierem. 12.
and that it goes so well with them which without any shame offend, and live
in wickedness. Furthermore, the wicked take occasion hereof to gather, that
all study and endeavor of true religion, is superfluous and unprofitable, as
we may see in Malachie. 2. and.3. Chapter. But we must here remember that the
wicked are even then ruled with the beck of Gods providence, when things seem
most to succeed with them against the Oracles of God. For it comes to pass
by the just judgment of God, that being drunken with this good success, they
are lifted the higher, to the intent they may fall the lower. Whereunto Solomon
had a respect when he said: Presumptuousnesse goes before destruction, Prou
16.
and after a proud stomach there follows a fall. And David teaching us how
the glory and felicity of the wicked is but transitory, says: I my self
have seen the ungodly in great power and flourishing like a green Baye tree.
And I went by, Psalm. 37.
and lo he was gone. I sought him but his place could no where be found.
Therefore it is a folly to be offended at the prosperity of the wicked,
considering it is the chief cause of their destruction, because they use it
insolently against God, as may be gathered of the success of this present
business, that Luke now rehearses.

For Herod seeing all things succeed after his desire, Herod des^reth to be
honored as a God.
being drunken with the favor of fortune, began to aspire to divine honor
also, as it shall more evidently appea^e, if you will confer the things that
Josephus writes in the.xix. book of his antiquities, and seventh Chapter
with Luke. For he writes that he had appointed games or plays in the honor of
Caesar, and that upon a day assigned for that purpose, he sat in his throne,
having on a Princely ro^e, wouen throughout with strokes of silver, meaning
openly to make an Oration unto the people. And where the garment by reason of
the Sun beams rising upon it, glittered and shined in his face, the
flattering Courtyers took occasion thereof to magnifye him as God, and all the
people followed their example. First therefore they begin to cry, the voice of
a God, and not of a man. And forthwith turning them to prayers and
supplications, they say: Be merciful unto us. For although we have hitherto
feared thee but as a man, yet now we see thou art of an higher nature. etc. It
seems that these things are for this cause chiefly intermedled with this
history, that we may behold the vanity of all the people, wherewith they
were so infected, that they deserved so to be oppressed and pinched under so
vile a tyrant. For why should God give them a better Prince, which were not
ashamed so to extol a fylthie and wicked man with godly honor? But the like
vanity reigns euerywhere in these days, considering we see most cruel
tyrants given wholly to beastly pleasures, being almost laden with like
ambicious and godly styles and tytles. Nor it is not now sufficient to call
them benefyciall or conquerors, but they must be called most victorious, and
have these divine names of Grace and Majesty, which by Scripture are due unto
God, only so often repeated, till a man would loathe it. And because the
Courtyers first begin, and the rascal people not only follow them, but
also imitate the servile and slauishe condicio^s of their teachers: we are
worthy that by open tyranny of Princes, and their manifest wickedness, we
should to our great loss and damage be reproved as liars. Let those most
ambitious men well remember this gear, which abuse the foolishness of such
servile people, to the end to be taken for ioly fellows, by such
counterfeyte and vain titles. For by this mean they declare themselves to be
the companions both of Herod and Caligula, and Domitian, and other such like,
and therefore with them God shall punish them, as Herod here proved. The
destruction of Herod.


For streightway the Angel of the Lord smote him, which Eusebius out of
Josephus writes, appeared to him in visible wise. Of the which stroke he by
and by began to be tormented with pangues and grypes of the belly, Eusebius
in the.2. book of the Ecclesiastical story.x. chap.
which extorted some confession of truth out of his heart, though otherwise so
ambitious. For he turned him to them that waited on him, and said: Behold I
your God, must now exchange life for death. And I whom you called immortal,
am now led away unto death. But Luke declaring the kind of his death,
says: he being eaten and gnawen with worms, gave up his ghost. A disease
which may well be called the lousy evil, by reason of lyce which increase so
mightily, that they devour and eat up the body.
It seems therefore he dyed of the disease called Phthiriasis, having worms
or lyce breeding in his flesh, which fed upon him while he lived, with great
grief and fylthinesse, and at length were the cause of hisdeath. Moreover,
Luke assigns this to be the only cause hereof, for that he gave not God the
glory. For first he thought the honor of ye kingdom, came not of God, but of
Caesar, whom for that cause he worshipped with ordeyning shows and games in
the honor of him. After that he went about cruelly to persecute the true
religion of God. Last of all, he rejoiced in the blasphemous words of
flatterers, whom it had behooued him to have detested and abhorred. Let them
therefore learn by this example, what to look for at Gods hand, which with
like impiety set up themselves against him. It behooves us chiefly to note
how mightily God reuengeth pride, seeing he does not only punish the proud
grievously, but also shamefully, the more to tame and pull down their haultie
hearts and courages. So it pleased him that Pharao should not dye valiauntly
in the fyelde, but be drowned in the waves of the red sea, which is a
shameful kind of death. So he slew Sanherib miserably in the Church of his
own God, by his own sons. And with the same disease which is here
described, before that, was Antiochus, Herod the great, Sylla, and at length
Maximinian the persecutor, vglily consumed. Peter therefore said most truly, 1.
Pet. 5.
that God resists the proud. Let all degrees and states of men hereby learn
to keep themselves within the bounds of their vocation, and if they perceive
any thing in themselves singular or excellent, to acknowledge that it comes
altogether of the goodness of God. So shall it come to pass, that humbling
themselves under the mighty hand of God, they shall use his gifts as they
ought to do. Furthermore, this place teaches us, what hurt flatterers procure
unto Princes. For of nature we be selfelouers, and like best our own doings
and sayings. Then if we admit flatterers, we become stark blind, so that we
see not manifest vices, and grow to be such as cannot abide to hear the truth,
or to be admonished. Which thing has been the cause that great Realms have
been overthrown by the tongues of flatterers, as hystories declare. And surely
Herod had been most prosperous, if he had given ear rather to the Apostles,
reprehending his vice, than to the voices of flatterers and clawbacks. For they
caused him being swollen in a wicked and proud contempt of God, to be
destroyed with horrible death.

Over all this, having showed the end of the tyrant, Luke returns to the
story of the Church, The enlargement of Christ's kingdom.
which he begone how the Gospel did spread, to declare that by Herod it
was nothing hindered. For the word of God (says he) increased and was
multiplied, spreading it self every day farther abroad. This he will declare
in the things following, whereunto he makes a digression touching Paul and
Barnabas return from Jerusalem. For we heard about the end of the eleauenth
Chapter, how they were sent thither to carry that money that was here and there
gathered to the poor and needy brethren in Jury, pinched with dearth and
famine. Which business after they had faithfully discharged, they return unto
Antioch, from whence shortly after they departed with Mark, whom they brought
with them, and published the Gospel both far and near. This is very
comfortable, that we see the Church stand fast and survive all her enemies,
and all tyrants. For she is borne and conserved by the word of God, which
endures for ever. This thing the hystories of all times and nations teach us.
1. Pet. 1.
For miserably and fylthily died Pha^ao, the Chanaanites, Sanherib, the
Babylonians, Antiochus, the three Herodes, Nero, Domitian, Traiane, Antonye,
Seuerus, the Maximini, Decius, Valerianus, Aurelianus, Dioclesianus, the two
Maximinianes, Liciuius, Maxentius, Julian, and as many as ever after all these,
durst to set upon Christ's Church. For she flourishes and lives, and shall
for ever live, under her trusty and most victorious defender and revenger,
Jesus Christ: to whom be praise, honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.xiij. chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The.lxxxvj. Homely.
THERE were in the congregation that is at Antioch certain Prophets and
Teachers, as Barnabas and Simon that was called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene,
and Manahen, Herod the Tetrarches nursefellowe, and Saul. As they ministered
to the Lord and fasted, the holy ghost said: Separate me Barnabas and Saul
for the work whereunto I have called them. And when they had fasted and
prayed, and laid their hands on them, they let them go. And they after they
were sent forth of the holy ghost, departed unto Seleutia* and from thence they
sailed to Cyprus. And when they were at Salamine, they showed the word of God
in the Sinagoge of the Jews, and they had John to their Minister.
THe Euaungelist Luke now in the two Chapters following, describes how the
doctrine of the Gospel by the ministry of Paul and Barnabas, began with
full course to be preached indifferentlye to all Nations. For where the Jews
only until this time (as has oftentimes been declared) challenged to them
the name of the Church, and people of God, and the benefyte of redemption
purchased by Christ, seemed to appertain but unto them alone, and that that
has been said of Cornelius the Centurion, and of the Antiochians, might seem
came to pass of some special privilege or favor. Therefore that no doubt
might remain, the doctrine of salvation is now carried indifferentlye unto
diverse Nations, and those things are openly accomplished, which the Prophets
long before prophesied of the calling of the Gentyles. But least any one
should think that Paul and Barnabas did in this business ought of their
own head and presumption. Luke begins this history with their calling and
sending: the chief scope whereof is, that the kingdom of God, and the whole
matter of salvation, was transferred and brought to the gentiles, not by man's
devise, but by the appointment and commandment of God, and that the Gentyles
appertayned no less unto ye church of God, than the believing Jews. And that
it was needful to have this matter so diligently declared, shall appear by
that contention, which hereafter is described in the.xv. Chapter. Yea, we may
see in the Epistles of Paul, that the Jews oftentimes withstoode the
salvation of the Gentyles, and stood in doubt of it. And the Jews were for no
cause so much offended with Paul, as for that he made the uncircumcised
Gentiles all one with the Jews in Christ, which they thought was not without
the notorious injury and profane contempt both of the law of Moses, and also
of the people of the Jews, which thing also was cause that euerywhere he used
such earnestness in defending his vocation, who could well enough have borne
the contempt of his own name, but that he saw the glory of God, and salvation
of the Gentyles indaungered thereby. But to come to the treaty of this present
place, first Luke describes the Church at Antioch, from whence Paul and
Barnabas were sent to preach the Gospel to the Gentyles. Then declares he
their vocation and sending, with the circumstances thereof. Last of all, he
shows how they used themself in the office committed unto them.

The commendation of the Church at Antioch.
He first describes the Church of Antioch not without a cause. For hereof it may
be gathered, that they could rashlye ordain or appoint nothing, having the
spirit so abundantly among them. Neither can Paul and Barnabas be accused, as
to have left that Church destitute of their ministerye, considering it was so
well seen unto after they were gone. For there were among them certain
Prophets and teachers. Prophets.
They are called Prophets which either by instinct of ye holy ghost show of
things to come, as we see before, Agabus the Prophet did, or else which have
the gift truly and rightly to expound the writings of the Prophets: in which
sense Paul uses this word Prophecy, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians.
14 Chap. Both these senses is well agreeing in this present place. For by
hystories it is plain, that the gift of prophesying endured many years in the
primitive Church. And it can not be said that so notable a Church wanted
exposition of Scriptures. And they are called Teachers, which openly instruct
the Congregation, and apply the holy Scriptures duly to all men's
information, whom we now a days call Pastors, Pastors.
or Ministers of the word. There was therefore at Antioch, not only a Church,
such as is euerywhere, but also a College or school, out of which was taken
learned Ministers, to be sent to other Cities. This place teaches us, that the
chief ornament and beauty of the Church, yea, all the preservation thereof
consists in this, that it be furnished and provided of fyt Ministers and
Teachers. For by the ministry of them Paul plainly teaches, that through
the word of God Churches are begotten, builded up, and preserved. For how
shall they believe in him (says he) of whom they have not heard? Roma.. 10.
how shall they hear without a Preacher. Again: In Christ Jesus have I
begotten you through the Gospel. 1. Cor. 4.
Hereto chiefly it appertains where he writes that Christ has given some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some shepeheardes, Ephesians. 4.
and Teachers, to the edifying of the Saints, even to the edifying of the body
of Christ. And because it is evident that the gift of teaching is not given to
all men in myraculous wise, as it was once to the Apostles, therefore it is
needful to have schools, where such may be brought up, as shall afterward
serve in the Ministry. Such were wont to be among the Jews, in the Cities
of the Levites, and it appears by the storye of Samuel and Helisaeus, that
those singular Prophets of God, had a special care of these schools. Yea,
Amos the Prophet most sharply reprehendeth those that did use to corrupt the
Nazarites, and the young men given to the study of the Scriptures, with wine*
Amos. 2.
This did great Kings and Emperors foresee in the Primitive Church, which did
erect Colleges of their own costs, least at any time want of teachers might
prejudice Gods religion. Howbeit, now a days either slo^hfull Dranes dwell in
them, or else they be at the appointment of such proud men, as hunt rather for
ambicious names, than study for the edifycation of the Church.

Moreover, Manaen a noble man and a Courtyer.
for that the notable Ministers of Christ's Church should not be defrauded of
their due praise, the holy ghost would have their names recorded for a
perpetual remembrance, that it might evidently appear, that God regard^th
those which do faythfullye serve and study for his Church. And among these
persons Manaen seems to be the chief, who Luke writes was fostered and
brought up with Herod the Tetrarch of a child. He was therefore a Courtyer,
and of a noble stock. For who will think that one of a ba^e stock should be
appointed a playfellow with a kings son, or that Herod would afterward
despise him, that had been brought up with him from his childehoode. This is a
notable example of the goodness of God, which uses in all states of men to
have his chosen, and to call them when i^ seems him good. For that universal
spirit and author of eternal life, blows where it pleases him. So we read
that Naaman was in the Court of the king of Syria. And in Babylon, Daniel and
his fellows held fast Gods true religion, yea, Paul makes mention of some
in the house of Nero that believed. Phil. 2.
And Nichodemus is a Disciple among the Scribes, the greatest enemies of
Christ. There is also in Manaen set out unto us an example of faith and sincere
religion, who following the example of Moses, chose rather to be afflicted with
the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, Heb. 11.
thinking the rebuke of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Herod. And
surely if a man would compare the state of the Church, as it was in those
days, with the life of the Court, he shall find a marvelous working of the
holy ghost in this Manaen, and evident tokens both of true regeneration and
mortifycation, and forsaking of himself. But that we hear that he did, it
behooves us to imitate. For it cannot be that they can truly take hold of
Christ, which have not yet learned to despise and tread under foot this
world, with the honors, riches, and pleasures thereof.

But let us come to the second part of this division, Paul and Barnabas are
sent to the Gentyles.
wherein the sending of Paul and Barnabas to the Gentyles is described. Here
are two things chiefly to be discussed, videlicet, the holy ghost the author
and moderator of all this business, and then the order that Luke writes they
observed. First, he expressly teaches, that the holy ghost was the author of
all this doing. For as they ministered to the Lord and fasted, the holy ghost
said: separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called
them. And it is no doubt but these things are spoken of the holy ghost,
forasmuch as mention is made of holy ministerye and fasting. Here the Papists
play the fools, following Erasmus his translation, and because he as unaptly
translated the Greek word by this word sacrifyce, they expound this place
of the sacrifyce of the Mass. Howbeit, the Greeks say, they do (...), which
are occupied or busied in public office or affairs, as it may appear where
Paul calls Magistrates and Angels (...), Romans 13. Heb. 1.
not for that they used to do sacrifyce, but for that they are Gods public
officers and ministers. And where by Christ's death it is manifest the
Leuiticall sacrifyces are abolished, and that the service of Christ consists
not in outward ceremonies, but in the spirit and in truth, therefore here can
be understood none other ministry, than such as Christ would have used in
his Church. This comprehends in it, the preaching of the word, public
prayer, and the sacraments which are not sacrifyces, but holy actions
instituted to keep in memory the sacrifyce which Christ once offered upon
the altar of the Cross. And herein were they busily occupied, when the holy
ghost admonished them to send forth Paul and Barnabas. For that they were
earnestly occupied herein, the mention made of fasting abundantly proves.
There are in this part many things which prove the vocation of the Gentyles,
to be the work of God. For as they were ministering to the Lord, the spirit
advertised the congregation thereof. Afterward, separate me (says he) Paul
and Barnabas. Then they were in the ministerye or service of God when they
preached unto the Gentyles. Besides he says, for the work whereunto I have
called them. These things make for the assuring of our salvation against the
insolent bragging of the Jews, which say they are only the people of God,
and hereout may be taken arguments, whereby Christ may be proved to appertain
unto us also, if any men's consciences incline unto desperation.

The order of Ecclesiastical ministry.
Here ought we to consider the order of ministry, whereof this place teaches
us to judge. The author hereof is the holy ghost, as hereafter also shall
appear in the.xx. Chapter. For as by the spirit, the dignity of Ministers
appears: so it is plainly manifest, that they are not to be taken for
lawful Ministers, unless they be called by the spirit. For how shall they
preach except they be sent? Romans 10.
Which is the cause that as well the Prophets as the Apostles so often and so
constantly inculcate and defend their vocation. Yet let no man always look
for a voice to come from heaven, to call men unto the Ministry. For we must
judge them called of God, that are furnished with necessary gifts of the holy
ghost, and chosen by the lawful voice of the congregation. For that the Church
has herein her voice and election, appears plainly by this place. For
although the holy ghost does expressly confess, that he called these two, and
Paul testifyeth, that he was appointed from his mothers womb for the
ministry: yet the holy ghost requires the allowance of the Church. And I
think that it is requisite chiefly for this cause, that hereby the Ministry
might have the more credit and authority, because the holy ghost knew it to
be a thing subject to the reproach of a great many. In the mean season we are
taught, that order is necessary in the Church, as well in all other things, as
chiefly in the choosing of Ministers, least any man (as the Apostle says)
should take unto himself honor. For how much such things displease God,
Heb. 5.
we learn by the example of Corah, and by the hystories of many ages, whereby
it may be proved, that there has risen in the church scarce of any thing
greater troubles, than of the disordinate and unlawful choosing of Ministers.
Furthermore, as the electing of Ministers in some part belongs unto the
Church: so it behooves the Church to use all holiness in a matter of so great
weight and importance. Whereupon they are said here again to have fasted and
prayed. Howbeit, they could not err in the persons, forasmuch as the holy
ghost had named them that were appointed for this present business: yet they
pray, that they may be increased with the holy spirit, forasmuch as they
heard they were called to an office of such labor and peril. Would God
those men would weigh these things, that use to choose Ministers among their
cups, and in a matter of most weight, use their affections, which are the
woorst Counsaylers that can be, whose wickedness we may thank for the most
part of the evils that are seen at these days in the Church. Also these
Antiochians add unto their prayers the solemn ceremony of laying on of
hands, which we declared heretofore was an outward sign of consecration,
where we spoke of the institution of Deacons.

Now remains the last part of this division, that is, how Paul and
Barnabas began to discharge the office committed to them by God and the
congregation. This part Luke so joins unto the premises, How Paul and
Barnabas begin to preach among the Gentyles
that it appears they forthwith took their journey from thence. This is a
notable example of godly industry and zeal. For what excuses they might have
laid for themselves, all men may easily understand, that have but lightly run
over the stories of that time. The Romans at that time were Lords almost of
the whole world, who they knew would not admit the abrogation of their old
ceremonies and superstition. They knew also that they should have to do with
the Gentyle Philosophers, men very subtle, and greatly exercised in
extemporall and ready utterance of speech. Moreover, they knew the condition
of the Commons, how they use so stowtelye to maintain their old Mumpsimus, in
so much that they will rather lose their life than it. Howbeit, all these
things cannot stop them from preparing themself hereunto, being ready to
take in good worth whatsoever travels and dangers should ensue. These men's
diligence ought all such to imitate, as are appointed of God to any public
office, forthwith to obey the calling of God, and constantly to go on in the
same. For the Lord cannot away with lingerers and triflers, as who of most
right challenges all things to himself. For this cause it is said, Exodus
3.4.
he was angry with Moses in time past, because he refused the office he called
him unto. And Christ says to the Disciple that would first go and bury his
father, follow me, and let the dead bury their dead. Howbeit, Math. 8.
Luke makes mention here of three things, of each whereof somewhat is to be
said.

First he shows whither they went. To Seleucia, The Apostles preach unto the
Cypriotes.
which was not far distaunt from Antiochia, and from thence to Salamine, a
City of Cyprus. The old Cosmographers for the most part attribute unto
Cyprus, among all the Islandes of the Mediterranean sea, the chief praise for
fertility and riches. For this cause all the Cypriotes were so given to ryote
and lechery (as ere while we declared) that the whole Islande was dedicated to
Venus, who, as it is reported, was borne there. Now this one thing declares
what great corruption of life and manners reigned in that Nation, which had
dedicate it self and the whole land unto Venus. Wherefore we must think it
was not without a great cause, that they first went thither, being sent by the
holy ghost to preach the Gospel unto the Gentyles. For this is a singular
example of Gods favor, which uses not to forsake sinners, but to seek their
salvation, that as Paul says: where sin abounded* Romans 5.
there might grace also abound. Whereunto chiefly belongs that saying of
Christ, where he testifyeth, that he came into the world to save sinners. And
there be notable examples of sinners, Math. 9.18. Luke. 9.
whom Christ very bountifully and graciously embraced, amongst which, this
present example is neither least nor last. These things as they serve for our
consolation: so they teach us, that we may not rashly cast of sinners, but
rather comfort and train them, if by any means they may be amended and saved.

The Apostles preach the word of God.
Furthermore, here is noted the argument of their doctrine and preaching, where
it is said, they preached the word of God. And it is certain that in the
word of God all salvation is contained. Wherefore it was not needful to
rehearse all the articles of their doctrine, which may easilye be gathered of
other as well Sermons as Epistles of the Apostles. Let us rather observe this,
that no man's authority ought to be so great in the Church, as to preach what
him lists, seeing that we hear how Paul and Barnabas preached nothing of
their own brain, but the word of God only. For where the Church is the house
of God, in it must the word and voice of God only sound, And it is a point of
sacrilegall boldness, to teach any thing in the Church under pretense of Gods
name, which is not agreeable with the word of God. For the which cause we
read that as well all the Prophets as the Apostles, were bound unto this
commandment, to propone nothing unto the Church, but that they received from
the mouth of God. See* Ezech. 3. Ierem. 1. Math* 28.

They preach in the Synagoge of the Jews.
Thirdly, is declared where they taught, to say in the Sinagoges of the Jews.
For although they were sent unto the Gentyles, yet order was to be observed,
that salvation should first be preached unto the Jews. For so it behooued that
after they through their own default had fallen from salvation, the kingdom
of God should be carried unto the Gentyles, that their fall might serve unto
the salvation of other Nations. Romans 11.
Yea, if we well expende the matter, it shall appear it was not without the
devise of Gods providence, that at that time the Jews should dwell scattered
almost among all Nations. For hereby was offered the Apostles a very good
occasion to preach the Gospel. See Theodorete touching ye providence of God,
in his x. Sermon.
For out of the law and Oracles of the Prophets it was declared, that Jesus
Christ was that Savior of the world that was promised. Which thing when the
Gentyles heard, and perceived that the history of Jesus Christ agreed in all
points with the writings of the Prophets, they began to have a good opinion
of the holy scriptures, which was the first step unto salvation, and thus it
came to pass, that they by true faith embraced that ^auiour that was preached
among them. Therefore the Apostles did very well and wisely to begin their
preaching in the Jews Sinagoges: Let us acknowledge the goodness of God,
through whose benefyte true salvation by preaching of the Gospel is offered to
us also in these days, though we be unworthy in Jesus Christ our Lord, to
whom be praise, honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.lxxxvij. Homely.
WHEN they had gone through the Isle unto Paphos, they found a certain
sorcerer, a false Prophet a Jew, whose name was Bar^esu, which was with the
ruler of the country, one Sergius Paulus a prudent man. The same Ruler called
unto him Barnabas and Saul, and desired to hear the word of God. But Elymas
the sorcerer (for so is his name by interpretation) withstoode them, and sought
to turn away the Ruler from the faith. Then Saul which also is called Paul,
being full of the holy ghost, set his eyes on him, and said: o full of all
subtlety and deceytfulnesse, thou child of the Devil, thou enemy of all
righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the straight ways of the Lord?
And now behold the hand of the Lord is upon thee, and thou shall be blind,
and not see the sun, for a season. And immediately there fell on him a mist
and a darkness, and he went about seeking them that should lead him by the
hand. Then the Ruler when he saw what came to pass, believed, and wondered at
the doctrine of the Lord.
THat sentence of David the King and Prophet, is very notable, where he
prophecieth that Jesus Christ shall rule in the midst of his enemies. Psalm.
110.
For hereby a kingdom is promised unto Christ, but we are therewith also
admonished of the subtlety and tyranny of the Devil, which assaulteth the
same kingdom with continual war. This book declares unto us many and
notable examples hereof. For hitherto it has set out to us those which have
openly encountered with Christ, such as were first the chief heads of
Jerusalem, and then Herod called Agrippa. Yet Christ our king overcame their
enterprises, and they well found that they strove against him in vain. And
Herod because he attempted a bolder enterprise than the rest, bought his
wickedness with* horrible punishment. Yet Satan pulls not back his foot,
but brings into the game place a new Champion for his kingdom, which is
Elymas the sorcerer, if by any means he could by magical sleightes and
conueyaunce, overcame these soldiers of Christ, whom he saw peril of
imprisonment and present death could not subdue. For where Paul and Barnabas
had spredde the light of the Gospel almost throughout Cyprus, and now drew
nigh unto Paphus, a great renoumed City, he sets this sorcerer against
them, by his mean to stop the prosperous course of the Gospel among the
Cypriotes. Yet the Apostles overcome, having Christ to their Captain, whose
glory the more Satan went about to obscure and darken, shined the brighter. The
describing of this contention is diligently to be considered, where Christ
sets his Apostles to wrestle with a famous sorcerer and deceyuer. For
besides that it teaches us always to look to be contended with, it
egregiouslye pa^n^e^h out the (...) and conditions of false Prophets, and
teaches us how we shall (...) against them. But that (...) may receive the
more commodity hereby* we will first consider the occasion of this contention,
then their encou^^^i^ and joining together, and last of all the conclusion.

The occasion of this ^^^^nesse seems to have been the prosperous success of
the gospel in the Isle of Ciprus. The occasion of the contention between
Paul and Elymas the sorcerer.
For where beginning at Salamine, which stands on the sea coast Eastwarde,
the Apostles had gone through the whole Islande, as far as to Paphos
westwarde, so that the fame of this new doctrine by them thus published, came
to the hearing of Sergius Paulus the Proconsull, he sent for the Apostles, and
was desirous to hear them preach the word of God. Whereby it appears,
though he were a Roman, that he was desirous of the truth, and that he
begone already to suspect the Gentyle religion, which perhaps was the cause
that he gave ear to this sorcerer the Jew, hoping that he was able to teach
him the truth. And pricked forward with like desire, he sent for Paul and
Barnabas also, to hear what they taught. But this could not Elymas the
sorcerer abide, who hitherto had been very familiar with the Proconsull: He
therefore diligently watched all means, to withstand the Apostles, as shortly
after we shall hear. Now before we go any further, two things are to be
marked. First that God has some that be his, in all degrees of people, as we
said in the sermon before going. Here is to be added how he uses to call and
save those that be his, when they seem to stand upon the pit of destruction.
For Sergius Paulus, of whom mention is here made, being brought up from his
childhoode in ye religion of the gentiles, had been always used to ydolatrie.
Afterward, although he acknowledged his error, he was encombred with a new
and more hurtful error, while he hitteth upon this Jew a Sorcerer and false
Prophet. Who can say that God had any care of this man, whom he suffers to
be seduced with so many and diverse errors. But that faithful shepehearde
Christ seeks his lost sheep in the mountains and valleys, Luke. 15. John.
10.
yea, and in the sea also, and will not suffer them to be taken out of his
hand. This place therefore teaches us that we must not despair to hastilye
of any man, except he manifestly prove himself to be of the number of the
reprobate. Moreover, Luke declares in this Sergius the example of a good and a
godly magistrate. For both he is very desirous to learn the truth, and also he
ouerhastilye condemns not the Ministers of a doctrine not heard before, but
calling them before him, gives them liberty freely to declare their doctrine:
The Princes of our days should do well to imitate this man, whereof many of
them condemn the doctrine of truth, before they know it, and use cruelly to
punish them, whose faith and religion they are utterly ignorant of. But let
them remember, they shall not be excused through ignorance, considering it is
their parts to do nothing of ignorance, but diligently to search out and
examine all causes.

These things being thus premised, let us now mark how the contention
begins, The meeting together of Paul and Elymas the sorcerer.
where it plainly appears that the Apostles were the beginners hereof. For
where Sergius the Proconsull had sent for them, to learn of them the word of
God, it is like that they made no tariance, but with all speed hasted to set
forth the kingdom of God. And here streyghtway comes forth this Magitian,
and withstandeth them as they preach the word. For he quickly saw that there
was like to be no longer abiding for him with the Proconsull, if he were once
lightened with the knowledge of truth. And although Luke declares not after
what sort he resisted the Apostles, yet because he was a false Prophet and
sorcerer, it may be easily gathered, that he left no ways vnassayde, which
might seem to oppress the truth. And this Contender is diligently to be
considered, that by him we may learn to know all false Prophets. And first
mark his proud name, whereby he challenges to himself a certain Godheade.
For being called after his right name Elymas, he would in the Syrian tongue be
called Bariesu, that is to say, the son of the Savior, The conditions of
false Prophets.
whereby we conjecture that he presumed to promise salvation, to them that
would follow his teaching. He is therefore of the number of those, that Christ
prophesied should come, and challenge to them the majesty of his name. Math.
24.
But it is the property of false Prophets, that if themselves usurp not the
name of God, yet they will have their doctrine called after his name, that
under this pretense they might the easlyer beguile the simple. Thus Zedechias
speaking before Achab of the victory that he should get against the Syrians,
uses that common beginning of the Prophets, Thus says the Lord. The same
may we see in diverse others. Yea, there was yet never false Prophet, but he
went about to get him authority by color of Gods name. Moreover, this he does
according to the usage of all false Prophets, he gets him the friendship
and familiarity of the Proconsull, and cleaves fast unto him, as a most near
companion. For deceyuers use to get them the friendship of great estates, both
for that when they have got them on their sides, other by their example are
the easlyer allured, and also to purchase themself safety by their
authority. For where they know they are destitute of the aid of truth, they
must needs seek for the arm and power of man, whereby to defend themself.
So Baalam in time past, notwithstanding he was admonished to the contrary by
Oracle, went about to get the friendship of Balac king of the Moa^ites. And it
is manifest that the Roman Antichrists have clymed to such power as they
have, being aided with the amity and armor of Princes, yea, the deceyuers and
hooded Iuglers, are so near and at hand about Princes, that they can scarce
let a fart but they must know it. And this is the cause that such teachers
frame their doctrine according to the delicate ears of their hearers, least
they should offend them, upon whom they wholly depend. This was Elymas only
scope and end, to turn the Proconsull from the faith, that he should not
believe that that Paul said. And as all the Ministers of true doctrine
consent herein, to win men unto God by faith in Christ, so all deceyuers
agree herein, to overthrow the faith in Christ, which being overthrown, the
kingdom of God can take no place among men. For Satan knows that his force
is most weakened by true faith, whereof there are examples euerywhere in the
Evangelists.

But let us see how Paul confuted this wicked enchaunter. Paul confuteth
Elymas.
First Luke says he was full of the holy ghost, whereby he means that he was
moved by the spirit somewhat above his ordinary wont, which thing he therefore
declares aforehande, that we might think he did nothing of fleshly affection,
when we shall hear his heavy and intolerable weight of words. In the mean
season we are admonished to fight against the enemies of truth, not with the
blind affection of flesh, but by the conduct and counsel of the holy ghost,
whom undoubtedly they shall find to be their enimye, be they never so well
guarded with worldly power, Then he goes on in his business, fyxing his eyes
fast upon Elymas, which is an argument of a well meaning and unfearful mind.
And verily it becomes us boldly and constantly to resist Antichristians, that
they may think men fear them not. 1. John. 4.
For why should we fear them, seeing he is greater that is on our side. Why
also should they be the more encouraged through our cowardlynesse, who already
are turmoyled with the terrors of their naughty conscience? Thirdly he
painteth him out egregiously in his colors, and joins a special weight and
poyse unto every word. First, o full of all deceytfulnesse says he. He
accuses him therefore of subtlety and craft, as one that sought praise and
authority by sorcery and enchauntment. Secondly, he vpbraydeth him with
naughtynesse of mind, being ready to commit whatsoever wickedness it were.
For what is more naughtye and wicked, than under color of Gods holy name, to
beguile men, which is the chief commendation of false Prophets and sorcerers?
For by this means, they set God at six and seven, as they say, who
threatens that he will not let the profanation of his name go unrevenged.
Thirdly, he calls him the child of the devil, to declare his impudency,
who presumed to call himself the son of the Savior. For that he was a
child of the Devils, both his insolent pride of mind, and earnest study of
naughtiness did abundantly declare. Fourthly, he calls him the enemy of all
righteousness, and that well worthy, forasmuch as he was Christ's adversary,
without whom can be found no righteousness, that is before God acceptable.
Fifthly, thou ceasest not (says he) to pervert the straight ways of the
Lord. In the which words he comprehends two most heinous offenses,
incurable maliciousness, and earnest desire to pervert the word of the Lord.
For his word is simple and pure, and shows unto us a most plain way of
salvation. But through the naughtiness of man, it seems uncertain and
full of perplexity. Last of all, he thundreth against him the heavy sentence
of punishment. And now behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thee, and thou
shall be blind, and not see for a season. Where yet among the terrible thunder
crackes of Gods threats, we see there is hope of salvation left, if he will
repent and turn unto the Lord. For God so uses to reveal his wrath by his
word, that yet he will not have them swallowed up of despair, whom he will
have saved. The chief use of this place is, that we learn what the faithful
Ministers of Christ's Church have to do in these days, where many Elymae are
buzeing in the ears of Kings and Princes, to bring them from the faith, that
they may at their pleasure oppress the ruder sort and the Comminaltie. For we
can judge the Monks and Priests none other, which deceytfully sell their
trifles, under color of Gods holy name, and like the presumpteous Gyauntes
arrogate to themselves power upon heaven, who of set purpose strive against the
righteousness of Christ, and the faith that makes righteous, who impudently
set light the authority of Gods word, and corrupt the same with the traditions
of men, who make the most plain way of salvation most intricate and
vnfyndable, with their infynite mazes of Monkish vows, of orders, of rules, of
merits, of bulls, of pardons, and of cases reserved: who finally not herewith
content, procure Princes to commit slaughter and murder, and to shed
innocent blood. These must be accused with like boldness and liberty, that
men may learn to beware of them, which hitherto have beguiled them with their
stagelike majesty. Neither let us give ear unto them, which in this case
prescribe us rules of modesty and charity, forasmuch as it is evident that
many of them be incurable, and are bent only to defend their usurped
tyranny, be it right, or be it wrong.

Now remains the end and success of this contention, The end and success
of the contencion.
heavy for Elymas the deceyuer, but most joyful for Sergius the Proconsull.
For on Elymas falls by and by the punishment pronounced by Paul, and being
stricken blind, he gropeth for one to lead him by the hand. The like we saw
fall out before to Ananias and Sapphira, whereby it behooves us to learn ye
power of Gods word. The chief thing to be marked in this place is what
remains for false teachers and deceyuers, which dare to withstand the word
of God, either for vauntage or honor. They are made blind for the most part,
if not in body, yet it mind, and the Lord of his just judgment has given
them up into a reprobate sense, so that they are neither able to embrace the
truth, nor yet to forsake and avoid manifest and known errors. Furthermore,
being in Gods judgment defamed, they lose the strength and aid of flesh,
wherein they so much trusted. So is fulfilled that that is written in Zachary.
11. chap. o Idols shepehearde that leaves the flock. The sword shall come
upon his arm, and upon his right eye. His arm shall be clean dried up, and
his right eye shall be sore blinded. And there want not examples of this
judgment in our days, but we want eyes to behold them. And these our Elymae
are so much the more miserable, that being blind, yet they think still they
see, and seek for none to lead them, but contemptuously disdain those which
God offers them. Furthermore, as this contention came to pass
vnprosperouslye for Elymas, so great profit came thereby unto the Proconsull,
whom the Lord by this means delivered out of darkness. For he seeing the
judgment of God, believed, and began to make much of Christ's doctrine. This
is the peculiar property of Gods children, that they acknowledge the
judgments of God, and are amended by others example, 2. Tim. 3.
where the evil and deceyuers wax worse and worse. But in all this story,
this thing is most comfortable, that we see the truth can be vanquished,
neither with open force of Tyrants, nor subtle conueyance of the Devil. For
being pressed and borne down, it rises again, and by striving gathers the
more strength. Therefore let us embrace the truth, and constantly stand by the
author and defender thereof, Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom be praise, honor,
power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.lxxxviij. Homely.
WHEN Paul departed from Paphos, they that were with him, came to Perga in
Pamphilia, and John departed from them, and returned to Jerusalem. But they
wandered through the countries, and came from Perga to Antioch in Pisidia, and
went into the Sinagoge on the Sabbath day, and sat down. And after the
lecture of the law and the Prophets, the Rulers of the Sinagoge sent unto
them, saying: ye men and brethren, if you have any sermon to exhort the people,
say on.
THere appear many and notable tokens of divine power and majesty, in the
works of Jesus Christ, but among them all this is the most notable and evident,
that by ye ministry of the Apostles within few years, he subdued all the
world. For where it is manifest, that they were furnished with no fleshlye
succors, but were the least esteemed of all men, and yet brought to pass
things of such importance: we must needs acknowledge that Gods power wrought
by them, whereby it came to pass, that the world was brought to a new
countenance, and the Gentyles delivered from the errors of their old
superstition, and received the true religion. This is the chief thing that we
have to consider in this present voyage of Paul and Barnabas. For these two
being sent forth by the appointment of God, to preach the Gospel indifferently
to all Nations, they prosperously pass through all impedimentes standing in
their way. And first coming to Cyprus, they subdue unto the kingdom of
Christ, the inhabiters of a most rich Islande, given to all riotousnesse and
worshipping of Venus, and they do not only win unto them the common people,
but Sergius also the Roman Proconsull, whose authority only had been enough
to have resisted them, if it had been man's affairs only they had gone about:
and they lead about Elymas the sorcerer, a chosen instrument of the Devil,
and stricken with horrible blindness in triumph, so that in one conflict it
appears man's force, and the Devils sleightes, were ouercommen both
together. Now let us see how such a prosperous beginning gave a good occasion
to the Apostles, farther to spread the kingdom of Christ.

Pamphilia is lightened with the gospel.
Having gone through Cyprus, they pass from Paphus into Pamphilia, and came
unto Perga, a City of that Region, making a great voyage both by sea and by
land. And there is no doubt but that they caused the doctrine of the Gospel
to shine also over Pamphilia, seeing for that end they took in hand this
voyage. And this is a rare example of Apostolic zeal and industry, that
although they had brought a most famous Island to the knowledge of Christ, yet
they think not now to leave of, as though they had fully accomplished their
duty, but hold on still, and think they are the more bound unto Christ, the
more favorably they see he furthereth their beginnings. So Paul in another
place, having filled all places from Arabia unto Illyricum, with the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, stays not so, but purposes in his mind to go through Italy
and Spain also. Romans 15.
By which examples their slothfulness is reproved, which having yet scarce
begone and given the onset, make holyday, leave of, thinking they have done
very much already, and supposing it neither meet nor right that men should
look for any more at their hands. But it behooves us to continue unto the
end, that we be never weary of doing Christ service, as long as we hope we
may set forth Gods glory, and bring any to the knowledge of salvation.

John Mark fails in the ministerye of the Gospel.
But being occupied in this most holy business and travail, befalls an heavy
case. For while they are busied in training others unto Christ, they lose their
companion and fellow minister, whom they had chosen out of a great number.
This was John surnamed Mark, son to that Mary* to whose house Peter came
when he was escaped out of prison, as has been declared before. This John, as
hereafter shall appear in the.xv. Chapter, being wearied with continual
trauayles and dangers, left them, and returned to Jerusalem, whereby he not
only disapointed them of his help, to whom he ought fast to have cleaued in
that most godly business, but also was the occasion of a bitter contention
that arose afterward between Paul and Barnabas. But because it is said he
returned to Jerusalem, where his mother was: it is like he pretended for his
sloth, the love he ought to his mother being a widow: so that he may be
judged to be of the number of them, whereof in the Gospel he is an example,
which being called of Christ, said, he would first go and bury his father.
The holy ghost sets out such examples to us, not to be followed, but that we
might understand there will be always slidebackes, and heavy calamities that
shall hinder the course of the Gospel. For Satan who desired to syft even the
very Apostles, is not idle. For although he could not pull them clean from
Christ, yet he brought to pass, that they were so feared with his apprehension
and bands, that they all fled from him. So we read in the.vj. of John, that
diverse thousands fell from him at once. And Paul which now sees Mark thus
slip away, complains afterward how Demades embraced this present world,
and when he should be brought before Caesar, how all his friends forsook
him. Let no man therefore be offended at the leuitie and inconstantnesse of
some people now a days, who having profited very well in Christ's religion, by
and by give over. For both Christ and his Apostles prophesied such should come.
In the mean while let these men remember that they grieuoussy sin. For they
forsake Christ his cause, which is a kind of denying him. Beside, they offend
the weaker sort, and give occasion to them that think not well of the Gospel,
and of the Christian faith, to sclaunder it, so that by their mean the name of
Christ is ill spoken of. Furthermore, they make all them that are unknown and
forreners, to suspect them whom otherwise they would succor and relieve.
Finallye, they are authors of division, while they cause other to take part
with them, who ought to join both hearts and hands together, to set forth the
kingdom of Christ. And they offend the more grievously, the more they be of
authority.

But to return to the Apostles, let us learn by their examples what we have
to do, if ye like things come to pass. For, The Apostles go into Pisidia.
do they when they understand of Marks sodeine departure, leave ye office they
are put in charge with? No. But they go through Pamphilia, and passing over the
mount Taurus, come into Pisidia, and to Antioch (which sometime was also called
Caesarea, as Pliny testifyeth) where they preach the Gospel more earnestly
than ever they did before, as the things following shall abundantly declare. We
are by this example admonished, that we must not either for falshoode or sloth
of other, suffer our selves to be plucked from doing our duty. For other
men's faults cannot excuse us, whose falls we must rather eschew than
imitate. And because it is the Lords cause that we stand in, it shall be
easy for him to defend it, though but by a few, and those of no authority
in the worlds sight. Yea, he many times suffers those to fall away, of whom
we hoped for most help, that thereby he might declare, how we should rejoice
but in God alone. Besides this, though we be forsaken of the world, yet be we
not alone. For that that Christ pronounced of himself, must be applied unto
all his members. The time comes (says he) that you shall be scattered every,
one into his own, and shall leave me alone: and yet am I not alone, John. 16.
for the father is with me. Yea he says moreover: I will not leave you
succourlesse. John. 14. Math. 28.
Behold I am with you unto the end of the world. Hereto belongs that
saying of David: when my father and mother forsook me, the Lord took me,
Psalm. 27.
and received me. And these things must not Ministers of the word only
remember, but also Princes and Magistrates. For these also have God for the
author of their vocation, who testifyeth that he is in the midst of them.
Wherefore if they be constant, in setting forth his glory, there is no cause
they should be moved with the terrors of the world, forasmuch as they shall
have God for their protector and revenger. Let private persons think so
likewise, that they be not dismayde at the countenance and look of the world.
For the world shall perish, but the word of the Lord whereupon both our
salvation and vocation is founded, Esaias. 40.
endures for ever.

What the Apostles did in Antioch of Pisidia.
Further, let us see what the Apostles did at Antioch. Upon a Sabbath day they
go into the Sinagoge and sit down. This Luke writes, to show unto us, that
they sought occasion to teach or preach the Gospel. For on the Sabbath days
the Jews used publicly to assemble, to be instructed in the law, and to make
their prayers unto God. Which thing was the cause that not long after, the
Apostles went into the Jews Sinagoge at Salamine also. And there is no doubt*
but they did the like also otherwheres, forasmuch as there was no hope for them
in any other place more commodiously to teach. And they were not deceived. For
when the solemn and accustomed lecture of the law and Prophets was ended,
the Rulers of the Sinagoge supposing them to be no common persons, gave them
leave to speak unto the people. For they send a message to them, saying: ye
men and brethren, if you have any Sermon to exhort the people, say on. And so
Paul begone a singular sermon of Jesus Christ, and the whole mystery of our
salvation, the beginning whereof (God willing) we shall hear to morrow. At
this time we have certain other things to consider, of which we will speak
in order.

First and foremost the Apostles spredde not the doctrine of salvation abroad
in Tauernes, The truth must be preached openly.
among drunken blowbolles, nor yet in corners and woods among the rude and
ignorant people, but they come into a public place, and openly teach the
Gospel. This it appears they did after the example of Christ, who used
himself to go into the Sinagoges, and to teach openly. And when he was
examined by Caiphas, of his doctrine and Disciples, as though he had been an
heretic, he defends himself by this argument only, that he taught openly in
the Sinagoge and in the Church, and was not afraid to abide the judgment of
the whole people, touching his doctrine. John. 18.
Which examples serve to repoorue them, which sow new opinions secretly among
the people, and fly and abhor nothing so much as the light and judgment of
the congregation. This one thing abundantlye proves that they are deceyuers,
seeing that truth desires nothing so much as the light. Where yet we do not
condemn them, which being compassed about with persecutions, exercise the
duties of godly religion in secret, which thing we read was done at Jerusalem
by the faithful in the house of Mary, and otherwheres: so that they be ready
to give an account of their faith, to as many as require the same, and not like
the Anabaptists, by stubborn silence and crafty dissimulation, delude them
that go about to try their faith and doctrine.

Then again it is no superfluous notation of time, where it is said, The
Sabbath days must be kept holy.
they went into the sinagoge on the Sabbath days. For hereby he teaches us,
that they diligently kept the religion of ye Sabbath, which day it is evident,
was dedicated unto God at ye beginning of the world, and was diligently
commended by Moses unto the Israelites. For where we be busied with diverse
occupations, it was necessary that there should be one time appointed, free
from all cares and business, wherein we should give our selves wholly both in
body and soul to the honoring of God. Therefore God appointed the seventh
day to this exercise, which he for this cause called his day, that when that
day comes, we should abstain from all other businesses and exercises. And
he ordained it to be kept so holilye, Number. 15.
that he appointed death for the breakers thereof. And in the Prophets this is
reckoned for one of the most grievous offenses and causes of the captivity of
Babylon, that they did vnhallowe the Sabbothes of the Lord. For the which
cause the son of God, although he many times reprehended the superstitious
keeping of them, yet he diligently observed those things wherein the worship
of God consisted. For on those days he entered into the Sinagoges and was
present at their public assemblies and prayers. Moreover, he taught and
heard others teach, and also used diligently the deeds of liberality. Which
thing the Apostles remembering, they thought good also to follow the example of
their master. But now a days the matter is come to that pass, that among
Christians they may go for the best men, that break the Sabbothes but with
handy works, toward the getting of their living, whereas a great many profane
them with heinous wickedness, nor at any time do men more sin in pride and
arrogancy, in drunkenness, concupiscence and riot, than on that day which
ought to be bestowed wholly in the study of godly works, and eternal rest and
quiet. And notwithstanding these things are openly committed, yet we still
seek what should be the causes of the miseries and wretchedness of our days.

Howbeit, The order of holy metings or assemblies
where the religion of the Sabbath as touching the outward observation,
consists chiefly in the holy assemblyes which Moses calls holy
conuocations. Luke declares diligently what was done in this assembly. First,
the Apostles sat down, no doubt, among the residue that were there gathered
together. This is the duty of modesty and honesty, whereof regard must
always be had euerywhere, but chiefly in the Church, that nothing be done out
of order and dishonestly. Then he makes mention how the law and the
Prophets were read, which was observed among the Jews of a common custom,
as we shall understand a little after by Paul's sermon, and by the words of
James in the.xv. Chapter. For so Moses ordained by the commandment of God,
which custom after their return from Babylon, Esdras restored again, as
appears in Nehemias cap. 8. And Christ used none other custom, when out of
the place of Esaias, he taught the mysteries of our salvation in the Sinagoge at
Nazareth. These things teach us, that in the congregation, Luke. 4.
the word of God comprehended in the Scriptures, ought to be entreated. For
this cause Paul commends unto the Ministers of Churches the study of holy
scripture, because none other voice, than such as speaks in the scripture,
must be heard in Gods house. Therefore their error is enormious and absurd in
that Church which declare unto the simple people most foolish trifles out of
the Legendes of Saints, or else urge and exact man's traditions, wherewith Christ
himself out of the Prophet teaches, Math. 15. Esaias. 29.
that all Gods religion is corrupted. Which thing as it is in these days to
much frequented, ^o if at any time any place be left for the word of God, it is
used to be said or song commonly in a strange tongue, so that no profit can
come to the people thereby. But touching this matter, see Paul's judgment. 1.
Cor. 14. Thirdlye, this also is to be commended, that none of them takes upon
him to speak, before he be lawfully requested. For although of ancient
custom, the interpreters and Prophets, sat next to the Teachers, yet none
impudently intruded himself, so that undesired or without necessity, he
would speak unto the people. Wherefore Paul and Barnabas also, although they
were sent by the holy ghost, yet they think it not good to break so
profitable and ancient a custom of the Church. Therefore the Anabaptists
disorder is not to be suffered, which abuse the place of Paul. 1. Cor. 14*
saying that all men ought to have leave to speak in the Church. For Paul in
that place speaks of those, that had the gift of interpretation and
prophecy, and sat with the teachers, as was even now said. But such as were
no interpreters, he commands to keep silence. And he commands all things
to be done decently and in order. Neither let any man object here unto me,
what I think the Apostles would have done, if no man had given them leave.
For who can doubt but they would then have used the liberty given them of the
spirit? But forasmuch as they might use the same, and not break the custom
of the Church, they must needs have been reprehended, if they would without
cause have broken that custom. Furthermore, this was very well done of the
Antiochians, to give leave unto men unknown and strangers to say their
mind. For they would not quench the spirit, nor despise prophesying, whereof
Paul elsewhere gives warning. 1 Thessalonians. 5. Here is chiefly to be observed,
that they require a sermon of exhortation. For thus they express the end
whereunto all doctrine and preaching in the Church is to be referred, namely
that the Church be not only taught what it ought to do, but may also be
provoked with godly exhortation to do their duty, and so may be builded upon
the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, and may truly close and join
together under Christ their head. And hereto belongs that commendation of
holy scripture, 2. Tim. 3.
which Paul says is profitable to teach, to improoue, to amend, and to
instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect and prepared
unto all good works. These things are to be observed of them, which make
their sermons in the Church for ostentation sake, and are more careful for
their own glory, than for Christ's. Let every man rather learn so to order
all exercises of the Church, that by godly exhortations they may be builded in
true faith, unto the glory of Jesus Christ: to whom be praise, honor, power,
and glory for ever. Amen.

The.lxxxix. Homely.
THEN Paul stood up and beckened with the hand for silence, and said: Men
of Israel, and ye that fear God, give audience. The God of this people chose
our fathers, and exalted the people when they dwelt as strangers in the land
of Egypt, and with an high arm brought he them out of it: and about the time
of forty years, suffered he their manners in the wilderness. And he
destroyed seven Nations in the land of Canaan, and divided their land to them
by lot. And afterward he gave unto them Judges, about the space of four
hundred and fyfty years, until the time of Samuel the Pro^phete. And
afterward they desired a king, and God gave unto them Saul the son of Cis,
a man of the tribe of Benjamin, by the space of forty years*
Now follows it how Luke the Evangelist describes the Sermon which Paul
the Apostle that most chosen vessel made to the Congregation at Antioche: and
this is the first of Paul's sermons that the holy ghost would, should be put in
writing, not that he judged the rest unworthy to be known, but that by this we
might judge of the other, which could not be but like unto this, because the
spirit of God is at all times and places, like unto it self: Howbeit, it is
not without a cause that Luke chose this sermon chiefly of all other, so
diligently to rehearse. For as this one comprehends in it most fully all the
mysteries of Jesus Christ and of our salvation: so when those of Antioch
contemned it, the Apostles did that which we read they very seldom did
before. For shaking the dust of from their feet upon the Jews, they carried
the doctrine of salvation unto others.

Furthermore, The argument and par^s of Paul's sermon.
the argument of the Sermon is the same that Christ commanded the Apostles to
observe. For he labors altogether to bring the Jews from the vain affiance
of the law and ceremonies thereof, unto the faith in Christ. For the better
obteyning whereof he proceeds in most commodious order. For first where he
knew they gloryed much in certain prerogatives, so that they thought it
superfluous, to search or take any other way of salvation, he teaches that
they have nothing of themselves wherein to glory, but that they have received
what so ever good quality is in them of the mere mercy of God, who for the
Messiah sake, which he had promised, did vouchsafe both to save them, and also
to give them those prerogatives. And thereof he gathers that it is necessary
for them to embrace that Messiah, least they fall from the grace of God, and be
deprived of all goodness. This done, he shows that this Jesus is the son
of God, and of Mary the virgin, and that savior and Messiah that was promised,
and here he so reasons of his office, that he briefly comprehends all the
business of our salvation, and confyrmeth the same with evident Oracles of the
old Testament. At length he shows the threats of the Prophets, that as many
as despised the son of God, and the salvation in him offered, might know
that the horrible judgment of God, hanged over their heads. And this is the
sum of all his sermon, which it suffyceth in few words to have touched,
because we entende to speak more at large of every thing in his place. Now
let us come to the treaty of the same.

The beginning of Paul's sermon.
The beginning is short, after the manner of the Apostles, not to be suspected of
any curious artifyciousnesse or conueyaunce. He first holds out or lifts up
his hand, which was a kind of gesture used in the old time to cause men to
keep silence, when others were about to speak, as we shall see in places
following, not so few as one. Then to make them the more attent, he calls
them by such names, as he both knew would get their good will, and also
admonish them of their duty. For first he calls them Israelites, in which
name they greatly rejoiced, not only because of Jacob the Patriarch, which
was first so called, but because therein also were contained manifest promises
of Gods help and protection, as we may see Genesis 32. And he adds: And ye
that fear God, give audience, so plainly thereby admonishing them of their
duty, that they might perceive they were then true Israelites, when they
feared God, and obeyed his word. The brevity of the Apostles beginning,
admonishes us of two things very worthy to be known and considered. The first
is, wherefore those tytles serve, that we use in the beginning, when we
reverently and honorably speak unto the hearers, wherein much is to be
attributed to honor, even by the testimony of Paul, who commands us in
giving honor to go one before another. Romans 12.
Yet must we take diligent heed, that we nourish not the ambicion of arrogant
men, with a flattring tongue and meaning, which are even drunk with the pride
of glorious names. But this rather we must observe, that with meet and
condign names, we admonish them with whom we have to do, of their duty.
Therefore the simplicity of our auncesters and elders is very worthy to be
commended, who being content with the names of their office and duty only,
never knew what these painted and flattering tytles meant. For what will thou
add unto the name of a king? that shall be more honorable or noble than it,
seeing the very name alone conteyneth more in it than any manne is able to
perform? And if thou have to speak unto Christians, what can thou devise
more amiable than the name of brother, or more honorable than the name of
Christian, whereby both the Priestly dignity, and Princely majesty, whereunto
Christ has advanced us, is expressed? But now a days the world is come to
such foolishness, that they are judged rude and rusticall, that stuff not
their orations and writings with counterfeyted and most p^euish and ridiculous
tytles, whereby they make men already not well in their wits, stark staring
mad. How much better did Augustus Caesar, who thought this name Dominus,
Suetonius Tranquillus in the life of Augustus chap. 53.
or Lord, more honorable, than sitting for a mortal man as he was? Secondly,
we are taught what manner of men they should be that will hear the word of
God worthily, and to their profit and utility. First they must be Israelites,
which in the wrestling of temptations, must take fast hold of the word of
God, and not suffer it by any adversity to be taken from them. 1. John. 5.
Therefore is faith required, whereby the Apostle witnesses, we overcome. Then
must they be such as fear God, and tremble with great reverence at his word,
as the Lord admonishes by his Prophet. Esaias. 66. For it cannot be that any
can obey the word of God, but he that has learned to think well of it. For
the which cause when Moses came to talk with God, he was commanded to put of
his shoes, that is to say, all beastly and fleshly affections, whereby the
majesty of God uses to be driven away. Now seeing there be so few such
hearers in these days, for that cause we see the word of God is so much
preached in vain.

But to return unto Paul, he adds to his beginning, The narration.
the narration of an history, wherein the first part of his Oration is ended.
And he takes the beginning of his narration of the fathers, thereby declaring
that he preached neither new God, nor new faith, but the same by the which
the fathers in time past were saved. For he affirms that they had in deed
many singular gifts, but yet nothing but that God of his grace gave them, who
would have the Savior that he promised, borne of their posterity. But
because they which trust in their own worthiness, can hardly acknowledge the
grace of God, Paul uses a diligent rehearsal of Gods benefyts, which both
maintains the grace of god, against the boasters of their merits, and also
contains manifest examples of our whole redemption. Wherefore it shall not be
from Paul's purpose, if we run them all over, and expende such points as
serve for our instruction.

First he touches the fountain of all goodness, which is free election. Free
election or choice.
The God of this people (says he) chose our fathers. He calls him the God
of the people of the Jews, not after the manner of the gentiles, which
appointed to every Nation their peculiar God, but because that God which was
the Lord and governor of all Nations, chose unto him the people of Jews
before all other, by whom he would be known unto all the world. Psa. 76.147
That this election or choice, was of his free mercy, the Scripture teaches
in every place. Joshua. 24.
Uerily Iosue testifyeth that Abraham served strange Gods before he was
called. And Moses does many times inculcate this election, that they might
understand whom to thank for all those benefytes that they had received. And
hereto belong the things which we read in Ezechiel 16. and Amos. 3. and they
take from the Jews all occasion of glorying. Hereby also appears that our
salvation, and whatsoever we have that good is, ought to be referred unto the
grace of God, whereby he did vouchsafe to choose us also, before the
foundations of the world were laid. Ephe. 1.
David therefore does well say: Blessed is the man whom thou have chosen. And
if we have no goodness of our selves, but are chosen of God, Psalm. 65.
what madness is it I pray you, to attribute salvation to our merits or
works, which unless free election go before, cannot please God.

Secondly, The delivery out of Egypt,
he alleges the glory and notable deliuerye of this people out of Egypt. For
when they were Pilgrims and strangers in Egypt, God did marvelously exalt
them, first by Joseph, who being made ruler of Egypt, obtained favor for them,
of the king of that Country. After that being oppressed with tyranny, he
brought them out of the house of bondage into liberty, wi^h an high or mighty
arm, that is to say, by miracles and wonders with great power. And that this
was a free benefyte and goodness, appears in this, that they were pilgrims
and men most abject For what could such deserve? To say nothing in the mean
season how they were polluted and defiled with the superstition of Egypt,
whereby they deserved rather to be kept in bondage still, than to be set at
liberty. These things contain in them a figure of our common redemption, much
agreeing with this present argument. For it is manifest, we are all pilgrims
upon the earth, and have here no continual dwelling place. Such therefore as
we who deserved no possession upon earth, has God lift up into heaven, yea,
he has witsafe to take as his children. He also has delivered us being
oppressed with the deadly tyranny of the devil, with his high arm, that is
to say, by his son, whom Esaye the Prophet cap. 53. calls the arm of
the Lord.

The sufferance of God toward sinners.
Thirdly, he says, God suffered their manners forty years in the wilderness.
Herein is noted a marvelous, and more than fatherly bearing and tenderness,
such as no mortal man would use toward his only son, or servant most
profitable unto him. This thing well appears, if we read the story of Moses.
How often read we, they murmured against Moses, how often rose they
sediciously against him, how often went they about to murder him? But to let
pass the things they did against Moses, what did they not commit against God
himself? They forgate his commandments and made a Calfe, and changed the
glory of God immortal into the similitude of an Ox that eats hay. How
often preferred they the servitude of Egypt, before the benefyte of their
glorious delivery? how often did they tempt the will and power of God? yet God
bare with their incurable malice, although they daily deserved with new
punishments to be destroyed. This might seem a wonderful meekness of God,
if we daily found not the like. For what day or hour passes, in the which
we provoke not the judgment of God against us, either in words, deeds, or
thoughts and wicked desires? Yet the Lord spares us, as though he had not
thunderboltes and diverse other weapons at hand, wherewith to punish and
strike us. Psalm. 103.
For he knows whereof we be made to use the words of ye Prophet) and
remembers that we are but dust. Yet least any man might think he may hereby
sin without check, let us note that this lenity of God served but hereto
only, because he would not destroy the whole Nation, according to their
deserts. In the mean while, he grievously punished them that were incurable,
and would not repent. For none of them entered into the land of promise, but
were overthrown in the wilderness with many plagues, in so much that God
neither spared Aaron nor Moses, because they also had been occasions of offense
unto the people.

The possession of the land of promise.
Fourthly, he rehearses the inheritance of the land of promise, which God gave
by lot to the people of the Jews, having first destroyed seven mighty
Nations. This is at large set forth in the book of Iosue. And Moses diligently
sets forth that benefyte of God, where he says: when the Lord thy God
has brought thee into the land, which he swear unto thy fathers, Deuteronomy. 6.
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and gives thee great and goodlye Cities, which
thou buildedst not, houses full of all manner of goods, which thou fylledst not,
and wells dug which thou diggedst not, vineyardes and Olyue trees which
thou plantedst not. etc. Which words as they marvelously amplify the
liberality of God: so they might cause God to be thought unrighteous and
cruel, unless the causes be well considered, for the which these Nations were
cast out. Moses recites them in other places, where he forbids wandering and
promiscuous lusts, incest, ydolatrie, sorcerie, and enchauntmentes, and such
other curious arts, and adds: Thou shall not do after the manner of this
Nation which I cast out before thee, for all these things have they done,
wherefore I have abhorred them. etc. See Leuit. 20 and.18. Deuteronomy. 18 Therefore
for these offenses these Nations were destroyed, wherewithal when the
Israelites also were defiled, we read that God cast them of also: so that no
man ^an in this case accuse God either of unrighteousness, or of overmuch
severity.

Fifthly, The ordinance of common weal and kingdom
he sets forth the benefyte of a common weal governed by good laws. For
God did not only give unto them the land, but also Judges to govern and
defend them against the tyranny of their enemies. And here is to be marked a
manifest error, which through the negligence of Stationers and Printers has
depraved the numbers. For it is written, that after Moses and the distribution
of the land, the Judges ruled four hundred and fyfty years, whereas by
infallible computation can be gathered but three hundred years only, which
Paul was not ignorant of. For it is evident that from the people of Isreal's
going out of Egypt, until the building of Salomons Temple, 1. Reg. 6.
which began in the fourth year of his reign, were but four hundredth and
four score years. From these take the forty years that Moses led the
people in the wilderness, and the forty years of Samuel and Saul, and as
many of David, with the four years of Salomons reign, and then shall remain
three hundred and six and fyftie years, in the which the Judges governed the
common weal of Israel. In these are declared two arguments of Gods goodness.
For in all that time of the Judges, they deserved not so few times as once to
be destroyed, and yet were still saved. Moreover, when they desired a King,
despising that form of common weal which was the best of all other, given
them of God, God did not set over them any foreign tyrant, but gave them Saul
to be their king, one of their own brethren, and one of the least regarded
Trybes, least the power of the new king should be to great and intolerable
at the beginning. Yea, the Lord took in good part, and did well interpretate
their inconsiderate rashness. For so he brought the kingdom to Judah, Genes.
49.
out ofwhose Princely stock Jacob prophesied that the Messiah should come.
But of this shall be entreated hereafter. At this present, let us consider,
that the institution of a common weal, is to be numbered among the special
benefytes of God. For where men naturally shun to be corrected, and yet
without discipline it is impossible, to lead a quiet and safe life: it is a
work of Gods power and goodness, to have commonweals and Magistrates
ordained, which thing it behooves them to consider, which through Gods gift
enjoy peace and good laws: least while they show themselves unkind toward
God, they cause God to give them Kings in his wrath, as the Prophet testifyeth
he did to the Jews. Hose. 13.
But chiefly let Christians acknowledge their felicity, for whom God has
prepared the fruition of the heavenly kingdom in Jesus Christ, the most
victorious and immortal king, to whom be praise, honor, power, and glory
for ever. Amen.

The.lxxxx. Homely.
AND when he was put down, he set up David to be their King, of whom he
reported, saying: I have found David the son of Iesse, a man after mine own
heart, which shall fulfill all my will. Of this man's seed has God according
as he had promised, brought forth to Israel, a savior, one Jesus, when John
had first preached before his coming the baptism of repentance to Israel.
And when John had fulfilled his course, he said, whom ye think I am, the same
I am not. But behold there comes one after me, whose ^^ooes of his feet I
am not worthy to unloose.
THe Apostle Paul in this Sermon of his, labors altogether to bring the
Jews, from their vain and superstitious trust in the law, to the wholesome
faith of Jesus Christ. But where they so gloried in certain prerogatives,
wherewith God had adourned their Nation, that they thought they had need of
none other Savior, in the first part of his sermon, he beats down this
affiance, and teaches that the fathers had not of their own merit, but of
Gods mere favor, whatsoever goodness was in them, and that for the Messiah
sake, which was to be borne of their stock. And hereof he leaves to every
wise man to consider, that this Messiah ought to be taken hold of and kept by
constant faith, unless they will altogether fall from the grace of God, and
their former dignity. Furthermore, he ends this first part of his Sermon,
with a diligent rehearsal of the old benefytes of God, in every of the which
appears the goodness and bounty of Gods grace, which as it chose the
fathers at the beginning, so he saved them beyond all their deserts, where he
might have oftentimes cast them of, and destroyed them. And he brings the
history unto the time of Saul, who^ for this cause he chiefly makes mention
of that he may the easilier come unto David, whom the Scriptures call the
father of the Messiah that was promised. And in this place he declares how the
kingdom was translated unto David: then by that occasion he takes in hand the
other part of his sermon, wherein he proves that Christ is the Messiah, whose
office and whole work of our redemption he sets out more at large.

The translation of the kingdom of Jury unto David.
The translation of the kingdom makes much for Paul's purpose. For therein
appeared a singular token of Gods goodness, in that he set not a tyrant over
them, which so boldly durst alter the state of their common weal, but when he
was gone, gave them a very good king, the father of the Messiah promised, yea
vouchsafed to turn their follye and rashness otherwise than they deserved, to
their commodity. And that Gods benefyte might the more appear, he recites a
praise of David pronounced by God himself. Howbeit, we have somewhat to say,
both of Saules putting from the kingdom, and of David's placing in his room
(which things it is like Paul discoursed more at large) because they serve
greatly for our information. And first, for that no man shall think that God
delights in transferring of kingdoms from one to another, like a tyrant: the
holy scripture must be perused, which very diligently reherseth the causes why
Saul was rejected. The chief of them was, the proud contempt of Gods word,
which made him more desirous of his own glory, than of Gods. Hereof we have
examples in the first of Samuel cap. 13. and.15. Upon this followed monstrous
and horrible deeds. For he did not only attempt to persecute David whom he
saw God allowed and liked, but also went about to put Ionathas his own son
to death, and murdered the Priests of God most cruelly. Furthermore, he
seeks counsel of a witch, and showed the token of a reprobate mind, even
in the end of his life, by killing himself. This example is very notable,
which all men, but chieflye such as bear rule and office, ought often to
consider, that they may understand how both their own wealth, and the
wealth of their commonweals, depend upon God only, and therefore let them
give ear unto the word of God, let them set forth his glory, and serve him
(as David says) in fear, Psalm. 2.
and reuere^^^y and humbly kiss the son of God Jesus Christ, whom he has
appointed king of kings. But because Kings and Princes count it but a sport
now^ a days in contempt of gods word to turn all vpsetdown, at their
pleasure, no man must marueyle, that they and their kingdoms so miserably
perish. For of Christ it was prophesied: the nation and kingdom that will not
serve thee, shall perish. Esaias. 60.


But let us see David, The praise of David.
whom God adourneth with a notable commendation, which Paul gathers partly
of the.lxxxix. Psalm, and partly of the.xiij. Chapter of the first book of
Samuel, and he adds nothing unto the word of God, but that he calls him the
son of Iesse, who was a Bethlehemyte, and a man of a base and poor estate,
and which got his living by cattle and grasing, as the Scripture declares.
This makes for the setting forth of Gods goodness, who would promote a man
of base degree, and the youngest of all his brethren, to so high a dignity, and
also warns them not to glory overmuch in David, seeing he was so exalted,
through the mere grace of God. And surely if we will credit David himself, he
is content to confess the same. For when he heard the promises of God touching
the Messiah that should be borne of his stock: we read that he cried, what
am I o Lord, or what is my house, 2. Sam. 7.
that thou should so greatly advance me. etc. Moreover, as we said, Saul
was put out of the kingdom because of his great pride, contempt, and
disobedience toward God: so David is commended chiefly for that he fulfilled
all the will of the Lord. Whereof may be gathered a general doctrine, that
they are chiefly allowed of God which frame themselves to do his will. For God
is not delighted in sacrifyces, 1. Sam. 15.
so much as in obedience.

Howbeit, some would ask in this place, How David is said to have fulfilled
all the will of God.
how David did all the will of the Lord, considering he defiled himself with
adultery and manslaughter, and being overcome with pride, took a general
muster of his people, contrary to the will of God. But hereto it may easily be
answered. First, when David heard he should be the father of the savior
promised, he took hold thereof by constant faith, and therefore he could not
displease God, having him in whom God was pleased. Then out of this faith
sprang all those virtues, wherein it is plain, God is delighted. For this
faith made him humble, and greatly to esteem the benefytes of God, as even now
was said. This faith when at any time he fell through infyrmitie, rayred him
up again, and provoked him to repentance. This faith made him to love and
desire the word of God, Psalm. 19.
so that he preferred it before the honye and the honey comb. It was also a
work of faith, that he patiently could abide when he was rebuked by the
word: yea, he declared himself to be obedient to suffer whatsoever was
enjoined him because of his sins. For when he heard that Nathan the Prophet
threatened him with the sword and with civil wars, he did not lightly shake
him of, nor accuse him of sedition, but was contented thus only to answer: I
have sinned against the Lord. And it was not the saying of a sluggish or
lumpish mind, but of one heartily sorrowful, and desiring to have his offenses
forgiven, as we may see in the.lj. Psalm, which he made even at that very
time. And the thing it self declares he nothing dissembled. For when by his
son he was driven out of the City and kingdom, he said unto Zadocke the
Priest which brought him the arc: Carye the Ark of God again into the City.
If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and
show me both it and the Tabernacle thereof. 2. Sam. 15.
But and if the Lord thus say, I have no lust unto thee, behold here I am,
let him do with me, what seems good in his eyes. An argument of like mind
it was, that he did not only patiently suffer Semey railing against him, but
by his authority defended him, that he had no hurt. 2. Sam. 16.
Where God also gave him liberty, of three plagues to choose whether he would,
he answered: I am exceedinglye troubled, let us fall, I pray you into the
hand of the Lord. 2. Sam. 24.
etc. Furthermore, as the Angel struck the people with grievous pestilence,
he said: It is I that have sinned, and I that have done wickedly. But these
sheep what have they done? Let thine hand I pray thee, be against me and my
fathers house. What can be more modest than this mind, what more godly, more
tractable and meek? To say nothing in the mean while of those duties and
loves which he showed toward Saul, so many ways iniurying him. With these
things if a man compare the mind of Saul, boiling in ambition, pride, envy,
hatred, wrath, contempt of God, and outrageous stubbornness, he shall easilye
perceive what difference was between them. These things serve for the
instruction of all men. For they teach us what manner of men they ought to be,
who desire to please God. For if they embrace Jesus Christ with true faith, and
desire to fulfill his commandments, it shall come to pass, that the offenses
they have made through the infyrmitie of the flesh, shall by Christ's merit
be supplied, and if they fall into any sin, by repentance and through guiding
of the spirit, they shall rise up again.

The second part of the Sermon teaching how Jesus is Christ.
Moreover, Paul taking occasion of the story of David, passes to the second
part of his sermon, wherein he declares that Jesus whom the Apostles
preached, is the promised Savior, for whose sake God in times past did so
benefyte the fathers. And because he knew he had to do with the Jews, the
most grievous enemies of Christ, he proves it by many and strong arguments,
of the which there are three contained in this place, which we will in order
treat of.

Jesus is borne of the seed of David, according to ye promise.
The first is, where he says, he shall be borne of that stock, whence the
Prophets said he should come, that is to say, of the seed of David. But it
would be long to recite all the promises, yea, superfluous, considering they
were so common and rise, that the Messiah was commonly called the son of
David. Yet if any man desire more, let him read the things written, 2. Sam.
7. Psalm. 132. Esaias. 11. Ierem. 23. etc. That Christ was borne of the seed of
David touching his manhood, Mathewe and Luke prove by a diligent Genealogy
or Pedigree. And here we have to mark, that he says, this Savior was raised
up according to the promise. This part teaches us that he was given unto us
also, according to the mere grace of God, and that it is to be attributed to
no merits of man, that God has sent his son to be our Savior. For that the
promise was made of favor, David himself confesses, as erewhile we saw. And
if any man attribute this unto David's modesty, he shall be convinced by the
promise that we read was made to our first fathers, who had deserved death,
Genes. 3.
and fled away to hyde themselves from God. And Christ himself truly
refers all this salvation to the grace of God, where he says John. 3. So
God loved the world that he gave his only begotten son. etc. Which words the
Apostle expounds and writes: Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that
he loved us. etc. 1. John. 4.
Here also appears the infallible truth of God, which must be extended to all
promises, that we may herein fet fyrme comfort in all kind of temptations.
For he that would not deceive us, when his sons death lay upon it, how
should he in other things deceive us?

The second argument is, Jesus had a forerunner, as was foreshewed.
that he says he shall come in such sort and wise, as the Prophets
prophesied the promised Messiah should come. For he had a forerunner, such as
is described. Esaias. 40. Malach. 3. and.4. Chapters. That was John which
preached the baptism of repentance, whereby he prepared the minds of men duly
to receive Christ. Mark the Evangelist uses the same argument, where he
writes, the Gospel of Jesus Christ began, as it was foretold by the
Prophets. In the mean season it is worthy to be observed, that it was
necessary to have a forerunner, who by repentance, which he declared both by
preaching and sacraments, should prepare a people unto Christ. This proves
the corruption of our nature, whereby it commes to pass, that we cannot
attain to salvation, except we be wholye changed and regenerated.
Furthermore, it confuteth them which think that Christ's doctrine is the seed
of licentious living, seeing none comes unto him but he that is worthily
prepared by true repentance. But because we have already often entreated
hereof, and have fresh occasion still offered to speak of the same, it shall
suffyse briefly thus to have noted it.

The third argument he takes of testimony. The testimony of John Baptist
concerning Christ.
For he alleges the testimony of John, not for that Christ's cause
consists or stays upon man's testimony, but for that John was of such
authority among the Jews, that he was commonly taken for a Prophet, as may
be seen Matthew. 21. and in Josephus which says, that the death of John was
cause of the overthrow that Aretes gave unto Herod. Josephus in his.xviij.
book of antiquities cap. and Eusebius Caesariens. reports the same out of
him in ye first book of his ecclesiastical history and xiij. chap.
In which sense Christ in another place uses his testimony John. 5. This man
(says Paul) where some thought he was the Messiah, to put the people out of
all suspicion, says: whom think you that I am? I am not Christ, for behold,
there comes one after me. etc. These things are more at large declared in
John. 1. Luc. 3. and Math. 3* Chapters. Herein is declared what the property
of the people is in their judgments of Gods servants. For either they
attribute to much unto them, or utterly contemn them, for mean is there
none. For they that at first thought John was the Messiah, suffered him not
long after to be the pray of a most cruel tyrant. Example whereof we shall see
in those of Lystra in the next Chapter. John teaches us by his example, what
trustynesse the godly ought to use in setting forth the glory of Christ. For
they dandle not the dullness and folly of the people, thereby to have
themselves the more magnifyed: but that Christ may have his whole glory, they
use to abase themselves, and to think themselves the woorst of all other. Yea,
they think their glory consists in this, if by their mean Jesus Christ may
euerywhere be glorified. And if John which was the holiest man that ever was
borne of a woman, be no body in comparison of Christ, who then perceyueth not
that the whole praise of our redemption is to be ascribed to Christ alone? The
example of Peter and John have declared the same, whereof was spoken in the
third and tenth Chapters. It is our duty to trust in Christ only, and to
acknowledge him to be the Savior that was promised in the beginning: to whom
be praise, honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.lxxxxj. Homely.
YE men and brethren, children of the generation of Abraham, and whosoever
among you fears God, to you is this word of salvation sent. For the
inhabiters of Jerusalem and their rulers, because they knew him not, nor yet
the voices of the Prophets, which are read every Sabbath day, they have
fulfilled them in condemning him. And when they found no cause of death in
him, yet desired they Pylate to kill him. And when they had fulfilled all that
were written of him, they took him down from the tree, and put him in a
sepulcher, but God raised him again from death the third day, and he was
seen many days of them, which came up with him from Galiley to Jerusalem,
which are his witnesses unto the people.
THat that all the Scripture both of the old and new Testament with one
consent declares, that same in this sermon Paul both plainly and constantly
teaches, namely, that Jesus Christ is the only redeemer and savior of
mankind, in whom alone we have blessing, righteousness, salvation, and life.
But because he had to do with the Jews, whom he knew still withstoode
Christ with great obstinacy, therefore he handles this cause with great
gravity. And first he proposes three arguments to prove the same, unto these
he adioyneth other which he so puts forth, that therewithal he also
answers those objections which might pull the hearers from embracing the
faith in Christ. For first he testifyeth that Christ pertayneth unto them,
least any man might think he spoke of a matter pertaining nothing to ye
purpose. Then he puts the offense away that men might take, because Christ
suffered on the cross. And last of all, he alleges and constantlye proves
the resurrection of Christ, which is the chief argument of his godheade. We
shall speak of each of them in order, as much as God shall permit us.

Ye men and brethren (says he) children of the generation of Abraham, and
whosoever among you fears God, The Gospel ought first to be preached to the
Jews
to you is the word of this salvation sent. This is a grave little preface,
wherewith he means to provoke them to think that the doctrine of Christ
belongs unto them. For it is like there were diverse in those days, which
thought it unsitting for their profession, to have ought to do with
controversies rising about faith and religion, such as are now a days
euerywhere to be seen, who by this opinion go about to purchase to themselves
great praise and glory. But Paul denies this, and that he might ye more
easily persuade them the truth, he calls them by a worshipful name and
title. For besides that, after the common usage he calls them Men and
brethren, he adds thereunto, children of the generation of Abraham: in which
name by reason of the covenant and promises of God, he knew they greatly
rejoiced. Yet that they should not think the prerogative of the Nation
sufficient, he admonishes them also of their duty, where he says: and
whosoever among you fears God. For by this means he teaches them, that they
are then the true and right children of Abraham, that join unto outward
profession, the fear of God and sincere study of religion, whereof Christ also
in the.viij. of John disputes. Then he proceeds, saying: To you is the word
of this salvation sent. As though he should say: If you will be taken for the
children of Abraham, and the sincere worshippers of God, you must by no means
despise the doctrine of salvation, which is offered unto you, by the singular
benefyte of God. Yet Paul speaks not this in such meaning, as though he
thought the Gentyles still excluded from the fellowship of salvation, whom the
holy ghost had appointed him to call. But he has a respect unto the counsel
of God, who as he set forth the promises of Christ unto the fathers of the
Jews, and called them out from others, as a peculiar people unto himself: so
would he first have the salvation given us in Christ, preached unto them, as
Christ in the Gospel evidently testifyeth, when he first sent out the
Apostles, Math. 10.
forbidding them to go into the way of the Gentyles. But when the veil whereby
the Gentyles were divided from the Jews, was removed away by the death of
Christ, then also was the door opened unto them, that being made the children
of Abraham by faith, they might enter into the same inheritance of salvation
with the Jews. Therefore Paul admonishes the Jews of the prerogative that
God did give them, least they should unadvisedly reject the knowledge of
Christ, as nothing appertaining unto them. And this example of Paul ought all
Ministers of the word to follow, remembering that they must so preach the
word of God, that the hearers must understand how the things spoken do
belong unto them. For except they so do, the word of God shall strike their
ear, like a song whose sound is in vain, as we read in Ezechiel
the.xxxiij. Chapter. So therefore let them inculcate the commandments of
God, that all men may be assured that the observation thereof belongs unto
them. So let them preach the judgments of God, that they that commit the like,
may know they have to look for the like. For then is the word of God rightly
divided and cut, when every body may learn thereby to take what serves either
for their instruction, consolation, or erudition. Furthermore, it is a singular
praise of the Gospel, that it is called the word of salvation, in the which
sense the Angel spoke unto Cornelius, as we before saw: Simon Peter shall
speak words unto thee, through which thou and thy house shall be saved. etc.
Let it suffyce here to admonish thus much: that their ingratitude is very
enormious, which rail at that word, and that they are the greatest enemies of
their own salvation of all other.

From hence Paul comes to the slander of the cross, He answers the
slander taken by the cross.
which he diligently puts away, because they yt were ignorant of Christ's
mysteries, were offended with Christ's death, not without a great cause. And
chiefly it seemed an heinous matter, that the Priests at Jerusalem were the
authors thereof. For Jerusalem was the sea of religion, priesthood, and
doctrine, and from thence, according to ancient Prophecies, Esaias. 2.
was the word of salvation looked. Wherefore it could not choose but seem a
great absurdity to acknowledge him for a Savior, whom the chief of
Jerusalem put to the death of the Cross, as a schismatike and a deceyuer, and
to embrace that doctrine that was not received at Jerusalem. For such was the
authority of the holy City (for so the Prophets called Jerusalem) that many
thought it impossible for them to err in matters of faith and religion. But
Paul so answers this offense, that he teaches the example of that City,
is rather to be avoided than to be followed, least they might offend God through
like ingratitude and impiety. And there be four things which he brings to
this end.

The priests were ignorant of Christ and the scriptures
First he says: they that dwelt at Jerusalem, and their Rulers, because they
knew him not, condemned him. Therefore he says ignorance was the cause of
their so heinous an offense, as also is said. 1. Cor* 2. Who will think it a
thing worthy to be followed, when he hears men sin of ignorance? And yet
this is not to be counted such ignorance, as excuses the deed. For they are
said also to be ignorant of the scriptures, yea, of those common Scriptures,
which used to be read every Sabbath day. But it is a foul thing, and not
worthy to be pardoned, for a Priest to be ignorant in the Scripture, Mala. 2.
considering God commands to search the knowledge of the law at his hand.
Furthermore, he takes from them a great part of their excuse, John. 5.
in that Christ admonished them to search the scriptures. But Paul in another
place says, that this was the only cause of their ignorance, for that they
were occupied in reading Moses and the Prophets, without the help of Christ.
For this was that veil, that was the only cause that they could not see Moses
face, 2. Cor. 3.
that is to say, the true meaning of the law. Seeing therefore they were blind
guides (as Christ also calls them Math. 15.) they are not to be followed. We
are here taught, that we must not always cleave to the judgments and examples
of notable men, but rather try and examine all things after the rule of the
Scripture, before we imitate them. For if they were so fowly deceived, which had
the greatest dignity among the people of God by his appointment, what shall we
hope of others? They are also confuted, which when we bring forth the word of
God, bring us the examples of Princes and great estates. For the question is
not what men do, but what is done, according or contrary to the word of God.
Moreover, we are taught that the reading of the Scripture never so much
preuayleth not, if we well understand not the meaning of the Scripture. Moses
and the Prophets were read of ordinary among the Jews in all their sinagoges.
But whereas they were deceived in the affiance of their own righteousness,
they knew not the end of ye law, which was Jesus Christ and being ignorant
thereof, they fulfilled the Scriptures, presumptuously putting him to death,
whom Moses and the Prophets did prophecy should be their savior. We see ye
same has come to pass these many years in the papacy or Popedom. The
unlearned Monks and Priests read and sing the holy scriptures. Yet Christ
whom the scriptures teach, is despised of a great many: and Antichrist is
worshipped and glorified, whom the scriptures with one consent warn us to
beware of. And other cause of so fylthy an error is there none, than for that
men being puffed up with a Iewishe affiance of their own works, are not able
to see the righteousness of Christ while they go about to set up their own
righteousness. See Romans 10.

The Priests fulfilled the scripture^*
Secondly, he alleges the authority of Gods providence, declaring that for
this cause no man ought to be offended at the death of Christ, because he
suffered nothing, but that the Prophets, to whom the holy ghost long before
revealed the counsayles and ordinance of God, prophesied he should suffer.
Wherefore the Priests when they understood not the scripture, yet they
fulfilled them, in that they presumed to condemn and put Christ to death. And
it is no doubt but Paul in this place, brought forth the oracles of the
Scripture, which are extant euerywhere touching Christ's passion. In that he
says the Prophecies were fulfilled by the wicked enemies of Christ, we learn
that the very wicked also are the instruments of God, by whom oftentimes he
uses to bring his ordinances and devises to pass. And yet they are not
therefore to be excused, because they do that that God will have to b^ done.
For where they like Bedlems rage in impiety against God, and go about to
hinder, and not to set forward his ordinances, they are in the fault, and God
is to be praised and glorified, which can moderate and order their audacitie
and boldness so well. Also his invincible power and infallible verity
appears in these examples. For if his devises take effect through the mean
of his very enemies also, then must they needs stand fast for ever. Therefore
they whose infyrmitie is feared with the cruel devises of the Princes of this
world, let them seek comfort hereat.

But whereas it might notwithstanding be objected that it was scarce credible,
that God would appoint him to be our Savior, Christ was put to the death of
the cross innocently.
who was made away by so slanderous a death, and such as was cursed even by
the law: therefore in the third part he proves he was innocent and
guiltless, and shows that his kind of death must not be so much considred,
as his cause: when they found by him (says he) no cause of death, yet desired
they Pylate to kill him. These things might have been declared more at large,
as it is like Paul did, because he spoke unto them which suspected all
Christ's doing. Let it suffyse us to hold fast the scope and end of Paul,
that is, how no man ought to be offended at Christ's death, which he suffered
being an innocent, forasmuch as many times the holiest men of all, use to be
put to death, both unworthily and unjustly. Also the true use of Christ's
innocence must be well weighed which consists in the purgation or clensing
of our sins. For if Christ had not been free and clear of all sins, he
could never have been able to have satisfied for our sins. For how can he
make others clean, that is himself unclean? Or how should one being
indebted himself, pay other men's debtes? Therefore it behooued Christ
should be innocent, that we might know how he who had deserved no death for
his part suffered death for us. Esaias makes mention hereof, where he expounds
the mystery of our redemption, cap. 53. And hereto belongs that saying of
Paul: God made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, 2. Cor. 5.
that we by his means should be the righteousness which before God is
allowed. And this is the chief cause why the Evangelists be so earnest in
setting forth the innocence of Christ. Then if none ought to be offended with
Christ's death, because he suffered innocently, Romans 8. 2. Tim. 2.
by the same reason the unworthy and unjust slaughters of the Saints ought to
offend no body, whereby they are made partakers of Christ's cross, to the end
to be glorified with him.

Fourthly, The Priests enterprises could not hurt Christ.
least any man should think that Christ was overcome by the force or power
of his enemies, and therefore should deny that he were a savior or revenger,
he teaches that he received no loss or harm, by the wicked enterprises of
the Priests. They performed all the things which were prophesied of him,
while they killed him on the Cross, and pierced his side with a spear, and at
length took him down from the cross and laid him in a sepulcher. But for all
this he was of never the less power or glory. For God (as he foreshewed)
raised him up from death, so that now he lives for ever, in a glorified
body, where they enuyed him this miserable and corruptible life. But let it
here offend no man, that Christ's burial is permitted to his wicked enemies,
the honor whereof the Evangelists ascribe to his faithful disciples Joseph
and Nichodemus. For Paul here speaks how they were not contented with his
ordinary burial, but caused the grauestone to be sealed with Pylates signet,
and got soldiers to watch him, and forceably to keep him down in his
grave, thinking that they of their own power had killed him upon the cross,
and were ignorant that he laid down his life of his own voluntary. John. 10.
This diligent description of his burial, makes for the more certainty and
truth of his resurrection. For thus it appears there could be no frawde or
deceyt in the matter, and that it was a false rumor that the Priests caused
to be raised by the soldiers, being well bribed with money, that his
Disciples came and stole away his body. In the mean season we may take a
general comfort hereof, that the enemies of Christ fight against him in vain.
The same may also be applied to his members. They have many and cruel enemies.
Yet howsoever they rage they have no power upon the bodies, no not so much as
upon the hear of the faithful, unless God permit it. Yea, although they have
power to take away our lives, yet have they no power to take away the glorious
resurrection of our bodies, nor the fruition of heavenly life, which Christ
has prepared for those that be his. Let us therefore in times of persecution
comfort our selves oftentimes with these meditations.

The resurrection of Christ is proved.
Moreover, where Paul is come to the resurrection of Jesus Christ, he makes a
diligent assertion and proof of the same, because thereby the divine Majesty
of Christ is most evidently of all others declared, and in the same, (as says
the same Apostle. 1. Cor. 15.) consists the chief hope of our redemption and
salvation. And for because he knew many denied the same, therefore he
alleges diverse witnesses thereof. He was seen (says he) many days of them
which came with him from Galyley to Jerusalem, who are his witnesses unto the
people. He speaks of those which the Euaungelistes say accompanied Christ, in
his last journey, of whom it appears there was no small number, Luc. 10.
because Christ appointed seventy of them to prepare the way for him by
preaching. What if we think that they were of those five hundred, 1. Cor. 15.
unto whom Paul says, Christ appeared after his resurrection. Uerily,
whosoever they were, their faith is worthy to be praised, in that they were
bold, to bear Christ witness against so many of his enemies. And he
produces these men before the Apostles, not that their dignity so deserved,
but because their credit was less suspected with the Infidelles, and for that
they should not think, but Christ had more witnesses of his resurrection,
than the Apostles. Then straight way he alleges the testimony of the
Apostles with great gravity, whereunto he also joins the Oracles of the
Prophets, whereof shall be spoken in the Sermon following. In the mean while it
becomes us to acknowledge the goodness and truth of God, which would have
the things wherein our salvation chiefly consists, so certain and
undoubted. Let us therefore embrace our savior with constant faith, who rose
again from death, conquered the tyranny of death, has restored us to the
liberty of the sons of God, which is the only begotten son of God, Jesus
Christ, the true and euerlyuing God: to whom be praise, honor, power, and
glory for ever. Amen.

The.lxxxxij. Homely.
AND we declare unto you, how that the promise which was made unto the fathers,
God has fulfilled unto their children, even unto us, in that he raised up
Jesus again, even as it is written in the first Psalm: Thou art my son,
this day have I begotten thee. As concerning that he raised him up from death,
now no more to return to corruption, he said on this wise: The holy promyses
made to David, will I give faithfully to you. Wherefore he says also in an
other place. Thou shall not suffer thine holy one to see corruption, for David
after he had in his time fulfilled the will of God, fell on sleep, and was
laid unto his fathers, and saw corruption. But he whom God raised again,
saw no corruption.
Paul in the second part of his Sermon which he made in the Synagoge at
Antioche, teaches that Jesus whom the Apostles preached, was the true son
of god, and that savior of mankind, that was promised, for whose sake God so
benifyted the fathers. Because of the Jews, he handles this matter very
grauelye, and proves with firm and strong arguments, that which he goes
about to teach. For he declares both the stock of Jesus Christ, and the manner
of his co mming, is agreeable with the Oracles of the old Prophets. Then he
alleges the testimony of John, who was of such authority with the Jews,
that it was not lawful to speak against him. But where he knew the cross of
Christ was their greatest stumbling stock, he shows that the Prophets
foretold thereof, and that it was no derogation to Christ, because he rose
again from death, despite of his enemies. Moreover, when he comes to speak
of the resurrection, he defends the same most diligently, and at large, both
because the same is a most evident argument of Jesus Christ's true divinity,
and also because the chief hope of our resurrection depends thereon. And
first because it should not seem that none knew and testified hereof but the
Apostles, he produces Galyleyans for witnesses, who also saw Christ, after he
was risen again from death. And now he joins to their testimony, the
Oracles of the Prophets and Apostles. The testimony of the Apostles
concerning christ and his resurrection.


He alleges the testimony of the Apostles, speaking as in the name of all
the Apostles. We preach unto you (says he) the promise made unto the fathers,
ho^ God has performed the same unto their children, that is to say, to us, in
that he raised up Jesus again. etc. And no man must take such a grave saying
of the Apostle, as insolent and arrogant, both because Paul uses it, and
Christ ordained the Apostles to be his witnesses, and also for that he and
Barnabas took this present embassage in hand by the special commandment of
the holy ghost, as was declared in the beginning of the chapter. Therefore he
sets forth the commandments of the Apostleship committed unto him plainly
and with worthy gravity, whereof this is the sum, how God gave unto their
posterity all that before times he promised unto the fathers. After which
sense and meaning, in the second Epistle to the Corinthians the first chapter,
he says: for all the promises of God by Jesus Christ are yea, and are in him.
Amen, that is to say, are by him fulfilled. So that it appears they are
greatly deceived which glory in the promises and grace of God, and yet reject
Christ, in whom only they are ratifyed unto us. For whatsoever things
appertain to the salvation of mankind, they are given unto us in him. For in
him is that righteousness, 1. Cor. 1. John. 1. John. 14.8. Romans 8.
which defends us before the judgment seat of God. He is made unto us of
God wisdom, satisfaction, redemption, and sanctification. In him is life. He
is the way, the truth, and the light. In him is given us the spirit of
adoption, by whom we cry Abba, father. By him we are made heirs and partakers
of the kingdom of heaven, as he says himself: I appoint unto you a kingdom,
as my father has appointed unto me. etc. Again: Luke. 22.
Father I will that they which thou have given me, be with me, where I am.
John. 17.
And although these things for the most part were accomplished upon the altar
of the cross, even when Christ being ready to yield up the ghost, said, it
is finished: yet in his resurrection chiefly appears the effect of them. For
thereby, he testifyeth that the sting of death is made blunt and broken, 1.
Cor. 15.
and that therefore death is spoiled and disarmed as Paul teaches at large.
Therefore the Apostle now makes mention of them, after he had begun to
speak of the resurrection. But here are certain things diligently to be
observed, before we go from this place.

First we preach (says he) the promise made unto the fathers. Ergo, the
Apostles are Authors of no new and strange doctrine, The doctrine of ye
Apostles is not new.
but teach that way of salvation, which was once promised by God unto the
fathers. For this cause Christ alleges the testimonies of Moses and of the
Prophets. John. 5. Luc. 24.
And Peter heretofore said, that all the Prophets bare witness of Christ. By
these is proved the worthiness of our faith, and the certainty of our
salvation gotten by Christ. Moreover, here appears ye difference between us
and the fathers of the old Testament. That salvation was promised unto them,
which is performed to us in Christ. They also looked for the fulfylling of
that which we believe is fulfilled. Furthermore, they had certain figures and
tokens of their redemption to come, whereby to exercise and feed their faith:
But God has prepared for us sacraments and seals of our redemption and
salvation, which are accomplished and finished. Math. 13.
To conclude, our eyes see, and our ears hear that which the holy fathers in
times past greatly desired to see and hear. As these things confirm our
faith: so they ought to stir up our minds to be thankful, that we seem not
ungrateful to despise the salvation given us, the hope and expectation
whereof, kept the fathers in times passed, in all kind of dutifulness, The
truth of Gods promises.
in the middle of all their adversities.

Furthermore, the truth and infallible trust of Gods promises, may herein be
seen. For he so perfourmeth the promises made to the fathers unto their
children, that he rather would have his son live poorly and not regarded in
this world, and at length to suffer shameful death, than to break his promise.
Where also other circumstaunces are to be considered of us, all which, it
appears to agree with the promises of God, and the Oracles of the Prophets.
For at the time promised, Dani 2. Gene 49. Gene. 3. Esa. 7. Mich. 5.
the son of God came to take flesh upon him, when now the fourth Monarchy
flourished, and when the Scepter was taken from Judah. He was also borne of a
woman, his mother yet remaining a Uirgin. The place where he was borne was
Bethleem, foreshewed by the oracle of the Prophet. The miracles wrought by him,
were such as Esaias said should be done in his kingdom. cap. 53. As touching
his death and passion, resurrection and ascension, what needs to speak,
seeing that in them is fulfilled according to the letter, all the things which
are red. Psalm. 22.41.68. Is. 53.63. Of the effect of these things, which God
sometime promised by his Prophets, we spoke before. It is truly therefore
said of Paul, that God has performed whatsoever things were in times past
promised to the fathers. Here ought we to fet arguments of consolation in our
temptations, that we doubt not of Gods promise in perfourming of his help and
favor, who we hear has so faithfully performed those things, which could
not be performed, but by his son, sent into the world, and into the
darkness of death.

But let us return unto Paul, which confirms by the Oracles of the
Prophets, that which he spoke of Christ with so great authority. The
testimonies of the Prophets, of Christ, and his resurrection. Psalm. 2.
Amongst which the chief place is attributed to David, who in the first Psalm
(which now a days is counted the second) he says prophesied of Christ. And
he brings one verse of the Psalm only, yet so as he calls to their
remembrance the whole Psalm, which though some go about to expound of David,
yet in deed it contains a manifest prophecy of ye kingdom of Christ,
forasmuch as diverse things therein can by no means be applied unto David. For
the Prophet by suggestion of the spirit, shows that Christ shall have many
and cruel enemies, desirous to overthrow his kingdom, and to pull down all
his authority, but their enterprises shall be in vain, because Christ shall
overcome them all. The cause of all which he alleges to be Gods decree,
saying: Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee. Ask of me, and I
will give thee the Gentyles for thine enheritance. Paul expounds this place
of Christ's resurrection, because that hereby God openly declared him to be his
son, even when his wicked enemies chiefly conspired against him. For not long
before he heard those blasphemous words: If thou be the son of God, come
down from the cross. If he be the king of Israel, let him now come down from
the Cross, and we will believe him. etc. Yea, being compassed about with the
cruel terrors of death, he cried out: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? And shortly after he was so closed in his grave, that Pylate the Roman
President in the Emperors name and authority sealed the grave stone with his
ring, and set soldiers to watch it, that he should not rise again: who
would then have thought he had been the son of God, upon whom the wicked had
such authority? But even the same day God begat him, that is to say, declared
him to be his son, whom yet otherwise he begat from everlasting, and yet
now seems he to forsake him and cast him of. For when his wicked enemies
said: If thou be the son of God, come down from the cross: he would not
have him come down, but did that that was more in raising him up again from
death, so that by their own words he condemned them for wicked, and showed in
deed that Jesus Christ is his son. The resurrection declares the glory of
the sons of God.
We have furthermore to consider that the holy ghost proves the kingdom of
Christ, and his divine majesty, chiefly by his resurrection. For Paul in
another place, speaking of Christ, says: who was declared to be the son of
God with power, according to the spirit that sanctifies, Romans 1.
in that that he rose again from death. For when death was overcome, it
appeared unto all men, that the Devil also, which was the Lord of death was
overcome, which victory was not a work of man's power, but of Gods majesty.
This thing must also be extended unto Christ's members. For where both he that
sanctifyeth, and he that is sanctified, are all one, our glory also which is
due to the children of God, shall appear at length in our resurrection. We
cry now also Abba father, and carye the pledge of salvation in our hearts,
which is the holy ghost, and be even now the children of God, but yet it
appears not what we shall be. 1. John. 3.
But we know that when Christ appears at the later day, we shall be like
unto him. This is the cause that Christ calls that day the regeneration Math.
19. not because we are then first made ye children of God, but for that they
that seem in this world to be forsaken of God, and enuyed, shall at that day
be declared to be the children of God, See Wisdom. 5 Let us herewith comfort
our self in adversity against the unjust judgment that the world has of
us, and casting away the desire of earthly glory, let us aspire to the glory
to come, which is heavenly.

The place of Esaias. 55.
Secondly, he produces Esaias, by whom God speaking amongst other things, of the
benefytes that he would give us in Christ, says: I will make an everlasting
covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. Furthermore, Paul following
the common translation of the Greeks, expounds this word mercy, by this word
holy, and not unaptly, because he means Christ, upon whom only depend all ye
promises of God, made in times past to David and to the fathers. This therefore
is the sense: I will give unto you that holy one, that is to say, that savior,
which I sometime promised unto David, and in whom he put all his hope and
trust. He applies ye whole place to ye resurrection of Christ, taking his
argument of the perpetuity of the covenant, as though he should say. God made
an everlasting covenant with David, and promised that the same should remain
for ever unto his posterity. And it is certain that that covenant is grounded
upon Christ, whom the Scriptures euerywhere call the son of David. Ergo,
Christ also must be eternal and immortal. For the covenant could not be
eternal, unless he also were eternal and incorruptible, in whom the same is
made, and which is the only mediator thereof. It follows therefore that it
was necessary, that Christ should rise again from the dead, and being raised
again, should after that suffer no more corruption. Here by the way it is to
be observed, Christ is but once only offered.
how Christ must die but once. And then it follows, that he must be but once
offered for sin, forasmuch as without shedding of blood, there is no
forgiveness of sin. See how copiously Paul handles this matter. Heb. 9.
and.10. Whereby the sacrifyce of the Mass is so overthrown, that it is
marueyle how there should be any among Christians so void of shame that can
go about to stablish and defend it.

The third testimony he alleges out of the.xvj. Psalm, The place of
the.xvi. psalm.
which we see Peter also used in his first sermon at Jerusalem, and even in the
same sort and wise. Also he proves that that place cannot be understood of
David, but only of Christ. For thus he reasons. David says: Thou shall not
suffer thine holy one to see corruption. But it is manifest that David fynished
the course of his life after the manner of other men, and after he had ended his
life, fell on sleep, and mouldred to dust. Therefore David speaks not of
himself, but of Christ, which he knew should be borne of his stock. For
before he suffered corruption, he rose again the third day in his glorious
body. So Paul in few words comprehends all the mysteries of Christ, and
shows that it is he, of whom the Prophets euerywhere have spoken.
Furthermore, before we make an end, The state of the dead.
let us observe the phrase of speech where he says that David after he had
served his age or time. This thing teaches us both our duty, and condition,
and state, admonishing us that mutual charity is required of us, as long as
we live in this world, but after we are taken out of this life, that we are
quitte of all duties toward all men, and that from thenceforth there is no
more required at our hands. Ergo, the dead have nothing to do with the
living, so that it is truly said of the saints in the Prophet: Abraham
knows us not, Esaias. 63.
and Israel is ignorant of us. By this invocation and intercession to saints
is confuted, whose felicity cannot be perfyte, if they should be troubled
with our miseries and adversity. Also the appearing of spirits and souls are
reproved, whereby they that forged and invented the fire of Purgatory have
hitherto gotten great gain. The consideration of death
Then also Paul so describes the death of David, that by the same may be
seen the state of every one of us in death. For first he says he fell on
sleep by the will of God. Then our death hangs not upon the uncertain
hazardes of fortune, or upon the will of man, but upon Gods counsel and
determination, Math. 10.
who as he has the hears of our heads numbered: so has he also the number of
our days. And this one thing is sufficient to comfort us against the dangers
and terrors of death. That done, he says he fell on sleep. Christ also
calls death sleep, because we being rid of all the sorrows and griefs of
life by death, Apoc. 14.
rest from our labors in hope of the resurrection to come. Thirdly, he says,
he was laid unto his fathers, which kind of speech in the Scripture is used
very often, and teaches us that there are certain places appointed for the
souls of the dead, whereof Christ also makes mention in the Parable of the
rich glutton and Lazarus. For the souls of the godly are laid with the
blessed, Luc. 16.
whose resting place the scripture sometime calls the bosom of Abraham.
Contrariwise, the souls of the wicked, Ezech. 32. Esaias. 14.
and of as many as have put men in fear in the land of the living, go unto
hell.

Last of all, David saw corruption. For this is the immutable sentence of God,
that we which took our beginning of dust, should be turned into dust again,
and so is it requisite for the order of our salvation. For this corruptible
must put on incorruptibility, 1. Cor. 15.
and this mortal must put on immortality, because flesh and blood cannot
inherit the kingdom of heaven. Therefore we have a great hope in our
corruption, which we know is the beginning of our regeneration and
resurrection to come. And that this was the only hope of the Saints, Iobes
words in his.xix. Chapter manifestly declare. Let us therefore comfort our
self with the same, and not fear death, seeing that we shall be made like
unto Jesus Christ the son of God: to whom be praise, honor, power, and glory
for ever. Amen.

The.lxxxxiij. Homely.
BE it known unto you therefore ye men and brethren, that through this man is
preached unto you the forgiveness of sins, and that by him all that believe,
are justified from all things, from which you could not be justified by the
law of Moses. Beware therefore, least that fall on you, which is spoken of in
the Prophets. Behold you despysers, and wonder, and perish ye. For I do a
work in your days, which you shall not believe, though a man declare it you.
AFter the Apostle Paul had diligently and plainly declared, that Jesus
Christ was the very son of God, and that savior that was once promised unto
mankind, and had also removed out of the way, all those impedimentes that
might hinder the Jews from the embracing of Christ, now at length he
concludes his sermon, which consists in two points. For first he shows
what benefytes are given us in Christ, meaning thereby to inflame the minds of
his hearers with the desire of true faith. Next he lays the horrible
judgment of God before their eyes, in that he uses to revenge the contempt of
his son, and of his word, upon them that hold on in their incurablenesse
and unbelief.

The knowledge of christ is necessary to the attainment of salvation.
The first he concludes with great weight of words, saying: Be it known unto
you therefore, ye men and brethren, that through this Jesus, whom I have
hitherto preached, is the forgiveness of sins declared unto you. And it is
not without a cause that he thus begins, saying: Be it known unto you. For
by this means he thought to make them the more attent, and diligently to
consider that which was to follow. And hereby he teaches us that it is
necessary and convenient that as many men as desire to be saved should know
Christ. For Christ himself teaches us, that the chief point of our salvation
consists in the knowledge of him, where he says: This is life everlasting
(o father) that men should know thee, the only true God, John. 17.
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Then also where it is the peculiar
counsel of God, that the knowledge of Christ through the preaching of the
Gospel should be published over all the world, they that despise this
knowledge of salvation offered unto us by God, must needs be judged wicked
and ungrateful contemners of Gods goodness. They are by this place confuted
that say, matters of religion belong not unto them, and are wilfully ignorant,
and deceived in their salvation. Using commonly to abuse Christ's words, where
he says: The servant that knows his masters will and does it not, Luke. 17.
shall be beaten with many stripes. So that they think they shall be excused
before the judgment seat of God, so long as they be utterly ignorant in the
mysteries of faith and salvation. But they ought also to think that it is
unmeet and not convenient that they which will be called and taken for the
servants of God, should be ignorant of their masters will, and refuse to
learn it. It is Gods will that householders should declare his commandments
and works unto their family: and shall we think to be excused, if we
wittingly be ignorant of that which God reuealeth unto us both by writing and
plain teaching? Why do we not rather harken what Christ says, that they
which are borne of God, John. 8.
refuse not to hear the word of God? And James sends them which lack
wisdom unto prayer, to obtain it of the father of lights. And we want not
examples both of David, and other holy men, Jacob. 1.
who were most desirous to obtain this heavenly wisdom. See Psalm. 25.119.
etc.

But let us return unto Paul, Remission of sins is given us in Christ.
which comprehends in a few of words, the sum of all Gods benefytes given
us in Christ, saying: Through this man is preached unto you remission of
sins. For in forgiveness of sins, is understood all those things that
appertain to our salvation. For it is evident that God is offended with us
because of sin, and that for sins sake we be excluded from the grace,
spirit, and kingdom of God. Whereby again is gathered, that God must needs be
merciful unto them, whose sins are forgiven and taken away: Ergo, he gives
them his spirit, wherewith being regenerate and made his children, they become
inheritors of the kingdom of heaven. Let us note how Paul in this brief
sentence, does most fully teach the true knowledge of salvation, which if it be
divided into certain points and articles, shall most easilye be perceived and
understood. The first of them is, All men are sinners.
that we should understand we be sinners, and stand grievously detbounden
unto God: which hereby appears for that the scriptures euerywhere make
mention of forgiveness of sins. The scriptures likewise eueriwhere accuse us
of sin, and teach us that we be of nature corrupt. Moses from the mouth of
God declares that the inventions and devises of man's heart are naught, even
from his childehode. Gene. 8.
He sets the law before us, as it were a glass, wherein the flesh may
behold her corruption, which otherwise uses to flatter her self. In the
book of Iobe it is written that none borne of a woman is clean. David
confesses that he was conceived and borne in sin. Psalm. 51.
Solomon writes that the just man falls seven times a day. And in Esaias the
Prophet, the faithful confess that our righteousnesses by reason of the
contagiousnesse of sin and the flesh cleaving unto us, are like an arrayed
and fylthy clowte. Esaias. 64.
And Christ admonishes us of the same, where he teaches us to pray, forgive
us our trespasses. For that prayer were superfluous, if we were not laden with
grievous sins. Sins are forgiven of grace and favor
Now it must needs be that this foundation must lie in the knowledge of
salvation, because man can have no care thereof, unless he first understand he
is utterly lost and corrupted. But we have need also of another thing, that
is, to understand how we be freely forgiven. For where through sin we have
deserved eternal death, and have no spark of goodness of our self, and all
that good which we seem to do, is corrupt and imperfect: it must needs be
that this remission and forgiveness must come of favor and grace. The Parable
in the.xviij. of Matthew teaches us the same. And we profess this remission or
forgiveness, among the articles of our faith, where we say, we believe the
forgiveness of sins, and we allege nor make mention of no satisfaction that
depends upon our works. Thirdly, Grace is given us in Christ.
it behooves that we know for whose sake this grace is bestowed on us. The
same is Jesus Christ only and alone, in whom the father is well pleased,
because he has taken our sins upon him, and has pourged them on the
aultare of the Cross, by the merit of his blood: insomuch that otherwheres
he says, he is made to us of God the father, 1. Cor. 1. 2. Cor. 5.
righteousness, satisfaction and sanctifycation, yea, and a sacrifyce for
sin, that we by his means might be made righteous. John the Baptist taught
us the same where he says that Christ is the lamb of God, John 1.
that takes away the sins of the world. Fourthlye, we must hold fast the
means whereby Christ is made ours, Christ is taken hold of by faith.
which Paul plainelye teaches us, where he says, forgiveness of sins is
preached to us through Christ. For hereby is gathered that he is received by
faith, because there is none other mean whereby the word preached may be
taken hold of, yet he expresses the same more plainly in the words that
follow, saying: By him every one that believes is justified. Whereunto all
the things written of faith in any place of the scripture, are to be referred,
but specially that that Christ commanded his Disciples at his last departure
from them. For in Luke.xxiiij. he commands repentance and forgiveness of
sins to be preached in his name. And in another place, whosoever believes,
and is baptized, shall be saved. And all that that Paul prosecuteth at large
in ye Epistles to the Romans, Galathians, Ephesians, and to diverse other, he
comprehends in this brief sentence, whereof if a man list to see yet any more
compendious and short sum, let him hear this saying of Paul: All have
sinned, and are destitute of the glory of God, but are justified freely by his
grace, Romans 3.
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, through faith, by the means of
his blood. etc.

And forbicause Paul knew that the Jews, with whom he had to do, The law
can not iustifye.
did ascribe iustifycation to the law, and to the works thereof, and that
this was the chief stumbling block of their faith and salvation: therefore he
preuenteth their objection, saying: By him all that believe are justified from
all things, from which you could not be justified by the law of Moses In
which words comparing the law with Christ, he so challenges the praise and
glory of our iustifycation to him, that therewithal he testifyeth the same can
by no means be attributed to the law. For the law (says he could not
iustifye us from all (to say) sins, from which yet all they are delivered,
which take hold of Christ by true faith. And yet Paul is not to be accused of
rashness, as though he went about over impudently to infringe the authority
of the law. For it shall appear that he truly so said, if we diligently
consider the law. The law may be comprehended in two parts, whereof the one
consists in virtues or good works, the other in ceremonies. In the first we
include moral and political precepts, a short abridgement whereof, we have in
the Decaloge or tables of the commandments. And if we look in the same, it
shall appear what God requires of us, what we owe unto him, what to our
neighbor, and finally what to our selves. And our infyrmitie and corruption
shall also appear, through the deprauation whereof, we do not only disobey
the law of God, but also are unable to obey the same. For what man is there in
all the world, that is able to bring his mind and all the affections of his
flesh to the obedience of faith, as God requires? For what else is the law
but a glass, wherein is bewrayed the corruption of our nature, and our sins,
as well secret as open, brought unto light? And if we come unto Ceremonies, by
the which the Jews in time past measured their righteousness, it shall
appear that they also are vain, and that we be rather accused thereby, than
justified or relieved. For what other thing does the Circumcision made in our
privy member teach us, but that the beginning of our generation, is corrupt,
and that we have need of regeneration? What do the daily and yearly
sacrifyces, the sprinklings of blood, the often washings, the rytes of
expiation and purifying, what other thing did they teach us, but that we have
need of purifycation and clensing? But did true purifycation consist in them?
No truly. For the Lord by his Prophet cries out, that their hands which were
most occupied in the exercise thereof, were all to embrued with blood. Esaias. 1.
Psalm. 50.
And in another place: Think thou that I will eat Bulls flesh, or drink
the blood of Gotes? And David troubled in conscience for his most heinous
deed, says: Thou desire no sacrifyce, else would I give it thee, but thou
delightest not in burnt offerings. etc. Nay, having a respect to the blood
and merit of the Messiah that was promised, he prays saying: wash me
thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sins. Thou shall purge
me with I soap, and I shall be clean: wash thou me, Psalm. 51.
and I shall be whiter than snow. Deliver me from bloudguiltynesse, o God,
thou that art the God of my health. etc. Hereof it seems Paul took that
saying of his: The blood of Bullokes and Goats cannot take away sin. Hebr.
10.
So that Paul in this place says most truly, that the law cannot iustifye
us. And yet for all this he contemns not the law, The use of the law.
or makes God the author of a thing superfluous and unprofitable. For his
honor remains safe unto him, while herein consisted only certain godly
exercises of faith, and while the law was (as Paul otherwhere says) a tutor
and bringer of them which diligently marked the end thereof unto Christ.
Galat. 3.


It is very worthy to be diligently observed, Righteousness of works is
overthrown.
that Paul says we be justified from all our sins through faith in Jesus
Christ, which was impossible by the law to be performed. For thus saying, he
does not only overthrow the affiance which the Jews had in the works and
ceremonies of the law, but also all manner of Popery, and the whole Popedom,
which is the greatest enemy that can be found against the righteousness of
God, and the salvation which is offered us in Christ. They marvelously glory
in Christ their savior, but they egregiously euacuate his deserts, while they
teach that through his merit original sin only, and the sins committed
before baptism, are purged, but all other sins through our own
satisfactions. And these satisfactions for the most part consist in the
inventions of men's traditions, as in observing of appointed fastes, in holy
days, in lyings on the ground, in cowles, in pilgrimages, in purchasing of
pardons, and such like try^^es. Thus they reprove Paul of lying, which says
we be delivered from all our sins, through the faith we have in Christ. They
reprove Christ of lying, which out of the Prophet teaches that God the
father is in vain worshipped with the traditions of men, and cal^eth us
unprofitable servants, Math. 15. Luke. 17.
although we could do all that is commanded us in the law. Let us therefore
fyrmely hold fast this sentence of Paul, which as it attributes to Christ
alone, all ye whole mean of our salvation: so is it sufficient to confute all
kind of sects and heresies. And he is no true Christian, that follows not
the same, and steadfastly cleaves not unto Christ only, acknowledging him for
his savior and redeemer, putting his trust in him, and worshipping him in
spirit and in truth. For it is impossible that they can please God, which dare
despise the son of God, and prefer their works before his merit. Uerily,
Paul as he preaches Christ alone in this place, so in other places he
confesses he knows nothing but him only, 1. Cor. 2. Galat. 6.
and thinks it to be a most heinous offense, if any body would trust or
glory in any other thing.

The conclusion of Paul's sermon.
Furthermore, to make an end of preaching with the Apostle, it remains for us
to consider his conclusion, which contains in it a grievous and very horrible
commination, the cause whereof was (as may seem) for that he perceived in the
hearers, evident tokens of obstinacy and unbelief. For it is not credible
that such a spirit as the Apostle had, could without a cause so be moved. For
he says: Beware that that fall not on you which is spoken of in the Prophets.
etc. Therefore he so threatens them with punishment, that yet he leaves a
place for hope of pardon, while he warns them to beware least. etc. He
brings the Oracle of the Prophet out of Abacuc the first Chapter, which by
comparison or collation, he applies to the matter present. For it is evident
this Prophet preached in the reign of Manasses, what time both ydolatrie and
all kind of vice reigned, under that wicked and cruel king. For it is
reported that he brought Jury into error, and the Citizens of Jerusalem, so
that they exceeded the Gentyles in naughtynesse, whom God before that had
destroyed. Besides this, he greatly contemned the word of God, and passing all
measure hated the truth, against the which he was so inflamed, that he filled
the whole City with the blood of Innocents. And yet they puffed up in the
confydence of Gods covenant, of their forefathers, of the temple, and
ceremonies, thought they might without check thus do, and those that
admonished them to do otherwise, or threatened them with the judgment of God,
they wickedlye scoffed at. Therefore Abacuc then prophesied the coming of the
Chaldeyes, which he said should overthrow the City and Temple, and should
carye all the people away, a thing which they thought was impossible to be
done. Hereunto Paul having a respect, seems to say: you know what befell
unto your forefathers, when they despised the sayings of the Prophets. They
saw the destruction both of the City and Temple, neither could that proud
name of the people of God, and trust in their ceremonies, deliver them from the
punishment at hand. For although it would seem incredible unto you, if a man
would say, that God would destroy your nation: yet I say, there are greater
and more horrible punishments prepared for you. For the kingdom of God shall
be taken from you, and you shall be forsaken, and that salvation that was
promised to your forefathers, shall be conveyed unto the Gentyles.

Unto the Gospel must be joined threats and declaration of punishments.
This example of Paul teaches us, that the word of salvation must so be
preached, that the judgment of God must also be laid before the eyes of those
that despise it and be unfaithful. Therefore they are not to be heard that
say, such preaching is not fytte for the myldenesse of the Gospel, and
unseemly for charity. For so Christ taught his Apostles, when he said it
should be easier for those of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment,
than for those which refused to hear them. Yea, himself thundreth out that
horrible (woe) unto those unthankful Cities of Bethsaida, Math. 11. Luke. 19.
Corozaim, and Capernaum. Does he not also threaten Jerusalem with besieging,
with the sword, with famine, and with destruction. Mat. 23.24.
This the frowardness of man's nature partlye requires, which sometime must
be brought under by threats, and partly the duty of a pastor or shepehearde,
whom it becomes like a watchman to give warning of the sword hanging over
the peoples heads, that though they be incurable, yet he may deliver his own
soul, Ezech. 3.33.
that the blood of them that perish be not required at his hands. This place
also teaches us, that there is no sin more grievous than the contempt of
Gods word, Contempt of Gods word word is a most grievous sin.
forasmuch as God uses to punish no sin more grievously. For whatsoever
sins else a man commits, might after a sort, be ascribed to man's
infyrmitie, by reason whereof sometime, even the best men that be, do fall.
But if a man join unto licentious life, contempt of Gods word, that is a
token of a deuilishe and incurable wickedness. Which was the cause that God
always most severely revenged the same. It is known what came to pass in the
beginning unto the world for despising Noah the preacher of righteousness. The
like felt Pharao, Saul, Achab, Manasses, and all the people of Israel, being
led into Assyria. Yet were these things but a pastime and fleabyting to that
that afterward came to the Jews for rejecting of Christ, whereof to discourse
any further, the time will not suffer us. In the mean season it is necessary
to tell you this one thing, that in the Jews is set out to us, and to all
ages, an example, whereby we are taught that no man shall escape unpunished,
that is so bold as to contemn the doctrine of Christ. For he that spared not
the natural branches, Romans 11.
will much less spare the impes and graffes set in that stock, if they be
barren. Which thing we see the Churches of Asia and Greece has many days
since proved, which being once founded by the Apostles, are now divided from
Christ, and bear the horrible yoke of Mahomets impiety. And would to God we
saw not in these days the preambles of calamity to come, in a great many,
which to much disdainefully loathe the salvation of the Gospel. Let us therefore
apply to our selves that which Paul says in this place, and embracing the
doctrine of the Gospel with constant faith, and thankful minds, let us give
our selves wholly to Jesus Christ our Savior and redeemer: to whom be praise,
honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.lxxxxiiij. Homely.
WHEN the Jews were gone out of the congregation, the Gentyles besought, that
they would preach the word to them the next Sabbath. When the Congregation was
broken up, many of the Jews and virtuous Proselytes followed Paul and
Barnabas, which spoke to them, and exhorted them to continue in the grace of
God. And the next Sabbath day came almost the whole City together to hear the
word of God. But when the Jews saw the people, they were full of
indignation, and spoke against those things which were spoken of Paul,
speaking against it, and railing on it. Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold,
and said: It was mee^e that the word of God should first have been preached
unto you. But seeing you put it from you, and think your selves unworthy of
everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentyles. For so has the Lord
commanded us. I have made thee a light of the Gentyles, that thou be the
salvation unto the end of the world.
THat saying of God uttered in this wise by the Prophet Esaye. 55. concerning
his word, is very notable and comfortable: Like as the rain and snow comes
down from heaven, and returns not thither again, but watreth the earth, and
makes it fruitful and green: So the word also that comes out of my
mouth, shall not turn again void unto me, but shall accomplish my will, and
prosper in the thing whereto I send it. For although there be many that
wickedly repel it, yet has God always his chosen, in whom it uses to bring
forth fruit. An evident example whereof we have at this present. For after
that Luke has reported Paul's sermon, he shows also how he had diverse kind
of hearers, whereof some we must imitate, and other some for their wickedness
and boldness, we must diligently eschew. And in these diverse hearers, we see
the word also to have a diverse effect. For to some it is the savor of life
unto life, and to other some the savor of death unto death, as Paul himself
bears witness, in the last Epistle to the Corinthians. cap. 2.

Reprobates cannot abide to hear the word of god.
Paul begins with those which heard the Gospel preached without any
fruit, that is to say, the Jews, who went out (says he) of the Sinagoge,
before the congregation brake up. And this they did for none other cause, but
for that they could not abide to hear the doctrine of Christ, as shall
appear by that that follows, where it is written how they made much ado
and striving against the Apostles. For as they that are borne of God, John.
8.10.
hear the word of Christ, and know by and by the voice of their shepehearde,
so the reprobates and children of this world, hate that voice as evil as a
Tode, and can not be brought willinglye to seek it: and if at any time they
seem to hear it otherwise than they looked for, or against their will, then
they turn their heads from it, and get them out of the place where such
noise sounds. This is an evident token of incurable malice, as we read David
also noted, comparing them to a deaf Adder, which will in wonderful wise
stop his ears, because he will not hear the voice of the charmer. Psalm. 58.
And although sometime they pretend they do it for modesty: yet it is always the
beginning of a greater impiety. For they which at the first do but a little
loathe the word of God, and refuse to hear it, if they shall more stronglye be
urged there with, then without all reason they rage against it. The Scripture
shows us examples in Pharao, Saul, Achab, and many others, which to rehearse
would be superfluous, forasmuch as we shall streightway hear how stowtly and
impiously these men bend themselves against the doctrine of salvation.

The elect acknowledge the word of God and receive it.
Now against these men Paul sets other, which worthily embraced the
Apostles doctrine, who Luke says, were partly Gentyles, and partly Proselytes.
And that these Proselytes were the more apt to receive Christ, it is evident,
for that they had not that proud affiance in their own worthynesse that
hindered the Jews from the faith in Christ, A Proselyte, was any stranger or
forreuer born that did convert or turn unto the Jews religion.
as Paul otherwheres teaches. Although among these were also some Jews,
because God did not so utterly cast of that Nation, but that he reserved
certain remnantes to be saved. Moreover, as in the first sort we may see the
manners of the reprobate, so in these other sorts the property of the elect and
children of God, does notablye appear. Which therefore is the more diligently
to be considered, because by them we may see what is wanting in our selves, and
what we ought to do. First, they desire the Apostles, Esaias. 1.10. Romans 10.
that they will the next Sabbath day preach to them again the same doctrine of
salvation. Ergo, they love the word of God, and they are not weary of it,
because by the secret suggestion of the holy ghost, they perceive the voice of
their heavenly father sounds in the same. Then when the Church brake up, they
followed the Apostles, and openly acknowledge them for teachers of the truth
and their salvation, who yet they knew were hated of a great number. Then they
are not ashamed of the word of God before men, and they prefer the grace of
Christ before the friendship of the world. These are the principles and
rudimentes of true religion, wherein who so well exercise themselves, shall at
length bring forth fruits of faith and salvation not to be repented of. By
these may we judge of the manners of our days. For a great many now a days
despise the word, and think nothing so void of true wisdom, as for a man
to take advise of the word of God concerning his doings and sayings. And
though we no way else declare the same, yet we abundantly testifye it, by this
one token, in that we be not only ashamed of the Ministers, but also hate
them, abhor them, fly from them, rail at them, and every way injury them,
as the public enemies of salvation, and authors of all evil. And yet (on Gods
name) we brag egregiously of our faith and zeal toward Christ and his
Gospel. But God is not beguiled with vain words, nor delighted with any
kind of religion, but such as has truth joined therewith.

But what say the Apostles hereunto? In religion, perseverance or holding on
is needful.
They exhort them to continue in the grace of God For they knew well that
saying of Christ: No man that lays his hand to the plough, and looks
back, is worthy of the kingdom of God. Again, He that abides to the end,
shall be safe. And because they had good experience of man's infyrmitie, they
knew that exhortation was needful for them, for that they had but newlye
laid the first foundation of their faith and salvation. For many times it
comes to pass, that they which have begone well, being either afraid of
danger, or carried away and maystred of their affections, fall away again and
swerve. Therefore we must note the example of the Apostles, that we think not
faithful admonitions superfluous, without the which, faith and the knowledge
of salvation are very seldom retained.

In the mean season it is very worthy the noting, The Gospel is called the
grace of God.
how they which persevere in the Gospel, are said to continue in the grace of
God. For by the Gospel is the grace of God offered us. And Christ says that
that peace that the Gospel preaches shall dwell in that house, Math. 10.
Luke. 10.
where the children of peace be, who are such as embrace with true faith the
peace and grace of God. Whereupon we gather again, that all they which refuse
the Gospel, which is the only message of that grace, do fall from the grace
of God. And hereof follows all kind of evil, so that they are the most
unworthy people in the world, which forsake Christ for the worlds sake. This
appears by the example of the Jews, whom the contempt of the Gospel
brought to that miserable state that they have lived in, now more than.xv.
hundredth years. Therefore let us think that said unto us, that the Apostles
said to these men in this place, and let us embrace the Gospel, and persevere
in the same, that we may likewise enjoy the undoubted grace of God, and his
assured help in all adversities.

The contention of the Apostles with the Jews.
Howbeit, Luke adioyneth to these premises, a grievous contention, following
this prosperous success of the Gospel, whereby we are taught that the kingdom
of Christ in this world begins never so prosperously, but that some storms
of persecution are ready for them which go about to set forth the same. For
the saying of Christ fails not: If they have heard my voice, John. 15.
they will hear yours also. And where this world commonly hates the light of
the truth, the more they perceive the same shines, the more they use to rage
and be mad. Therefore no man ought to think it a strange thing, if the like
fall out in our days, and that we see troubles arise among them, to whom the
Gospel at the first is preached. For Paul and Barnabas the faithful Apostles
of Christ do here find the same to be true. For the next Sabbath day, when
almost all the City was gathered together to hear the word of God, the Jews
beholding such a great company ready to embrace the kingdom of Christ, were
filled with disdain, and first began to speak against Paul, and at length
fell to flat blasphemy and railing. And because this contention went so
far, that the Apostles were ^aine to shake of the dust of their feet against
them (a thing which we read very seldom done by them) therefore it behooves
us to expende the circumstances of the whole history the more diligently.

First, Luke teaches us what the cause was of such a tumult and business. The
occasion of the contention.
Uerily, for that the Jews saw the whole City almost came together to hear
the word of God. Howbeit, it was evident enough that they all came not of a
godly intent and purpose. For otherwise they would never have suffered the
Jews, a people hated of all Nations, to have entreated the Apostles so
ungently. Wherefore although the desire of truth drew some thither (as was
aforesaid) yet the greater part were moved of vain curiosity. Which thing
although the Apostles might easily have supposed, yet would they not let pass
so commodious an occasion, but are pressed and ready to teach them. Whereby we
learn that they which will fruitefully be occupied in setting forth the
kingdom of God have need of a fervent study and zeal, and that they must let
no opportunity escape, be it in season or out of season, Phil. 1.2. Tim. 4.
as Paul elsewhere admonishes. Christ teaches us the same by his own
ensample, which takes occasion of every thing to teach by, and did so little
refuse any one that came unto him, that he rejected not Nicodemus coming to
him in the night season, nor the woman of Samaria, given to dishonest gain and
advantage. John. 4.
Yea, he says, this is his meat, to do that whereunto his father sent him.
Hereby is their sloth improoued, which being often called on, will not teach,
and have more regard of their own ease, than of men's salvation.

Then next the cause of the tumult is declared, which was the envy of the
Jews, The cause of the contention.
seeing such a great throng of people. They seem to be moved partlye with
ambition and envy, while they are afraid to lose their private honor and
glory (which thing Christ obiecteth unto them, John. 5.) and partly with a
preposterous zeal of the law, whereby they were led to take in evil part,
that the uncircumcised Gentyles should be matched with them in salvation,
which thing was cause that Paul was much troubled, as we shall see when we
come to the places. In the mean while, this place teaches us, that all kind
of zeal is not allowable before God, and that they which of zeal and good
intent impugn the truth, are not streightway to be pardoned. For Paul
otherwhiles attributes a zeal of God unto the Jews, yet he condemns them,
in that they are not zealous for the glory of God, according unto knowledge.
Romans 10.
We must therefore beware that no evil affection rule in us, and that we sin
not of ignorance in Gods will, which must be the only rule of all our doings.
Number. 15.


Thirdlye, The sleightes and weapons of the Jews.
here is declared what the Jews the Apostles adversaries did, which went out
before the congregation was broken up, because they would not hear the word
and because they feared they should lose their glory, they speak against them
also, and strive against the truth by arguments. And seeing they cannot that
way prevail, they turn unto railing, whereby no doubt they depraved both the
doctrine and persons of the Apostles, to make the simple people suspect their
doctrine, and envy them. Such are the crafts of the wicked which even now a
days also they practice: and they of whom men look for arguments and
scriptures, they think by their talk so to prevail, that they will rail,
and often times open their wicked mouth against the name and word of God. Also
this place teaches us, whereunto hatred of the truth brings men at the
length, when they will continue in the same. For it makes them blasphemers,
open enemies, and impudent raylers, who yet at the beginning seemed good men
and tolerable. Let men therefore stop at the beginning, and use to acquaint
their ears with the truth, if they mean not to hold on still in
stubbornness.

But did the Apostles give place to this stowtnesse of the Jews? No. The
Apostles stoutly and boldlye resist.
But with greater courage and boldness of speech resisted them. For so must
the Ministers of the word be furnished, that they must not only teach the
truth, but also be able to withstand the gainesayers. Titus. 1.
And it is unmeet that they that are the Ministers of Christ should yield
unto the enterprises of the world. Hereunto appertain the examples of the
Prophets, who we read were always the constanter, the more bold they saw
the enemies of Gods word were. See what is said of Micheas in the first book
of the Kings, and.xxij. Chapter, and of Jeremy, and others in every place.
And it seems that Christ admonished the Apostles of dangers to come, for
none other cause so much, as for that they should not be discouraged with the
boldness of their enemies, nor be offended at them. These things must we
remember in these days, where Antichrists band is so whote in assaulting the
truth. Let us think that now our constancy and stoutness is chiefly
requisite, faithfully to defend the Churches quarrel being in hazard.

And the Apostles saying is diligently to be considered, The Apostles
excommunicate the incurable.
where they with grave and godly weight of words, pronounce the horrible
sentence of excommunication, against these incurable persons. For what more
hope was there to be had of such as they saw had clymed up to the top of
impiety, and first had stopped their ears against the word of God, and after
that had spoken against it, and at length were become blasphemers of it? But
chiefly the Apostles charge them with unthankfulness and incredulity, which
was the cause of their punishment, saying: it was meet the word of God
should first be preached unto you, whom God did vouchsafe to adorn with the
covenant, the promises, and kindred of his son. But you make your selves
unworthy of such grace, while through your incurable malice you despise the
salvation offered unto you. What other thing therefore remains, but that we
turn unto the Gentyles, and gather God a Church out from among them, which
hitherto have been strangers from the covenant and Testaments? For so must
that saying of Christ be fulylled: The kingdom of God shall be taken from you,
and given unto a Nation which shall bring forth the fruits thereof. Math. 21.
In these things it is very diligently to be considered, Math. 10.
how these unbelieving perish through their own judgment, unto whom Christ
is preached for a testimony. Furthermore, how notwithstanding man's
incredulity and unthankfulness, Gods word is nothing prejudiced or
hindered. For God is able of stones to raise up children unto Abraham, which
shall embrace Christ with true faith, as we see comes to pass in the
vocation of the Gentyles. For they whose hearts were harder than stones, being
mollifyed with the spirit and word of God, came with great cheerfulness
unto the kingdom of Christ.

Howbeit, because the Apostles would seem to do nothing rashlye, and of
their own heads, The place of Esaias. 4 9. touching the vocation of the
Gentyles.
they allege the Oracle of God out of the.xlix. Chapter of Esaias, whereby they
teach that God long ago decreed, that the Gentyles also should know how
they had salvation in Christ, and that the same should no longer be deferred,
seeing the Jews, unto whom the same was first to be preached, despised it.
Here therefore is the calling of the Gentyles proved, whereof we have
heretofore oftentimes spoken. Moreover, the place of Esaias teaches us, what is
given to us in Christ. First and foremost, a light which works in us the true
knowledge of God and salvation, which the industry of man's reason cannot
attain unto: for no man has seen God at any time, the only begotten son,
which is in the bosom of the father, John. 1.
he has declared him. Uerily salvation follows this light. For this is life
everlasting, that we know God the father, and Jesus Christ whom he has
sent. John. 17.
This is a wonderful bounty and goodness of God, which would in so short
and brief a sum set out unto us all that belongs to our salvation. Let us
therefore walk in this light, that darkness do not ouerwhelme us, that we may
attain to salvation in this light, that is in Jesus Christ: to whom be
praise, honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.lxxxxv. Homely.
WHEN the Gentyles heard this, they were glad, and glorified the word of
the Lord, and believed, even as many as were ordained unto eternal life. And
the word of the Lord was published throughout all the region. But the Jews
moved the devout and honest women, and the chief of the City, and raised
persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and drove them out of their coasts.
But they shook off the dust of their feet against them, and came unto
Iconium. And the Disciples were filled with joy, and with the holy ghost.
ALthough God gave unto his Son Jesus Christ a kingdom, and all manner of
power: yet the scriptures euerywhere testify, that he should have many enemies
in the world, and Christ himself oftentimes admonished his Disciples thereof,
least they should hope for a temporal felicity and kingdom, and so be
offended with the cross and adversity. This present history shows us an
evident example of such things as Christ said should come to pass. Paul
after he had converted Cyprus and Pamphilia, came to Antioch in Pisidia, and
there according to his custom, preached Christ in the Sinagoge of the Jews.
By and by he has both Jews and Gentyles to embrace the doctrine of faith:
yea, the whole City almost began to listen and give ear to the gospel, so
that the matter seemed to be brought to pass even as he would have it. But
sodeinly the Jews stand up, and openly speak against the Apostles in their
sermons, and refrain not from railing. In the which contention, the constancy
and boldness of the Apostles is specially to be noted, whereby they did not
only resist their wicked enemies, but also pronounced the horrible judgment of
God against them, declaring how God would forsake them, and transfer his
kingdom unto the Gentyles, yet could not this contention be so appeased, but
more grievous matters yet ensued, of the which Luke entreats in this place.
For he teaches us how the doctrine of the Gospel was most faithfully
published even in the middle of the enemies. After this, he shows a new
persecution, by means whereof the Apostles were driven out of Pisidia, and
came to Lycaonia. The end of this Tragedy at length is declared to have been
prosperous and joyful to the godly, but very horrible and miserable for the
ungodly.

To the first part of this place appertains this saying: when the Gentyles
heard this, they were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord, The doctrine
of the Gospel is set forth in the midst of troubles.
and believed, even as many as were ordained unto eternal life. And the word
of the Lord was published throughout all the Region. The Gentyles which heard
Paul's words, rejoiced not because the Jews were forsaken (for that had been
unsitting both for their faith and Christian charity) but for that they heard
that salvation belonged to them also, and that Christ was the savior, not
only of the Jews, but also of the Gentyles, according to the Oracles of the
Prophets. Therefore with thankful minds they embrace the word of God, and
worthily commend it. And this salvation is not contained within the walls of
the City only, but is carried and spread abroad by preaching of the word, over
all the Country of Pisidia. There are in these things certain points worthy
of diligent consideration, of all which we will entreat orderly.

And first it is to be considered, what these men were, of whom these things
are reported, verily such as were ordained unto eternal life. They that are
ordained unto life eternal believe.
And Luke so describes them, that it is manifest what the cause is, that men
believe the Gospel, when the same is impugned of many and cruel enemies.
Surely it is the free election of God, who ordeyneth those unto life, whom it
pleases him, and likewise leaves them in destruction, and eternal damnation,
whom it seems him good. For if we consider man, as he is of nature, we shall
see it is not in his will or power to believe the Gospel, and to take hold of
Christ. 1. Cor. 2. Phil. 2.
For the natural man perceyueth not the things belonging unto the spirit of
God. And we be not able of our selves so much as to think a good thought.
Our savior Christ teaches us ye very same, where he says: John. 3 6.
it is needful that we be borne again from above, and that none comes unto
him, but whom his father draws. He said likewise unto Peter making
confession of his faith: Happy or blessed art thou Simon the son of Jonas.
For flesh and blood has not opened that unto thee, but my father which is in
heaven. Math. 16.
Of the which sayings we may easily gather, that faith belongs to them only,
whom God has chosen and predestinate unto life everlasting. And it is plain,
that this election was made from everlasting, and before the beginning of the
world, Ephesians. 1. 1. Pet. 1.
and that in Christ who was ordained to be our savior and Redeemer before this
world was made. Therefore our election is free and of Gods mercy. Furthermore,
those whom he chose in Christ, the same when he sees good, he calls by
preaching of the Gospel, and draws effectuously by his spirit, that being
graffed in Christ through faith, they may be justified by his merit, and made
partakers with him of the heavenly glory, according to that saying of Paul:
Those which he knew before, he also ordained before, that they should be
like fashioned unto the shape of his son. Romans 8.
Moreover, whom he appointed before, them also he called. And whom he has
called, them also he justified, and whom he justified, them he also glorified.
And as many as be of this number, they easily hear the voice of Christ, and
perceive that God calls them, because they have the seed of God in them,
which lying hidden before, is by the word of God quickened, and brought to
maturitie and perfyte ripeness. Hereof it proceeds that Christ says, they
that are borne of God, and are the sheep of his flock, hear his voice, and
are delighted therewith, yea, and those he acknowledges for his sheep, of
whom hitherto he was unknown, and which were afterward to be called and
drawn, saying: I have other sheep also which are not of this fold. Them also
must I bring in, John. 10.
and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one fold and one
shepehearde. Of which sort Luke shows that these Antiochians were. And the
treaty hereof ought to seem to no man superfluous, forasmuch as there is
nothing belonging to our salvation more pleasant or profitable to be
considered than this. For herein are opened the fountains of our salvation,
and we are taught that the same depends upon the mere grace of God, and
therefore the arrogant and Pharisaicall glorying in man's justice and merit,
is hereby quite overthrown and buried. This also proves the certainty of
our salvation, and marvelously fortifyeth our faith, if it should stagger
through temptations. For God cannot repent him of his electing and calling us.
Romans 11.
And whereas we be elected or chosen in Christ, which is that impregnable
rock, against which the gates of hell are not able to prevail, and which will
not suffer his sheep to be taken out of his hands. It is impossible that they
should fall from their salvation, which feel themselves to be graffed in him.
Whereunto this place also is to be referred, where it is said: As many
believed, as were ordained unto life everlasting. For although the Jews raged
never so much, they could not hinder the salvation or faith of one of the
elected. And as many as shall in this wise consider Gods predestination and
election, shall perceive their faith to be marvelously increased. And if any
will wade yet deeper in Gods secrets and mysteries, and will presume to call
his eternal counsayles to the count of man's reason, they shall at length go so
far, that either they shall scoffingly deride the judgments of God, or else
attribute that unto man, which it becomes us to seek only in the grace and
favor of God, and shall spoil Christ of his glory, who is the foundation of
our salvation. See Romans 9.11.

But to return to these electes, let us consider the effect of Gods word, The
effect of Gods word in the elect, and their duties.
that appeared and showed it self in them, by the which may easily be gathered
what their duty is whom God electeth. This is a marvelous effect of Gods
word, that even in the greatest fear of all dangers, the hearts of those
that believed, are recreated with joy, considering how God the father is well
pleased with them. Whereunto Christ had a respect, Math. 5.
when he bade us rejoice in troubles. Then after that, it is said, they
glorified the word of God, which is a token of thankfulness, which they
cannot choose but render unto God, which have any thing tasted of the grace of
God. They use to glorifye the word of God, which embrace it with faith, and
submit themself unto it, subduing all their reason and understanding unto it,
which is not the last nor least end of preaching the Gospel, as we have in
other places declared. These things teach us, what they have to do, that
will be counted of the number of the elect, and they also are here confuted,
which say the exercises of Christian religion and good works, are by this
doctrine of free election and predestination put away and destroyed. For where
(as it was before declared) vocation or calling follows election, and
iustifycation by faith follows calling or vocation, it cannot be that he
which understands he is elected, can cast from him the works of a Christian
man. For he knows that we are elected in Christ to that end, that after we
have here lived an innocent and irreprehensible life, Ephe. 4.
we shall live with Christ for ever in heaven. Wherefore according to the
Apostles commandment he labors by continual traueyle in innocence and
godliness, to ratifye and confyrme his election and calling. 2. Pet. 1.


Thirdly, The word of God is set forth through the enterprises of the
adversaries.
it is to be observed how Luke says the word of God was published throughout
all the Country. For hereby it appears how little the wicked are able to
prevail against Christ with all their attempts. For the spirit of God blows
where it lists, and is not moved either with the authority or power of man.
Therefore the same comes here to pass, that we saw came to pass before at
Jerusalem, in the persecution of Steven. And this is the property of the word
of God, the more to show his power and force, the more it is withstanded,
delighting (as it were) to wrestle with the adversaries. And there is no cause
for any man to ask why we see not Christ's kingdom have as good success in
these days. For by our sloth and negligence, the bounds thereof are drawn
in, and narrowed, and we see that saying of Christ is true in all states of
men, where he testifyeth that in the later times, faith shall be very rare and
scant upon the earth. Luke. 18.


Furthermore, after these joyful successes of the Apostles, Persecution raised
by the Jews.
and victories gotten against these wicked enemies, a new business aryseth,
namely, a manifest persecution, whereof the same Jews were the authors,
because they could prevail nothing at the first, and because they saw the
doctrine of Christ stronger than to be ouerturned with the craft of Sophisters,
or with slanders and reproaches. And the Jews many times in this book are
reported to have been the beginners of persecution, and Paul writing of them
in the first Epistle to the Thessalonians second Chapter, says: For as they
killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, even so they persecute us, and
God they please not, and are contrary to all men, and hinder us that we should
not speak unto the Gentyles, that they might be saved to fulfill their sins
always. etc. Which things are therefore to be observed, that we might
acknowledge the just judgment of God upon them, and how those horrible and
strange calamities fell upon them worthily, which our Savior Christ
threatened unto them, and are written in hystories. For God purposed by the
example of them to teach us, what remains for all the despisers and enemies
of his son. And it is very worthy the consideration, to see by what subtle
means they procured this persecution, and what effect it had.

First their subtlety appears in those whom they went about to make on their
sides, Women raised against the Apostles.
against the Apostles. And these were first certain women commended for their
honesty and godliness. And it was not without a cause that they thought their
help meet for this purpose. For this sex of women as they are naturally
inclined and given to superstition, so are they very apt to deceive, specially
when the matter has a pretense of religion, and color of any custom
received. Then by them is there an entry made unto the husbands, with whom by
flattery and enticements, they are able to do very much, but specially if they
be commended for their honestye and godliness. Heua the first mother of us all
may serve for example, whom Satan in the beginning thought a meet instrument
to abuse, whereby to deceive mankind. And because his first enterprise
succeeded so well, he thought afterward to use the same instrument still.
Therefore through women he deceived Solomon, which was the first sower of
Idolatry among the Israelytes, which Idolatry afterward could not be rooted
out, with all that the kings and Prophets could do. And by the authority of
Iesabel, he brought in the worshipping of Baal. I let pass infynite other
examples which might be alleged. Paul had so well marked this thing, that he
wrote how this was commonly the property of deceyuers, to beguyle women, 2.
Tim. 3.
specially such whose consciences they see are clogged with sin. And this is
so common a thing in our days, that he is blinder than a Mole or Want, that
sees it not. Yet let no man think I speak this in reproach of womankinde. But
let it serve rather to teach women to beware, that they suffer not themselves
to be beguyled, under so false a visor and pretense of religion.

Magistrates offended with the Apostles.
And where women alone perhaps might be made light account of, they move the
Magistrates also and the chief of the City against them, in exasperating of
whom, they doubtless used the help of the women. They make the Magistrates
offended with them, as with disturbers and breakers of public peace, which
has in all ages been the only argument wherewith the wicked have most
impugned the doctrine of truth, as the hystories of the Propetes teach us, all
which it is plain were for the most part accused with Christ of sedition. And
at this day there is nothing more ryfe and common. But let us mark how there
is nothing in all Antioch of any power, either by reason of holiness, or
public authority, but it is bent and armed against the Apostles, having none
but the Commons only to take their part. They that measure religion according
to the authority of men, are hereby reproved. For if this opinion may
prevail, the Apostles cause must be in danger of quailing. Therefore Christ
teaches us a far other manner of lesson, who testifyeth that the mysteries of
the kingdom of heaven are hidden from the wise, and revealed unto little ones.
Math. 11.
Refer also to this place the things spoken 1. Cor. 1. about the end, to
this purpose.

Now the effect of the persecution was, Banishment the effect of persecution.
that the Apostles were exyled the borders of Pisidia, by public authority.
Yet was not the gospel utterly banished and put to flight, forasmuch as there
is mention made hereafter of Disciples, which were endued with all kind of
gifts of the holy ghost. It was a common thing in all ages, that always the
true worshippers of God were put in exylement, as public plagues. Where in the
mean season the wicked might without check walk up and down in the middle
of the streets, for whose sake the wrath of God uses to be kindled. And after
banishment commonly follows loss of goods, and miserable poverty. God
suffers these things to light upon his elect for many causes. For this way he
declares his power, which then most appears, when he preserves his Church
in the middle of the waves of persecution. Then also he tries the faith of
those that be his, as gold is tried in the fire, and mortifieth the unworthy
relics of ye flesh, that we be not thereby deceived, and ^war^e aside.
Moreover, he makes us like unto his son, 2. Tim. 2.
y^ they which suffer with him, may also reign with him. Furthermore, he uses
this way to make those that be his, weary of the world, which world
otherwise our flesh uses to esteem, and make to much of. Therefore these
things ought to offend no man, but let us rather often think on the promises
of Christ, such as are these: There is none that has forsaken house, or
brethren, or sistren, Marc. 10.
or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my sake, but he
shall receive an hundredth fold now in this life, with persecutions, and in
the world to come life everlasting. Again: ye are they which have bidden with
me in my temptations: and I appoint unto you a kingdom, Luke. 22.
as my father has appointed to me, that you may eat and drink at my table in
my kingdom. etc. And again: where I am, there shall my minister also be.
John. 12.14. and.17.
They which diligently consider these things, can have nothing come unto them
so grievous or intolerable, but they know the end thereof shall be joyful.
In the mean season, let us earnestly show our duty of charity unto those
that are banished for Christ's sake, and which come unto us, being driven out
of their own Country, and let us not suffer them by our means wrongfullye to
be suspected, seeing they suffer for the same cause that Christ's Apostles did.
Let us remember that saying of Christ: I was harbourlesse, Math. 25.
and you took me in. etc.

Now let us see the end of this Tragedy, which Luke writes was very
horrible and miserable to the obstinate Jews, The end of the persecution.
but very joyful to the godly and those that believed. For the Apostles seeing
y^ malice of the Jews to be invincible, shook of the dust of their feet
against them, and departed unto Iconium, a City of Lycaonia, which thing they
did according to Christ's commandment, who said on this wise to his
Disciples: The shaking off of oust.
whosoever will not receive you, when you go out of the City, shake of the
very dust from your feet, Luke. 9.
for a testimony against them. And again, in the same Evangelist he says
cap. 10. Into whatsoever City you enter, and they receive you not, go your
ways out into the streets of the same and say: even the very dust of your
City which cleaves on us, we wype of against you. Notwithstanding be ye sure
of this, that the kingdom of God was come nigh upon you. Therefore this
shaking off of dust was a solemn and public sign of execration, whereby was
signified that all the wicked contemners of the Gospel, should be scattered
abroad like dust, and that such horrible curse of God hong over them, that they
which would be saved, should not so much as be partakers of the dust
belonging unto them. And these things God would have done for a testimony or
witness against them, to take away from them all manner of excuse. For the
wicked commonly pretend ignorance when they are urged with Gods judgments.
And to the end they should not so do, but be choked with the testimony of
their own conscience, the Apostles might not depart thence without public
protestation, and denunciation of punishment which should come upon them, as
if they should say: we be free from your blood. For we preached unto you the
kingdom of God according to our duty, which because you reject, through your
incurable impiety, we leave you to the just judgment of God, which shall be
so grievous, that it is not lawful for us to have so much as ye dust of your
streets to cleave unto us. For as Christ bears witness, at the later day
Sodom shall have an easier judgment than you. And if the dust which cleaves
to the feet of Christ's Ministers, be sufficient to convince and reprove the
contemners of the Gospel, what then shall we judge, I pray you, of the
sermons, devises, writings, and blood that they have shed for the
testimony of Jesus Christ. Let us compare these things with our times, that we
may perceive how inexcusablye they sin, which in these days with so great
impiety refuse the preaching of the kingdom of God. Let us therefore eschew
so heinous an offense, and abhor the familiarity of them, whom we know to
be polluted herewith. For although such threats as these seem but ridiculous
to these kind of men, they shall yet find at the end that they were to be
believed.

The end of persecution is joyful unto the faithful.
But the end of this hystory was not so grievous to the wicked, but it was as
cheerful for the godly. For of these Luke says: The Disciples were filled
with joy, and the holy ghost. We heard before how they rejoiced. That joy
could neither be disturbed by this persecution, ne yet be clean taken away,
but remained unto them whole and sound. Therefore that saying of Christ is
truly fulfilled: your heart shall rejoice, and no man shall take your
rejoicing from you. John. 16.
The author of this joy is the holy ghost, which emboldened them and comforted
them, that they should not faint under the cross, and also instructed them
with diverse gifts, wherewith the Primitive Church (as we have often said) did
flourishe. Here appears an invincible power of the holy ghost, which is able
to defend the faithful of Christ against all the power of the world. Let
the same comfort us in these days in our dangers, and let us not suffer our
selves to be overcome with the fears of this world, we, I say, which be
elected through grace before this world was made, and are now called by the
preaching of the Gospel, that we may be justified by faith, and glorified in
Jesus Christ: to whom be praise, honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.xiiij. chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The.lxxxxvj. Homely.
AND it came to pass in Iconium, that they went both together into the
Sinagoge of the Jews, and so spoke that a great multitude of the Jews, and
also of the Greeks believed. But the unbelieving Jews stirred up, and
unquieted the minds of the Gentyles against the brethren. Long time abode they
there, and quitte themselves boldlye with the help of the Lord, which gave
testimony unto the word of his grace, and granted signs and woonders to be
done by their hands. But the multitude of the City was divided, and part held
with the Jews, and part with the Apostles. When there was an assault mad e
both of the Jews and of the Gentiles, with their Rulers, to do them violence,
and to stone them, they were ware of it, and fled unto Lystra and Derba,
Cities of Lycaonia, and unto the Region that lies round about, and there
preached the Gospel.
WE heard in the Chapter before going how Paul and Barnabas being sent forth
by the commandment of the holy ghost, began to preach the Gospel among the
Gentyles, who had so good success in their business, that within short space
of time, they did lighten the Isle of Cyprus, Pamphilia, and Pisidia, with the
doctrine and faith of Christ. Howbeit, the waywardness of the Jews which were
at Antioch seemed somewhat to hinder the course of the Gospel: whereby it came
to pass, that being shamefully banished the coasts of Pisidia, they were
constrained to shake of the dust of their feet against them, a thing which we
read they scarce did in any place before. Howbeit, because no man should
think the Apostles were afraid that Christ's kingdom was any thing hurt or
hindered thereby, Luke goes forward with his history begone, and declares
what they did after they were expulsed the coasts of Pisidia. And this place
conteyneth a declaration of the things done at Iconium, which we shall note
when we have told of Iconium such things as make for the understanding of this
history.

Iconium in Lycaonia, Iconium.
into the which there lies an open passage out of Pisidia, to them that
traueyle Eastwarde, has been a very famous City, so called in Greek, by
reason of an Idol or Image, which the Poets ^eigne was made by Prometheus and
Minerua, at the commandment of Jupiter, after the floude of Deucalion, and
quickened by wind blown into it. Wherefore as by reason of their riches, they
lived riotouslye: so because of the ancient superstition of this Image, the
Citizens were given altogether to Idolatry, even like the people of our days,
which use to glory in the Images painted by S. Luke, or in other as notable
lies as that is. Here appears the marvelous goodness of God, who would
vouchsafe to visit this City with the light of his word, and so mercifully
offer salvation to them in his son, which by reason of their profane
worshipping of Images, deserved destruction. And for none other cause does
Paul elsewhere so diligently describe what condition the Gentyles stood in,
before they knew Christ, than for that it might thereby appear that all our
salvation consisted in the mere favor of God, and that nothing ought to be
attributed to man's merits. Whosoever shall well examine themselves and
consider what they were before they knew Christ, shall confess the same. But
these things being thus premised, let us consider the hystorye present, where
Luke shows what the Apostles did at Iconium, what success they had, and how
after they had faithfully traueyled in the business of the Lord, new
persecution arose against them.

First, they go into the Jews Sinagoge, and there teach. But what they taught,
The Apostles teach in the sinagoge.
Luke declares not, because before he had reported in his history certain
whole sermons of theirs, of the which may easily be gathered, what they
euerywhere preached. For they which had received of Christ an express and
evident commandment, and which did all things by the guiding of Christ's
spirit, which is the spirit of truth, and therefore in all points agrees
with it self, could not teach diverse things, and repugnant in themselves.
Therefore what should it need so often to repeat one thing? But this is
worthy both to be observed and marueyled at, that they will again go into the
Jews Sinagoge, and teach among them, whom they had found the greatest enemies
of the Gospel, and whose company not long before was to their great
hindraunce and displeasure at Antioch. This is a notable argument of constancy
and trust, The constancy and faith of the Apostles.
which they did use in the office committed unto them. For as we saw in the
end of the Chapter before, the Magistrates of Antioch so took against them,
by reason of the instigation of the Jews, that they were in danger of their
life, and were banished the coasts of Pisidia, in shameful wise. Besides,
there were diverse things which might have made them despair of the Jews
salvation. For they were not ignorant of the prophecies and threats of
Christ, which with one consent declared how the kingdom of God should be
carried to the Gentyles: and they might many ways perceive that the time of
this forsaking was at hand. And what, I pray you, might they hope for at
their hands, whom they saw embrued with the blood of the son of God, and
who did deadly hate the truth? Yet go they on constantly executing the charge
committed to them of the holy ghost, least any should perish through their
sloth. And no doubt but that saying rang in their ears, which was said unto
Ezechiel: If I say unto the wicked and ungodly man, without doubt thou shall
die, Ezech. 3.
and thou give him not warning, that he may turn from his evil way and so
live* then shall the same ungodly man dye in his own unrighteousness, but his
blood will I require at thy hand. etc. But let all men to whom God has
committed charge over any persons, think that said unto them, that was said
to the Prophet, and which we see the Apostles observed. In which place
Magistrates, Parents, and other such like are to be accounted. All which must
well beware, that they let not the malice of men overcome them. For, although
they whom they have the charge of, be incurable, yet shall they receive great
profit by their diligent study and endeavor, if they do deliver but their
own souls.

Moreover, this is a notable example of Christian charity, The love of the
Apostles toward their enemies.
that the Apostles so painefully and with such peril traueyle to bring a most
envious nation, and like shortly to perish, by reason of their incurable
wickedness unto salvation. For where charity always hops well, they also
hoped that some remnants might be saved, as we see comes to pass oftentimes
in shipwreck. Hereof comes it, that Paul so incessantly prays for them,
Romans 10.9.
and wishes to be accursed, so that they might be saved. The like affection we
see in Christ, who was moved with all manner of pity, when he saw them
miserably dispersed like sheep that had no shepehearde. He wept also when he
beheld that bloody Jerusalem, because he saw they obstinatelye ran into
their own destruction, Luke. 19.
and would not know the day of their visitation. By these examples are those
barbarous and gross people reproved, who are touched so little with the
calamity of others, or else so impotently led with the desire of private
revenge, that for some fewes sake who have iniuried them, they will bear
hatred to the whole Nation: to say nothing of such, who when they can allege
no cause of their hatred, are yet of a certain secret corruption of nature,
driven headlong with hatred, and rejoice at the misery of others. But how can
they be the children of God, which so far differ from the nature and
property of God? 1. Tim. 2.
For he desires that men should be saved, and come to the knowledge of truth.
He uses to spare whole Cities for a fewes sake that be good, which Cities they
desire to be destroyed, for a fewes sake that be evil. But the chief cause of
this evil is, for that we consider not as meet is, the goodness of God
toward those that deserve a thousand deaths, nor his promises, which
rewards them that earnestly do their office and duty.

Now let us see what the Apostles got by this fervent proceeding of theirs,
that hereby they also may be refused which leave of, The effect of the Apostles
doctrine
despayring they shall do any good before they take the matter in hand. They
so spoke (says he) that a great multitude both of the Jews and Greeks
believed. Therefore the word of God is never preached without fruit: and
euerywhere there are some found, which receive it as they ought to do, so
that it brings forth fruit, as we have oftentimes declared. And God fails
not for his part those that faithfully labor in his name. For as Peter letting
slip his nets at the Lords bidding, caught a great hale of fyshe, having
before taken nothing as long as he followed his own head, so as many as
order their matters in the name of God, and as he appoynteth them, find
greater commodity of their labor than they looked for. Therefore it must be
attributed to our sloth and falshoode, that so little good is done in these
days. For how should the Lord with his help prosper them, who having no
regard of his glory, seek only their own commodity, and never will
adventure to do any thing for Gods name sake, and for the salvation of all
men* Also it appears in this place, as we have often said, that the
enterprises of Christ's enemies are in vain, and that his kingdom by
persecutions, is rather furthred than hindered. The continual course of the
Acts of the Apostles declares the same, if we well regard it. Let us in these
things acknowledge the wisdom of God, and not despair to soon of Christ's
kingdom, seeing he can so prosperously defeat the devises of his enemies.

The persecution against the Apostles.
Furthermore, after this good success, Christ's kingdom is afreshe persecuted,
so that a man may see it is most true that Christ foreshewed, concerning the
wicked enterprises of the world, and the traueyles and dangers of his
Ministers. It shall profit our knowledge, if we deeply weigh and consider all
the circumstaunces of this new tragedy. The Jews are authors of the
persecution.
First, he names the beginners of the persecution, even the Jews, who not
content with their own incredulity, incensed the minds of the Gentyles
against their brethren, who had professed Christ: which could not be without
slaundering of them. And no doubt but they called them the authors and sowers
of sedition and trouble, forasmuch as we see the faithful servants of Christ,
have in all ages been charged with like crimes. It is verily an horrible thing,
that the Jews should conceive such a cankred hate against the truth, and they
whom God in time past used to call his children and Priestly kingdom, to be
made the ungodly vessels and instruments of wrath. Let no man therefore
put his confydence in the worthynesse of forefathers, or in any such
prerogatives, but follow humility, and reverence God, if they mean not to be
thrown down of God, as they were, let us mark in this place who are the
authors of tumultes and sedition. Not they that believe the Gospel, but they
which refuse to believe it. For the believing labor to be at peace with all
men, as much as in them lies. The other because they can not abide the light,
use to bring the Ministers of the truth in suspicion with the people, through
false accusations, and by sedition, to oppress the truth. But in the mean
season they go about with marvelous conueyance to put the godly in the fault,
whereof we have examples in Achab the king, and in the Jews accusing Christ
before Pylate. It behooves us to mark these things, that we now a days to
quickly believe not those which say, that commonweals and public peace is
disturbed by preaching of the Gospel. Secondly, it is declared what manner of
men the Apostles showed themselves to be in this tumult. The Apostles do
boldlye resist the seditious.
They go on, and yield not at the first to the wicked, but abiding a long
space at Iconium, do the business of the Lord with great trust and
boldness. And God assisteth them with his favor, and by miracles and signs
gives testimony unto the word of grace, that is to say, to the Gospel,
whereby the grace of God in Christ is preached unto us. The example of the
Apostles teaches us, that they which will be Ministers of Christ must not
yield over soon to the attemptes of the wicked, although they see great
trouble like to follow thereof. For we must admit nothing against the glory of
God, the rather to agree with ye world, which Christ calls naughty,
adulterous, and untoward, Marc. 8.
and therefore teaches it to be unmeet that the true servants of God, should
have so much regard thereof. In the mean season this place shows us what the
use of miracles is. They be done by the hands of the Ministers, God being the
author of them, not for that men should attribute unto the Ministers more than
unto men, but that they should be as seals for them that believe not, and
which have not been used to the word of God. John. 5.10.
Christ our Lord confesses the same of his miracles. And he teaches us that
those which the Apostles should do, Marc. 16.
should serve for none other use. Here therefore are confuted two errors
reigning euerywhere in our days. The first is the error of them, which
require miracles of us, whereof there is no great need among Christian people,
whose faith must stand upon the word of God, and which confess that the
Apostles doctrine has long since been sufficientlye proved by miracles. The
other is of the Papists, which allege a number of most pieuish miracles
against the manifest truth, for their invocation of Saints, transubstantiation,
Purgatory, and other such kind of trifles. Howbeit, it behooued they should
first have proved their opinions by the word of God, which thing seeing they
cannot do, Math. 24. 2. These. 2.
they ought to be taken for false and lying signs, that are brought forth for
the proof of them, such as Christ long agone prophesied Antichrist should
work in the later days. Thirdly, All the city is at division.
it is declared how far this persecution went: The whole multitude of the
City was divided (says he) and part held with the Jews, and part with the
Apostles. This was not therefore a little trouble among a few of persons, but
all the whole City was divided, and take part one against another, which thing
is the greatest plague that can happen in a City. Howbeit, this is it that
Christ said should come to pass: I came not to send peace, but a sword.
For I came to set a man against his father, Math. 10.
and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her
mother in law, and a man's foes shall be they that are of his own household.
Here yet must we remember what was said before of the unbelievers, which were
the procurers of this persecution. For Christ is not properly and truly any
author of division, forasmuch as in all places he commends peace unto us,
and commands us to love our enemies. But such is the malice of the wicked,
that the more they are urged with the wholesome doctrine of Christ, the more
they rave, and at length profess open enmity, which thing cannot be ended
without sedition. For as the ungodly will hold fast their ungodliness with
tooth and nail, so the godly must not forsake their standing wherein they are
placed of God, least they seem to make more of the friendship of the world,
than of the glory of Christ, and the salvation of men's souls: For the which
cause the Apostles show not themselves to be Neutrales in this contention,
although they were strangers, whom Cicero forbids to be curious in other
men's commonweals. For where some are said to take part with them, it easily
appears that they also took a part. Therefore they are little like unto the
Apostles, which as soon as controversies fall out in matters of religion,
think it an high point of wisdom to stand as neutrales and indifferentes.
Solon says he was no good Citizen, which in a sedition would be of no side.
And shall we call them Christians, who when Christ's glory is assaulted, will
sit like idle gazers, without all danger, and look on? Apoc. 3.
Surely these men are those warmelinges neither cold nor hot, which Christ
threateneth he will spewe out. The Apostles fly from Iconiu^, and preach at
other places.
Fourthly, the same end comes of this persecution, which was before of that
at Antioch. For the enemies of Christ with the rulers and Magistrates rose up
in such rage, that the Apostles were in danger to have been stoned. Wherefore
they following the counsel and example of Christ, fled from thence, reserving
themselves for a more seasonable time. And yet are they not to be blamed
because they fled in a sedition, raised by their occasion. For what should
they else do, seeing the matter tended to open violence? Let us diligently
mark what they did after they were escaped. For they gave not themselves to
fylthie idleness, but coming to Lystra and Derba, spread the doctrine of the
Gospel over all Lycaonia. As therefore it is lawful to fly, when neither the
glory of Christ, nor the salvation of the Church is in hazard, least by
putting our selves in danger rashlye, we seem to to tempt Christ: so must we
take heed, that we follow not the counsel of rascal fear, and forsake the
office that God has called us to. Let us therefore have always before our
eyes the glory of God, as the mark of all our devises. For so shall it come to
pass, that having passed all dangers, we shall keep both our faith and
souls in Jesus Christ our Savior: to whom be all praise, honor, power, and
glory, for ever. Amen.

The.lxxxxvij. Homely.
AND there sat a certain man at Lystra, weak in his feet, being a creple
from his mothers womb, and never had walked. The same heard Paul preach,
which beholding him, and perceiving that he had faith to be whole, said with a
loud voice. I say to thee in the name of Jesus Christ, stand upright on thy
feet. And he start up and walked. And when the people saw what Paul had done,
they lift up their voices, saying in the speech of Lycaonia: Gods are come
down to us in the likeness of men. And they called Barnabas Jupiter, and
Paul Mercurius, because he was the Preacher. Then Jupiters priest which dwelt
before their City, brought Oxen and garlandes unto the porch, and would have
done sacrifice with the people.
WHen our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ first sent forth his Apostles to
preach the Gospel, he warned them of nothing so diligently, as of
persecutions that should come unto them in going about that business. Of
these he foretold they should suffer both many and grievous, not hereby
meaning, through fear to dismay them, but to arm them with faith against
troubles foreseen, that thereby they might learn to overcome them. Paul and
Barnabas the chosen vessels of Christ well understood this thing, who at the
special commandment of the holy ghost were sent forth, as we heard before,
to preach among the Gentyles. For they use such faith and constancy in their
office and charge, that after persecution, as men increased with more force and
strength, they return with more alacrity to their office again. For being
driven out of Antioch, they fill Iconium with the doctrine of Christ. Again,
beinst expulsed Iconium, by reason of a sedition there raised, they come to
Lystra and Derba, and there they begin to teach. And it is said, they
preached the Gospel, least any man might think they had changed their
doctrine for their enemies pleasure. Their constancy is set forth to be
imitated of all men, to the end that they which will seem the true worshippers
of Christ, should give no place to the wicked enemies of the word. For he is
unworthy of Christ, that more sets by the friendship of this untoward and
adulterous world, than by the glory of Christ. Howbeit, because mention was
made of miracles, whereby God gave testimony to the Apostles doctrine, now
Luke rehearses one miracle among a great many, which by reason of the effect
falling out thereof, seemed very worthy to be declared. For the more profit
that may come unto us by the consideration thereof, first we will discuss the
miracle with the circumstances, and then declare the effect thereof.

Luke begins with the description of him, The miracle of the Creple that was
healed.
on whom the miracle was wrought. He was a townesman of Lystra many ways very
miserable. For he was lame of his feet, and that from his mothers womb, so
that thereby it appears his disease was incurable, such as they be for the
most part, that cleave to us from our nativity and birth. It is also added
that he never went on his feet or walked. The miserable state of the Creple.
So diligent a description of this Creple, makes for the certainty of the
miracle, and that the power of Christ might appear the more evident, in whose
name not long after he was healed. Here is to be observed, how Christ commonly
sets forth the glory of his name, by them which either are sick of
incurable diseases from their nativity, or else are otherwise in great
calamity. Such an one we read the blind man was, whom Christ restored to his
sight. John. 9.
Such another was he that had the Palsy, who at length after he had
been.xxxviij. years diseased, was restored again to his health. John. 5.
Such an one was the woman which had eyghtene years gone stowping and bowed as
it were together. Such were the Demoniakes that so raged, Luke. 13. Math. 8.
and were by his benefyte delivered. These things serve first for our
consolation, that we should not take the adversities that God sends
impaciently, considering that hereby Christ knows how to fetch matter to
glorifye his name by. For God so little hates us therefore, that rather by
bearing them patiently, he makes us the instruments of his glory.
Furthermore, they make for our instruction, that we rashly ride not on them,
whom God has punished with any deformities or blemishes of nature. For
according to the saying of Solomon, he that derideth the poor, contemns god
his maker: so is he very wicked, which by tauntes and scorns nicketh them whom
God has chastened or afflicted with his hand. Deuteronomy. 27. Leuit. 19.
Which thing is the cause that the law pronounces them accursed, that lays
a stumbling block in the blindes way, or curses the deaf.

Let us see what this Creple did, before he was made whole. The Creple hears
the Gospel, and believes.
He heard Paul preach and believed he should be made whole. Whereby it
appears that Paul preached of the salvation of Christ. Which when the creple
heard to be confyrmed with many miracles, he conceived also good hope of his
restitution, who by like had also some secret suggestion of the holy spirit,
forasmuch as there is no promises universal, that promises health of body to
all that believe in the name of Christ. Luke meant to show the cause of his
salvation, where he says he believed. For all the Scripture teaches us that
by faith we are made partakers both of Christ, and of all his benefytes, and
Christ many times teaches us the same, saying when he healed any: Be it done
unto thee according to thy faith, or thy faith has saved thee, or made thee
whole. It is very worthy to be considered, how first it is said he heard, and
afterward mention is made of his belief, which he gatte by hearing the word.
This teaches us after what sort and means faith comes unto us. It is
manifest that faith is the gift of God, and that it consists not in the will,
eloquence, or wisdom of man. For no man knows the father but the son,
Math. 11.
and he to whom the son will open him. And God uses men for Ministers and
instruments of his word, when he means to teach men his word, according to
that saying of Paul. We be the Ministers of Cod by whom you have believed, 1.
Cor. 3.
even as the Lord gave every man grace. Therefore whosoever will attain unto
faith, must diligently harken to the word of God. For how shall they believe,
except they have heard? how shall they hear without a Preacher? for faith
comes by hearing, Romans 10.
and hearing by the word of God. Wherefore Christ joining both these together,
John. 5.
says: He that hears my word, and believes in him that sent me, has life
everlasting. These things serve for commendation of the outward word, that we
contemn it not, nor imagine another word of God, nor search for such ways of
faith as the Saints never knew of. Which who so do, they lie open commonly
to the assaults of the Devil, and are troubled with marvelous illusions, and
fare like men, which hearing how God gives the increase of corn, leave of
tillage, a thing that God has ordained for the maintenance of man.

The Creple is myraculously healed.
After this, Luke shows the miracle. For Paul well beholding this Creple,
perceived certain tokens of faith in him, which could not be without some
secret working of the holy spirit. For who is able by a man's countenance,
which is the most variable and deceyueable thing that is, to judge surely of
any man's faith: it must needs therefore be the suggestion of the spirit,
that certifyed Paul of this lame man's faith. Then turning about unto him, he
gives him perfyte health of his body. And as it is written in certain ancient
copyes of great credit, he says: I say unto thee, in the name of Jesus
Christ stand upright upon thy feet. For it is not credible, that those first
words wherein the name of Christ is alleged, were of Paul omitted (as it is
read in the common copyes and translation) because this was the only end and
mark both of the Apostles doctrine and miracles, to bring men to believe that
Christ was their savior. And this work on both sides proceeding of faith,
wanted not a prosperous success. For he by and by which hitherto had always
been lame, start up and walked. Thus God by this miracle gave testimony to the
Apostles doctrine, as yesterday was declared. And because the miracles of
Christ and the Apostles commonly set forth unto us, the manner of our salvation
and redemption, therefore we will in this lame man briefly touch the same.

This lame man or Creple is a pattern or example of the state and condition of
us all, A figure of the redemption of man.
yea, of all mankind. For as this man is lame, and that from his mothers
womb: even so all we be weak and lame unto all things belonging to our
salvation. And this infyrmitie cleaves to us, even from our mothers womb, as
who be conceived and borne in sin. And if we consider our life passed, we
shall see that we never walked, to say, in ye ways of God which ledd us to the
inheritance of eternal life. For we have all strayed out of the way like
sheep, every one of us has followed his own ways. Esaias. 53.
And God himself testifyeth, that the imaginations of men are evil even from
their childehoode. Gene. 8.
Therefore look in what case this lame man was, as touching his body, and the
same case be we all in as concerning our soul, and look how far the soul
passes the body, and in so much more miserable a case it shall appear we be.
Therefore there is no health in our selves, but we must needs look it without
our selves, even there where this lame man found it. He heard the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, and by his power, he believed he should be made whole, and by
faith obtained his desire. We must go the selfsame way to be saved. Let us
hear the Gospel, and believe in Jesus Christ, which is preached in the same
Gospel, and streightwaye we shall be saved. He it is that delivers all them
from their sins that believe in him, because he is made sin for us, 2. Cor.
5.
that we through him might be made that righteousness, that is acceptable
before God. It is he that regenerateth us, and who by the immortal and
eternal seed of heavenly generation heals the sores and maladies of our
corrupt nature. It is he that instructs us with fresh force, so that we that
were not able of our selves to think one good thought, are able by him to do
all things, John. 15. Phil. 4.
and as long as we abide in him, we bring forth much fruit. And because he
only is able to work these things, he only is to be taken for our savior, and
we being in misery and like to perish, must out of hand seek for him to be
our Physician and none other. Also we are taught by example of this lame man,
what the duty of them is, whom Christ has thus healed and delivered. He at
Paul's calling start up by and by and walked. So when Christ calls us, let us
forthwith rise up out of the mire, wherein we have to long sticked, and casting
away the works of our corrupt and blind flesh, let us walk in the ways of the
Lord. These things might be more copiously dilated, and with many examples
amplified, but it may suffice by these few words to give occasion to think
further hereof, to those which are fervent in ye study of godliness.

Now come we to the second part of this place, How they of Listra were
affected at the miracle.
where the effect of the miracle is described, which fell out far otherwise,
than Paul purposed. For as by his doctrine, so by the miracle, he meant to
train his hearers unto Christ. But they take occasion thereby to start from
Christ. For being deceived with the old fables of Poets, they suppose the
Apostles are Gods, which took upon them the form or similitude of men,
and so came down into the earth. And perhaps they called to mind the coming
down of Jupiter, and Mercury to Lycaon their progenitor. Ovid. Meta. 1.
For these two (cried they) were come down from heaven, and most foolishly
applied their names unto the Apostles. For they say Barnabas is Jupiter, either
because he was the auncienter man, or else because of his grave countenance,
and they think Paul is Mercury the gods interpreter and messenger, because he
spoke unto the people. And iumpe at that time comes Jupiters Priest, which
more pricketh these mad men forward. For bringing Oxen and garlands with him,
he makes preparation for a sacrifyce, according to the manner of the Gentyles.
This is a most notable example teaching us, how easily man's nature swarueth
from true godliness, unto superstition and ydolatrie, and how hard a thing
it is to put errors away which have bredde in us from our tender years. Not
long before, Old errors are hardlye put away.
these people of Lycaonia gave ear to Paul, preaching of Christ. They saw a
miracle also wrought in the name of Christ. Yet the old persuasion of the
Gods coming down unto the earth, remains still in their minds, and they
take occasion of foul error, of that whereof they should have catched hold
of godliness. Howbeit, we all confess that they were both foolishly and
wickedly deceived. But how more foolish than these, are the Papists? which
yet use to brag of the name of Christ. They confess the Apostles are but
men, and the servants of Christ, whose ministerye it pleased him to use in
setting forth his kingdom. And yet they make Gods of them, and attribute unto
them those things which belong to God only, and ought to be ascribed to no
creature, without ye profane contempt of the true and living God. For they
teach us, yt they are to be inuocated in dangers, and prescribe unto them
their diverse properties and prerogatives as foolish as ever the heathen did in
their Gods, appoynting one a Patron for prisoners, another for those in
danger of shipwreck, another for traueylers by the way, and other for those
in peril of fire. And because they cannot tell when they have played the
fools enough, where they confess that these Saints have suffered death for
Christ's sake, yet they ascribe unto them a great part of the glory of Christ,
feygning that they are intercessors and advocates unto God for them, and making
their vows and prayers unto them. Let us be ashamed therefore to take such
pains in confuting the follye of the Gentyles, seeing there is much more folly
to be found among the professors of Christ's religion. Furthermore, the holy
ghost sets out unto us in this example, the beginning and proceeding of
Idolatry. The beginning and going forward of Idolatry.
The beginning of all error has been the ignorance of the true God, and for
that men would after the usage of the Gentyles, call the nature and essence of
God, to the judgment of man's reason. Which error brought in the multitude of
Gods, and the gross and absurd opinions that men had of them. Of this
followed another error that where they thought there were many Gods, they
judged every person and thing whereby they had any benefyte and commodity to
be a God. Hereof it came to pass, that they counted the stars of heaven, the
elements, beasts and men to be gods, whose pedegrues, and tombs, and
monuments, were to be seen upon earth. Now these false and counterfeite Gods,
must needs have sacrifyces, and worshippings. Then were holy days devised,
altars erected, temples builded, sacrifyces killed, pictures and Images hong
and set up, and infynite such like devises, of ancient superstition brought
in. Of all which things the Priests were the Captains and Ringleaders, who
by this stuff sought their private honor and gain. And if now a man would
compare the doings these many years among Christians, with these things, he
shall find no difference between the old and new superstition, more than
that the names of the Gods being changed, the same rytes and sacrifyce are
still retained, and the error is so much the more detestable, because under
the pretense and name of them, which willingly lost their lives for the glory
of Christ, the glory of God the father, and of his Christ is defaced. And the
multitude of Priests which hereby perceived such plenty of gain growing unto
them, increased the ignorance of the people. But how much this doing offended
the true worshippers of God, Paul's oration following, abundantly shows. Let
us learn to know God by the Scriptures, to worship him in spirit and
truth, to call upon him only in our needs and distresses, and to give
thanks to him only, when we be delivered out of dangers, in the name of his
son Jesus Christ: to whom be all praise, honor, power, and glory for ever.
Amen.

The.lxxxxviij. Homely.
WHEN the Apostles Barnabas and Paul heard this, they rent their clothes, and
ran in among the people, crying and saying: Sirs, why do you thus? We are
mortal men like unto you, and preach unto you that you should turn from
these vanities, unto the living God, which made heaven and earth, the sea, and
all things that are therein: the which in times past suffered all nations to
walk in their own ways. Nevertheless, he left not himself without
witness, in that he showed his benefits from heaven, giving us rain and
fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness. And with the
sayings scarce restrained they the people, that they had not done sacrifice
unto them.
MAn through the fall of sin, did not only lose his former dignity wherein
he was created, but also had the light of his reason wherewith before he used to
behold God and his proceedinges, so extinguished, that he was not able by his
own capacity and understanding to attain unto the knowledge of those things
that belonged unto the spirit of God. Which thing was the cause that he not
only deceived himself through his own imaginations, but also perniciouslye
abused those things, that God had ordained, whereby to bring him to knowledge.
Examples hereof appear euerywhere in the hystories of all ages, and this is
one very notable that falls out among these people of Lystra. For Paul and
Barnabas preach unto them the Gospel of Jesus Christ. And no doubt but they
used as great diligence in preaching to them, as we read they used in other
places. Besides their teaching they showed a miracle, whereby a certain lame
man was through the name and power of Christ restored to his limbs again: and
so was it declared by the very deed self, that Christ was such an one as the
Apostles preached he was, that is to say, a most mighty restorer and redeemer
of man's decayed nature. But what prevailed all these things with the men of
Lystra, which being destitute of the light of the holy ghost, were led with the
blind reason of their flesh. They learn not to know Christ hereby. They
take no occasion by such a miracle to glorifye him. But according to the nature
and property of man, taking hold of every thing next them, stick only in
the Apostles, wonder only at them, and think they ate the only workers of
the miracle, and without any regard had unto Jesus Christ, prepare godly
honor and sacrifyces for them. And it had been a tolerable thing, if they of
Lystra only, whom custom of Gentyle superstition had long bewitched, had
thus offended. But the infection of this ensample ran so far, that among
the professors of Christ's name, the chief point of godliness and religion
seemed to stand in like worshipping of Saints, unto whom by reason of the
miracles wrought by them in times past, sick persons, prisoners, men in
danger on the seas, and otherwhere, used to make their prayers, to e^e^t
altars, to make (...), and to build Churches, and to offer all kind of
sacrifyces, having in the mean season little or no regard at all of Christ's
merit, in whom only ye Apostles and Martyrs showed us all hope of salvation.
The madness of these people deserves more at large to be confuted. But this
present place is sufficient to confute them, where it is declared how the
Apostles took this doing of the people of Lystra.

The Apostles put away worshipping from them by their gestures.
First, he lively describes the Apostles gestures, whereby they abundantly
declared how much this kind of honor displeased them. For they rent their
garments after the manner of their Nation, which was a gesture of those that
took great grief and indignation, by reason of some intolerable blasphemy,
as appears by the example of Ezechias and Caiaphas, of the which Ezechias
hearing the blasphemous sayings of Rabsaces the Chaldey, declared his sorrow
and indignation by this gesture: and the other sitting as a Judge upon Christ's
cause, did egregiously counterfeyte a mind abhorring blasphemy by the same
gesture. But the Apostles which used always to prefer the glory of Christ,
before all private affections, did not counterfeyte or dissemble in this place.
And being not satisfied with tearing of their garments, they leap into the
throng of the people, as men ready to quench some public fire, which they
being strangers and forreners could not do without danger of their life.
Furthermore, they go not about their matters with bare words only, but with
crying out, that a man would think they had forgotten all modesty and
myldenesse, being in their private cases known to be most modest and pacient.
Therefore by this example may be gathered, what the nature of the godly is, and
with what feruencie of zeal they use to strive for the glory of God. It
seems to them an intolerable blasphemy, when men go about to give unto
them, or to any other creature, any divine honor. They have a careful regard
unto the covenant of God and to his law, the chief and principal point
whereof is, to acknowledge and worship him only as our God. And because they
knew he was a gelous God, and a severe revenger of his honor, they also must
needs be zelously incensed, when they see Gods glory openly taken from him,
and given unto other. The like example we saw before in John and Peter the
Apostles, cap. 3. and.10. And it appears the Angels are of the same mind
and judgment as the faithful messengers of God. See the Apoc. 19* and.22. We
learn by this place, what we ought to think of them, that dare arrogate and
challenge to themselves any godly honor, such as we read sometime Herodes
Agrippa did Caligula, Domitian, Dioclesian* and such like filthy men, and
monsters of nature. And now adays we see the Bishops of Rome challenge unto
them ye title of holiness, the forgiveness of sins, and absolute power to
do all things, without check, insomuch that no man must reprehende them,
though they carry headlong with them into hell infynite heaps of men's
souls. These kind of men ca^ by no argument reprove* themselves more
euidentlye to be destitute of Ch^^stes spirit, seeing the Apostles of Christ
so abhorred such glory, with the desire whereof these men are so ravished, that
for this glories sake they fear not only to seduce the whole world with
false doctrine, but also to f^ll all places full with fyghting and wars.
Moreover, it appears by this example, that they worship not the Saints,
which use to invoke them, and outwardly to worship them, which thing God
challenges to himself alone* For what else do these men (as much as in them
lies) but make them the vessels of Gods wrath and ignominy, which while they
lived on earth, bent all their endeavor and study to have God glorified. For
it is not to be thought, that now they are in heaven, they have changed their
opinion, or that God has changed his mind and will, which in times past,
said by his Prophet: I am the Lord: this is my name, Esaias. 42. The Apostles
put from them worship by speaking.
and my glory will I give to none other. Yet a more evident demonstration of
all these things shall appear in the Apostles Oration, immediately following,
every part whereof we shall pervse in order.

The proposition and sum of their oration is, that neither the Apostles, nor
any other Creatures ought to be inuocated or worshipped, The propos^tion.
but only the true and living God. Which thing where they might plainly have
pronounced it without any circumstance of words: yet they thought good to
express and set out their meaninges by an interrogation, saying: Sirs, why do
you thus? These things agree very well with the gestures which even now were
declared. For in few words they plainly testifye, that that worship wherein a
number now a days thinks the chief praise of godliness and religion
consists, is impious, valawfull, and abominable. And let no man object unto
me, that the Apostles were offended with that Gentillike worship and names of
counterfeyt Gods, but would have taken it in good part perhaps, if they had
honored them in such sort as now a days they are honored in the Popes
kingdom. For they simplye abhor all kind of worship, saying that such honor
belongs to God only and alone.

This appears most evidently in the second part of the Oration, The
confirmation.
which conteyneth the confyrmation of the Proposition, fortifyed with two
strong arguments. The first is taken of their own person or nature, where they
say, we are mortal men like unto you, as though they should say: It is an
absurd and foolish part to honor and worship them as Gods, which are of the
same nature that we our selves be, and subject to such infyrmities as we be.
For both we be sinners, and by reason of sin, are subject unto all such
troubles and miseries, as fall out in this life. The self same argument we
heard that Peter used before to Cornelius falling prostrate before his feet,
which said unto him, Arise, for I my self also am a man. And if this argument
be well weighed, it shall appear that all worshipping of Creatures is hereby
overthrown. For if men be therefore unworthy of divine honor, because they be
men, what shall we say of other creatures, which are all inferior unto man, as
which were created for man's sake and use to do him service? From which order
the Angels also must not be excluded, for so much as they are spirits of
administration, sent out for the ministry of them which shall be heirs of
salvation. Hebrews. 1.
And we will not here admit their cauillation, which say, that by this
argument worshipping of Saints is not refelled, because they are delivered from
all kind of miseries and infyrmities, and are made partakers of the heavenly
glory. For to grant them that by this argument nothing can be gathered
against them: yet are there infynite other places of Scripture that teach us,
they ought no more to be inuocated now, than when they lived here on earth.
For the holy men in the Prophet testifye, that even now they are ignorant,
in what state and condition we be. Esaias. 63.
And this agrees very well with beatitude or bliss, which they enjoy not, if
they be feign either to behold or revenge our miseries. Furthermore, there is a
grounded and inviolable principle of religion, where we are taught that we must
worship and honor one God only. Deuteronomy 6. Math. 4.
And if men neither while they are living, neither when they are dead, must
have any godly honor, who can sufficiently laugh at their folly, or rather
bewail it, which turn and transform these Saints into the works of their
own hands, that is to say, into dumb Images?

The other argument the Apostles fet from their office, saying they came unto
them and preached the gospel, to the intent that they should turn from these
vanities, and begin to worship the living God, which was the creator of heaven
and earth, the sea, and all things contained in them. And thus they plainly
protest that they may not suffer any godly honor to be done unto themselves
without manifest impiety and offense unto God. For who will not take him for a
traiterous ambassador, and worthy of all punishment, which under the name and
pretense of his king, would advance his own cause, and study to establishe
his own tyranny among them, whom he ought to bring to his Princes obedience,
who would not think him a wicked caytife, which would under the pretense of
old acquaintance and friendship, bring another man's wife home to his own
house? But it is evident that the Apostles and other Ministers of the word are
Christ's Legates and Ambassadors, and the Bridegroomes friends, and that it is
their duty to bring men to the obedience of faith, and to marrye them to
Christ, whom he has redeemed with the price of his blood, and made his
unspotted spouse. Thus John the Baptist reasons of his office with his
Disciples, John 3. 2. Cor. 11.
and Paul in other places. And therefore in this place he refuses these honors
offered him with such detestation, because he sees he should incur both
treason and fornication, if he should commit the like thing. Would God they
did well observe these things, which in these days think it most godliness
and religion, to send the simple and unlearned Comminaltie unto Creatures, or
else teach them to seek salvation in the merits of men.

All worship is vain, devised without the word of God.
Moreover, it is worthy to be considered, how the Apostles call this worship
which they of Lystra would have done unto them, vanity. For hereby we gather,
that all such religion is vain, and of no force as is devised of man's
imagination, without the word of God, specially if it tend not to the worship
of God only, but unto creatures, to whom God will not impart his glory. Math.
15. Esaias. 29.
Hereunto agree the things which Christ alleges out of the prophet: They
worship me in vain, teaching the doctrines of men. Let the Papists here make
answer, whose religion, as it chiefly consists in honoring of creatures: so
it stands upon none other foundation, than men's traditions.

The duty of the ministers of the word.
Furthermore, the Apostles in these words, comprehend the duty of those that
are mynisters of the word, while they affirm, that their preaching is to the
end, that men should turn from the vain worshypping of creatures, unto the
only living God. Therefore the faithful ministers of Christ must join these
two things together, that is, they must both overthrow false religion, and
plant the true. Whereunto is to be referred, that saying of the Prophet. Ierem.
1.
Behold, this day have I appointed thee, to root up and destroy, and to
build up and plant. For as in husbandry and tyllage, all the labor taken in
plowing and watering is in vain, except the things that hinder the corns
growth, be rooted up, and good seed sown: so in the husbanding and dressing
of the mind, they have most vnfruitefully labored, which have not paynefully
and carefully joined both these together. Therefore the men of our days commit
double offense. For there are some men that so abhor Antichrist, and his
wicked religion, that being occupied only in overthrowing the same, they have
no remembrance to restore again true and sincere religion. Again there are
other some which will have men taught the true religion by preaching the word,
but will not have abuses and superstition touched, because they would not have
the displeasure of the world. And these latter sort hope that superstition will
fall of it own accord, when men are come to the knowledge of the true God:
and they perceive not that there is no place for the knowledge of God in men's
minds, till these superstitions be removed. Therefore who so means
profitably and with commendation to traueyle in matters of religion, must join
both these (as is said) together.

Thirdly, the Apostles teach us to know what manner of God he is, God is the
Creator and governor of all things.
even the maker of heaven and earth, the Sea and all that in them is. Such a
God the scripture declares every where he is, and such an one we openly
profess him to be, in the articles of our faith, according to the tradition of
the Apostles. But they which confess him to be the Creator, must also needs
confess that he is a governor. For it is not meet that we should ymagine
God to be such a work master, as has no regard or care of his work. And
David confesses in deed that he dwells on high, but yet that he beholds
whatsoever is done in heaven and in earth. Psalm. 113.
For by his providence it comes to pass, that the poor of low degree are
advanced to princely dignity, that kingdoms are conveyed and transferred
from one to an other, that women that are barren, are made fruitful, that the
earth brings forth all manner of fruits, that the seas ebb and flow, that
all the world is tossed and turned with such interchaungeable course and
variety of seasons. And to conclude, there is nothing so excluded from Gods
providence, but that it numbreth even the diverse ways of birds flying, the
flowers of the fyelde, and hears of our head. By these things is their doting
confuted, which say that this world is eternal, which is the first step up to
impiety. For hereof it will follow, that all things come to pass by chance,
and that either there is no God at all, or else that he walks up and down
ydely in heaven, and has no regard what is done on earth. David most
diligently discribed this sect of men, which thus ymagine and feign, in his
Psalm 14. and.53. But at this day this sect so reigns, that a man shall see
few which are in deed persuaded that God is the creator and governor of all
things. But the end of these men Peter trimlye sets forth in his last
Epistle and third Chapter.

But let us return to the Apostles, who in the third part of their oration,
confute the objections that might be made against them, The confutation.
such as was prescription of time, and uniform consent almost of all the
world. Which arguments at this day are wont to be alleged against the truth.
For it seems an unmeet and an absurd thing, that so many should have erred,
so many years together, and that the truth should now at the length, be known
but to a small number of men, and those of small name and fame. But the
Apostles answer these things in few words: God (say they) in times past
suffered all nations to walk in their own ways. In these words, lie two
arguments. The one that the Gentyles walked not in the precepts of God, but in
their own ways and inventions: therefore we may not take them for an example
therein to follow. The other is that this thing fell out through the
permission and sufferaunce of God, not that he was pleased with their
superstition, but that the presumption of such curyous men so deserved, who (as
Paul in an other place says) would seek further in the mysteries of God
then man's reason could attain to, and were not content with the ordinary
means, Roma. 1.
whereby God had appointed to be known. This place teaches us that the ways
of man in his salvation are blind and deceyueable, because the natural man
(as was said in the beginning of this sermon) perceyueth not the things that
belong unto God. 1. Cor. 2.
Except therefore man's wisdom submit it self unto the word of God, it cannot
attain to the true knowledge of salvation, yea the higher it shall mount in
persuasion of her own ability, the deeper she shall fall into the gulf of
errors. Therefore it is a great blindness of theirs, that think matters of
religion and controversies rising about the same, can by man's reason and devise
be calmed and appeased. These men do* as if one should appoint those for
Judges of causes, that can neither see nor hear, we are further admonished by
this place, that al they are miserably beguyled, which allege the multitude in
matters of religion, and affirm that the Church cannot err. For it is euydent
in all ages, that the greater number have been deceived with false opinions of
God, and have not truly served him. Only Noe with his family, which were but
eight persons, followed an opinion of God and religion contrary to all the
world, and has God to confyrme and warrant of the same. And the Patriarchs a
very few in number, as bright stars shining in the dark fyrmament were
scattred abroad among the unbelieving Gentyles, what shall we say of the people
of Israel, the peculyars of the Lord? Read we not, that they and their Bishops
most fowly and wickedly erred? when contrary to the commandment of God, they
enterprised to cast a Calfe, and (as the Prophet says) turned the majesty of
their God into the similitude of an Ox that eats hay? Psalm. 106.
And to speak of Gods new people, Luke. 12. Math. 7. Acts. 20. 2. These. 2.
does not Christ call it a small flock, and says he not they are few which go
in at the narrow gate, unto salvation? yea Paul says, that grievous Wolves
shall rise up even of those of the congregation, which shall not spare the
flock, and he says also that Antichrist shall sit aloft in the temple of God.
Let them cease therefore to object unto us the consent of multitude and
authority of the Church, which resist the open verity. We require the word
of God, and voice of Christ, which ought to be the only touch and rule, to
judge all controversies in doctrine.

God is not to be charged for men's Idolatry.
Furthermore, least any man should put God in fault of the Gentyles ydolatrie
and superstition, the Apostles use a preoccupation or prevention, in the which
they clear God of all manner of fault. For, (he say they) has always borne
witness of himself, his nature and pleasure, and has showed his invisible
nature and essence unto the world, by his visible works. And omytting those
great and wonderful works of God, which pass man's capacity and reach, he
rehearses his daily works, whereby he does good unto men, that even for this
cause they were able to draw any man to the diligent consideration of so
sovereign a God. For who is so blind or dull, that he perceyueth not the
seasonable times, and the increase of victuals springing thereof? who will say
these things come to pass by chance, that are knyt together so fast by order
of nature, that if any thing comes beside the woonted course of nature, it is
thought a wonder? And I pray you what an unthankfulness is it, not to
acknowledge that God, which alone prouydeth us not of necessaries only, but
also gives us abundance of those things that are delectable and pleasant? Or
what excuse of ignorance can they allege for themselves, which as often as
they take their meat, are admonished of Gods liberallitie toward us? In this
place there is a profitable doctrine, and for the beating down of the
superstitious curiosity of some persons, very necessary, that is to say, who
is the author of the influences of heaven, and the increase and yield of the
earth. The Apostles say of God the Creator, that he gives us rain from
heaven, and fruitful seasons, replenishing us with food and gladness.
Hereunto agrees the scripture in every place. Dauyd diligently accounts the
same among the other works of God, saying: He covers the heaven with
clouds, and prepares rain for the earth, and makes the grass to grow upon
the mountains. He gives fodder unto the cattle, and feeds the young Ravens
that call upon him. He gives snow like wool, and scatters the hoare frost
like ashes, Psalm. 147.
he casts forth his yse like morsels. He sends out his word and melts
them, he blows with his wind and the waters flow. Again: He watreth the
hills from above, Psalm. 104.
the earth is filled with the fruit of his works. He brings forth grass for
the cattle, and herb for the use of men, that he may bring food out of the
earth. etc. I omyt infynite other testimonies which might be brought. But God
moderateth all these things according to his just will and pleasure, while he
sends plenteous increase to them that walk in his law, Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.
and scarcity and barrenness to the disobedyent, whereof we have euydent
examples. Here the Astrologers are confuted, who attrybuting these things to
the position and placeing of the Planets, revoke and bring in again the
profane names of Gods, and almost all kind of gentilitie. The superstitious
are here also reproved, which make the saints authors hereof, which ask rain
and seasonable weather of them, having Masses and service appointed for that
end and purpose. Let both these sorts see what God says in Hoseas. chap. 2.
And let us follow the Apostles doctrine* and acknowledge one only God to be
the author and governor of all these things, which is ^eyther bound to the
course of Planets, nor is not subject to nature, but according to his good
pleasure and just judgment, moderateth and orders all things.

Now Luke declares the effect of the Apostles sermon, and says, The effect
of the Apostles sermon.
that they of Lystra could scarce be restrained with all this weight of words
and sentences, but that they would do sacrifyce unto them. So froward and
obstinate man is in retayning of superstition, yet is the obstinacy of our
time greater. These men could with one Sermon be prohibited, where now adays
there are numbers, which with many years traueyle, and daily sermons can not
be brought into the right way. Let us therefore pray unto God the father, that
he will illuminate both them and us with his holy spirit, and bring us to the
true and wholesome knowledge of him, and his son Jesus Christ: to whom be
praise, honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.lxxxxix. Homely.
THITHER came certain Jews from Antioch and Iconium, which when they had
obtained the peoples consent, and had stoned Paul, drew him out of the City,
supposing he had been dead. Howbeit, as the Disciples stood round about him,
he arose up and came into the City. And the next day he departed with
Barnabas to Derba. And when they had preached to that City, and had taught
many, they returned again to Lystra, and to Iconium, and Antioch, and
strengthened the Disciples souls again, and exhorted them to continue in the
faith, affirming that we must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom
of God.
AS our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ labors incessantly to maintain and
defend the salvation of mankind: so Satan is altogether occupied in
overthrowing the kingdom of God, and in pulling men from the way of
salvation. Hereof in this history have we a most evident example. For as the
Apostles were preaching at Lystra, first Satan moved certain superstitious
persons to give divine honor unto them, and no doubt but this was the drift of
that malicious enemy of man's salvation, to have tripped the Apostles by
tempting them with ambition, whereas he had attempted Christ before with the
same. But his enterprise comes not to pass. For, Paul and Barnabas
perceiving this craft of the Devil, and being enflamed with more zeal than
before, defended most constantly the glory of the true God: so that now the
townsmen of Lystra begin to taste of the knowledge of God, and to forsake
the errors of their forefathers. Wherefore Satan proves another way, and
armeth against them the professed enemies of the truth, by whose means he had
caused the Apostles at other times also, to give place and to go back. For he
calls certain Jews from Antioch and Iconium, who with slanders had so
incensed the minds of those of Lystra against the Apostles, that they like
mad men rose against Paul, would have stoned him, and haled him hal^e for
dead out of the gates of their City. And the very use of all this history
is, to learn us to beware of Satan's sleyghtes, wherewith he uses to undermine
the truth, and to imitate the constancy of the Apostles in withstanding them.
But because there are other things in the same, serving both for our
instruction and comfort, it shall be very profitable to consider all the
circumstances of this contention.

Satan has euerywhere his instruments.
First, the same parties are the beginners of this disturbance, who before had
troubled the Apostles, even the Jews, of whose horrible blindness and
desperate obstinacy in contending against Christ, has been already oftentimes
spoken. But here is to be marked a notable sleyght and policy of Satan, in
that he brings these men from Antioch and Iconium, as old tried soldiers.
For his chief care is to have euerywhere his instruments, whereby he may
overthrow the kingdom of Christ, and establishe his own. Wherefore if he
perceive that men are not fyt enough for his purpose in one place, he will
bring other from other places, by whose means and industry he will compass
his purpose. Hereof might many examples be brought, if old examples needed,
where daily are abundant. For the like subtlety he uses in these days,
procuring Bishops and idle Monks to creep in, and maintain the counsels of
the wicked, and to incense the unlearned Comminaltie with slanders against
Christ's doctrine, inuegling the Nobles with fair promises, and sometimes with
gifts and rewards, laboring all that they may, to destroy the fruit of the
Gospel, even in the springth and blade. And this it shall be very profitable
for us well to mark, that we may labor with no less traueyle and study (yet
godly and void of all guile) to defend and set forth the truth.

Secondly, The inconstancy of the Commons.
we have to consider the inconstancy of the Commons and people. For they which
not long before took the Apostles for Gods, and prepared to do sacrifyce
unto them, being suddenly persuaded by forreners, and men of another profession
and religion, go about to put them to cruel death. What therefore shall we
think they would have done, if they had been pricked forward, either of
their own Nation, or of the Roman Presidents? But this the leuitie and
ticklenesse of the people, which is both forgetful of benefytes received, and
with detestable injuries reward their benefactors, is not so dishonest as
common in every place. Example hereof we see in the Egyptians, who being
through Iosephes counsel not only preserved in time of dearth, but also
advanced to great power and glory, yet forgotte they him almost before he was
dead, and used all manner of cruelty and tyranny against his posterity.
Moses felt even the same, who being the protector and defender of the people of
Israel, and having suffered all kind of slanderous reproaches, could scarce
escape stoning. What need we to speak of David and diverse others, whose
examples we read in the stories of the Gentyles, seeing it is evident Christ
suffered the like? For they which called him and hayled him as their king, and
with honorable and great showtes received him as he came into Jerusalem,
shortly after joining with the Scribes and Phariseyes, desired to have him
crucified. These examples are very profitable. For they teach us, that we must
not trust in the praise of the people, which is so variable and inconstant. For
if a man will consider but himself only, he shall easily perceive what diverse
minds and contrary affections he shall be in at once. And think we that the
Commons, a beast of so many heads, will always be constant, which look how
many heads it has, with so many senses it is led? and admits and
harkeneth every day to the new devises of them, which use their inconstancy
and leuitie to their lucre and advantage? Why rather labor we not to make our
doings acceptable to God only, with whom we know there is a sure reward
laid up for us, which neither the leuitie of the Commons, nor violence of
Tyrants can take from us.

Thirdly, we have to consider God himself, The providence of God preserves
the godly in dangers.
according to whose beck and providence it is manifest all things are ordered.
He suffers the most faithful Apostle of Christ, and chosen vessel of his
grace, to be stoned, and that of them, whose salvation he most desired, and
for whom he prayed without ceasing. Therefore it ought not to seem a strange
or insolent thing unto us, if the like come to pass in these days, and we
must not judge of any man's doctrine or faith according to the evil success
thereof, because the like fell out in times past to the Prophets, as Christ
testifyeth. Math. 5.
Let us rather comfort our selves with Gods providence, which appears in this
place by many arguments. For who will not acknowledge it to be the singular
working and counsel of God, that Paul was thus stoned, and Barnabas
untouched, being Paul's companion, and whom not long before, they seemed to
prefer before Paul, calling him Jupiter? Who will say but he was preserved
by the assistance of God, seeing we read none was present, that went about to
resist the enterprise of these harebrained Commons? And if any man will
demand why God assisted this man rather than Paul, surely he can render no
certain reason therefore, more than that it so lyked God, whose judgments are
truth and verity. Yet if place may be given to godly conjectures, it may seem
that God therefore spared Barnabas, because he knew he was as yet more weak,
than to bear out such a brunt. For God is faithful, and will not suffer us to
be tempted with more than we can bear. 1. Cor. 10.
And Gods care and goodness seems toward Paul no less: for he preserves
him in the midst of the showting of the people, and stones flying about his
ears, so that he caught no deadly wound, or if he had any, he recovered it.
Yea, he so restored him again, that being thought to be dead, and being
drawn like a dead caryon out of the gates of the City, he was able the next
day following to take his journey. Let no man therefore despair in the middle
of dangers, considering that the bounds of Gods providence pass the marks
and doles of all dangers. For whether we live or die, we be the Lords, and
nothing is able to separate us from his love. Romans 8.14.
And Paul himself teaches us to learn a general doctrine of this example,
in the later Epistle to Timothy cap. 3. by these words: Thou have seen the
experience of my doctrine, fashion of living, purpose, faith, long suffering,
love, patience, persecutions, and afflictions, which came on me at Antioch, at
Iconium, and Lystra, which persecutions I suffered patiently: and from them all,
the Lord delivered me, yea, and all they that will live godly in Christ Jesus
shall suffer persecution. Wherefore first let us lay this foundation in our
mind, that nothing can come unto us without the ordinance and pleasure of God,
who has numbered even the hears of our head. Math. 10.
Next, let us think he ordreth all things after his righteous and holy
judgment. Thirdly, let us be fully persuaded, that he will never cease to take
care for us, but bears a fatherly mind and affection to us: and that even
then he most cares for us, when we seem most in danger of our enemies.
Therefore he will deliver us out of all danger, if he think it so meetest for
our behoof. And if it seem not so good unto him, which far better knows
our case, and what is meet for us, than we our selves, what be we, I pray you,
to replye against him? But hereof we shall have occasion to say more about the
end of the sermon.

The duty of Christians toward their brethren in distress.
Now what did the Disciples whose minds were lightened with sounder knowledge
of Christ, in all this business? Did they deny their faith and take part with
the Gentyles: or were they ashamed of Paul so being stoned, and in shameful
wise haled through the City? No truly. But they gathered about him, by
likelyhoode of good will. For where they were not able to defend him against
the open violence of the furious people, they do yet as much as in them lies.
And whom they thought to be dead, him they stand about bewayling him, and
desirous to accomplish the last duty of burial unto the most valiant
minister of Christ, as we heard the faithful at Jerusalem did before, when
Steven was martyred. And yet was this a dangerous enterprise, if a man well
consider the Jews cankred hatred toward Christ, and the rage of the people,
not yet calmed by reason of the late disdain conceived. But our Savior Christ
fails not to further such godly duty. For whom they lamented as dead,
him did God in such wonderful wise restore again, that he by and by rose up
and went into the City. We are taught by this example, what duty we owe unto
the faithful ministers of Christ, being in danger for doing of their duty.
First, they that are able, must faithfully help them being in distress:
wherein many duties are to be considered and fall out, amongst which there is
none so small, that has not his reward before God, considering that he shall
not lose his recompense, that gives but a Cup of cold water unto a Disciple
of Christ. Math. 10.
And if any deny them the succor they are able to give them, let them think
that said unto them, that Mardocheus sometime said unto Queen Hester: If
thou hold thy peace at this time, then shall the Jews have help and
delyueraunce some ootherwayes, and thou and thy fathers house shall perish,
Cap. 4. The second degree of duty is, that they that are not able to help
them, consent not unto the counsel of the wicked enemies of Christ, and by all
means possible declare that they never consented unto them. Marc. 15.
The story of the Gospel shows us as example hereof in Joseph of
Arimathaea. The third and last is, that we comfort those, whom other
tyrannouslye afflict, by all the means we are able: and if we lack ability,
yet to testifye by our tears, how we lament their state. And let us not be
ashamed of them, in whom we know Christ lies bound, is banished, afflicted,
and put to sorrow. This did Josephus most faithfully perform, while he
caused Christ to be honorably buried, whom his adversaries shamefully hong on
cross. If we would now a days thus dutyfully use our selves toward the
members of Christ, we should see God would help and aid us, beyond our
expectation. For God will not suffer the endeavors of his beloved to be lost,
nor the kingdom of Christ his son, to be shrowne down, by the enterprises
of the wicked. But let us return to the Apostles, and see what they did after
they had escaped these broils, of whom thus much is reported, as follows.

The next day following, The Apostles made the bolder by afflictions return
to their vocation again.
Paul accompanied with Barnabas went from Lystra, and came unto Derba, where
he preaches the Gospel of Ie^us Christ, and brings many disciples unto
Christ. This is a notable and rare example of christian constancy and
faithful endeavor, that by danger being made the more bold and fervent, they
return again unto their office and duty. Hereby is reproved the
sluggishnesse of those slydebackes, which after they have been once in danger,
as though they had then done all their duty, can never be brought again, to
suffer any more for Christ's sake. Howbeit in deed they should rather have
considered, that by reason God of late had so delivered and helped them, they
should have been the more encouraged and bold. For has God therefore set us
at liberty, to the intent we should afterward stand idle and look on, while
others are in peril? Nay, but for this cause rather he makes good his
promise, to the end we should stand the more boldly in the defense of his
name. Paul remembering this, could not find in his heart to rest scarce one
day together, and yet it might seem he had deserved to have his Quietus est.
This also is to be observed, that wheresoever Luke reasons of the Apostles
doctrine, he makes mention of nothing but the gospel, the Ministry and
preaching whereof Christ had committed unto them. Marc. 16.
This is a great argument of the faith and credit which they used in the
office committed to their charge, and also teaches us what ought to be
preached in the Church. For if the Apostles durst not take so much upon them,
as to give back and starte from the commandment of Christ, and to infeoffe
the Church with new traditions. Doubtless their boldness can not be excused,
which now a days impudently presume so to do, under the name and pretense of
the Apostles.

Moreover, the Apostles return to the three Cities, from whence they were
expulsed, They come to the Cities again, from whence they were driven.
that is, to Antioche, Iconium, and Lystra, to confirm and establishe those
that they had woonne unto Christ in the faith. For as in ordering of an house,
it is as much praise to save that is gotten, as to get more unto the same: so
in the Church of God, we must have a care not only to get more unto it, but
also to take heed that none fall from their duty and faith through our
negligence. And as seed must not only be thrown into the ground, but also
be tended and cherished, that thorns and briars ouergrowe it not, so that it
perish: so the seed of Gods word being once sown amongst men, must still be
cherished and watered. For the parable of Christ is well known, concerning our
enemy, which while we be a sleep, uses to sow Darnell and Co^cle. Therefore
they are much to blame, which after they have preached the word, think they
have discharged their duty, whereas afterward their dyligence and industry,
is more needful than before, that they which before began to hear and follow
the voice of Christ, be not seduced and pulled back through Satan's craft. Also
it is a notable example of christian love and zeal, that Paul and Barnabas
returned to them again, who injuriously and shamefully had entreated them,
dryuing them out of their Cities. Let no man therefore be offended at the
unthankfulness of men, nor think it is therefore lawful for him to leave of
his duty, because his hearers, for whose salvation he is so careful, like
not of him as he deserves. For why should a man imitate him whom he thinks
worthy to be blamed? Thou think them worthy to be reprehended which do not
their duty. Why then suffer thou thy self to do worse than they, in not
doing thy duty? Remember rather that thou art the servant of God, and
therefore look for thy reward at his hand, and not of this blockishe and
ungrateful world, whose property it is, to requite those that do them good
with all evil. The things that came to pass unto Moses, David, the prophets,
to Christ, and his Apostles, abundantly declare the same. Yea, the hystories
of the Gentiles are full of these examples. For here unto are to be referred
Aristides, Themistocles, Miltiades, Cimon, Camillus, the Scipions, the Catones,
Cicero, and infynite others, who where they were the deliuerers of their
Countries from calamities, whereby the unkind Citizens, either shamefully
banished their Countries, or else unworthily put to death and killed. But let
us diligently consider what Paul and Barnabas did, in the Cities whereunto
they returned.

First, it is said, they confirmed the minds of the Discipels. And yet is it
the work of God only, There confirm the minds of the Disciples.
to rule the minds of men, to confyrme them, and to move them after his own
pleasure. Yet the Apostles confyrme them, whose ministry God did vouchsafe to
use to that purpose, who where he works only all things, in all men, yet for
the most part he uses his means, and a certain orderly proceeding. Therefore
even as by preaching of the word, he illuminateth men's minds with faith: so
by the same means, he confyrmeth men's minds in the faith. And so must we
think and consider hereof, least we attribute to the ministry of men, that
which is only the work of God, or else make to light of the ministry
ordained of God. For grievous and detestable is the error of them, which while
they will seem to defend the glory of God, contempne the order appointed of
God, despise the doctrine of his word, shun to ^oyne with the congregation,
neglect prayers, and under the pretense of Gods holy name, live carelessly and
wickedly.

Howbeit, They exhort men to perseverance.
Luke declares how the Apostles confyrmed the minds of the Disciples, saying
as follows: exhorting them to continue in the faith. Men's minds therefore
use to be confyrmed with exhortations, taken out of the word of God. Let us
also mark how it is not sufficient for men, once to believe in Christ, but
that they must also abide and continue in the true faith. For except they so
do, Math. 12. Luke. 9.
the later end will be worse than the beginning, and they are not thought
worthy of the kingdom of God, which have once laid their hand to the Plough,
and look back again. Hereof came it to pass, that Christ after his
ascension, rebuked the Church of Ephesus, because she had lost her former love,
and fervent zeal of faith, but commended the Church at Thyatira, because they
increased every day more and more in faith and godliness. Apocal. 2.
Therefore it behooves all congregations diligently to meditate all these
things, that they corrupt not the lawdable beginnings of faith, with fylthie
falling away and negligence. Also let all degrees and states of men learn
hereby to take heed of their office, this is a general rule in all things,
that it is in vain to begin well, except we continue on unto the end. In
the mean while this place teaches us, that the doctrine of faith is certain
and inviolable. For it were no commendable thing to persevere and continue in
the faith, if there were any thing in the doctrine, thereof to be amended or
changed, which thing is to be objected against them, who while they dare not
openly condemn the doctrine of the Apostles, yet (say they) there are diverse
things added to it since, as necessary to be observed, as the things that they
taught. But if a man will compare those things with the doctrine of the
Apostles, he shall find that the truth of the Apostles doctrine can not
stand, if such things be admytted. Let us learn therefore so to persist in
the faith and doctrine of the Apostles, that we admit nothing contrary
thereunto, yea, that we believe not an Angel, Galat. 1.
if he would now preach any new or other gospel.

Moreover, they put away the offense of the Cross, They put away the offense
of the cross.
which was a thing very needful, because man's reason most times judges of
faith according as things in time fall out. And it is not unlike but many men's
minds were marvelously tempted, seeing the Apostles doctrine was euerywhere
rejected, and they still in danger and trouble for the same. But the Apostles
in a brief saying, give a most effectual comfort to the weak in faith,
saying: that by many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of heaven.
This saying has in it two reasons very fytte to comfort us. The first is, that
they say it must so be, and can not be otherwise. And common sense teaceth us,
that we must take patiently and in good worth, that that cannot be otherwise.
Thus they declare in what state of life the godly have to live in this world:
which Christ also testifyeth, is full of all manner of afflictions, whereas he
commands us every day to take up our Cross, Luke. 9.
and so to follow him. And surely if a man will mark the course of this life,
he shall see nothing free from evil and misery. For this life flows with
all manner of molestations, which spring of sin, such as are sickness,
labor, care, watching, poverty, alteration of the world, and infynite like, by
reason whereof our life is compared to a most troublesome and perilous
pilgrimage, and continual traueyle. But beside these, there are other
afflictions which the world that cannot abide the light, has in store for the
godly. For hereof proceeds it that the world hates them, that they are
rayled on, and put to shame, that every man does them iniurye, that they lay
violent hands on them, that they are imprisoned, manacled, and fettered, that
they are banished, lose their goods, and suffer most vile and horrible
deaths. Psalm. 34. John. 15.16.
Thus is fulfilled the saying of David: Many are the tribulations of the just,
and that Christ foretold should come unto us. And in all these things we must
remember, that so it must be, not only for that God may be found true of his
word, but because it is expedient thus to tame and bridle our flesh, and to
move us to loathe this life, and to desire the life to come. For we feel in
our selves, what a love of this world is in our flesh, and with how much
ado we are brought to the desire of heavenly things. And what (think you)
would come of us, if we should taste of no adversity in this world, but have
all things come to pass according to our desire and lyking? Surely, the flesh
would never be brought to renounce this world, which notwithstanding all these
vexations, is woonderfully in love with the world. The second reason is, that
they declare how there is a joyful end of tribulations, for that by
tribulations there is an entrance for us into the kingdom of God. Which words
are not so to be understood, as though by suffering afflictions we deserve the
kingdom of God, which is purchased for us by the blood of our Savior Christ
only. But they teach us, that Christ by his example has trod out this way
unto us, that as he by the cross entered into the glory of his father: so the
end of all afflictions is set forth unto us to be the inheritance of eternal
life, according to the promise of Christ: John. 12.14. and.17.
I will that where I am, there my Minister shall also be. Who therefore will
henceforth abhor the cross? who will be offended at afflictions, seeing he
hears they come also unto the wicked, but by Christ's mean work to the
salvation of the godly. Let us remember these things at this day (O brethren.)
Let us consider that it is Gods appointment, that we should be thus invred with
diverse troubles, and that it can not be otherwise, because the naughtynesse of
our flesh so requires. Let us have an eye to the example of Christ, who
because he would be our Captain, suffered first all these things.
Furthermore, let us fasten the eyes of our mind upon the glory of the
heavenly life, and forgette these frail and temporal things behind us. Let
us join hereunto fervent prayer, that he may vouchsafe to accomplish and
perform the good work which is begone in us. And so shall it come to pass,
that being inspyred with his spirit and grace, and having prosperously ended
this race of our life, and attained to the reward of the heavenly, we shall
live and reign with our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: to whom be praise,
honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.C. Homely.
AND when they had ordained them Elders by election in every congregation, and
had prayed and fasted, they commended them to the Lord on whom they believed.
And when they had gone thorowout Pisidia, they came to Pamphilia, and when they
had preached the word in Perga, they descended into the City Attalia, and
thence departed by ship to Antioch, from whence they were committed unto the
grace of God, to the work which they fulfilled. When they were come and had
gathered together the congregation, they rehearsed all that God had done by
them, and how he had opened the door of faith unto the Gentyles. And there
they abode long time with the Disciples.
AS it was the duty of the Apostles, to bring our Savior Jesus Christ
Disciples, and to gather him a Church out of all Nations, by preaching of the
Gospel: so was it their parts and duty carefullye and diligently to see unto
the same Churches. And this do Paul and Barnabas most faythfullye. For after
they had with peril of their lives planted Congregations at Antioche, Iconium,
and Lystra, they labored with all industry possible to maintain and defend
the same, against the assaults and crafts of Satan. And because they knew the
Jews did marvelously vex them, they returned again to the Churches there,
notwithstanding they were opprobriously driven forth of them. Neither do they
return without profit, but confyrme and strengthen the minds of the
Disciples, with admonitions and comfortes, exhorting them to continue and abide
in the doctrine, and putting away the slander and offense of the Cross, of
all which has been spoken in the sermon before going. Hereunto is to be
adjoined that that is said in the beginning of this place, touching Elders
ordained by the said Apostles. When we have hereof entreated as much as God
shall give us grace, then will we speak of their return unto the Church at
Antioch again, to whom they recounted all that they had done abroad.

When they had (says Luke) ordained them Elders by election, The Apostles
appoint Elders in every church.
in every congregation, and had prayed and fasted, they commended them to the
Lord on whom they believed. They are called Seniors or Elders, which partlye
are Ministers and teachers of his word, and partly such as are ayding and
assisting the Pastors in the administration of the Church, and which by reason
of their authority see that Discipline be observed in the Church. And where
Luke says they ordained such in every Church, it easily appears, that it is
very necessary for the conservation of the Church, to have such as by whose
ministry the doctrine of the word may be had in continual use. This is
requisite both for the infyrmitie of the flesh, and also because of the
corruption of man's nature, which must needs be oftentimes warned to do his
duty, least he be brought to destruction by the crafts and subtlety of the
Devil. For the which cause Christ did not only send forth the Apostles to
preach the Gospel among all Nations of the world: but also gave unto his
Church, Ephe. 4. 1. Cor. 12.
Pastors and teachers, by whose diligence the faith and knowledge of God which
the Apostles taught, might be confyrmed and preserved in men's minds. And Paul
writes that he left Titus for this cause in Creta, that he should ordeyne
Elders in every City of that Islande. And hereunto it is manifest the godlyest
Kings and Princes that were hertofore had a respect, by whose liberality
Churches were endowed and enriched, least for want of provision, the ministry
of the word should have failed. Therefore their error is very pieuishe and
absurd, which reject the doctrine of the word as unprofitable and
superfluous. For if these men did well know themselves, they would perceive
that this is the readyest way whereby to attain unto salvation, as Christ
sometime told Martha, being very much busied and occupied in other matters.
Therefore as many as will have the Church to be maintained, let them
diligently provide that the Church want not fytte and worthy Ministers.

The ceremony or manner of the Primitive Church in ^hoosing Elders.
The Euangelyst also declares the ceremony or manner of choosing Elders, wherein
prayer and fasting were first placed, whereof mention was made (as we have
heard before) in the like case. Act. 1. and.13. When the Scripture uses to
join both these together, it signifies that the Church used in solemn wise
to come all together. For the Primitive Church used when any great necessity
urged or constrained them, to appoint solemn assemblies, giving themself to
prayer and fasting until the evening, whereof we have evident testimonies in
the Prophet Joel the second Chapter, and in the hystories of the Kings. The
Primitive Church was moved with weyghty considerations to observe these
things in the electing of the Ministers. For where they thought men might
easily be deceived, they would not in such a weyghty case attribute any thing
to man's judgment, and therefore they thought it meet by godly prayers to
seek the inspiration of Gods spirit. Again, where they thought it was
requisite, to have men furnished with singular gifts, for such an office,
they besought God of the same also by humble supplication, whereunto because it
should be the more fervent, they joined fasting, as we have otherwheres
declared. Moreover, Luke makes mention of laying on of hands, by the which is
understood, not only consent of voices, but also imposition of hands, which
was a sacrament and token of consecration. And it seems ye later was the
rather observed. For it is not likely that ye Apostles receded from the
ceremony which they used in ye choosing of Matthias, or that they permitted
any thing to the judgment of man (as we see comes to pass in men's voices)
seeing they provoked all men to prayers and fasting. This religion and holy
simplicity of the Church is worthy to be diligently observed, wherewith if a
man would compare what is done at these days in the like case, it shall easily
appear with what tyranny the Church is oppressed. For through the
covetousness and ambition of Bishops, it is come to pass, that the liberty
of the Church is trod under foot, and choosing of Ministers depends upon
them, who either sell all spiritual livings for money, or else watch
carefully that none be made ministers, but such as are for their own tooth,
that will cloak and wink at all their doings.

After the choosing of these Ministers, Luke says, The Apostles comme^d the
congregation unto the Lord.
they commended the congregations to the Lord, on whom they believed. This is
a duty of courtesy and humanity, to commend them to the tuition and defense
of God, whose prosperity and well doing we wish. It also declares the
diligent care of the Apostles, which always had a special consideration of
the Churches well fare. Whereunto that saying of Paul is to be referred: I am
combred daily and do care for all congregations, 2. Cor. 11.
who is weak and I am not weak? who is offended and I burn not? In the mean
season we are admonished, that by reason of our infyrmitie we have need of
Gods protection and governance. For, as we be prone and ready to fall, so
Satan is still seeking how to catch us in his snares, so that when Christ was
going out of this world unto his father, he did not without a cause, commend
his Disciples unto the protection of his father. John. 17.
This ought to kindle in us a fervent desire to true godliness and religion,
that we betraye not our salvation through our own slothfulness. Again,
hereof we may also take comfort, in that it appears, our salvation depends
upon the protection and providence of God. For who would not despair, if it
should depend upon man's will and power, which is the most inconstant and
deceyueable thing in the world. Howbeit, there is no cause for us to despair,
if we consider how it stands in the tuition and governance of God, who can
not but have a special care of us, seeing he has such care for the flowers of
the fyelde, and birds of the air, and has numbered the very hears of our
head. He has by his son promised us, John. 14.
that he will not leave us succourlesse. And Christ in whom we believe
professes he is both a faithful and valiant shepherd, John. 10.
out of whose hand no man is able to take his sheep. Yea, Paul in an other
place teaches us, that God knows who are his, 2. Tim. 2. Romans 8.
and how there is nothing that can separate us from the love of God. Therefore
as often as Satan tempts us, let us fly unto the sanctuary of Gods mercy
and favor, unto the which Christ has commended us. Moreover, the example of
the Apostle teaches us, what we should do after we have done our duty. Let
us commit all the success thereof unto God, by whose providence we know all
things are governed. This is the only mean to moderate and quiet our devises.
Wherein who so are ignorant, are marvelously troubled, and often times leave
off their duty, supposing to bring matters to pass through their own
wisdom and devise. For, standing between hope and dread, they can find no
resting place for their devise. But they that know that trust and diligence is
required of them, in doing their duty, and that all success thereof
depends upon God: when they see they have done their parts and duty, they
can set light all dangers that come unto them, and no fear of danger can
with hold them from doing their duty.

Now these things being done, The Apostles preach the Gospel at Perga.
Paul and Barnabas appoint to go again to Antioche in Syria, from whence
before they had took their leave: And because they would not lose their labor
by the way, they preach the Gospel at Perga, a City of Pamphilia. This city
was famous by reason of Diana, that was there worshipped, which of the place
was called Pergaea, as the Gentyles write. It was therefore a singular work of
Gods goodness, that he would vouchsafe so superstitious and ydolatrous a
people the light of his word. Again, the diligence of the Apostles is to be
considered, and their vnwearysome and great traueyle that they used in
overthrowing the kingdom of Satan. Whosoever will be counted Apostolic, and
mean despite of the world, and Prince thereof, to root out superstition, and
to set up the kingdom of Christ, let them imitate this zeal. For they are not
to be regarded, which either by reason of the ingratitude of the world, or of
dangers on every side appearing, leave of their duties. But it is time to
consider what the Apostles, did after their return to Antioche.

They give account of their doings abroad.
First, when the congregation was assembled together like faithful Legates and
Ambassadors, they declare unto the whole Church all that they had done in
their circuit. Therefore the Apostles were no Lords over men's faith,
prescribing all things of their absolute power, according to their pleasure.
But rather they acknowledged themselves to be the servant of Christ, and did
not impudently contempne his spouse, as in these days they use, which swelling
in the name and succession of the Apostles, think it unmeet to be at others
appointment, or to render an account of their doings, to any man. Let them
read I beseech them, that is written. 1. Pet. 5.


They refer all their doings unto God.
Moreover, they utter and speak nothing of themselves, in arrogant manner, but
make God the author of all their doings. And it is not without a cause that
Luke makes mention twice or thrice of the grace and work of God. For first he
says, they were committed unto the grace of God in this work, to the intent
that all the Church might witness, they were able to do nothing without the
grace of God. Then declare they what woonders God wrought by them, which kind
of phrase attributes the whole success of their embassage and ministry to
God only. Moreover, they declare how God opened the door of faith unto the
Gentyles. Then is there a door opened unto the faith, when an effectual
operation of the holy spirit is joined unto the outward preaching, whereby
the minds of men are illuminated and drawn unto the obedience of faith. This
is the only work of God, John. 6.
as Christ testifyeth saying. No man comes unto me, except my father draws
him. We are taught therefore, by the example of the Apostles to attribute
nothing to our own industry and wisdom in deed, of us it is required to be
faithful and diligent. Howbeit as the success of our doings must be committed
unto God, so must all the praise and glory of their well doings, be referred
unto him also. Which doctrine is not only for ministers of the word to
remember, but also for all Magistrates, householders, married folk, servants,
and to conclude for all states and degrees of men, as we have oftentimes
declared.

They repo^e themself after their traue^le and dangers.
Last of all it is said, they tarry a good space, at Antioche, to the end
doubtless to recreate themselves with honest and godly quietness, having been
wearied a long while before with many labors and dangers both by land and
sea. For it is meet and convenient, that they should reap some fruit of
their labors, whose faith and diligence had been so many ways tried. So
Christ bade his Apostles when they returned from preaching the gospel, Marc. 6.
to go aside out of the way for a season, and to repose themselves a little.
Let no man yet think that the Apostles sat still at Antioche ydely, gasing
upon others. For without doubt they faithfully taught the brethren, and took
pains in helping the other Ministers. But for a certain time, they surceased
from traueyling, and taking any enterprise of danger in hand. God, the
father of mercy grant, that all they that now a days glory in the gospel,
may fynishe the course of their life, with like diligence and success as did
the Apostles, and that in the heavenly Chanaan, they may enjoy perpetual rest
and peace, with Jesus Christ our Savior, to whom be all praise, honor, power
and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.xv. chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The.Cj. Homely.
AND certain men which came down taught the brethren: except you be
circumcised after the manner of Moses, you cannot be saved. So when there was
risen discention and disputing not a little unto Paul and Barnabas, and
certain other of them, should go up to Jerusalem unto the Apostles and Elders
about this question. And after they were brought on their way, by the
congregation, they passed over Phoenices and Samaria, declaring the conversion
of the Gentyles, and they brought great joy unto all the brethren. And when
they were come to Jerusalem, they were received of the congregations and of the
Apostles and Elders, and they declared all the things that God had done by
them.
IN the former part of his treatise or work, The doctrine of the Apostles is
ons^t, by intesti^e division and schism.
Luke has declared how the primitive Church was gathered together, both of
Jews and Gentiles, by preaching of the Apostles, and how by the wonderful
assistaunce of GOD, it was preserved among the contynuall storms and blastes
of persecution. Hereunto is added a new history in this Chappiter, that
teaches us, how the Lord preserved the same Church against false brethren
and teachers, least it might lose either simplicity of doctrine, or purity
of faith. For hitherto for fourteen years together Paul had preached the
Gospel, and according to the common consent of the Apostles doctrine had
taught, that all salvation was in Christ Jesus only, which doctrine being
euerywhere received, certain of the Jews, specially those of the Phariseys
sect, that professed the faith of Christ, began to withstand. Who albeit they
confessed Christ, yet they would needs have circumcision and the ceremonies of
the laws to be joined with it, which opinion whiles Paul earnestly resisted,
caused great adooe and contention, insomuch that it horribly shook the whole
Church. But our Savior Christ forsook not them that stro^e for the glory of
his merit, by whose providence it came to pass, that the plain and simple
doctrine of Christ was defended and confyrmed, by the public testimony of the
Apostles, and the whole Church. The consyderation of this history serves much
both to instruct and comfort all congregations. For as by the example of the
Apostles, we are taught which way to resist false doctrine: ^o learn we that
the doctrine of truth stands fyrme and sure against all invasions, wherefore
we will in order consider all the parts of this present place.

The Authors of the discention.
First, Luke tells who were the authors of this strife and discention, even
certain persons that came out of Jury and from Jerusalem. Therefore they must
needs be of great authority, considering Jerusalem was the mother Church of
all other, and was worthily esteemed of all men, because from thence the
Gospel of salvation did first issue and spring: for the which cause Paul also
commends it, saying: It was meet the Gentyles should minister corporal
things unto those of Jerusalem, Roma. 15.
which had given them the spiritual and eternal gifts of salvation. And it
is no doubt, but those deceyuers and seducers did marvelously brag of the
name and authority of the Apostles, and did make light of Paul's name, as who
should say, he deserved not to be counted among the Apostles, because he had
not been conversant with Jesus Christ while he lived. For this may we gather
of Paul's Epistles, where he is enforced earnestlye to defend his authority,
and Apostleship against them. Furthermore, we may here see how deceyuers
breed even in the Church, but were never true members of the Church. For they
that are in deed of the Church, use to continue in the same. 1. John. 2. Math.
7. Acts. 20.
Therefore Christ says, they go in sheep clothing. And Paul in another
place says: from among your selves shall rise grievous wolves. etc. And this
is a wonderful craft of Satan which knowing that men do hate and abhor
him, uses to counterfeyte an Angel of light, and under the cloak of
holiness, 1. Cor. 11.
to beguyle and deceive the simple. This place serves to confute them which
constantly believe that the Roman Church cannot err, and be deceived, and
affirm that whatsoever comes from thence, ought to be received as an Oracle.
And yet out of Jerusalem where the Apostles discharged their office and duty
with all diligence, came these hypocrites and deceyuers. What therefore shall
we hope for at their hands, amongst whom these many hundred years, has been
seen no token either of Apostolic life or doctrine.

The state of the controversy or discention.
Furthermore, the state of the controversy that these deceyuers held, is
expressed. For they called back the Gentyles unto Circumcision, and Ceremonies
of the law, saying: Except you be circumcised, you cannot be saved. Which
saying it is very like they confyrmed with many articles. For they had the law
of God, Gene. 17.
who ordained Circumcision for a perpetual sign of his covenant amongst the
Israelites. They had also the example of the Church at Jerusalem, where the
Apostles yielded so far to the weakness of the Jews, that they circumcised
their infantes. Moreover, where through Circumcision they were bound to
observe the law (according to that saying of Paul: I testifye to every man
that is circumcised, Galat. 5.
that he is bound to keep the whole law. This being taken away, they cried
and said that the whole law was abrogated, and a gate opened unto all
wickedness. Yet they confessed Christ notwithstanding, and would seem to be
followers of the Gospel, like goodlye blenders and compounders, which thought
the law might be mingled with the Gospel, and the righteousness of works
with faith. This therefore was the whole state of the controversy: whether men
were justified through the grace of God, by faith only in Christ, or whether
the righteousness of the law was necessary unto salvation. And if a man will
weygh and expende this matter well, it shall appear that this was the very
same controversy, which is between us and the Papists now in these days,
who profess Christ also, but yet affirm that men are justified and saved by
their merits and good deeds, saving that in this point the Papists case is
the weaker and worse, for that they ground not upon the law of Moses, once
given by God, but upon man's traditions, Esaias. 29.
which long sithence have been condemned by the sentence of God. They worship
me in vain teaching the doctrines of men. Therefore it is very necessary for us
to understand this controversy. Math. 15.
For if there be no place due unto the works of Gods law for us to glory we
be justified by, then doubtless be they very miserable and blind, which dare
challenge this praise unto the cold obseruances of man's traditions. In the
mean season, man's perverseness bewrays itself in this place, which where
God offreth salvation unto us freely, contemns the same, and seeks rather a
sumptuous and laborious way of attayning thereunto. Examples of this
peruersitie appear in all ages, and the Lord complayneth hereof in Esaias. 55.
saying: Wherefore lay you out your money upon the thing that feeds not, and
spend your labor about the thing that satisfies you not? Again: My people
has committed two evils: Ierem. 2.
they have forsaken me the well of the water of life, and dug them pits,
yea, vile and broken pits, that can hold no water. And would God that he had
not more occasion to make the like complaint euerywhere at this day.

Thirdly follows the effect of false doctrine, The success thereof.
that these Jewish Christians brought in. That was sedition and open schism,
through the which Luke says, the Church at Antioch which hitherto had been
most quiet, and as a common sanctuary to all the godly, was disturbed.
Therefore they that fall from the simple doctrine of the truth, and bring new
and false opinions into the Church, these are disturbers of the Church. By this
name does Paul here set out these fellows, saying: I marueyle that you are
so soon turned from Christ, that called you by grace, unto another Gospel,
Galat. 1.
which yet is none other, but that there be some which trouble you. And in
other places he calls them Dogs, evil workers, concision, Philip. 3.
and the very enemies of the cross of Christ. I know we are charged by the
Papists in these days, to have disturbed and to disturb the Church. But if
the truth of the Apostles doctrine be well marked, it shall appear we are most
clear from this crime, the purity of which doctrine because we endeavor to
restore, makes us in deed to disturb the idleness of them, who under a
false pretense of Christ and his Church, had a delight to disporte themselves
both with the felles and flesh of the miserable sheep. Furthermore, the
chief use of this place is, that we be not so offended with the discentions
rising in our days, by reason of religion, that we therefore think all
doctrine of faith and religion, to be doubtful and uncertain. For it is
evident, that the doctrine of truth, has in all ages been diversely assaulted,
and that therefore diverse discentio^s have risen by means thereof. This God
suffers to come to pass by his just judgment, and for the weal of our
salvation. For first, according to the saying of Paul, 1. Cor. 11.
there must needs be sects, that they which are perfect, may be known.
Again, by this occasion it comes to pass, that the chief articles of our
faith and salvation are the more diligently and earnestly examined, which
unless they were thus called in question, would for the most part, lie
unconsidered and buried. For God can so moderate mischiefs, that they serve
unto the salvation of those that be his, and to those that love God, all thing
works to the best. And this may we see in this present controversy as clear
as day. For hereby came it to pass, that the mean of our iustifycation was
entreated and discussed the more diligently by the Apostles, and that the
ceremonies of the law were the less regarded among the Jews, wherein yet a
great many put much trust. Even so in our age, the sacrifyce of the Mass was
no way more overthrown, than by the controversy which fell out about the
supper of the Lord. Therefore their clamor is pieuishe and absurd, which
complain and say, that by reason of such discentions, religion is doubtful
and uncertain. For under this color, they go about to hyde and cloak their
profane and hollow hearts.

Paul and Barnabas stowtely resist.
Furthermore, let us consider what Paul and Barnabas and the faithful of
Antioch did in this disceptation. As for Paul and Barnabas, it is said that
they had much contention and daily disputation with these disturbers.
Therefore they were no dumb Dogs, which would suffer all kinds of doctrine
to creep into the Church, but rather they earnestly withstoode these
deceyuers, so that the true faith was not ouerturned with their gloses. Yet
otherwheres Paul becomes all things to all men, and earnestly commands
those that be strong in faith, patiently to bear with the weaker. Why
therefore shows he himself in this place to be so difficult and untreatable?
Because it was a matter of more importance than could be dissembled. For by
this opinion, the righteousness of faith which we have in Christ alone, is
ouerturned. For they which by Circumcision, make them self bond unto the law,
Galat. 5.
to them is Christ become unprofitable, and they which will be justified by the
law, are fallen from grace. Moreover, by this means the Christian liberty
was in hazard, which could be purchased with none other price, than with the
blood of Christ, and they which were justified by the faith in Christ, and
enfrauncised with the liberty of the children of God, were not subject to the
commandment and intolerable yoke of the law, as Peter hereafter will
declare. Beside this, the true use of the law was perverted, Galat. 3.
which was to bring men, as a tutor and governor, unto Christ. And these
fellows sent those that were graffed in Christ unto the principles and
beginnings of the law. Moreover, it could not be chosen, but the light of the
Gospel should have been obscured and darkened with the shadows of the law.
Therefore Paul might not in any case have borne with these deceyuers, unless
he would have been counted an vntrustye Minister of Christ. By the which
example we are taught, that we must for concord and unities sake admit
nothing, that may any way obscure the glory of Christ and simple confession of
the faith. For that is a very hurtful concord that is redeemed with the
profanation of the name of Christ, and denying of the faith. For, this saying
of Christ stands fyrme and strong: he that loves father and mother more than
me, Math. 10.
is not worthy of me. Again: whosoever shall be ashamed of me before this
adulterous and naughty world, him will I be ashamed of, Marc. 8.
when I come in the glory of my father. Furthermore, let us hereof be
persuaded that Christian men can have no peace without Christ. For if they
will be true Christians, John. 16.
in the world they shall have afflictions, and in Christ only peace.

Howbeit, they of Antioch that believed, The congrega^ion at Antioch refer
the controversy to the judgment of the Apostles
when they perceived this contention every day more and more to kindle, they
decree at length with one consent, that Paul and Barnabas with certain other
Disciples, should go to Jerusalem, to propounde this question unto the
Apostles and Elders, there to be discussed. And Paul easily yields unto this
decree, not meaning to put the cause of truth to the judgment of man, but
for that he well knew these deceyuers abused the name of the Apostles.
Therefore for the more commodity of the unlearned and simple people, whose
eyes they had dazeled with the brightness of Apostolic authority, he easily
admitted this counsel, as the most commodious and readyest way that could
be devised. The cause of conuocations sinodes, and counsayles in the primitive
Church.
And this has been the chief cause of all the Sinodes and Counsayles that
heretofore have been gathered by godly Kings and Bishops. For it was never
the mind of those holy men, that the cause of faith and salvation should be
in subjection to man's judgment. But where Heretics used impudently to vaunt
them of the consent of Apostolic doctrine, and universal Church unto the
unlearned people, the Catholics thought good most commodiously to bridle them
by Synodes, and the public testimony of the Church, to the end that they
should not afterward be believed. We have diligently to consider the modesty
that Paul here uses. For it is manifest, he was end^ed with such constancy,
that he would not have yielded unto the Apostles, if they would have
pronounced any thing against the truth. For he durst boldly reprehende Peter at
Antioch, and he teaches us that we ought not to believe an Angel, Galat. 1.2.
if he would preach any other Gospel. Yet he despises not a mean and devise
of peace vttred by the godly brethren, whereas he saw the glory of God could
thereby no way be obscured, and that the quiet of the weaker sort might
thereby be procured. This modesty must be joined with constancy, least while
we will seem constant, we be found obstinate and wayward. For the spirit of
Christ is tractable, and makes men which use him as their counsayler, desirous
of his glory. In the mean season their leuitie is not to be allowed, which
while they will seem tractable and easy to be entreated, be obedient to such
counsayles, they see do quite deface and overthrow the verity of faith, and
glory of Christ. Furthermore, this place teaches us, which is the best way
to calm controversies and contentions, that rise about faith and religion.
Some there be that think these matters might be taken up and ended by man's
wisdom and policy, if each part would somewhat yield one to another, as
though men might daily in religion, and Gods causes, as in other worldly
affairs. Why rather do we not resort unto the Apostles, to hear what they
have taught and appointed, whose doctrine is manifestly confyrmed with the
testimony of Christ himself. Luke. 10.
For unto them it is said: He that hears you, hears me. etc. And we know
that Christ prayed for them which should believe in him, John. 17.
according to their preaching. Moreover, they were openly endued with ye holy
spirit, which showed manifest arguments of his presence and operation in them.
Wherefore we must earnestlye take heed that we swerve not one nails breadth,
from their doctrine. The Apostle John teaches us the same, where in his first
Epistle and second Chapter, he says: Let that remain in you which you
heard from the beginning. If that which you heard from the beginning shall
remain in you, you also shall continue in the father and in the son. Paul
also where he aduertiseth us of such as presume to pervert the truth, says:
But continue thou in the things which thou have learned, which also were
committed unto thee, knowing of whom thou have learned them, 2. Tim. 3.
and forasmuch as thou have of a child, known the holy scriptures, which are
able to make thee learned unto salvation, through the faith which is in Christ
Jesus. Therefore they are fowlye deceived, which by this example will obtrude
unto us Counsayles, as though religion ought by them to be ruled, where it is
evident these many years they have been such, as have had no sign or token of
any Apostolic spirit in them. And if they would hear the Prophets and
Apostles, we would according to the example of Paul and Barnabas, willingly go
up with them unto the Apostles, to hear what the spirit of God speaks in
them. But if they will harken unto men, farewell they, seeing we have none
other master to harken unto, but Jesus Christ.

Paul and Barnabas journey to Jerusalem.
But Luke also descrybeth Paul's going to Jerusalem, because there be diverse
things therein worthy to be considered. Amongst which, the first is, how Paul
and Barnabas are brought on their way by the congregation, which appointed
them worthy and faithful companions to journey with them. Whereby it appears
the congregation took their part, and had no suspicion in their doctrine and
belief. Let all congregations follow this ensample, that they leave not the
faithful ministers of Christ destitute of help. For what else do they but
sustain open war in the Churches quarrel and behoof? And surely their
ingratitude is execrable, which provide to stand out of Gunneshot, when
troubles arise about religion, and will stand ydely gasing on, as though the
matter pertayned nothing unto them, but only unto the Ministers. Then also to
the end their journey should not be unprofitable, and all the time of their
voyage lost, they preach euerywhere the conversion of the Gentyles. And this
was the chief cause of the contention, because many took it in evil part,
that the uncircumcised Gentyles were received into the fellowship of Christ and
his Church. But the godly men understood, that the works of God which served
to the setting forth of Christ's glory, must not be dissembled, because some
men had a wrong judgment of them. Nay we must rather wrestle against the
waywardness of the world, least thereby Gods glory might be impaired. For
that that Christ sometime said unto the priests, being offended with the
childrens showting: If these hold their peace, the stones shall cry: the same
let us think spoken even to us. For although we prouyding for our
slothfulness, dare do nothing for the glory of God: yet will God easily
find faithful defenders of the same, and we shall be made the vessels of
wrath and ignominy, which would not be the instruments of grace and glory.
Thirdly, the brethren rejoice in the conversion of the Gentiles, and neither
envy them the fellowship of salvation, neither Paul nor Barnabas the singular
commendation of such a Ministry. This is the property of the godly, that
they rejoice at the setting forth of Christ's glory, and the salvation of
others. Fourthly, when they were come to Jerusalem, they were received by the
Apostles, and the whole congregation, as singular instruments of Christ. For
it becomes us to reverence the gifts of God in them, whose ministry God
uses both to our profit and his praise. They again declare what God had done
by them, because the same made much for their purpose, the adversaries going
about, through their peeuishe opinion to overthrow the vocation of the
Gentyles. God grant that in these days also, contentions being calmed and
laid down, we may all give ^are to the Apostles doctrine, and that all
hearts through the unity of faith, and bond of true love, may strongly be
knyt together, in Jesus Christ our only savior, to whom be all praise,
honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.Cij. Homely.
THEN rose up certain of the sect of the Phariseys, which did believe, saying,
that it was needful to circumcise them, and to command them to keep the
law of Moses. And the Apostles and Elders came together to reason of this
matter. And when there was much disputing, Peter rose up, and said unto them:
ye men and brethren, you know how that a good while ago, God did choose
among us, that the Gentyles by my mouth should hear the word of the gospel
and believe. And Cod which knows the hearts, bare them witness, and gave
unto them the holy ghost, even as he did unto us, and put no difference
between us and them, seeing that with faith he purified their hearts. Now
therefore, why tempt you God, to put on the disciples necks that yoke, which
neither our fathers nor we were able to bear. But we believe that through the
grare of the Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be saved as they do. Then all the
multitude was appeased, and gave audience to Barnabas and Paul, who told what
signs and wonders God had showed among the Gentyles by them.
AFter the doctrine of the Gospel was spread by the ministry of Paul and
Barnabas among the gentiles, and that they were taken into the communion of
Christ and his Church, a grievous contention fell out among those of the faith,
because diverse said the Gentiles ought to be circumcised, and to be enforced
to observe the law of Moses, which thing others again did constauntly deny.
Luke by the instinct of the holy ghost descrybeth this controversy very
dyligently, because it serves much for the instruction of all men. For it
teaches us, we must not take it for any insolent or strange thing, though
now a days also some controversies rise among the professors of one faith
and doctrine, for as much as God suffers not such controversies to come to
pass, without some utility and avail to all men. Again he shows us what
we have to do in such a case. For we must according to the ensample of Paul
and Barnabas, stowtely defend the truth against all men, and not harken to the
judgments of any men, but ask counsel of the Apostles of Jesus Christ, whom
he has appointed for to be the teachers of his word.

The controversy of iustifycation before the Apostles.
But Luke holding on in the history begone, says that a greater contention
fell out hereabout, after that the matter was proposed unto the Apostles and
Elders at Jerusalem. The Authors hereof were those of the Phariseys that
believed in Christ, yet retayning this smatche of old leaven, that they
strengthly urged the fulfylling of the righteousness of the law. For it
appears by the story of the gospel, that the Phariseys set all
justification in the outward exercise of the works of the law. Wherefore it
could not be chosen, but that they should be the more obstinate in keeping the
same. Whereof we have example in the Monks at this day, whom it is an hard
matter to draw from their old sect, but some tokens thereof will still
remain. It is worthy diligently to be observed, how the chief article of
christian religion was canuassed through this contention, in the hearing of the
godly before the Apostles, so that whether part held the truest opinion,
could at the first not be perceived. Hereby we are taught, that we must not
marueyle, although the excellentest heads and wits in the world be sometime
deceived, or else stiffely stand in defense of received errors. For by this
mean God shows us how to mark the corruption of our nature, that we being
humbled by the consideration thereof, should not stand to much in our own
conceyte. Peter's judgment concerning justification.
Howbeit, Peter until this time held his peace in all this contention, to the
end he would not seem arrogant in prescribing of others, and because it was
expedient that every man should say his mind. But when he perceived that the
contenders minds waxed hotter and hotter, he stands up both modestly and
gravely by his authority, to moderate the matter, and plainly defends the
opion of Paul and Barnabas, who taught that the mean of man's salvation,
consisted in the only faith of Jesus Christ, and that the observation of the
ceremonials needed not: yea, that no praise and glory of justification was to
be ascribed unto the law. All his saying depends upon two points, whereof
the one shows that God appoints none other way of salvation to be
observed, than that which is prescribed in the gospel, namely the faith in
Jesus Christ. The other declares how it is a very heinous matter, for any
man to affirm that the fulfylling of the law is necessary to salvation. But
of each of them, we shall by order entreat.

God iustifyeth of favor or grace through faith in Christ.
The first point is taken out of the example of God, which justified the first
fruits of the believing Gentiles, none otherwise than by faith in Jesus
Christ. This place must be understood as concerning the hystory of Cornelius
the Centurion, which Peter alleges to very good purpose, because the same
before had been called in question and argued on among the faithful, as we
saw in the eleventh Chapter. The sum of his argument is this: God when he
called and adopted Cornelius and his family, from gentilitie unto Christ, and
into the society of his Church, did by that example set forth unto us, a true
and perfyte mean and way of attayning unto salvation. But he required nothing
else of them, but to hear the gospel of me, and to believe it. Ergo, these
two things are sufficient for man to be justified by, and to attain unto
salvation, that is to say, to hear the gospel, and by true faith to embrace
Christ preached in the same. And Peter gathers most strongly, of perticulers,
an universal doctrine, because God uses one certain and inviolable rule, in
saving of all men. And it is not like that God would neglect that rule in
saving a profane souldyour, that was confyrmed in the blood of his son. But
that his argument might bear the more weight, he calls them for witnesses of
the same thing: you know (says he) how that a good while ago (that is in the
beginning of the Church) God did choose or appoint amongst us, that the
Gentyles by my mouth should hear the word of the gospel, and believe. Upon
the which words, he might have inferred: why then do you require circumcision
and fulfylling of the law, over and beside those things that seem to God
sufficient. Or whence have you authority to alter the order appointed of God,
and to be so bold as to add or take any thing from the same. But he leaves
all this to them to gather. Yet he joins two things more hereto, whereby he
opens this example. First God (says he) which knows the hearts, and is not
deceived with any outward appearaunce, has abundantly proved this way,
that I have now told you, to be sufficient even by his own testimony. For
as soon as men believed the gospel that was preached, he sent unto them the
holy ghost, as well as unto us. Which spirit since this world and profane men
even by Christ's own testimony can not receive, it appears most evidently
that God acknowledged these men, for the members of his Church, and for
coinheritours with Christ, although they were neither circumcised, nor had
received any other ceremony of the law. Then pointing, as it were with his
finger to the manner of iustifycation: and God (says he) put no difference
between them and us, seeing that with faith he purifyed their hearts. Before
this in deed, the Jews were divided from the Gentiles by the law, but Christ
has broken down the particion of the law, and of two people has made one
Church, and has purifyed the Gentiles, as well as the Jews, by faith. Hereto
appertains that place of Paul. Ehesi. 2. Roma. 3.
And the words which he writes to the Romans. cap. 3. We hold therefore,
that a man is justified by faith, without the works of the law. Is he the God
of the Jews only* Is he not also the God of the Gentiles? yes, even of the
Gentiles also, for it is God only that iustifyeth the circumcision that is of
faith, and uncircumcision through faith.

Furthermore, The way how we are justified.
Peter in one brief sentence comprehends whatsoever may be said of our
iustifycation. First he confesses that our hearts have need to be purifyed.
Man therefore must needs be a thing altogether polluted, because the heart is
the Fountain out of which spring all our doings. God himself bears witness
hereof, where he says, the inventions and devises of man are naught even from
his childhood. Gene. 8.
And this one thing is abundantly sufficient, to overthrow all the
righteousness of our works, as oftentimes we have declared. Then teaches he
how purifycation is wrought by faith, because it takes hold of Christ, whom
God has ordained to be our iustifyer. He cleanses us from our sins, 1.
John. 1.
through the merit of his blood. He communicates unto us his righteousness,
so that by reason of faith, whereby we be grafte in him, we are taken for
righteous, in the sight of God. Wherefore Paul declares that he is made our
righteousness of God: 1. Cor. 1. 2. Cor. 5.
Again, besides this, he only mortifyeth the relics and dregs of our
flesh, whiles he changes and regenerateth us by his word and spirit,
gyuing us power to bring forth fruits aunswerable to our profession: Whereunto
these words of his are to be referred: Now are you clean, through the words
which I have spoken to you. He that abides in me and I in him, John. 15.
brings forth much fruit. But because we can have no fellowship with Christ,
but through faith, the scripture truly affirms, that we be purifyed and
justified by faith: which phrase of speech must not so be taken, as though
faith were a virtue, through ye merit whereof men were cleansed from their
sins, but because we thereby take hold of Christ, in who^ all our
righteousness consists. Thirdly, he makes God ye author of this
purification. Therefore he is ye only author of our faith, Ephesians. 2.
which Paul also testifyeth to be ye gift of god. John. 6.
And Christ says, none comes unto him, but whom the father draws. For
where the natural man perceyueth not the mysteries of the spirit, and we of
our selves are not able once to think well, we must needs be illuminated and
drawn of God, that faith may take place in us. So all the glory of our
justification must return unto God, and nothing must be left, to man's power
or merit. This saw David long ago, when he called upon God to be forgiven of
his sins, saying: Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from
my sin. Purge me with Isope, and I shall be clean, Psalm. 51.
wash me and I shall be whyter than snow. Deliver me from bloud-guyltinesse o
God, thou that art the God of my salvation. And hereby may we receive great
comfort to strengthen our faith in temptations. For where our iustifycation and
salvation depends upon God, it must needs be certain and infallible. Hereof
proceed those sayings of Paul: who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
chosen? Romans 8.
It is God that iustifyeth, who is it that can condemn. Such was the
certainetie of this doctrine among the people of God in all ages, Math. 9.
that the Phariseys also could plainly confess, that God only had power to
forgive sins. Therefore we do not without cause now a days bewail the
folly and pride of those men, which attribute this glory either to their own
works, or else to most arrogant and impudent hypocrites. How grievously these
men offend, Peter shows in the second part of his oration, which now we shall
consider.

To attribute righteousness to the works of the law, is an heinous offense.
Now therefore (says he) why tempt you God, to put upon the Disciples necks
that yoke which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear? He teaches by
these weightye words, that all our salvation is overthrown, and that such
intolerable yoke cannot be laid upon the Disciples necks without a
marvelous offense, if they be driven to seek salvation by observing the law.
And with this opinion or doctrine he says God is tempted. For they tempt him,
that without his commandment, either go about themselves, or exact of others
to do that that is not in their power. And they also which will be taught the
will of God, by any other means than he has appointed. So the Israelites
tempted God, when after his infynite benefytes, Psalm. 78. Number. 11.
they said they would acknowledge his goodness and omnipotency, if he
could give them flesh to eat in the wilderness. And Christ should have
tempted God, if he had followed the devils counsel, to have cast himself
down headlong from the pinnacle of the Temple, to have proved the will and
truth of Gods promises toward him. Both these things it is manifest they do,
that will be justified by the works of the law. For those things which far
pass the strength of man, without any calling of God or his word, both they
themselves enterprise to do, and also exact of other. For it is as impossible
for any man to fulfill the law, as to reach heaven with his finger. For the
law is spiritual, and requires not only our outward works, but also all
our mind, and all the powers of man to obey God. But we be carnal and sold
under sin. Romans 7.
And even in the Saints remain the dregs of flesh, and the law of sin, which
brings us in thrall to sin, even against our will, and against the spirit
of God, as Paul confesses of himself in the chapter last rehearsed.
Moreover, the law threatens the sentence of malediction and death unto as many
as fulfill not all the commandments thereof. What else then do they, but tempt
God, Deuteronomy. 27.
which will be justified by the law? And because they neglect the mean of
salvation, which God offreth them in Christ, and deuyse a new mean to attain
unto the grace of God, they tempt him two ways. And if they will enforce other
men also unto the same way, they lay such a yoke upon them, as ye holy fathers
in time past were not able to bear. For thus used they to say: If thou Lord
wilt mark narrowly what is done amiss, who shall be able to abide it: Enter
not into judgment with thy servant. Psa. 130.143
All our righteousness is like a patched garment, Esaias. 64.
and like a cloth arrayed with a woman's monthly disease. Mark therefore what
just occasion we have to contend with these men, which now a days would
have people justified by their works, and which like the Phariseys contemning
the righteousness of God, which he gives us in Christ, go about to set up
their own. And let no man here replye, Ergo, the law is given us in vain.
Ergo, we will boldly do what we list. The use of the law.
For the true use of the law remains still in that like a Tutor it leads
us unto Christ, and shows us a rule how to live godly. Neither must we
renounce good works, although we attribute not the glory of iustifycation unto
them. For although iustifycation belongs only unto God, yet is it evident,
that the duty of them, whom God iustifyeth, is continually to keep
innocence and purity of life, which is given them in Christ, as much as in
them is, Romans 6.
touching which point Paul has diverse considerations. What can be spoken more
grievously than that, yt Peter says against them which would seem to strive
for the glory of God, for good works, and the duties of a Christian life? He
says they tempt God, which is such an heinous offense by Scripture, as is
worthy of no pardon. They put a yoke upon other men's necks, and bring them
into thraldom again that are redeemed with the blood of Christ. Therefore
they commit sacrilege against Christ. If our adversaries now a days would
expende these things, they should easily perceive, that they had no cause to
rail and fare so foul with us, but would rather acknowledge their fault, and
not tread under foot the grace of God, and the merit of Christ with their
fylthie hypocrisy, so waywardly as they do.

Furthermore, The faith of the fathers of the old Testament, and the new is
but one.
least Peter might seem ouerboldlye to condemn the fathers, in saying that
they were able to fulfill the law, in his conclusion he brings in the mean
whereby they were saved, saying: we believe that through the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be saved, as they do believe. Thus he encourages
the weak, to whom it seemed an hard matter to forsake that religion wherein
they believed, their forefathers pleased God and were saved, as though he
should say: you are fowlye deceived, if you think our Predecessors were
justified and saved by the works of the law, seeing they have plainly
confessed they never fulfilled the law. And if you would then know which
way they were saved, we can show you none other than the same, which is at
this day preached to us in Christ. For he whom we know is come, they waited
for to come, and hoped in none other Savior but him. Therefore there is but
one manner of faith, both of the old and new Testament, and but one way of
salvation in them both. Christ testifyeth the same, speaking of Abraham, where
he says that Abraham saw his day, John. 8.
and rejoiced therein. And Paul says that the fathers did eat the same
spiritual meat that we do eat, and confesses that they drew salvation out
of the rock which was Christ. 1. Cor. 10.
And to conclude, he makes such a communion between us and the fathers, that
one while he applies their sacraments unto us, and an otherwhile ours unto
them. They are therefore greatly deceived, that say the old Testament
belongs not unto us, and say we be no Jews, for whose behoof they were
written. Why rather do not we think the Jews were the people of God, whom
God saved none other way in times passed, than we be saved now adays? Again,
Peter briefly touches the mean of our salvation. And the foundation thereof
he lays in the grace of God, by the which word alone, the righteousness and
merit of works is excluded, because they be contrary one to the other. For if
salvation come of grace (as Paul says) then not of works, for then grace
should not be grace, if works should merit. But if we be saved by works,
then it is not by grace, for the work loses the name of merit, as soon as
grace enters. See Romans the.xj. Chap. Which place abundantly teaches us,
that the grace of God, and the merits of our works cannot stand together.
Then again he says, that Jesus Christ is the mediator of that grace, Math.
3.17.
in whom we are taught by Oracle from heaven, that God is reconciled unto us.
Last of all he says, we take hold of this grace by faith. For we believe
(says he) to be saved by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore all
the mean of our salvation may be comprehended in few and plain words, if we
say we be saved by faith, through the grace of God in Jesus Christ, which is
the sum of all the doctrine, as well of the Prophets as the Apostles.

A President of a counsel, assembled in the holy ghost
Now after Peter had ended his saying, all the multitude were appeased, and
with silence testified their consent. By this may be gathered, as by a most
evident argument, that they were gathered together in the holy ghost. For as
he is the spirit of truth, so whosoever he breaths on, cannot choose but
yield unto the truth. And we must never believe that those Counsayles are
governed by his guiding, where men's ears are stopped up from hearing the
truth, and use all liberty of speech against ye same, such as we see the
Bishops of Rome now many hundredth years have summoned and kept. For as in
them they have ratifyed opinions clean false and ungodly: so no man could
without manifest danger of his life speak against their decrees. Howbeit,
Paul and Barnabas take occasion of Peter's words, to declare what miracles and
woonders God wrought amongst the Gentyles for the confyrmation of their
ministerye, that hereby it might the more evidently appear how God made no
difference between the Jews and the Gentyles, seeing he would have such
miracles wrought amongst the Gentyles, as used to be showed among the Jews.
Thus we see the end ofall miracles is, to confyrme the Apostles doctrine,
whereof we have oftentimes spoken heretofore. It shall be our duties with
attent mind and fyrme faith to embrace that way of salvation that Peter has
declared. For so shall it come to pass, that we also being purifyed and made
clean through grace, shall attain to the inheritance of heaven with Christ
our Lord: to whom be praise, honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.Ciij. Homely.
AND when they held their peace, James answered, saying: Men and brethren,
harcken unto me. Simeon told how God at the beginning did visit the
Gentyles, to receive of them a people in his name. And to this agree the words
of the Prophet, as it is written. After this, I will return and will build
again the Tabernacle of David, which is fallen down, and that which is fallen
in decay of it, will I build again, and I will set it up, that the residue
of men may seek after the Lord, and also the Gentyles, upon whom my name is
named, says the Lord, which does all these things. Known unto God are all
his works from the beginning of the world. Wherefore my sentence is, that we
trouble not them, which from among the Gentyles are turned unto God: but that
we write unto them, that they abstain themselves from fylthinesse of Images,
and from fornication, and from strangled and from blood. For Moses of old
time has in every City them that preach him in the Synagoges when he is read
every Sabbath day.
THe Evangelist Luke has very diligently described the controversy that came
to pass in the primitive Church, about the matter of iustifycation. In this
description we have seen what Peter's judgment was, who has taught us that
faith only was sufficient to justify the Gentiles, and that they were not to
be burdened with the yoke of the law. And because many men were moved with
the example of the fathers, supposing they were justified by the law: he
answers this objection, showing that they could be justified none other
way, than by the grace of God, the author and mediator whereof, is our Savior
Jesus Christ. But because we have entreated hereof in the Sermon that is gone
before, let us now see what James the Apostle the son of Alpheus, of whom
Paul speaks.2. Galat. says, whose words consist of two members or parts.
For first he subscribeth unto Peter, and then he declares his counsel, how a
peace and true concord might be made and conserved between the Jews and
Gentyles.

But before we come unto James words, The order of the Apostles Counsayles.
we must mark how he began not to speak, before he saw other hold their
peace. For hereof a man may gather the order of the Apostles Counsel, how
they did all things with modesty, and how there was none of them that would
prescribe another. An example of the like we saw also before. For while diverse
did egerly contend, Peter held his peace. But when he saw time served, he
arose up both with modesty and gravity, and began to speak his judgment,
and was heard of others with like patience, as he not long before had heard
others. After he had done, Paul and Barnabas were heard without interruption
of any body, who confyrmed Peter's sentence by an argument taken of miracles.
And when these also had spoken their mind, James steppeth forth, and almost is
the last manne that speaks, although he was accounted among the pillars of
the Church. This modesty was an evident sign of the holy ghost, which
governed their minds, that by over great heat of contention, there should
rise no uncomely tumulte or trouble, and that men should not stop their
ears against the truth. This order ought to be observed in all public acts
and affairs, so that no man should be so ready to speak, as to hear what
other shall say. For as that kind of men is foolish, who for that they only
would seem wise, think it meet for them only to speak, and suppose they
have great injury done unto them, if any man dissent never so little from
them, so are they also unprofitable and pernicious.

But let we these things pass, and hearken unto James, which in the beginning
of his Oration, 1. James subscribeth unto Peter's judgment.
yields unto the judgment of Peter, saying: Simeon told how God at the
beginning did visit the Gentyles, to receive of them a people in his name.
James acknowledges here Gods counsel and purpose, which by the calling of
Cornelius did abundantly declare, that the Gentyles had need of none other
preparation to be justified and saved, than of faith in Christ, and therefore
he plainly subscribeth unto Peter's opinion. The Prophets are agreeable with
the Apostles.
And least the Apostles only might seem to be of this opinion, he proves the
same by the uniform consent of the Prophets, although he bring but one
testimony out of them. Neither was it needful to bring any more, forasmuch as
all the Prophets were inspyred with one and the self same spirit, and agreed
in the declaration of man's salvation. It is worthy to be diligently marked,
how the Apostles of their mere authority obtrude and charge the Church with
nothing, but by scripture prove all the things that they teach. For they
acknowledged themselves to be the servants of Christ and his Church, and
therefore they thought they ought to establishe nothing that was repugnant to
the will of Christ and the holy Scripture. Which modesty if they had observed,
which would be taken and called their successors, we should at this day have
less superstition in the Church, and more godliness, and sincere religion.

The place of Amoz the.ix. Chap.
Concerning the oracle of the Prophet, it is in the.ix. chapter of Amoz. He had
before prophesied destruction unto the Jews, which they had deserved because
of their unruly and licentious living. But because by destruction of the Jews,
the promises of the eternal kingdom of the Messiah might seem to quayle and
fall, God comfort them again, promysing, that he will restore the
tabernacle or kingdom of David again. I will return (says he) and will
build again the Tabernacle of David that is fallen down, and that which is
fallen in decay of it, will I set up again. And it is not without a cause that
he makes mention of the Tabernacle. For so he comprehends the outward
worship, which must be abrogated and abolished in the kingdom of the Messiah.
And therefore it seems that James makes his argument, that the Gentyles
should not be striuen withal about ceremonies and observation of the law, for
as much as it was long time before prophesied, that all Moses discipline
should cease in the time of the Messiah. Also here is declared what manner of
people should be in the church under Christ. And among these, the first place
is given to the remnaunt of the Jews, even unto those which were saved by the
peculiar goodness of God, from the universal destruction of all the nations,
according to that saying of Esaias, the tenth Chapter. Though the people of
Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet shall the remnaunt of them be saved.
But unto these shall come all other nations, which shall be called after the
name of God, and shall seek the Lord with the Jews. In these words lie two
arguments. First, it is said that in the kingdom of Messiah, the Jews and
Gentiles shall be* one as worthy as an other. And next they shall have both one
office and duty. This shall be their dignity or worthynesse, that the name
of God shall be inuocated over them all: that is as much to say, they shall
both be called after the name of God, and the people of God. For this is a
phrase of speech much used with the Hebrews, which is to be found in Gene.
48. and Esaias. 4. The duty of both this people shall be to seek the Lord.
Which thing is not done with outward ceremonies and obseruances of the law,
but by true faith. Of these words of the Prophet, James most stronglye
concludes, that it is a folly and unmeet for the ceremonies of the laws
sake, to berealie the Gentyles of that glory, which God long sithence
vouchsafed to give them. Moreover, as it is a singular comfort, that through
the falsehood and destruction of man, Gods promises can nothing be stopped or
hindered: (for what though some of them believed not? Shall their unbelief
make the promise of God of no effect. Nay, let God be true, and every man a
liar) so whosoever will be taken for the people of God, are in this place
admonished of their duty. That is to seek the Lord, who being a spirit
infynite, and pear^ing through all thing, and governing all thing, is not tied
to any certain place, but may be sought and found by faith only, which
takes hold of him. While he manifests himself unto us, by his word. And
least it might seem an absurd and strange thing to any man, that the
Gentyles should thus suddenly be matched with the Jews, Amoz makes God the
Author hereof, and James expounding the same says. Known unto God are all his
works from the beginning. As though he should say. There is no cause why
either we should marueyle at these things, or accuse God of unrighteousness.
For although these seem unto us to be absurd things, yet God knows
certainly the reason of all his doings. Neither let us think that God can be
deceived, because long ago, before this world was created, he disposed and
ordered all things well, by his eternal counsel. Hereof may be gathered a
general doctrine, that we must not call the eternal purpose of our salvation,
to man's account, but reverently kiss and order the righteousness, wisdom,
and goodness of God. Romans 9.11.
See Paul touching this point. Romans 9. and.11. Chapters.

In the second part of his oration, A deuyse how to make an unity and
concord between the Jews and the Gentyles
James utters a counsel both profitable and necessary. He saw great
enmity between the Jews and the Gentyles, whereof at length was like to
grow a pernicious and dangerous schism in the Church. Wherefore necessity
required, that deliberation should be taken with speed, for the procuring and
mainteyning of concord, and shows what is best to be done. The sum of all
his advise is, that the liberty of the Christians must be kept safe and
inviolable, and that it must be so tempered, that it break not out into
lycentiousnesse, and give occasion of offense. Unto the first point belongs
this saying of his: wherefore my sentence is, that we trouble not them, which
from the Gentiles are turned unto God. The meaning is, that the yoke of the
law must not be laid upon them, nor their consciences charged with the
observing thereof, as a thing necessary unto iustifycation for them which had
forsaken the superstitiousnesse of gentilitie, and professed Christ. And that
the Gentiles should not think the law so abrogated, as though men were at
liberty to do what they list, he thinks good to admonish them touching
certain points, wherein the Gentiles offended, both against christian purity
and holiness, and also against brotherly love. Four things he forbids,
whereof two are of themselves unlawful, and other two are mean and
indifferent things.

Of the first sort are filthynesse of Images and fornication. And hereof were
the Gentyles to be admonished, Fylthynesse of Images and fornication.
because they fowly offended in them both. For there were of them, who after
they had professed Christ, yet went into the ydols temples, and being invited
and bidden of their friends, were present at the Gentiles sacrifices, eat of
such things as were offered unto the ydols, and to be brief, were partakers at
these sacrifyces, as easily appears by the first Epistle of Paul to the
Corinthians. And they thought they offended not in thus doing, because they
knew the ydole was nothing, and were well instructed concerning the faith. But
James in one word preuenteth and answers their reasons, while he advises
them to abstain from filthynesse of Images. For hereby he teaches us, that
ydolatrie is unlawful and abominable of it self, so that no man can be
partaker thereof, without manifest pollution and uncleanness. This saying it
seems he took out of the law, where God says by Moses. The graven images
of their Gods shall thou burn with fire, and cover not the Gold and Silver
that is on them, nor take it unto thee, least thou be snared therein. For it is
an abomination before the Lord thy God. Deuteronomy. 7.
Bring not therefore abomination into thine house, least thou be a damned
thing as it is: but utterly defy it, and abhor it, for it is a damned thing.
As touching fornication, what licentiousness the Gentiles therein used without
all check or punishment is more known than deserves to be declared. There are
euerywhere extant in hystories and Poets wrytings, the examples of fylthie
lust, the Poets seeking great commendation of wit, by descrybing such
venerious acts and persons. Therefore it was needful to admonish the
Gentyles diligently of both these things. Hereof ought to be gathered a
general and perpetual precept, how it is the duty of christian people, to
keep themselves in all things clean and unspotted unto God. Neither must they
be partakers of strange sacrifyces, for as much as God requires the whole
heart and mind of man. Deuteronomy. 6.
And that saying of Paul is well known: you can not be partakers of the
Lords tables, 1. Cor. 10.
and of the table of deuilles. Again, as touching our conversation of life, it
behooves us also to consecrate the same unto God. For it is evident, that our
bodies through the blood of Christ, are dedicated to be temples of the holy
ghost. Therefore God must be glorified in our bodies. 1. Cor. 6.
Wherefore fylthie and abominable is the error of them, which say whoredom is
lawful and free for christian men, whereas Paul would not once have it named
among christians, and threateneth the horrible vengeance of God, not only
unto adulterers, Ephe. 5. Heb. 13.
but also unto whoremongers.

In the second sort are numbered, strangled meats and blood, Strangled and
blood. Genesis 9. Leuit 17. and.19.
from which he would have the Gentyles also absteyne. For although this precept
be numbered among the ceremonies, which are plainly abolished in Christ: yet
because there was an old law concerning the same, appointed by God unto all
the world after the floude, and this was a thing daily used among men, they
of the weaker sort among the Jews, could not but be greatly offended, seeing
the Gentiles eat of all those things without any difference. Therefore James
thinks it meet, that the Gentyles in this behalf should refrain their
liberty, and for charities sake, absteyne from those things which of
themselves were lawful, and granted by God, yet by using them inconsiderately
and unwarily, might be offense unto others. And that this was the Apostles
meaning, Romans 14.
appears by the words of Paul. I know and am fully certified by the Lord
Jesus, that there is nothing common of it self, but unto him that judges it
to be common, to him it is common. But if thy brother be grieved with thy
meat, now walk thou not charitably: destroy not him with thy meat, for
whom Christ dyed. Cause not your treasure or commodity to be evil spoken of,
for the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace,
and joy in the holy ghost. etc. He says also, that he would never eat
flesh, 1. Cor. ^.
rather than offend any man. Therefore this place makes not for them, which
think they may lawfully prescribe fasting days, and such like, by the
authority of the Apostles, commanding to absteyne from strangled and blood.
For their reason is not all one, because they urge man's traditions only, which
are of no authority in religion, and lay snares for men's consciences, which
the Apostles thought by all means, to be avoided. But hereto also appertains
the reason that James brings. The reading of Moses.
Moses (says he) has of old time in every City those that preach him in the
Synagoges, where he is read every Sabbath day. By the which words, he
means nothing else, but that as yet, Moses was of such authority among the
Jews, that it was impossible suddenly to pull them from his ordinances.
Therefore for the times sake, and for charity, this was to be granted them,
until (men's consciences in the mean season being at liberty) the old
ceremonies might honorably be laid aside and buried. In the mean while, we
have to consider, that this was an ancient usage in all ages among the people
of God, that the law and sacred scriptures were used to be read on the holy
days. It becomes us therefore to keep the same use, and diligently to
defend our liberty, and having a consideration of charity and purity of
life, beware of gyuing of offenses. So shall it come to pass, that both we our
selves shall be saved, and shall also bring others unto Jesus Christ: to whom
be praise, honor, power and glory for ever. Amen.

The.Ciiij. Homely.
THEN pleased it the Apostles and Elders, with the whole congregations, to
send chosen men of their own company to Antioche with Paul and Barnabas.
They sent Judas whose surname was Barsabas, and Sylas which were chief men
among the brethren, and gave them letters in their hands after this manner. The
Apostles and Elders and brethren send greeting unto the brethren which are of
the Gentyles at Antioche, Syria, and Cilicia, for as much as we have heard,
that certain which departed from us have troubled you with words, and cumbred
your minds, saying, you must be circumcised and keep the law, to whom we
gave no such commandment: It seemed therefore unto us good, when we were come
together with one accord, to send chosen men unto you with our beloved
Barnabas and Paul, men that have ieoparded their lives for the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, we have sent therefore Judas and Silas, which shall also
tell you the same things by mouth, for it seemed good to the holy ghost and to
us, to charge you with no more than these necessary things: that is to say,
that ye abstain from things o^fered to images, and from blood, and from
strangled, and from fornication, from which, if you keep your selves, you
shall do well. So fare you well.
Because all power is given unto Jesus Christ, from God his father, he can
therefore not only defend and preserve his kingdom, but also so moderate and
govern all things, that whatsoever Satan works against the same kingdom,
he makes it serve for the setting forth of the same. For after Satan could not
by persecutions and open violence stop the course of the gospel, he set upon
the Church by sowing dissension among them, and raised a grievous contention
about iustifycation, which is the chief and principal article of christian
religion to this end and purpose, that all the doctrine of the gospel, might
be enuyed and suspected. But he prevailed so little, that by this occasion, the
truth was the more known, and the righteousness of faith the more valiauntly
defended, against the Phariseys, as we have hitherto seen in the sayings of
Peter, Paul, and Barnabas, and last of all by James saying. Whereunto chiefly
belongs that joyful and victorious end of all the contention, which Luke
now describes: First rehearsing the consent and agreement of the whole
Church, and next a Copy of the Epistle sent from the Synod, of all which we
shall speak in order.

The consent of the counsel of Jerusalem.
First, he expresses the uniform consent of them all, where he says: the
Apostles and Elders, and the whole Congregation, decreed that Messengers should
be sent with letters to Antioch, where this great fire was first kindled in all
their names. This was very prudently decreed of them, for that the present
contention might hereby not only be alayed, but all occasion of strife in time
to come might be prevented. And first, because they whose minds through
contention were moved, might happen to suspect Paul and Barnabas credit in
this dealing, they join unto them messengers of no small dignity and
estimation. Again, least Silas and Judas might not seem by craft and
subtlety to be won, and made on Paul's side, they commend and defend their
authority by public letters. By which example we are taught, that prudence
and wisdom is chiefly to be used in public affairs of the Church, least
unadvised rashness may prejudice a cause of it self otherwise both good and
honest. Here is to be considered the order of the Primitive Church, which the
same Church was wont to use in public affairs. The Apostles in deed with
the Elders, had the rule and ordering of all matters, as they who had the
oversight of the Church committed unto them. Yet they took not on them such
rule and authority to exclude or shut out the people from the hearing of such
things, as appertayned indifferently unto the whole Church. Again, in the
people was great consideration of modesty, whereby it came to pass, that
every one gave place unto the truth, and none of them provoked either with
(...), or other perverse affection, would unadvisedly stir or make business.
Now where the ambition of Prelates has disturbed and broken this order, who
contrary to the commandment of Peter the Apostle, have challenged unto them, a
Lordship over the inheritance or Church of Christ, the congregations are every
day molested with new contentions, and there appears no end either of
errors or most bitter debates. But let us see the letters of the Synod or
Counsel, where a thing of most weight and importance, is most briefly and
plainly entreated. For as truth is easily perceived and void of all guile: so
it desires no fetches, nor affectate ornaments and deckings. This Epistle or
letter consists of four parts, all which for the more perspicuitie, we will
severally speak of.

The first part contains the superscription, The superscription of the
letter sent from the Counsel.
which names the authors of the Epistle, and those to whom the same is
written. And they are all so named, as a man may perceive nothing is spoken of
arrogancy or ambition. Yet is there an order observed, whereof a man must have
regard in every thing. First are the Apostles placed, because Christ appointed
them to be teachers of the whole world, and his witnesses, and adourned them
with such dignity, that they are called the salt of the earth, and light of
the world. After that, are the Elders named, of whose office we have spoken
already before. Last of all, all the believers are comprehended under the name
of brethren. Therefore these letters are written in the name of the whole
Synod and Congregation. And they are written unto the brethren that dwelt at
Antioch in Syria, and Cilicia, amongst whom schism and troubles were raised,
through the malice and craft of deceyuers. We must mark the calling of one
another brethren, which appears to be a most ancient usage, even from the
time of the Apostles. There is two occasions of this name. We are called
brethren, both because we have all one father which is in heaven, who has
prepared for us one inheritance of his kingdom, and also for that Jesus
Christ the son of God takes us for his brethren, and does vouchsafe to make
us coinheritours with him. As therefore this name serves much for the
mainteyning of concord among Christians: so it brings a singular comfort in
all kind of temptations. For it is impossible that Jesus Christ should
neglect them, whom he has once taken for his brethren, and will have to be
heirs of his kingdom. Would to God they would expende this name, which now
a days make such odious differences of Nations, as though no duty of
Christian charity were due unto those which are borne out of our country. Yet
the Apostles acknowledge the Assyrians and Cilicians, people far distaunt
from them, and borne of the Gentyles, to be their brethren. What wickedness is
it therefore to think Christian men, whom Christ takes for his brethren,
for the Countries sake, to be strangers unto us? Ephe. 4.
Ought the inheritance of the earth to be greater than the inheritance of
heaven?

The false Apostles are touched.
In the second part, they gravely control the deceyuers and false Apostles,
even as the weight of the cause, and danger of salvation by them procured,
deserved. And first they confess, they went forth from them, but so as they
were no partakers with them. And this they lay as a stopple against their
vain vauntes and bragging. For they used to say they came from Jerusalem, and
had learned their doctrine of the Apostles, who taught the same learning at
Jerusalem. Therefore the Apostles deny not that they went forth from their
Church, but yet therefore they advise not every man to credit and receive that
they teach. For it is commonly seen, that deceyuers come forth of the Church,
as we have elsewhere taught. Therefore that vain vanity of tytles, and
succession, whereby the Bishops of Rome defend their dignity in these days,
while they allege the authority of the Church of Rome, and the Apostles their
Predecessors, is not sufficient. We be not ignorant that the faith of that
Church was once such, that Paul worthily commended the same. We know also
that there have been many Bishops in the same, of notable godliness, faith,
and learning, of whom diverse have been crowned with martyrdom. But what is
all this, to our Bishops now a days, whose belief, learning, and
conversation, is altogether different from those men. They that will defend
themselves by the authority of the Church, should follow the steps of the
Primitive Church. This done, they declare what these deceyuers did. They have
troubled you with words, and cumbred your minds. They are therefore
disturbers and not builders of the Church, as Paul well observed, writing to
the Galathians: I marueyle you are so soon turned unto another Gospel, which
is nothing else, but that there be some that trouble you. Again: I would to
God they were separated from you that trouble you. Galat. 5.
In these words is declared the effect of false doctrine, which a man may
epsy in all them, which ascribe not unto Christ only all the order and praise
of our salvation. First, they trouble and make the hearers uncertain of their
salvation, whiles they overthrow faith. For it cannot be that they have any
thing stable and certain that stick to the works of the law, because the
law exacteth a perfyte and an absolute obedience in all points, which is not
in man's power to perform. Wherefore, according to the saying of Paul, as
soon as salvation is declared to be in works, then faith is in vain, and the
promise of none effect. Romans 4.
And the false Apostles do not only trouble men this way, but also for that
they be authors of schism, which must needs ensue, as soon as salvation is
not attributed to Christ only. For example we have the Church at Corinth, the
which Paul complains to have been divided into many and diverse factions,
through the subtlety offalse teachers. Both these things they found true,
which were led about with the doctrine of the Monks, before the light of the
Gospel appeared. But the Apostles add a notable sentence unto the description
of these deceyuers, whereby they manifestly declare, that they gave the false
Apostles no such thing in commandment. Therefore they accuse them of lying,
and thereby likewise declare, that there shall be liars in all ages, that shall
preach the iustifycation of works, under the pretense and name of the
Apostles. Let them therefore cry till they be horce again, that they are
Legates sent from the Popes side, let them pretend Fathers and Counsayles, let
them wrest scriptures, let them glory in the authority of Kings and Princes:
and we shall set against all these, the Counsel and authority of the
Apostles, which openly testifyeth, that the Apostles make nothing for them
which dare overthrow the righteousness of faith, and attribute the glory of
our salvation any way unto works. Nay, we will refer that saying of Paul
unto this place, who doubted not to strike with Curse, Galat. 1.
an Angel, presuming to preach any other Gospel than this.

In the third member of their division, Paul and Barnabas are commended.
they greatly commend Paul and Barnabas, because they knew that these
deceyuers did greatly impugn their authority: which also was the cause that
Paul diverse times defended his Apostleship, not without some suspect of
ambition, as his Epistles to the Galathians and Corinthians declare. Therefore
they call them their beloved, by which name, they accuse all those of lying,
which affirmed that Paul discented from the other Apostles. They join
hereunto a praise, which is the greatest that can be devised, where they say
they ieoperded their lives for the name of Jesus Christ. The example of the
Primitive Church teaches, that their name and fame which deserve well in
setting forth the salvation of men, ought to be maintained and defended. And
this is not to be judged as any flattery, when it is done modestly, and to
that end, to keep their authority unblemished. Thus it pleased Christ to
adourne the sons of Zebede with worshipful tytles, as long as their virtuous
doings so deserved. And Paul sometime digresseth, and takes occasion to
commend Titus, Luke, Timothy, Epaphroditus, and such like, both to spur
them forward, and also that their ministry might the more profytably proceed
and go forward. And this is to be observed, not only in the Church, but also
in the common weal, because lively and courageous spirits, are no way more
effectually cheared, to take in hand virtuous and worthy exploytes, than by
praise and honor. And there are euerywhere examples that teach us, that no
commonweals have long flourished, where there have not been appointed worthy
rewards of commendation and honor for well deseruers. Furthermore, in this
place is expressed, what the true praise of a Minister is, verily, when
necessity so requires, to lay down his life for the testimony and name of
Jesus Christ. For, as he deserves not to be called a good soldier, who is
not ready to hazard his life, if the commandment of his Captain, and public
weal so require: so can he be no faithful minister of Christ, which is not
ready to forsake all he has, yea, and his life to, for the glory of Christ,
and thus does Christ even of very equity and right require of us, seeing he
first did vouchsafe to lay down his life, for the salvation of all mankind.
And yet these things are not so to be understood, as though none should be
taken for a faithful Minister of Christ, but he that has hazarded his life.
For Christ would not have us rash, and to prodigal of our lives, but rather
he commands us to use the prudence of serpents, shunning and taking heed of
dangers. And many times there appears no danger, why we should fear our
life, yet in the mean time it is required, that we should be prompt and ready
in mind, that we step not back, when with peril of our life we should
defend the glory of Christ. This promptness of mind does Paul show, when
being admonished how he should be laid in bonds, he confessed that he was
ready not only to suffer bonds or imprisonment, but also death for the name
of Christ. See the Acts.xx. and.xxj. And that that is said of the Ministers
of the word, is understood also of all that be Christians. For it is an
universal rule, which commands us to confess Christ before the world, and
teaches that he is not fytte for the kingdom of God, which looks back
again, Luke. 9.
after he has once set his hand unto the plough.

The decree of the Counsel is expounded.
The fourth part expounds the decree of the Synod, in the which Peter and
James sayings are repeated and reconcyled: in the which place we have orderly
to consider three things: First, they allege the author of the decree, namely
the holy ghost: It has seemed good (say they) unto the holy ghost and to us.
They join themselves with the holy ghost, not meaning to match their
authority with his, or that they would be believed alone, without the consent
of the spirit, but because Christ made them Ministers of his spirit, by whom
he thought good to utter his Oracles. In the which meaning also it is said:
Luke 10.
He that hears you, hears me, and he that despyseth you, despises me, and
he that despises me, despises him that sent me. Therefore because the
Apostles pronounced nothing but that the holy ghost bade them, they join
themselves after none insolent sort, but after a modest and convenient gravity
unto the holy ghost* least they might seem to dissent from him. And that the
thing they write is the oracle of the holy ghost, it appears by this, that
they decree nothing repugnant unto the holy Scriptures. And if the President of
y^ Popish Counsayles may say the same of their decrees, we will confess that
they also are gathered together in the holy ghost, and that the things they
enact are the decrees and Statutes of the spirit. But as often as they shall put
forth opinions varying from the Scriptures, and repugnant unto them, so often
will we deny that they are led with the holy ghost, because he cannot
disagree with himself, forasmuch as he is the spirit of truth. Secondly, they
declare what it is that seems good unto the holy ghost, namely, that we
should charge you with no more yoke and burden. Therefore whatsoever is
beside the faith in Jesus Christ, is a yoke and a burden. For men's
consciences are burdened with the unprofitable observation of traditions,
which can not further our salvation. They repeat also what James had
prescribed touching the eating of things offered to Idols, touching whoredom,
strangled, and blood, and they say these are necessary to be observed. Here
is to be noted what we said in the last Homely, touching the differences of
these commandments. For the two first are simplye and plainly necessary,
because it becomes Christian men to abhor all kind of ydolatrie, and to
keep their vessel or body holy and unspotted, and not to make that the
member of an harlot, that Christ by his blood, has consecrated to be a Temple
for the holy ghost. But concerning the decree of strangled and blood, they are
necessary per accidens (as they say) or by reason of another thing, that is to
say, because of offense, which the weak brethren might take by the eating
thereof. For where it is an heinous matter to destroy him by thy eating, whom
Christ has vouchsafed to red^eme by the merit of his blood, we must of
necessity abstain from those things for the weakes sake, which otherwise of
themselves are granted and lawful, least our liberty may give unto other
occasion of destruction. Otherwise, this saying of Christ stands in his full
force and strength: Math. 15.
Nothing that goes in at the mouth can defyle man. And Paul permits men to
eat of the things offered to Idols, if there be no danger of offense, 1.
Cor. 10.
and says that the conscience is no whit polluted thereby. And in another
place he calls it a doctrine of Devils, when such a difference of meat is
appointed, 1. Tim 4.
as wherein salvation is said to consist. Therefore they most foolishly abuse
this place, which say the decrees of Counsaylers are necessary to be observed,
whereas diverse of them serve only to yoke men's consciences, and manifestly
repugne against the evident Oracles of Scripture. In the mean season Christian
liberty must not be overthrown, for their sakes, which being rather obstinate
than weak, will not forsake their once conceived errors, but by all means
cleave to the defense of the same. Against whom, Christ his saying must rather
be used. Suffer not them, Math. 15.
for they are blind leaders of the blind. Finally, they declare the utility
and profit hereof, saying: from these things, if you keep your selves, you
shall do well. For both you shall keep your selves clean and undefiled, and
offend no man. This must be the mark whereunto all our doings must be
leuelled. In Christ only by faith we must seek iustifycation and salvation.
In the mean season let us keep our selves from all contamination, both of
Idolatry, and other uncleanness, and endeavor as much as in us lies, to
bring other men to salvation, and let us not give offense unto them, for whom
Christ has vouchsafed to die. These things whosoever will observe, they cannot
be deceived and err, and having prosperously ended the course of this life,
they shall obtain the fellowship of eternal life with Jesus Christ our Lord:
to whom be blessing, honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.Cv. Homely.
WHEN they therefore were departed, they came to Antioch, and gathered the
multitude together, and delivered the Pistle, which when they had read, they
rejoiced of the consolation. And Judas and Silas being Prophets, exhorted the
brethren with much preaching, and strengthened them. And after they had tarried
there a space, they were let go in peace of the brethren unto the Apostles.
Notwithstanding it pleased Silas to abide there still. But Paul and Barnabas
tarried still at Antioch, teaching and preaching the word of the Lord with
other many. But after a certain space Paul said unto Barnabas, let us go
again and visit our brethren in every City, where we have showed the word
of the Lord, and see how they do. And Barnabas gave counsel to take with
them John, whose surname was Mark. But Paul would not take him unto their
company, which departed from them at Pamphilia, and went not with them to the
work. And the contention was so sharp between them, that they departed a
sunder one from the other, and so Barnabas took Mark, and sailed unto Cyprus,
and Paul chose Silas, and departed, being committed of the brethren unto the
grace of God. And he went through Syria and Cilicia, establishing the
Congregations.
AFter the Evangelist Luke has diligently described the Acts of the Counsel
at Jerusalem, and showed with what dexterity that contention was calmed and
appeased, which began among the Christians, about the matter of
iustifycation, now in the last part of this chapter, which we have here
recyted, he rehearses four things chiefly to be considered, whereof we mean
to entreat so much as the grace of God obtained by your prayers, shall suffer
us.

The execution of the embassage unto ye church at Antioch.
First is described the execution of the embassage or message which the
Ierosolymites sent to them of Antiochia, wherein is to be considered what the
Ambassadors Paul and Barnabas did, and next how the Church of Antioch
received them. Touching the Ambassadors three things are said. First, when
they came to Antioch, after the congregation was wholye assembled, they
delivered the letters taken them by the counsel. For where it was a public
matter, and indifferently appertaining unto all men, they thought they would
not have any thing hidden from the people. Where we may again see the manner of
the primitive Church, in the which such matters as belonged to the knowledge
and salvation of all men, were entreated in all men's hearing. The ambition of
Masklike Bishops, has utterly taken away this custom, with the great
detriment of public salvation, who have judged the ignorance and blindness of
the people to be the chief boutrace and defense of their tyranny. Then next
Judas and Silas with many exhortations and consolations, confyrme the brethren
in the received and acknowledged truth. For the which end and purpose, the
Apostle abundantly declares that they were sent. Yet is there a reason rendered
of their so doing, because they were Prophets, that is to say, public
expositors or interpreters of scriptures, lawfully ordained. For that the name
of a Prophet is taken in this sense, it manifestly appears by the first
Epistle to the Corinthians.xiiij. Chapter. This place in the mean season
admonishes us, that no man ought to take upon him to do any thing publicly
in the church, but he that is lawfully called, and instructed with worthy and
convenient gifts. For pernicious and detestable is the impudency of the
Anabaptists, who being neither called nor furnished with fyt gifts, rashly
start forth and take upon them to preach. Thirdly, they depart not from
Antioch, before they are dismissed in peace and with solemn blessing, and that
they see all troubles well composed and assuaged. All which if a man confer
and lay together, it shall appear that in this Legacy of theirs, they used
great diligence and trust, and it is no doubt but the holy ghost by a general
example would teach us, with what credit and industry public affairs,
as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, ought to be handled. Furthermore, as touching
the Church, it is said that she received them with joy, and was much
recreated by them. Before this, the Epistle sent from the Sinode, declares
they were much disturbed by reason of discention. For the godly men were much
grieved, that the articles of the Christian faith were contended upon, with
such great offense. Again, another cause of grief there was, that they saw
the Apostles Paul and Barnabas vnworthilye defamed, and their Churches, after
a sort, priuilye accused. Therefore they cannot choose but greatly rejoice,
when they hear that peace is restored, their teachers quitte of slander, and
their Churches confyrmed with the testimony of the Apostles. Of this
disposition ought all faithful Christians to be, unto whom they are far
unlike, that are delighted with contentions, with the ignominy and contempt of
Ministers, and with the disturbance of congregations.

The industry of S^las, Paul and Barnabas in setting forth ye kingdom of
Christ.
Secondly, Luke describes the trusty care and industry of all these persons,
in the setting forth and mainteyning of Christ's kingdom, which may be
perceived by many and evident arguments. And as concerning Silas, it is said,
that when he had license to return home again, yet he chose rather to remain
at Antioch, doubtless for that he perceived his traueyle, whereof he saw good
success followed, was yet needful for that Church. Therefore Silas had more
regard of the Church of Christ, than of his own matters, considering he
prefers Antioche before the City of Jerusalem, and his own proper
habitation. Which example it becomes all the Ministers of Christ to imitate,
that they may forsake themselves, and all earthly things, to the end to
traueyle the more easily in the ministry of Christ and his Church. Therefore
the covetousness of them is execrable, who being appointed to the ministry
of the Church, prefer their private doings before the salvation of men, and
for lucre sake, leave the congregation, among whom they might with great
utility do good service. But of Paul and Barnabas is somewhat also said,
namely, how after they had abidden a certain season at Antioch, they preached
the Gospel, with many other their fellow Ministers. Therefore they gave not
themselves unto lurdenly idleness, although they might seem after so many
dangers and traueyles, to have had just occasion, to have sought their rest
and quiet. And in that it is said, many in the Church at Antioch preached the
Gospel, it may easily be gathered, what myldenesse of minds was among them,
and how void they were of envy, seeking nothing more than the glory of
Christ, and the salvation of many. And the exercise of the Apostles is most
worthy to be considered, who, as we see, chiefly intended the preaching of the
Gospel. For they knew that was the message of salvation. They knew that with
these weapons, Nations were subdued unto Christ, and the world brought unto
the obedience of faith. They knew finally, that our Savior Christ was chiefly
busied about this one thing, and did nothing so oftentimes as that. And they
were not ignorant of the old figure, where God commanded that the Priests
vesture should be hoong with belles, thereby teaching that the sound of his
voice, that is, Exodus 28.
the doctrine of the gospel was chiefly to be required of the ministers. But
now adays it is come to this pass, that Bishops abhor from nothing so much
as from the ministerye of the word, thinking it to be more commendable for
them, to feed Hounds and great Horses, and a sluggishe and servile sort of
Courtlings, of the revenues of the Church, than to feed Christ's sheep with
the food of heavenly doctrine. And so by their example, they bring the word
of God in contempt with all states of men, which is the chief cause of the
calamities of these days. There is also added an other argument of Paul's
doctrine, namely, how he was careful also for other Churches, consulting with
Barnabas, touching the visitation of them. For he well understood that it was
not sufficient once to plant Churches, but also how it was very necessary to
visit and look unto them, because beside the natural leuitie of mankind,
diverse other things also fell out, which might pluck us from the faith, and
disturb and ouerturne the best ordered Churches that are. Wherefore like a
stowte soldier he keeps his watch and standing, and spares no labor, so
the Church may enjoy that peace, for the which they were once ordained, which
example if a man would compare with those, which are wholye given to disturb
and overthrow the Churches stablished by the faith and diligence of others, it
should easily appear with what spirit they are led, and what Princes
Ministers they are.

Thirdly, is declared a greieuous and unfortunate discord between Paul and
Barnabas, The discention between Paul and Barnabas
which for many causes is notable. We heard before in the thirtenth Chapter
how these two were made fellows and Coparteners by the holy ghost. They
suffered many perils together, both by land and by sea, which is the greatest
band to bind amity and friendship together that can be. Beside, they proved
that God did marueylouslye bless their labors with good success. But now by
reason of a grievous discention fallen among them, they depart one from
another, and we read not that they afterward jointly labored together any
more. The cause of this contention was one John Mark, of whose defection and
falling away has been spoken in the.xiij. Chapter. Barnabas thought good to
have him taken in again into the grace and fellowship of the Ministry, and
no doubt but he alleged weyghty reasons for his deuyse. For with God there is
pardon, if men acknowledge and confess their fault. And it is evident that
Peter after he had denied Christ, was restored to his former rowme and dignity
again. And the godliness of Marie his mother seemed not a little to relieve
his cause, who when persecution raged most, let her house be a certain haven
and sanctuarye, as it were for the godly. But for all these reasons Paul
could never be persuaded to consent to have such an one to his fellow, whom
he remembered had so fowly slidde back in the middle of his course, and perhaps
not without the grievous offense of many. For he remembered Christ's saying:
Luke. 9.
No man that lays his hand to the plough, and looks back, is meet for
the kingdom of God. And if we consider the circumstances, it shall seem that
Paul was helped with the consent and approbation of the Church. For he
choosing unto him Silas, is commended of the brethren unto the grace of God,
that is, with solemn prayer is let go unto his work or business. Of Barnabas
Luke reports but this one thing, that he took unto him Mark, and sailed
into Cyprus (which was his country, as was said before in the fourth Chapter)
being moved, and taking the matter in ill part. And although Paul's severity
in every point seem not to be excused, yet would the holy ghost have this
example to remain as a President against all runnagates and forsakers of their
profession, whereby we might learn, that sinners have an access unto the
grace of God, but yet that they must not be to soon admitted into the
ministerye of the Church, which have been authors of any grievous offense, and
whose credit by reason of their offenses before committed, is not without a
cause suspected. For a Bishop must be blameless, and Paul forbids young
scholars chiefly to be kept out of the Ministry, because such are in danger
of backbiting and slaundering. Now adays because we be to soon entreated in
admitting of every one, it is no marueyle though the authority of the
Ministry grow so much in contempt. Moreover, it may seem to any man
marvelous, that God would suffer such most chosen vessels of his grace, to be
entangled in such implacable hatred, and that the holy ghost would have their
errors recorded in writing, for their sake that should come after. But to him
that shall deeply ponder these things, there shall appear to be diverse just
and weightye causes of this doing. For first these things teach us, that even
the holiest men also, are subject to perturbations of mind, and therefore have
need of the grace of God. This Paul acknowledges, where he writes that he
felt the prick of the flesh, and had the messenger of Satan sent him,
against the which he had none other ways to resist, but by the grace of God.
2. Cor. 12.
The same Paul writing of the law of sin, which in all men fyghteth against
the spirit of God, cries out: O wretched man that I am, Romans 7.
who shall deliver me from this body subdued unto death? I thank God, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. The use of all these things is, to teach us that
whatsoever things holy men do commendably, we should ascribe them unto God, as
to the author, and only magnifye him therefore. Again, these slydinges of
holy men, stir us up unto a fervent and continual desire of godliness,
Phil. 2.
that according to Paul's saying we may work our salvation with fear and
trembling. For who will not be afraid? who will not be stirred up to watch and
pray, when he sees such notable servant of God, so grievously fall? Who
will not stand in dread to fall, yea, even then when he seems to stand
sure? 1. Cor. 10.
There is also another use and commodity of this contention, that we now
adays be not offended with the discentions of the Ministers of the word, nor
for discentions sake suspect the doctrine of Gods word. For the authority
thereof depends not on man, but as Esaias says, endures for ever, Esaias. 40.
when all flesh with the glory thereof wythereth and falls away like a
flower.

The fourth and last point of this Chapter is the peregrination of Paul and
Barnabas, Paul and Barnabas visit the churches.
in which they execute and perform their devise concerning the visiting and
confyrming the Churches in the word of God. For although they disagreed among
themselves, yet is neither of them unmindful of his duty. But Barnabas goes
into Cyprus, and Paul into Syria and Cilicia, and from thence into Lycaonia.
And this constancy is worthy of all men to be followed, that we suffer not our
selves by contention and importunity of men to be ouercomme, and so forgetting
our duties, become unfaithful unto God. In the mean season it behooves us to
consider the goodness and wisdom of God, which knows best how to use the
offenses of his people. For of this lamentable discord of the Apostles,
springs this profit, that diverse Churches are at one very time visited and
confyrmed. Yea, God many times uses the sins of the wicked to the setting
forth of his glory, and the salvation of man. Examples whereof are extant,
both in the sale of Joseph, and many other hystories. Yet let no man for all
this think us void of fault. For men sin, and by sin deserve to be made
the vessels of wrath. And if any good follow of their offending, all that is
to be ascribed to the goodness and wisdom of God. God grant that by us his
name may be glorified, and that our most merciful father would use all our
doings to that end, to serve for the commodity and salvation of many, that
we may live in heaven with Jesus Christ: to whom be all praise, honor, power,
and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.xvj. chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The.Cvj. Homely.
THEN came he to Derba and to Lystra, and behold a certain Disciple was there
named Timotheus, a woman's son which was a Iewesse, and believed, but his
father was a Greek. Of whom reported well the brethren that were at Lystra
and Iconium. Him would Paul that he should go forth with him, and took and
circumcised him because of the Jews that were in those quarters. For they knew
all that his father was a Greek. As they went through the Cities, they delivered
them the decrees for to keep, that were ordained of the Apostles and Elders
which were at Jerusalem. And so were the congregations stablished in the faith,
and increased in number daily.
THe Apostle Paul appointed to visit the Churches, which he had gathered
together by preaching of the Gospel, and to confyrme them in the faith they
had once received, least being either drowned in security, or circumuented
with the subtlety of Satan, or overcome with persecutions, they should fall
away. This he so does, that whersoeuer occasion also is offered, he labors
to win more congregations unto Christ. This history Luke in this place
describes, who was Paul's continual companion in this journey, and therefore
as a witness that saw all things, knew all things well. And first we heard
how they went over Syria and Cilicia. Then it follows what they did in
Lycaonia, the Churches whereof by reason of the Jews, the bitterest enemies
that Christ had, had more need to be strengthened than others, and hereof Paul
stood in fear, because he had diverse times tried the hostyle attemptes, and
implacable minds of the Jews.

The calling of Timothy.
Moreover, the Evangelist takes his beginning of the calling of Timothy, whom
Paul took unto him as a companion in his voyage, and partener in all his
labors. For he knew that without fytte Ministers of the word, the kingdom of
Christ and faith in him could not be enlarged. Wherefore, as the Princes of
this world, which labor to dilate and stretch out their borders a far, are
altogether occupied about getting of long tried Captains, and bold soldiers
from all places: so was this the chief care of Paul, to search and get many
faithful and fytte Ministers for the Church of Christ, by whom the kingdom
of Christ might be stretched far and wide, whosoever desire the safety of
the Church, whether they be teaching Bishops or ruling Magistrates, they must
follow this example. For as without the preaching of the word, new Churches
cannot be planted: so those that are already planted and gathered together,
cannot be kept in doing their duty without the same. Hereof proceeded that
care and industrye, which the Prophets of the old Testament had about
schools, which our Predecessors being most prudent and godly men did imitate,
as the foundations of most ancient Colleges do testifye. In the vocation of
Timothy, there are two things to be considered, whereof we shall speak in
order.

First, it is described, who and what manner of one he was. What Timothy is,
and what manner of man.
He had to his mother a Jew, but one that believed, but his father was a
Greek, that is to say, a Gentyle. And Paul in his later Epistle to Timothy,
does at large commend the godliness of Eunica his mother, and Lois his
grandmother, whereof this is a most evident argument, for that she procured her
son to be well brought up, in the faith and religion of Christ. And here Luke
says, that he was a disciple, that is to say a christian, before Paul called
him to the office of the ecclesiastical ministry. Besides, he says he was
well commended of all y^ brethren and that not of those at Lystra only, where
he had his dwelling, but also by them of Iconium, so that his godliness was
perceived and known to them abroad also. This description of Timothy teaches
us what manner of men ought to be chosen into the ministry of Gods word and
church. Where it behooves the greatest care to be had for religion, least such
as either are utterly deuoyde of faith, or else young scholars and Nouices be
chosen into the Ministry. For as these last sort commonly are uncertain and
stand in doubt of all things, and light and inconstaunt: so the other use
religion but for lucre, which they also laughe at in their sleeue, and cause
other men to deryde the same. Then must a respect be had of their learning,
that we may have such to govern the Church, as are well exercised in the holy
scripture, wherein Paul testifyeth, 2. Tim. 3.
Timothy was brought up of a child. For in deed it is impossible that he
should teach other, whose self before has not learned, and such can be none
other than blind leaders of the blind, as Christ calls them Math. 15. And
where the doctrine of the Church must be taken out of the holy Scriptures, it
behooves that Ministers of the Church should be most exercised in them, and
that there is no account to be made of them, though they be never so expert and
prompt in Philosophye, if they be rude and ignorant in the holy Scripture.
Which was the cause that Christ would not suffer the Apostles to go abroad to
preach before they were well instructed. Thirdly, it behooves that he have the
testimony of an approved life and conversation, least their doctrine be
contemned, or at the least suspected for their sake. Therefore Paul will have a
Bishop to be irreprehensible. 1. Tim. 3.
And how much religion and doctrine is defaced by the dishonest life of
Ministers, the example of the sons of Elye does abundantlye declare, through
whose concupiscence and sacrilegious boldness, it came to pass, that all the
people for the most part refrayned from the worshipping of God, and by that
occasion wickedness so prevailed among all sorts of men, that it could not
be redressed, but by public calamity and much bloudshedding. Therefore Paul's
prudencie and diligence must be followed in these days, who would take unto
him no companion in the Ministry, but such an one as was perfyte in all
points, and which had so confyrmed the hope conceived of him, as it seemed he
would never break the same.

Timothy is circumcised.
Secondly, let us first consider what Paul did with this new partner and
fellow of his: Him (says he) because Paul meant to have with him in his
journey, he took and circumcised. What is this (say thou) that I hear*
What lyghtnesse and inconstancy is this? Not long before Paul earnestly bent
himself against those which exacted Circumcision of the Gentyles, and such a
disturbance grew hereupon, that the matter was hard to be taken up and
quieted, before the Apostles and the whole congregation at Jerusalem. And now
after the Apostles had decreed that the Gentyles were not to be burdened with
Circumcision, Paul circumciseth Timothy, who had been a Chrystian a good
while before. But herein is nothing done of lyghtnesse or frowardness, because
Paul has great reason for his doing, neither does he varye from himself, if
we well consider the matter. For it was well done of Paul to wythstande the
Phariseyes or Nazareanes, which urged Circumcision as a necessary thing,
forasmuch as by that opinion, Christ's merit was defaced and extenuated, the
faith in him light set by, and Christian liberty overthrown and subverted.
And because of these men he would not circumcise Titus, for that he perceived
they craftily laid snares for the liberty of the faithful. Galat. 2.
And here he circumciseth Timothy, because of a great number of Jews, which
dwelt in those parties that by this occasion Timothy might have an access and
entry in to them to preach the Gospel among them. For it is well known, how
greatly the Jews abhorred the vncircumcysed Gentyles, insomuch that they
openly accused Peter, for that he was conuersaunt with them, and afterward
laid hands on Paul as a seditious person, for bringing the Gentyles into the
Temple. Unless therefore he had circumcised Timothy, he should never have
had access to have taught among the Jews, and they would afterward also have
stopped their ears at Paul, as a transgressor of their law, and ancient
religion. Therefore he prudentlye yields thus far unto their infyrmitie,
and circumciseth Timothy, to the intent that by his ministry, he might make a
way into the Jews, and teach them by little and little, how Circumcision
and the other Ceremonies were by Christ abrogated. And he meant none other ways
to circumcise Timothy, than as the Apostles in their Synod, forbade the
eating of strangled and blood. So he confesses he became a Jew unto the
Jews, to win the Jews unto Christ, 1. Cor. 9.
and not to confyrme them, in the superstitious observation of the law. Of
this may be gathered an universal rule, whereby we are taught how and after
what sort it is lawful to dispense in outward things. Namely, when charity
and the edifycation of the Church so requires. But as soon as we perceive they
bynd worship unto them, or erecte confydence in man's merit, or craftily go
about to entrappe Christian liberty, then must we not admit or suffer the
least of them. For those things which might be taken for mean and indifferent,
as soon as the profession of our faith and the glory of Christ's merit is in
hazard. Therefore the Papists do foolishly and to impudentlye allege the
example of Paul for their traditions, whiles by this reason that Paul
circumcised Timothy, they say we ought to retain and keep Masses, Images,
pompous Diriges, prayers for the beade, fastings, differences of meats and
garments, single life, Monkishe vows, auricular confession, absolution,
satisfaction, and six hundredth such like. For to omytte how they compare the
pieuishe and superstitious deuyses of man's inventions, with Circumcision,
which had his beginning of God, Barbers and bleare eyed (as they say) know,
how they set the chief part of Gods worship in these things, how they
repose their greatest trust of righteousness and salvation in them, and to
conclude, Christian liberty cannot be mayntayned, if these be retained, yea,
these things conteyne that notable mark of the beast, which no man can receive
or keep without denying of Christ. Wherefore it becomes Christian men, rather
to impugn these things, than never so little to violate the profession of
Christ's name.

Before we pass from this place, Timothy is borne of parents, the one a Jew,
the other a Gentyle.
we have to consider the marriage of Timothies parents, forasmuch as Luke makes
express mention thereof. He says that Eunica his mother was a Jew, and his
father a Greek or a Gentyle. Yet we read that Jews were forbiden to marrye
with the Gentyles. Yet such was the state of the people of the Jews in those
days, that being oppressed under the tyranny of the Romans, and dispersed
here and there, they were driven to suffer many things against their will. In
the mean season the godly woman Eunica, by reason of this marriage, was in such
danger, as God foreshewed in his law. For she was not able by Circumcision to
take her son Timothy into the society of Gods people, who no doubt was
borne before Christ suffered, and the law was abrogated, by reason her
husband withstoode her, who as it is like was deuoyde of true religion,
because Paul commends him in no place, and yet sets forth in writing the
worthy faith of Eunica and Lois. These things ought to fear the professors of
Christian faith, 2. Cor. 6.
from drawing the yoke with Infydels, as elsewhere the Apostle says. Also the
example of Eunica is very notable, which procured her son to be trained up in
the scriptures from his childehoode, against her husbands will, least he
should be corrupted with the superstition and ydolatrie of the Gentyles. Let
Matrones matched in such unlike marriages well observe this thing. Let them
remember that their children be holy, by reason of the promise of the
covenant, 1. Cor. 7.
as Paul plainly teaches. Let them therefore bring them up in the doctrine of
true godliness, and train them unto God, whose honor if they seek with all
their heart, they shall find him true of his promises, where he says he will
be their protector and defender.

But let us come to the treaty of this present place, The doctrine of Paul
and his companions.
where after the vocation of Timothy, is declared what they which were with
Paul taught in the Churches. As they went (says he) through the Cities, they
delivered them such things to observe and keep, as were decreed by the
Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem. Which words the Papists wrest, I wot not
to what manner of traditions, which they imagine the Apostles and their
successors delivered from hand to hand, unto the Church, but were never
written. This Sanctuarye being by them once founded, whatsoever they cannot
prove by authorite of Scripture, they say by and by, it is the tradition of
the Apostles. But Luke says no such thing, but speaks of those decrees
whereof mention was made in the chapter before going. They were these, that man
was justified and saved by the only grace of God, through faith in Jesus
Christ, and not by the works of the l^we, that we should abstain from those
things which pollute the profession of our faith, and our holiness, as is
Idolatry and fornication that we must labor for love, and in outward things
yield somewhat unto the weak, or else unto such as are not yet come unto the
faith, if there be any hope of winning them. In the mean season that we beware
men's consciences be not snarled, or charged with any burden intolerable.
These things Luke says that Paul and those with him, did euerywhere
inculcate, both to repress the Jews, which to importunately urged the
Gentyles to the observing of the law, and to bridle the licentiousness of the
Gentyles, which abused the Christian liberty with great offense. For he
chiefly desired that peace might flouryshe in the Church, whereby he knew the
same should chiefly increase. Again, where there was no danger of offense,
he constantlye defended the liberty of Christ, because he would not prejudice
the same, which thing the Apostles wynked at, for the weakes sake. The first
Epistle to the Corinthians teaches the same, where he makes the eating of
things offered to Idolles free, 1. Cor. 10.
as touching conscience, if there be none present that is offended therewith.
In the mean season Paul's example teaches us, that it is not sufficient to
have good laws made, unless they which have the charge thereof, see them put
in execution. For daily experience teaches us that execution is the life and
sinews of the law. Take that away, and the law shall lie as dead, and as
Anacharsis said shall become like unto Spyders webbes, which every bold and
presumptuous body will not stick to break. Therefore let both Ministers of
the Church and governors of the common weal imitate Paul, if they mean to
do their duty, and not rather with vain counterfeyting mock both God and
man.

The profit of the Apostles labor.
Last of all, Luke adds a notable success of their most godly endeavor and
labor, where he says the Churches were confyrmed in the faith, and grew and
increased every day more and more in number. And because he makes mention of
faith, it is evident that Paul chieflye beat that into their heads, and not
vain and cold Ceremonies and traditions. These are the continual effects of
the word of God, that like unto a shower it never returns without fruit
unto him that sent it. These also are the weapons whereby the kingdom of Christ
in this world is most prosperously enlarged, to say, diligent preaching of the
word, and fervent desire to conserve and keep the same. Whenever these
cease, by and by faith falls, and all love of true religion dies. We have
examples hereof euerywhere, whereby they are convinced, which think it
sufficient, if they be not constrained through tyranny to be partakers of
wicked sacrifyces, and yet in the mean season they live in such places, where
the word of God is banished, and no duties of Christian religion exercised.
Let us all therefore study to set forth the word of God, that both our selves
may be confyrmed in the faith, and the Church daily increase in number of
believers, wherein Jesus Christ only reygneth, the savior of mankind, and
only Brydegroome of the Church: to whom be praise, honor, power, and glory,
for ever. Amen.

The.Cvij. Homely.
WHEN they had gone throughout Phrygia, and the Region of Galatia, and were
forbidden of the holy ghost to preach the word in Asia, they came to Mysia,
and sought to go into Bithynia, but the spirit suffered them not. But when
they had gone through Mysia, they came down to Troada. And a vision appeared
to Paul in the night, There stood a man of Macedonia, and prayed him saying:
Come into Macedonia, and help us. After he had seen the vision, immediately
we prepared to go into Macedonia, being certified that the Lord had called us,
for to preach the Gospel unto them. When we losed forth then from Troada, we
came with a strayte course to Samothracia, and the next day to Neapolis, and
from thence to Philippos, which is the chief City in the parts of Macedonia,
and a free City.
THE spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ would that the iourneyes and voyages
of the Apostles, The use of the Apostles peregrinatio^ or (...).
and specially those of Paul, should be diligently described, because the
same make not a little for our instruction. For by them appears a great
goodness of God, which within so short a space of time, did vouchsafe to
lighten all the world with the doctrine of the gospel, and salvation, and to
bring the profane Gentyles when they were most corrupt, to the knowledge and
fellowship of him. It appears also by this history, by what means and
weapons the kingdom of God uses here on earth, both to be enlarged and
conserved. Uerily, by the preaching of the Gospel, whereby in despyte of the
world, the spirit of God blows where it will, as Christ otherwheres says.
And where God does vouchsafe to use the ministry of men herein, he required
of them earnest diligence, and vigilant zeal. Wherein we have to imitate Paul
of all others, touching whose fervent zeal Luke reports many things.
Whereof this is no simple argument and proof, that not contented to have
gained many Congregations unto Christ, he goes again to visit them, and
confyrmeth them by faithful admonitions: teaching us that we must be careful
in the matter of our salvation, because all men know the sleyghtes of Satan,
which labors to turn us or ever we be ware, out of the way of salvation.
Yet Paul so visits the congregations, that he endeuoreth to gather and gain
new companies unto Christ, of the which thing in this place Luke chiefly
entreats.

First, it is said, he went through Phrigia and Galacia. Phrygia and Galatia
are converted.
And that there were new congregations there erected, the Epistle of Paul to
the Galathians abundantly declares, containing in a compendious and perfyte
abridgement, all the whole sum of Euangelike doctrine. In that journey came
to pass this one thing most marvelous of all other, Paul is forbidden to
preach in Asia
that they were forbidden by the holy ghost to preach the Gospel in Asia.
Under the name of Asia is comprehended that part, which bordering on the sea
westwarde, conteyneth in the continent Acolia and Lydia, above Ephesus and
Smyrna, and Ionia it self. Which countries as they are most fruitful and rich
of all others, so for this cause they were very unhappy, in that Christ would
not at this time, they should hear the doctrine of salvation. Such was the
case of Bythinia also, into the which the same spirit of Christ would not
suffer Paul to go neither. By which argument it easily appears that the
Apostles wandered not about the world at their own pleasure, but did all
things by the guiding and ordering of the spirit of GOD, for we know that
this holy spirit, was promised and given unto them by Christ. Beside that
they had singular revelations when need was, whereof we had example before in
Peter and Philip, where the Ethiopian Eunuch and Cornelius the Centurion by
their ministry should be converted. This makes for the commendation of the
Apostles doctrine that we despise it not as an humane thing, and to be little
esteemed, seeing it is manifest it was published among men, by the evident
working of the holy ghost. But some men use in this place to move a grave
question, why Paul was suffered in one place to teach, and forbidden in
another. This question some men think is very commodiously soluted, if all
such doings be referred unto Gods prescience or foreknowledge. For they say he
foreseeth who be worthy to have his word, and to be saved, and who be not. But
these kind of men while they are careful to defend the justice of God, for
fear of making him the author of any sin, they make little of his grace,
measuring salvation by the worthynesse of men: which is impossible for them
to do, unless they will also stablishe the merit of man, and the proud
affiaunce in man's righteousness. But how frivolous and vain a gloss this
is, appears by this, in that all men of themselves are unworthy of
salvation. For as Paul testifyeth: All have sinned, and are destitute of the
glory of God, and there is not a just man, no not one. And there is none worthy
to receive the word of salvation, but such as God pleases to make worthy and
meet. For of our selves we are not once able to think good, but all our
worthynesse and ability to perceive that that is good comes of God. 2. Cor.
3.
This saying of Christ is notable, and well known to all men: No man
comes to me, John. 6.
but he whom the father draws. An example whereof we had in the.xiiij.
Chapter, where it is said, they believed, that were ordained unto life
everlasting. And in the next Sermon we shall have the example of Lydia, which
therefore believed Paul, because the Lord had opened her heart. It remains
therefore that there can be none other cause alleged of this doing, but the
frank and free election of God, which embraces by his mercy whom he
pleases, and whom again he ly^^eth, their hearts he hardens. And yet no man
must accuse God either of unrighteousness or cruelty, forasmuch as he is
bound to man, and so ordreth his judgments, that great learning comes
thereby unto us. For in the elect he shows an example of his mere goodness,
and in the reprobate the severity of his justice, that we may learn to fear
the one, and to embrace and kiss the other. Moreover, the use of this doctrine
serves and is necessary for many purposes. For it marvelously comfort us
in temptations, because we know our salvation is not founded in our power, or
in the merit of our righteousness, but in the grace of God, and merit of
Christ. For who can overthrow this righteousness or grace? who shall separate
those from the love of God, Romans 8.
whom he has once embraced? Or who shall be able to take one sheep out of
Christ's hand, seeing all power is given to him in heaven and in earth? John.
10.
Whosoever teach that salvation depends upon our worthiness, do utterly
infringe the force and strength of this consolation. Besides, this doctrine
teaches us our duty, and to acknowledge the great goodness of God, when we
perceive our selves more sought after and visited by the word of God, than
others. For as God attributes not this unto our merits, but of his mere
grace goes about to save us: so if any disdain to acknowledge his goodness,
and show themselves unkind toward him, he shows the horrible severity of
his justice against them. We have for example, Corozaim, Bethsaida, Capernaum,
and the whole Nation of the Jews, which we read God cast of for none other
cause, Luke. 9.10.
but for that they would not acknowledge the day of their visitation. Examples
of like seuertitie are those Cities, which God did vouchsafe to illuminate by
the ministry of Paul more than other. For we s^e they are at this day
tyrannously oppressed by the Turks, because they showed not themselves so
thankful unto God, as they ought. Let us I beseech you, think hereof, whom
it has pleased God these many years to let enjoy the preaching of the
Gospel, and to let us abound in the quiet and peace thereof, where a number
beside feel great want thereof, and being famined, would be glad of one little
morsel of Euangelike consolation.

But let us return to Paul and his companions, Paul is called to go into
Macedonia.
who though they be forbidden in one place to preach, yet cease not from doing
their duty, but passing through Misia, come at length to Aeolis, and to a
City in the same Country, called Troas, earnestly seeking euerywhere,
occasion to preach. And there Paul being admonished by oracle, understands
he must go into Macedonia. For there appears unto him a Macedonian, which
undoubtedly was nothing but an Angel, and desires to have his country
helped. And here came diverse things very profitable for us to consider. First
is the example of Paul, whereby we are taught, that we must not be slack in
doing our office and duty, although our enterprise succeed not at the first
or second attempt, as we desire. For we read the like came to pass many
times both to the Prophets and the Apostles, which followed their calling the
more earnestlye, the more impedimentes they perceived were laid in their way.
Let all men go forward after these men's examples, and God will assist their
endeavors, who uses when he sees time and place to give occasion of onset,
and also prosperous success. Furthermore, this place shows us a singular
example of Gods goodness, whereby it comes to pass, that God works our
salvation, when we least know or think of it. For who among the Macedonians,
would you think, thought either of Paul, or of the way of salvation, who
when he came, had none but a few of women to follow him and hear him? So by
this mean is the saying of the Prophet fulfilled: I am found of them that
sought me not, and have appeared to them that asked not after me. Esaias. 65.
And that that Luke says came to pass here among them of Macedonia, the same
may be seen in all other that either have attained, or at this day do attain
unto salvation. For before this world was made, Ephesians. 1.
Paul says we were elected in Christ. And our first parent Adam when he was
fallen in sin, and did not only not seek God, but fled from him, Genes. 3.
yet was he both sought of God and called, and received the free promise of
salvation. Hereto appertains it that men in the Scriptures are compared unto
s^eepe, which having once strayed from the flock, never return, unless the
shepeheard by his diligence fette them again. But Christ is our shepehearde,
which uses to seek his sheep in valleys and mountains, Esaias. 53. Luke. 15.
and when he has found him, lays him on his shoulder and brings him home.
And this care of God may not only be perceived in those things that concern
the salvation of our souls, but also shows it self in the things serving to
the use and maintenance of our bodies. For as God feeds our body
bountifully, in giving us a living out of the earth: so has he appointed the
Angels to be our tutors and keepers, which ^arie round about them that fear
him, and deliver them. But because we have hereof entreated heretofore, let
this now suffyse. Yet let us mark the use of his doctrine, which consists
chiefly in this point, that we should be thankful unto God, and strive in
all kind of adversities to defend our calling, by the invincible hope and
affiaunce of Gods aid and succor. Furthermore, this example commends unto us
the dignity of the Gospel, and the ministry thereof. For first this is a
notable thing, that Paul is called by an Angel, and by the Oracle of God to
preach. So Peter was admonished by a vision from heaven, to preach unto
Cornelius, and to the Gentyles, and the spirit led Philip to teach the
Ethiopian his salvation. Therefore some men do very vainly to contemn the
ministry of man, as a thing of small or none account, and require to have
Angels to teach them, seeing Angels send us unto men to be taught. Yea,
Paul will not have us to believe an Angel, Galat. 1.
if he teach any thing disagreeing from the doctrine of the Apostles. Also the
words of the Angel commend the dignity of the Ministry. For he says,
Come into Macedonia, and help us. Yet is it in Gods power only to help us
both in body and soul. But because the word of the Gospel, is the power of
salvation to all that believe it, the Ministers thereof are therefore not
without a cause said, to help men and to save them. And for this cause Abdias
prophesying of the kingdom of Christ, calls the Apostles Saviors. Therefore
the temeritie and impiety of those, which say that the Gospel causes
troubles and disquietnesse, is reproved, seeing it is evident that men cannot
choose but perish, except they be called by the preaching of Christ into the
way of salvation, according to the saying of the Prophet: Esaias. 6^.
The Nation and kingdom that serves not thee shall perish.

Paul's passage into Macedonia.
But what does Paul, when he hears he is called of God into Macedonia, to men
unknown, and into Europe another part of the world? Does he tryfle and make
delays, because he was before once or twyse forbidden? No, yea, he prepares
him to the voyage, and frames him altogether unto Gods calling, and at length
with a straight course comes to Philippie, a very notable City and state. By
which example we are taught that nothing is rashly to be taken in hand without
Gods calling, but when we are certain thereof, then with speed to do that
the Lord commands. For he so little regards prolongers and delayers, that
he cannot abide pretense of godliness, if under color thereof, we neglect our
vocation, as we are taught by the example of him, which was not suffered to go
bury his father, Luke. 9.
after Christ had called him to the ministerye of the word. But this is the
most commodious way, to do well, if we have a diligent regard to the calling
of God, and follow the same faithfully and earnestly. For they that trust
their own devises, and seek after vanity as David says, cannot choose but
grieuouslye offend. God grant that we be all mindful hereof, and follow
our vocation, that after we have on earth fulfilled our duty, we may at
length live in heaven with Jesus Christ our Savior: to whom be praise,
honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.Cviij. Homely.
WE were in that City abiding certain days, and on the Sabbath days we went
out of the City besides a river, where men were wont to pray. And we sat
down and spoke unto the women which resorted thither. And a certain woman
named Lydia, a seller of purple of the City of Thya^ira, which worshipped God,
gave us audience, whose heart the Lord opened, that she attended unto the
things that Paul spoke. When she was baptized, and her household, she besought
us saying: If ye think that I believe on the Lord come into my house and
abide there. And she constreyned us.
THe Apostle Paul being called of God by the Angel, passed into Macedonia,
to preach the Gospel unto the men of that country. By which example is
proved partly the dignity of the Gospel, and partly that salvation that is
given us of mere favor and grace is declared. For if we consider the
Macedonians, they were in the same case and condition that other Nations were,
which Paul otherwheres writes, were subject unto the power of darkness,
were Idolaters, were the servants of sin, and therefore void of God. Besides
that, God sends Paul now to teach them the way of salvation, when they once
think not thereof. But let us see what he did at Philippi, the chiefest city
of Macedonia.

We were (says Luke) in that City abiding certain days. The cause of this
abode (as may be gathered by all circumstances) was for that the Apostles saw
no opportunity to preach, Paul preaches at Philippi.
which thing they chiefly waited for. Wherefore at length they sought the same
out of the City. For they went out of the City on the Sabbath day, and
preached the Gospel to certain women, nigh unto a certain River, whither
they used of custom to resort unto public prayer. This is a very notable
example, teaching us how God uses to try and exercise the faith and
constancy of his servants. For as it has been declared, the Apostle was
called by the Angel, as one speaking in the behalf of all the country, and
desiring help. Wherefore a man might have hoped that the Macedonians should
have received Paul when he had come, with all kind of alacrity, and
declaration of joy, and that every man's mind had been prepared to receive the
light of the Gospel. But this hope so deceyueth them, that in a most famous
and populous City, there is not one that gives ear unto them, neither can
they epsy any occasion to make a sermon, notwithstanding they narrowly waited
for the same. And without the City, women only gave ear unto them, and but
one of them all, that believed the word, one Lydia which was a stranger. Who
therefore would not think this calling of Paul to have been a mockery,
seeing no effect to follow of the same? But God uses to lay many stoppes in
the way of them that walk in his calling, whereby to hinder and pull them
back, to prove their faith, to train them unto constancy, and to teach them
to wrestle and overcome adversity. So Moses being sent to deliver the people,
fyndeth many impedimentes laid in his way, which seemed much repugnaunt to
the will and appointment of God. For the Angel of the Lord threatens him
with death, because he neglected the Circumcising of his son, and he fyndeth
Pharao not only set and bent against his requests, but also the children of
Israel murmurre and rebel against him: And when he was out of Egypt, the sea
lay in his way before him, so that nature her self seemed to fight against
him, but his constancy of faith and steadfast purpose to fulfill the
commandments of God, overcame all these adversities. So that cruel enemy
Saul ryseth up against David being called and appointed to be king, by whose
tyranny or ever he came to the kingdom, he was expulsed his country. And
many such like things came daily to pass, whereby God uses to try our
faith. But it is our duty constantly to hold on, and with sure hope to wait
for the assistance of God, and so we shall find he will neither fail of his
promises, nor want to further our enterprises.

Lydia is an example of true conversion.
Furthermore, we have a marvelous example of conversion set forth in Lydia,
which by reason of the manifold doctrine thereof, the Evangelist most diligently
describes with all ye circumstances. And beginning with the description of the
person, he says there was a woman, to admonish us of that se^e or kind, by
the which sin entered into the world. By her condition and calling she was a
seller of purple, and exercised a kind of merchandise serving more to the
maintenance of pomp and pride, than unto necessity: to say nothing of
covetousness, craft, and deceyte, and such like vices as this kind of people
are commonly given unto. Besides, she was a stranger borne at Thyatirae a
City of Lydia. These things are declared to the end that we might know how
God uses to despise no state or degree of men, but of al sorts favors and
embraces those that are desirous to convert and turn unto him. Infynite other
examples of like kind there are, which teach us the same. John. 4. Luke. 7.
Math. 9. Luke. 19.
For Christ in many places reasons with harlots, about their salvation. In
other places again he opens the kingdom of heaven unto Publicanes. He
disdeyned not the order of Phariseyes, seeing he admitted Nicodemus to talk
with him in the night season, and mos^e friendly instructed him. Yea, he did
lighten the Centurion which was appointed to see him executed, Math. 27.
with the knowledge of him. These places teach us that we should not despair
of Gods grace, by reason of the trade or kind of life that we have heretofore
led. For it is evident, that the door of salvation stands open to every
man which unfeignedly desires it. In this example also appears the counsel
of God, which of little beginnings promoteth the kingdom of his son. For he
appoynteth Lydia to be the first fruits of that Church, whose faith afterward
Paul thinks he could never sufficiently commend. So Christ chose out from
among fyshers and Publicanes his chief Disciples. And we must not think it is
without a cause that Christ's kingdom here on earth touching the outward
sight, is of no reputation, and a despised thing. For hereof we may gather,
that it is not of this world, nor that we must seek the things of this
world in the same. It is also evident that they which desire to be partakers
with Christ, must not glory in the wisdom of the flesh, in Nobility, in
pomp, and other such like things, but only in the Lord, as Paul has taught
at large in the first Epistle to the Corinthians the first Chap. Here have thou
what to answer those, which rail at the doctrine and faith of the Gospel,
because none hold with the same, but the Comminaltie, and men of small or no
reputation, using the same argument, that the Phariseyes and Scribes sometime
used against their servants, John. 7.
which commended Christ's doctrine. Why rather harken they not what Christ
says: I thank thee o father, Math. 11. Luke. 1^.
because thou have hidden these things from the wise and prudent, and have
showed them unto Babes. Verilye father, even so was it thy good pleasure.

But after he had described the person of Lydia, The order and manner of
conversion.
he declares the order and manner of her conversion. In the which first she is
said to be religious, and to fear God, as diverse other did, both among the
Jews and Gentyles, which yet were ignorant in the way of true religion, and
salvation, and therefore the more zelouslye they defended superstition, the
more egerly they resisted the truth, yet in the mean time this is needful in
salvation, that men's minds should not be void of the fear of God, but
inclined to embrace the truth, and desirous of true religion. For except the
ground be good, the seed of the word can not well grow in it. Luke. 8.
And yet this is not so to be understood, as though this promptness and
towardness came of our self. For of our selves we are not able to think
well, and the inventions of man are naught, even from his childehoode, as God
testifyeth. It is therefore the gift and work of God, if men be given unto the
desire and love of religion and the truth, which otherwise by reason of
natural corruption, they abhor in their hearts. Next, Lydia heard Paul's
teaching. Therefore she uses that mean and instrument, whereby God uses to
give and stir up faith in us. For faith comes by hearing, Roma. 10.
and hearing by the word of God. Therefore whosoever will profit in the
knowledge of salvation must labor to have faith, and we must not regard those
that seek new revelations. For God speaks to us in the scriptures, which who
so refuse to hear, are commonly prays for the devil, which miserably
deludeth the deceived with lying revelations. Last of all, it is said, that God
opened the heart of Lydia, to give heed unto the things that Paul spoke. For
without this in vain is the word either preached or heard, whereof because
we have already oftentimes spoken, it seems not now needful to say any
more. And if any man ask why God did not open the hearts of others as well, to
him we say with Paul: o man what art thou that disputest with God? who has
first given unto God, and it shall be given to him again? For it becomes us
not over curiouslye to search out the privy counsayles of God, but in them to
reverence his great goodness, justice, verity, and wisdom. It is our part
by this place to learn the order of true conversion, which chiefly consists
in these three points, to have a love in our hearts unto religion, to hear
the word, and to be illuminated with the spirit of God.

It remains for us to consider the effects of true faith, which showed
themselves in Lydia. First, The effects of conversion and true faith.
she is baptized according to the commandment of Christ, and custom of the
Church. By baptism he comprehends the confession of faith, whereby she
renounced her old superstition, and professed to follow Christ, desiring to
be accounted among the members of his Church. We are by this example also
admonished, that the godly must not contemn the sacraments, but use them
reverently, both for that they know they are instituted by Christ, and also
for that they are glad to have the benefyte of salvation, whereof Christ is the
author, by them sealed and confyrmed. But Lydia not content with her own
baptism, causes her whole household and family likewise to be baptized. This
is the property of all the faithful, that they desire all men to be partakers
of salvation with them, but specially those which they knew God has
committed to their charge. And this they do not of private affection, but
following the commandment of God, whose will it is always that we shall
consecrate and dedicate unto him, all our people. So Abraham circumcised not
only himself, but all the men in his family according to Gods commandment.
And in the law householders are commanded to instruct their family in the
commandments of God. Deuteronomy. 6. Psalm. 78.
And that which was commanded them, Magistrates must think belongs to them
also, and labor to take away superstitiousnesse, and to plant the desire of
true religion among the people, as we read those godly Kings David, Asa,
Iosaphat, Ezechias, Josias, and such like diligently did. And doubtless it is
not without the great suspicion of impiety, that one should so rule over
others, to bereue God of his right, which claymeth all men to himself.
Finally, Lydia bids the Apostles home to her house, and offreth them lodging
with great instancie, saying: If you think that I believe on the Lord, come
home to my house, and abide there. Which words have in them such kind of
obtestation that the Apostles might not refuse the friendship offered, except
they would both condemn her, and think her unworthy the name of a Christian.
Although at the first, after a civil sort, they refuse to come home to her
house, both for that they would not be thought like deceyuers, to abuse the
simplicity of women, and to gape after their goods, and also for that Paul
would never burden any, as he many times testifyeth. 1. Cor. 9.2. These. 3.
Howbeit, Lydia by her entreaty utters a mind inflamed with charity, and
vnfearfull constancy. For it is a point of charity, in that she is desirous
to take them into her house, and to give them their boorde, of whom she had
received and drawn the doctrine of salvation. Again, it is a token of a
valiant courage, that being a stranger, she durst receive teachers of a new
doctrine into her house, which she well knew she might not do without
danger. But this is the property of faith, that it neither fears body nor
goods, so that the glory of Christ may be enlarged. Let them I pray you, look
on the example of this woman, which now a days boaste of their faith, and
they shall straight perceive how wide they are from the property of faith.
Let us therefore pray unto God, that he will vouchsafe to open our hearts, that
we being instructed in true faith, may express Christ in our whole life, and
live with him in heaven: to whom be praise, honor, power, and glory, for ever.
Amen.

The.Cix. Homely.
AND it came to pass as we went to prayer, a certain Damsel possessed with
a spirit, that prophesied met us, which brought her master and mystresse
much vauntage with prophesying. The same followed Paul and us, and cried
saying: These men are the servants of the most high God, which show unto us
the way of salvation. And this did she many days. But Paul not content,
turned about and said to the spirit, I command thee in the name of Jesus
Christ, that thou come out of her. And he came out the same hour.
ALthough Jesus Christ the Son of God by the merit of his death, has so
overthrown the kingdom of the Devil, that he has no more power against the
kingdom of Christ, yet cease he not, according to his ancient usage, still
to assault the same: and as Christ intermitted nothing belonging to the
redemption of mankind: so Satan for his part leaves nothing vnassayd, to pull
men from Christ their savior, and from the way of salvation. An evident
example hereof is declared in this present history. For after Paul was come
unto the Philippians, Lydia the sel^er of Purple, converted unto the faith by
his preaching, began to declare the singular fruits of faith. For showing
her duty of thankfulness unto the Apostles, she requested them home to her
house, and lodged them. By which occasion it came to pass, that the Apostles
proceeding earnestly in their office, daily wanne more and more Disciples, and
so began a Church together, as shall appear in the end of the Chapter. But
Satan thinking this gear intolerable, assayeth to resist these first
principles and beginnings of Christ's kingdom. And first he handles the
matter with subtlety, and guilefull flattery, and by and by, when his first
enterprise succeeds not, he sets upon the Apostles by open force, and at
length dryueth them out of the City. But at this time we will examine but the
first encounter.

Luke begins his history with the description of that person, A Maid
possessed with a spirit, is an instrument of the Devil.
whose help Satan used in this conflict. This was a maid or damozell
possessed with the spirit of Python, which by her prophesying, was very
gaynefull unto her master and mystresse. Now this spirit of Python the
Gentyles supposed to be Apollo, who had that name given him (as the Poets
feign) of that Serpent Python which he slew with his bow and arrows. And
that Apollo was the President of prophesying, is more manifest than needs by
many words to be proved. For Delphi, Claros, Delus, and diverse other places,
where under the name of Apollo the devil sometime used to utter his Oracles,
were very notable and famous. He likewise inspyred certain private persons,
striking them suddenly mad, and making them speak ambiguous and doubtful
sayings, which superstitious men received and embraced for credible Oracles.
And at length the matter came to this pass, that foolish men would
enterprise or take nothing in hand, unless they had first consulted with these
Prophets, and in all their distresses they would run to these Oracles,
whereby it came to pass that great advantage followed. Because man is of this
nature, that he will let for no labor nor cost about those things which may
any kind of way satisfye his curiosity. And Satan rayseth up an instrument
hereof among the Philippians, against the Apostles, to the intent either to
make the wiser sort suspect them, or else the rude and unskillful Commons to
hate them. In the mean while we may consider with what engines Satan
maintayneth his kingdom amongst men: namely, by lying, and curious and
soothsaying Arts, wherein he counterfeyteth the spirit of Prophecy, to draw
men by that means from the word of God, which ought to be the only rule in
all our doyngs. The Professors of these Arts in Egypt, were the Magitians,
Exo. 7.8.
which the Scripture says wythstoode Moses. Among these may Baalam also be
numbered, although he did egregiously counterfeyte a love of the truth. Such
were diverse and many sorts of Prophets among the Chanaanites, whom God by his
law commanded to be destroyed. Unto the which may be referred the Augures
Aruspices, and interpreters of dreams, Astrologers, Necromancers, Geomancers,
Hydromancers, and infynite others, whose counsayles and sayings were of great
authority among Kings and Magistrates, in the administration and governance of
their kingdoms and commonweals. And surely if we consider the thing well,
Satan scarcely exercised the power of his kingdom in any other thing more,
than in this vanity of Oracles, wherewith he bewitched all the world a great
number of years. And in these days he many times rayseth up certain
Prophets, which either make themself cunning in the knowledge of things to
come, or else can put away diseases by enchauntments, and assay to do diverse
other things, impossible for man to perform. But some will demand wherefore
God in times past suffered and yet to this day suffers these things to be done.
The answer is ready. For where the Gentyles in times past were not contented
with the revelations of God, but went about to find out the mysteries of Gods
majesty, by the pregnancie of their own wit, this presumption of theirs
deserved, that they should be given up into a reprobate sense, and miserably
seduced with the wyles and ginnes of the Devil. Roma. 1.
Paul gave us warning that the same should come to pass toward the later
days, saying that Antichrist should have power on them which would not embrace
the truth. 2. These. 2.
offered of God. And if a man consider the Philippians, he shall find they
were worthy to be thus seduced by this Demoniake Damsel. For such was their
liberality toward her, that her Master and Dame had no small advantage by
her. But yet they so little regard the Apostles of Christ, that they had
wanted harbor, unless Lydia which also was a forrenner, had taken them into
her house. The like unthankfulness and peruersitie is in these days. For men
will not embrace the light of the truth, and where they bestow much cost upon
dumb images, deceyuing Priests, Coniurers, Inchaunters, Soothsayers, and wise
folk (as they call them) every thing seems to much that they bestow on the
doctrine of truth. They are worthy therefore to be a pray for Satan, by whose
subtlety they may perceive both their goods to be consumed, and their bodies
troubled and molested. Let us therefore learn to harken unto the law of God,
which teaches us to take heed and beware of all such kinds of deceyuers, and
commands us only to study and follow the word of God. See Deuteronomy. 18.
Leuit. 20. Esaye. 8. And they that will not thus do, let them learn by the
example of Saul, what to look for. See. 1. Sam. 28.

But now it is time to mark what Satan did by this Damsel. She following the
Apostles, Satan bears witness unto the truth.
which of custom resorted to the prayers, cried out saying: These men are the
servants of the most high God, which show unto us the way of salvation. What
kind of thing (say thou) is this that I hear? Is this the saying of the
Devil, withstanding the Apostles? Yea, verily. Why? he could not say any
more in their commendation, than to confess them to be the servants of God,
and the preachers of salvation. Howbeit, it behooves us not so much to
consider the words, as the pretense and meaning of the Devil, by whose
suggestion these words were spoken. For so shall thou perceive that he most
craftily undermines Christ's cause, where he seems most to hold with the
same. For here in this place, he bears witness unto the Apostles doctrine,
to make it with the wiser sort (specially with the Jews, if any were present)
to be suspected. For Satan knows he is accounted a liar amongst all men.
For this cause he cries that the Apostles are the servants of God, and
messengers of salvation, to make them the rather to be suspected with wise men.
Furthermore he seeks to make those that believe the Apostles, to believe also
his answers, whereby they heard the Apostles doctrine commended. But the faith
in Christ cannot stand, where ought is attributed unto the devil, whose
kingdom Christ came into this world to destroy. Therefore under the pretense
of Christ, he seeks privily to creep into them, and to draw them which began
to believe in Christ, by little and little from him. Besides this, he thought
to tickle the Apostles minds, with ambition and desire of vain glory, to
the end that being herewith entysed, they might neglect the glory of God. You
see therefore what poison lies hid under the bayte of this honorable and holy
acclamation. Marc. 1. Luke. 4.
With this intent we read he flattered Christ also, and bare record of him.
Let us here mark the sleyght of Satan, which can marueylouslye dissemble his
hatred of the truth, and transform himself into an Angel of light.
Therefore let us suspect whatsoever comes from him. Neither let us believe
his instruments, although they speak never so gravely and honorably in the
commendation of Gods servants, and have the holy scriptures never so ryfe in
their mouth. This place serves to refute them which say we are unjustly
offended with the Papacy, because therein the name of Christ is preached, the
commendation of Saints are celebrated, the lessons of holy scripture are daily
used, and nothing is done without the invocation of Gods holy name. But these
men are ignorant how Antichrists sea or chair must stand in the Church, and
mark not this saying of Christ, Math. 7.
Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord. etc. And if we would look
nearer on the matter, it shall appear that they seek nothing under the
pretense of religion, and Christ his Church, and his reverend name, but to
establishe their tyranny, and to bring men's traditions in credit. Also by
this place are they confuted, that hold with Coniurers, enchaunters, or
soothsayers, because they hear them mutter out the reverent names of God, and
weighty sentences of scripture. But what marueyle is this, since the Devil
durst allege scriptures against our Master Christ? yea, they sin the more
grievously, because they color their impiety with the name of God, the abuse
and profanation whereof, he will not leave unpunished.

Now what Paul's opinion was touching all these points, Satan by the name of
christ is expelled.
this present example declares. He for a time bears with this Maiden,
testifying this truth of them, waiting for some suggestion of the holy spirit,
because he would not offend through blind and ouerhastie affection, at
length inflamed with an holy zeal and indignation, he rebukes the Maid thus
crying, and in the name of Christ expels the spirit. Which example although
it serve for the instruction of all men, yet chiefly it teaches the Ministers
of the word their duty, who must have so great a care of the truth, that they
should suffer nothing, which by any means may derogate any thing from the
same, although it made greatly for their praise and glory. For (as we declared
before) Satan uses by flattery, to set on such, as he knows are other ways
invincible. For the which cause Christ forbade the evil spirits to speak,
and would receive no commendation at their mouths. Wherefore they are greatly
deceived that use to dally with those whom they know are altogether
strangers from the truth. They hide many times their poison, but the more they
flatter, the sorer they hurt. It is the part of a christian man to take none
for his friend, whom he knows to be Christ's enemy, and cannot abide the
doctrine of Christ. But this is very worthy to be considered, that Paul
sets Jesus Christ against the Devil, and that he is constrained to depart
as soon as he hears the name of Christ pronounced. This is an unspeakable
argument of the power of Christ. For none can enter the house of a mighty man,
and ryfle him of his goods, except he first bind him. But Jesus Christ
coming into the world, has so vanquished the Devil the Prince thereof, that
if he hear but the name of Christ only, he is constrained to leave his
possession in men, and to give place unto Christ. Therefore we must needs
confess that the power of Christ is much greater than the power of the devil.
And of this we must fet comfort in our temptations, that we fear not him, who
has no power or force against Christ, in whom we are graffed through faith.
Again, we are by this place taught, that Christ has nothing to do with ye
devil, seeing he does not vouchsafe to receive of him any testimony, be it
never so honorable. For what society or communion can be between them, seeing
according to the first promise, Gene. 3. 1. John. 3.
Christ came into the world to break or crush the Devils head, and to destroy
his works? This also admonishes Christians of their duty, that they should
have nothing to do with the devil. For it is not meet for them that have
professed Christ, to dallye with the Devil in any point. Let them therefore
fly these soothsaying Arts, which the craft of the Devil, and curiosity of
man has invented. Let them fly the inglings of enchauntmentes, whereby he
promyseth men help in their diseases, or in their other distresses. Let them
fly false and profane worshippings, Idolatrye, superstition, and whatsoever
else plucketh us from God. Let them hate the tyranny of sin, whereby the
liberty that Christ has purchased us, is lost. Let them watch constantly in
the faith, and resist the Devil, and he shall depart from them: whereby it
shall come to pass, that we having shaken of his yoke, shall here lead a life
acceptable unto God, and shall hereafter live and reygne in heaven with our
Lord and savior Jesus Christ: to whom be praise, honor, power, and glory, for
ever. Amen.

The.Cx. Homely.
AND when her Master and Mystresse saw that the hope of their gain was gone,
they caught Paul and Sylas, and drew them into the market place unto the
Rulers, and brought them to the Officers, saying: These men trouble our City,
seeing they are Jews, and preach ordinances which are not lawful for us to
receive, neither to observe, seeing we are Romans. And the people ran
against them, and the officers rent their clothes, and commanded them to be
beaten with rods. And when they had beaten them sore, they cast them into
prison, commanding the Iayler of the prison to keep them diligently. Which
when he had received such commandment, thrust them into the inner prison, and
made their feet fast in the stocks.
AS the Devil, partly with flattery and deceyte, and partlye by open force
withstoode Jesus Christ, while he lived here on earth, and preached the
Gospel, even so he uses the same weapons against the Apostles of Christ at
this day, that in times past he used. This may we see in this present
history. For against Paul preaching among the Philippians, he sets a
Damsel possessed with the spirit of the Devil, by whom he gives a notable
testimony of the truth unto Paul, meaning this way to bring the doctrine of
the Gospel in suspicion with wise men, and to get himself some rowme among
the professors of christian faith. But the Apostle Paul quickly smells his
subtlety, and compels the spirit being adjured by the name of Christ, to
come out of ye maid, teaching us by this example that there ought to be no
fellowship betwixt the devil and Christ and his servants, forasmuch as Christ
came into this world, to destroy the works of the devil. But for all this the
devil leaves not his tackle, but rather, seeing by flattery, he cannot
prevail, being stricken in a great rage, professes extreme enmity against
Paul, by the master and mistress of the maiden, and proceeds so far in
the matter, that he first causes the Apostles to be beaten with rods, and to
be put in prison, and at length to be thrust ^ut of the City. This place is
worthy to be singularly considered, because it sets forth to us, to behold,
as it were in a glass, the crafts and enterprises of our common enemy.

But chiefly Luke declares what cause incensed the Masters of this Maid
against the Apostles. Covetousness commonly incenseth Christ's enemies.
They perceived (says he) when this prophesying spirit was driven out that
the hope of their gain was gone. Covetousness therefore was the chief cause
of this ado, which did not only dazell their eyes, that they could not see
the truth, but did also so set them on fire, that they could not but with
deadly hatred persecute the same. This is an example very notable, teaching us
what a mischievous evil covetousness is. Paul calls it the root of all
evil. 1. Tim. 6.
And the scripture in another place techeth us that there is nothing more
wicked than a covetous man. Eccles. 10.
There are also euerywhere examples which prove, that law and right is
corrupted, through covetousness, good manners infected, the honesty of Maidens
and Matrones assaulted, amities and friendship broken, and finally most
flourishing commonweals ouerturned. But the force and infection of this
evil, is nowhere more evidently espied, than in matters of religion. For
covetousness drawing the mind of man from God, makes them Idolaters, which
ought to put all their hope and trust in God only. For, where our treasure is,
Math. 6.
there is also our heart. The treasure of a covetous man is in his goods, and
heaps of money. Therefore the covetous man's mind must needs be ^yed
thereto. Therefore it is evident, there can be no religion, wheresoever
covetousness once bears rule. For ye which cause, Paul doubted not to call
covetousness, Idolatry. Coloss. 3. Ephe. 5. And when covetous men brag of
religion, they use religion but for their gain also, and the more holy a
pretense they set upon their covetousness, the more they offend. So
through the covetousness of the Iewishe Priests, it came to pass, that the
Temple of the Lord was made a Fayer or market, and under the pretense of long
prayers, the houses of the widows and fatherless were devoured. And the
Apostles chiefly attribute this unto the deceyuers of the later days, that
they shall deny the Lord that redeemed them, 2. Pet. 2.
and make money and merchandise of his members. Which Oracle if a man would
compare with the usage of our days, he should confess that Peter had hit the
nail on the head, for that now these many years all things have been sold
in the Popedom for money. Yea, this only thing may we thank for all the
traditions of men, for so many orders of Monks, such confusion of ceremonies,
Diriges, and whatsoever such like. But besides all these things there is one
much more grievous matter, namely, that this covetousness makes men they
cannot abide the truth, and the enemies thereof. For although covetous men can
abide many other things, yet they cannot suffer their advantage to decay, nay
they will wax stark mad, if a man take away the occasion thereof. Of this
spring such wicked consultations against the truth, treasons, tumults, and all
kind of persecutions. Examples to prove the same are euerywhere to be found.
John. 11. John. 12.
Caiaphas blinded with covetousness caused Christ to be killed. Judas moved
with covetousness betrayed him. And the master and mystresse of this Damsel
wished the Apostles out of the way, for no cause so much as for that their
doctrine hindered their gayning. They could abide that Lydia was converted
unto Christ, that the Apostles were lodged in her house, that they preached
unto them that assembled together by the water side, and brought every day new
Disciples unto Christ. But they cannot abide to have their gain turned away.
The very like we shall see a little hereafter in Demetrius among the Ephesians.
But what stand we in rehearsal of old examples, seeing in our days
covetousness only does chiefly hinder and stop the course of truth? The
Bishops of Rome blinded with desire of lucre, fly all kind of reformation.
The same binds Princes and the Nobility unto Antichrist, in that they
perceive the Popes and Bishops may maintain many of their kinsfolk, with
Ecclesiastical goods and livings, which otherwise might go for rascalles, and
be feign to labor and toil with their hands. The same makes merchauntes,
customers, soldiers, and all states of men offended with the Gospel, because
they see that if the Gospel be received, such trades of waxing rich, as many
occupy in these days, cannot stand. What shall we say of the Gospellers? Do
not they run chiefly upon this rock, while under a cloak of the Gospel,
they hunt for riches and honor? Of which hope if they be disappointed, they
become open enemies of the truth, being of the same mind that we saw before
Simon Magus was of. Let us therefore fly this hideous monster, and being
content with our state, think nothing better than the knowledge of the truth
of the Gospel, which only is able to make us partakers of everlasting
salvation.

But let us return to this Damsels Master and Dame, The Apostles are accused
of sedition and deceyt.
and see what they did against the Apostles. First, they lay hold on Paul
and Silas, as the chief authors of all this matter. When they had bound them,
they bring them into the market place, unto the headboro^ghes of the City,
after that, they deliver them unto the soldiers, which the Romans had there
put in garrison. Then they begin an accusation against them, both biting and
artifycious: These men (say they) trouble our City, seeing they are Jews, and
preach ordinances, which are not lawful for us to receive, neither to
observe, seeing we are Romans. They object therefore against them two most
heinous crimes, seditious disturbance of the City, and seducing of the people.
The later crime they amplifye, by reason of the Roman laws, whereby new
manners of worshippinges or religion, were forbidden: neither was it lawful to
honor or worship any new God, before the senate had allowed him for a God, as
that ancient writer of the Church Tertullian, has noted. Further, they
exaggerate both the crimes, Apolog. 5.
by circumstances of persons. For they glory in that they are Romans, and
therefore worthy to be defended, that they may live in safety according to the
Roman laws. They call the Apostles Jews, after an odious sort and wise,
because the name of the Jews was hated and enuyed of all men, in so much that
in Claudius days, they were all driven out of Rome and Italy. And surely it
might seem a grievous attempt for Jews, defamed persons, almost with all men,
to prescribe laws unto the Romans, the Lords and seigniors of the whole
world. And this accusation was of such force and effect, that all the people
ran upon the Apostles, as it had been to the quenching of some great fire
begun. Thou shall in this place consider what the crafts of the enemies of the
truth are. We heard how they were incensed and led with the desire of private
lucre and advantage. But because it was an dishonest point to disturb the whole
city for a fewes sake, they make of a private case, a public, with marvelous
art and craft, so proceeding, as though they took the public weals cause in
hand. Thus we hear Caiaphas played the Rhetorician, when he said unto the
Scribes, consulting against Christ: It is expedient for us, that one man dye
for the people, and not all the Nation perish. And now a days, nothing is so
common a thing as to set a pretense of common weal upon private affections,
when men desire the doctrine of truth to be banished. This craft they have
learned of their Captain the Devil, who we read used the same tricks even
from the beginning. For did he not this ways entyce our first parents to
break Gods commandment, and so propose his matter, as though he had sought
no whitte for his own avail, but was only careful for theirs. When he
begoonne also to dispute with Christ, he seemed to go about to cause Christ to
declare his Godheade unto the world, by some wonderful and myraculous wise,
and not to hold the world any longer in suspense and doubt, what he was. For
to this end were his sayings, touching turning of stones into bread, and
casting himself down from the pinnacle of the Temple. We have euerywhere
examples of such sleyghtes, the chief end whereof is, to warn us that we
suffer not our selves to be circumuented and beguiled, either with the crafts
of the devil himself, or of his members. This place also teaches us, with
what crimes commonly the truth is charged in this world. Namely, that she
troubles and disquieteth commonweals, and beguyleth the simple Commons with
new and false religion. Hereof comes it to pass, that the Ministers and
teachers of the truth, are counted for seditious fellows, seducers, and
beguilers. The faithful servants of God, Moses and Aaron, are so called of
Pharao the tyrant. For thus he answers them, desiring him that the people
might be set at liberty: You Moses and Aaron, why pluck you the people away
from their labor? But the wicked Achab more bitterly vpbraydeth the Prophet
Elias with the same, saying: Art not thou he that troublest Israel. Yet is that
more grievous, that Amasias the Priest lays to Amos the Prophets charge,
before king Jeroboam, in these words: Amos has made a conspiracy against
thee, in the midst of the house of Israel, and the land cannot away with his
sermons. Yea, the wicked Courtyers of Sedechias the king, accuse Jeremy of
treason, and of flying to his enemies the Assirians, saying he is the only
author of all their miseries and destruction. But this is no marueyle,
considering these were the points of accusation that were laid unto Christ's
charge. For the Priests said unto Pylate, we found this man perverting the
whole Nation, and forbidding to pay tribute unto Caesar, saying he was Christ
a king. Again: If thou let him loose, thou art not Caesar's friend. Whosoever
makes himself a king, speaks against Caesar. These are grievous matters,
and argue the great impudency of the world. And yet they may seem tolerable
being compared with the things done in our days. These things in times past
did they say, which were the professed enemies of the Prophets and Apostles,
and which knew not that Christ was their savior. But now adays they that
will be taken and counted for Christians, which challenge unto them the chief
governance of the Church, which profess themselves to be the nurses,
shepeheardes, and defenders of the Church, use to persecute the ministers of
Christ and his Gospel, and call that a new doctrine, a seditious, and a
deceytfull, which according to the scriptures of the old and new Testament,
shows that all our salvation is only in Christ Jesus, which teaches us, the
right use of the sacraments, innocence and purity of life, the duties of
charity, commands us to love our enemies, leaves laws and privileges
free unto Magistrates, bids us give unto Caesar that is Caesar's, and unto
God, that belongs unto him, which commends unto us principally the desire
of peace, and commands us as much as lies in us, to have peace with all men.
Who may not therefore cry out, o manners, o times. Let us therefore acknowledge
the blindness of this world, and not esteem their slanders one myte,
whereby they go about to defame and bring in suspicion the wholesome doctrine
of the Gospel.

The Apostles are scourged and put in prison.
It remains for us to consider what the judgment of the Governor of Philippi
was, concerning this present cause. But what say I the judgment, whereas
without all judgment, they raged like mad men against the Apostles?
Sreyghtways they tare and rent their garments, as though there wanted Ministers
of such mischief. Then they command them without hearing their answer, and
being guiltless, to be beaten with rods. And when they had been well
scourged, at length they cast them in prison, commanding that they should be
well watched, as though they were worthy of more punishment than other
malefactors. Which thing was the cause that they were put in an inner prison,
and their feet thrust into the stocks. But what more injustice could
Magistrates and men in office show? He offends that does but deny him leave
that is accused, to excuse himself. But these men besides beat strangers
with rods, and when they have beaten them, thrust them in prison, meaning
afterward at leisure to hear their answer. The cause of this rage was, for
that they suffered other that slaundered them, to much to kindle their choler.
Therefore let them that sit in judgment, fly this pestilent plague, and
remember that they have two ears given them for this cause, that one may be
kept open for the Plaintiff, and that other for the defendant. Let them also
remember that God is the President of judgments, to whom they also shall one
day give an account of their judgments. In the mean season we are admonished
what the state of the godly is, in this world. Notorious malefactors may live
in safetye, but the godly are hated and persecuted of all men, and where they
hurt none, but do good unto all men, they have least thank of all men in the
world. It was a singular benefit to deliver the Damsel out of the thraldom
of Satan. But for their good turn they are punished with strypes and
imprisonment, as public enemies of the City. Hereof we have every day
examples. But forasmuch as Christ once prophesied that these things should
come unto us, it is our parts not to be offended thereat, but with constant
faith and patience to hye us unto the mark appointed us, that we may obtain
the reward promised to us in Jesus Christ: to whom be praise, honor, power,
and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.Cxj. Homely.
AT midnight Paul and Sylas prayed, and lawded God. And the prisoners heard
them. And sodeinly there was a great earthquake, so that the foundation of the
prison was shaken, and immediately all the doors opened, and every man's bands
were loosed. When the keeper of the prison waked out of his sleep, and saw the
prison doors open, he drue out his sword, and would have killed himself,
supposing that the prisoners had been fled. But Paul cried with a loud
voice, saying: Do thy self no harm, for we are all here. Then he called for a
light, and sprang in and came trembling, and fell down at the feet of Paul
and Sylas, and brought them out, and said: Sirs, what must I do to be saved?
And they said, believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, and thy
household. And they preached unto him the word of the Lord, and to all that
were in his house.
AS the holy scripture euerywhere does teach the godly, that they must suffer
persecutions in this world: so likewise it promises them Gods abundant
help and succor, and there want not examples, whereby God even from the very
beginning of the world, has declared the truth of his promises: such as are
the examples contained in this book. For before this, by his Angel, he
brought all the Apostles out of the prison, who as we heard before had taught
in the Temple. And Peter being delivered out of prison, defeated the cruel
devise of Herod, and of all the people gaping for his death. It is very
notable also that your charity even now heard recited. For here the
faithful Apostles of Christ, Paul and Silas are not only delivered out of
prison, but also the keeper of the prison, a barbarous and cruel person, is
delivered out of the bands of impiety, and being illuminated with the true
knowledge of salvation, is converted unto Christ. And because this history
may many ways serve both for our instruction and consolation, it shall be
very profitable to examine all the circumstances thereof. Let us see therefore
what God and the Apostles do in this case, which thing being considered, then
we will also entreat of the Iaylers conversion.

The Apostles being whipped and put in bonds praise and pray unto God.
We have heard how Paul and Silas were very evil entreated, and beaten with
rods, and at length put in the stocks. Wherefore some might think they
should like puling women bewail their mishappe, and every hour complain of
Gods justice. But Luke reports they were far otherwise occupied. For he
writes that at midnight they made their prayers unto God, and magnifyed him,
and that not in any soft and secret wise, but so loud, that the prisoners in
the farther prison might easilye hear them. This was an argument both of a
constaunt faith, and merye conscience, which can be found in none other kind
of men, but in the faithful only, Roma 5.
in the time of adversity. For this thing Paul attributes to them as
peculiar, that in tribulations they glory and rejoice. Luke declares the cause
of this joy in the.v. chapter, where he writes how the Apostles were beaten
with rods in the Counsel, and went out praising God and rejoicing that they
were judged worthy to suffer for the name of Christ. For they had a regard to
the promise of Christ, who promises them the fellowship of the kingdom of
heaven, Luke. 22.
which have abidden with him in his temptations. Whereupon they gather with
Paul, that they shall be partakers of the glory of Christ, 2. Tim. 2. Roma. 8.
and live with Christ for ever, which in this world are made like unto him by
bearing the cross. It is very worthy to be considered, that we hear the
Apostles so fervent and earnest in prayer, who being illuminated with the holy
ghost, and with true faith know that all things are ruled and governed by the
providence of God. By this example are those fine and ouercurious wits
confuted, which say there is no need of prayers, because God of himself
knows all our necessities, and by his providence all things are administered,
whose deuyse cannot be revoked or interrupted by any manner of prayers. In deed
we declare not our case unto God, as one that is ignorant, but by careful and
faithful remembering him, we testifye our faith. The holy men and Saints also
know that this is Gods everlasting decree, that as many as are in distress
and convert unto him, and call for his help and succor, those he hears. For
it is the commandment of God: Psalm. 50.
Call upon me in the time of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee. etc. Again:
Turn unto me, and I will turn unto you. etc. The Apostles therefore pray in
their afflictions, and according to their ensample, all the godly in their
adversity, ought to seek help and deliuerye at God only, and in none else.
We are taught moreover, that we ought not only in adversity to seek our
delivery, but also to give God thanks, and magnify his holy name, when we are
afflicted. For verily it is an argument of his fatherly affection toward us,
when he corrects the wantonness of our flesh, with the rod of the cross or
tribulation. And in nothing is the force of Gods comfort more effectually
seen, than when we are exercised in diverse temptations, according to that
saying of the Prophet: In the multitude of the sorrows that I had in my
heart, Psalm. 94. 2. Cor. 1.
thy comfortes have refreshed my soul. And Paul says: As the afflictions of
Christ abound in us, so through Christ abounds our consolation. Whereunto it
seems Peter also had a respect, when writing unto the brethren dispersed
among diverse Nations, he begins with the praise of God, and commendation of
his grace. These things ought we to remember, when we are tempted with
impaciencie of the flesh, that we be not overcome thereof, and mutter against
God, which sin of all other chiefly provoke the wrath of God, as the
examples of the children of Israel murmuring in the wilderness, 1. Cor. 10.
abundantly declare.

Now let us come to the second point of this place, where it is showed what
God did. Sodeinly (says Luke) there was a great earthquake, God delivers the
Apostles calling upon him.
so that the foundation of the prison was shaken, and immediately all the doors
opened, and every man's bands were loosed. And no man need doubt but that this
was the only work of God, and of none other, because the Scripture declares
there is none other that can do these things. In this place is set forth the
force and effect of faithful prayer. For (as the wise man says:) it pierces
the Clouds, and ascends up into the sight of God, Eccle. 35.
which neglects not the same. Hereof comes it to pass that by prayer those
things are obtained, which far exceed the strength of man, and where nature
is constreyned to give place. So we read that by prayer Moses divided the
waves of the red sea. By prayer he gave the Amalekytes a great overthrow.
James the Apostle testifies that Elias through prayer locked the heavens that
they gave no rain, and by the same opened them again. Here in this place, at
the prayers of Paul and Silas, the foundations of the prison are shaken, gyues
and manacles unloosed, and all the doors of the prison opened. Whereunto that
which we heard before of Peter which was delivered out of prison at the
prayers of the congregation, is also like. Let us herewith comfort our selves
in adversity, that we be not overcome of the threats of the world, forasmuch
as no man is able to take praying from us, which is of more force and
efficacy, as it well appears, than any other thing. And of the more force it
is always, the more grievously we are oppressed. Likewise let all men abstain
from oppressing of Innocents, whose prayers and gronings we see are of such
effect with God.

Furthermore, let us see the principal effect of this miracle, The keeper of
the prison is converted.
that is to say, the conversion of the Iayler of the prison, wherein the holy
ghost thought good to set forth a general example for all men to imitate.
This conversion has in it certain steps and degrees, which it shall be good
for us in order to consider. First, being waked with the earthquake, he sees
all the doors opened: and where he thought all the prisoners were fled, he
drew his sword, and was about to have killed himself, fearing the severity
of the laws, which made it death for the Iaylers of prisons, if any prisoners
escaped through their negligence. An example of which severity, Herod before
showed upon them, which he set to watch Peter. This keeper therefore mynding to
escape open shame, and being deceived with the common error of the Gentyles,
thought it would sound to his great praise of manlynesse, in avoiding infamy
and shame, to kill himself. Thus had Satan bewytched men's minds, that they
sought salvation in destruction, and praise in ignominy and shame. Howbeit, in
deed there is nothing more pernicious and dishonest, than to go about by
violent death to throw down the burden of the cross that God lays upon
us, and this kind of fear does utterly declare cowardlye hearts, and such as
grow out of kind, which neither can nor will suffer any thing. Again, this
is an evident argument of a desperate mind, forasmuch as no man will bereue
himself of life (which of all other is the pleasauntest thing that man can
wyshe or desire) but he that before hand despayreth of the help and grace of
God, and as the example of Judas the Traitor and such like abundantly declare.
Therefore Paul does well to call upon this keeper, that he do himself no
harm. And Christian men must take heed that they harken not to the
suggestions of Satan, persuading them to kill themselves. For whatsoever color
or pretense he set upon them, yet in deed they are deuilyshe, Ezech. 18.
and dangerous, because it is evident, God will not the death of a sinner, but
rather that he should convert and live. We are therefore taught by this
example, what kind of life they commonly lead, which either serve the wicked,
or consent unto them, as it is evident this Iayler did, of whom we entreat.
For being to obsequious and double diligent, to execute the wicked
commandment given him of wicked Magistrates, he puts the Apostles in the
stocks in the inner prison. But being fast a sleep, as though all thing had
been safe, such a chance falls, as puts him in hazard both of body and
soul. Yea, he had even now utterly perished, had not the Lord of his singular
favor revoked him from destruction, by Paul the preacher of salvation. Let us
think that to be a notable and very golden sentence, which is in the first
Psalm. Blessed is that man that has not walked in the counsel of the
ungodly, nor stand in the way of sinners, and has not sitten in the seat of
the scornful. etc. Furthermore, we have in Paul an example of Christian
charity, which is so careful for his salvation, who not long before had so
discourteously and unjustly handled him. Let us imitate this doing, and love
those which hate us, and seek their salvation that wish our destruction. So
shall we be taken to be the true children of God the father, Math. 5.
which suffers his sun to arise both upon the good and the bad.

But let us return to the Iayler of the prison, which Luke writes was suddenly
changed, yea, become altogether another man. For after he heard the prisoners
were not fled, but stayed by the hand of God, comparing the boldness and
playnnesse of the Apostles, whereof the like hitherto had been seen in no men,
with the present miracle, being stryken with the inward inspiration of God, he
is altogether a whaped in his mind. For he begins to feel in himself how
grievously he had sinned by his ungentle usage of those, whom he saw God so
greatly regarded. Wherefore calling forthwith for light, he goes in unto them,
falls down at their feet, and at length bringing them forth (which was
contrary to the Magistrates commandment) says: Syrs, what must I do to be
saved? Who will not here acknowledge the mighty hand of God, which wrought
all this matter? Surely it must be ascrybed unto God, that he reuerenceth these
men being scourged and put to open shame, that he breaks the wicked and
unjust commandment of the Magistrate, and that he demands the right way
how to be saved. Yea, he teaches by his example, that those things must not
lightly or negligently be passed over, that God works myraculously in his
servant. For there is nothing almost more pernicious than that amazedness,
which makes us blind in the manifest works of God. It is evident that this
thing in time past brought Pharao to his destruction, and at this day this
hurts many men, that they judge all things come to pass by fortune and
chance, and search not out the judgments of God in the things which they see
fall out beyond the course of nature. Let us therefore always diligently mark
and search out the right way of salvation, touching which, we see this keeper
now so profytably made inquiry.

For straight ways the Apostles answer him friendly, The sum of salvation
is faith in Christ.
and declare unto him in few words, the right and absolute way of man's
salvation, saying: Believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, and thy
household. They preach faith only, and that faith that stays upon none other,
but Jesus Christ, the only author of salvation. For in him is contained all
satisfaction, righteousness, redemption, and sanctifycation, all which we
obtain none otherwise than by faith, which is the cause that the scripture
teaches we are justified and saved by faith: whereof seeing we have diverse
times entreated, these few words for this time may suffyse. Let us note well
this one thing, that there is none other thing, in scripture, for faith to take
hold on, but Christ. For hereof it is gathered that all they that seek
salvation out of Christ, lack faith, and are miserably molested with
uncertain opinions. Yet because this doctrine was more brief, than a
barbarous man and a Gentyle, could at the first understand, therefore the
Apostles afterward, open the same more at large. For they preach the word of
the Lord, that is, the Gospel, as well to him as to all his household, the
sum whereof is, that we are justified and saved by faith, through the merit
of Christ. In the mean season we are taught, that faith is no rashlye
conceived or imaginatyue opinion, but a full and perfyte knowledge of Jesus
Christ, which depends upon the eternal word of God. Therefore faith must be
learned in his word, and nothing admitted that is not plainly expressed in the
Gospel. And whatsoever is contained therein, that let us embrace with steadfast
faith, that we also by that mean may be saved, through our Lord Jesus
Christ: to whom be praise, honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.Cxij. Homely.
AND he took them the same hour of the night, and washed their wounds, and
was baptized and all they of his household straight way. And when he had
brought them into his house, he set meat before them, and ioyed that he with
all his household believed on God. And when it was day, the officers sent the
Ministers saying: Let those men go. The keeper of the Prison told this, saying
to Paul: The officers have sent word to lose you. Now therefore get you
hence, and go in peace. Then said Paul unto them: they have beaten us openly
uncondemned, for all that we are Romans, and have cast us in Prison, and now
would they send us away privily? Nay verily, but let them come themselves and
fet us out: when the Ministers told these words unto the officers they
feared, when they heard that they were Romans, they came and besought them,
and brought them out, and desired them to depart out of the City. And they
went out of the Prison, and entered into the house of Lydia, and when they had
seen the brethren, they comforted them and departed.
AS the Evangelist Luke has diligently descrybed the tyranny and
unrighteousness of the magistrate of Philippi, used against the faithful
servants of Christ, Paul and Silas: so he reports as dyligently, how the
keeper of the Prison, a great dooer in the said wicked enterprise, was
converted unto the faith of Jesus Christ. The end of all which history is
partly to learn us the true way how to turn unto God, and then what
afterward we must do, when we are turned unto God. And the first point of
this present place, pertayneth unto the later member, wherein is declared what
this keeper did, after he had embrased Christ. This part therefore we will
first declare, meaning afterward, to speak of the Apostles delyuerie, as much
as God shall put in our minds.

The fruit and works of faith.
As touching the keeper of the Prison now converted unto Christ, four things
chiefly are affyrmed. First in the same night he brings the Apostles out of
Prison, and washes their sores. This he does contrary to the commandment of
the magistrate, which badde they should diligently and straightly be kept.
Yea, even he that knew the severity of the Judges to be such, that he would
even now have killed himself, when he thought the prisoners were fled,
brings them out of his own accord, putting himself in manifest danger of
his life. This place teaches us, that the chief and principal effect of
faith, is to make men obedyent unto God, and bold to put those things in
execution, that they know God allows and commands, although the world
think never so much the contrary. For this is the saying and mind of all the
faithful, as well as of Peter, that we must obey God more than man. Therefore
they are confuted by this example, which now a days allege the authority of
Princes, publyke laws, the friendship of the world, and infynite such like,
against the precepts of God, and being frozen with cowardely fear, dare never
attempt any thing in Christ's quarrel and glory. Let us rather follow this
keeper of the Prison, whom neither authority of magistrate, public law,
breaking of Prison, nor present danger, could so fear, but that he durst
bring them out of prison, whom he knew were unjustly committed thither, and
to unworthily entreated.

Outward religion.
After this he is by and by baptized, and causes all his household likewise to
be baptized. For he had learned by the Gospel which the Apostles preached unto
him, that it was an ordynance of Christ, that all they which would believe in
him, should be joined together into one body of the Church by baptism.
Wherefore he thinks the sacrament instituted of Christ, ought not to be
neglected, nor did not sophistically reason of the doctrine of faith going
before on this wise: If faith only in our savior Jesus Christ be sufficient
unto salvation, as you erewhyle did teach, why require you now baptism,
which must needs be superfluous and unprofitable? For they that truly believe
in Christ, will never despise the ordynaunces of Christ, because they know that
the sacraments are not repugnaunt unto faith, but are rather certain labelles
and outward seals of Gods promises, whereof we take hold by faith. In the
mean season we have to consider the zealous faith of this keeper, wherewith he
was so enflamed that he would have his household also dedicated unto God by
baptism. An example whereof we had before also in Lyddia. Which thing as it
serves to confute the Annabaptistes, which of their own head keep the
children of the faithful from baptism: so it reprooueth the sloth and
intolerable sluggishnesse of them, which have so little care for their
family, that they regard not to have them consecrated unto Christ and to his
Church, by outward sacraments, thereby abundantlye declaring, that they are
not greatly careful for the glory of God.

Thirdly, he prepares meat for them at his house, Charity.
for that he knew they had in the Prison a very slender supper, or none at
all. This is a work of christian liberality and love, which they that believe
in Christ are never without. For it is impossible, to separate faith from the
love of God. And he that truly loves God, can not neglect his neighbor, whom
he knows is made after the similitude of God, and so esteemed of him, that he
would have him redeemed with the blood of his son, which was the cause that
Paul says, faith works through love. Galat. 5. For although there be many
works of faith, yet may they all for the most part, Math. 22. Roma. 13.
be referred unto charity, because through it the whole law is fulfilled. And
the Apostle John teaches us that he that neglects his neighbor, neither
looueth God, nor has any faith. Therefore this Iayler does well, to declare
his faith by works of charity, which it becomes us also busily to apply, if
we will not be taken and called vain professors of the faith.

Fourthly, he rejoices with all his household, because he believed in God, and
knew he now belonged unto the Church of Christ, Joy of spirit
in whom only the treasures of salvation are laid up. And yet (as we
erewhyle declared) he was in great danger thereby. For if the Judges minds
had notbene suddenly altered, (which alteration he yet wist not of) he had
dyed for it, insomuch as he had let those loose, whom the Judge had commanded
to be laid in yrons. But as faith makes all men obedient unto God: so it
overcomes all labors and dangers, and suffers not the feeling of heavenly
joy, which the spirit of Christ inspyreth, to be overcome with any
temptations. Therefore Paul writing to these faithful of the Phylippians,
byddeth them always to rejoice and be glad. Moreover, if a man would lay
together all things said hitherto of this Iayler, it shall appear that faith
is not idle, nor can not be separated from good works. For what good works
are here lacking? He recompenseth the injuries made before unto the Apostles.
He obeys God duly with present danger of his life, declaring hereby how
ready he meant afterward to be in all other things. He received the
sacraments duly as he ought to do. For where he received baptism straight
way, it is not like he absteyned from the Lords supper, seeing he was
conuersaunt with the faithful. Furthermore he was careful for the salvation
of his family, and caused them also to be brought unto Christ, and unto the
congregation, also he exercises charity and benefycence liberally, and even
in the middle of dangers ioyeth altogether in spiritual gladness. And yet
the Apostles being asked the true way of salvation, appointed him but faith
only in Jesus Christ. And this faith brought forth straight way such excellent
fruits as we have heard. Whereunto yet we must not attribute the glory of
salvation, because he could have done none of them, unless by faith he had
been graffed in Christ, and quickened with his spirit. Here first are they
confuted, that say the doctrine of faith is an enemy unto good works, seeing
such increase of good works springs of none other thing so much as of faith.
Roma. 6. James. 2.
And next they also which under a false pretense of the Gospel, seek the
vnbrydelled licentiousness of the flesh, and to sin without check.

Full and per^^te delivery of the Apostles.
Howbeit after the hystory of the keeper of the Prison ended, Luke comes unto
the officers of Philippi, and declares how the Apostles were delivered by
their commandment and authority. For Gods works are perfyte, and beguyle
not men's minds with vain hope and expectation of his help and succor. In
the mean season yet God marvelously tosseth the Apostles, that one may see
he uses the wicked to fulfill his pleasure even against their will. But let us
discuss all things in order, that we may receive the more comfort and
instruction thereby. By the break of day came Sergeaunts from the
Magistrates, commanding the Apostles to be let loose: and it shall appear
afterward by Paul's words, that this was a secret dimission they went about,
meaning also to send them out of the City. But howsoever they were dimissed,
it is plain that these Judges did acknowledge both the innocence of the
Apostles and also their own unrighteousness, which they used against them.
But whether it was the mean while of the night, that caused them to consider
so much, or the earthquake that struck them in such fear, that they durst not
hold on in their tyranny, it is uncertain. But assuredly, such sudden
change of mind, did abundantly declare, both their rashness and
unrighteousness. Yet go they about marvelous craftily to hyde the
heynousnesse they had committed, and whereof they were ashamed. For therefore
would they have the Apostles privily to be set at liberty, to lay all the
fault in them, as though they mistrusting their cause, had broke open the doors
and fled out of Prison. Thus the wicked use with crafts and colors to seek
to seem righteous, being ashamed of their naughtiness, but meaning no earnest
repentance, which causes them to their further shame, to heap fresh
offenses and sins upon the old. Therefore this place teaches us first what
the repentance of the wicked is for the most part. The repentance of the
wicked.
Doubtless a counterfeyte repentance and such as reverence and fear of men
only wringeth out of them, not repenting in the mean season from the heart,
nor nothing mindful of amendment. Thus we read Saul repented, when he
earnestly required Samuel not to depart from him, 1. Samu. 15.
least his authority and estimation should utterly have quayled, before the
Elders and the people. That this is a vain and unprofitable repentance,
appears even by this, for that in the mean season, they hate the word of
God worse than a Tode, because the light thereof discloseth their wickedness.
Let every man therefore so learn to acknowledge his offenses, that he may also
be sorrowful for the same, and not seek to hyde them with the shaming of
other, but rather let them publishe them to the amendment of other, and to the
setting forth of Gods glory, whereof the scripture gives us examples in David
and Paul. Also this place teaches us, Wicked officers.
how easilye wicked officers can quit themselves of great and heinous offenses.
For what could this men have done more wickedly and unworthy their calling,
than to beat innocent persons, without hearing their cause, at the ^ry and
clamor of the commons, and being all gore blood, and their sores not washed,
to cast them into a dark dungeon? And now they think it is ynnough, if they
put them not to death with more shame, but convey them privily out of the
City. And here is no word of amends making. This is a common thing in these
days, especially in their causes whom the world hates because of their
sincerity in truth and religion: yea, they think, they deserve great
commendation of modesty and equity, if they do but deprive such Christians
of honors and goods, and banishe them their country. But let officers
consider, Roma 13. 2. Para. 13. Deuter. 1.
that they are placed of God in such degree of power and honor. Let them also
remember that judgment belongs unto God. Furthermore, let them often
remember, that they shall one day also come before Christ to be judged, where
they shall give an account of all their judgments. And therefore according to
the admonition of the Prophet, let them hold the blood of their subjects
dear in their sight. Psalm. 72.


Furthermore here appears the invincible power of God, The power of God, in
delyuering his people.
whereby he is able to take and deliver his beloved out of the hands of the
wicked, although they persist in their wickeddesse. For they repent not of
their naughtiness, and think of no amendment, as we said even now, yea they
undoubtedly wished the Apostles of Christ destroyed, yet by the secret working
of God they are compelled to let them go free. So the Egyptians although they
truly changed not their minds, Exodus. 12.
were constreyned to let the people of Israel go, laden with Gold and
silver. Hereunto is to be referred how Saul, with his own mouth, pronounced
David to be just, and whom he had long sought to slay, him being found, 1.
Sam. 24. and.26.
he dismyssed with the public testimony of an innocent. So we read the
Apostles also were set at liberty in the Counsel at Jerusalem, when yet none
of the Senators had forsaken his former impiety. Let this comfort us against
the incurable malice of this world. Let the wicked run on as long as they
will, yet are they Gods instruments, to use at his pleasure, and by them many
times even against their wills, he uses to set forth his glory.

The keeper of the Prison tells Paul what the counsel had degreeed, being
glad because he perceived no craft in the matter. The simplicity of faith.
For commonly such is the simplicity of the children of light, that they
cannot always see the meaning of the wicked. And at this day many like unto this
keeper, think all is well, if they whose lives were in danger beset at
liberty, and perceive not in the mean season how they go about to prejudice
the Gospel with unrighteous judgments, and to stop and hinder the course
thereof. Paul will not be set at liberty, and dismyssed privily.
Therefore Paul did much better, thus stowtely to refuse the favor offered by
this wicked magistrate, saying: they have beaten us openly uncondemned, for all
that we are Romans, and have cast us in Prison, and now would they send us
away privily? Nay verily, but let them come themselves, and fet us out. In the
which words he complayneth him of injury done to him, and his fellow Silas,
and to aggrauate the accusation the more, he alleges the Roman laws,
wherein it was enacted, that no man should use any vyolence upon the body of
a Citizen of Rome before his cause were heard. Further he would not privily
be put out of the City, but honorably. Let no man for all this accuse Paul,
either of pride or impatiencie, considering he has very good cause thus to
do. For first, he has a care, that the doctrine of the Gospel be not charged
with any wrong suspicion, which either might offend those that as yet were
weak in the faith, or else give occasion to open enemies to reproach the same.
For who would not have thought that the Apostles had suspected their own
cause, if it had been bruted abroad, that they had been secretly fled?
Moreover, Paul thought he would put these fierce fellows in a fear, and make
them by this means to use hereafter more aduisednesse, and less cruelty
toward the members of Christ. The trade of Christians paciencie.
Whereby we gather, that christian paciencie, is not to suffer the wicked to
do what they list without comptrolement. But rather their wickedness must be
reproved and brydelled, if by any means, it may commodiously be done. Also
the glory of God and our innocence must be defended, because many times
herewithall, the salvation of many is imperilled. Thus Christ calls them that
came out to take him with swords and staves, the ministers and fulfyllers of
the power of darckenesse. And he openly reprehended the Priests servant, that
smote him without a cause. So therefore must we patiently suffer whatsoever
adversity comes unto us, that yet we must not betray the cause of Christ and
his truth, nor otherwise dishonestly forsake the same. Again we are taught
that the godly may use the privilege of positive laws for their defense, as
far forth as they repugne not against truth and religion. Defense of law is
permytted to the godly.
For Paul who was most ready to suffer any thing for Christ's sake, would not
have alleged the laws of Rome, if they had been wicked. So after this we
shall hear, how he appealed unto Caesar, and used the lawful defense of
armor against that wicked conspiracy that intended to kill him. Therefore
great is their injustice, which say all use of law is forbidden Christian
men, and all kind of defending themselves by law, and will have them rashely
to rushe into all kind of dangers.

The preposterous fear of the wicked.
But what did the Magistrates of Philippi, when they had heard Paul speak?
They were afraid, not for that they had done them wrong, but because they
understood they were Romans, whom they had so served. For they well knew
what the severity of the Romans was in defending their laws and
privileges, in so much that (as Cicero testifyeth against Verres) this saying,
I am a free man or Citizen of Rome, helped and saved many, in the farthest
parts of the world, even among the barbarous people. And surely, next unto
religion, there is no stronger hold and band of commonweals, than fyrme and
constant keeping of equity and laws. Therefore their fear was not without a
cause, for it was the occasion that they forthwith came unto them, to excuse
themselves of that they had done, and courteously to bring them out of prison,
desiring them for the avoiding of further trouble, they would vouchsafe to
depart out of their city. Where likewise may appear the conditions of the
wicked, which being touched with no fear of God, fear only men of more
authority then themselves, and severity of laws. And if they may freely
without check, offend before men, then dare they do any thing. Whereof there
is none other cause, then that they think there is no God, that cares for
men's doings. But the godly are far otherwise minded, whose care being set on
God, they so detest the horror of sin, that if at any time they offend of
infyrmitie, they are feared more with the consideration of the offense
committed, then of the punishment due for it. In the mean season we learn by
this example to what end and pass the rash judgments of wicked Magistrates
come. Surely to bring the authors thereof into peril and shame. Hence came it
that these Magistrates stricken in fear, The end of rash judgment.
bring them forth honoraably, whom the day before, they had ignomiously put to
shame: and thus accuse they their own temerite and unrighteousness. There are
many examples of like kind, the use whereof is to teach Magistrates, and
whosoever bear authority, to learn to bridle their affections, and according
to the profane writers saying, to take good deliberation before they go about
that thing, which they once intend to do. Moreover, this example teaches us,
that the force of innocence is so great, that it egregiously confounds her
fiercest enemies. Therefore, let us labor for innocence, and let us not
doubt, but we also by her means shall triumph over our enemies, how fyerce so
ever now they show themselves to be.

Now remains the last part of this history, The Apostles departure from
Philippi.
touching the Apostles going away, which they must needs do, considering
there was henceforth no place for them in that city. Yet they so depart not as
utterly neglecting the congregation, but first they go to see the brethren
gathered together at Lyddias house, and them they exhort to be steadfast in the
faith, and comfort them very effectually. Moreover, Paul writes an Epistle
unto them, wherein we are taught, how prosperously this congregation afterward
came forward, whose beginning seemed altogether vnprosperouse and untoward.
Whereby it appears the course of the Gospel can be hyndered by no attemptes
of the wicked. Sometime the Ministers thereof are bound, but the word of God
can not be bound. Again, they that preach the same are thrust out and
banished, but the spirit of Christ cannot be banished, but breaths
wheresoever it pleases, yea, when men hold their peace, the stones will
preach Christ. Let these things make us constaunt in the faith, that having at
length overcome the world and Prince thereof, we may live and reign in heaven
with Jesus Christ our savior: to whom be all praise, honor, power, and glory,
for ever. Amen.

The.xvij. chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The.Cxiij. Homely.
NOW as they passed through Amphipolis, and Apollonia, they came to
Thessalonica, where was a great Synagoge of the Jews, and Paul as his manner
was, went in unto them, and three Sabbath days disputed with them by the
scriptures, opening and alleging that Christ must have suffered, and risen
again from the death: and this is Jesus Christ, whom said he, I preach unto
you: And some of them believed, and joined in company with Paul and Silas:
also of the Grecians that feared God a great multitude, and of the chief women
not a few.
OUr Lord and Savior Jesus Christ in the Gospel of Luke says: No man
which puts his hand to the plough, and looks backward, is meet for the
kingdom of heaven. Which words do admonish us, that of all christians,
especially of the Ministers of the word, is required an invincible constancy
of the mind, whereby they may go forward without fear, against al traueyle
and danger, and not be withdrawn by any temptations, to forsake the office
committed to their credit. Of which constancy is set out unto us a most worthy
example in the Apostle Paul: The constancy of Paul.
who from the first day he took in hand the service of Christ and the
Gospel, was in continual labor and danger, and yet held on, seeking daily
new occasion, with great courage of mind to set forth the kingdom of Christ.
And as he had done heretofore in other places, the self same did he with
incredible industry among the Macedonians, as this present history declares.
For being very evil entreated at Philippi, to the which place he was called
by a vision, yet he murmureth not against God, nor doubts not of his calling,
nor leaves not of his duty through fear, but takes his journey directly
through Amphipolis and Apollonia, and comes to Thessalonica, the chief City
of all Macedonia, where after he had spread the light of the Gospel, he
gets him to Berrhoea, and from thence to Athens, where he preaches Christ
among the most learned Philosophers of the Gentiles, and as it were upon the
open stage of all the world. But to let pass all other things, let us see
what was done at this time, at Thessalonica.

First it is said he went through Amphipolis and Apollonia, Paul preaches
unto the Jews.
and there is no mention made that Paul preached in those Cities, therefore it
is like the holy Ghost, offered him no occasion there to preach. But when he
came to Thessalonica, he went into the Jews Synagoge, which was very notable
and full of people, and there by the space of three Sabbath days he taught
them the gospel of Jesus Christ. And yet it might seem a strange thing, that
Paul would offer the doctrine of salvation again, unto the Jews, whose
incurable malice he had so often tried, and whom he perceived, God had cast of
by many evident arguments. But he was moved partly with the fervent desire he
had to set forth the kingdom of God, and partly with the constant love that he
bare to his nation, for whose sake otherwhyle, he wished to be accursed. And
yet we must not think this to be any blind affection, for as much as the
Lord had long before prophesied, Esaias. 10.
that though the Jews were cast off, certain remnauntes should be saved. And
perhaps he might be moved by the example of Elias, who when he thought all
the people had forsaken the God of Israel, was told that there were yet
seven thousand, which had never bowed their knees unto Baal. We are taught by
this example of Paul, that we must not over hastily cease from doing our
duty, because of many men's ingratitude, but rather (as the Apostle otherwhere
teaches us) tolerate the evil with meekness, instruct those that make
resistaunce, if at any time God will give them repentance to know the truth,
2. Tim. 2.
and that they may come to themselves again, out of the snare of the Devil.
For where we be the servants of God, it becomes us to imitate his condition
and property, and not to be offended with the ingratitude of the world, for
as much as we know, that we have a reward laid up with the Lord, which
shall never fail us. Therefore inexcusable is their waywardenesse, which
as soon as they perceive, they nothing profit, cease of from doing their
duty, and are not led with the example of God, and of Christ, which used
such great lenity and long sufferaunce toward the incurable malice of the
Jews, even from the first beginning of that nation. It is also worthy the
observation, to see how Paul keeps the religion of the Sabbothes, The
observing the Sabbath days, and coming to Church.
and goes into the Synagoges to preach there, following the example of Christ,
who did nothing in secret, but taught abroad openly. In the mean season we
see this was an old usage among the people of God, for the godly to come unto
the Church, for whose sake we read holy days, and holy places were in times
past ordained of God. It is necessary that we observe the same, both for
doctrine sake, which can no way more commodiously be taught, and also because
of externe religion, which ought to be openly exercised, that the profession of
true faith fail not. For the which cause Christ adourned the congregation and
Church, coming with his example, and commended it with a notable promise, and
this is the cause that Paul in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, is so
diligently occupied in gyuing precepts, for the well ordering of them.
Wherefore their frowardness must needs be detested which deryde and scoff at
the public assemblies of christians, plainly testifying that they are led
with no care of wholesome doctrine or sincere religion. The tr^de or manner of
Paul's doctrine.


But what does Paul in the Synagoge of the Jews? even the same that we hear
he used to do in many places. For he taught out of the scriptures, declaring
how it was necessary that Christ should die, and rise again from the dead,
and that this was the same Christ whom he preached. Here must we diligently
mark all these points, because they fullye conteyne the whole trade of the
Apostles doctrine. For first they show Paul fet his doctrine, verily out of
the wrytings of Moses and the Prophets, 2. Timo. 3. John. 5.
which otherwheres he says were inspyred of God, and in the which Christ
witnesses that the mysteries of eternal life are contained. Therefore out of
the same also in these days, must the doctrine taught in the congregation be
taken. Neither must their impudency be borne with, which will not have the
controversies of our days divided by the Scriptures, but allege unto us the
traditions and Canons, (as they call them) of the Apostles and the fathers, and
the counsels, as though they had left us things of more imperfection and
certainty, than the Apostles. Further Paul handled the scriptures. He opened
them, that is to say, by dyligent interpretation, he picked out the true sense
and meaning of them, and applied the things therein contained to his present
purpose. Which he could no ways more commodiouslye do, then by conference of
places. By this example of Paul is their error confuted, which say it is
sufficient to have the scripture read over in the Church, and will not suffer
the same by exposition to be opened. Therefore in these men's judgment, Paul
offended very much, yea Christ himself, who as we may read used the same
order of teaching in the school at Nazareth. Luc. 4.
But whosoever follows the example of Christ can not offend. And Paul does
much better, which requires such a teacher of the Church, as can distribute
and deal (as it were) the word of truth justly and duly, 2. Timo. 2.
and can apply it Paul's doctrine, which conteyneth in it chiefly two points,
setting them as it should seem, against so many errors of the Jews. For
first they were offended at the cross of Christ, because they understood the
oracles of the Prophets according to the letter, and ymagined that the
kingdom of Christ should be temporal, and looked for a Messiah without a
cross: Which error may now a days also be perceived in them, which would
have the Gospel preached without the cross, and where they desire to be saved
by Christ, will not suffer, and be afflicted with him. The other error of the
Jews was, that they denied Jesus the son of Mary, to be their Messiah or
Christ. Paul labors to put both these errors away, going about to prove
by testimony of scriptures, that God had from before the beginning of the
world, ordained this way for man to be saved by, that is to say, by the
incarnation, death, and resurrection of his son. Again, applying those
things unto Jesus the son of Marie, which the Prophets in times past, spoke
before of the Messiah, he evidently declares, that he ought to be acknowledged
for the Messiah, and that none other ought to be looked for. Now as Paul
declared these things at large, by testimonies of scriptures gathered out of
all places: so might they be by us in ample wise prosecuted. But because it
appears easily by the sermons, both of Paul and the other Apostles going
before, what places they for the most part used, and they that use to read the
scriptures, find euerywhere such things as conteyne in them the knowledge of
Christ: we will of purpose be the shorter. In the mean while we have here two
things to observe. First, what ought to be preached in the Church. Uerily, even
Jesus Christ only, whom Paul otherwheres confesses only that he knows and
none other. For where he alone is sufficient for us in all things, because he
is given to us of the father, to be our Brydegrome, Shephearde, King and
Priest, head, righteousness, wisdom, satisfaction, sanctifycation and
redemption, and he himself would have men brought unto him: it is unmeet to
teach any thing not agreeable with him. The second thing is, how Christ
should be preached. To be even such an one, as the Scriptures declare him to
be, who dying for us on the Altar of the cross, purged our sins, and by his
glorious resurrection overcame death, and who reigns not in this world, like
unto the kings here on earth, but being taken up into heaven, comfort us by
his spirit, and through our afflictions and infyrmitie of the flesh,
triumphs over all our adversaries. They that have conceived in their minds
Christ to be such an one, can be offended at no worldly attempts, but being
void of care, and merry, laugh at all that the world goes about, against the
Church. Learn therefore, hereby to judge of the doctrine of these days, and
harken not unto them, which in the business of our salvation, teach any more,
then Christ, seeing that Paul knew him only, notwithstanding he was rapt up
into the third heaven.

Moreover, the success declares, The fruit of Paul's teaching.
that Paul's preaching was not in vain. For certain of the Jews believed,
yet but a few, because now began the blindness of that nation. Yet God
keeps and fulfylleth his truth, while he saves certain remnauntes, out of
the innumerable multitude. And that they were unfeigned believers, appears by
this, that they openly join themselves unto Paul and Silas, both for learning
sake, and also to protest openly their belief. Yet a greater company of the
Greeks believed, whom he calls religious, because before this, they had
tasted a little of true religion, which it is like they learned, by being
conuersaunt with the Jews. For although the incredulity of that nation was
past hope, yet God would use them being dispersed abroad in the world, to
bring the Gentyles from ydolatry, unto the worshipping of the true God, and
euerywhere to sow certain principles and grounds of pure religion, touching
the honoring and inuocating of one God. With this company of the faithful,
are numbered certain noble and chief women, that a man may see how God
has a regard of his elect in all states and degrees of persons. This place
teaches us, that the Gospel is never preached in vain, as has been already
oftentimes declared. Here are also touched the duties of them that truly
believe, ardent desire of true doctrine and religion, thankfulness toward
the teachers of salvation, and plain and open profession of the true faith.
For God will have none of them to worship him that can dissemble, and play on
both hands. God grant that we also being illuminated with the light of true
faith, may declare our faith both in word and deed, and by the same may come
unto the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven, with the only begotten son
of God Jesus Christ: to whom be praise, honor, power and glory, for ever.
Amen.

The.Cxiiij. Homely.
BUT the Jews which believed not had indignation, and took unto them evil
men, which were vagabondes, and gathered a company, and set all the City on an
roar, and made assault upon the house of Jason, and sought to bring them out
to the people. And when they found them not, they drew Jason, and certain
brethren unto the heads of the City, crying. These that trouble the world
are come hither also, whom Jason has received privily. And these all do
contrary, to the decrees of Caesar, affirming an other king, one Jesus. And
they troubled the people and the officers of the City, when they heard these
things. And when they were sufficiently answered of Jason, and of the other,
they let them go. And the brethren immediately sent away Paul and Silas by
night unto Berrhoea, which when they were come thither, entered into the
Synagoge of the Jews.
AS God ordained his son from everlasting, to be the savior of mankind: so
he prophesied in the beginning of the world, that there should be perpetual
enmity and contention, between the Devil and him, when he said unto the
Serpent. I will set enmity between thee and the woman, between thy seed and
her seed: The same shall tread down thy head, Gene. 3.
and thou shall tread upon his heel Continual examples of which prophecy,
this book of the Apostles acts declares unto us. For wheresoever in the
world, the Apostles went about to erect and establishe the kingdom of Christ,
by the preaching of the Gospel, there Satan by his instruments, always
withstoode them. This he did first at Jerusalem by the Scribes and Priests,
after that at Samaria, by Simon the Sorcerer, after that again, at Damascus by
Areta king of Arabia, in Cyprus by Elymas the Sorcerer at Antioch in Pisidia,
by the Jews: who after that of an obstinate purpose and implacable hatred
followed Paul euerywhere by sea and by land, to hinder and stop the course of
the gospel. For these were his enemies at Lystra. These withstoode him as he
taught at Derba. And now being called of God into Macedonia, they trouble and
molest him. For by their means, as this present place teaches, he is thrust
out of Thessalonica, where the gospel began prosperously to take root. The
chief use of all these things is, that we must not be offended, if the like
come upon these days, but that we consider, that this always is the state of
the church, in this world, because the world delyghteth more in serving the
Prince thereof, than in Christ. But let us vewe this present place, which
marvelously serves to instruct and comfort us, against the wicked assaults
of the Devil, and the world. For first it teaches us with what instruments
the Devil fought against Paul at Thessalonica. After that, it describes
their properties and qualities, and the good success of all this Tragedy.
Hypocrites and vagabondes are the enimyes of truth.


Among the instruments of the Devil, which he here thought good to use, are
two kind of men rehearsed. The first are the Jews, which Luke says had
indignation at the Apostles. But they were hypocrites, which used the pretense
of Gods law, and zeal of ancient religion, to cloak their obstinacy and
unbelief with, where in deed they sought nothing, but their private gain and
glory, as by their conspiracy may easily appear. For they took unto them
certain vagabundes, men of naughty conditions, whose company they ought to
have shunned, as a most pestilent plague, if they had loved truth and
religion. For thus are idle and luskishe lubbers worthy to be called, who when
they have spent their goods in waste, stand in the market place, like publyke
wares to be sold, and are ready to commit all kind of mischief, so they may
find a buyer. This is a marvelous society, and such as a man would never once
suspect could be among professors of such unlike studyes, but that the force
of hatred, once conceived against the truth, is so great, that it uses to
join men of most diverse conditions, and natures in league together. Thus thou
see the Priests, Scribes and Phariseyes, the Sadduceyes, Judas the Apostle,
the soldiers, Herod and Pilate, conspire together against Christ, all which
otherwise were of diverse countries, religion, and profession. This place
teaches us, who are the most earnest and chiefest enemies of the truth. Uerily
hypocrites, which under a false pretense of religion, seek their own
advantage, and such as being nusseled in idleness, and cannot away with
poverty, are ready to sell their help about any thing. For as the first sort
by the testimony of Christ, can not believe, John. 5.
because they burn in desire of private glory: so the other think there is
most right, where most meede is. Therefore Satan uses craftily to join and
consocyate these two sorts of men together, to the end, that these bold and
desperate dickes of Caria hired and waged by hypocrites, may with open violence
bring that to pass, which they cannot with their crafty and subtle
inventions. This is the cause that now a days, so many Prelates are seen in
kings Courts, that Bishops be of Princes counsels, and that Monks which
brag they are men dead unto the world, are seen flying in the fyeld among
armed men. For they can find themselves no more trusty defendoures, than such
as have sold their souls and consciences, and measure all truth and religion,
by gain and lucre. These things teach us what kind of men they should most
of all beware of, which desire to have their Churches in safety. In many places
now a days, Abbotes and Bishops, craftily insynuate themselves, and pretend a
kind of zeal. But when they are once let in, by and by they find men meet
for their purpose and devises, which being brybed with gold, dare forceably
do any thing against the doctrine of Christ: and they are found to be most
of all other, void of al religion and righteousness, which seemed before to
bear greatest zeal unto God.

This the second part of this place teaches us, The endeavors of the enemies
of truth.
which declares their doings which hitherto pretended the zeal of godliness
in their enterprise. The first thing that they do, they set all the City by
their conspiracy in an uproar, which was easy for them to do, by false
rumors which they spredde both openly and privily against the Apostles, as
enymies of the public weal. That done, they violently give an assault to an
other man's house, meaning to have brought forth the Apostles, if they had found
them there. But what kind of zeal is that, that makes men burst open doors,
and hale innocents unto death? Yet is there a more heinous matter than this.
For when they could not find them they sought for, they bring and pull before
the Judges, Jason the Apostles host, a man for his hospitality, worthy of
singular praise, and with him certain of the brethren which believed in
Christ, and accuse them as Traitors unto the City. And they so frame their
accusation, that they intermeddle in every word, most impudent lies, and
slanders: These (say they) that trouble the world, are come hither also,
whom Jason has received priuilye. They call the Apostles, which preach peace
and mutual love, troublers of the world, whereas they themselves had now
set all the City on a roar like seditious fellows. But because they knew,
religion in pretense whereof they made this adooe, was smally regarded among
the Thessalonians, they exaggerate the matter, and say that the Apostles did
all things against the laws and decrees of Caesar, and so accuse them of
treason, saying, they appointed an other to be king of the world, affirming in
a manner the same, that they of Jerusalem before objected against Christ before
Pylate. If you let these men go, you are not Caesar's friend. The chief use of
these things, is to learn us with what instruments and weapons, the wicked
most assault the truth and her Ministers. First they use open force. For where
Satan is a murderer, they think they have a great defense therein for
themself. So Pylate sent forth his crewe with swords and clubbes to take
Christ, Luc. 22.
which plainly said he did exercise the power of darkness. Thus Cain
violently killed Abel. And Pharao openly afflicted the Israelites. Yea if a man
would consider the hystories of all ages, he should see the chief arguments
of the enemies of the truth founded upon seculer power. And commonly in these
days, they use to dispute against the godly, with imprisonment, chains,
Gunnes, Spears, fire and sword. Howbeit, because the wiser sort, abhor from
manifest violence and tyranny, Satan knows craftily how to mittigate the
heynousnesse of this matter with lying, going about by false accusations and
slanders to bring the servants of Christ and faithful Ministers of the
truth, in ignominy and suspicion. Examples hereof we have else where alleged
in Achab the king, and in the Jews, accusing Christ before Pylate, so that we
need tarry no longer in this matter. Let us learn at the least not rashely to
believe them, that grievously accuse the godly, as though they were blasphemers
of God, injurious to the saints, and disturbers of the common weal. Let us
rather search out the very truth of the matter, and commonly it shall appear
they are most innocent, which before seemed worthy of all kind of punishment.
This place teaches us furthermore, what great destruction comes unto commonweals, by idle and graceless persons. For when they have spent and consumed
their own goods, they gape after other men's, and will be hired for a little,
to commit a great mischief, whereby it comes to pass, that they which will
not by justice of discipline punish them, are at length much cumbred and
endammaged by them, and perceive their commonweals by them to be much
hyndered. So these men being long suffered at Thessalonica, wax at length so
bold and desperate, that being entised and hired by the Jews, they begin a
public sedition, and their boldness puts all men in fear, which thing
seems to me, to have been the cause that Paul afterward writing to the
Thessalonians, warns them so dyligently to see to the ordering of them, that
lived ydly of other men's labors. For to let pass this present example, there
are euerywhere many examples of other nations, which teach us that there are
no kind of men more pernicious unto commonweals. But in steed of a great
many, that one may serve, that is written in the story of the Romans, of the
coniuration of Catiline and his Accomplices. Most prudently therefore did the
Athenians sometime inact, that sluggishe and idle persons should be brought
out into the market place, and openly shamed, as men getting their living by
no honest art or trade. With the same Athenians, the officers called
Areopagitae, when they suspected any of inordinate life, called them before
them, and demanded of them, how they lived and mainteyned themselves. Which
severity and industry, if it were used in our days, would make our commonweals and Churches more quiet than they be. But it is a foul thing for
christian men, in this point, to be overcome of Gentiles, whom reason and
experience of the flesh only taught to be more wise than we.

Now let us see the end of this Tragedy, A joyful end of the sedition.
whose beginning was such that no man would have thought it could have been
ended without shedding of blood. First the Judges and people are both moved,
as commonly it uses to be in sedition, so that at the first brunt, wisemen and
modest also, are almost amazed, and wot not what to do. But as God with a
little blast of wind, can chase away the threatening and clowdie countenance of
heaven: so in this place, with small ado, he makes them quiet and calm, that
erewhile seemed to be stark mad. For by the secret working of his spirit, he
mittigateth the minds of the Judges, to hear Jason speak, and at length
being satisfied, to dismysse him and the other brethren. In the mean while,
the brethren in the night season, send away Paul and Silas to Berrhoea, where
they again go into the Synagoge, and preach with great fruit and utility.
But as in this council of Thessalonica, is set forth a president of civil
justice and equity, for all men to follow, which are in office and authority,
so in the other persons have we some things also to be observed. And first
this thing is very comfortable, that is told of Jason. He for his kindness
showed unto the Apostles, is in great danger. But the Lord so delivers him,
that he obteyneth an everlasting praise in the congregation of the saints. And
thus is the promise of Christ fulfilled, which promised a sure reward unto him
that gives but a Cup of cold water unto any one of his disciples. Math. 10.
Let this kindle in us also a desire unto godliness, that it seem not to us
intolerable to suffer traueyles and perilles for Christ's faythfulles sake.
Further the brethren of Thessalonica show themselves thankful unto Paul and
Silas, in that they accompany them and bringing them on their way, in the
night season, putting themselves a fresh in danger, so that it is not without
a cause that Paul commends their faith in the Epistle he writes unto them.
The Galathians also are commended of him for the same cause, who (says he)
were ready to have given him their eyes, if he had needed them. But now a
days Ministers have small thanks, for they are the first in danger, and
sometime delivered into the hands of their cruel enemies, by them which will
be taken for most christian people, and Gospellers. Finally, we have to
consider Paul, which embraseth the counsel of the brethren, wylling him to
fly, understanding that it was a thing permytted by Christ, when neither the
glory of God, nor the weal of the brethren and congregation was in danger.
For God will not have us perish without great cause, and for no profit. In
the mean season, in the flying, they are not forgetful of their duty, but
as soon as they come to Berrhoea, they teach again. By which example we are
admonished, that we must so see to our own safety, that we forsake not our
standing and tackle. But if we be endued with the zeal of God, the cause it
self, time, and place, shall easily give us counsel what to do. Let the
power and goodness of God also comfort us, whereby we see Paul so often
defended and delivered, and having this, let us manfully defend our vocation,
that having with steadfast course gotten the Gole, we may obtain the reward of
eternal life, in our savior Jesus Christ: to whom be praise, honor, power
and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.Cxv. Homely.
THESE were the noblest of birth among them of Thessalonica, which received the
word with all diligence of mind, and searched the scriptures daily, whether
those things were even so. And many of them believed, also of worshipful women
which were Greeks, and of men not a few. When the Jews of Thessalonica had
knowledge that the word of God was preached of Paul at Berrhoea, they came
and moved the people there. And then ymmediatly the brethren sent away Paul
to go as it were to the Sea, but Silas and Timotheus abode there still. And
they that guyded Paul, brought him unto Athens, and received a commandment
unto Silas and Timotheus, for to come to him with speed and went their way.
ALthough the kingdom of our Savior Jesus Christ is daily and continually
assaulted by this world, and the Prince thereof, yet can it be so little
overthrown, that in the myddle of persecutions, it most prosperously comes
forward. The contynuall history of this book declares the same, but
chiefly the discourse of the things done by Paul. For as he labored more
than all the Apostles else, so he suffered more grievous persecutions than
they, and found euerywhere enemies of the faith, by whose craft he was still
chased and driven away. But as often as the rage of his enemies compelled him
to avoid any place, so often he left the seed of Gods word in the minds of
the hearers, and carried the Gospel to an other place, and so still wanne more
unto Christ the Lord. Luke writes that this was done at Macedonia. For we
heard how he was unjustly and unworthily entreated at Philippi, yet the
Epistle which he wrote unto the Philippians declares, that he had not labored
there in vain. His persecution was cause that he went unto the Thessalonians,
amongs whom he taught three Sabbath days. At length he was driven from thence
also, by his old enemies the Jews. But the faith of Christ could not be
driven out, which now had taken root in many men's hearts. But he being come
unto Berrhoea, preaches the Gospel with great avail. These things serve to
comfort us, against the attempts of the world, and the Devil. For as Solomon
says: There is no counsel against the Lord. But it is his counsel or devise,
that Christ should have all power in heaven and in earth, and that the borders
and bounds of his kingdoms should be stretched over all the world.
Wherefore it must needs come to pass, for as much as heaven and earth shall
sooner fail, then the decrees and ordynances of God. But let us see this
present place, which declares what things Paul did at Berrhoea.

He begins with the commendation of the Jews at Berrhoea, Berrhoea is
lyghtened with the Gospel.
declaring how prosperously, and in what order the gospel proceeded among
them. He commends them by comparing them with the Thessalonians. For these
men contumeliously rejected the word of God. But those of Berrhoea, being of a
more towardness and better zeal, received the same with all readynesse of
mind, and searching the scriptures by themselves, at home they examined and
tried the things that Paul taught, as with a Touchstone. Hereof it came to
pass, that a great multitude of them believed, and by their example, many of
the Greeks and Gentyles, as well men as women, were brought unto the faith of
Christ. This example teaches us what manner of men they ought to be, that will
profytably hear the Gospel. Above all things it is necessary to have a
certain readynesse of mind, to receive the same. For unless the word may
have place given it in the minds of men, it can bring forth no fruit.
Wherefore, they stumble at the very thresholde, and even in the beginning,
that disdain to hear the word, which is the peculiar mark of the children
of the Devil, John. 8.
as Christ teaches. This example is to be well observed of them which are
proud of their nobility and birth, and vaunt themselves thereof, in vain
cognizaunces and badges. Howbeit, touching the generation of the flesh, it is
in all men alyke corrupt, and such as makes us the children of sin. The
seed of regeneration is the word of God, which being quickened in our mind
by the spirit, we that before were the servants of sin, are borne to be
the children of God. Therefore they are neither noble nor gentle which give not
place hereunto, and be not borne again of the same, and so be made the
children of God. Wherefore Luke truly calls these people of Berrhoea noble,
for their study and desire that they had unto the word. In the mean season
yet we must take heed of to much facility, least to hastily receiving
whatsoever is taught, under pretense of Gods word, we learn false opinions,
and be carried about with uncertain doctrine, as with a blast of wind.
Therefore we must weygh and expende, and examine whatsoever is said, by the
Canon of holy scripture, according to that saying of Paul: Try or prove all
things, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
keep that which is good. And S. John the Apostle says: Beloved, believe not
every spirit, 1. John. 4.
but try the spirits whether they be of God or no. Two notable errors are
confuted in this place, which have grievously troubled the Church, a great
number of years. One of them is the forbidding of the laytie, and commons, to
read the holy scripture. Yet God would have them always common to all sorts
of men. For he made a law to that end, before all the multitude of Israel
called unto the same. And the holy Ghost ordained that the books of Scripture
should be written in none other, but the vulgar tongue. And sure it were an
absurd matter, to exclude any man from the doctrine of eternal life, seeing
God would have the same, 1. Tim. 2.
and the knowledge thereof, to come unto all men. The other error they hold,
which will have their doctrine judged of no man, but like arrogant and
Cyclopicall Gyauntes, challenge to themselves authority, to teach what they
will in the Church: yea they say it is intollorable and heretical, that any
man should demand of them any reason or account of that they say. Are they
then better then Paul was, which suffered his sermons to be examined according
to the rule of scripture? Or else shall he be an heretic that now a days does
that for the which these people of Berrhoea were counted noble and true
children of God? Yea, how say you, if Paul submit himself unto the censure
of the godly? His words be these. If either I Paul, or an Angel from heaven
preach an other Gospel, Galat. 1.
than has been preached, he ought to be accursed. And Christ says this is the
property of his sheep, to know his voice, John. 10.
from the voice of a stranger, and to follow his voice only. Howbeit the
short role or recount of believers that Luke rehearses, must be also
considered, which we see was gathered together of al kind of men. First many
Jews believe, although the forsaking of that Nation was even at hand. Yet
God utterly forgets not his covenant, but according to his promise, Esaias.
10.
preserves certain remnaunts. Unto these are adjoined certain noble and
chief women of the Gentyles, and at length are diverse men besides numbered.
Whereby it appears, that the grace of God, which is given us in Christ,
appertains to all sorts of men, and that none is to be excluded from it,
either for cause of country, nation, sex or whatsoever condition. For in
Christ Jesus, there is neither Jew nor Gentyle, Galat. 3.
bondsman, nor free, man nor woman. etc. Which thing as it serves to comfort
us, so it teaches every man to be mindful of christian society, and to
contempne no man over insolently, in comparison of himself.

But let us see what Satan attempted at Berrhoea against the kingdom of
Christ, The disturbance of the Church at Berrhoea.
verily even the same that he did otherwheres. For he can not suffer that to go
forward, that he knows hyndereth and overthrows his kingdom. And because
he could find none in that City, meet to serve his turn, he calls out the
Jews from Thessalonica, who hearing and disdayning that the faith of Christ
went forward at Berrhoea, come flying in post haste, and cause a great stir
and tumulte there also. Satan therefore uses the like policy here that we
saw he used before at Lystra, which is his property also at these days, if
he perceive there want disturbers of Christ's kingdom in one place, to bring
and fetch them from an other. And it is a marueyle to see how nymble the
Monks be in accomplishing this matter, whom the Devil can craftily send
abroad not only into Cities, but also into kings Courts and privy counsels,
to cause Princes being bewitched with their suggestions, to shut their ears
against the doctrine of truth. In the mean season, mark here the incurable
malice of the Jews, wherewith they are so netled, that they themselves do not
only refuse the faith of Christ, but also can not suffer other to be
illuminated with the same, so that it is not without a cause, that Paul so
earnestly reprehendeth them, in the first Epistle to the Thessalonians, the
second Chapter. Like unto these men are all those in these days, that give
themselves to the devil, to be instruments to impugn the faith of Christ,
and thereby seek great commendation. Yet let them remember, that they shall
have the same judgment, whereof was showed an example upon the Jews, to the
wonder of the whole world. For the holy ghost long agone prophesied, Psalm. 2.
that all they should be bruised with the iron rod of Christ, which would not
be corrected and amended by his word. And there want not examples of most
mighty kings, which have found this reuengefull sentence of Christ true, to
their great loss and hynderaunce, whereof because we have already at large
entreated otherwheres, we will for this time be contented, to have spoken these
few words.

But what do the brethren in the midst of this hurlye burlye? Paul
departs from Berrhoea.
Leave they Paul in the briars and danger, or refuse they to give him
counsel, and to help him? No. But rather leaving Silas and Timotheus, which
were not in such danger, to remain at Berrhoea, they convey Paul away, using
therein great and singular diligence. For they take their journey toward the
sea, and by and by turn their course and come to Athens, from whence Paul
afterward wrote his first Epistle to the Thessalonians. It seems they held
not on their way directly, because they would avoid the wait of the Jews,
who they saw raged in such hatred against Paul. Furthermore, here is to be
observed, the love and kindness that they of Berrhoea show unto their
teacher. For who doubts but this attempt of theirs was a matter, not only of
much expense and labor, but also of great danger. But nothing could let them
to go on in their godly duty, because they had a right judgment of the
benefyte of the gospel, which they had received, and they think it but a
small matter, to show an outward duty and reverence, for the gift of
eternal salvation. Now a days, because few men judge rightly of Gods grace
offered in the gospel, they will sustain no labor and peril about the same.
But most times it comes to pass, that they which will suffer no danger for
Christ's cause, an other time are molested with greater cares, for causes less
godly. This place furthermore teaches us that wisdom with faith may well
stand together. For Christ commands us to beware of the wiliness of men,
Math 10.
and to use the wisdom of Serpents against it. We have need thereof, because
of the children of this world, Luke. 16.
whom Christ himself witnesses to be wiser in their generation, than the
children of light. Yet let us remember that we must appoint certain bounds
unto the wisdom of the flesh, that we do nothing through the counsel and
persuasion thereof, against our duty, wherein there is no better or more safe
remedy, then if we submyt all our understanding unto the obedience of faith, as
Paul otherwheres teaches us. So shall it come to pass, that we shall neither
tempt God by putting our selves rashely in danger, nor dishonestly forsake the
truth, but hold the myddle way in doing our duty, and hereafter reign with
Jesus Christ whom we serve in heaven: to whom be praise, honor, power and
glory for ever. Amen.

The.Cxvj. Homely.
WHILE Paul waited for them at Athens, his spirit was moved in him, when he
saw the City given to worshipping of Images. Then disputed he in the Synagoge
with the Jews, and with the devout persons, and in the market daily with them
that came unto him by chance. Certain Philosophers of the Epicures and of the
Stoikes disputed with him. And some there were which said, what will this
babbler say? Other said he seems to be a tidings bringer of new Devils,
because he preaches unto them Jesus and the resurrection. And they took him
and brought him into Mars his seat, saying, may we not know what this new
doctrine whereof thou speak is? for thou bring strange tidings to our
ears, we would know therefore what these things mean? For all the Athenians
and strangers that were there gave themselves to nothing else, but either to
tell, or to hear some new thing.
THe Evangelist Luke hitherto has described the diverse iourneys and wanderings
of Paul the Apostle, by reason whereof he lyghtened so many nations and
Cities with the preaching of the gospel, that he said otherwheres, not
without a cause, that he had labored, more than all the Apostles. Further,
least any man might think, he had drawn ignorant and unlearned men only
with an artifyciall and elaborate kind of eloquence, he came at length to
Athens, not without the certain advise of Gods prouydence, which I think was
the most famous City that ever was. The praise of Athens.
For in antiquity it passed many, as which had to her king Cecrops, about the
time of Moses. Afterward being renowned by reason of the victories that she
had achieued against the Persians, she did purchase unto her self immortal
commendation, for delyuering of Greece out of the hands of a barbarous people.
In happy pregnancie and sharpness of wit, she passed all other. For her we
have to thank, for Socrates, Plato, Zenophon, Crates and infinite others, very
famous by reason of their wisdom. Which was the cause that in her was founded
a certain university and school, as it were of the whole world, whereunto
most noble men resorted from all parts of the world, as unto an only sea and
Castle of all wisdom. And such was the fame of her wisdom, that the
Romans when they had overcome all Asia, thought their children could no where
in the world be better infourmed in precepts of wisdom and manners of
living, then at Athens, as the preface of Cicero to his son, upon the books
of Offices and duties testifyeth. And even as in many other things, so also in
religion and honoring of the Gods, she seemed to excel all others, because in
her was to be seen, the image of Minerua, which was thought to have comme
down from heaven, and many persons were at Athens whom they gloryed in, and
accounted as Gods: Into this City did the Lord send Paul the Apostle, to
bring it by his ministry unto the obedience of faith. And that this was not
attempted without good success and profit, the end well proved. This is a
notable example both of the goodness of God, and of the power of the gospel.
For who would not acknowledge the unspeakable grace of God, when he hears a
City utterly drowned in the darkness of ydolatrie, and human wisdom, to
be so favorably regarded of God. Again, who will not marueyle at the
invincible power of the gospel, when he sees the wisest men in the world,
confounded by the same? and that by the ministry of Paul, which brought
nothing with him, but the pryntes of rods and whippes, and being driven out
of so many Cities, was of no estimation in the world. Therefore the history of
the conversion of Athens, is most worthy to be considered, the first part
whereof Luke rehearses in this place, declaring first what Paul did there,
next how his doctrine was received, first preached of most men in the City,
when he first preached: we will speak of each of these things in order.

Paul abiding at Athens for the coming of Silas and Timotheus, Paul takes
occasion to preach at Athens.
walked in the mean season round about the City, consydering their manners
and vsages, in so much that he pretermytteth not the temples, but goes into
them, and veweth them, as by his oracion hereafter shall appear. And
perceiving the greatest City that he had, as yet seen, so given to Idolatry
and drowned therein, waxes fervent in the spirit, mislyking that Gods
religion was in such wise profaned. For God is offended with no sin more
then with ydolatrie. And the minds of the godly are most provoked when they
see the same, because they hold nothing more dear* then the glory of the
sovereign God. Hereof came it to pass, that when Moses saw the golden Calfe,
almost forgetting himself, he brake the Tables of the law, and beats the
Calfe unto powder, and throws it into the water, to the intent the ydolaters
might drink, and let down their Calfe into their belly. Elias incensed with
like zeal, killed the priests of Baal with his own hand, whom Iehu
directly followed, and is in holy scripture commended therefore. The scripture
teaches us, that Josias with like zeal burned the bones of the ydolaters upon
their own aultars, that all men might perfytely see the indignity of such
wickedness, what shall we say of the Prophets, which scarce used more force
of wit and eloquence in any thing, then in speaking against ydolatrie and
images? For then spared they neither earnest nor game, to blase and deface a
thing most hateful unto God. Their contumacie and stubbornness therefore at
this day is much to be marueyled and woondered at, that will be taken for
christians and gospellers, and yet hold with images, and fight for them
against the brethren, that profess the faith of Christ, and by odious names
call them, whose zeal is commended by so many testimonies of scripture, and
examples of holy men, fyghters against Images, and Image breakers. In the mean
season, Paul's example teaches us, that all they which will fruitefully and
with commendation traueyle in Christ's quarrel, and in the kingdom of God,
have need to be indewed with zeal. For where impiety is a very obstinate
and tough evil, it can never be pulled up, without very fervent zeal. Let
the example of Christ stir up in us this zeal, who seeing his fathers house
turned into a market place or fair, as one that had forgotten his accustomed
myldenesse, made a whyp of such cords as were next his hand, and drove these
wicked merchants out of the Temple, calling to the disciples minds that
saying of David: the zeal of thine house has even eaten me up. John 2. Psalm.
68.
Here the consideration of the Lords prayer, puts us in mind of our duty,
the chief peticions whereof are, that the name of God should be sanctified, and
that his kingdom should come. But how shall they with unfeigned minds pray
for these things, whom no unhallowing the name of God, and overthrowing of his
kingdom touches or moves? Therefore these hollow hearted people, which in
handling of religion, are neither hot nor cold, and contrary to the saying
of Elias halt on both sides, gaping to get great praise, while they be addict
to no side, but are a like friendly to all parts, are not to be heard or
regarded. Such sometime were ye people of Laodicia, whom Christ threatens,
Apoc 3.
he will spewe out of his mouth. But to return unto Paul, does he fret and
disdain within himself, Paul disputes at Athens about religion.
because of ye ydolatry yt he sees? Nay, he minds how to reform this great
City, being both a stranger, and of no name amongst them. Forthwith therefore
he reasons of true religion, and begins to preach Jesus Christ. But I pray
you how many things were there, to have kept him from this doing, if he would
have yielded to the reasons of the flesh? For he might this have thought, will thou be so bold in so notable a city, to improoue that religion, which is of
so many years antiquity, and established with such prosperous success, and
glorious victories heretofore? will thou have to do with men of such fine
wits, and so in ^red with disputations, having scarcely learned the principles
of their Philosophy? Know thou not, how odious, and dangerous all
alterations are, but chiefly those, whereof strangers and forreyners are the
authors, whom common reason and sense forbids to be curious in other men's
commonweals? These and infynite such like things, it is to be thought
recourced to Paul's mind, because he was a man which by long experience, had
learned what was meet in every thing to be done. But leaving all these
reasons, he sets boldlye on the matter, teaching them that are occupied in
Gods vocation by his example, to admit no reasons of the flesh, that might
procure them from doing their duty. For if the Prophets and Apostles had been
ruled by such reasons, never should any of them have done his duty, but
rather like Jonas, they should have provided for themselves, to have escaped
by the sea. For we see Moses straue against Gods commandment, and refused the
charge, as long as he followed his own reason, and compared his impediment of
speech, Exodus 4.
and lack of skill, with Gods commandments. Let us consider therefore that
all things depend upon Gods will and pleasure, and not ours, who can easily
make the way plain for them that walk in his calling. For he is a sharp
double edged sword, piercing even into the marrowe: Heb 4. Ierem. 23.
he is a devouring fire, and dividing the very stones. Being therefore
encouraged herewith, let us boldly enterprise whatsoever god commands us,
leaving to him the success of the matter, which cannot be other than joyful
unto such as follow his conduct and leading.

Furthermore, Luke declares the order that Paul followed in setting forth the
kingdom of Christ among the Athenians. After what manner Paul taught at Athens.
First he reasoned with the Jews, touching that matter, because he knew they
would the more easily give ear unto him, if he brought Moses and the
Prophets. This done he takes those to instruct which had tasted of sincere
faith and religion by keeping company with the Jews, but yet were not fully
informed. And having now laid this foundation, he talks with every one he
met withal in the market, and went so far that the Philosophers, whereof the
City had abundance, began to dispute against him. And among diverse sects of
them, the Epicures and Stoikes chieflye encountered with him, who being of
contrary opinions, one to another, could yet agree together, to set upon the
Minister of truth. For the Epicures being the enemies of all wisdom and good
learning, did set perfyte felicity in pleasure, yet honest pleasure (as they
said) as which contained in it quietness of mind, and health of body: but
climbing no higher than this, they were authors of most absurd opinions which
sprang hereof. For where the fear of God, and consideration of the life to
come stryketh men's consciences in dread, and makes all worldly things
unpleasant, they denied the providence of God, and also the life to come. For
they fabled that God walked up and down from one side of heaven to another,
and had no regard of mortal men's affairs, and that the souls died as well
as the bodies. Insomuch that they used this Sardanapalus like saying: Eat,
drink, make merry without any measure, for after death there is no pleasure.
The Stoikes utterly differing from them, taught all felicity and bliss to
stand in virtue: which opinion though it seem plausible and godly, yet it
pulled men from God, as much as the Epicures did, because it taught men to
seek felicity, in the merits of their own works. Again, because they
perceived the study of virtue was disturbed and troubled by affections, they
would have the followers of felicity to be void thereof, so that neither
they should rejoice in prosperity, nor show any signifycation of sadness in
adversity, making of men stones and stocks, deuoyde of those natural motions
and affections, whereby parents and children are led one to love another.
Furthermore, by a certain concatenation and connection of causes, they imagined
a fatal necessity or destiny, whereunto they made god also subject. These
things teach us with whom Paul had to do, and also admonish us, who are at
this day and ever have been the enemies of the gospel, and of true doctrine.
For although in times passed, the names of Epicures and Stoikes were in use
among the gentiles only, yet were there among the people of God that were of
their opinion, and be also in these days. Surely, Nabal sometime among the
Jews said: There is no God, and David testifyeth there were innumerable other
of the same opinion. Psalm. 14. and. 53. Such were they also that said: The Lord
shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it. Psalm. 94.
Touching the later times (in the which we are) there are prophecies extant
both of Christ and the Apostles, which evidently teach us that Epicures trade
and sect shall reign among us. For Christ says: As it came to pass in the
days of Noah, so shall it be in the days of the son of man: they did eat
and drink, Luke. 17.
they married and were married, even unto that same day that Noah went into the
Arc. etc. And Peter prophecieth that there shall come mockers in ye later
days, which shall walk after their own concupiscence, and say: where is the
promise of his coming? for since the fathers died, all things continue in the
same estate. etc. 2. Pet. 3.
And such we see euerywhere now a days, which although they directly profess
not Epicures opinion, yet live they so, yt every man may easily perceive, they
believe there is neither God, nor life to come. And they cannot abide the light
of the Gospel, because by it, as Christ says, their evil works are
reproved. John. 3.
In like wise may the Stoikes opinion be found in all ages. For this opinion
held the Phariseyes sometime among the Jews, who as they trusted in the
righteousness of their own works, so were they the greatest enemies of
Christ. This sect (as we saw in the.xv. Chapter) bredde great disquietters in
the Primitive Church, mingling the law and the Gospel together, and the
merits of works with faith. In the days of the fathers and Doctors, sprang
the Pelagians, the maynteyners of the same doctrine. And if a man would search
for the like in our age, he should find the Monks, whom we may truly call
the sworn Disciples of Zeno. For beside that, they ascrybe felicity unto
their own virtues, they teach also and earnestly exact such indolencie and
want of grief, as the Stoikes did, and go about to pull up by the roots
those affections which Nature has sown in the mind of man. For what else do
they, while they command parents to cast of their own children, and to
pen them up in monasteries, while they also teach the children, to put away
all the love and care of their parents, and to addict themselves wholye to
Moonkishe rules? It is known both to Barbers and bleare eyed (as they say what
hard and unworthy things either to be spoken or believed, they beat into
tender minds. Such as these are, must needs be enemies of the Gospel, which
accuses and condemns these mad and furious errors. But we must not
therefore give place unto them, but rather according to Paul's ensample, strive
earnestly against them. And what way we must so do, we are taught by the same
ensample. For it is no doubt but the Philosophers defended their matter with
quaynt fallacies, and many words. But Paul avoiding vain contention of
words, sets before them Jesus Christ only, and his resurrection, declaring
that these two things are sufficient to convince all the dotages of
Philosophers and Heretykes. For if God sent Jesus Christ into the world to
purge the sins of men, and to save mankind, neither can the opinion of
Epicures, Stoikes, nor Iusticiaries stand, which either say God regards not
the things appertaining to man, or attribute salvation to the merytes of our
works. Again, if there be a resurrection of the dead, there must needs
follow another life after this, and therefore it is most folly to set
felicity in the pleasure of this present world. This might be extended to all
sects and heresies, but it may suffyse to admonish you, that all faith and
salvation is so contained in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and the article of
resurrection, that whosoever is well instructed herein, is easily able to
confute all manner of heresies. Therefore the order of our salvation is plain,
and needs not much demonstration of words and vain quiddities of
Sophistry. They that in times past could boldly urge this way, did easily get
the victory of all heretykes, were they never so subtle witted. It seems good
to me in this place, to show what Sozomenus reports to have chanced to a
certain Logitian, very expert in Dialecticall quiddities, in the council of
Nice. Where as this Logitian every day gave new onsets upon the Bishops, who
both in the affiance of the dexterity of their wit, and skyll of Logic,
dysputed with him, and none of them could get any hold or advantage of him:
a certain simple man of nature, This storye is written in Sozomenus 2. book
and 3. chap. But this author has followed Ruffinus, reporting the same in the.x
book of the Ecclesiastical story and 3. chap. there shalt thou read it
told with some more circumstances.
which knew nothing but Jesus Christ and him crucified, took him in hand,
and said: Philosopher, in the name of Jesus Christ hearken unto the truth.
There is one God which made heaven and earth, and gave life unto man made of
the slyme of the earth, which created all things as well invisible as visible by
the power of his word, and established and made fast the same, by the
sanctification of his spirit. This word and wisdom, which we call the
son, pitying our misery, was borne of a virgin, and by suffering of death,
has delivered us from eternal death, and by his resurrection has purchased
us eternal life, whom we wait for to come, to be the judge of all our
doings. Beleeuest thou this is true, o Philosopher? Then he as one that had
never learned the skill to deny a thing, I believe it, says he. And turning
about to his Disciples, and to all that heard him, says: As long as the
matter was debated by words, I set words against words, and by art and
skill of speaking, ouerthrewe that was spoken: but when in stead of words,
virtue or power came out of the mouth of the speaker, words could no longer
prevail against power, nor man was not able to strive against God. etc. So
mighty is the plain and unlearned confession of Christ, which whosoever
blendeth with the subtiltye of Philosophers, make it very weak and feeble, as
may evidently be seen in the school Doctors. But this conspiracy of so many
diverse sects against the truth, teaches us moreover how impossible it is to
preach the doctrine of the Gospel unto the world without contention, forasmuch
as the wisdom of the word is contrary to it, whereunto so ever it incline,
whether it banish or embrace virtue. Therefore they are in deed to be laughed
at in these days, which would have us perform that, that neither Christ nor
his Apostles could perform.

It remains that we declare how the Athenians received Paul's doctrine,
where we see two sorts of men are bewrayed. How the Athenians received Paul's
doctrine.
One sort are such as receive the word with railing, saying: What means this
babbler or tryfler* And these men are to be found among the professors of
wisdom. So unfit is the wisdom of man, to perceive the kingdom of God,
that whatsoever is preached of Christ and life everlasting, it seems to him
foolishness. Here have thou what to answer those men, which now a days
object unto us the authority of wise and great men, and all the pride of the
world. For if these things should take place, Paul undoubtedly had had the
overthrow among the Athenians. The other sort is curious men, which
supposing that Paul preached new Gods or half Gods, took and brought him
unto Mars his street, to ye end that he should there openly give account of
his doctrine. Therefore there gathers about him an infynite number of idle
persons as well Citizens as forreyners who (says Luke) had naught else to do
every day, but either to hear or tell news. This thing God did permit so to
come to pass, because he would have his son preached in the most famous
place of all the world. In the mean season, this place teaches us, what
condition the Gospel is in, in this world. For either it is most dishonestly
despised of manifest enemies, or else light men of behavior abuse it as
dishonestly to serve their affections, which if they perceive succeeds not
after their mind, then they become also openenimies thereof. And because these
things have thus fallen out in all ages, no man ought to be offended hereat,
but rather to follow Paul's constancy, and not to care one Dodkin for the
lyghtnesse of this world, but with a strong faith to trust in Jesus Christ our
savior, who though he be rejected of those which will seem to be builders of
Gods Church, yet is he become the head stone in the corner. To him be praise,
honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.Cxvij. Homely.
PAVLE stood in the midst of Mars street and said: ye men of Athens, I
perceive that in all things you are to supersticious. For as I passed by and
beheld the manner how you worship your Gods, I found an Altar, whereon was
written, unto the unknown God, whom you then* ignorantly worship, him show
I unto you: God that made the world, and all that are in it, (seeing that he
is Lord of heaven and earth) dwells not in Temples made with hands, as
though he needed of any thing, seeing he himself gives life and breath to
all men every where.
THe Apostle Paul in the first to the Corinthians says: we preach Jesus
Christ crucified, unto the Jews an occasion of falling, and unto the Greeks
foolishness. For where the wisdom of the flesh, looks only upon the
things before her eyes, and perceyueth not the mysteries of Gods spirit, it
cannot seem but a most foolish thing unto her, if a man seek salvation in
Christ that was crucified and openly slaundered. This thing Paul found true,
as well at Athens, as in other places. For where as in that City he preached
Christ among the wysest men that were in those days, they give so little ear
unto him, that it appears he scarce prevailed any where less than there. For
some of them rayled at his doctrine, and clapped their hands at it, other of
curiosity frame and apply it to their affections. In the mean season, in so
great a corruption of men, appears the wonderful wisdom of God, which
could so well use the naughty affection of most curious men. For by this
occasion it comes to pass, that Paul being brought out into Mars his
street, as into a publyke stage of the whole world, preached the Gospel of
Jesus Christ. The argument of Paul's sermon.
The argument of his Sermon was, to bring the Athenians from superstition and
Idolatry, to the honor of the only true God, through Jesus Christ. First
therefore he friendly reprooueth them, and accuses them of their overmuch
superstition. After that he reasons of God and of the true religion, nycking
their foolishness, which thought God could be worshipped in Images, or in any
other inventions of man. At length he comes nearer unto Christ's cause. Yet
at this time we will entreat but of the first part with some other points
annexed to the same.

The beginning with insinuation.
His beginning is very brief, wherein he artifycially insinuates himself, and
comprehends both the proposition and sum of his sermon. He calls them men
of Athens, because they esteemed it to be a very honorable name, as the
Orations of Demosthenes and diverse others declare. In the old time they were
ignorant of those ambitious tytles, wherewith now a days proud and vain men
rejoice to be made mad and drunken, which think all glory stands in the
beauty of such names. Furthermore, he insinuates himself very friendlye into
their minds, least they might be offended with the beginning of his talk, and
so refuse to hear him. For he says: I perceive you are overmuch given to
superstition. Your wisdom and policy is euerywhere commended, but in
religion you seem not only ouercurious, but also uncertain of all thing, so
that therein you seem to have least knowledge wherein you should have most.
And because no man should reprove him of lying, he proves his saying by the
public superstition of a certain altar in that City. What the said
superstition was, diverse have gone about curiouslye to search. The Greek
Schools make mention of one Philippides, whose hystory they show, and say the
inscription was thus. (...). That is to say: To the Gods of Asia and Europa,
and Aphrica, to the unknown and strange God. Howbeit, I suppose it was only
but such as is of Paul reported. For he might have been suspected for a forger
and false reporter, if he had recyted the superscription wherein they reposed
so great holiness, otherwise than it was written. But it behooves us chiefly
to consider Paul's intent and purpose, which was to prove that the Athenians
had no certain religion whereunto to stand, but wandered up and down in a
maze of opinions and superstitions, being not contented with the Gods of the
Gentyles, and of their own country, but also worshipping an unknown God. And
undoubtedly the wyser sort were not a little moved and touched with his
sayings. And therefore without holding them longer in doubt, he promyseth to
teach them ye knowledge of that true God, whom as yet they knew not. The
Athenians are more superstitious than other Nations.
It is very worthy to be considered how the Athenians erred in religion above
all other Nations, being yet the wysest and best learned of all others. For
their City flowed in the most subtle professors of Philosophy, whom (as we
erewhile said) students from all parts almost of the world came to hear.
This example teaches us how fowly they are deceived, which will not suffer
youth to study divinity, before they are even drunken in the Gentyles
Philosophy, and made utterly unapt to the obedience of the Gospel: where
notwithstanding no kind of persons more profit therein, than those which
abandon the pregnancie of their own wit, and submit all their
understanding to the obedience of faith. Moreover, let us mark in this place,
how the Athenians are here chiefly accused of false religion, because they
worship an unknown God. For hereby Paul proves that they have nothing
certain in their religion. (...)
Herby it appears that religion cannot stand without the true knowledge of
God. For not only Paul but Christ also uses the same argument, against the
Samaritanes: where (as it were) with one blow he stryketh down all their
religions, saying: you worship you know not what. For the whole Scripture
teaches us, John. 4.
that religion consists chiefly in true faith and invocation of God. For
without faith it is impossible for any body to please God, Hebr. 11. Psalm. 50.
or to come unto him. And God requires this worship chiefly of us, that in our
troubles we should ask help and delivery of him. But unless we be inspired
with the knowledge of Christ, we can neither believe in God, nor call upon him,
Romans 1^.
which thing Paul teaches by an elegant and feate gradation. He that calls
upon the name of the Lord (says he) shall be safe. But how shall they call
upon him in whom they believe not? How shall they believe, unless they have
heard. etc. Beside this, they that know not God truly, turn to the
imaginations of their own reason, wherein it appears evidently there is no
certainty, by this one argument, that either they themselves daily have new
devises, or else embrace the devises of other men, according to that saying of
Christ: John. 4.
Whosoever drinks of this water (material and drawn by his own strength)
shall thirst again. etc. Examples to prove the same are euerywhere extant.
For the same that we hear the Athenians did, foolishly worshipping such a God,
as by their public inscription, they confessed they knew not, the same we
read, has come to pass unto all men. Romans 1.
For think we the Gentyles would have changed the glory of the immortal
God, into the image of a mortal man, or else into a brute beast, if they had
known him truly? Would they every day have received new manners of honoring
him, borrowed of foreign Nations? Would they have thought, by act of
Parliament, to have confyrmed, or disanulled their Gods, and their religion, as
Tertullian in his Apology testifyeth the Romans did? What a foolish saying of
the shipmayster was that, which bade Jonas call upon his God, if happily he
would hear them, seeing they had called on their other Gods hitherto,
altogether in vain? But that that was thought a foolishness in the Gentyles,
the same Elias vpbraydeth the Israelites with calling upon Baal. 1. Reg. 18.
And God many times complayneth how the people multiplied and increased their
Gods. And we can confess that all these people offended in times passed. And
yet few acknowledge with their heart, that the same has many years been done,
and is yet done in the Popes kingdom. For what certainty is in that religion,
where the Pope every day makes new gods and Goddesses? Where every day new
kinds of rytes and ceremonies are devised? Where the dead can not be in rest
and safety, because the insatiable avarice of Priests exacteth tribute of
them, fayning that their souls are tormented and purifyed in the furnace of
Purgatory? Is there not an unknown God worshipped among us, the God Maozim,
as Daniel says, whom all our fathers knew not, which either is made of
bread, or changed into bread? Would God men would now a days expende these
things, and learn what a miserable case it is to want the light of truth. For
whosoever lacks this light, are both ignorant themselves of all things in
religion, Esaias. 29. Math. 15.
and lose their labor before God, which neither can nor will be worshipped with
man's traditions. Let us therefore harken unto Paul and the Apostles, whom God
ordained to teach the blind world, his true religion and worship.

Furthermore, Paul so teaches al these things in the second part of his
sermon, Paul teaches the true knowledge of God.
that therewith also he confuteth ye errors of the gentiles, whereof sprang those
errors, which yet bewitch the world. In the mean while, although he had to do
with most subtle Philosophers and curious men, yet he disputes not subtly
of Gods essence or nature (which God himself testifyeth Exo. 33. is
inscrutable) but describes God by his works, teaching what we ought to believe
of him, and how to worship him. God (says he) that made the world and all
things therein contained, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth. etc. It
seems he speaks this against the Epicures, which affirmed the world was
from everlasting, or else that all things came together by concurrence and
meeting of motes together, and that God had no care of worldly things. But
Paul says that God is the creator and lord of the world, and layth this for
an infallible ground of his doctrine, such as no man will deny, but he that
is void of common reason. Herofhe gathers that templary religion, was but a
vain thing, The religion in Temples is a vain thing.
which was of such price and authority among the Grecians, that they hated the
Persians, for none other cause more than for that they euerywhere burned the
temples in Greece, because they saw they served more for superstition than
godliness. Thus reasons Paul. He that is Lord of all things, must needs be
euerywhere. But god as he is creator of all things, so is he Lord of all.
Therefore he is present euerywhere, and so by consequence, dwells not in
Churches, which are builded with men's hands. But that which is said against
the Gentyles, which judged that religion stood in the bewty and furniture of
Temples, and unto them tied the majesty, power, and grace of God, the same
makes against all those, which glorying in the honor of the true God, are yet
drowned in the dotage of this error. When Solomon had bestowed great costs
and treasure in building of a Temple, at length he says unto God: Behold the
heaven of heavens, is not able to conteyne thee, 1. Reg. 8.
how much less this Church which I have builded? And God himself in Esaias
cap. 66. says. Heaven is my seat, and the earth is my footestoole, where
therefore shall this house be that you will build for me? Jeremy sharply
reprehendeth the Jews, Iere. 7.
trusting in the religion of their Temple. Yea, Christ says that true
worshippers, are not tied unto certain and peculiar places, John. 4. Matthew. 24.
but shows us that they worship God euerywhere in spirit and in truth. Here
therefore are all pilgrimages taken away, in the which foolish men, of an
heathenish error, suppose salvation chiefly to stand. And yet for all this,
we utterly condemn not the use of Churches. For they serve for outward
religion, which is necessary for the profession of faith, and for the
nourishing of concord, and unity, while we resort thither to hear the word
of God, that is to say, common prayers, and to have the sacraments ministered.
Whereunto Temples must be so ordered that we must think it unlawful to
pollute them with any kind of profane vsages.

But Paul continues on in describing of God, God is not worshipped with
sacrifices.
saying that God has need of nothing. Whereupon he gathers that he is not
worshypped with hands, and that religion consists not in outward obsequies
and duties of men. He proves the Antecedent, in that he says he gives life
and breath unto all men. By this argument he impugneth the vain affiance in
priests, in whom our Ancestors reposed the chief part of religion. It
seems Paul took his argument out of Gods words, where he accuses the
Israelites, that thought he was worshipped and pleased with sacrifyces. For he
says: I will take no Bullock out of thy house, Psalm. 50.
nor he Goats out of thy foldes. For all the beasts of the forest are mine,
and so are the cattelles upon a thousand hills. I know all the fowls upon
the mountains, and the wild beasts of the field are in my sight. If I be
hungry, I will not tell thee. etc. But by this argument it appears all popish
religion is condemned. For what else do they in that religion, but being
deceived by wicked superstition, Esaias. 63.
take from the poor, commended to us by Christ, the duties which they offer to
Saints that have no need, yea, which know us not. Yea, the most of their
oblations serve for Idols void of all senses, or for Priests, that live
wantonly and in riot. In the mean season superstition has taken so deep
root, that it is thought a less offense, to kill a man and rob him, than to
take a piece of a veil from an Idol, or the altar, to clothe a poor body
with. O manners, O times.

But some man may say: If God be not worshipped by sacrifyces, Wherefore
Sacrifices served.
why did he appoint them for the people, by Moses and command them? Let us
consider, there were two kinds of sacrifyces. The one was expiatorie for
sins, so called, not for that sins could be purged by the blood of Oxen
and Gotes (for that Paul plainly denies Heb. 10.) but for that they
prefygured Christ, whom all the holy and godly men believed should dye for
the sins of the world, at a time long before appointed. They taught us also,
that we should slaughter and mortifye all beastlye affections, and bring a
contrite heart before God, which David testifyeth, Psalm. 51.
is the acceptablest sacrifyce that God requires. Another kind of them was
gratulatorie, The sacrifices of christians.
or of thanks giving for benefytes received. Yet all these for the more part,
consisted in blood, because as yet the blood of Christ was not shed, wherewith
only the father should be appeased. This blood therefore being shed, and the
mystery of our redemption accomplished, there remained no more sacrifyce
expiatorie or propitiatory for sins. For Christ his merit is sufficient,
and there is no need of other sacrifyce, as the Epistle to the Hebrews at
large teaches us. Yet Christians want not sacrifyces, but yet unbloody, for
since the blood of Christ was shed, there is no more use either of beasts
blood or man's, in the things pertaining to the ordinary honoring of God.
Romans 12.
For they make themselves lively sacrifyces unto God. They offer prayers and
thanks giving in the name of Christ. They bestow their goods and money, Math.
26.25 Heb. 13.
meat and cloth, and such other duties upon the poor, whom Christ has left
in his place. They that duly fulfill these things, accomplish the Christian
religion. Let us therefore hold fast Paul's saying, which affyrmeth that God
has need of nothing, let us worship him in spirit and in truth, and bestow
our temporal goods upon the poor, which are the lively Images of God, that
our service may be acceptable unto God, through Jesus Christ: to whom be
praise, honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.Cxviij. Homely.
AND has made of one blood all Nations of men, for to dwell on all the face
of the earth, and has assigned before, how long time, and also the ends of
their habitation, that they should seek God, if they might feel and find
him, though he be not far from every one of us. For in him we live, move,
and have our being, as certain of your own Poets said: for we are also his
generation. Forasmuch then as we are the generation of God, we ought not to
think that the Godheade is like unto gold, silver or stone, graven by craft
and imagination of man.
THat that Paul sought both in all his sayings and doings, the same he
chiefly performed in his sermon, made at Athens, even to bring his hearers
from superstition and ydolatrie, to the true religion and knowledge of God.
This was impossible to be done, except he should first confute the errors that
blinded them. But because he would not be to long in his talk, he took the
chief errors to confute, whereupon the residue depended. And yesterday he
disputed against the vain affiance of Temples and sacrifyces, teaching that
God was not contained within Temples, because he was infynite, nor was not
worshipped with sacrifyces, because he had need of nothing. Which things he
so handles, that the same may serve to confute all those which at this day
esteem religion according to the beauty or magnifycence of Temples and
oblations. But now he sets upon the very head of impiety, that is to
oblations. But now he sets upon the very head of impiety, that is to
say, feigned Gods, and images, and the worshipping of them, of the which he
disputes with great earnestness, declaring that it is to shameful and
impudent an error, to change the majesty and glory of God immortal, into
miserable men and dumb Images. And because he knew he had to do with those
which were brought up in such superstition, whom it was a very hard matter
to persuade, he heapeth a number of things together, to make the error seem
the more heinous. And there is no doubt but Paul entreated of the matter at
large, although Luke has noted but the chief points thereof, we shall speak
of them all in order.

First, he declares the beginning of man. The beginning of mankind teaches
the worship of one God.
God (says he) of one blood made all mankind. For it is manifest, that all
men, of what nation and degree soever they be, come of Adam. Whereto does Paul
allege this? We gather two things of these words, which make very much for
the purpose we have in hand. The one is, that they which have but one maker
and one beginning, ought not to be divided in sundry religions, but ought
rather to join all their minds and studies together, to worship that one
Creator. Therefore he nicketh the leuitie of the Gentyles, which did not only
worship one false God, but imagining there were diverse and many gods,
marvelously disagreed among themselves, in this one thing, and yet in this
agreeing, that they altogether swarued from the way of the truth, Hereof ought
a general doctrine to be learned, how they offend against the order of
nature, which in religion bring in sects and division. For they are authors
and occasions that men forgette their beginning, and neglect their maker.
Therefore this is a greater offense, than commonly men ween for. Would god
this argument might take place among Christians, who professing one Creator,
and one kind of beginning, and glorying in one Jesus Christ the savior of all
men, do yet let themselves every day be divided in new sects, which pull
them away from god their creator, and Christ their savior. And truly it is to
be pitied that the authority of this argument should be of less force now
a days, among Christian men, than it was in times past, among the gentyles.
The other thing that Paul gathers of man's origin and beginning is, that
gods neither can nor ought to be made of men, which was an error spredde
euerywhere among the Gentyles. For it was plain unto all men, that those
sometimes had been men, whom they worshipped now as gods. For in Creta were
kept Jupiters cradell, and Image. Delos was the Island of Apollo and Diana. The
City of Thebae was renowned by reason that Bacchus and Hercules was borne
there. And Venus of the Country where she was borne, was called Cypria, Marce,
Thracius, Vulcan, Leninius, and Priapus, Lampsacenus. But Paul teaches us, it
is a foolish opinion, to believe that they are Gods, which in times past had
been men, forasmuch as all mankind is come of one blood. But by this argument
the worshipping of Saints is overthrown, whom in the Popish religion it is
more evident, are worshipped for Gods, than needs any long demonstration. For
prayers are made unto them, they are inuocated and called on in men's
distresses, temples and aultars are dedicated to them, sacrifyce is done unto
them, holy days are appointed for them, and the glory of health recovered, is
ascribed unto them. Howbeit, we know they were men, and such men as were
subject to like infyrmities as we be, as Paul confessed before the people at
Lystrae. Furthermore, all the Scripture testifyeth that they were sinners. And
the Apostles according to Christ's commandment, prayed, forgive us our
trespasses. etc, as well as we. Therefore it cannot be, that they are now
become Gods, and governors of the world. Yet for all this, we despise them
not, nor yet bereave them of the honor due to them, we acknowledge that they
were singular instruments of Gods grace, but we affirm they had this of the
mere grace of God, as they euerywhere confess themselves. Wherefore it
should be an absurd thing for us, to stick to them, or depend upon them as
Gods, and not rather after their doctrine and ensample, to trust only in
God, through Jesus Christ, whom the scripture has set out unto us, to be our
mediator. Surely we think the Saints can have no greater injury done unto
them, than to have the glory of God which they most earnestly defended,
ascribed to them. For they thought good to maintain his glory, yea, with the
shedding of their own blood.

The prouydence teaches us that one God ought to be worshipped.
But let us return unto Paul which says that men were not only made by
God, but also placed by him to dwell upon the earth. And least any man might
hereof infer Epicures opinion, and think that God had given them ye earth to
use at their pleasure, he declares that all this comes to pass by the
eternal decree of Gods providence. God (says he) has appointed the time and
ends of their habitation, that is, God has appointed to every nation and
people their countries and borders, and has ordained times and seasons,
according to the decrees of his eternal providence, when men shall be borne,
and when they shall die. Therefore nothing comes to pass on earth by
chance, or without the providence of God. These things does Paul allege to
this end, to prove that all people ought to be occupied in honoring of one
God, who has given them all things for their behoof, and by whose providence
they are governed and preserved. Thus he confuteth the common error of the
Gentyles, which had for every country a God to be their patron and defender.
For the Athenians thought themselves in safety under the godheade of Pallas.
Ephesus gloryed that she had Diana for her defender. The people of Cyprus had
chosen Venus to be their Lady and gouernesse. Carthage lived under the
protection of Juno. The Romans trusted in Mars their Progenitor and
President. Yea, so far went this superstition, that there was no house but
had her peculiar and proper gods belonging to her. Which error gate in also
among the Christians. For there was no City, but had taken to it some Saint or
other, through whose defense it thought it self in safegarde. But Paul
proves that God is the distributer of all countries, and the only President
of all people, who being present euerywhere, needs no Substitute or Uicare to
supplye his rowme. Mark well by the way, how Paul attributes unto God, not
only prescience, but also providence, whereby he governs all Countries and
Nations, by whose ordinance whatsoever things that are done in the world,
come to pass. On his beck depends the alteration and mutation of Realms,
as all the Scripture declares, but specially the Prophecies of Daniel,
concerning the four Monarchies of the world. Upon the same providence depend
private men's doings. For God (as David says) takes up the simple out of the
dust, Psalm. 113.
and sets him with the Princes of his people. We have examples in Saul,
David, Jeroboam, Cyrus, Ottomanne, and infynite others, to let daily examples
pass. Yea, Gods providence abaseth it self down even unto things of small
or no regard, while he cares for the birds of the air, Math. 6.10.
garnisheth the flowers of the fyelde, and numbreth the hears of our head.
Let us therefore bid them auaunt, that acknowledge in god, nothing but his
prescience, and imagine that he is but an idle beholder of the things which are
done in this world. Let us rather believe that all things are ordered and
governed by his providence. For as this makes much for the godly ordering of
our life, so in adversity it brings no small comfort.

These things being thus premised, he shows to what end men were made, and
had the earth given them to dwell on, namely, The end of man's creation
teaches us the worship of God.
that they should seek the Lord. They seek the Lord, which are busily
occupied in his vocation, and in the knowledge of him, searching what his will
is, worshipping him only, and serving him from their hearts. And that this is
the end whereunto man was ordained, all the Scripture testifyeth. And surely
it is good reason that they to whom god has given a sovereign power over all
other creatures, should again wholly give themselves unto him. Paul makes
mention hereof, to declare that they know not, to what end they were created,
and that they were unworthy to dwell on the earth, because they had forsaken
the true God, and worshipped counterfeyte gods and dumb images. In this
place appears the wonderful corruption of mankind. For if we consider the
end wherefore man was made, it shall appear he does nothing less, than that
he ought to do. It were our duty to seek God, in whom all kind of bliss
and felicity is reposed. But the most part of men use rather to follow
unstable riches, uncertain honors and fylthie pleasures of this world. And
then that will seem more religious than other, are given rather to the
worshipping of Creatures, than of God, and to impudently go a whoring after
them. And this peruersitie is so much the more intolerable, Esaias. 1. Ierem. 8.
because all other creatures do their duty most diligently, and man alone is
most forgetful of the same.

And least the thing that God requires, might seem to difficult and
impossible for man to perform, Paul by a preoccupation, GOD is (...) better
by the creation of man, than by images.
cutteth away all kinds of objection. And says, that if we seek after God,
we shall find him even as if we felt him, meaning that he offreth himself
euerywhere to our senses, while by his visible works he reuealeth to us his
invisible power, wisdom, and goodness, as he shows at large. Romans 1. And
surely there is no part of the world so abject, no creature so simple, but it
sets before our eyes the unspeakable power of God. This appears in the
rude and ylfauoured clottes of earth, which yet have in them a marvelous force
to bring forth fruit. The same we see in the alteration and intercourse of
times, in the perpetual motions of heaven, in tempests, and in all other
kind of heavenly influences. Yea, behold well but a little flower, and thou
shall be enforced to wonder at the infynite power, and singular wisdom of
the maker. But because it would have been an endless labor, to have run
through all the parcels of the world, and such is the blockishnesse of a
number, that they are able to search nor find nothing that is without
themselves, God insinuates himself nearer into us, and is not far from any
of us. For we live, move, and have our being in him, and be even of his
generation and kynne. For who will not confess, that he lives by his power
and mean, seeing by man's reason it cannot be compassed, how the infant lives
and is nourished in the mothers belly. Who does not acknowledge the power of
the Creator in the marvelous workmanship of man's body, in the proportion
and agreement of members, in sense, moving, and the use of them? Who will
deny that we have our being by his power, seeing we are beset round about
with so many dangers, and yet escape them every day? Who perceyueth not
certain tokens of godly seed in us, when he considers the perpetual
moouings and operations of the soul, her immortality, and the whole dignity
of man, whereby he passes all other creatures? Therefore the dullness of man,
that does not acknowledge God, is inexcusable. It is also an absurdity and
madness, to counterfeyte dumb images of God, seeing we bear about us the
lively image of God. That the Athenians might the better understand the same,
and be also ashamed thereof, he cites the testimony of Aratus the Poet, to
declare that he preaches no new doctrine, such as before time had not been
heard, but such as the wise men in times past had learned even by natures lore,
and that they were very gross and barbarous that had suffered such natural
notices and knowledges to be extinguished in them.

God can not be expressed in any image
At length concluding the place, he thus infers: forasmuch then as we are the
generation of God, we must not think that the Godheade is like unto gold,
silver, or stone, graven by art or industrye of man. He calls us the
generation of God, chiefly because of the image, after which we be made. For
as yet, there was no place to speak of the adoption of the elect, before them,
which yet understood not the principles of the knowledge of God. The meaning
therefore is this. Where God would have his image to shine in man, the Lord
and governor of all creatures, it were to gross an error, to forge a dumb
image of him, out of any dead thing. For we cannot counterfeyte man, as he is
the Image of God, because his image is in the soul, whose form and nature, by
man's art, can not be expressed nor shadowed. How much less then, can manne
express God, in any Image* He names first precious matter, gold and silver,
showing that this is not able to represent the image of God. For how much
soever it is esteemed among men, yet are they frail things and corruptible,
but God is incorruptible and everlasting. Furthermore, he speaks not of the
forms and fashions, which man at his pleasure gives unto God, but of the art
and industry of man, as if he should say: Although the singularest artifycers
and masters would lay all their heads together, yet are they not able to
conceive in their minds, Esa. 40.44
much less to express in any matter or Image, the true Image of God. Hereof
we gather, that the Images which are made of God, are very lies, because they
are not able to perform that they promise. But I pray you, what greater
injury can be done unto God, than to make him which is eternal truth, like
unto a lie? What is this else, but to make of God, the Devil, whom Christ
calls the father of lies? No honest man would be contented to be
represented, and made like unto a murderer or Ruffyan, and an honest Matrone
would much mislyke to be pictured in the attire of an harlot. Shall we then be
so bold, to adventure to represent God by lies? It is not without a cause that
Lactantius, that eloquent writer, uttered this sentence, saying: there was no
religion where any Images were. Would God they would well consider this
gear, that now a days hold with Images, who in my judgment are not the
least cause that God sends in the Turks, to reform the world, seeing that
Princes cannot abide to have Christendom purged of superstition and ydolatry,
by the doctrine of the Gospel. It is our parts to remember our beginning and
dignity, to worship one God in Jesus Christ our Redeemer: to whom be all
power, honor, and glory, now and ever. Amen.

The.Cxix. Homely.
AND the time of this ignorance God regarded not, but now byddeth all men
euerywhere repent, because he has appointed a day, in the which he will judge
the world with righteousness, by that man who^ he has appointed, and has
offered faith to all men, after that he had raised him from death. When they
heard of the resurrection from death, some mocked, and other said, we will
hear thee again of this matter. So Paul departed from among them. Howbeit
certain men claue unto him and believed, among whom was Dionisius a senator,
and a woman named Damiris, and other with them.
WE have heard the first part of Paul's sermon, wherein he has most
diligently confuted the errors of the Gentyles, teaching that God is neither
included within Temples, nor worshipped with sacrifyces, with great and fervent
zeal, inueyed he against the feygned Gods and Images of the heathen, plainly
admonishing them that they transgressed the order of nature that worshipped
them, and that they were vnmyndefull both of the end and dignity that they
were made for. Now let us lysten to the later part of his sermon, wherein he
exhorts them to repentance in Christ, namely that they should convert and
turn from their impiety and false worship of gods unto the true God. In
which place because of the Epicures which laughed at all kind of religion, he
most earnestly urged the mention of the last judgment. We will declare each
thing in that order that Paul utters it.

First he answers a question, used to be moved in all ages, An answer to
them that allege the ignorance of their forefathers for their errors.
and is at these days, euerywhere objected, when the truth is preached: that
is to say, why God has suffered the world, so many years to be seduced.
And whether it be likely, now at the length, that the truth is disclosed, to a
few persons of no name and estimation? But Paul answers these demaundes
briefly, how that God has hitherto winked at the times of ignorance, not
because he delyteth in ignorance, but because so it seemed good unto him, which
appoynteth all things according to his just judgment: and that the world
could not choose but err, as long as God hid the light of his truth, because
men of themselves, have no feeling or understanding of God. And where he says
that the truth hydden from the world before times, is now revealed, he
declares, that henceforth ignorance shall not be excused. It is very worthy to
be noted, how Paul alleging Gods doing simply and barely, moves no
disputation at all, concerning the causes why God suffered the world so long
to err. We must also follow this tracke of modesty, that we wade not to
deep in searching out the ^au^es of Gods judgments, or that we charge not him
with the cause of our ungodliness. For it is evident, that he can do no man
wrong, because we all long sithence had deserved eternal damnation, and be
borne the children of wrath. It is also evident that he governs all things
by just judgment. And Paul in another place, speaking of the revelation of
the Gospel, says, it is a mystery hidden from the beginning of the world.
Romans 16.
Christ teaches the same, Math. 13.
saying, that the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, are not revealed to
every one. It is therefore a folly, and to malapert and wicked an offense, to
call gods doings to the controlment of man's reason, seeing he requires of
us obedience of faith, and seeing nothing so well becomes the children of
God, as to frame themselves unto his will, which appears in his word and
works. Furthermore, Paul in this place expresses the end of the preaching
of the gospel, forasmuch as he says, it is declared to every man, for that
they should repent. Therefore it is not enough to have heard or learned the
gospel, but it behooves us to repent us of our errors, and other vices. The
order and course of the whole story of the gospel teaches us the same. John
the Baptist begins with the doctrine of repentance. Then after him Christ
cries, Repent you, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. The Apostles preach
likewise by his commandment. And in the last of Lukes gospel, he prescribes
the same order of teaching, that first repentance should be preached in his
name, and then forgiveness of sins. Which order, all this book, and their
Epistles do sufficientlye testifye, they diligently observed. Therefore they
falsely and to impudentlye call themselves Gospellers, which hold on in their
former errors, and licentiously follow vice, and will not suffer the Ministers
to reprove their manners; which is as though a man should desire of the
Physician to maintain his health, but yet would not have him withstand
sickenesses, and apply thereto convenient diet and remedies. We are taught
moreover, that no man is excused before God, either through ignorance of his
Predecessors, or times passed. For that our ancestors erred in the ages
passed, was through the just judgment of God, which dissembled and bare with
their errors. But when he reuealeth his will, it is certain he will no longer
bear with their error, but requires repentance of all men. Which thing whosoever
performs not, are contemners of the grace offered, and therefore deserve most
grievous punishments. This thing should they well observe, that under the
plausible pretense of forefathers, and ancient superstitiousnesse, persecute
the Gospel with fire and sword. But they shall never escape the judgment of
God, whereof Paul reasons in this present place.

For he alleges the cause wherefore God now reuealeth his word unto the
Gentyles, He urges repentance by terror of the last judgment.
saying: for he has appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world
with righteousness.etc. Thus he lays before their eyes, the ancient usage
of God, which never punishes any sinners, but such as are abundantly told and
warned before. For he can do nothing, but he first reuealeth the same unto his
servants the Prophets. Amos. 3.
We have every where examples not only in the scriptures, but also in the
stories of the Gentyles, so that we need not here to stand long in rehearsal
of them. It is better for us to consider the order of the last judgment, which
Paul briefly and plainly touches. First because of Epicures, and their
sectaries, he declares that God has appointed a day of judgment, because
none should hickscornelyke deryde the mention thereof, 2. Pet. 2.
which thing Peter teaches us certain ^o^kers should do. And that that Paul
says, the whole consent of scripture proves. Hereunto appertain the things
spoken in the last chapter of Daniel. Which Christ also so often inculcateth.
John. 15. Math. 16.24.25. 2. Cor. 5. Romans 14.
And as it is said in an other place, we must also come before the judgment
seat of Christ. This does the justice of God plainly require, which could by
no means stand, if that judgment were not where every man shall receive
condign reward according to his works. For in this world we see for the
most part, that the godly are afflicted without any renumeration, and the
wicked rage and riot without check. Then he declares who they be that shall be
thus judged, naming all the world, which we in the articles of our faith
express, by the quick and the dead. Therefore none shall escape that day, but
as we said before, we shall all come before the judgment seat of God. For
there is no respect of persons with God, neither can any man bleare his eyes.
This thing ought to make great men which are puffed up in worldly pride,
mindful of modesty and humility. Thirdely, he declares the manner and
fashion of the judgment, saying he shall judge with righteousness. Therefore
there shall be no place for colors or pretenses, but they that have sinned
under the law, shall bear the sentence of the law, and they that have sinned
without law, Romans 2.
shall be condemned without law. And every man shall receive according to
that he has done in his body. This ought we to remember, when the entisements
of sin, 2. Cor. 5.
and the flesh creep upon us, which pull us from doing our duty: when also
the glory and riches of this world provoke us to sin. For what shall man
give for the redemption of his life, in that day, when the most severe Judge
shall pronounce sentence, according to the tenor of justice. Finally, Math. 16.
he defyneth the Judge, by whom God shall judge the world, ver^ly by the man
whom he has ordained. So he calls Christ, because of his human nature,
meaning to use the more tolerable name among the unbelieving, to the end he
might come by little and little to speak of the mysteries of Christ. It is not
without a cause that the scripture euerywhere declares that Christ shall be our
Judge. For this makes very much for the comfort of the godly, when they hear
he shall be their Judge, who they know is their Savior and Bishop. For hereof
they gather, that he shall rather be a revenger than a Judge for them, as Job
calls him. Cap. 19.
And they are not afraid of the sentence of damnation at his hand, whom they
believe was offered on the cross for them. Again to the wicked it is a great
terror, when they think he shall come to be their Judge, whom they have
wickedly contemned. For they shall look upon him whom they pierced, Zach. 12.
John. 19. Psalm. 2.
and to their perpetual hindraunce and loss, shall be constrained to abide
his judgment, whom they would not acknowledge to be their redeemer.

Now because Paul has made mention of Christ, he begins to entreat of
his mysteries, He preaches Christ.
in which treatise no man may doubt but he was more prolixe and diligent, then
is here mentioned. Luke notes the chief points only, which abundantly
declare what Paul's oration and doctrine was. They are three in number. First
he says he was predestinate or appointed of God, from everlasting, as is
elsewhere said. 1. Pet. 1.
This appears by the promises which declare he was ordained to be the savior
of mankind, even from the very beginning. Hereof we gather (as Paul
otherwheres teaches) that salvation comes of grace, without any our desert.
Ephesians. 1.
For what man is there which can brag that he has deserved from everlasting,
that the son of God should be appointed, to be his savior? Secondly he
says, that God in Christ has performed his promise unto all men, meaning
that in him the promises, fygures, and prophecies, wherein long agone salvation
was comprysed, are fulfilled, whereunto Christ being ready to yield up the
ghost, had a respect, and said, It is finished or performed. And after his
resurrection he showed that so it behooued things should be performed, that
the Scriptures might be fulfilled which are written in Moses, Luc. 24.
the Prophets and Psalms. Where upon we gather, that they all fowly err,
which show any new or other way of salvation, than in Christ. For what else
do they, but reprove God and Christ of lying? See touching this point. 1.
John. 5. He that believes not God, makes him a liar. etc. Thirdly, he makes
mention of Christ's resurrection, meaning thereby to prove, that he is the God
and judge of all men. The which argument he uses also. Romans 1. Under this also
he comprehends all the whole business of our redemption. For if he rose
again, surely he dyed. and dyed (as is said elsewhere) for our sins, Romans 4.
but was raised again for our justification. But because we have oftentimes
discoursed of these points, and have occasion euerywhere to entreat more of
the same, these few shall suffyse for this present.

The effect of the doctrine of Christ among the Athenians.
Now remains the effect of this doctrine, which was diverse and variable,
according to the diversity of the hearers. For some at the first mention of
the resurrection, did mock and scoff at it, namely, they of Epicures sect,
whereof there are great numbers in these days. Other somewhat better than these
desired to hear him dispute again touching this point, thereby declaring they
had somewhat tasted of the truth. There are again other some, whose hearts God
had illuminated by his spirit, to believe, and openly to join themselves unto
Paul. So euerywhere is fulfilled the saying of Paul, that the Gospel is to
some the savor of death unto death, and to other some the savor of life unto
life. Among those that believed, is Dyonisius accounted a man of great
dignity, as who was one of the number of the Judges called Areopagitae. Also
Damaris, a woman by all likelyhoode, of great dignity and estimation, because
mention is made of her by name. Wherefore the gospel is never preached without
some fruit or profit: and although but a few believe at the first, yet great
and famous congregations grow of small beginninges, as hystories declare, came
to pass at Athens. It is our duties not to be offended at the paucitie or
small number of believers, but to embrace with thankful minds the gospel of
salvation, that it may bring forth in us worthy fruits, and that we may
attain unto salvation through the promises thereof, by Jesus Christ our Lord:
to whom be praise, honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.xviij. chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The.Cxx. Homely.
AFTER this, Paul departed from Athens, and came to Corinthus, and found a
certain Jew named Aquilas, borne in Pontus, lately come from Italy with his
wife Priscilla, because that the Emperor Claudius had commanded all Jews to
depart from Rome, and he drew unto them, because he was of the same craft, he
abode with them and wrought. Their craft was to make tents. And he preached in
the Synagoge every Sabbath day, and exhorted the Jews and the Gentyles. When
Sylas and Timotheus were come from Macedonia, Paul was constrained by the
spirit to testify to the Jews, that Jesus was very Christ.
THe Evangelist Luke in the chapter that went before, showed us how Athens
was converted, a very notable city, both by reason of the school of wisdom
therein, and also because of the manifold fame of their religion. Then next
unto this he handsomely joins the history of the conversion of Corinth unto
Christ, a most rich and a most corrupt City, in which hystory the power of the
spirit of Christ, and the efficacy of the gospel, so brightly and
woonderfullye shyned, that Paul called the Church of Corinth the seal of his
Apostleship. 1. Cor. 9.
For as Corinth as well by reason of hi^ situation between two seas, was very
rich and famous, What manner of City Corinth was.
as also for merchandyzes and traffike there used, so the baytes, entycementes,
and number of merchauntes, resorting thither from all parts and coasts,
infected the same with most corrupt manners, insomuch that the ryotousnesse
thereof was now noted in publyke Proverbs. Corinthiari vt graecari. etc.
For when men would speak of persons given to great ryote and sensuality,
they would say they played the Corinthians. And this was a common saying in
all peoples mouths. Every man may not come unto Corinth. Among other vices,
there whoredom chiefly reigned, whereunto they were so given, that in Venus
Temple they had about a thousand Damsels and Nuns for that purpose: and
afterward even among them that had professed Christ, there was one which
unlawfully kept company with his stepmother, until by Paul's censure and
appointment he was excommunicated. Into this City comes Paul when he went
from Athens, and that not without the ordinance of God, as the end and
success declared. For the Lord which did vouchsafe to save his elect out of
the pumpe of sinnefulnesse, by the preaching of the gospel, had there a great
many of people. Moreover, this City gives us an ensample both of the
goodness of God toward sinners, and also of the virtue or power of the
Gospel. For if a man would compare the abject and base estate of Paul, being
but a stranger and unknown with the indurate custom of sin, with the
glorious show of riches, with the abundaunce of delyghtes, with the
entycements of pleasures on every side, and with the pomp and pride of
Merchauntes, his attempt shall then seem altogether ridiculous, which would
go about to reform both their life and religion at once. But the thing that
seemed ridiculous in the judgment of the flesh, wanted not a most prosperous
success given by the Lord. For within an year and a half, by the preaching
of the Gospel, the spirit of Christ therewith working, Paul set a new face
upon this City, and universally reformed it: a thing which no lawmaker, of
how great authority so ever he had been, could have been able to have
persuaded them, so that it is not without a cause that Paul reioyseth so much
for the converting of this City, considering he no where found a more
effectual working of the Gospel, than there. Which also seems to me, to be
the cause that Luke is so diligent in describing this history, insomuch that
he prosecuteth at large the least circumstances thereof. Which thing in other
places, either he utterly lets pass, or else only touches them lightly,
as it were by the way. This thing ought to stir up also our diligent
attention, to consider the same.

First and foremost he makes mention of the place where Paul hosted, in the
fynding out whereof, Aquilas is Paul's host.
I suppose, Paul used some great circumspection, because Christ gave the
Apostles a peculiar commandment, touching the providing them of commodious
and fytte hosts. Paul therefore found an host, called Aquilas, which was a
Jew, borne in Pontus, who not long before, by reason of Claudius the Emperors
proclamation, with his wife Priscilla, was feign to depart from Rome, and to
come unto Corinth. For at that time the state of the Jews was very miserable,
because the vengeance of God followed them, being embrued with the blood of
the son of god in all places. It came to pass further also, that they which
denied Christ to be their savior, were feign every day to seek them new
saviors, and to make new stirs and vprores, so that all men worthily
hated them. Aquilas therefore being violently carried with the common calamity
of the whole Nation, is also banished, yet not without the providence of GOD,
which prepared Paul a lodging with him among the Corinthians, and used his
help in laying the foundation of a most famous Church. Thus comes it
oftentimes to pass, that the thing which at the first seemed to us very
grievous and intolerable, is yet at length the cause of great commodity and
profit. Therefore Paul for diverse occasions takes up his lodging with this
man. For besides that he was well instructed in the faith, his fortune was to
be banished with others, made him ye more gentle unto strangers, whom they
that dwell and live all their life at home, for the most part contemn.
Furthermore, being of the same occupation that Paul was, that is to say, a
sower or maker of tents, which in those days were made of hydes and skynnes,
it was very commodious for the Apostle to dwell with him, because he might by
the same trade help to get his living. It shall be good to consider yet
diligently both Aquilas and Paul's person. Aquilas gives us a notable example
both of faith and charity. For being a man of handycraft, and banished,
Aquilas is an ensample of faith and charity.
he receives the Minister of Christ to harbor in a strange City, by his
example reproouing the richer sort of dishonestie and shame, which made so
little account of strangers in their own dwellings, yea, it appears by other
places, that his hospitality was so great, 1. Cor. 16. Romans 16.
that he had a Church or Congregation in his house. Let them therefore be
ashamed of their inhumanitie and filthy niggardenesse, which abounding in
riches and peace, have no compassion on the banished for Christ's sake. These
shall one day learn to their great grief, what the sorrows of banishment
are, and what an heap of cares persecution brings with it. But they which
being enflamed with the love of Christ, make much of his servants, and take
them in, shall find the Lord a most thankful recompencer, who promyseth him
a worthy reward, Math. 10.
that gives but a cup of cold water to any one of his Disciples. He shall
at the last day take whatsoever is done for any of his members as done unto
himself. Likewise in Paul are notable and singular virtues to be seen. For
this is an argument of constant faith, that he is not so offended at his course
lodging, that he would therefore forsake Corinth. For he knew that God used
to choose the despised things of this world, with the which to set forth his
kingdom to the confusion of them, which seem in their own conceyte,
excellent and singular. Again, he exercises love and equity, Paul gets
his living with the labor of his hands.
in that he sits not idle in Aquilas house, but lays his hands to work,
and gets his living honestly. Which example, as it is worthy of singular
commendation, so do they naughtily apply it, which by the same exact of all
Ministers, to labor with their hands, as though it were not meet for them,
to live of the ministry of the word. For Paul labored not, because he
thought it unlawful for any to live of the stipend of the Church, but for that
there was yet no church at Corinth gathered, of whose stypende he was able to
live. In the mean season, he thought he would not burden those first fruits
of a Church, gathered in Aquilas house, whose substance and goods were no^
very great. Afterward, when the congregation was grown to a full Church, he
would not use his right and liberty, by reason of the slanderous reports of
certain false teachers, which said that he and such as he was, lay in wait
to enrich themselves by other men's goods, and therefore they taught for
naught. For this cause would Paul in no case be inferior to these fellows,
thinking it better for a season to want his duty, than by to hasty calling
therefore to bring the Gospel in suspicion. Yet he says he robbed other
Congregations, to preach unto the Corinthians freelye. 2. Cor. 11. Philip. 4.
And he confesses that the Philippians relieved him with money which they sent
him. By this example of Paul our masking Bishops are reproved, who living
in riot like Persians upon the goods of the Church, do no service to the
Church at all. And not these only, but certain belly Gods also that glory in
the name of the Gospel, and yet are given altogether unto covetousness,
shamefully forsaking the Churches, where they might by their service do much
good, for a little lucre and advantage sake of some greater stypende and
wages. Both these sorts shall one day feel the judgment of God, which will
not suffer his Church to be so slenderly regarded, for naught.

Paul preaches at Corinth.
But because Paul came not to Corinth to the end to sow Tents, but to set out
the kingdom of Christ, it is also declared, which way he did the same. After
his accustomed manner, he frequented the Church on the sabbath days. And first
he prudentlye moderated his doctrine, handling it according to the capacity of
his hearers, as he otherwheres confesses, saying, 1. Cor. 3.
he fed them with milk, because as yet they could not away with stronger
meat. This order Luke expresses, by this word persuading, to declare that he
did creep, as it were within his hearers, for fear of of^ending them at the
beginning. And verily it is to be thought that he proceeded in that order, that
he used at other times. He knew the Jews were led with a preposterous zeal
of their law, and that they sought salvation and iustifycation in the works
thereof. He taught therefore, that all men were sinners, and that they were not
able of themselves to satisfy the law. Thereby it was easily to be gathered,
that an other must be sought for, by whose merit men might be saved. Which was
a most commodious way, to come unto the mysteries of Christ. Let all Ministers
of the word of God, and his Church imitate this example of Paul, least while
they have no consideration of their hearers, speaking all things in a confused
order, they drive them from the kingdom of Christ, whom they might win,
using the matter modestly and prudently. Surely he requires such a Minister of
the word, 2. Tim. 2.
as can break or deuyde the word of truth, in due order and rightly. And
Christ requires of him not only trustiness, but also prudencie. But least
any man might think, that Paul fed them still with milk, Luke writes that
at length, upon occasion offered, he more earnestly handeled Christ's cause.
For when Silas and Timotheus were come out of Macedonia, he began to pull all
his wits together, either for that he heard the Gospel had good success
among the Macedonians, or else for that he was troubled in his mind with the
miserable case and blindness of so famous a City. For whose heart would not
be moved, to see so notable a City running headlong into her own mischief
and destruction, and to see the ignorance of such a sort of men so miserably
deceyuing themselves? Surely what ever that constraint of Paul was, it is
certain, that he began more earnestly to be incensed by the holy ghost, and
to preach and testifye to the Jews more openly, that Jesus the son of
Marie, was the Messiah and Christ, that is, the savior of the world, that was
promised, by whose only merit, we are delivered from the curse of the law,
from sin, and from death. Thus let Ministers prepare them away prudently,
that at length they may wax fervent in setting forth Christ and maintayning
his doctrine, that they cloak not their fearfulness with the pretense of
modesty. Christ is the chief point of the Apostles doctrine
Again, it appears that Christ is the chief mark and Butte of the Apostles
doctrine, whose witnesses they were chosen to be. Peter in the Sermons that are
before gone has taught us, that in him only is all our salvation contained.
Paul afterward writing to the Corinthians, confesses that he knows nothing
but Jesus Christ, and him crucified. John says that whatsoever is written by
the Euaungelistes, serves to this end, that we should believe that Jesus is
Christ, and by belief, attain to life everlasting, we must therefore be
contented with the same. For it is not lawful for any man, to challenge to
himself any more knowledge of salvation, then the Apostles did, which had
Christ to their schoolemaister, and his most faithful spirit for their
counselor. Wherefore let us all know Christ only, which is our king and only
priest, who dying for our sins, and rising again for our iustifycation, has
redeemed us, and made us kings and priests to his father. To him be praise,
honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.Cxxj. Homely.
AND when they said contrary and blasphemed, he shook his raiment and said
unto them: your blood be upon your own heads: from henceforth will I go
blameless unto the Gentyles. And he departed thence, and entered into the house
of a certain man called Iustus, a worshipper of God, whose house joined hard
to the Synagoge. Howbeit, one Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagoge,
believed on the Lord, with all his household, and many of the Corinthians,
when they gave audience, believed and were baptized. Then spoke the Lord to
Paul in the night by a vision, be not afraid, but speak: for I am with thee,
and no man shall invade thee, that shall hurt thee, for I have much people in
this City. And he continued there a year, and six Months, and taught them
the word of God.
OUr Savior Jesus Christ many times testified, that the chief cause why he
came into the world was to save sinners. The Apostles being mindful hereof,
used to preach the doctrine of salvation unto notable sinners, and to bring
them into the felloship of Christ and his Church. So behooued it to be in the
beginning, because none should think Christ's merit could be overcome by
any heynousnesse of our sins, or should begin to despair of their
salvation in him. This same may notably be seen in the conversion of Corinthe.
For we heard erewhyle, that it was a most naughty and corrupt City. Yet is
Paul sent thither, to deliver them by the preaching of the Gospel, from the
brynke of destruction. And first according to his usual manner, he offers
salvation unto the Jews, who yet of all others had deserved that God should
not regard them. Who therefore will despair of Gods mercy, who so earnestly
sought the salvation of so hateful a people? Let us here mark how the
incurable impiety of this people wrastled here also against the long suffering
of God, Christ our Savior ouercomming and triumphing in the myddle of this
stir and business.

For it is written that the Jews gaynesayde Paul, The Jews withstand Paul
bearing witness unto Christ.
plainly bearing witness unto Christ, and at length rayled at him and
blasphemed his doctrine. That this was their common usage, we have now learned
by many examples. This wickedness of theirs is horrible, if we consider either
what they were in times passed, or expende the rage of evil speaking, that
they use against Christ yet to this day. For who would not fear the horror
of Gods justice, seeing he perceyueth no Nation these many hundredth years,
such miserable vessels of his wrath, as they which sometime were called the
first begotten of God, the chosen stock, and Priestly kingdom of God? It is
very worthy to be noted, that they now at length, contrary and gaynesaye
Paul, when he most plainly begins to bear witness unto Christ, where as
before this, they had heard him entreat of the law, and certain other
points certain sabbath days together, very willingly. For this that was done
at Corinth, we see comes to pass now a days euerywhere. They are after a
sort borne withal, that can nicke manifest abuses and errors a far of, as
many used to do in the time of Papistry. But as soon as Christ is urged, and
his glory plainly and manifestly defended, then become they stark mad, which
before seemed very modest. The cause of this evil is, for that without the
preaching of Christ all other reprehensions are but cold, and are of no more
weight than the taulkes of Philosophers, who we may read disputed with great
show of learning, touching the studies of virtue, and the miserable condition
of vices. But Christ entering into the hearts of men, cutteth away even to the
quick, all corruption as well of religion, as of manners and living, and
therefore the consequences that necessarily follow of this doctrine, seem to
the world intolerable. For of this doctrine follows utterly the fall of
buying and selling of holiness. Hereby is the brightness of man's
righteousness clean put out, and all affiance in our own merits quyte
overthrown. The same reprooueth our corrupt manners, and exacteth of us no
counterfeyte or pagiantlyke repentance, but a sincere and perfyte, such as
neither the corruption of our flesh, can abide, nor man's power perform. It
seems tolerable enough unto the world, to reprove an adulterer, a
soldier, an usurer, a drunkerde, and to let him alone in the Church, if he be
purged with a frivolous satisfaction, although he follow still the same trade
of life. But if a man thunder out the sentence of damnation against him, by the
voice of the Gospel, and exclude him out of the kingdom of God, because he
will not repent, this they think to be a thing intolerable. This is an
evident proof of our corruption, and that they are in deed the enemies of
God, that purposely run on in sin, and will not be corrected by the word
of God. For who will not think him to be the enimye of God, who despyseth the
son of God in comparison of his abominable sinfulness? Again, let us
observe the manner of speech, that Luke uses: They spoke against him (says he)
and blasphemed. The first degree of ungodliness, is to speak against the
word of God. Degrees of ungodliness.
This because many do of ignorance, their error at the first may be winked
at. But he that is so led with naughtye and evil affection, to speak against
the truth revealed, being not contented with this first degree or step, they
commonly turn them unto railing. What these raylings and slanders were, that
the Jews used against Paul, we may gather of those things which we heard
before in the vj.xvj. and.xvij. Chapters. By example of these things, we learn
that we must resist things at the beginning, least being led at the first with
naughtye desires, we fear not to speak against the word of God, and so at
length through contention fall to blaspheme it. And so little by little
entangle our selves in that horrible sin against the holy ghost, and at the
last driven and carried with gyantlyke audacitie, fight against God, the end
whereof shall be none other, but the miserable and everlasting destruction of
the soul. We have euerywhere examples hereof.

But what does Paul now? Goes he from Corinth, Paul shakes of the dust
against the Jews.
because of these obstinate Jews, so that the wickedness of a few persons is
the hinderance of all? No. But rather bidding these froward and wicked persons
adewe, he turns him to the Gentyles. And least he might seem to do any
thing of heat, or passion of mind, he diligently observes the trade
prescribed of Christ. First he shakes his garments, as we declared he did at
Antioch, in the.xiij. Chap. where may be seen what is to be learned what this
ceremony or doing means. Next, he threateneth them with punishment,
declaring that they perished through their own default, saying: your blood be
upon your own head: from hence I will go blameless unto the Gentyles. He
alludeth unto the words of God written in Ezechiel, cap. 3. and.33. after this
sort: Thou son of man, I have made thee a watchman over the house of Israel,
that whereas thou hear any thing out of my mouth, thou may est warn them on
my behalf: If I say unto the wicked, thou wicked, thou shall surely dye, and
thou give him not warning that he may beware of his ungodly way, then shall
the wicked dye in his own sin, but his blood will I require of thy hand.
Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his way, to turn from it, whereas
he yet will not be turned from it, then shall he dye, because of his sin,
but thou have delivered thy soul. Unto these words I say, Paul alluded,
saying: I have done my duty, and set before you Jesus Christ the only
author of salvation: but because you reject him, you are culpable of your own
perdition, and I being in no fault thereof, will get me to the Gentyles. Thus
he threateneth them the same that Christ does, where he says unto the Scribes:
Math. 21.
The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation that shall
bring forth the fruits thereof. And this that is said unto the Jews, let all
contemners of the Gospel think said unto them. For where through the Gospel
God offers us a remedy against destruction, they must needs perish through
the just judgment of God, which wickedly despise the same. In the mean
season, Paul's doing teaches us, that Ministers of the word are then
blameless, when they have faithfully fulfilled their duty toward sinners, by
teaching, rebuking, and exhorting them? But if they be dumb dogs, such as
Esaias describes. cap. 56. then shall the blood of those that perish be
required of them, that is to say, God shall make them guilty of all that blood
that is shed through their negligence. But the Scripture euerywhere sets
out the horrible guiltynesse of blood. See Genes. 9. Numer. 35. Psalm. 51. etc.
We see therefore it is not without a cause that the Prophets and Apostles use
such vehemency of zeal in their teaching. Paul having a regard hereunto
said: Woe unto me if I preach not. And Amos says in the third Chapter: When
a Lion roareth, who will not be afraid? Seeing then that the Lord God
himself speaks, who will not prophecy? Finally, Paul goes into one Iustus
house, not for that he hated Aquilas, but for the more credit of his
protestation. For it seems that this Iustus was a Gentyle, except we shall
think Paul was fantastical, which would forsake a believing Jews house, to
go into an other Jews house. Yea, his words signify as much, from henceforth I
will go unto the Gentyles. Yet there appears in Paul a fervent good will
toward his own Nation. For although he chose him a Gentyle to be his host,
yet his desire is, to dwell nigh unto the Synagoge, because he would want no
occasion to win the Jews. Let all Ministers follow this example. For where
they are called Pastors and fathers, it becomes them to bear such affection
toward those that perish, as shepeheardes do toward their straye sheep,
and as fathers do toward their untoward children. Such affection declares
Christ, when he wept looking on Jerusalem, and bewailed the destruction that
should come upon her by the just judgment of God. Luc. 19.


But Paul's industry and travail was not in vain. For of the Jews, Crispus
the President of the Synagoge, The conversion of Crispus and the Corinthians
was won to the belief in Christ, whom Paul writes that he baptized in
the first Epistle to the Corinthians, the first Chapter. Also many of the
Corinthians believed, who not long before, seemed to be drowned in sin and
perdition. And it may be thought by their baptism, that they did not feign a
faith, but that they openly and plainly protested the same. Therefore they want
not the blessing of God that labor faithfullye in their vocation, neither can
the unbelief and frowardness of others frustrate the promise of God, as Paul
in other places teaches. Romans 2. As many as find they have grievous and
incurable enimyes, may here fetch comfort. Moreover, a notable place follows,
which teaches us that Paul in this business was comforted by God: where
first Paul's person is to be considered, then God who strengthened him with
consolation.

Paul is tempted with fear.
It appears by this consolation that God gave Paul, that as a man, he was
afraid. And he saw every day before his face, many things to cause him to
fear. For he well knew the incurable rage of the Jews against Christ's
doctrine. The remembrance of the dangers he had been in by their means was
fresh in his memory. And such corruption of the city as was daily noted in
common Proverbs, gave him small hope of doing any good there. Besides, the
crafts of false brethren and teachers, of whom he oftentimes complayneth in
his Epistles. Yea, he plainly confesses that he was at Corinth in much fear
and trembling. 1. Cor. 2.
And as far as we can gather by the word of God, Paul was minded to leave
the City, seeing he had so little hope to do any good there. We learn by
this example, that even the servants of God also are subject unto affections,
and that otherwhiles they are so afraid, that they forgette their duty. For
this that Paul suffered at Corinth, diverse other found true to their greater
ruin. Abraham the father of the believing, after he had forsaken his native
Country, and showed a notable proof of his faith, being overcome with fear,
stained his good name with a foul lie, and brought his wife into great peril
and danger. Jacob having so oftentimes found God his ayder and helper, is
afraid to go meet his brother Esau. Moses fearing the tyranny of Pharao,
flies into Madian. and scarce would return again into Egypt at Gods
calling. Iosue a valiant warrier, discomfyted with one overthrow of his
people, declares the fear he had conceived in his mind, by unmanly weeping
and mourning. We read how David which being but a stripling, overcame
Goliath, after he was a man grown, and had gotten many victories, feared
oftentimes the threats and attemptes of Saul. Helias whom neither the sight
and tyranny of Achab, nor fury of the people, could withholde from killing
the Priests of Baal, being afraid at the threats of one syllye woman, which
was Iesabel, took him to his heels, and desired god he might die. What shall
I speak of Peter, who being not afraid of a company of harnessed men, was
quite dismayde at the word of one simple wench, and denied Christ? Many like
examples might be rehearsed, which we repeat not, to the end to detect the
infyrmities and falls of holy men, but because the consyderation of them
serves not a little for our instruction. For both we know our own infyrmitie
thereby, the knowledge whereof makes us not to trust to much in our self, and
we are admonished of charity, that we rashly condemn not men, which otherwise
have deserved well, if they seem to do otherwise than becomes them. For God
will have the tokens of common imperfection, appear even in them also, that we
be not to much addicted unto them, and so forgette the grace of God, which by
them had wrought singular works. In the mean season we must help them with
our prayers, that either they may beware they fall not, or else that they may
by Gods grace speedily rise again. For this deutie did Christ use toward his
Disciples, as the Gospel declares. Luc. 22. John. 17.

But let us consider Gods person, which by and by comfort him being in this
fear, The diligence of God in comforting those that be his.
although there is no mention made that he did call upon God therefore. For
God does not only hear them, which open their desire of mind by crying, but
he sees the secret sobbes and gronings of the heart, and helps and
comfort them. And so is it very needful he should, because often times it
comes to pass, that we are so compassed on every side with adversity, that
we are not able in words to declare the desire of our hearts. Then is fulfilled
that that God promises by his Prophet Esaias. cap 65. It shall come to pass,
that or ever they call, I shall answer them, while they are yet but thinking
how to speak, I shall hear them. So the Lord speaks to Moses standing by
the red sea: why cryest thou? Yet we read of no word he spoke. This is a
great argument of the goodness of God. For as God knows whereof we have
need, so he uses to help us in season and time, and although he sends us
temptations, to teach us our infyrmitie, and to inflame us the more unto
godliness, yet he tempereth the same with comfort, that we be not utterly
swallowed up of sorrow. Let no man therefore despair to soon, seeing God has
infynite means, whereby to comfort and help us. And here in this place he
thought good to use both vision and Oracle, both which were very needful,
because Paul had no man to comfort him, and saw many causes which might make
him think that so corrupt a City had no regard of God. The words that God
here spoke, conteyne in them three points, of every whereof, we will entreat
orderlye.

First, he takes away the cause of all this evil, where he bids him, Fear
is forbidden.
not to fear. This kind of precept is often times mentioned in the scripture.
For so says god unto Moses, Deuteronomy. 3.
being dismayed at the meeting of the king of Basan. To Iosue also being ready
to join battle with ye five kings, it was said: Be not afraid of them.
Iosue. 10.
And the Lord says unto Jeremy when he called him to the office of a
Preacher, Be not afraid of their faces. etc. Christ also bids the Apostles,
that they should not fear those which killed the body, but could not hurt
the soul. I omit diverse places of this sort. Math. 10.
The cause why God so oftentimes forbids his servants to fear, is for
that there is nothing of more efficacy to pull men from doing their duty
than fear. For as soon as fear is once conceived in the heart, the light of
reason is so blemished, that it cannot see what is needful to be done, and no
devises or counsels are more uncertain, than such, as persons in fear and
perplexity take in hand. And if they stand thoroughly in fear, then makes
it men shameless also, so that for fear of loss of life or goods, they
commit most mischievous acts, and many times they incur a greater
danger, for the avoiding of a peril present. Because this thing falls upon
private men, how much more necessary is it that men in public office should
be bold and void of fear? For if these men offend, it is not against them
self only, but against other also, whom God has committed unto their
charge. Exodus 18.
Which was the cause that the wise man Iethro required boldness of mind in
Judges. Therefore God did very aptly make his beginning of comfort in this
place.

Ministers must speak, and not hold their peace.
In the second part he commands him what to do. Speak (says he) and hold
not thy peace. Here no man must think that God used any superfluity of
words. He joins these two together, because many times diverse speak, and
yet hold their peace, whiles they speak such things as they think no man
will be offended with, and in the mean while keep silence of such things
which they ought by Gods commandment to speak. The meaning therefore of the
commandment is, that he should preach the gospel plainly, and dissemble or
keep close none of the things contained in the same, although he wist many
would be displeased therewith. By this let all Ministers learn, that they have
not done their duty, if they preach the word of God, except they preach it
all, and that plainly, and so apply it unto every man, that he may think it
spoken unto him. For as he is an untrusty ambassador, which speaks nothing
but that he is commanded, and yet utters not every thing, but for favor of
some persons, omitteth many things: so can he not be judged to be a faithful
Minister of Christ, that leaves out never so small a portion of the Gospel,
to please men with. See what is said hereof. Iere. 1. Ezech. 3. and.33. Math.
28.

Reasons and arguments of consolation
In the third part he shows very grave and effectual reasons, whereof this is
the first: for I am with thee. This one reason ought to be sufficient against
all dangers. For whereas God is almighty, they can want nothing David
gathers very probably thus, The Lord is my helper, I will not fear what man
can do unto me. Psalm. 118.
And because this promise is general, and appertains to all them that walk
in the vocation of God, all men ought to apply it unto themselves, and in
affiaunce hereof to bear out all the assaults No man shall invade thee that
shall hurt thee. He says his enemies enterprises shall be in vain. This is a
special promise which always takes not place. For many times it comes to
pass, that the godly are entangled in many troubles and grievous dangers, and
we read that Paul was laid hands on many times, yea, after this he was
taken, and brought to Rome by sea and land, where he ended his life by the
sword. And notwithstanding these things came so to pass, yet abides the
truth of Gods first promise sure and fast, and god saves those that be his
from death, and never fails them. Wherefore we must walk and hold on in the
vocation of god by fire and sword. The third reason is, that he says he has
much people in Corinth^ Math. 22.
Which is the cause that Publicanes and harlots are preferred before Phariseyes
in the kingdom of god. And Christ appointed the doctrine of salvation to
begin with the reprehension of sinners, that laying aside the pride of our
own righteousness, we might learn to fly unto the grace of god. In the
mean season it ought much to comfort us, that the Lord has many heirs of
eternal salvation in so untoward a Nation. For hereby it appears that God
is never without his seven thousand, although all men seem wicked and
naught. 1. Reg. 19. For such is the certainetie of Gods Election and
Predestination, The certainty of election and predestination.
that they are counted for Gods elect, which are from everlasting written in
the book of life, although they yet lie drowned in sin. Even so Christ
calls them his sheep, which yet he had not called by outward preaching, nor
drawn by inward operation of his spirit, but yet knew, they were given him
by his father, before the foundations of the world were laid. John. 10. Ephe.
1.
And this is a consolation of all other most effectual, that our sins cannot
hinder Gods election. For whom he has predestinate, those in time he calls
and draws, and makes like unto the image of his son, Romans 8.
and suffers them not for any thing to be separated from his love.

Moreover, how great the force of Gods comfort is, Paul taryeth at Corinthe.
appears by Paul, which abode a whole year and six Months at Corinthe,
and there preached the word of God. Here the patience of Paul and the truth
and power of God which preserved his servant so long, in so wicked a City, is
diligently to be considered. He aboade so long among these proud and
unthankful men, as till he had brought those unto God, which he heard were
his elected. What fyercenesse and discourtesie they used in the mean season
against Paul, may easily appear by his Epistles. This example of Paul
reprooueth them, that rashely leave their Churches, as soon as they see all
things succeed not according to their desire, we are taught moreover what a
painful thing it is to edifye and build the Church, seeing we hear that
Paul labored so long at Corinthe, 1. Cor. 3.
where he confesses that he did but plant only. Yea, his Epistles declare
that there was need afterward of contynuall traueyle and care. Therefore the
sloth of some Ministers is very detestable, which suppose vehemency of zeal
in edyfying of the Church is but superfluous. Let them all follow Paul's
industry, that by daily exercise of faith, we may make sure our election and
vocation, and come to the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven, with Jesus
Christ our Lord: to whom be praise honor power and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.Cxxij. Homely.
WHEN Gallio was Ruler of the Country of Achaia, the Jews made insurrection
with one accord against Paul, and brought him to the judgment seat saying:
This fellow counsels men to worship God contrary to the law: And when
Paul was about now to open his mouth, Gallio said to the Jews: If it were a
matter of wrong, or an evil deed, (o ye Jews) reason would that I should
hear you. But if it be a question of words, or of names, or of your law,
look ye to it your selves, for I will be no judge of such matters, and he
drove them from the seat. Then all the Greeks took Sosthenes the chief
Ruler of the Synagoge, and smote him before the Judges seat. And Gallio cared
for none of these things.
ALthough God sends out the Ministers of his word, as sheep among Wolves,
yet he defends them with his favor and protection, so that the wicked
enimyes of truth can not do what they please against them. This Paul found
true both at Corinth specially, and at many other places besides. For being in
fear and trembling in the midst of many dangers, and almost swallowed up of
fear, God preuenteth him with his comfort, and promyseth him not only
safety, but also great success and fruit of his labor and traueyle. And
that he promised him, he perfourmeth to the uttermost, as this present place
declares. For in a tumulte and uproar, where the Jews raued like mad men,
when all hope of man's help was past, God by his secret power wonderfully
saves and delyuereth him, so that he takes no harm. And because this is a
peculiar and very notable example of Gods aid and assistaunce, it shall not be
unprofitable, to discuss every circumstaunce of this history.

The Jews are the beginners of a tumult against Paul.
And first, the begynners of this trouble are here noted which are the Jews, of
whom seeing we have often times entreated, it needs not that we say any more.
These men having hitherto been quiet, being kept under, and repressed by the
power of God, while Gallio a new President of Achaia lies at Corinthe, with
one consent set upon Paul, take him and bring him into the market before the
judgment seat of the Liefetenaunt. By which example we are taught, that the
promises of God are not so to be understood as though God had ordained us to
be out of all manner danger and hazard. But rather he will have us to be
invred with troubles, because it is so requisite for our flesh, and for the
order of our salvation, which is the cause that as David says: Many are the
tribulations of the just, but the Lord delyuereth them from them all. Psalm. 34.
Hereunto are the examples of all those to be referred, which after most large
and ample promyses of God, have been tempted with most grievous dangers, God
says unto Abraham, I will bless thee and magnify thy name: Gene. 12.
I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee. Yet
after this by reason of his wife Sara, he was in danger, he was troubled with
wars, and suffered the great distress of banishment. And yet for all this
God is no liar, but his troth is so much the more manifest, because he
delyuereth him out of so many and such perilles. The same we might affirm of
Moses, David, Jeremy, and all the Apostles, but that we study to be brief.
Therefore they are greatly deceived, which so expound the promises of the
gospel, that they by and by reprove the Ministers of lying, so soon as any
cross or trouble aryseth. Let us remember that Christ promises us a
retribution of those things which we lose in persecution for his names sake,
Math. 10. Luke. 9.
and that all they which will follow him, must bear the cross, after his
example.

Furthermore, The properties and studies of the enemies of truth.
let us in this place observe the manners and conueyances of the enemies of the
truth, that we may the easilyer beware of them. First we see the Jews seek
occasion craftily to do harm, where until this time, they might seem hushte
and quiet. For in a whole year and a half almost they sturred not against
Paul. But as soon as they had a new Lieftenaunt, then they begin either for
that they hoped that he was a man void of religion and justice, and therefore
the fytter for their turn: or else for that they thought they might safely
make a stir, under a new officer, who was not as yet acquainted with the
state and affairs of Corinth. Therefore that wisdom appears in them, wherein
Christ says they pass the children of light. Luke. 6.
This teaches us, that we must not snorte in security, when the enemies of
the truth, and those that sometime were our enymies for the truth sake seem to
lie still. But rather we must use the wit of Serpents against their crafts
and enterprises, which as soon as opportunity serves them will burst forth.
Wherefore that saying of Ecclesiasticus serves well to this purpose. Believe
not thine enemy. etc. Next this, the Jews with one accord make an
insurrection against Paul, which is one other property of the wicked. For
where through diversity of affections, they are always at jar and hurre yet
to set on Christ and his word, they cleave together like burres, because they
all hate the same alyke. Thus the Phariseyes could agree together well enough
with the Sadduceyes and Herodians, when they went about to apprehende Christ.
And we know how Pylate was reconcyled unto Herod, after he had sent Christ
unto him to be mocked. Let no man therefore trust the discordes of the wicked,
but let him put all his trust in Christ, the author of true unity and consent.

But let us consider the chief point of the accusation that the Jews laid
unto Paul's charge. The chief matter of their accusation.
This fellow (say they) counsels men to worship God, contrary to the law.
Their meaning is, that he brings in new manner of worshippings, contrary to
the laws of God. Now all alteration of religion was an hateful thing unto
the Romans. And without doubt they amplifyed that fault marvelously, and
brought forth the Roman laws, as we heard before was done at Philippi, and
Thessalonica. But that this was a false accusation, may be gathered by this
one argument, for that Paul preached Christ, which was the end of the law,
and in whom were fulfilled whatsoever things were contained in the books of
Moses and the Prophets. Yet we see always the true worshippers of God are
accused for prophaners of religion, and yet are there none more earnest
defenders and reuengers of the same then they. And here they that are farthest
of from all religion, brag most how they are the maynteyners of religion, as
the Jews pretend the keeping of the law, where they had long agone
overthrown the same with man's traditions. So the profane enimyes of the
truth now a days have the saints and images of saints in their mouths
against us, where as notwithstanding it is evident they little set by either
saints or their images. For if they will defend the honor of the saints, why
do they not imitate their faith? Why persecute they their doctrine and
wrytings with fire and sword? Why call they them heretics that desire to
follow their steps? If they count images so godly a thing, why neglect they the
lively images of God? why rob they the poor to clothe stocks and stones?
why burn they christian men to whom Christ has restored the image of God by
the price of his blood? What else therefore do these men, but as the Jews
did, which under a fair pretense of religion, wyshed all religion and truth
extinguished?

Gallio refuses to hear Paul's cause, as a matter not belonging to him.
But what does Gallio in this uproar? Commands he Paul to plead his cause,
or gives he him the hearing? No. But being about to speak, he interrupteth
him, which yet might seem tolerable, because he pronounced no sentence
against him, the matter being vndeclared. But he clearly puts of the matter
from his hearing, saying, it appertains not to his determination, speaking
most contemptuously of the Jews religion, as though it had been a thing
consisting only in bare and uncertain words, or names. The cause of his thus
speaking, he seemed to take of the Jews own words, which by their foolish
genealogies and brawles about words, caused the gentiles to laugh and scorn
at all their religion. The like thing we see now a days in papistrie, whose
iuglings and frivolous opinions causes the Jews and Turks to laugh at our
christian religion. And would God there were not among the professors of the
gospel, which by their strange and queynt questions caused not the ungodly
to scorn the christian faith. But as touching Gallio, he commands the busy
Jews to leave of, and puts them from the bar. Wherein some things are to
be allowed, and other some to be reproved. It is to be commended that he
rashely condemns not that religion that he knew not. For in so doing, he is
of more equity and modesty, then many magistrates in our days, who being
ignorant in all kind of religion, do yet take upon them only to have skill
in the same. Which is one of the greatest causes of the calamity, that
troubles the whole world in these days. But by no means is it commendable,
that Gallio altogether neglects religion, and thinks the hearing thereof
appertains not unto him. For God will have the king still to be reading of
the law, and has appointed magistrates to be severe and diligent reuengers of
true religion. See Deuteronomy. 17 and 13. And we have examples of most godly kings,
which in the scripture are for this cause chiefly commended, that they
banished superstition and restored true religion. Therefore intolerable is the
error of them now a days which go about to persuade the magistrate, that they
should not meddle with any man's religion, but to let every body serve God, as
seems him good. But in deed, these men have a far other fetch. For they
hope it will come to pass, that Princes shall follow the example of Gallio,
and shall give them leave to plant what religion they please in the Church. And
as great is the error of some princes and magistrates, who being desirous to
be counted and called christians, yet affirm that religion pertayneth not to
their jurisdiction, but commit the same unto covetous Monks, and to unlearned
and proud Prelates, leaving Christ's sheep to the ordering and pleasure of
most foolish men, yea unto Woolues to be devoured. And thus princes think
they are well excused, which hope of theirs shall greatly deceive them: for God
shall one day require his people which he committed to their charge at their
hands, and by this argument, they shall be proved to be untrusty servants,
because they said religion appertayned not to their charge, which of all other
things was chiefly commended unto them.

Now let us see the end of this Tragedy, where the verity of Gods promise,
most manifestly appears. The end of this Tragedye is prosperous.
For after the Greeks perceived that Gallio did not much regard the matter,
they take Sosthenes the Ruler of the Synagoge, and shamefully beat him. This
it was like they did, by the setting on of the Jews. For Sosthenes was a
faithful companyon of Paul, whose help in setting forth the gospel, it
manifestlye appears Paul used, by ye superscription of his first Epistle to
the Corinthians. But this seems a wonderful thing, that when the matter
came to hand strypes, Paul against whom all the Jews made this insurrection
goes away unhurt and untouched, yea is not compelled to depart the City. For
we shall hear how he tarried there a good space after. But shall we say the
cause was that they spared Paul? were they persuaded by his eloquence and
defense, to keep their hands from him. The Liefetenaunt would not vouchsafe
to hear him, was it the authority of the Liefetenaunt that defended him? why
he being a Gentyle, and a manifest ungodly person, had no regard unto the
Jews matters. Had he any other advocate or defender? But what other could be
found of such authority, to withstand such furious men? especially the Ruler
being slack in his duty doing, who only had authority in that City to
command. It remains therefore that we confess, how Paul was preserved by
the secret assistance of God alone, that the promise should be fulfilled, that
said no man should be able to do him harm. Thus we read how the Patriarchs
were sometime preserved among the Chanaanites, God thundering in their ears
and hearts. Touch not mine anointed. etc. Psalm. 105.
So Christ with one word delyuereth his Disciples, although Peter had provoked
the raging enemy, with drawn sword, and wounding the Bishops servant. By
these things we may comfort our selves, seeing we see the power of God, to be so
great, in perfourming his promise and defending his people, that even then they
escape safe away, when they seem to be in the myddest of their enymies fury.

But we must return again unto Gallio, Gallio is a president of an ungodly
Officer.
in whom the holy ghost has set us out a president of an ungodly Magistrate
and void of religion. For he not long agone flatlye denied, that religion
belonged to his jurisdiction. He also confessed, that it was his duty to
defend the harmless from injury, and to punish wickedness. But yet he
suffers Sosthenes to be misintreated in his sight, and so perfourmeth not that
which erewhile* he confessed was his duty. Many such there are in these days,
who for modesties sake, leaving of the hearing of matters in religion, do
streyghtway bewray themselves, to be men, farthest of from all religion and
justice, in that they defend not the servants of God from civil injuries, yea,
notorious wrongs done unto them. And there is no cause why we should think
them maintayners of justice, which have cast from them the care of religion.
For how can it be that he can be faithful and trusty to see men have their
right, that is untrusty to Godwarde, and thinks it not his duty to
maintain Gods honor and glory? Therefore we may now a days see many
Galliones, the more is the pity, and there is no greater cause of publyke
injustice, than for that a number of Princes for the most part have no feeling
of religion. But how much more grievously may we say they sin, who
glorying in the name of Christian men, suffer the faithful servants of Christ,
to be misvsed before their face, and whom they ought to defend by their
authority, and with the sword, for men's sakes consent to let their enemies
have them, to condemn at their pleasure: which is a thing in these days so
much used, that it needs no examples to declare it.

What manner of state those people are in that lived sometime in freedom, but
now in bondage.
Last of all is to be considered, what a miserable state they are in, which have
lost their liberty, and are enforced to serve strangers. For such were the
Jews, who from Pompeius Magnus time, as we know were in subjection to the
Romans, and scattered abroad over all their jurisdiction. Such also were the
Corinthians, who as hystories make mention were vanquished and brought under
the Romans obeysaunce by L. Mu^mius their general. And no doubt but both
these Nations were punished by the just judgment of God, for their sins and
offenses. But what misery fell they into, by this one fact of theirs? The Jews
were scattered throughout the world and hated of all men. They hear their
religion most shamefully despised by those, whom they are enforced to take for
their Lords. The Corinthians, although in religion they agreed with the
Romans, yet had they such a President, as regarded not public injuries, but
winked at most heinous wickedness. Let them be mindful hereof, to whom God
has given liberty and freedom. Let them use it to the glory of God, least
they feel the like judgment of God, and become examples for other. Yea, let
them in that liberty of mind and body that God has given them, rather serve
and please him, that they may live with him in heaven through Jesus Christ the
only giver of true liberty: to whom be blessing, honor, power, and glory,
for ever. Amen.

The.Cxxiij. Homely.
PAVLE after this tarried there yet a good while, and then took his leave of
the brethren, and sailed thence into Syria, Priscilla and Aquila accompanying
him. And he shore his head in Cenchreae, for he had a vow. And he came to
Ephesus and left them there: but he himself entered into the Synagoge, and
reasoned with the Jews. When they desired him to tarry a longer time with them,
he consented not, but bade them farewell, saying: I must needs at this feast
that comes, be in Jerusalem, but I will return again unto you, if God
will. And he departed from Ephesus, and when he was come unto Caesarea, and
ascended up and saluted the congregation, he departed unto Antioch, and when he
had tarried there a while, he departed, and went over all the country of
Gallacia and Phrygia by order, strengthening all the disciples.
AS Paul lived no where in greater tear and trembling, than at Corinth: so
found he God no where more ready to aid and assist him than there. For first
he promised him his help and favor by a vision. Next, being apprehended by the
Jews, and brought before the Lieuetenant, he delivered him in wonderful
wise, although the matter came to strokes, and Sosthenes was very evil
entreated. The use of all these things (as we erewhile said) serves for the
comfort of the godly. For God is able to deliver them also in like sort, and we
ought not to doubt of his good will, forasmuch as it is evident, he is true of
his word, therefore he cannot break nor fail of his promise. But because we
have hereof said enough in the last sermon, following the order of the storye,
let us see what was done after the styrres raised against Paul at Corinth.

The first thing here in this place declared, is how Paul tarried at Corinth
many days after these fears of peril and danger. Paul after his dangers
abides at Corinth.
The next, when he had taken his leave of the late erected Church, how he took
his journey with Aquilas and Priscilla into Syria, and unto Jerusalem, yet
having first shaven his head at Cenchreae, by reason of a vow he had made.
Here Paul's constancy and manlynesse is singulerly to be commended, which
boldly overcomes all dread and fear, and remains at Corinth, among his
cruel enemies, having no hope either in Magistrate, or other kind of men,
verilye, for the rude and weak Disciples sake, which he saw had need of
comforting, least their belief being as yet but tender and green, should dye
(as they say) in the blade and first sprooting. Yea, he does the part of a good
shepehearde, which Christ says flies not when he sees the Woolfe coming,
but ventureth his life for the safegarde of his sheep. John. 10.
There may also a general doctrine be taken hereof, how they that have once
assayde the aid and help of God, ought to hold on in their vocation, the
more boldly and constantly, and not (as some preposterous wisemen use) think
they are therefore set at liberty, because they should thenceforth take no
more pains and traueyle, as though they had discharged all their duty. Also
Aquila and Priscilla those godly cowple, are as much to be marked and
considered, who having been once or twice banished before, The trust and
friendship of Aquilas and Priscilla toward Paul.
do yet once again change their dwelling, and accompanye Paul both by sea
and by land. And how ieoperdous a thing this was (to say nothing of their
expenses and traueyle) may be gathered by this one thing, for that the whole
nation of the Jews seemed to have conspyred most obstinately together to
destroy Paul. Uerily Paul for this their company, and for other causes
prayseth them, as those that had hazarded their lives for his sake. In which
doing, as they at that time deserved great thanks of all congregations, so
they gate themselves an immortal glory of name, which remains unto this day,
and shall for ever. See Romans 16. By their examples we ought also to be
provoked, to be bold in Christ's glory, for the Gospel, and the Ministers
thereof, because there are extaunt general promises, which promise them a sure
reward, which give but a cup of cold water to any one for Christ's sake. The
same reason ought to cause us to consider all other needye brethren also, whom
the Lord has so commended unto us, that he will at the day of judgment take
it as done to himself, that has been bestowed on them. And the opinion of
those men that think commonweals are ouercharged with the multitude of
banished persons, is most detestable and ungodly, whereas such commonly
procure the blessing of God unto those places that they be in. Lot only
restored the Sodomites, Gene. 14.
being taken and ouercomme to their liberty again. And if that City had had
but ten inhabitants like unto Lot, they had also been delivered out of that
horrible destruction of fire from heaven, Gene. 18.
for their sakes. I might rehearse diverse other like examples, but that the
time and Text requires us to speak of other things.

Paul's vow.
This is a strange thing, and not heard of in the books of the new
Testament, that Paul for a vows sake that he had made, shaueth his head.
This place can be understood none otherwise than of the vow of the
Nazaraeans, unless we will say Paul was given to man's traditions, who in
other places affirms and stands in it, that the faithful ought not be
burdened with the ceremonies of Gods law. As touching the Nazarites, Moses
writes at large in the book of Numbers, cap. 6. By the which place it easily
appears, that every man was at liberty to use what trade of life he would,
after the time or date of his vow was expyred and run out. For where we read
that Samson and Samuel (which from their mothers womb were put apart for great
and weighty affairs) observed the laws of the Nazarites all their life long,
we must make no general rule or law thereof. They as having inspiration and
feeling of great religion in their minds, bound themselves of their own
accord, to the observation of this vow, to the intent that they would the
more fervently apply Gods calling and service. Wherefore they altogether
abstained from wine, because drunkenness and religion can by no means stand
together. And with wine they avoided also other pleasures, which otherwise were
lawful. Furthermore, they came at no burials, no not of their parents and
kinsefolke, because no affection ought to pull away men truly addicted unto
God, from him, for Christ also says, that the care of the dead pertayneth
rather to them who had rather to dye in the world, Luke. 9.
than with him to aspire to the society of heavenly life. Moreover, the
Nazareans all the time of their vow, let their hear grow, thereby
testifying that they were not at their own appointment, but bound by a
peculiar vow. For Paul himself teaches us, that the covering of the head
was a token of subjection, where he commands men to pray bareheaded, but
women with their heads covered, because the man is free, but the woman under
the man's power, whom she ought to take for her head. 1. Cor. 11.
For the which cause, when the time of the vow was out, the Nazareans were
shaven in solemn wise, to thend they might know they were restored to their
former liberty again. It may seem that Paul took this vow upon him,
because of the Jews, which thought him to be a profane and wicked contemner
of the law, and therefore thought by this mean the sooner to win them to
hearken to the Gospel. For he seems to confess a like thing, where he
writes he became a Jew unto the Jews, 1. Cor. 9.
and to those that were under the law, as one himself under the law.
Otherwise he was not ignorant of Christian liberty, which he euerywhere
writes ought not to be broken for any ceremonies sake. See Colos. 2. Galat.
4. Therefore they do most foolishly which abuse the example of Paul, to the
maintenance of Monkishe vows. For this vow was instituted in the law of God,
which although in the death of Christ it is abolished with the ceremonies
thereof, yet for the ancient dignity thereof, and for the weakes sake, it was
not sodeinely to be made away and buried, but by little and little. But it is
evident that Monks vows are founded upon the traditions of men, which ought
to be of no authority in religion. Again the Nazareans vowed unto God, where
the most part of Monkishe vows are made unto Creatures. Again the vows of
the Nazareans altered not the trade of life, neither was the unity of the
Church thereby divided. But Monkish vows, as they take away all former trades
of life, so they bring into the Church many diverse sects. The Nazareans vowed
such things as man was able to perform. Monks vow chastity, which the whole
Scripture says, is not given to every man. The Nazareans were grievous or
chargeable to none, by reason of their vow. But Monks while they vow wilful
poverty, will be fed like idle paunchbellies of other men's labors. The
Nazareans vow forbade them not obedience to Magistrates, Parents, and all
other estates, to whom we be bound by nature. Monks vows break all
obedience, and bind them only to their Abbots, who owe obedience both to
Parents and Rulers. Furthermore, the Nazareans had no affiance in their own
merits. For they both confessed themselves to be sinners, when their vow was
ended, and that God was the author of all goodness. But Monkishe vows most
of all other maintain an affiance in man's righteousness and deseruings.
Wherefore if there were no other cause, this one were sufficient to condemn
them, and put them away.

But to let pass this pumpe and sink of superstition, Paul teaches the
Jews at Ephesus.
return we unto Paul, which traueyling out of Achaia into Asia the lesser,
came to Ephesus, where we have to consider four things in order. First he
goes into the Synagoge and disputes with the Jews. Again here appears the
love he bare to his countriemen, whom for many causes (as we have otherwheres
declared) he could not hate, although he had once or twyse before shaken the
dust of against them. This example of Paul teaches us, that the wrath and
judgment of God should so be set out unto the wicked, that if they convert,
they may yet know there is hope left that God will be favorable unto them,
and pardon them. For it is God that says: Ezech. 18.
I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he convert and live.
Wherefore we must use all the diligence that we can, to bring and win people
unto the Lord. Secondlye, the example of the Ephesians teaches us, that the
labor of the Saints is not in vain. For where they are desirous to have Paul
remain longer among them, it appears evidently, they had much profyted by
him. For it cannot be that they can delyght in the Ministers company, that
have not as yet tasted the fruit of the doctrine of the gospel. Neither can
they be judged for lovers of the Gospel, that use to hate the Ministers
thereof, and little to regard their labors, and disdainefully to avoid their
companies. Let us again consider how Paul refuses to accomplish a godly
request. For he says: I must needs at this feast that comes be at Jerusalem.
I pray you what need urged Paul so to be? Shall we say it was for devotion
sake of the feast? No. For he knew well that holy days were abrogated among
other ceremonies, and there was no cause urged him for the weak brethrens sake
to go up to Jerusalem, because there were many Jews in every City, drowned in
Iewishe superstitions, which notwithstanding went not thither. Wherefore, as in
other places we have read how Paul was guided by the holy ghost in all his
doings: so it is like he was secretly moved by the same spirit to take this
voyage now in hand, although the cause be not expressed nor yet declared what
he did there, more than saluted the congregation and brethren. Surely Paul's
traueyle could not be in vain in such a City, whereunto against the feast,
repaired such a great multitude both of Jews and Gentyles, from among all
nations. For so even at one time together, might the doctrine of the Gospel be
scattred among many Nations. It is to be marueyled why Paul is pulled so soon
from them, which seemed to be so ready to receive profit by the gospel, and
it may seem an discourteous and an vnloouing part to leave them, if we should
herin lean unto reason. But Gods doings are to him known and certain. And
the chief use of such examples, is for us to learn to submit our wills and
desires, seem they never so holy and good, unto the pleasure of God. Fourthly,
let us see how Paul departed from Ephesus. He bids them farewell, which is
a token of thankfulness and friendly good will. For their discourtesie is
very dishonest that depart from their host, where they have received benefytes,
without taking of leave. Moreover he leaves Aquilas with them, that they
should not seem altogether destitute. Furthermore, he promises to return to
them again, by the leave of God. Whereby it manifestly appears, that he bare
them no evil will, but was compelled and strayned for weighty considerations
to leave them. Here we have to imitate Paul's religiousnesse, which in a most
godly cause presumes nothing of his own head, but understanding that all
endeavors and devises, depend upon Gods providence, refers all things unto
his pleasure. This sentence of Solomon is common, Prouer. 16.
manne purposes, but God disposes. What rashness then is this of men, to
attribute so much to themselves in profane matters so to appoint their doings
as though they would prescribe laws unto God. See Jacob. 4. Luc. 12.

Paul's labors and diligence
Paul being now departed from Ephesus, comes to Caesarea in Jury, and from
thence to Jerusalem, when he had there greeted the congregation, and dispatched
the matters about the which he went, he came to Antioche, the public sanctuary
(as we said before) of all godly persons. From thence he passed through the
Galathians and Phrygians confyrming the brethren, euerywhere in the faith, for
that he was not ignorant of the crafts and enterprises of Satan, which lies
still in wait for the godly. Luke in few words comprehends the great
pains, care, and marvelous dyligence that Paul used in the governing of
Christ his Church. But if a man would compare the Bishops of our days with
him, which brag of Paul and Peter's name (good Lord) how little shall a man
find in them, expressing but one sparkle of Paul's breast. In the mean
season, let us acknowledge the truth of God, which provides for his Church;
such faithful and chosen instruments, and let us beseech him, to send out
faithful laborers into his harvest, which may enlarge the bounds of his
Church, that our Lord and savior Jesus Christ may have a kingdom in all
nations: to whom be praise, honor, power and glory for ever. Amen.

The.Cxxiiij. Homely.
AND a certain Jew named Apollos, borne at Alexandria, came to Ephesus, an
eloquent man and myghtie in the scriptures. The same was enfourmed in the way
of the Lord, and spoke fervently in the spirit, and taught dyligently the
things of the Lord, and knew but the baptism of John only. And the same
began to speak boldly in the Synagoge, whom when Priscilla and Aquila had
heard, they took him unto them, and expounded unto him the way of God more
perfitely. And when he was disposed to go into Achaia, the brethren wrote
exhorting the Disciples to receive him. Which when he was come helped them
much, which had believed through grace, for he overcame the Jews myghtilye,
and that openly, showing by the Scriptures that Jesus was Christ.
Unto the discourse of the things done by the Apostle Paul at Corinth and
Ephesus, Luke annexeth in order, the history of Apollos the Jew, borne at
Alexandria. For first it makes for the more perfyte declaration of the things
done among the Corinthians, because Apollos not long after this, went to
Corinth, and watered the Church there that Paul had prosperouslye planted, and
like a dyligent husbandman, brought it to more rypenesse of fruit, as the
Apostle confesses in the first to the Corinthians the third Chapter. Here
appears likewise the great goodness of God in prouyding for his Church. For
we heard in the Sermon going before, how Paul by secret instinct of the
holy ghost, was taken from the Ephesians, which being inflamed with the love
of the gospel, desired longer to have kept him with them. Therefore least any
man might think, that God neglected those that were so desirous of salvation,
and so might take occasion to think ill of God, he substituteth Apollos in his
place, to supply Paul's absence, by his diligence and endeavor. For God
neglects none that are desirous of the truth, who calls all men unto him
every where, and allureth them with spread open arms. Therefore this history
makes not a little for the comfort of the Church, containing also an example
of a faithful and an absolute minister, with many other things, belonging to
our instruction, wherefore it shall be profitable to examine all the parts
thereof.

Luke begins very commodiously with the description of the person, What
manner of person, and of what qualities Apollos was.
saying first he was a Jew, where partly is declared the great mercy of God,
which out of a most envious nation, falling and running headlong into
destruction, chooses out every day new and fresh worshippers of his son,
and Ministers, and partly the Jews malice is proved incurable, which could be
overcome neither with the great dyligence of the Apostles, nor yet with daily
and domestical examples. Next he declares how he was borne at Alexandria,
where hystories say, and this present place proves, was a most famous Church
and school erected, even in the time of the Apostles. For from thence, comes
this Apollos furnished with so many diverse gifts, whose labor and traueyle
afterward appeared so great, in the buylding up of the congregation. Luke in
very few words attributes to him singular qualities, saying he is eloquent,
that is to say, had a gift aptly and in due manner to speak or reason of any
matter: also power or might in the scriptures, that is a conuenable dexterity
in handling or entreating of them, as one that had not learned them only for
ostentation sake. Moreover, he declares he was brought up in the way of the
Lord, thereby attributing unto him the knowledge of Christ: yet declaring he
wanted some points thereof, where he says, he knew but the baptism of John
only. The baptism of John.
So calls he the principles of christian religion, comprehending under this
word baptism, all the doctrine of John, and all that business whereof he was
Minister. In the which sense Christ also demanded the Scribes of John's
baptism. Math. 21. Yet this place must not so be understood, as though John
had had no knowledge of Christ, or had taught his Disciples any doctrine
contrary to Christ. For John's doctrine and Christ's was all one. For as Christ
commands the Apostles to preach repentance and forgiveness of sins in
his name: so read we that John moved his hearers unto repentance, and showed
them that the grace of God and salvation was to be had in Christ only. For the
sum of his doctrine was: Repent you, for the kingdom of God is at hand.
Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world. The father
loves the son, and has given all things into his hand, that all that
believe in the son, may have life everlasting. See Luke. 3. John. 1. and
third chapiters. And because John was in the myddle betwixt the Prophets and
Christ, and was therefore but the forerunner of the savior that was promised,
who should prepare and make ready the people to receive Christ, it suffised him
to declare but a short and brief sum of our salvation and knowledge of
Christ, that all men might understand how forgiveness of sins, and life
everlasting, was to be had but in him alone. In the mean season it is
manifest, that he no where taught the secret mysteries of Christ's death,
resurrection and ascension, or the whole order of our redemption, in express
words. For the perfyte understanding hereof was reserved for an other time,
yea we read that the very Apostles were not so skillful in these things,
although that Christ had oftentimes reasoned hereof, until after his
ascension, they were illuminated by the holy ghost, that was sent them, as
Christ had promised them. Therefore, although Apollos was brought up in the
way of the Lord, and knew that Christ was the savior of the world, yet was
he ignorant in many things, which concerned the manner of our redemption,
whereof he was more at large to be enfourmed, as shall follow a little
hereafter. In the mean time, we have two things to consider in the description
of this person. First is the order and lincking together of gifts, The gifts
wherewith Apollo was endued.
wherewith God thought good to adourne Apollo. Amongst these things eloquence
occupies the first rowme, which is a thing necessary for all persons, as well
in the ministry as in the common weal, as daily experience declares. But
whether this gift come unto man by nature, or be gotten by art, labor,
study, and traueyle, we know it has been a thing, long agone argued on,
amongst the fine witted Orators and Philosophers. But we following the Apostles
saying, 1. Cor. 12.
account the gift of vtteraunce among the gifts of the holy Ghost. By whose
inspiration we say that Apollos had this gift. Secondarily, Luke says, that he
was mighty in the Scriptures, and endued with an effectual dexterity of
handling them. Thus he makes a difference between this man's godly eloquence,
and profane. For unless the matter entreated of, be taken out of the holy
scriptures, or from the mouth of God, eloquence is to no purpose, as the which
is occupied rather about tryfles and in ostentation, then about things needeful
to be known and done. And verily the Orators of the gentiles are not to be
called eloquent, which in deed disputed and debated things fynely and trimly,
but such as per^^yned nothing to the godly and christian leading of our life,
what else therefore shall we say they did, but heave out vain words, pulling
Hercules buskinnes as they say, upon a childs legs. Certain men marueyle at
the force of their speech, but yet vain men, and not much unlike unto them.
How much better did that Lacedemonian answer a Sophister that promised to
tell a long and extemporate tale of any matter: I (says he) would not commend
that shoemaker that would pull a wide shoe upon a little foot. Therefore
unto this godly and profitable study of Scripture, Apollo joins the
knowledge of eloquence. But because diverse, even in scripture seek ostentation
and vain glory (as Christ vpbraided the Jewish Scribes) therefore in the third
place Apollo is said to have been infourmed in the way of the Lord, that is,
to have the knowledge of Christ. Luke uses this word (way) to declare that he
was not idle in this knowledge, but following the rule of Christ, labored to
order his whole conversation of life thereafter. This is the end of all
gifts. For where our salvation is contained in Christ only, vain and
unprofitable is the ostentation of all other things, except men join the
knowledge of him with their other studies. And Christ himself expressly
teaches us, that this should be our mark and end, John. 5.
in searching the Scriptures. Which was the cause that Paul judged all those
things which the world greatly esteems, as dunge, Phil. ^.
so he might attain to the knowledge of Christ. He says also that Christ is
made of God, our wisdom, and he desires to know nothing but Jesus Christ,
^. Cor. 2.
and (...) crucified. Would God they would consider these things, which in
schools and universities bewitch young men with vain Philosophy, and banishe
from thence the knowledge of Christ, as a thing belonging only to beggarly
Divines, as they call them. The second thing to be learned in Apollo, is that
such an excellent man wants yet some things, which to know is necessary for
all men. Whereupon we gather, that God gives not all things unto all men, and
that there are increasements and certain degrees of increase in gifts,
considering no man in the world has full and perfyte knowledge of the
mysteries of the kingdom of God, which Paul says we shall have in the world
to come, when we are taken into heaven, 1. Cor. 13.
and shall see God face to face as he is. Whereof yet no man must gather,
that all things said of religion in this world, are uncertain. For where God
by his word in the Scripture reuealeth to us the knowledge hereof, it cannot
be uncertain that is declared in the word. Yet because the perfyte knowledge
of God is reserved for us in heaven, we may every day as long as we live,
profit and increase therein. We must therefore never rest here, but still
study for more knowledge of God, that we may attain even in this world, to
some taste of this perfection, as far as we are able. Hereby are those idle
Dranes reproved, which think all study that is given unto Scripture, is
vain and unprofitable, thereby declaring that they never once tasted the same.
For such is the pleasantness of Scripture, that it is a bait as it were, for
men always to bite at. Those proud men also that have so much affiance in
their knowledge, that they think there is no more for them to learn, and
therefore despise all study of scripture, are here confuted, which are so far
from that perfection, that they persuade themselves to have that they yet know
not themselves very well.

How Apollos used his gifts.
Furthermore, to return unto Luke, he joining to the description of his person,
the things that he did, declares how Apollos used these gifts that God gave
him. He spoke fervently in the spirit, and taught diligently the things of the
Lord. Again, he began to speak boldlye in the Synagoge. Therefore he used
his gifts to the setting forth of the glory of the Lord, teaching us by his
example, that then Gods gifts are lawfully used, when Gods name which gave them
us is by them celebrated. This thankfulness we owe even by the law of nature
which is graffed in all creatures. Therefore they greatly offend which ydly
bury the gifts that God has given them, whereof Christ entreats under the
Parable of a naughty servant, Math. 25. Yet much more grievously do they
offend, which abuse his gifts at their pleasure, to the reproach of his holy
name, as now a days commonly the gifts both of the mind and body are
abused. But they shall one day give a straight account unto God, that thus
fylthilye defyle and pollute themselves. Also this example declares what trade
of teaching should be used in the Church. The trade how to teach in the
church.
First, zeal and feruencie of spirit is needful, that all men may see
their saying comes from the heart. For unless this spirit be present, the
teaching shall serve but to ostentation. Thus that ardent and continual
traueyle in teaching, and that fervent spirit in reforming the Temple,
abundantlye declared the zeal that Christ was enflamed with. And those that
are milk warm teachers shall never be allowed, because Christ will have even
private men in matters of religion to be hot. See Apocalypse. 3. Next, it is
needful to use diligence both because of our dull wit, which perceives not
heavenly things, and also because of the corruption of our nature, which
always uses to resist Gods commandment. Beside, the malice of Satan our
common enemy whose crafts it behooves the faithful Ministers of God, day
and night diligently to withstand. Therefore Paul commands Timothy, whom
he knew was brought up of a child, 1. Tim 4.
in the study of Scripture, to give heed to his reading. Likewise hereafter
he exhorts the Pastors of Ephesus to wakefulnesse and diligence, by most
weighty arguments. Thirdly, it behooves that Ministers should be bold to
speak, that they dissemble not either for favor or fear. But hereof we have
spoken before, where Paul was commanded to speak, and not to hold his peace.
And the things enjoined the Ministers of the word, it is necessary al men that
bear office should likewise perform, as ye scriptures euerywhere declare.
Yea, let all men privately apply these things to themself, if they mean to be
allowed of God in their vocation. For where God requires us to serve him, with
all our hearts, we that have given our selves wholye unto him, must not choose
but paynefully, plainly, and fervently occupy our selves in these affairs,
as meet is.

Now Luke describes how Apollos profyted in the knowledge of Christ and
salvation, Apollos profits in the knowledge of Christ.
while he goes about to set forth his glory, and to further the salvation of
others. For he says: when Aquila and Priscilla had heard him, they took him
unto them, and expounded the way of God unto him more perfitely. And here
above all things appears the truth of that promise of Christ, To every one
that has (says he) shall be given, and he shall abound. Math. 25.
They are said to have, which acknowledge the gifts given unto them, and
which use them diligently to the glory of God, that when the Lord requires an
account of them, he may receive it with vsaunce and increase. This because
Apollos did perform with all diligence and industry, as we said erewhyle,
therefore God fails not of his promise, but streightway stirs up faithful
Ministers which inform him more fully and perfytely in his will. This ought to
serve for the instruction of all men, that they may understand how all the
graces of God, are no way more happily increased, than by faithful study.
Thus they that use their wisdom to the setting forth of Gods glory, do feel
every day how God increases the same. The like reason is to be made of
learning, honors, riches, and of all other things, whereof we lack not
examples to prove the same. Again, there is no greater cause why the gifts
of God are quenched in us, than when we give our selves rather to sloth and
idleness, than to the setting forth of Gods glory. Here for many
considerations both Aquila and Priscilla, and Apollos are to be marked. For
under those few words the Euaungelist comprehends great godliness and
virtues. The praise of Aquilas, and Priscilla.
It is a great argument of godliness, that they give ear to Apollos while he
teaches, whereas yet they had so great intelligence in the mysteries of Christ,
that they were able to teach both him and others. This is the true mark of the
children of God, John. 8.
whose property Christ says, is to hear his word both willingly and often.
They are reproved by this example, which think they have profyted so much in
the knowledge of salvation, that they have need of no farther instruction, and
therefore will neither read the Scriptures at home, nor come at the Church to
hear Sermons. Thus while they think they have profyted to much, they openly
declare they are yet ignorant, what the chief cognizance of the children of
God is. For they because they know the kingdom of God consists not in bare
knowledge, but rather that God requires we should order our life according to
the rule of his word, they cannot be satisfied with hearing, because they
feel that they want much even in the chiefest point. Moreover, this holy
couple of married folk, declare a fervent desire to the glory of God, in taking
such an one to instruct, as they saw was able greatly to profit the Church of
Christ. Again, it is an argument of true love, and clear of all envy, that
they privately instruct him, and envy him not that glory that he had hitherto
gotten, by his faithful traueyle, but rather help him, that both he may be
the more perfytely instructed, and the more people woonne by his mean. If a man would compare this with the doings in our days, good Lord, how few or
rather no tokens of so Christian a mind shall we find in them, which will
seem godly, and restorers of the light of the Gospel? For as soon as they
perceive the authority of any man to increase, by and by the gyddinesse of
ambition makes them to envy him, and they seek all means possible, if any
occasion serve, to bring him in envy and contempt, as though they could not
provide for their own honor, but with the infamye of others. But how shall
they be believed, John. 5.
that are so desirous of the honor of the world. Surely this is the spirit of
Cain, who we read rose against his brother for no other cause, but for that he
perceived his brother was better than he, and more in favor with God than he.
Now as in religion and in the ministry of the Church, it behooves to avoid
this mischief, so in private doings it becomes diligently to avoid all
occasions of envy and hatred, if we will be called the true children of God.
But as in Aquila and Priscilla these virtues appear, The modesty of Apollos.
so in Apollo may be perceived a rare and singular modesty and tractabilitie.
For he that excelled in eloquence, and in all kind of learning, is contented
to be taught of a man of handycraft, and of a woman, unknown to him before
this time, and strangers. For true is that saying of Paul, that the spirits
of the Prophets are subdued unto the Prophets. 1. Cor. 14.
Now compare with this Apollo, the arrogaunce of them which cannot abide to be
admonished or rebuked of their Coministers, whereof there is to great a number
in these days. But as in times past, the insolency of such did much hurt unto
the Church, so this is the chief cause in these days, that there is such
contention euerywhere, because there are in all places, which take upon them
such rule in the Church, that they esteem their brethren and Coministers, but
as dogs or hogs.

Besides these, is there yet an other argument, whereby Appollos declares his
fervent desire to set forth the kingdom of God. Apollos goes to Corinth.
For after he perceived he was sufficiently instructed in the knowledge of
Christ, he appointed to go into Achaia, to Corinth, because he perceived that
Church had much need of his help. For as valyant souldyours of their own
accord, choose them such places, as where they see is most labor and danger:
so they which will traueyle in the warfare of the Church with their
commendation and the profit of the same Church, must dyligently observe where
their help is most requisite, and thither haste themselves dyligently, that by
their negligence the kingdom of God suffer no detriment. Here also is the
faith and dyligence of the brethren of Ephesus to be observed, which would not
let the faithful Minister of Christ, and one that had deserved so well of
their congregation, to depart without a public testimony of his virtuous
behavior: yea they so commend him unto the Corinthians, that they also desire
them to give him the rowme of a teacher in their Church. For as it is needful
that a Minister of the word have the commendation of persons abroad, that he
fall not into the snare of the slaunderer: so they may not be denied the
commendation of their virtue, which have declared their faith by manifest
arguments unto the Church. For they that promote such as these are to the
ministry, deserve no small praise in the kingdom of God. Again they are
worthyly accounted wicked, both against Christ and the church, which of blind
affection, keep back such as are worthy from the ministry, yet we must
beware (as Paul says) that we admyt not every one rashely thereunto, 1. Tim.
5.
least we be partakers of other men's sins. And that we say of the Ministers
of the church, is to be observed of all other in any manner of office or
vocation, that is to say, that the worthy be set forward, and the unworthy
repulsed and kept back, as much as in us lies, least while we commend
naughty packes, we endammage and indaunger the whole common weal. And as
concerning Apollos, he endeavored himself to answer the testimony and
commendation of the brethren, least they might seem to have thrust an v^meete
Minister into an other peoples Church. For he much profyted the brethren at
Corinth, which believed through the grace of God. Now whether a man refer
this word grace to Apollos, or to the Corinthians, it comes all to one
sense. For he teaches thereby that nothing is to be attributed to man's
industry, but how God is to be taken for the author of all goodness, which
did vouchsafe to give such an increase: whereof Paul disputes at large in the
first Epistle to the Corinthians, the third chapter. And surely if the
Corinthians had well considered this one thing, they had never given place to
those, which afterward disturbed the Church with the factious names of Paul's
disciples, Peter's and Apollos. But Luke declares also the mean and way how
Apollos thus profyted the brethren, namely by open confuting of the Jews, and
by proouing out of the scriptures, that Jesus was Christ, that is to say, that
savior of the world, that was promised, which place teaches us many things
needful to be observed. For first we learn, In the church it is necessary
that the wicked be confuted.
that not only the Church has need to be instructed, but also that the
adversaries should be confuted. For they can not much profit the church, which
do not with all their endeavor go about to root up false doctrine, even as
that tyllage can not be fruitful, which suffers thorns and coccle to grow
among it. For this cause Jeremy is commanded first to weed and pull up, and
then after that to build and plant. And Paul appoints such an one to be
Bishop, as is able to convince the gainesayers and adversaries. Titus. 1.
And that we say of false teachers, which must needs be confuted, the same is
also to be understood of open and notorious naughty packes, which give
occasion of offense unto the weaker sort. For the faithful Minister must set
on them also with the sword of the spirit, or else leave his Church to be
torn of the Woolues. Therefore they are far deceived, which would have the
gospel so preached now a days, that men must speak neither against impious
doctrine, nor ungodliness of manners. The ministers must fight with scriptures.
We are furthermore admonished with what weapons church men must fight, verily
with Scriptures, which Paul says are inspyred of God, and profitable to
teach, improoue, exhort and amend. 2. Timoth. 3. They are fowlely therefore
deceived, that say the heretics must not be convinced by scriptures, because
they are to obscure and dark to convince them by. Wherefore they fly unto
counselles, and to the determination of the church. But therein they fare, as
if one should take from a souldyour going to the battle, his sword of iron,
and give him one of lead. As though the authority of man's constitutions were
greater than the holy ghost which speaks in the scriptures. Finally, as we
have oftentimes advertised, here is repeated the end of preaching the gospel,
which is to believe in Jesus Christ our Lord and savior: to whom be praise,
honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.xix. chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The.Cxxv. Homely.
IT fortuned while Apollos was at Corinth, that Paul passed through the upper
coasts, and came to Ephesus, and found certain disciples, and said unto
them, have you received the holy ghost since you believed? And they said unto
him, no, we have not heard whether there be any holy ghost or no. And he said
unto them wherewith then were ye baptized? And they said, with John's baptism.
Then said Paul, John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying
unto the people, that they should believe on him, which should come after
him, that is on Christ Jesus. When they heard this, they were baptized in the
name of the Lord Jesus. And when Paul laid his hands upon them, the holy
ghost came on them, and they spoke with tongues and prophesied, and all the men
were about twelve.
Because the Euaungelist Luke began to speak of the beginning of the
Ephesian church, in the chapter going before, he makes an end of that
history now in this chapter, declaring how Paul returned to Ephesus
according to his promise, and there brought the church so happily begone, unto
a perfection. But that the power of Gods grace, declaring it self by preaching
of the gospel, may appear the more, before all things we have to consider
Ephesus, the which writers report was the most famous City in all Asia. The
^^ate of Ephesus.
For by reason it was of situation and fruitfulness of soil so commodious for
traffiquers, it grew to be passing rich. Beside the fame of false religion,
which called gestes thither from all parts of the world. For there was the
Church of Diana, the most sumptuous and gorgeous thing that was builded in all
the world, because it appears that all Asia was occupied in the buylding
thereof, about a two hundred and twenty years together, so that it was
worthyly accounted among the miracles of the world. In this City therefore
reigned riot and superstition, which commonly has waiting (...) her, as her
companions and handemaydes, magical and curious arts, whereof we shall see,
when we come to the place, that the Ephesians were most s^udious. Yet Paul so
converted this City within the space of two years, that there was founded a
most famous Church there, unto the which afterward Christ attributes no small
praise in his revelation. Apocal. 2.
In this place we have partly to consider, the grace of God which Paul
hereafter commends to the Ephesians, by this their own example, as may be
seen in his Epistle to them, second chapter, and partly here appears the
power of the ministry of the gospel, which neither the authority of rooted
superstition, neither pride and glory of the world could hinder, but that
Christ's kingdom flourished, where the same gospel was preached. Moreover,
Luke purposing to declare a story of the things done by Paul at Ephesus,
begins to tell first how he brought certain persons to frame that vaunted
themselves of the gospel, but were not thoroughly instructed therein, and how
he adourned that church with the gifts of the holy ghost. Which history as
it serves much to our instruction, so is it for this cause dyligently to be
considered, because diverse men in times past, have contended by authority of
this place, to baptize those again which before had been baptized by
Heretics. At this day also the Anabaptists abuse the same, a very froward
and phrentike kind of persons, keeping infantes from their baptism, and
affirming that none ought to be baptized but such as are of years of
discretion, and well infourmed in the principles and knowledge of Christ. But
that both these and the old writers were deceived, it shall easily appear by
the text it self, whereby it shall be proved, that Paul meant nothing less
in this doing, than that which they go about to gather thereof.

For first it is said Paul went about to examine certain disciples, Paul
examineth such as answered not in life to their profession.
which he met withal, after he came again to Ephesus. But it is not lykely that
these and no more had professed Christ, because we may gather a greater
utility of the gospel among the Ephesians, by that we heard in the end of
the.xviij. chapter. Now that Paul takes these to examine rather then any
other, this seems to be the cause, for that they lived not agreeably to the
profession of christian men. For it is like it happened at Ephesus, as it does
commonly in every place, when the truth is first preached, but the discipline
of the church not fully established. For then we shall see many, which will
profess to be gospellers more for hatred of the old state, then for love of
the truth, because they would under a cloak of the gospel, live the more
licentiously. Because Paul perceived that these were such a kind of people,
to the intent they might be brought to better conformity and pass, and not
perish, like those that received the seed of the gospel into a stony
ground, Paul begins to examine them of their belief, and so to lay
before their eyes, how far they were as yet from the mark of perfection. He
demands therefore if they had received the holy ghost? This question must be
understood of the gifts of the holy ghost, which God at that time used to
give to the faithful, that is to say, the knowledge of tongues, and exposition
of the scripture, whereof we have already many times entreated. This place
teaches us how to know true christians, from false and counterfeyte. For
although those special gifts of the holy ghost, which were sometime
miraculously given, be at this day ceased, yet the promise of Jesus Christ
remains fyrme, which promised his spirit to those that were his. And as
Paul elsewhere says, they that have not the spirit of Christ, Roma. 8.
can not be his members. And the other effects of Gods holy spirit, are as
necessary at this day, as the understanding of tongues and interpretation of
scripture was in time passed, namely the mortifycation of the old man, the
regeneration and innovation of our mind, purifycation, sanctifycation, and
such other like. As many therefore as lack all these things, it is certain
they boast in vain of the faith and name of Christ, except we shall say that
the spirit of Christ is an idle and sluggishe spirit.

The gross ignorance of those which truly pro^esse not Christ.
But let us hear the answer of them whom Paul examineth, in which they
utter a very gross and barbarous ignorance saying: No, we have not heard
whether there be any holy ghost or no. But how were they ignorant of the holy
ghost, which had heard so often mention of him in the law and in the Prophets?
For it is out of doubt they were Jews, because they were baptized with the
baptism of John. Were they ignorant then of that saying of Moses which in the
beginning of his history writes, that the spirit of God moved upon the
waters? Or else had they never heard that saying of David: by the word of the
Lord were the heavens made, and all the hosts of them by the breath of his
mouth. Psalm. 33. (...). 51. (...). 61.
Again, take not thy holy spirit from me. Besides they might have known the
voice of the Messiah speaking by the Prophet, the spirit of the Lord God is
upon me. etc. How is it therefore that they say, they have not heard whether
there be any holy ghost or no? The answer is easy. For as Paul demanded of
the effects of the holy ghost, so they make answer concerning the same, as
if they should say: we being content with those things which we have heretofore
learned, seek no farther, neither care we whether there be any holy ghost or
no, which works such peculiar gifts in men's minds, because we think the
knowledge hereof to high for us, and not to appertain to us. So these men be
an example of carnal people, which profess the truth with their mouth, but
have denied the power thereof as Paul says, and in deed refuse that, which
with mouth they confess. 2 Timoth. 3. Tit. 1. A great number of these are
every where to be found, who being persuaded that the bare name of Christ is
sufficient unto bliss, do little regard the gifts of the holy ghost, namely
the mortifycation of the flesh, the renewing of the mind, regeneration,
sanctification and such like. And through these men's fault, it comes to
pass for the most part, that the doctrine of the gospel is so ill spoken of
in the world. Therefore such must not be suffered, but be reproved, and their
dissimulation must be disclosed, that both they may understand their error,
and other be the less offended.

So does Paul in this place. For he gathers nerer upon them, and urges them
to confess, Outward profession improoueth counterfeyt christians.
that they were not come to the christian perfection: For he says: In whose
name then were you baptized? That is to say, what professed you, when you first
received the Gospel, and joined your selves to the Church of Christ? They
answer they were baptized with the baptism of John, and so they testifye
that they professed that doctrine and religion, whereof John was a Minister and
teacher, and thereby they plainly show, they care little for any other than
that. Now Paul here catches them, and holds them fast, and infers: John
(says he) baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying to the people that
they should believe on him that was to come after him, that is, in Jesus
Christ, hereby teaching that John required a far other thing of his
Disciples, than a bare profession of his name, and of the Gospel. For first he
appointed repentance, whereunto with great earnestness he exhorted all
degrees of persons, as appea^eth, Luc. 3. Neither requires he only
repentance, but shows also remission of sins, preaching Jesus Christ,
whose forerunner he was appointed of God to be. He taught men to embrace him by
true faith, to follow him, to give themselves wholly to him, because in him
only those things were to be found which are fygured by outward baptism.
For who is able to perform them without the operation of the holy spirit?
Therefore the glory you have in John your teacher, is of so little
sufficiency, that his doctrine and baptism wherewith you were baptized,
compels you to go further, and so to cleave unto Christ, that being graffed
in him through a lively faith, and quickened with his spirit, you may declare
by the very effects of the holy ghost, that you are true Christians. And that
this is the very plain and vnracked meaning of Paul's words, the whole order
of the hystorye proves. Wherefore foolish is the error of them, which by this
place go about to prove that John his baptism and Christ's was not all one,
but diverse. For that is a thing so far from Paul's meaning, that it rather
proves how men are sent by the baptism of water that John ministered, unto
Christ, in whom only those things are to be taken hold of, the tokens
whereof we receive in baptism. Also here is a general rule confyrmed, how it
is not to be borne with, that they that will be taken for true worshippers of
God, should stay or rest upon the authority of man, but that they ought to be
urged, to give themselves wholly unto Christ, to live in him by the quickening
of his spirit, least while they profess him with their mouth, they declare by
their deeds, how they be farthest of from him.

Furthermore, The baptism of Christ, or of fire.
Luke joins hereunto a most prosperous end of this history. For these
persons being convict in their consciences, through the secret working of the
holy ghost, yielded unto Paul's reasons, and were baptized in the name of the
Lord Jesus. These words must not be expounded of the baptism of water, as
though they received that again. For so it should follow that John's baptism
had not been lawful, nor sufficient to consecrate men unto God. But that this
is an absurd thing to be said, both the example of Christ teaches us which
did vouchsafe to be baptized of John, and so to become a copartener with us,
and also this thing proves the same, for that we no where read how they were
rebaptised, whom John had baptized before, wherefore this place must be
understood of the baptism of fire, the Minister or author whereof, John
before had said that Christ should be. For the holy ghost was given in the
likeness of fire, whereof we spoke in the second Chapter of this book. And
it is manifest that this word baptising is often used for the giving of the
holy ghost, and his gifts. For so John uses it, speaking of Christ: he shall
baptize you with the holy ghost and with fire. Christ being ready to ascend up
into heaven, uses it in the same sense, saying: you shall be baptized with
the holy ghost within these few days. Which phrase of speech Peter uttered
in the same sense, before the congregation, entreating of Cornelius conversion.
Acts. 11.
So in this place, Luke teaches us how this word baptising ought to be
taken, while by way of exposition, he adds: And when Paul had laid his
hands on them, the holy ghost came on them, and they spoke with tongues, and
did prophecy. Therefore by laying on of hands, they were consecrated or
appointed only unto Christ, and after that followed the holy ghost, acco^ding
as we heard came to pass at Samaria also. Whereupon it appears that the
old writers abused this place, while by authority hereof they contended that
those ought to be new baptized which had been baptized by heretykes before.
Herein they were deceived that they thought John and Christ's baptism of water
was diverse. And the ignorance of the Anabaptists is as great, that apply unto
the baptism of water that which ought to be understood of the baptism of
fire, that is to say, of the receiving and gift of the holy ghost. But we have
principally to consider the end and use of the miracle, that is, how God meant
to confyrme and adorn the authority of his Gospel hereby among the Gentyles,
as we have already oftentimes declared. Let us therefore believe the Gospel,
whose credit and truth is proved by so many and notable signs and woonders.
Let us in life answer to the profession of our faith, that we being quickened
with the spirit of Christ, may live in him: to whom be praise, honor,
power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.Cxxvj. Homely.
AND he went into the Synagoge, and behaved himself boldlye for the space of
three months, disputing and giving them exhortations of the kingdom of God.
When diverse waxed hard hearted, and believed not, but spoke evil of the way,
and that before the multitude, he departed from them, and separated the
disciples. And he disputed daily in the school of one called Tyranus* And this
continued by the space of two years, so that all they which dwelt in Asia,
heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks. And God wrought
special miracles by the hands of Paul, so that from his body were brought
unto the sick, Napkins and Partelettes, and the diseases departed from them,
and the evil spirits went out of them.
AFter the Evangelist Luke has declared how Paul had fullye enstructed those
twelve men at Ephesus, which lived not aunswereable to their profession: he
shows afterward how by the ministry of the same Paul the kingdom of God
was spredde far and near, both among the Ephesians, and over all the
Country bordering upon Asia. And this present place comprehends the sum of
this history, in the consideration whereof, we must be the more diligent,
because there are diverse things in every part thereof, which serve for the
common instruction of us all. After this, he shows what was done with the
reprobate and unbelieving. Thirdly, he describes the singular profit and
commodity of the Apostles labor and traueyle.

Paul preache^h to the Jews in the Synagoge.
First, the Evangelist comprehends the whole sum of Paul's doctrine in few
words, where he says that he entered into the Synagoge, and there disputed
three months togther boldly, and exhorted men to receive the kingdom of God.
Therefore as otherwheres, so here also, he preaches first to the Jews. Hereby
appears partly the great mercy of God toward so rebellious and froward a
people, and partly a most fervent and sincere affection of charity in Paul,
which by so many and grievous injuries could not be quenched. But because we
have hereof entreated diverse times already, let us omit this point, and see
what trade of teaching Paul used among the Ephesians, whereunto there
appertain three things, whereof Luke discourses. First he names the place,
and says he taught in the open Synagoge. The place for doctrine must be
public.
That therefore that Paul diligently observed in other places, he thought good
to use also at Ephesus, namely to teach in one certain and public place,
although he knew well the Jews vsages, which in that place bare all the rule.
Whereby we learn, that there must be a certain place for doctrine to be
taught in, and how the same must not without some great cause be forsaken. For
this is a thing very profitable for the maintenance of true doctrine, and
keeping under of false teachers, which priuilye use to creep in, and to
beguyle the vnwarye. For the which cause Christ himself used most times to
teach in the Temple, and in the open Synagoges, because he would not by his
example defend them which without a cause, refuse to come unto the Church, or
else sow false doctrine in corners, both which the Anabaptists in our days
ouerboldly use to do.

Secondly is declared the trade that Paul used in teaching. The manner how to
teach.
He spoke freely and boldly, dissembling nothing. And first he disputed
confuting the errors of the Jews, wherewith they confounded and obscured the
way of salvation, being of it self plain and simple. Next, he exhorted and
counseled them to yield unto a truth. This is the best order of teaching,
wherein these two things are necessary to be observed, first that the
adversaries arguments be confuted, and that by effectual reasons they be urged
to take hold of the truth, and earnestlye to follow it. For as truth can have
no place as long as lies and errors bear rule: so fruitelesse and vain shall
the knowledge of truth be, unless men earnestly embrace her, and labor as it
were, to be transformed into her. Therefore Paul commands the Minister of
the word not only to teach, but also to exhort, rebuke, 2. Tim. 4.
and to be instant in season and out of season. And Christ would have those
that were bidden to the wedding of the heavenly kingdom, to be compelled to
come in. Therefore filthy is the error of them, which say a bare and literal
treaty of the Scripture is sufficient in the Church, and will not suffer those
things to be openly discussed in them, that serve for the instruction of all
parties, as though our salvation stood only in a naked and empty
contemplation of things.

Thirdlye, Luke shows the matter and argument of Paul's doctrine, where he
says, he spoke of the kingdom of God. The argument of the Apostles doctrine.
For so are the affairs of our redemption and salvation called, the
administrator and executor whereof the Prophets long since declared, that the
Messiah should be. But of this Messiah, the Jews had conceived not only
false, but also very carnal and gross opinions, by reason they misvnderstoode
the Oracles of the Prophets. For they dreamed the kingdom of the Messiah
should be here upon earth, and hoped to enjoy a golden world under him, such
as had been sometime under Solomon. With the which error the Apostles also
being beguyled, promised themselves notable dignities and promotions, as may
easily be gathered by their contentions. And they among the Jews also, whose
minds were more of their salvation, than of this earthly kingdom, did rather
think it consisted in wearishe ceremonies, than in the merit of Christ.
Therefore Paul diligently declared the verity of the kingdom of God, showing
that it was spiritual, not earthly, and that it consisted not in the vain
observation of Ceremonies, but in the merit of Christ, and in faith, whereby
we be graffed into him. This doctrine of Paul is to be had both in his
Sermons, which Luke has described in this book, and also in his Epistles, The
kingdom of God
so that there needs no long rehearsal thereof. Let us mark how the
Scriptures call our redemption and salvation the kingdom of God. For hereby
the end thereof is declared, which is that Satan being vanquished, and the
world overcome, God might bear rule over us as our king, as we desire in our
prayer, saying: Let thy kingdom come. Wherefore they are false Christians,
that glory in the name of Christ, and yet let the Devil rule in them, who can
have no communion or fellowshippe with Jesus Christ. Neither can they be
Christians which are out of the kingdom of God, because Christ came into the
world, for no cause, but to restore his kingdom. But how can they be in the
kingdom of God, which suffer themself to be ruled by the Deuilles spirit,
and obey him in all things.

The usage and property of reprobates
But because Christ can never be preached any where so luckilye, but many
reprobates shall rise against his doctrine, he declares how Paul dealt with
them, but yet so, as he first shows what they did. They hardened their
hearts against Paul's doctrine. This is the property of the wicked, the more
they are urged with the word of God, the more they harden their hearts, not
that Gods word is in the fault, but their own selves. For where they have not
in them the seed of the children of God, they cannot know his voice and
word, and therefore the more mightily the holy ghost works to bring them to
order, the more fyercelye use they to resist him. Examples we have euerywhere
in Caine, Pharao, Saul, Judas, and diverse other: whereunto would God we had
not every day fresh examples joined. After induration it follows that they
will neither believe nor obey. Therefore they cast away the word of God, as
vain and nothing pertaining unto them. Besides a worse property than all
this, namely railing and slaundering, whereby they go about to bring Christ's
doctrine and religion in suspicion and envy, amongst the people. For they
follow the Devils property, desiring to have many partners and fellows of his
perdition. And by these steps does impiety climb up until she be so high yt
she falls into destruction. What does Paul with these persons? How
reprobates must be dealt with.
First he departs from them, least he should either more inflame them, or
give occasion of unprofitable contention: and this does he according to Christ's
commandment, which bade us we should not cast pearls before Dogs and
Hogs, Math. 7.10.
and commanded us to shake the dust of our feet from us, against open
obstinates. Then next he separated those disciples from them, which had
received the sound doctrine, doing the duty of a faithful shephearde, whose
chief care is, that the sound sheep be not infected with the contagiousnesse
of the diseased. And yet Paul is not to be called a Schismatike for his so
doing, although they bare the name of the church, and people of God, from whom
Paul severed his disciples. Yea, it is necessary, that the good should avoid
the familiarity and company of the ungodly, because both they bycome heard
hearted by the means, and many times also partakers of the vngodlyes
punishment. See Apoc. 18. Thirdely, Paul teaches daily in the school of one
Tyrannus, with what manner of thing it was, and how it came to be so called,
makes no great matter, but it is like it was a public place, and commodious
to preach in. Let us rather consider Paul's diligence, which could by no
untowardness of the wicked, be pulled from his duty, but the more he sees
them rage, the more busily he holds on in teaching. Let all that are in
office, either of the common weal, or of the ministry, follow this example.
And these were the exercises of the primitive Church, which we read was
busily occupied in the word of God, which thing now a days is less regarded
of none, than of those that will be called and accounted, for the successors of
the Apostles.

Furthermore, The fruit of Euaungelike endeavor is manifold.
let us consider the profit of the Apostles endeavor and traueyle, which was
manifold. First the word of God is spredde over all Asia, both among the
Jews and the Greeks. For so it often comes to pass, that the fame of the
gospel pierces the minds of those, who have not yet heard the Minister
speak. And the example of great and notable Cities, makes not a little for
this purpose, which the inhabitaunts near about, are easily allured to follow.
Next, God himself works with Paul, and by notable miracles bears witness
to his doctrine. For Handkerchers and Partelets, brought to those that had not
seen the Apostle, drove away sicknesses and spirits. Let no man yet ascribe
divine or godly power to the Handkerchefes, or Partelets, as they use, which
have thrust into the Church, the superstitious worshipping of relics. For it
is expressly declared in this place, that God was the worker of the miracles,
and to Paul is nothing attributed, more then the Ministry. And surely it
were very ridiculous, to attribute more unto Paul's Handkerchefes, than to
Christ's cote, at the touching whereof the woman diseased of the bloody flux
was healed, not by the operation of the cote, but by the virtue and power of
Christ, which he said went out from him. See Mark. 5. We must rather regard
the end of those miracles, which served to set forth Paul's doctrine, as we
have elsewhere declared. Here lies hid also a third utility, namely how the
sick are healed, and the Demoniacks delivered. For by the gospel health of
soul is taught, and the Devils kingdom destroyed, because Jesus Christ is
that blessed seed of the woman, that was ordained to tread down the Serpents
head. Let us therefore embrace him with true faith, and wholly be knyt to him,
that being delivered from the tyranny of the Devil through his merit, we may
atteyne unto true salvation, and reign with him hereafter in heaven: to whom
be praise, honor, power and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.Cxxvij. Homely.
THEN certain of the Vagabunde Jews, exorcistes, took upon them to call over
them, which had evil spirits, the name of the Lord Jesus, saying: we adjure
you, by Jesus whom Paul preaches. And there were seven sons of one Sceua a
Jew and chief of the priests which did so. And the evil spirit answered
and said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know: but who are ye? And the man in
whom theeuill spirit was, ran on them, and overcame them, and prevailed
against them, so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded. And this
was known to all the Jews and Greeks also, which dwelt at Ephesus, and fear
came on them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnifyed. And many that
believed came, and confessed, and showed their works. Many of them which used
curious crafts, brought their books and burned them, before all men, and they
counted the price of them, and found it fifty thousand siluerings. So
mightily grew the word of God and prevailed.
WE heard yesterday, how God confyrmed Paul's Apostleship, and the authority
of the doctrine of the gospel, among the Ephesians, by many and strange
miracles. It follows now, how he defended the same by an example of rare
severity, against them, which went about by instigation of Satan, to abuse the
name of Christ, which Paul preached, to get gain thereby, and so to bring the
authority of the gospel into suspicion. The chief use of which history is,
to make us understand, that God has a regard of his servant, and that as
many as go about to deface their authority, or are so bold to abuse the name
of Christ, at their lust and pleasure, shall not go unpunished. But that we may
receive the more profit hereby, let us consider all the parts of the history
in that order, that Luke rehearses them.

The Jews Exorcistes.
The first, conteyneth the description of the persons, and declares what they
did. They were of the Jews, and none of the basest sort, but the sons of
Sceua the chief priest. Next they are called Exorcistes, whereby it appears
their profession was, to get money by exorcismes and coniuring of spirits, for
the which cause, they used to go from place to place. These therefore seeing the
Apostle in the name of Christ, so mightily to control spirits, and to work
such miracles, as the like before had not been seen, enticed with a hope of
greater profit and avail, take upon them a new form of coniuration, and use
to intermeddle the name of Christ therein. It shall be good to consider
dyligently whereof these kind of people first sprang among the Jews. For
although Moses appointed many and diverse offices, among the Levites, yet we see
he makes no mention any where of Exorcistes. It was therefore the invention of
man, and therefore a deceyueable thing, Josephus in the eight Book of his
antiquities, the second chapter.
and contrary to the laws of God. It seems to have taken beginning of an
old fable, wherein it is reported, that Solomon had invented, by inspiration of
God, the science of coniuring, and exorcismes against spirits, and all kind
of diseases. So Satan would have defaced the credit of the Prophets
miracles, as though they also had been wrought, rather by magical
enchauntment, then by peculiar operation of Gods power, to confyrme their
doctrine. And at length, having thus incensed them with a foolish and an
ungodly emulation, he began to tell them wonders of the unspeakable power
of the name of God, and taught them to make exorcismes, whereby foolish men
set up his kingdom, and pulled away the minds of a great many, from the
worshipping and calling upon God. There remain to this day, certain tokens of
this old impiety, in the fables of the Jews, which they have devised of
their Schem Hamphoras, and in physic, they use many exorcismes, which is
euydent by little and little, crept in among the christians also, not without
the great hinderaunce of true godliness. Of this profession therefore, were
these seven sons of Sceua the chief priest. And this is no small argument
of great corruption, that the Bishops children gave their study, to wicked and
deuillishe deceytes, and sought to enrich themselves by an art which was
plainly forbidden by the word of God. Further this example teaches us, how
far error runs, as soon as men begin to swerve from the word of God.
For as it happened among the Jews, so we see it has also come to pass in
Popery. For where they would not seem, to want any of the orders that were in
the primitive church, they have also ordained Exorcistes, who though for the
most part they bragged of a bare name, only, yet so far has the presumption
of some of them gone, that they have taken upon them to conjure the spirits,
and souls of the deceassed, wherein one of the least defenses of Antichrists
tirannie has not consisted, to say nothing, how through their wicked
exorcismes, they have polluted baptism, and Gods whole religion. Yea, by this
mean it came to pass, that no kind of men had more students of Necromantie
and Magike, then the Monks and Priests, and even the highest priests were
not behind in these wicked sciences. For the hystories of Syluester the
second, Gregory the seventh, Alexander the sixte, and many other, are well
known to every man. Also we are taught, what to judge of such* as attribute
godly power, to holy names, and sentences taken out of scriptures, as though by
these, either evil spirits could be driven away, or diseases and maladyes
rid from men and beasts bodies: or that they which study south-saying, (an
art invented by man's curiosity) could tell us, what is to come, or what shall
happen hereafter.

This is a Judicial or rather an heathen or a Gentile superstition, and not
without a cause condemned by the laws of God. For first unto a vain sound of
words, unto dombe fygures, and ceremonies full of horror, is attributed a
power of help, which is no light offense, against the first precept of the
tables. For there we are commanded to acknowledge God only for our helper, to
put our trust in him only, and to ask all our aid and succor of him. Next,
men are sent from the invocation of God, unto wicked sciences, as though
thereby, God might be enforced to help us, against his will. Moreover, the
kingdom of the devil, is no way more fortifyed then this, who dyligently
seeks to make men look for help and counsel in other things then in God,
because that is the most commodious way for him whereby to deceive and beguile
men. Therefore we read that these sciences in old time were not without a
cause abolished, both by the laws of GOD and Emperors. And there remain in
the Popes law, Canons gathered out of most ancient counsels and fathers, Cod.
lib. 9. tit. 18.26. quest. 5. and.7. Aug. de doct. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 22.
which admonish us, to keep such as were given to these arts from the
communion of the faithful. And here we must not give ear to their objections
which frame arguments of the success and holiness of the words, thereby to
defend their impious superstition. For they say a many are healed by these
means, and that things otherwise impossible are hereby every day brought to
pass. Again they say, there is no offense in them, because they consist for
the more part, upon the holy names of God, or else upon certain notable
sentences of holy scripture. The answer is easy to both these objections. We
know that Satan is able to show woonders, but not without the sufferance of
God. It is well known what he wrought in times past, by the Magitians in
Egypt, and how he burned Iobes cattle and servants by fire from above. De
Trinit. lib. 4. cap. 11.
Yea Augustine testifyeth, that he is able to do strange matters, because he
can transfourme himself into an Angel of light. But does it therefore become
christian men, to believe his suggestions, or to use his help? why do we not
rather regard the counsel of God, which suffers Satan thus to do, because
he means either to try the faith of his people, or else to send effectual
illusions, to those that have deserved destruction? Let us therefore stand fast
in the faith, least we swerve therefro, and be left wholly to Satan's scorning
and delusion. Again, touching the holiness of the words, we dispute not, but
we say, the more holy they are, the more detestable it is to abuse them. For
this is not the use either of the names of God, or of his words, to serve for
magical mutterings, and with a vain sound, to drive away either spirits or
diseases, but to declare and set out unto us, the property of God, and his
will. And if holiness of words can excuse Magicians and enchaunters, then
shall they also be excused, that commonly abuse the other holy and wholesome
creatures of God. But how vain these men's excuse is, that form or manner of
exorcisme which these exorcistes used, abundantly declares. For what is there
in them to be reprehended? They use this word, adiuring, according to the
example of most godly men. Next, they adjure by the name of Jesus, and least
they might seem to mean some counterfeyte Jesus, they plainly express him
whom Paul preaches. Notwithstanding, they are accused of impiety, because
they used the holy words naughtily, and without faith, for their lucre sake
and advantage. Therefore away with them, that will seek such slender
pretenses for their Iewishe and heathen superstitions, and let us not believe
them which dare abuse the names of God and his Christ.

The effect of the exorcistes is unlucky.
But let us consider the success of this enterprise, which was very agreeable
to their presumptuousnesse. For the evil spirit answers these exorcistes and
says: Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are you? And streightway he
sets the man whom he possessed, upon them, and makes him to season on
them, so strongly preuayling against them al, that he well bette them, and set
them packing out of the house naked. By the which argument it is most evidently
perceived that there is no power in holy words of themselves, whereby to
drive away devils, or any other evils, but that all such effects depend upon
Gods providence, which sometime works miracles also even by Infydels, when he
sees their help serve for the setting forth of his kingdom and glory. This
example teaches what all they may look for, which abuse the name of Christ,
or his laws, for their private lucre and advantage. This is a common thing in
these days. For what else does the Pope, seeing under the cloak of Christ's
name, he chalengeth to him the supremacy in the Church. What else do Mass
Priests, when perverting the manner and order of the supper, they imagine
Christ is at their beck, and change the words of the supper into a
coniuration, through the power whereof they transubstanciate (as they say) the
bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ? What shall I speak of the
keys, under the pretense whereof, they have burst into men's consciences,
ordained satisfactions, and expiations of sins, little or nothing differing
from those which we read, the heathen sometimes used. I let pass infynite
other things, which though God punish not by and by, as we see he did the
children of Sceua, yet the judgment of the Lord (as Peter says) sleeps
not, 2. Peter. 2.
by the which long sithence, their punishments are appointed. We are moreover
taught by this place, how great the power of our Savior Jesus Christ is,
seeing he can use the Devil be he never so loathe, to the setting forth of his
kingdom. For who will think that he would willinglye bear witness to Jesus
Christ and Paul his servant, and hurt his own bondmen and instruments? He is
yet compelled to do both, because it seems so good unto the Lord, at whose
sight and beck the Apostle writes, Jacob. 2.
that the Devils tremble and quake. Why then are we afraid of Satan's craft or
power, whose help we see Christ here use at his pleasure so mightilye? Now is
the Prince of this world thrown out of his kingdom, which so long he has so
falsely claymed and usurped. And it is no hard thing for them to overcome him,
that are by faith graffed in Christ.

Now let us come to the last part of this history, The true use of Gods
judgments, and an ensample of true repentance.
which conteyneth in it manifold and singular fruit. First this thing was
known amongst all the Ephesians, who were all stricken of God, whom they saw
so severely revenge the abusing of his son, and of his name. This is the
lawful use of Gods judgments, to put in our minds a sense or feeling of Gods
religion. But O miserable wretches that we be, which may seem altogether to
be waxed deaf, seeing we are moved with no examples, that God daily shows
upon the blasphemers and contemners of his name and word. Next, many of them
that believed came of their own accord, and confessed their doings openly.
This is an evident argument of the mortifycation of the flesh, which being
most desirous of honor and estimation, can hardly be brought to confess she
has erred. But the desire of truth and glory of God overcomes all
affections of the flesh in those that believe. By this place it appears what
manner of confession the Scriptures require of us, verily public and open,
which serves to the setting forth of Gods glory, and to the amendment of
many. Therefore their ignorance is very gross, which think by this example to
establishe auricular confession, wherewith this confession that Luke here
speaks of, has no affinity. For these Ephesians come of their own accord,
and confess their old errors, giving thanks unto God, which had vouchsafed
to deliver them from them. But the Pope enforces men against their wills, to
confess their secret faults also, which no man was privy to before. We
read they made confession but once, where the Pope commands us oftentimes
to confess. They made open confession, and that before all men. But the Pope
teaches us to whisper our sins in the ear of the Priest only. They by
their confession sought nothing but the glory of God. The Pope commands to
ask remission of sins and satisfaction of the Priest. What stand we long?
The more diligently a man examineth the circumstances of this doing, the more
manifestly it shall appear, auricular confession is rather ouerthrown than
confyrmed by this example. But let us return to the Ephesians, whereof many
were hitherto given to curious arts, but are now so touched with the feeling
of Christ's spirit, that they openly burn their books on heaps, where we
understand not only their Magical books, but also all other books, that
served rather unto fruitelesse and offensive studies, than unto godliness,
such as for the most part are the books of Astrology, Geomantie, soothsaying
books, and books of love, and such like. He shows also the price or value
of the books, which after the Germans account amounts to the sum of six
thousand six hundred, threescore and six florenes. By this mean the godly
persons thought to take all occasion of offense, both from themselves, and from
other in time to come. And this is the true property of them that unfeignedly
repent, that they hate the instruments of sin, as much as the sin it
self, and are not grieved to lose those things, which they know had sometime
been occasion of their fall, be they never so precious. Therefore they cannot
be judged to have truly repented, nor to understand the heynousnesse of their
offenses, which use to retain and keep in these days, the instruments of
their evil dooinges, such as are Images, superstitious deckinges of Churches,
books that teach superstition, amorous writings, wanton apparel, and
innumerable such like. Last of all Luke says that the word of God grew
mightily, and was confyrmed in the hearts of the Disciples, which was an effect
of their former study. For the word of God uses marvelously to grow, if
all impediments be taken out of the way that may hinder it. Let us therefore
follow the example of this famous Church, that increasing daily more in faith,
we may become perfyte men in Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom be praise, honor,
power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.Cxxviij. Homely.
AFTER these things were ended, Paul purposed in the spirit, when he had
passed over Macedonia and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem, saying: After I have been
there, I must also see Rome. So sent he into Macedonia, two of them that
ministered to him, even Timotheus and Erastus, but he himself remained in Asia,
for a season. The same time there arose no little ado about that way. For a
certain man named Demetrius a silver smyth, which made silver shrines for
Diana, was not a little benefyciall to the crafts men. Whom he called
together with the workmen of like occupation, and said: Sirs, you know that
by this craft we have advantage. Moreover, you see and hear, that not alone
at Ephesus, but almost throughout all Asia, this Paul has persuaded and
turned away much people, saying, that they be not Gods which are made with
hands. So that not only this our Craft comes into peril, to be set at
naught, but also that the Temple of the great Goddess Diana should be
despised, and her magnifycence should be destroyed, whom all Asia, and the
world worshippeth.
Because Paul knew that the Lord had not appointed him to be a teacher of
one Nation only, therefore he thought he would not serve still in one Nation,
but preach the Gospel euerywhere unto all people. Yea, he thought that on him
chiefly lay the charge of all Churches, as he declares in his later Epistle
to the Corinthians. Wherefore being not contented here and there to gather
Churches together, he goes to see and visit those he had gathered and
ordained, least any thing might fall down again either by the wearysomnesse
of man, or by the craft and subtlety of the Devil. We have seen hitherto
diverse ensamples of like endeavor, whereunto this may also be annexed, that Luke
tells in the beginning of this place, to the which he joins a new history
of sedition, raised against Paul, whereby his purpose of visiting the
Churches, for a time was stopped.

The author of this devise and counsel, was the holy spirit, Paul is minded
to go from Ephesus.
by whose conduct and guyding, we have often showed that Paul began and
took all his matters in hand. He purposed to go into Macedonia and Achaia, to
visit and confyrme the Churches of the Philippians, Thessalonians, and
Corinthians, and also to gather an alms or relief among them, to carry to
the needy brethren in Syria, as may evidently be gathered of his Epistles to
the Corinthians, which journey being ended, he meant to go to Rome, to bestow
some gift of the spirit upon the faithful there also, Roma. 1.
and to receive mutual consolation of their belief. Yet because he would
seem to do nothing rashly, he sent Timotheus and Erastus which were of his
familiers before, meaning himself to follow not long after, if that uproar
begoonne at Ephesus, had not stayed him a good many of days. Again, by this
example it appears how needful it is for the conservation of the Church,
to be very careful, seeing the most paynefull Apostle which had as yet so
much to do, was feign so often to go visit and confyrme the Churches before
ordained. Therefore they bewray their fylthy sluggishenesse and wicked
arrogance, that think the zeal which the Ministers now a days use in this
behalf, is unprofitable or superfluous. Also in Paul appears the property
of true faith, because she is not idle and slothful, but makes men diligent
in their vocation. For where she burns in the zeal of the glory of God, and
love of her neighbor, it cannot be that she will stand still idle, no she
will be overcome with no traueyle or danger. Which is more evident by this
only example of Paul, than needs long proof. Let every man apply this to
himself, and by following it, declare his faith, by his works. Moreover, it
appears that faith is circumspect also, because Paul whom the holy ghost
guided in all his doings, sends such men before him, as he knew were
trustye. For as true believers, when they have the express commandment of
God, follow it without any staggering, although the flesh suggest diverse
things to the contrary: so in other things, whereof they have no certain
commandment of God, they do all things prudently and circumspectly, for
fear they might obscure the glory of God, and give the weak an occasion of
stumbling. And this is the safest way we can use in taking of things in hand.
etc.

Paul's purpose is disappoynted.
Howbeit, although Paul was scarce any where received with more good will,
than among the Ephesians, and had taught there two years together, with great
utility and success, so that not only many of the people believed, but also
he had gotten many of the chief of Asia to be his friends, as hereafter shall
appear: yet at length he fyndeth no better courtesy than that we have heard
he found so often in other places, namely troubles, and public sedition,
wherewith he was so tossed and turmoyled, that he reckeneth the danger he was
in at Ephesus, among the greatest troubles that ever he was in. For he writes
that he there fought with beasts, and was in despair of his life 1. Cor. 15.
2. Cor. 1. etc. Luke describes all this history marvelous diligently,
because in it as in a glass, the property and conditions of the enemies of
truth, their crafts and weapons, are set forth to be beholden: and also it
appears how God uses most faithfully to defend both his servants and the
truth. In this place first he proponeth the sum of the matter, and then next
he shows the beginners of the sedition, with the oration of Demetrius, who
was the cause and stirrer of all this tragedy, incensing the minds of his
adherentes against Paul.

A sudden uproar.
At that time (says he) there arose much ado about that way. He calls the
Christian sect or religion a way which the adversaries would have oppressed.
The time is diligently to be observed which shows us how this stir was
made, when Paul had set al things in an order at Ephesus, and was minded to go
to the Macedonians and Corinthians, and had sent two of his companions before,
to prepare all things necessary. By which example we are admonished, that we
must always be watchful, but chiefly when matters seem in safety, and out
of all danger. For Satan never rests, but being driven out of his hold,
seeks means to return again, as Christ teaches. Math. 12.
And there want not examples of such, as being grievously offended with sudden
crosses and troubles, have fallen from the faith. Let it yet comfort us, that
how much so ever our enemy rage and rave, yet has he no power upon Christ,
John. 14.
ne yet upon those which by faith are graffed in Christ, yea being long agone
vanquished, he does but lighten as out of a Basen, and show counterfeyte
scarmuches of fight, whereby to fraye untried and unskillful minds.

Demetrius is author of the uproar.
But let us see the author and instruments of this uproar Demetrius the
Siluersmith was the Captain of them, a welthy man, and one that made Silver
shrynes, and such other gay geere, in the honor of Diana, and thereby was an
occasion that the men of his occupation gate much money. Diana was worshipped
(as we showed above) among the Ephesians, under the name of (...) Multimannuia,
whom they being seduced by gentile superstition, believed to be a Goddess,
that nourished and fed all living creatures. The Temple of this Goddess was
the famousest and most sumptuous in all the world, unto the which there were
Pilgrimages instituted, from all places of Asia, both far and near, which
was the cause that they that made implementes of superstition, gat very much
daily by strangers that came thither. Therefore they could not abide the
doctrine of Paul, which at once overthrew both their superstition and all
their hope of gain. These men therefore being called together by Demetrius, go
about to oppress Paul by sedition, knowing that by no force of reason they
were able to convince him. Here therefore it appears as evidently as may be,
that the occasions of sedition, ought not to be ascribed to the gospel or
ministers thereof. For as the faith that they preach, unites us to God, so it
chiefly commends unto us charitiye and concord. And here Demetrius is
expressly named, for the begynner of this sedition, and not Paul, who for two
years before had so taught, that he had showed no token at all of a seditious
person. And of this kind there are many examples, both in this book, and also
in other hystories. Whereby we learn, that they ought not over soon to be
credited, which accuse the gospel and preachers thereof of sedition, but let
us search for the truth farther, and it shall appear, that they commonly are
the first begynners of sedition, which would lay the fault thereof upon other.
And such for the most part are they, which like Demetrius and his Complyces,
The Demetrij of our age.
either live of crafts and trades forbidden by God, or else hunte after game
and pleasure. The standard bearer among these men is the Bishop of Rome, and
his creatures, the Cardinals, Bishops, Monks, and priests. For the greatest
share of lucre and advantage by superstition comes to him. He causes his
creatures also to get much money, while being marked with his badge, he gives
them power to buy and sell, that is, to make marchaundize of of Gods word,
and to chop and change the same. But all these can not abide the truth of the
gospel, which like a sharp whyppe, shaken with the hand and spirit of
Christ, dryueth all marchaunting out of the Temple, and ouerturneth the tables
of the exchaungers of money. Next unto these are Kings, Princes, and all the
great train of noble men in this world. For superstition is gainefull unto
them also, because under the pretense hereof, they provide for numbers of their
children, and the defense of their dignity, while by their authority, they
thrust them into Bishopprickes, Abbacies, and Cardynalshippes, which perhaps
otherwise should be set to Marchaunts trade, or to get their living with their
hands, which seems to them the heynousest matter in the world. Now both
these sorts together, help the inferior sort of the commons, which live
either by Monks and priests, or by these nobles. For these commons being of a
servile nature and disposition, and fearing to dye for famishment, are soon
persuaded to any thing by these Demetrij. Add unto all these such as either
desire and seek to live lycentiously, or else such as follow their pleasures
and gains, by mischievous means, as are usurers, whoremongers, drunkardes,
hired Souldyours, and all such other like. For these people because their
works be naught, would not be reproved, and therefore they wish the light of
the gospel, which bewrays their doings, at once extinguished. These I say
are the begynners of sedition, against the gospel, as no man can deny, which
will dyligently view the usage of our days.

But chiefly Demetrius oration is to be considered, the proposition and state
whereof is, that Paul ought not to be suffered, which by his doctrine,
Demetrius oration.
draws men from the old religion. He confyrmeth his proposition with three
reasons or arguments, which use to be of great force in the kind deliberatiue.
The first is taken of commodity or profit, whereunto the hungryer and poorer
sort have always a special regard, you know (says he) that by this craft,
we have advantage. What remains then but that you must perish for hunger,
if you suffer your occupation to be overthrown by Paul's doctrine? The second
reason he borrows of necessity: you see and hear, that not only at
Ephesus, but almost throughout all Asia, this Paul has persuaded. etc.
Therefore this matter can be driven of, or borne with no longer, but it is
needful with speed to provide a remedy. The third argument he fetches of
honesty saying: Not only this our craft comes into peril to be set at
naught, but also the Temple of the great Goddess Diana should be despised, and
her magnificence destroyed, whom all Asia, and the world worshyppeth. As
though he should say: O companions what infamy shall we purchase unto our
selves, if we suffer that religion to decay amongst us, which has been so many
ages of so great authority in all the world? Also in this oration appear the
crafts and vsages of the wicked, who incensed and led with the desire of
private lucre only, will yet be counted for the defenders of religion. Such an
one does the holye-ghost describe Caiaphas to be. John. 11. Such are the talks
of the Monks in these days, and of all those which uphold and maintain
Popery, amongst whom a man shall scarce find one so plain, as this
Demetrius, which does not dissemble, but that his chiefest respect was for his
private gain and advantage. Let us learn to suspect these clamoures, and to
mark better whereunto they tend. It appears also in this place, with what
arguments most times the wicked use to defend their superstition. Uerily with
the consent of the unlearned multitude, with the authority of kings and
princes, with the pomp and show of outward holiness, with contynuaunce of
time, but chiefly with the pretense of private gain and advantage. These
things are common now a days, if a man would mark the talk of our
adversaries. But it is a foul fault for christians, to use the arguments of
the heathen, in matters of religion, which ought to be judged and determined by
scripture only. Finally, by Demetrius own saying may be gathered what force
and power the gospel is of. For he confesses that by Paul's teaching, in two
years space, that famous temple was brought in danger, which all Asia was in
buylding, about the space of two hundred and twenty years, as we declared
erewhyle, and which the barbarous people spared in the Persian wars, where
they set fire on all other churches. He complayneth also that all men's minds
for the most part were turned from worshipping of Diana: But it is evident,
this could be done by no man's power or authority. We are also taught that
men have then profyted well in the Gospel, when their minds are wholly turned
from superstition and Idolatry. For as long as they hang in suspense hereof,
it is certain their minds are not lightened with the truth. Let us therefore
examine our selves after this rule, and casting away all superstition, turn
with fervent faith, to Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom be praise, honor, power,
and glory for ever. Amen.

The.Cxxix. Homely.
WHEN they heard these sayings, they were full of wrath, and cried out
saying: Great is Diana of the Ephesians. And all the City was on a rore, and
they rushed into the common hall with one assent, and caught Gaius and
Aristarchus, men of Macedonia, Paul's companions. When Paul would have entered
in unto the people, the Disciples suffered him not. But certain of the chief
of Asia (which were his friends) sent unto him, desiring him that he would
not preace into the common hall. Some therefore cried one thing, and some
another, and the congregation was all out of quiet, and the more part knew not
wherefore they were come together. Some of the company drew forth Alexander,
the Jews thrusting him forwards. But Alexander beckened with the hand, and
would have given the people an answer. When they knew that he was a Jew,
there arose a showte almost for the space of two hours, of all men crying:
great is Diana of the Ephesians.
THe Euaungelist Luke by the instinct of the holy Ghost, sets out in this
book, not only the persecutions laid upon the Apostles, by Magistrates and
order of law, but also the raging seditions of the furious commons, amongst
which this deserves to be counted the chief, which was begone by Demetrius
against Paul at Ephesus. The use of this and all other like serves for two
causes specially. First, they serve for the instruction of the Ministers, that
they be not offended with the tumultes of the seditious commons, as at any
strange and rare thing, nor leave not their duty undone, for fear of them.
But rather they must consider, that the Church in this world, is as it were a
Bark or vessel tossed to and fro, with wind and tide, whose Pylate Christ,
seems sometime to be on sleep, as the story of the gospel declares. Math.
4. Let them also remember, that it can not scarcely be chosen, but seditions
must be, because there are every where so many, which can not brook the
doctrine of the gospel, for that it makes either against their gain,
dignity, or licentious living. And our savior Christ prophesied, that not
only men of our own Country, but also those of one house should be at
division, and hate one an other. Let it suffice Ministers, that they give no
cause of tumult to the seditious, but if being led with naughty affections
they take occasion, let them commyt the success unto God, and in the mean
season apply their vocation, because (as Ambrose says. Fifth book and.33.
chapter.
) It lies in us not to provoke the people, but to appease them being up, it is
in the hand of God only. Moreover, the description of these tumultes make for
the instruction of all men in general. For they teach us, that we should not
rashely impute the causes of uproar to the gospel, and to the Ministers
thereof, as men use commonly to do, but that every man should consider the
case thoroughly, and then they shall be found the begynners of tumultes, which
will not be ruled by the gospel. And such an one we have heard Demetrius was,
whom all they directly follow, which in these days use to disturb and hinder
the gospel. But because we have lately spoken abundantly hereof, now let us
consider the sedicion, and how Paul used himself in the same.

Luke descrybeth it very dyligently, rehearsing every circumstaunce thereof.
The description of the sedition.
And first beginning with the cause, he says, they were all filled with wrath,
which as it is an evil Counselor in taking any thing in hand, so as James
says, it works nothing that is right or good. The cause of their wrath was
the danger and loss of their gain and auailes, which as Demetrius a while
ago said, was near at hand, and perhaps every one of them perticularly
began in some part to feel the same. For the world can abide nothing less
than to have their advantage turned away or dyminished. And at this day,
there is none other cause of the disturbaunces used against the gospel. The
Popes and Bishops are angry, because they see their dignity decays. The
Monks and Priests are offended, by reason their Kitchyns wax cold, through
the loss of their market of holiness. The Princes and Nobility are grieved,
for that their children are put by the possession of ecclesiastical goods,
who always till now lived like Lords of the same. The poorer sort of the
commons which were wont to flatter the Priests, and the Nobility, for living
frette and fume. Fools, Iesters, Bawdes, Cooks, Harlottes, gelded men,
buggered boys, and all like dregs of most filthy wretches, whom these (I
warrant you) holy fathers hitherto provided of lyuings, stamp and stare at
this geere. And all these in their heat and rage, run to counselles to
consult, how they may break in sunder the bands of Christ, as is descrybed
in the second Psalm, what good therefore shall we hope for of all these
counselles, where wrath is the President, a blind and froward Counselor.
This done they turn to Great is Diana of the Ephesians. By the which saying,
they testifye that they will defend the worship of Diana, even with their
blood. They craftily make religion a cloak for their belly and lucre. And the
men of these days, tread even in their steps, which with as little
sobriety, have the Saints, and the blessed Uirgin in their mouths against
us, whose honor they promise they will defend. Although our men in deed be
more impudent. For it is not without a cause that the Ephesians so exclaymed,
because Paul openly spoke against the worship of Diana, and was a professed
enemy thereof. Which of us denies the saints? who speaks against the right
worship of Marie? who derogateth any thing from her dignity and honor? We
confess she is mother to the son of God, we confess she is a Uirgin
undefiled and unspotted. We confess the Saints were the chosen instruments
of God, and that now they live in heaven, in bliss. But invocation and godly
honor, we say is due to God alone. What injury is this, if we teach the
same, that they sometime taught, in defense whereof they thought good to lay
down their lives? It is therefore a manifest slander, that they say
Demetrius only was the author. By which example we are taught, what mischief
suddenly may arise of a few seditious persons. For as a little sparkle may
set fire on an whole house, the flames whereof being carried with the wind,
catch the whole street upon a sudden: so sedition rising of a few
beginners and contempned at the first, even by the only fame thereof,
spreads it self abroad, and compasses about whole commonweals, not
without the present danger of all men's goods. The holy Scripture shows
us examples in Core, Absolon, Saeba, and diverse others. The like are also to be
seen in the stories of the Gentyles, amongst which that enterprise of Catiline
is very notable, which brought the Romans common weal, in great hazard by his
seditious attempts, even then when it most flourished. Let Magistrates hereby
learn to stop those betymes as are lykely will one day be sedicious, such
as commonly ryotous persons are, and as many as love religion for lukers sake.
Who if they be not kept under by severity of laws, will at length pour out
their pestilent poison, to the calamity of the publyke weal. Fourthly, they
rushe into the common hall by vyolence, and pluck Caius and Aristarchus Paul's
companions. Therefore they work with force, and use all kind of cruelty
against Innocents. For although the tempest of sedition many times use to
catch good men, which are enforced against their will, to take some part: yet
for the most part, the greater number are evil, whereby it comes to pass,
that seditions are most hurtful to good men and guiltless. Therefore they are
very fools, that hope for any goodness of sedition, which they must with
all dyligence go about to resist, that desire the prosperity or safety of
their commonweals.

But what does Paul in the whottest of this sedition? What Paul did in the
sedition.
he would have stepped forth, and gone in among them, to have assuaged these
raging rebels, least his companyons should have been hurt, which were haled
away, as we heard even now. But his Disciples would not suffer him,
chiefly those great men of Asia that were his friends, who well knew the
property of the people. And in this place a man may behold a whole heap of
notable virtues in Paul at once. For it is a singular ensample of faith and
sincere friendship, in him that would not leave his companyons in danger and
peril. And if Paul made so great an accounte of two of his friends, that he
would ieoparde his life for their sakes, what a care think we, had he of
whole congregations, which he knew were redeemed with the blood of Christ?
Furthermore there appears a marvelous constancy and fortitude in him, which
would adventure himself amongst the furious commons. For what other was this,
then to commit himself to the rage of the sea, or else to the fire? But he
respected the promises of Christ, wherewith he was so emboldened, that no
danger could fear him, to do his duty. It is also a token of singular
modesty, that he yields to better counsel, and does not obstinately urge
that, which was both dangerous and had little profit joined therewith. Let
every manne follow this example, because we see many times the greatest
wits, in their own dangers, know least what way or counsel to take. It
is also worthy the noting, that Paul has great men to his friends. A few
such we read Christ had, amongst whom Nicodemus and Joseph are counted the
chief. John. 12.3. Math. 27. Here the error of the Anabaptists is refelled,
which say that a christian ought to bear no office. But chiefly we learn
how vain the defense and succor of the world is, seeing their authority
could not keep Paul from danger of sedition. It becomes us therefore, to
put all our hope and trust in God alone, and not in Princes, or in the children
of men, for there is no help in them. Psalm. 146. And that this is the use of
this present example, Paul teaches in his second Epistle to the Corinthians,
the first chapter.

Now Luke comes to the seditious, of whom he reports two things. A
confused countenance of sedition.
First, some (says he) cried one thing, some an other, and the most part knew
not wherefore they were come together. This is a peculiar thing in the time of
sedition, that like a flowing stream, it caryeth many away with it, being
utterly ignorant of the meaning thereof, and a great many good men also even
against their will. Therefore such would be appeased rather by counsel and
reason, then by force. For if force be used, commonly the Innocents drink for
it, the wicked beginners slily slipping away. A dolorous example whereof
Germany saw, when in the year of our Lord, a thousand, five hundred, twenty
and five, horrible streams of husbandmens blood almost ouerflowed her. Let
Princes therefore have in mind rather that saying of the Prophet, where they
are commanded to hold their subjects lives dear. Psalm. 72. Moreover, the
Jews thrust forward one Alexander, who by all likelyhoode was one of Paul's
friends and drew him forth, because they meant to bring him in danger. He
desired silence and would have given a reason and an accounte of things
attempted, touching religion. But when they perceived he was a Jew, and an
enemy of heathen superstition, they turn to their furious exclamations
again, and for two hours long fill all the City with the noise of their
Diana. For as the belly lacks ears, so commonly they are deaf and will
hear no reason, which move sedition for the bellyes sake. And this is the
contynuall practice of the wicked, to bark against the truth with furious
clamours, which otherwise they know is invincible. In the mean season the
faintness of a great many is reproved, who knowing the truth, are yet
altogyther cold in the confessing thereof, and regard not the zeal of the
ungodly, whom they see bold even in the defense of superstition. Let us
learn therefore, what state the truth stands in, in this world, and being
armed with the constancy of faith, let us stowtely bear out whatsoever God
sends, that we may vanquishe all adversity, through Jesus Christ our Lord:
to whom be all praise, honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.Cxxx. Homely.
WHEN the town Clarke had ceased the people, he said, ye men of Ephesus,
what man is it that knows not, how that the City of the Ephesians is a
worshipper of the great Goddess Diana, and of the Image that came from heaven?
Seeing then that no man says here against, ye ought to be content, and to
do nothing rashly, for ye have brought hither these men, which are neither
robbers of Churches, nor yet despysers of your Goddess. Wherefore if
Demetrius and the craftesmen which are with him, have a matter against any
manne, the law is open, and their Rulers, let them accuse one another. But if
you go about any other thing, it shall be determined in a lawful
congregation. For we are in ieoperdye to be accused of this days uproar,
forasmuch as there is no cause, whereby we may give a reckoning of this
concourse of people. And when he had thus spoken, he let the assembly depart.
WE have heard the sedition that Demetrius raised against Paul, described by
Luke. Where beside the property of the furious people, we noted diverse points
wherein Paul was chiefly to be considered. First, he boldly and constantlye
would have ventured to go in among the people, mynding to have given an
account openly both of his faith and doctrine. But seeing he could not be
permitted so to do, he keeps him among his friends, committing the whole
success of the matter unto God, yet so as he swarued not a nail breadth from
the truth, nor yet dissembled any thing for cowardlye fear. Which example
admonishes us, what we should do in like case, How Christians should use
themselves in time of sedition.
or in open persecution. Before all things it becomes us according to Peter
the Apostles precept, to be ready to give an account to every manne, that
demands it. 1. Pet. 3. But when the enemies shall so rave, that there is no
place for truth and the confession thereof, we must proceed warily and wiselye,
least we put our self in danger without Gods calling, and so tempt him. In
the mean season let us be constaunt in acknowledging the truth, and wait the
Lords leisure, who never forsakes them that put their trust in him, and who
by his wisdom and power is able easily to cease and alaye all cruel
tempests. This present hystorye shows us an ensample hereof, where God
appeaseth a very dangerous sedition to all seeming, by the help of one Scribe
or Towneclarke, and such a one as the whole course of his Oration proves
manifestly, to have had no understanding in Christ's religion, where the power
of God appears the more, seeing he uses the reprobate and their help in the
defense of his people. Let us examine the Towneclarkes Oration throughout all
the parts thereof, the chief end whereof is to repress the seditious tumult
of the unruly people, himself in the mean season being little careful for
religion.

He begins with that ye most vexed these seditious. They stood in great
fear of their Diana, for her sake they so cried out, as we have heard before,
because if the worshipping of her were laid away, they saw their gain was
like to be gone. But the Towneclarke says, this was no just or sufficient
cause for them to make such a stir. For what man is there (says he) but
knows that the City of Ephesus is a worshipper of the great Goddess Diana,
and of the Image that came from heaven. As who should say: To what purpose
repeat you so often with furious clamor, the name of Diana? Who denies you to
be her honourers? Who knows not that Dianas Image came down from heaven? Or
who lets you to go on in the religion received of your forefathers? Since
all these be things clear and out of question, it becomes you to be quiet,
and to do nothing upon a head, and without advise. But the Towneclarke
could not be ignorant that Paul by his doctrine impugned the worship of
Diana. But of a politic wit, he dissembleth all these things, thinking this
sufficient to appease them, to let them understand, how they were urged or
compelled by no public authority to forsake their old religion. And as we
said erewhyle, this politic man seeks only how to bring down this
sedition at ones, which he saw began to grow so hot: which thing he
supposed to bring to pass more commodiously by crafty dissembling of the
matter, than by open disputation, Dianas image come from heaven.
which the seditious would have little regarded. Here we may not omit that he
says the Image came down from heaven. For hereby it appears it was a common
opinion among the Ephesians, that they thought Dianas Image was sent down from
heaven. For after Satan had bewitched men with his iuglings, so that they
presumed to change the glory of the immortal God into the form of
Creatures, then deceived he them every day with new fetches and devises, for
the surer establishing of his kingdom. Hereby he persuaded them, that the
Image of Pallas came down from heaven, and that through her protection they
gate the victories which they had. So was it thought that the shield which the
Romans used, as the arms and scutchion of the Empire, in the reign of Numa
their king, came down from heaven. Unto the which this that the Town clarke
says of the Image of Diana at Ephesus, may worthily be joined. But it had been
tolerable, if the Devil in times past with such sleyghts had deluded but the
heathen only, so that we had not seen the like among Christians also. For who
knows not the fable of the Chapel at Lauretum, myraculously conveyed over
the sea? Who is ignorant of the Chappelles, that God himself and his Angels
have dedicated. There are to be seen diverse Images of the virgin mother, which
the Monks most impudently affirm Luke painted, where as the hystories declare
he was a Physician, and no Painter. Whereunto are to be referred whatsoever
miracles are told of Images in Monks books, whereof they say, some removed
out of their place, some could not be removed, some wept, some prophesied,
and other some had some notable properties, or other. By the which may
plainly be gathered, what a rank crop of errors uses to spring of Images,
where they are once received and worshipped, so that it was not without a cause
that Lactantius said: there could be no religion wheresoever any Image was. In
his second book of false religion cap. 19.
Which also is the chief cause, that all the Scripture is so diligent and
earnest in oppugning them: so that it is wonderful, how it comes to pass,
that so many are found to defend them, seeing there are so many unhappy
Presidentes of superstition, euerywhere in every man's eyes. This being
premised, whereby he thought their moodie minds were somewhat assuaged, he
plainly rebukes them and accuses them of great rashenesse, in that he
apprehended and laid hands on Caius and Aristarchus, being strangers and
knowing no cause why, saying: ye have brought these men hither, which are
neither robbers of Churches, nor yet despysers of your Goddess. So perhaps he
might truly say of them, because they took not upon them to teach. But of
Paul he should not have said true, who earnestly inueyed against the worship
and ydolatrie done to Diana, as may easily be gathered by that he did at
Athens. And it is credible he would not have suffered this defense of the
Towneclarke, if he had been present. For he being enflamed with the zeal of
God, thought any thing intolerable, that made against the glory and honor of
God. In the mean while, the Town clerks words declare, what faults for the
most part are laid to the Ministers charge, namely, Sacrilege and blasphemy
against God and the Saints. These things we hear commonly in our days,
neither are we decked with any other names or tytles at their hands that are
the professed enemies of the Gospel. But if a man would thoroughly weygh the
matter, The Ministers of the Gospel are neither Church robbers nor blasphemers.
they are both false. For they be Church robbers, which either by stelth convey
away the goods dedicated to God, and to his Church, or else violently invade
them, and convert them to profane uses. But who does this more impudently than
Popes, Bishops, Monks, Priests, and the other of this mark. For to say
nothing how they provide for their kinsfolk commonly of the Church goods,
let us consider their families, and it shall appear that the greatest part of
the Church goods is spent upon Harlottes, Dyce, Horses, Hounds, and a
lubberlyke sort of servants, yea, they disdain us, for no cause so much, as
for that we labor by preaching of the gospel, to restore the goods, to Christ
and his Church again. For we defend not them which under a color of the
Gospel, provide and satisfye their avarice of the Church goods. Again, they
are blasphemous against God and the Saints, which abuse the name of God, and
rob the Saints of their due honor. It is as manifest as can be, that they
do both these rather than we. For they abuse the word of God, and the name of
Christ, to establishe their ydolatrie and tyranny. They give unto Creatures
the honor due unto God. They accuse the faith and doctrine of the Saints, of
heresy, and use both fire and sword against their books, and them that
follow them. And in the mean season go about to defame us of sacrilege, and
of blasphemy. But oh the iniquity of our times. Among the Ephesians was
found an Heathen to defend the innocent. And now adays amongst the
professors of Christ are scarce any that will testifye the innocence of
Christ's Ministers. Let us mark also how the Towneclarke says these men are
no Church robbers nor blasphemers, for surely he would have judged them
worthy of punishment, if they had been such. For although the Gentyles sometime
greatly erred in the faith and in religion, yet the law of nature was of
great force amongst them which declared, that robbers of Churches and
blasphemers ought to be punished. But now a days all things are so far out
of frame, that the faithful defenders of the Gospel are in more danger, than
those which pollute the Church with manifest sacrilege and blasphemy.

But let us consider the later part of this Oration, The best form of common
weal.
where he prescrybeth a manner and form to be followed, as well in private
matters, as public, saying: But if Demetrius and the Crafts men with him have
any matter against any man, the law is open, and there are Rulers, let them
accuse one another. Thus he accuses them all of injustice, in that they make a
public case of a private, and belonging unto a few persons, and endaunger
themselves for another man's cause. Then adding thereunto a second point, he
says: ^ut if you go about any other thing, it shall be determined in a lawful
Congregation. By the which words he teaches them that a public matter
should not in such sort be taken in hand, and lays the danger before their
eyes that they stood in to the Romans, for this sedition that they had made,
who had a care principally that the people under their governance, should live
peaceably and in quiet. This place declares how the Romans governed their
common weal, while they observed equity and justice. They had euerywhere
abroad certain Liefetenants and Magistrates, which in all places kept Courts
and law days, and suffered no man to be hurt or harmed, whose cause had not
first been heard, and he lawfully convicted. And public affairs were ordered
in public assemblies, and lawful councels without any seditious tumultes. God
himself allowed this order of government, when he appointed Judges for his
people, whom he commanded to hear all causes diligently, and to give true
judgment. He would have no man to be a Judge in his own cause. Let this order
be observed among Christians, for whom it is a shame, to be overcome of
Heathens. Chiefly let them keep them from sedition, which both impaireth the
authority of the Magistrates, and subuerteth the state of the common weal.

Rebellions are easily suppressed.
But the effect of this Oration does Luke set out, when he writes that the
assembly which a little before was in a hurly burly, was dimissed very
quietly. For as the common sort are easily brought to an uproar, so are they as
easily pacifyed again, if a man deal with them by reason and counsel,
rather than by force and violence. And herein appears the provident care of
God, wherewith he delivers and defends his children. For as the same God
does accustomably raise the waves of the sea with sodeine blastes of wind, and
lays the same suddenly again, even so tries he his children with dreadful
storms of dangers, and when he sees good knows how to still them again
without any danger at all. Wherefore trusting to the goodness and power of
him, let us keep our standing with stout courage, assuring our selves to have
the upper hand, against all the attemptes of the wicked, through Christ Jesus
our Lord and revenger most faithful and invincible: to whom be praise,
honor, glory, and power, for ever. Amen.

The.xx. Chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The Cxxxj. Homely.
AFter that the rage was ceased, Paul called the Disciples unto him, and took
his leave of them, and departed for to go into Macedonia: And when he had gone
over those parties, and had given them a long exhortation, he came into Greece,
and there aboade three months. And when the Jews laid wait for him, as he
was about to sail into Syria, he purposed to return through Macedonia. There
accompanied him into Asia, Sopater of Berrhoea, and of Thessalonia Aristarchus
and Secundus, and Caius and Timotheus of Derba: and out of Asia Tychichus and
Trophimus. These went before, and tarried us at Troas. And we sailed away from
Philippi after the days of sweet bread, and came unto them to Troas, in five
days, where we abode seven days.
Because our Savior Jesus Christ called Paul his chosen vessel, or
instrument, therefore it is not without a cause that Luke repeateth so
diligently the things that Paul did. For so the truth of the testimony that
Christ bare of him, is proved, and a general ensample is set out for all men to
follow, which will be taken for chosen vessels of God. Moreover, the Evangelist
so proceeds in the rehearsal of Paul's matters, that sometime he declares
the whole Hystories with the circumstances thereof, such as in every part of
them contain many things that serve for our instruction, as we saw came to
pass at Philippi, Corinthe, Athens, and lately at Ephesus. Sometime he
comprehends many things in one, and in few words compriseth long and
perilous voiages, which were scarce finished in many months, that it might the
more evidently appear what diligence Paul used in his office, what
trustiness, and what incredible pains he took, and of what courage he was in
dangerous enterprises. The Argument of the xx. Chapter.
Both these things he observes in this Chapter. For first he briefly touches
his journey into Macedonia and Achaia, the entente whereof was declared before.
Next unto that, he shows certain peculiar things, as the miracle wrought at
Troas, where Eutychus was raised again, and the Synod of Ministers gathered
together at Miletum. We at this present will consider Paul's journey, the
report whereof is so ordered, that both that that Paul did, and others also
is rehearsed.

When, and in what wise Paul departed from the Ephesians.
And in this journey fell out three things chiefly to be considered in Paul.
First is declared how he departed from the Ephesians. After the rage was
ceased (says he) he called the Disciples unto him, and took his leave of
them and departed. Then he forsook not the Church, before all the business
was done, and that he saw the Disciples out of danger. Paul therefore is a
good Shepherd, and no hyreling, which sees the Wolf come, John. 10.
and flies away, and provides for him self. And then another he departs not
away secretly, but calls the Congregation together, and byddeth them
farewell, giving them admonition of all things needful for them to know and
observe. As this was the argument of a mind not culpable nor guyltie in it
self, so it shows a signification of a faithful care, that he would have
of them, even when he was absente. In so much that afterward when he wr^te
unto them, Ephesi. 1.
he says that he made continual mention of them in his prayers. And in an
other place he writes, that the c^re of all Churches lies on his shoulders.
2. Cor. 11.
Let all those follow this example, unto whose charge either the Church or
Common weal is committed, least they seem to provide for their own selves,
when public perilles be at hand, or else to have little or no regard of
them, whereof they shall give a straight accounte another day unto the Lord.
Paul visits Macedoni^ and Greece.
Next he shows whether he went, into Macedonia, and from thence into
Greece, in which places he spent three months, bestowing all that time in
visiting and confirming the Churches. Thus we read he did also other where is,
in the.xiiij. and.xv. Chapters. Whereby we gather, that it was the common use
of the Apostles, not only to plant Churches, but afterward to go visit
them, and confirm them in the faith, and to cleanse them of errors, if perhaps
any had crepte in, while they were absent. We learn by their example, that
they which have their Churches and commonweals once well ordered, ought not
to be careless, but to take good heed (as Christ warns us) that while we
are sleeping, Satan sow not ungracious cockle among them. He uses chiefly to
lie in wait for the Church, 2. Corin. 11.
to pull them from Christ, who ought to cleave unto him like a faithful wife.
He likewise diversely assaulteth many ways good and wholesome laws, because he
thinks his kingdom would easily be established, if they were ouerturned.
And his attemptes be not always in vain, because there are few that follow
Paul's faith, industry, sufferaunce, Paul exhorts the congregation to
perseuera^ce
and diligence. Thirdly, is plainly declared what Paul did in these Churches.
He gave them a long exhortation, verily to continue in the faith, without the
which none can be saved. Often exhortations are needful, both for us which
be ready of nature to fall, and also because of the Devil, which always
walks up and down like a roaring Lion, and seeks whom he may devour.
Therefore their judgment is not to be admitted, which think this is but a
superfluous care and labor. In the mean season we are admonyshed, that
Churches have nothing of more price, than the word of God, out of the which
daily instructions, exhortations, and corrections ought to be taken. Wherein
the Apostles were so diligente, that they easily neglected all other things in
comparison hereof, as we might perceive in the sixte Chapter. Therefore they
be far unlike the Apostles, that neglect the Office and Ministry of the
word and teaching, and are occupied in wearishe Ceremonies, or else in
administration of earthly jurisdictions.

But let us return unto Paul, The Jews lay wait for Paul.
and see what he suffered in this voyage. The Jews laid wait for him as he
was sailing into Syria, who had thought to have made him out of the way. But
Paul prudently disappoynteth them, altering his purpose, and going by land
into Macedonia and Syria. This place teaches us what reward Ministers of the
Truth have in this world. Certes the worste that can be, while men seek to
destroy them, which of all other men labor most to bring them to salvation.
For how careful Paul was for the Jews, both his continual labors and
travel, and also his Epistles testify, specially, that which he writes to
the Romans in the ninth and tenth Chapiters. And yet had he no greater
ennimies than they. The same we have other wheares declared, that Moses, and
the Prophets, and Jesus Christ the Son of God suffered. Let no man
therefore now a days be offended, when the like things fall out, seeing such
is the nature of the world, that they think their felicity stands in the
destruction of the godly. In which their judgment yet they are most
myserablie deceived. For thus they bereeue them selves of the wholesome succor
of prayers, which the godly use to make even for their ennimies. But what
shall we do (will thou say) if we should come into the like hazard?
Follow Paul, in whom thou shalt note principally two things. For he both
constantly went forward in his vocation, and likewise prudently avoided the
danger thereof arising. Thus must we above all things remember our vocation,
that we be not plucked therefro, through any ingratitude of the world. For
why should we forget our calling, and follow those, whose wicked usage we
are wont to deteste? Yet let us be circumspect, and as Christ counsayleth us,
beware of men, least we be said to tempte God, Math. 10.
by putting our selves rashly and unadvisedly in danger.

Now what does God in the mean season? Paul's guard or garriso^.
Leaves he his servant in danger? No. But while the Jews his kinssemen and
false brethren, (as he complayneth him.ij. Corinth. xj.) lay in wait for him,
God joins unto him faithful fellows and companions, in his trauelles and
dangers, which help him in this perrill, both with counsel and otherwise.
Here are reckened seven notable men, of diverse congregations, of whom Paul
many times makes mention in his Epistles, beside Luke the writer of this
present History, which made eyghte. And some of these go before, to see and
mark whether there were any lying in wait, and to provide Paul of lodging,
other some kept closely unto him, to comfort him with their company, and to
provide him of necessaries. And here the truth and goodness of God is
diligently to be considered, which uses to defend his servants that are
in danger, and to provide them of faithful companions, that labor and
travel for the glory of his name. Thus unto Joseph, that required to have the
burial of Christ's body, is joined Nicodemus, to bear part of the charges,
labor and peril in the same. But now a days, we complain of the slothe
and cowardelynesse of others, saying, we are not able alone to bear the
weight of Christ's quarrel, being as cowardely and slothefull as other. But if
we would do our duty, we should see God would quickly touch the
hearts of others also. We have besides in Paul's Companions a notable example
of love and thankfulness, what a dangerous and laborous thing it was to
follow Paul by Sea and by land, having euerywhere so many enemies, every man
may easily conjecture. But for all this, they which worthily esteemed the gift
of faith, that they had gotten by Paul's teaching, could not be separated from
him. And these men want not their reward even upon the earth, because God has
registered their names in eternal memory, and their souls no doubt do now
rejoice with Christ in heaven, because they accompanied his minister so
courteously on earth. The Apostle sets forth this promptness and readynesse
of mind in the Galathians also, who he says would not have spared their
eyes, if he had needed them. But O the filthy unthankfulness of our days,
which is run so far, that they which brag of the faith, rent and deface
with filthy slanders the names of them, by whose ministry they first
learned the faith. Yet let Gods promise and mercy comfort us, which will never
leave them destitute of his help, whom he has chosen to the inheritance of
heavenly life in his son Jesus Christ: to whom be praise, honor, power
and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.Cxxxij. Homely.
AND upon one of the Saboth days, when the Disciples came together for to
break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to depart on the morrow, and
continued the preaching unto Midnyghte. And there were many lights in the
Chamber, where we were gathered together: and there sat in a wyndowe a
certain young man named Eutychus, being fallen into a deep sleep. And as
Paul was preaching, he was the more overcome with sleep, and fell down from
the third lofte, and was taken up dead. But when Paul went down, he
fell on him, and embraced him, and said: Make nothing adoo, for his life is in
him. So when he was come up again, and had broken the bread and eaten,
and talked a long while (even until the morning) at the last he departed.
And they brought the young man alive, and were not a little comforted. And we
went before to Ship, and loosed unto Asson, there to receive Paul. For so had
he appointed, and would him self go on foot. When we were come together at
Asson* we took him in, and came to Mitylene. And we sailed thence, and came
the next day over against Chios. And the next day we arrived at Samos, and
tarried at Trogyllion. The day following we came to Miletum. For Paul had
determined to sail over by Ephesus, because he would not spend the time in
Asia, for he hasted (if it were possible) to keep at Jerusalem the feast of
Pentecoste.
AFter that the Apostle Paul had accomplished at Ephesus all things that
appertained to the establishment of the same Church, the^ went he on with the
voyage that he had before purposed to make, in the which he visited the
Churches of Macedonia and Greece, and confirmed them in the true faith. We
have seen there notable arguments of the Apostles faith and diligence, when
as Paul let for no labor or danger, either to get Churches, or to
preserve those that were gotten. At length he came to Troas, where fell out
certain peculiare things, in the describing whereof, Luke is very diligent.
And first he sets out an ensample of Ecclesiastical assembly, and next a
miracle that God would have wrought in that place, both for the commendation
and setting forth of Paul's Ministry, and for diverse causes else.

He describes this Church assembly with all the circumstaunces thereof very
diligently. And beginning with the time, An example of a church assembly.
he says they came together on a Sabbath day, which day as yet, was much
celebrated, because of the ancient custom. Afterward, when the Church began
more and more to increase, the next day following, the Sabothe was appointed
for Gods service, and in remembrance of Christ's resurrection, it was called
the Lords day. By this place we learn, that such days as God has
appointed for service or religion, ought not to be neglected of Christian
men. For they are not only needful because of outward woorshippe, but
also inward, which cheefely consists in the study of Gods word, and in
the diligent meditation of his benefits, the body and mind for the time
being clean separated from all profane matters, which thing was the cause
that GOD commanded the breakers of the Sabothe to be punished with death.
And the breaking of the Saboth is acco^^ted of the Prophets, amongst the
most heinous sins and causes of the Captivity of Babylon: so that it was
not without a cause that Nehemias thought it is duty, Nehem. 13
to see that day kept so holy, when the people returned from their captivity.
Whereunto appertains also the example of Christ, who as he oftentimes upon
the saboth day went into the Sinagoges, so he diverse times disputed diligently
of the right using of that day, to deliver it both from superstition* and also
from contempt. Holy places.
Then he shows also the place, where this company or assembly met. This
was a loft or chamber in the private house of some one of the faithful, who
appointed it for the Church or Congregation, because the Christians for good
cause abhorred the Temples of the Idolaters, and they had no public place
permitted them, by reason the Roman Presidentes bare rule in every place,
which either were no favorers of Christian religion, or else were open enemies
thereof. He says there were diverse candles lighted in the chamber, to put
away the darkness of the night, and for avoiding the suspicion of
dishonestie. Therefore it is a peeuishe error of them, which of a foolish
imitation make that a service of God, which in times past served for
necessity, and think that God which is the light everlasting, is woorshipped
with candles of tallowe or wax, and for the defense of their invention, use
both this place, and the example of Moses law. For here is plainly expressed
the night time, when it is needful for candles to be lighted. And for the
same cause afterward, the Christians used candles in their assemblies, because
they could not meet together, but in the morning before day, by reason of the
lying awayte of their ennimies, as appears by the Epistles of Plinius
Secundus, and may be gathered out of the Church writers. The which cause
being taken away, it is but foolishness, to help the day light with
artificial lights. It is evident there was a far other meaning of the
Candlestick in Leuiticus. For as all the ceremonies of that Priesthood, were
figures of things that Christ should perform, and were ordained only till
the time of correction, so the candlestick also was a figure of Christ, which
is the true and eternal light of the world, and which by the ministry of
the Gospel lighteneth his Church, for the which cause the Apostles, and they
which are their true and lawful successoures, Math. 5
are called the light of the world. In the mean season we learn, that it is
necessary to have certain places, for the outward woorshipping, and for the
Congregation to meet in, such as in the old Testament, the Temple and
Sinagoges were, and such as after the Apostles times, when the Church began
somewhat to be at rest, the Oratories that were builded, were. In these places
all things must serve for honesty and for religion, and nothing must be
suffered, that declares any superstition, too much riotous cost, The breaking
of bread.
or profane contempt. Thirdly, he shows the cause of this meeting, which was
(as he writes) to break bread. He means the holy supper of the Lord, which
in times past they called breaking of bread, because the bread was broken
therein according to Christ's institution, both for that we should confess
our self sinners, and guilty of the death of Christ, and also for that we
should understand, that the merit of Christ, was dealt among us, and pertained
indifferently unto all believers. It is very worthy to be observed, how our
forefathers in the time of the Apostles, used to order and celebrate this
Supper. First of all Paul makes a sermon, as the things following declare,
because the supper was ended after Eutychus was raised. Therefore when the
sermon was ended, they went to the supper, and that in the open sight of the
assembly, in a place and time appointed for Gods service, and after none other
fashion, than was appointed by Christ. For, that they observed the same manner
and rites in all points, both the word breaking of bread, and the example
of Paul declares, which revoked the Corinthians so carefully, to that form
of supper that Christ ordained. Thus is it evident that Christ also used to
teach before the supper, and did ordain nothing tending more to superstition
than religion. Therefore, let the Papists regard with what arguments or
examples they defend their Mass, wherein there is no word of God taught, al
things are don in a strange tongue, the people have nothing to muse or think on,
but wearish and peevish gestures, and stage plays: to say nothing in the mean
while of the impairing of Christ's sacrifice, of the derogation of his merit,
and how the faith and religion of Christ is overthrown, even unto the
foundations. But so ought they to be seduced which had leauer follow the
imagination of their own brain, than the institution of Christ.

Moreover, the manner that Paul used in his preaching, pertains to the
description of the assembly of the Church, The manner of the Apostles
preaching.
which we may conjecture by the time. For first it is said, that he prolonged
his sermon until midnight, then when supper was done, how he discoursed till
break of the day, of things appertaining to religion. Therefore his teaching
was not for a fashion sake, and as though he cared not whether he did it or
not, but with great zeal and diligence. For where he had a right judgment of
his ministry, and knew he was sent of God to be an Ambassador for Christ (as
he testifies in this later Epistle to the Corinthians the fifthe Chapter) he
therefore was very fervent in zeal, because he would not be coumpted an
untrusty Ambassadoure unto God. Also it is evident that the hearers had as
good a judgment of Paul's ministry, as of his doctrine, because they did
vouchsafe to bear him so patiently all the night long. By this example is the
sloth of our age reproved, and the great contempt of Gods word. For in the
Ministers appear not those tokens of the Apostolic zeal, because many of
them are occupied more in vain studies, than in the meditation of Gods word,
and think they have well discharged their duty, if they make one or two cold
collatio^s in a weke. Again, the people that can not stand long to hear,
think every minute of an hour that they spend in hearing of Gods word, an
whole day, whereas in trifeling studies, yea in filthy and dishonest, they
think no time, no cost, no labor too much. Hereof it comes to pass, that
the authority of the Ministry is despised, and the word of God kept from a
great many. See what God says of both these evils in Malach. 2. cap. and Amos.
7.

Now follows the miracle by the which God thought good, Eutichus falls out
of a window, and dies.
both to approve the ministry of Paul, and also to stir men up to the
diligente consydering of Paul's doctrine. In the first part whereof, Eutychus
is to be considered, upon whom the miracle was showed. As Paul was preaching
he sat in a window, either because the number of hearers were so many, that
there was no seat for him elsewhere, or else because he would have so shaken of
sleep, which he perceived came creping on him. Howbeit, at length being
overcome of sleep, he fell down, and died of the fall. But if this thing came
unto him whose sleepiness might many ways be excused, what think we may come
to pass and fall on those, which hear the word of God in contemptuous wise,
and while they seem to sit to hear, either of purpose settle them selves to
sleep, or else being overcome with surfe^ and quaffing, are enforced to sleep?
As these men are negligent of their salvation, so they much regard not the
majesty of God. Wherefore it can not be, but the preaching of the gospel must
tend to their destruction, which otherwise is the administratrix of salvation
unto the diligent hearers and them that believe it. Also we are taught by this
place, that God permits us sometimes to be tempted with doleful and heavy
troubles. For, what thing I pray you, could make Paul's doctrine to be
suspected, seeing his industry was disturbed with so dolorous a trouble? Yea
what envy should the Apostle have had, who should have been judged the cause,
by reason of his long sermon? But the Lord fails not those that are his, but
by a notable miracle shows by and by, that the gospel brings salvation, so
that whatsoever seems to make most against it, serves to the confirmation
thereof: Let us learn therefore to judge rightly of all adversities that
falls out, God sends them to fear us, and to have occasion to exercise
his power. Let us therefore patiently suffer al things, and not doubt of the
known truth. For so it shall come to pass, that the end of those things shall
be joyful, whose beginning seemed to us to be altogether unprosperous and
doleful, as shall be most evidently declared in the second part of this
miracle, to omit other examples which might be brought.

After this Luke describes the myraculous raising up of Eutychus again, The
miraculous raising again of Eutichus.
wherein all thing that Paul did, must be considered in order. First as soon as
he knew of the matter, he gate him down to help him, and alleges for his
excuse neither the dishnoouring of the Sabothe, nor of the supper. He is not
therefore superstitious, but remembering the doctrine of Christ, understands
that the Sabothe was ordained for man, and that all externe ceremonies must
give place unto charity. Therefore they are foolish superstitious, yea,
wicked, which in like necessity, say it is unlawful to break the traditions
of men, as they which are so bound unto Monkishe rules, that they may not
help their kinsfolk being in danger or distress, and think no cause
sufficient, to interrupt the sacrifice of the Mass. Then falling upon the young
man he embraces him, not because he thought he could bring him to life again,
by the touching of his body, but for that he knew this must be done by the
power of Christ, whose ambassador he was. Wherefore this gesture of Paul
contains the mystery of our salvation. For by the proud fall of Adam, sin
and death by mean thereof fell on us all. But in Christ, life and salvation is
offered us, partakers whereof shall all such be, which being drawn by the
doctrine of the Apostles, as it were by the arms, do come into the fellowship
of Christ, through faith. Furthermore, he friendly comfort them that are in
fear, saying: Make nothing ado, or be you not troubled. For he was not
without cause afraid, (as we said before) least the weak in faith would
hereby much have swarued. Wherefore he by and by adds: His life is yet in
him. By the which words, he denies not the miracle, but pronounces modestly
of him self, because he would not seem to attribute any thing to him self,
and for that he would give occasion to no man to think of him, above that
becommed them. Then returning forthwith into the chamber again, he makes an
end of the distributing the Supper, and begins a new sermon which he
continues until morning, and then by sun up, takes his journey. Herein is
Paul's wonderful diligence to be commended, which having wrought such a
miracle, goes yet on in his vocation, and thinks he has not yet fulfilled
all his duty, as some sluggardes use, but yet great vaunters of their own
labors and travails, let us imitate Paul's industry, and think that we owe
God the more service, the greater tokens we perceive in our selves of his
power and grace, Luke joins unto this miracle a notable fruit of this endeavor
and study. For they brought the young man alive. For the works of God are
perfect, and the Apostles beguiled no man with miracles of legierdemaine, as
Iuglers use to do. Then the believers were not a little comforted, not only
because the young man was restored to life again, but for that they saw set
before their eyes such an evident testimony of Gods grace and favor. By this
place are declared unto us the fruits that use always to follow the study of
the gospel. For it both brings life unto us, because the gospel is the
power of salvation, unto all that believe in it, and it recreateth the mind
with sound joy, while it teaches us that the Father is reconciled unto us
through the Son. John 16
Which joy as it is full and perfect: so no man is able to take it from us.

Furthermore, the Evangelist returns to the description of Paul's voyage,
rehersing in order both the Cities, and places, Paul's viages were full of
travails and danger.
which either they sailed by, or else made abode in for any time. The situation
and standing of which places if any man desire to know, he may peruse the
tables and books of the Geographers. From Troas unto Asson, Paul went on
foot, sending his companions before by Barche. For he meant either to visit the
congregation as he went, or to avoid the anoyance of sailing by Sea. Where yet
his humanity is to be praised, that he would ease his fellows of travail, and
not abuse their industry and good will. At length, passing by Ephesus, they
come unto Miletum, or Malta, where he called the ministers of Asia unto a
Synod. It is written that he made great haste, because he purposed to be at
Jerusalem at Pentecost, not after the usage of the Jews, but because of the
concursse of people, which he thought should hear him preach, to their great
avail and profit. This place is very notable, containing Paul's travails and
ieoperdies. By the which we learn, how difficult a matter it is, duly and
truly to serve God, who can abide none worse than idle and sluggish
worshippers. Thus we read Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, the Prophets, and after
them Christ were troubled and embrued with continual labors and perilles.
Therefore let us also prepare our selves to labors and dangers, that we be
not troubled when they suddenly fall on us. This place teaches us also, of
what authority the gospel ought to be with us, which we know was set forth
with such pains and travail, and with the effusion of so much blood. For to
this end labored all the Apostles, and the Prophets before them, and the
very son of God, Mark. 1 Luke. 4
who testifies that he came also to preach and set forth the gospel. Therefore
their slothfulness is execrable, which so easily let such a treasure be taken
from them. Their religion likewise is preposterous, which always having in
their mouths the Saints, and honoring of the Saints, do in the mean
season loathe the doctrine of the gospel, for whose sake, till the Saints
suffered such pains, abode so many dangers, and at length shed their blood.
Let us therefore have a true opinion of this treasure (O brethren) by the which
only, salvation is offered us, the aucthor whereof is Jesus Christ: to whom be
praise, honor, power and glory for ever. Amen.

The.Cxxxiij. Homely.
And from Miletus he sent Messengers to Ephesus, and called the elders of the
congregation, which when they were come to him, he said unto them: ye know
from the first day that I came into Asia, after what manner I have been with
you at all seasons, serving the Lord with all humbleness of mind, and with
many tears and temptations, which came to pass unto me by the laying await of
the Jews, because I would keep back nothing that was profitable unto you, but
to show you and teach you openly, through out every house, witnessing both to
the Jews and also to the Greeks, that the repentance that is toward God,
and that faith which is toward our Lord Jesus.
THe holy Ghost by the holy writer Luke, most diligently reports the Acts
of the Apostles of Jesus Christ, partly for that all ministers might have a
president to follow, and partly that all men might understand of what
authority the gospel ought to be with us, which they have set forth with
such great pains and travails. And heereunto is this present Act of Paul
the Apostle to be referred. Who although he made great haste to Jerusalem, and
meant to spend no time in Asia, yet he intermitted none of the things, which
belonged to the utility of the Churches of Asia. For he calls before him at
Miletus, the Elders or Ministers of Ephesus, and the Cities adjoining, The
council of Miletus.
and in a general Counsel, concludes with them, things of much weight and
importance. By which example, as the faith and industry of Paul appears: so
we are taught, that the convocation of ministers with the common consent of all
parties, is very necessary for the determination of Ecclesiastical matters.
This makes for the maintenance of discipline in the Church, to keep under the
ambition of prelates, to conserve an unity in true doctrine, and to beat down
heresies, which many times use to creep in, if ministers do not faithfully
set to their helps. Here therefore the error of those that would mingle the
works of the law with the faith in Christ, was abolished by a general
convocation, and the truth defended by authority of the same. Heereunto that
most godly and prudent Prince Constantine the great, had a respect, when he
used to call the Synodes of Bishops together, against the which Licunus the
public ennimie of Christian religion did greatly resist, who by public
Proclamation, as Eusebius writes, In his first book of the life of
Constantine.
forbade the pastoures of the churches to meet or assemble together. For the
crafty and subtle Fox perceived, that by consent and unity of the
Ministers, the Church, and the confession of a true faith, were cheefely
established, and that this consent was cheefely maintained by authority of
Counsels. And Antichrist as craftily has pulled unto him self all authority
of Counsels, to the end that he would not have his tyranny kept under, by
Counsels lawfully assembled. Also in the Ministers of Asia, is declared a
singular example of modesty, who although they were more in number, yet
refused not the appointment of Paul being but one, who had preached Christ
first in those quarters, and whom by many arguments they had proved, was a
chosen instrument of Christ. For although the dignity of all Ministers in the
Church is alike, and none ought to challenge power or authority over other,
yet an order is necessary in the Church, which can never be kept and
maintained, except Ministers will observe modesty and humility among
themselves. And Paul did not therefore call these Pastors of Asia before him,
because he challenged any private authority or jurisdiction over them, but
because it was for the behoof and avail of the whole church, that they should
have warning of matters of importance, wherein, he thought not to be behind
for his part, because (as he confesses other where is) he knew him self to be
a debtor both to the Jews and to the Gentiles. Roma. 1.


Furthermore let us see Paul's oration containing in it the causes of the
calling of this Synod. The argument of Paul's oration made in the counsel.
For it has in it a vehement and pithie exhortation, that for as much as they
should see him no more, they would follow his example, and diligently keep the
doctrine he had taught them, that they would carefully watch for the sauegarde
of the Church, and stoutly resist those heretics, whereof a number, very
noisome and hurtful would follow. He exhorts them the rather by his example,
and urges them the more earnestly, because that as he was in his own
conscience not culpable, so he communed with them, to whom his credit and
diligence was well known. And in the beginning he comprehends brefely both
the example of his own life, and the sum of his doctrine.

Concerning his living, he says thus: Paul re^dreth an account of his living
Ye know from the first day I came into Asia, after what manner I have been
with you, at all seasons, serving the Lord with all humbleness of mind, and
with many tears and temptations which happened to me, by the laying await of
the Jews. As he calls them to witnesses, so he alleges all the time of his
conversation among them, least any might think he had counterfaited
godliness for a small seasone, as a great many use to do, who when they have
craftily crope and got within men through their pretense of vertuousnesse, at
length most shamefully bewray their cloked naughtiness. For the wicked can
not long counterfeit godliness. But because Paul had wholely addicted himself
unto Christ and to his religion, therefore he always observed one tenor of
conversation, and one like study and travail in the Ministry.

Of this study and travail is it to be understood, where it is said, he
served the Lord, wherein he makes mention of three things specially,
humbleness of mind, tears, which the earnest desire of all men's salvation
caused him to shed, and grievous temptations which yet could never pluck him
from doing his office and duty. By these let the Ministers of Churches
learn what manner of men they ought to be in the Ministry of the Church.

And first let them labor for Humility, Humility.
that they ascribe not to them selves impudently any Divinity or Godheade
(which is the property of Antichriste) or contempne any person in comparison
of themselves, 2. Thessa. 2
and so arrogantly seek rule and Lordshippe over their fellow Ministers,
which thing Peter warns them of, in his first Epistle and fifthe Chapter. For
it becomes them that will be Christ's Ministers, to follow Christ's
ensample, who as he derogateth nothing from the glory of his Father, so he
never disdained any person, in so much that he lived very familiarely with
Publicanes and sinners, and did witsafe to wash his Disciples feet, so
leaving it to them as an Example of Humility, teaching them that they should
refuse no kind of duetifulnesse one toward an other. Unto Humility must be
joined a desire to profit all men, which Ministers must seek with all
diligence, Desire of al men's sal^ation.
yea even with tears. For hereof we have an ensample in Christ, who as
Mathewe writes in the ninthe Chapter was moved even from the bottom of the
heart when he saw the Jews go astray like sheep lacking a Shephearde. And in
an other place we read he wept when he beheld Jerusalem, that unkind and
bloody City, knowing that for their grievous wickedness, and irrepentant
minds, they should shortly come to destruction. Luke. 19


The like affection of Charity we see in Moses, who chose rather to be wyped
out of the Book of life, than to see the destruction of his Countrymen. Exodus
32
Samuel the Prophet had the like in him also, who hearing that God had
forsaken Saul, took such a care of heart therefore, that he ceased not
mourning till God reprehended him for it. 1. Sam. 15.16
1. Sam. 15. and* 16. And that Paul proudely bragged not of this affection,
both his faithful and continual diligence to set forth the public
salvation proves, and also this, that for the Jews sake which were his
mortal enemies, he wished to be accursed. And surely as many as well
understand the reason of their Ministry, cannot want this affection, for
where they hear that men are borne again by their Ministry, they take
them for their Children, whom they bring unto GOD, and they use to embrace
them with a Fatherly affection, which if any man want, doubtless he
abundantly declares that he understands not the dignity of his
Ministry. But there must be also joined heereunto a third thing, that they
fall not in the time of temptation, or being ouercomen with fear, John. 10
forsake not their Churches, when persecution arises. For Christ says, that
this is the propretie of hirelings. Yea let them think that their Faith
and constancy is then cheefely required, Constancy.
when they see both them selves, and their sheep most of all tempted. And if
a man would compare those, that now a days will be called Successoures of
the Apostles with this Example of Paul, it shall easily appear how little or
nothing of Paul's heart and mind is in them, because in pride they exceed all
barbarous Princes, they fill the world full of wars they have no pity of the
sheep that go astray, but are only careful how to provide for them and
theirs, with the common loss and detriment of other men.

But let us return unto Paul, who rendering an account of his Doctrine,
sets out a perfect pattern of the same, Paul gives an accounte of his
doctrine.
not only to the Ephesians and those of Asia, but to all Ministers, for all
times and all places. And first he says, he did all things among them of
good purpose and intent: I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you,
but showed you it. etc. The sense is, He taught all things.
that he kept from them nothing, that was necessary for them to know. The
same is required of all Ministers, to teach the doctrine of salvation
perfectly, and to keep back nothing, for the worlds pleasure. Yea, the more
the world rages, the more must the trumpe of the word sound, that they
suffer not the truth to be oppressed and overcome with the fury of the
world. Here is reproved the error of them, which think it good to yield
somewhat to the enimyes of truth, that they be not the more incensed by
playnenesse of teaching: as though they became not the fiercer through the
slothe of Ministers, while they think men fear them, and the Ministers
distruste their ground and quarrel. It is here chiefly to be noted, that the
Apostles teach all things fully and perfectly that concern the salvation of
man, so that there needs no additions or patches to supply or make up their
doctrine. For it is evident that Christ concealeth nothing from them, proving
by this argument that he took them for his friends, because he revealed all
things unto them, that he received of his father. He promised them his
spirit, to prompt them, John. 15.
and put them in remembrance of all things, which we have seen before they
received. Therefore the doctrine of the Apostles is full and perfect, whereby
they taught Jesus Christ only unto the Church, as their Epistles and
Sermons abundantly declare. Therefore they do great injury both to Christ
and his Apostles, which dare coin new Articles of faith, and thruste into the
Church diverse things expressly contrary to the doctrine of the Apostles.

Secondely, he declares the manner that he observed in teaching, He taught
both privately and apertly
while he says he taught both privately and apertly thoroughout every
house, witnessing both to the Jews and also to the Gentiles. These things
declare the continual travel of the Apostle, wherewith he was so enflamed,
that as he set before all men the doctrine of salvation, so he omitted
nothing, which made for the salvation of all men. We learn hereby what the
best trade and manner of teaching is. First, all things must be declared
generally and openly that belong to salvation, so that all men may understand
what they ought either to do, or to leave undone.

But because all men do not yield of their own accord, and yet many times
they offend of carelessness more than of malice, without offense of others, it
behooves also to adioyne private admonitions, exhortations, and reprehensions.
For if it be the duty of every Christian to admonish his neighbor, and to
bring him into the way that is out of it, how much more ought the Minister
thus to do, of whom Christ one day shall require an account of the office
committed unto him? But by this word witnessing, is noted an earnest and free
kind of speech, without the which all other things are but cold. It is
diligently to be considered, what authority the Minister has over the sheep
committed to his charge, seeing that he must teach and exhort them, both
openly and privily through every house. Where also may be gathered, how they
ought to be taken, which will not be admonished neither publicly nor
privately of their Ministers. For why should they be judged the sheep of
Christ, which presumptuously disdain the voice of their shepherd.

Finally he co^prehendeth the sum of his doctrine in two points, that is to
say, The su^me of Paul's doctrine.
in repentance toward God, and faith in Jesus Christ. These things agree with
the commandment of Christ, which appointed the Apostles to preach repentance
and forgiveness of sins in his name. Whereby it appears that Paul preached
a true Gospel, and also what manner of doctrine ought to be preached. And here
repentance has the first place, which otherwheres we have defined to be a
converting or turning unto God: which diffinition Paul allows, where he
says, he taught repentance toward God, Luc. 24.
that is, such a thing as men turn unto God by. Of this took the Apostles the
beginning of their preaching, as Christ commanded them, because we have all
gone out of the way, and are of nature corrupt. And because we fly the
sight of God, as Adam did, therefore must faith in Christ also be preached,
which teaches us that we are reconciled to the father through mean of his
son, by whom we being borne again of the immortal seed of Gods word,
are made the children of God. Therefore their error is very hurtefull and
shameful, which still urge penance, but in the mean while neglecte faith,
without the which repentance can not stand. For how should he return unto
God, which has not Christ, John. 14.
who only is the way, the light, and the truth, and without whom no man
comes unto the father? But because we have entreated of these matters other
where is, more at large, let these few suffice for this season. Let all men
learn by Paul's example to judge of Doctrines, and not suffer any manner of
doctrine to be thrust in among them, but such as teaches a true conversion
unto God, through faith in Jesus Christ, to whom be praise, honor, power, and
glory, for ever. Amen.

The Cxxxiiij. Homely.
AND now behold I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the
things that shall come on me there, but that the holy Ghost witnesses in every
City, saying, that bands and troubles abide me. But none of these things move
me, neither is my life dear unto my self, that I might fulfill my course with
joy, and the ministration that I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify
the Gospel of the grace of God. And now behold I am sure, that henceforth ye
all through whom I have gone preaching the kingdom of God, shall see my face
no more. Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the
blood of all men. For I have spared no labor, but have showed you all the
counsel of God.
ALthough Jesus Christ the son of God, while he was in this world, always
loved his Disciples maruelously, yet he declared most evident tokens of his
love, a little before his gooing away, as those grave and wholesome admonitions
that he gave them at his last Supper, abundauntly declare. Paul following his
example, was not only careful for the salvation of Churches, while he was
among them, but when he departed from them: yea being absent, he much more
manyfestly declared, how near his heart the welfare of them all did sit.
This appears euerywhere in all his Epistles, but specially in this oration
which he made in the Synod at Miletum, before the Pastors and Ministers of
Asia. For where he foresawe that he should never come again to the Churches
of Asia, and knew what danger was like to follow, by false teachers, after he
was gone, therefore he warns them with all trustiness and diligence
possible, both of their duetyes, and other things necessary for their
salvation. But chiefly, he sets before them his own example, to purchase
the more authority to his admonition, whereof because we yesterday entreated
sufficiently enough, now we will come to the explication of this present place.

For there follows a reason of the cause that moved him so earnestly to urge
his own example: verily, even for that he was upon departure, The Argument of
this place.
and should return no more to them again. For hereof he gathered, that they
ought to follow the example of their Apostle and teacher, and with all
diligence to take upon them the care of the Church, least they should lose that
through their slouthe and negligence, which he had gotten with so great labors
and travel. And this is the whole sum of this place. It shall be good to
consider all things in the order that they are declared, and to seek out what
mysteries lie hidden in every word.

First, and now behold (says he) I go bound in the spirit, Paul by the
guyding of Gods spirit goes to Ierus^lem.
unto Jerusalem. By the which words he understands a secret motion of the
holy Ghost, which we see was always his guide in all his doings. Unto who^,
although he willingly obeyed (as the things following declare) yet he
testifies, that he is led bound as it were, least he might seem over lightly
or rashly to tempt God, by putting himself in danger without a cause. He
declares therefore, that he could not do otherwise, unless he would
obstinately wrestle with the spirit of God. This manner of Paul's speaking
teaches us, how we should regard both the secret suggestions of the holy
Ghost, and also his open and express oracles. They must be like ba^ds whereby
our wayward and striving flesh must be brought to the obedience of faith, and
that willingly, least we feel the mighty hand of god to our great loss and
calamity: who brings the^ which had lefer to follow the se^suality of flesh,
than to obey his calling, even perforce to that he wills. Thus we read he was
angry with Moses, refusing ye office that he offered him. Exodus 4. Iere. 1.
Exodus 4. And unto Jeremy doing the like, and alleging his youth he said in
wrathful wise. Say not, I am to young. For thou shalt go to all that I shall
send thee unto* and whatsoever I command thee, that shall thou speak. etc.
Iere. 1. What happened unto Jonas for refusing the vocation of God, is more
evident than needs rehearsal of words.

Paul is called unto manifest dangers.
So from this matter he comes by little and little to his purpose, saying: I
know not what shall become of me there, nor what the cause is that the spirit
so urges me, to take this journey, but the same spirit tells me, that every
where, afflictions and bands are prepared for me, which thing the holy
Prophets in every Church with one consent testify. Yet must I go thorough all
these pykes and dangers, yea and through death also, considering it so seems
good unto God, who only has power both upon my self and death. This place is
very worthy to be considered, because it may serve much both for our
instruction and consolation. For first it declares the faithful care of God,
which uses to defend and provide for those that be his. For where he loves
entirely, he can not chose but consider them, and give them warning in time, of
all things that shall befall them. For how can he neglecte his servants
that honor him, seeing he foresheweth the pains of the wicked, and brings
no calamity upon them, but he first warns them thereof by his Prophets.
Next we see how God also warns those that be his, Paul understood, that
bands and afflictions were prepared for him, at Jerusalem. But what the end
hereof should be, the holy Ghost, as yet had not reveled unto him. God
therefore after a general sort, for the most part, admonishes those that
be his, although he declare not the perticulers of every thing. For he
reuealeth as much unto them, as is needful for them to know, so that they may
prepare themselves to bear the Cross, but to leave all the success thereof
unto him. So we have general predictions, whereby we are admonished, that we
shall suffer tribulations and adversities in the world.

The chief use whereof is, that we should prepare our selves to bear them,
least if they fell on us unarmed, they would be occasion of greater offense.
Thirdely it behooves us to observe the counsel of God, which he is wont
meruellously to show, toward his faithful servant. Paul being many times
before warned of the brethren, either by flying saved him self, or else
prudently defeated his ennimies awaytes. Now is he also admonished of bands
and afflictions, but he is so urged and prycked forward by the spirit of God,
that he understands he must wade through the middle of them, notwithstanding
the brethren greatly dissuade him to the contrary. We read also that Jesus
Christ, sometime avoided the attemptes and laying wait of his enemies, yet at
length he comes forth to meet them, when he perceived his hour was come,
and that the eternal decree of his heavenly father so required. These things
teach us, that dangers are not always sufficient occasions, for a man to
fly. For when we are urged with the sure vocation of God, we must not suffer
our selves to be revoked, neither through fire nor sword, nor floudes of the
maine Sea (as once happened at the red Sea) from doing our duty, whereunto
we perceive we are called of God.

Paul's constancy and faith.
But because he would not put his friends and brethren to much in fear, he
uses an Apostolyke and Christian consolation, saying: How of None of these
things move me. As who should say: I would not have you to be grieved for my
sake. For why should you take any sorrow for these things, that I make no
accounte off? Why Paul, do thou then contemn the Oracles of the holy
Ghost, and the loving admonitions of thy brethren? No, but I therefore little
esteem the present dangers that be at hand, because I pass little of my
life, that is to say, I esteem not this temporal life, more than my vocation,
which the Lord has appointed me unto. Yea, I desire to finishe my course
joyfully, and to satisfy my office and duty by publishing the Gospel of the
grace of God in all places. Therefore where I have long sithence dedicated my
life unto Christ, imprisonmentes and afflictions can not make me afraid. This
example of Paul declares how the godly should use themselves in adversity.
First they should not so care for tribulations, that for the avoiding of
them, they should commit any uncomely and unworthy part. Otherwise God will
not have us led with that Stoikes indolencie, but that we should not have
more consideration of our self, than of his vocation. There can be no greater
comfort in this case, than if men oftentimes meditate upon Gods providence,
which Christ sets before his Disciples, and David makes this to be his
only defense and safest Sanctuary, Math. 10. Psalm 56.
that he believes His fleetings are numbered with God, and his tears put in
his bottell. Math. 10. Psalm. 56. Next, let them take heed that they prefer
not this temporal life, before the eternal. Let them rather consider how God
has lent us this life, to live unto him, and if need also so require, to dye
unto him. And because we must once dye, we can never dye happelier, than in
Gods vocation. For so shall that saying of David be verified on us, Psalm 116.
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. And if it be
unlawful to prefer this life before the life everlasting, Math. 16.
how much less ought we to prefer riches, honors, pleasures, and such
other worldely commodities as these, before the same? For what aduantageth it a
man to get all the world, and to lose his soul? Or what thing is so precious,
Luc. 9.
that it can redeem but one soul? Finally, the godly must labor all that in
them is, to pass all adversities joyfully, and to accomplish their course,
that is, the office wherewith they are put in charge, prosperously. For it
su^fiseth not to begin well, but to continue still on, as we have often
times declared. Let all men therefore remember that this life is like unto a
race, the end whereof is death, which they most joyfully take hold of which
do their duty even unto the end.

But before we go any further, The gospel the grace of God.
let us see how Paul speaks of the Gospel and the Ministry thereof. He
calls it the Gospel of the grace of God, of the effect thereof, because it
offers to us the grace of God: it teaches us that we be reconciled to God
the father, through his son Jesus Christ. Hereby it appears what great
ungodliness theirs is, which wickedly disdain and contemn the Gospel. They
be like unto sedicious people, which think it not enough to move and stir
sedition against the Magistrates but will also scornfully deride the grace which
is offered them of the Magistrates, and fowly entreat the messangers sent unto
them with the same. For it is evident that all we are gyltie of sedition
against God, and have deserved destruction. But God pardons al our o^fences
for the merit of his son, and declares that grace and favor to us by his
Gospel. Which, whosoever refuse, verily they declare themselves to be utterly
inexcusable, and unworthy of pardon hereafter. Again speaking of the ministry,
he uses this word, testifying, whereby we have oftentimes declared, is
understood a plain, free, and earnest kind of preaching. For the Gospel is
not a bare and simple narration of a thing done, but a testimony of Jesus
Christ. And Christ him self calls his Apostles witnesses. Iosu. 15. Acts.
1.
They earnestly therefore preached Christ, yea they testified not only in
words and deeds, but also by their life and blood, that Christ was the savior
of the world, for the which cause they are commonly called Martyrs. That we
say the Apostles did, the same must all christians do likewise. Math. 8.
For Christ will have us to confess him before this world, and acknowledges
none for his servants which are ashamed of him and his gospel, before this
adulterous and naughty generation. But concer^ing Paul, because he would have
his exhortation to have the more authority with the^, he repeateth in a short
recapitulation, to what end he spoke those things which he had heretofore
said, Paul foresheweth his death.
he makes mention again of his departure, and not that only, but also he
plainly testifies, yt they shall see him no more hereafter, saying: And now
behold I am sure, that henceforth al you, through who^ I have gone preaching
the kingdom of God, shall see my face no more. Here he does as parents use to
do, being ready to depart this life, which in their admonitio^s oftentimes use
the like, thereby meaning to leave the sharper stings in the hearts of their
children. Paul's intent and purpose is worthy of al praise and dilligent
observation, whose marvelous and bold consta^ce appears in these few words.
For although he knows that this is the last meting he should have with the^,
and therefore looks for nothing but death, yet he does not with womanly weping
bewail his departure, nor vttreth any toke^ of sadness or private sorrow, but is
only careful for ye wealth of their churches, and only desires the^ to be
careful for the same. Which example teaches us, what minds we should have in
the consideration of death, or else when death approaches and is at hand. We
must in such case beware of this woma^nish pulinesse, wherewith many so bewail
their state and condition, as though God had appointed the^ only to dye: and are
with such sorrow and care pulled from their kinsfolk and friends, as though
there remained none in the world, through whose care and providence they might
live in safety when they were gone. Howbeit they ought rather to remember,
that this is the way of al flesh, Iosu. ^4. 1. Reg. 2.
as Joshua and David testify. What injury then receive we, if we do but as al
others do? As touching our friends, wives and children, neither do we lose them
by death, but either we send the^ before, being our selves shortly after ready
to follow, or else we go before the^, to that place whither they must follow,
where Christ has prepared us a country, and where the faithful of al nations
shall sit with Abraham, Math. 8.
Isaac, and Jacob. And the tutor and patron of those we leave behind us is
God, who^ the scriptures call the defender of the strangers and widows, Psalm.
68.
and the father of the fatherless. Therefore they must be committed to his
charge, and we must takewith steadfast faith that way which leads to heaven,
through the merit of Christ. Last of all Paul uses a most weighty
protestation, Paul's protestation.
wherein he lays the fault of their perdition on their own heads, if they
neglect the Churches committed to their charge, and suffer them to stray from
the faith. I take you (says he) to record this day, that I am pure from the
blood of all men. The reason is, for that I have spared no labor, but have
showed you all the council of God. Undoutedly he had a respect unto the words
of God red in Eze. 3. and.33. Where the blood of those that perish is imputed
to the minister, if he do not expressly give them warning, but him self is free
from al fault, if he do his duty faithfully. And because Paul so did, as one
not culpable in his own conscience, thus he speaks. Also he seems to
follow the example of singular men, such as Moses and Joshua were, Deuteronomy. 30.
Iosu. 24.
who we read used not much unlike protestations, a little before their death.
Paul's example teaches us, that they are excused before God, which do their
duty, although they little or nothing prevail among the people committed to
their charge. For they are gyltie of destruction that continue in
incurablenesse. And this doctrine is not to be applied only to the Ministers,
but also unto all degrees of men. And that it ought to have place in the
Magistrates, the example of Josias declares, whom the holy Ghost
maruellously commends, although he had many in his kingdom, yea in his
Court, that were not very sound, and many plain incurable and wicked, as the
Sermons of Sophonias the Prophet testify. The like reason is to be made of
Parents. For oftentimes it comes to pass, that godly fathers have children
that go out of kind, and yet the childrens wickedness is not prejudicial to
the fathers, if they fail not of their duty, in seeing to their children.
We have ensamples in the sons of Jacob the Patriarche, of David, and of
diverse like. But if Magistrates and parents forget their duty, and with
ouermuche tenderness or evil example, infect those that are committed to
their charge, then the severity of Gods judgment, will fall upon them, as we
see in the Scripture by the example of Heli. Here haste thou what to answer
to such, 1. Sam. 2.3. and.4.
that think it good to cease where no hope of profit is. This is now
objected both against Magistrates and Ministers, and with this argument the
sluggish use to flatter themselves. But do thou think that thy soul is also
in danger, which thou can deliver none other ways, than by faithful
diligence, and if thou deliver her, then think not that thou haste labored in
vain. It appears also by this place, what a miserable condition they are in,
who, where their predecessors have well discharged their duty before, they
either like sluggardes give over, or else with their naughtiness corrupt
that, that other before them have well ordered. For they are altogether gyltie,
and void of excuse before God, forasmuch as they which before had the charge
of them are clear from the blood of them. This ought to be observed in the
Churches of this age, reformed by the word of God. The reformation hereof was
both laborious and very dangerous. What excuse then shall the light backsliders
have, seeing that the very dust of the Ministers, shall suffice to convince
the^, as we have otherwheres declared? The like is nedeful to be observed in
the common weal. In Heluetia we enjoy a liberty redeemed with the blood of our
Auncestrie. Good laws are made out of the doctrine of the Gospel, and a
discipline of manners instituted with much labor and pains. Then woe unto us
wretches and worthy of all punishment, if either through cowardly fear, or
light demeanor or wickedness, we suffer these things to be taken from us, in
which our public weal consists. So the faithful industry and care of the
parents, makes the children inexcusable, if they be not aunswerable unto the
same. Finally it is all men's duty well to remember this, least while they
flatter them selves, they put the fault in another, whereof they are guyltie.
It is further worthy to be observed, that Paul has showed them all the
council of God, namely touching our redemption and salvation. We know
otherwise that there are many things in the providence of God, which it is not
lawefull for us to search out, neither can they be declared by tongue, such as
Paul testifies he heard in the third heaven. But he omitted none of the
things which concern our salvation, because he has declared the causes and
reason thereof, 2. Cor. 12.
and also most truly reported the duties of them which are saved. Whereupon
again we gather, that the Apostles doctrine contained in the Scriptures, is
perfect and absolute in all points. Therefore the vanity of them is very
rash, which thruste the traditions of men into the Church, whereof the
greatest part plainly repugne against the doctrine of the Apostles, which
teach us, that Christ alone is our Savior. For it can not be, that the
things so plainly repugnaunt amongst them selves, can have one self spirit
of God, to be the author of them. Last of all, thou shalt note, that though
Paul showed all the counsel of God unto the Ephesians, yet afterward he
wrote an Epistle to them, wherein he expounded the same unto them again. By
this example we are taught, what a care and consideration Ministers of the
Church must have of all men's salvation, and how little Apostolyke they are,
which so easily neglecte the Churches. In the mean season let us learn to
embrace with true faith and obedience the council of God, revealed to us by
the Apostles, in Jesus Christ, that we followyng the same, may attain unto
true salvation, through Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior, to whom be
praise, honor, power and glory, for ever. Amen.

The Cxxxv. Homely.
Take heed therefore unto yourselues, and to all the flock, among whom the holy
ghost has made you overseers, to rule the congregation of God, which he has
purchased with his blood. For I am sure of this, that after my departure shall
grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Moreover of your
own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things to draw Disciples after
them. Therefore awake and remember that by the space of three years I ceased not
to warn every one of you night and day with tears. And now brethren I commend
you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build further, and
to give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified.
Seeing nothing is more dear and precious to God than the church, which he has
purchased with the blood of Christ, it becomes all men, that will be compted
for Gods servants and friends, to study for the prese^uation thereof: but
cheefely this care belongs to the Ministers of the word, because God has
made them peculiar overseers of his Church, and will hereafter require an
account of their stewardship. For the which cause Paul the Apostle, being
ready to forsake Asia, called to the Ministers of the Church, and in open
assembly before them, discoursed diligently of al things, which appertained to
the administration of the charge committed unto them. And first he sets
before them his own example, and speaks of his going away from them, with a
most grave protestation, that they might know, how all the charge of the church
hereafter lay on them only, and therefore that they ought the more earnestly and
zelously to labor therein. Moreover after these premises he comes nearer,
admonishing them more plainly of their duty, alleging most pithie reasons,
the rather to provoke them.

First, propounding the sum of the matter in few words, he says: Let
Ministers take heed to the^ selves.
Take heed unto your selves, and to all the flock. By this word (attending or
taking head,) he comme^deth to them an earnest study, that they should not
think they had then done their duty, when they had but superficially seen
unto it, but that they should know there was great need of care and
circumspection. And he propounds two things, wherein they had need to be
circumspect. First he says: Take heed to your selves. This he commands
them, because they should not think their selves excepted or excused, but that
their health and well doing was in hazard, as well as other men's. And as it is
scarce credible, that they shall have any earnest care of others salvation,
which neglect their own: so they, which being set in high degree, ought to
view the life, manners, and conversation of others, can not be out of danger.
For either they shall swerve at one side, and run into ruin, being puffed up
with vain glory, or else they shall be drawn from doing their duty, by being
offended with men's unjust judgments of them. Therefore it is not without a
cause, that he admonishes them to take heed of them selves. And here it
behooves pastoures to have a special care of two things. The one is doctrine,
wherein they can not err without manifest detriment. That their doctrine
therefore may be true, let it be taken from the mouth of God, which speaks
unto us, in the scriptures, and distributing the same in prudent manner, let
them use it duly, in time and place, that al things may serve to edification.
Because this is a matter of no small importance, the continual study and
reading of holy scripture is needeful, as the same Paul teaches us in an
other place. The other is conversation of life, 1. Timoth. 4 2. Timoth. 3
which in Ministers behooves to be well ordered, and blameless, least they
destroy with their evil example, that they build up by their doctrine, and
that by their means, both doctrine and religion grow not in contempt, as we
read it came to pass sometimes under the children of Hely, and the wicked
Priests, that returned from Babylon. 1. Sam. 2. Malach. 1. and.2. 1. Sam. 2.
Mala. 1.2
And for the avoiding of these and such like things, it is necessary that they
have a good regard not only to their own persons, but also to their whole
family. For how shall he be able to rule the Church of God, which is not able
to rule his own house? 1. Timoth. 3. Titus. 1. 1. Timoth. 3. Tit. 1
Then secondly he commends to them the charge of the whole flock, wherein he
is somewhat long, as we shall hear. Under this word flock, he comprehends
the Church, Let Ministers look unto the whole flock
therein following both the Prophets and Christ, which many times used the like
Allegory or translation. And the use of this word is very commodious, because
it contains in it very expressly, all states and degrees of men, as do
these words, house, and family, whereby otherwhiles the Church uses to be
termed. For these words admonish both the Ministers, and the people, of
their duty.

The Ministers learn that the care of al men appertains unto them, and that
it is not lawful for them, to neglecte any man, be he learned or unlearned,
noble or base, rich or poor, master or servant, but must rather think, that
in a great house are many and diverse instruments which the good man of the
house will have all the servants to have a diligent and convenient care off.
Again, the hearers learn, that all men universally, of what estate or degree
so ever they be, ought to be subject to the Ministry and Discipline of the
word, and that no man is free therefrom, which will be accoumpted one of
Gods flock or family. For that that God said unto Hieremie, Ierem 1
is well known to every body: Behold, this day do I make thee a strong
fensed Town, an iron* Pillar, and a Brazen wall against the whole land,
against the Kings and mighty men of Judah, against the Priests and people of
the land. Therefore, it was not without a cause that the Prophets in times
past, took upon them to reprehende and admonish all states of men, as their
Sermones testify, whom John the Baptist did immitate, and reprehended not
only the common people, but also the Publicanes, Souldioures, Scribes, and
Priests, most earnestly, yea, he was so bold to tell Herod the King, that
it was not lawful for him to keep his brothers wife. The like did Christ,
being otherwise the miledest man that ever was, which would not divide the
inheritance between the brethren, because he would do nothing not belonging
to his office. The same did the Apostles, and their successoures, whose
labors and travails, the church does reverence yet to this day. Therefore
their blockishnesse is very gross, and their rebellion very obstinate, which
challenge to them self a certain immunitie and freedom, saying, the
Ministers have nothing to do with their matters.

But because it is needful with reasons to urge and set forward our dull
flesh in difficulte and dangerous functions, Paul therefore uses reasons,
and in the beginning he comprehends diverse in very few words. For he
says: Look unto the flock, among whom the holy Ghost has made you
overseers, to feed the congregation of GOD, which he has purchased with his
blood.

Ministers are ordained of God.
First, he alleges God to be the aucthor of his Ministry, to declare that
they are not free and at their own liberty, but ought to be occupied in the
vocation of God, unto whom they shall once give an account, as Christ
teaches in the Parables of the Talentes and Steward. Math. 25. Luke. 16.
He makes mention of the holy Ghost by name, because Christ by him does
cheefely rule and govern his Church, as in the first and second Chapiters of
this Book we might perceive. And this is a weighty reason if we consider how
we shall give an accoumpt unto him, from whom nothing is hidden, and which
beholds with what mind and belief we do all things, and which is not
only a judge, but also a swifte witness against all those, which cast from
them the fear of him, and neglect their duty, Malach. 3
as he threatens them in the Prophet. And this reason ought to awake and
stir up, not only the Ministers of the word, but also all other persons,
which take God for the aucthoure of their vocation and estate.

Let Magistrates remember, that they are advanced to honor and dignity by
God, and that he sits in the middle of them, and that they shall not escape,
if they neglect their Office. Psalm. 82.
Let Lords and Masters remember, that they also have a Master in Heaven,
unto whom they shall give an accoumpte. Ephe. 6.
Let married folk remember that God is the aucthor of their estate, who as he
has appointed the marriage Chamber to be honorable, so will he grievously
punish Adoulterers and Whoremongers. Hebrews. 13. Also let Parents consider,
that God has given them a charge over their Children, Heb. 13.
and therefore that they can not neglecte their Children without the
manifest fault of untrustiness. Likewise let Servants and Subjects
learn to obey their Masters and Princes, not only for fear of punishment,
but also for conscience sake, because GOD has made them subject unto them,
whose sight they shall never beguile* though they can beguile men.

This done, he sets before them, the end of their duty, saying,
Secondly, the end of Ministers, is to feed.
they are made overseers by the holy Ghost to feed the Church of God. He
alludeth unto Ezechiel in the third, and thirty three Chapters, where the
Prophets are called overseers, or watchmen. And to the end they should not
think that their duty consisted in a bare and vain speculation, he uses
this word, to feed, to the intent they should remember they were feeders,
and therefore ought to fulfill the duty of feeders. These points are partly
expressed by Christ in the 10. of John, and partly by Ezechiel in the four and
thirty Chapter. For a good Shepeheard brings his flock into well grown
pastures, he goth before them like a Faithful guide, he seeks for them that
are strayed and lost, he brings them home again, he binds up his wounds
that is contrite in heart and conscience, he strengthens the weak, he
keeps them under that grow to fat, he stoutely resists the Wolves, and
all these things he does circumspectly, and with judgment.

Paul admonishes the Ephesians and Ministers of Asia, of all these things,
where he says they are appointed to feed. Would God the Bishops of our
days would remember these things, who where they do none of these things, but
all things quite contrary, yet after an impudent sort, they challenge to them
selves, not only the titles of Bishops, but also exercise a manifest tyranny
over the Church, and like Princes of this world, obtain a kingdom upon
earth, contrary to the commandment of Christ. But what they shall have for
their labor, see Ezechiel. 34. and Zachary the.11. Chapiters.

The third reason is deduced of the dignity of the Church, which appears in
this, for that God purchased it with his blood. Thirdly, the dignity of ye
church.
He attributes blood unto God by a figure called communione, or propretie of
tongues, because Jesus Christ which is God from everlasting, at a time long
before appointed, became man, and redeemed the Church with the price of his
blood. Therefore the Church is dear unto Christ, and they are guilty of the
blood of Christ, that neglecte the Church, and either abolishe the profit
thereof themself, or else suffer it to perish and decay. Mark how the
Church belongs to no one man, but unto God, who has redeemed and purged her
with his blood, Ephe. 5
and espoused her unto him self. Therefore, as no man may challenge unto him
self, rule over the spouse of God: so every one that is a membre of the same,
must look that they consecrate them selves to God only, and addicte not them
selves to worship any creature, that they be not punished for their execrable
fornication. 1. Peter. 1
Also this serves for our consolation, that it is impossible, that God should
neglecte them, whom he redeemed with so great a price. Think that there is
the like reason before God of all creatures. For as every man is created after
the image of God: so are they redeemed and purchased with the blood of the
son of God. Shall thou then go unpunished, if thou slander any of them, do
him wrong, violently hurt him, or contumeliously disdain him, or offend him in
religion, or conversation of life? Read the things written of Paul. Romans 14.
which make much for this place, and the.8. chapter of the first to the
Corinthians.

Fourth of necessity.
The fourth reason, is borrowed of necessity. For he declares that it is
necessary, that the church be diligently seen unto, because it was in great
danger of wolves, or false teachers. For although the shepherd may sometimes
be at leisure, or take his sleep, when there is no suspicion of danger: yet
then is it no time of idleness nor sleep, when the Wolves begin to howl, and
to be seen coming in companies together. I am sure (says Paul) that after
my departure, grievous wolves shall enter in, which shall not spare the flock:
yea of your own selves shall men arise, which shall miserably pervert the
simple doctrine of truth, laboring rather to get to them selves scholars,
than to Christ, whose glory they ought only to seek. Paul knew that such
should arise, even by peculiar revelation of the holy spirit. 1. Tim. 4
For otherwheres prophesying of false teachers, he makes the holy Ghost the
aucthor of prophecy. Howbeit, let us mark in this place, the faithful care
of God, in using to provide for his Church. The Church is as a flock or Kid in
the middle of a sort of wolves. But God so cares for her that he gives her
diligent warning, not only of present dangers, but also of dangers to come.
For there are Prophesies of Antichrist, and Antichristian teachers. Christ also
reasoning of the later days, so describes these false Prophets, that he must
willingly and wittingly perish, that believes them. The wrytings of the
Apostles are full of the like aduertisements, which for breuities sake I omit.
In the mean time we learn how they dote, which now a days would have
nothing but the bare doctrine of truth taught, but will not have the Church
admonished of present dangers, and the Wolves to be reproved, because they see
that the exclamations of the shepherdes, vex and make the Wolves the more
fierce. As though it were possible to tame Wolves, or if no man take them in
hand, to alter their nature, and that the shepherds ought not rather to have
this mark before their eyes, to teach the sheep to beware of the Wolves. How
foolishly was it done of the Apostles, to admonish us of Wolves to come, if no
man now a days must find fault with them that go abroad? Secondarily, let us
mark, how he says these Wolves shall come when he is gone. For they are
afraid while the faithful Ministers are present, and through their diligence
and care, they are kept back from breaking in among us. But because this
unkind world commonly little esteems the diligence of such men, God
suffers Wolves to burst into the whole flock like wild and unbridled
horses, when the faithful Ministers are gone. And we lack not examples enough
to prove the same. Let us learn therefore how much we have to make of faithful
and diligent overseers as well of the Church, as of the common weal, the
deaths and departures of whom, be commonly tokens of great misfortunes, and
public calamities to come.

Thirdly, let us see the description of false teachers, The description of
false teachers.
and what their trade is. The Apostle calls them Wolves, after the example of
Christ, who it appears called them by the same name. They are so called,
because of their natural hatred against the flock of Christ, Math. 7 John. 10.
and also greediness for that insatiable and rauine of theirs, to spoil and
wurrie the Church. He declares also from whence these Wolves arise. They shall
arise (says he) from among your selves. So says John: 1. John. 2 2. These. 2
^hey went out from us. etc. And Paul shows us Antichrists seat, even in
the very Church. 2 Thessalonians. 2. It is profitable diligently to observe the same,
that we be not offended with the falling away of some light persons,
considering we see such become suddenly the enemies of truth, which a little
before, seemed stout defenders of the same. For what new or strange thing is
this? Seeing Judas for a certain space had a room among the Apostles, and
Paul knew that from among them to whom he so carefully commended the Church,
wolves would arise? Also hereby is confuted the peevish and d^ltish vaunts of
the Bishops of Rome, which they now adays stand so much upon. For they think
it is impossible, that the bishops of that church should err, whose account of
succession, they can make from the times of the Apostles. But to grant them,
that Peter and Paul had once been Bishops of Rome (which yet they shall never
be able to prove) will they deny, that their successoures may err? But Paul's
successoures among the Ephesians, were these ravening Wolves, of whom he
bids them to beware. But as the Papacy consists of nothing but visures
and shows, so must the majesty thereof, ready shortly to fall down, be
vpholden with counterfeit and visured arguments. Furthermore, he touches their
doctrine, where he says they shall speak w^ested and perverse things. For the
declaration of truth is plain and simple, which false teachers with their
gloses use to pervert, to make intricate, and by so doing, to make all things
uncertain. Moreover their end is, to draw disciples after them. 2. Peter. 2
They divide the Church therefore with sects, as Peter foretold should come
to pass. But Histories declare, that Paul's warning was not in vain. For it
is well known what swarms of Heretics, most miserably disturbed the Church
the whole world over.

And if a man would compare these things with our days, it shall appear, that
Paul's admonition, is as needful in these days, as ever it was. For out of
the Church every day, proceed those grievous Wolves, which now are grown to
such impudency, that they go about to cover them selves no longer in sheep
skins, but rather publicly profess their thirst of Christian blood, with
skarlet color, and their tyranny with clinking of armoure, and garrisons of
men. By mean of these, the doctrine of truth lies wrapped and entangled in
infinite erroures and laberinthes, and as it were even buried. And the same
parties have rent the Church, which ought most to maintain unity, hau^ ^ent
the Church into six hundred sects, every one of them professing a propre and
sundry faith and religion, in name, habit, ceremonies and vsages. Let us
awake O brethren, and go against these Wolves, and take heed that we be not
found to be hirelings rather than true shepherdes.

Secondly, of the example.
But let us hear Paul, which repeating his example (which is the.v. argument)
exhorts them most earnestly, saying: Wherefore awake, and remember, that by
the space of three years, I ceased not to warn every one of you, night and
day with tears. He makes mention of these three years, because they should
think no labor or travail too much. For it should be a shame not to take
labor and pains, seeing such an Apostle of Christ refused it not. And they be
in no small fault, which by their negligence let the Churches, gathered
together by the travails and deaths of the Apostles, run at havoc.
Furthermore, as it becomes the Ministers to follow the example of the
Apostles: so must all Christians follow their steps, for as much as they
were the followers of Christ, as Paul himself declares, 1. Cor. 11
where he says: be ye folow^rs of me, as I am the follower of Christ* And this
is the true worshipping of the Saints, not that that stands in adoration
and invocation of them, which all the scripture says is due to God only.

Sixthly, of the facility and utility.
Sixthly, he reasons of the easiness and utility of their doing herein, to
answer them, which were feared with the difficulty and danger that was on
every side. And for a more vehemency of speech, he uses a form of
imprecation, saying: and now brethren, I commend you unto God, and to the
word of his grace, which is able to build. etc. As who should say: I know it
is a difficult matter that I require, and passing all man's power. How be it,
it must not be brought to pass by man's force. This is Gods husbandry, this is
Gods work. He laid the foundation, he therefore is able to finishe the
building, and it is no difficult thing for him to use your help, to bring his
matter to pass. By his assistance therefore you shall easily overcome all
things. He shall guide you with his spirit, and the word of grace, which
though it seem but a slender thing, yet it pearseth, and cutteth sharper than
any two edged swoorde. The same God has prepared worthy rewards already for
such travails and pains, even the inheritance of his kingdom, where you
shall shine among them that are sanctified, like as the stars in the
firmament. These things must be laid up in the bottom of our hearts O
brethren. Dani 12
For as they comfort us in marvelous wise, so they teach us what the weapons
and strength of the Ministers of the word are. The weapons of our fight be
spiritual, says Paul. These be the spirit of God, the word and God him
self. 2. Cor. ^0
Who shall they then fear? Or who shall be able to withstand them. Let us
fight with these weapons, rather than with the frendships of this world, as
with the confederacy and wisdom of the flesh, which have very little, or no
use at all in setting up the kingdom of God.

We learn moreover, that the inheritance of the kingdom of Heaven
pertains only to them that are sanctified. The sanctified are such, whose
hearts faith has purified, and whom Christ has consecrated to GOD the
Father, through the price of his Blood. The same being quickened with the
spirit of God, do their duties earnestly, and strive earnestly to enter into
that inheritance through all kind of dangers, the hope whereof they know
will never deceive them, because it depends upon the son of God our
savior Jesus Christ: to whom all praise, honor, power and glory are due
for ever. Amen.

The.Cxxxvj. Homely.
I Have desired no man's silver, gold, or vesture, yea, ye your selves know
that these hands have ministered unto my necessities, and to them that were
with me. I have showed you all things, how that so laboring ye ought to
receive the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how that he
said it is more blessed to give than to receive. And when he had thus spoken
he kneeled down, and prayed with them all. And they all wept sore, and fell on
Paul's neck, and kissed him, sorowing most of all for the words which he
spoke, that they should see his face no more. And they conveyed him unto the
ship.
Because the Apostle Paul, in that notable assembly of the Ministers of Asia,
where he reasoned of the administration and governance of the Church,
foretold of grievous Wolves that should rise up, even out of their own selves,
which through perverse Doctrine, should miserably disturb the flock of
Christ: in the later part of his oration, he declares both wisely, and in
time and place, what they should cheefely beware of, if they would avoid the
name of such Wolves. He admonishes them only to take heed of covetousness,
because it is the root of all ^uill, and brings all things out of frame, if
it once take possession in the minds of the Clergy. For when they once make
lucre of religion, it causes all godliness to be set to sale, which also is a
cause, that they defile the doctrine of the word, with the traditions of men,
that they hunt after the favor and friendship of the world, that they wink at
open malefactoures, and set open the doors, to all manner of disorder. The
priests of the Jews may be an example unto us, in whom Christ chefely
reprehendeth this as the welspring of all corruption. Therefore Paul does not
without a cause other where is warn Bishops that they be not given to filthy
lucre, and here in this place, he diligently reasons of this evil.

And because his admonition should be the more of waighte, he provoke them
by his own Example, He dehorteth them from covetousness by his example.
declaring how he used himself while he was in Asia, and alleges weighty
reasons and causes of his so doing. I have desired no man's silver, gold, or
vesture, says he. By the which words, he declares that he labored not to
enriche him self by them; forasmuch as he desired not of them the things
necessary to his living, much less received or took them. Hereby he
teaches, that the Ministers of Churches must be free from the desire of
heaping up goods, because they that go about to enrich them selves, 1. Timoth.
6
shall never escape the snares of the Devil and temptations. But least any man
might Obiecte again, and say, whereof then O Paul, liuedst thou? He adds by
and by after: ye know that these hands ministered to my necessities, and to
those that were with me. For he was a maker of Tents, by the which occupation
we heard before that he got his living at Corinth. Here in this place mark the
modesty of the Apostles, which had rather lose their right, than to be
chargeable to any body. Touching which thing, more is to be seen in the latter
Epistle to the Thes^alonians the third Chapter, and in the second to the
Corinthians, 1. Sam. 12
the eleventh Chapter. The like example of modesty we have also in Samuel, who
in an open and great assembly of all the people, did rejoice in the like thing,
as Paul does here. These examples teach us with what spirit those men are
led, which either in the Church, or in the common weal, are only careful
for their own commodity, and not contented with necessaries, seek their
pleasures and delites, of the labors and sweat of those that are needy. Why
Paul requires not the stipend due unto him.


Furthermore, he renders diligently the reason of his doing, least his example
might prejudice or hinder the public right of other Ministers. For it is
manifest inoughe that Paul thought not that thing unlawful, that Christ had
ordained, namely that they should live of the gospel, that serve the gospel:
nay he proves most plentuously in other places, that it is most lawful of
all other things, both by authority of scripture, and also by law of nature.
1. Cor. 9 2. Cor 11
Moreover he confesses that he received money of the Macedonians, to the
intent to serve the Corinthians of free cost. Therefore Paul had a far
other meaning, that was, to bear with the weak, and to teach all others,
that they should not make luker of religion, and so bring religion in
suspicion, but rather by their free ministry, and duetifull demeanor, they
should commend both them selves and their doctrine, to be praised of all men.
Therefore certain evil occupied persons in these days do most foolishly make
a general doctrine of Paul's example, in that they would set the Ministers of
the word to plow and to harrowe, and to keep Hogs: wherein it is manifest
the Apostles herein used their right freely, and did as seemed good to them,
where there was no occasion of offense. But if they say that Paul refrained to
take his stipend at Ephesus and Corinth, because it was unlawful for him to
require the same, then I would have them answer me, with what equity Paul
took stipend of the Philippians, and other contribution of money, when he
preached to the Corinthians, and not to them? But if it was lawful for him to
use their liberality, how much iustlier should he have done, to have taken
a pension of them, whom he daily preached unto? It is evident therefore, that
Paul willingly remitted to them his right, because he would there offend the
weak, nor give the wicked occasion to slander him. And as this modesty of
Paul is to be commended, so the ingratitude both of the Ephesians and
Corinthians, is to be worthily reprehended, which suffered the Apostle to live
of the labor of his hands, seeing he bestowed himself and his labor, all
together upon them.

But for the more credit and authority of his example, and for a general
rule to be taken thereof, he alleges the saying of Christ: It is more blessed
to give than to receive.
It is more bles^ed to give, than to receive. Howbeit the words of this
sentence are not extant in the writings of the Evangelists, yet there are many
like, whereof this may easily be gathered, because Christ every where exhorts
us unto charity, and will have those that be his, more ready to bestow upon
others, than to receive. Moreover it appears sufficiently, that all Christ's
words and deeds were not put in writing, but out of a great many, those that
suffised abundauntly for the instruction of our faith and salvation. We must
yet see further the reason of this saying, and not stick at the bark, that
therefore it should seem unto us more blessed to give than to receive, because
by giving our money and goods, we should declare our liberality of mind, to
be praised for it, and to make other men bound unto us. For these fleshly
reasons savor of vain glory, and of the smell of the kitchen, wherewith we
read the very Ethnikes were enflamed to be liberal. But Christ commends and
requires liberality of Chrystians, for far other causes. For first it is
more blessed to give than to receive, because the faithful that do it are
disposers or Stewards of the goods that God has committed unto them. For it
is manifest that God has given to some men more goods than to other some, not
without a cause, but has made some richer than other some, to make room and
place for charity, and rich men be appointed as patrons and tutors for the
poor, to help them with their liberality, And how can it be, but he must
be judged blessed, which is faithful in the office committed to him of God?
Again, as Solomon says, Prouer. 19.
They which give unto the poor, lend unto the Lord. For he counts
whatsoever is bestowed on them, to be given to him, and he is both a faithful
and liberal rewarder. Wherefore it can not be but he will keep his promise,
where he allureth men unto liberality, as by these places it appears:
Blessed is the man that disperseth abroad, and gives to the poor. His
righteousness remains for ever and ever, his horn shall be exalted with
honor. Psalm. 112. Deal thy bread to the hungry, and bring the poor wandering
home into thy house. When thou see the naked cover him, and hyde not thy face
from thine own flesh. Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and
thy health flourishe right shortly, thy righteousness shall go before thee,
and the glory of the Lord shall embrace thee. Then if thou call, the Lord
shall hear thee: if thou cryest, he shall say, Isa. 58.
here I am. Finally, because we are in nothing so like unto God, as in doing
well, we no manner of ways ^ore resemble the nature and similitude of God, than
by helping of many. For as God only is blissed of him self, so is there no
more certain way of bilsse, than to be most like unto God, which thing
christian liberality chiefly performs. Wherefore although there be no
recompense of benefits in this world, yet in deed it is a much more blessed
thing to give than to receive. These things if we consider as we ought,
Monkishe order overthrown.
it shall appear how far the Monks religion is distant from Christ's
doctrine, who set all bliss and felicity in receiving, while they renounce
all such things as fall lawfully to them by inheritance, or other lawful
means, and profess wilful poverty, living of the labor of other men, where
they ought rather to minister to other men food and raiment. And so under a
plausible pretense of wilful poverty, they live careless in delights,
being subject to no misfortunes, as other men be.

Paul concludes his sermons with prayers.
But let us return unto Paul, which ends his Sermon made to the Clergy with
public prayers. For streightwayes he fell on his knees and prayed with them
all. For where he knew that God only gave all increase (as otherwheres he
teaches) therefore he was not unmindful of prayer, specially in a matter of
such importance, whereupon depended the salvation of al men. And hereof sprang
that ancient and notable usage of the Church, wherein sermons used to be begone
and ended with prayers, which prayers who so neglect, abundantly declare that
they resort unto sermons more of curiosity, than either for desire of Gods
glory, or their own salvation, of which sort they are which are described in
Ezechiel the xxxiij. Chapter. And as this example commends prayers, and
specially public prayers, which it behooves us to make with fervent affection
of mind: so it teaches us to observe also a godly modesty of behavior in
the same, whereby we testify the meaning of our mind. Among these gestures,
this is the most ancient, where the godly men use to pray on their knees, or
else lying with their bodies prostrate on the ground, thereby setting themselves
in order of humbleness. They use also commonly to lift up their hands unto
heaven, both to declare the ardent desire of their mind, and also to testify
their faith, whereby they firmly believe that they shall receive that they
desire. Yet must we take heed that we cloak not a naughty mind with a vain
kind of gesture, or that we lift not up hands embrued with blood. Touching
both which vices, read Esai. 1. and.29. Chapiters.

After all these things Luke adds Paul's departure out of Asia, in the which
two things fall out chiefly to be marked. The godly are sorry for Paul's
departure.
First, he says, they fell on weeping of all hands, and even they whom Paul
had somdeale more openly quipped. But they regarded not so much their private
reprehension, as the public commodity of the whole Church. They are therefore
sorry that the Church should be deprived of such an Instrument, and they
declare their sorrow, by weeping, embracing, and kissing. This is a very
delectable example of mutual charity, wherein the Ministers and Congregations
should strive, each to overcome others. Paul loved them wonderfully, as his
whole trade of life declared. Therefore they again loved him, and reverenced
him, as their Apostle and Father. Where this mutual affection reigns, all
things prosper well. But they which hate their Ministers, are for the most
part most unhappy, as may evidently be seen in the Israelites, which hated
Moses and Aaron. Against the Stoikes.
Also by this place the indolencie of the Stoikes is condemned. They think it
unlawful for any man to show any token of any affection. As though affections
were evil of themself, and not set in us by nature, and that when any excess
is committed it were not through our default. God requires of us a moderation
of the mind, but will not have men to become stocks or stones. Last of al
they bring Paul to the ship, which is a duty of reverence, and for the most
part proceeds of love. Here we learn that they are worthy of honor, which
labor diligently in setting forth the glory of God, or otherwise well
accomplish their duty. Again we are taught, that God never lets them go
without glory, that are such. For his promise is: 1 Samuel 2.
I will honor those that hono^r m^* Le^ ministers of the Church and
Magistrates also, remember these things, tha^ they may learn by like industry
to preserve and maintain their authority. And let us one with another lay to
our helps to the maintenance of the Church: so shall we hereafter be
partakers of the heavenly honor with Christ our Lord and Savior, to whom be
praise, honor, power and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.xxj. Chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The.Cxxxviij. Homely.
ANd when it chanced that we had launched forth, and were depar^ed from them,
we came with a straight course unto Choon, and the day^ following unto the
Rhodes, and from thence unto Patara. And when w^ had gotten a Ship that would
sail unto Phenices, we went aboo^d on it, and set forth. But when Cyprus
began to appear unto us, we left it on the left hand, and sailed unto
Syria, and came unto Tire, for there the Ship vnladed the burden. And when we
had found brethren, we tarried there seven days. And they told Paul through
the spirit, that he should not go up to Jerusalem. And when the days were
ended, we departed and went our way, and they all brought us on our way, with
wives and children, till we were come out of the City. And we kneeled down on
the shore, and prayed. And when we had taken our leave one of another, we took
Ship, and they returned home again. When we had full ended the course from
Tire, we went down to Ptolemais, and saluted the brethren, and abode with them
one day.
THe holy Ghost rehearses very diligently the paynefull and dangerous voyages
of the Apostles, that by them we might learn the exceeding goodness of God
toward us, who would have his elect instruments, and most faithful
Ministers, for our salvation sake* inured with such travels and dangers, for
that we should the more feruentelye embrace the doctrine of the Gospel,
which it behooued to have set forth with so great pains. And to this end
must the history of this Chapter be referred, wherein we are taught how Paul
passing many seas, through many hazardes came into Syria, and from thence to
Jerusalem, where being courteously received of the godly, but betrayed by the
sedicious, and apprehended, he was committed to the power of the Deputy or
lieuetenaunt of the Romans, al which things we shall consider in their time and
place. This place specially has many things which make much for the
explication of that we said even now. Wherefore the Contents must be the more
diligently discussed, which at the first sight seem but barren.

First it is declared how Paul unwillingly departed from Athens, with his
company. Paul is taken or pulled from them of Asia.
We launched forth (says he) and were plucked from them. On this sort it is
said, Christ was pulled from his Disciples at mount Oliuet. Luc. 22. By which
word is declared a great grief of mind, risen about his departure. And
verily the causes of this grief were neither few, nor yet tryfling. For
Paul's three years conversation amongst them, had engendered a mutual love
between them. And diverse arguments of this love were apparaunt, all which
these fresh tears and common grief taken on all parts, called again to
remembrance. Moreover Paul knew that he should come no more amongst them,
which loved him so intierly, that he had left them in danger of Wolves, whom
he had trained and brought to with great pains and travel. All these things
had been able to move even an heart of iron. Thus we see Parents mourn, when
their children by death are pulled from them, which by reason of their
minority are not yet able to help them selves. Yet Paul overcomes all
grief of mind, because he would obey the calling of God, which drue him to
Jerusalem. By which example we are taught, that Gods will and calling must be
preferred before all affections. For it is impossible for us to be wholly void
of these affections, as long as we live in the flesh: and it is evident, that
they bear a stroke even in the godly. But a moderation must be used, to bring
them under the obedience of faith. And this must be observed in all cases, but
specially when by death our friends be pulle^ ey^her from us, or we from them,
whose good counsel and help we found to be very profitable for us. Let us
then remember we are urged with Gods calling, whom to gaynesay or strive
against, as it is a very rash enterprise, so is it both foolish and
dangerous.

Paul's navigations is long and perilous.
Secondly, Luke describes Paul's long and tedious voyage, which al men must
confess to have been both painful and perilous. We will not tarry long in
the description of the places, for that is to be sought for in the Geographers.
And because there are so many places recited which Paul sailed by, without
making any abode in them, it is a token, that he made very great haste, to be
at Jerusalem by the feast of Pentecost. Here is to be considered Paul's
feruente industry and diligence in the office committed to his charge, and his
constant faith. He might have lived in the world (as he testifies of himself
writing to the Philippians) quietly and in honor. And his first state of life
abundantly declares, that he was of no small authority among the Jews. He saw
moreover, that in following of Christ, there was continual pains and travel,
and every day fresh dangers springing. Yet he embraced this kind of life,
according to Gods will and calling, and with a constant course overcame them
all, and whatsoever things in this world were either of gain or glory unto
him, those he counted as damageable, and set light of them, only for that he
would win Christ. Phil. 3.
Wherein it appears he was not a little encouraged with the hope of that
heavenly crown, which he knew was laid up for him, and all that were godly. Let
us follow the Example of so notable an Apostle, least we be either overcome
with trauails and dangers, 2. Tim. 4.
or else being enticed with the allurement of the world, leave of the course of
our vocation prescribed by Christ. For what is there in this world stable or
permanent? What thing is able to satisfy the desire of the mind, and of the
flesh? Only God is omnisufficient, and perfect good, who has opened to us in
Christ his son, the treasures of all goodness, in whom only men's minds
are quieted and at rest. He that drinks of this fountain, shall not thirst
for ever. Happy therefore and blessed are they, that can exchange the
counterfayte felicity of this world, for the fountain of this eternal
bliss.

Thirdly, he tells how they came at length unto Tyrus, Paul comes to
Tire.

The church of Tire.


where we have diverse things in order to be considered. Among which this is
one of the chief, that he says they found Disciples at Tyrus, that is is to
say, certain christian brethren, and such as might seem to have passed all
those, of whom any mention has been made hitherto in duties of faith and
charity. Which may seem a marvelous thing, if a man consider the ancient
state of the City of Tyrus, and the horrible Oracles of the prophets against
the same, reporting her to be both riotous, proud, covetous and lecherous. Yea
Christ our Lord detesting the unthankfulness of the Cities of Galilee,
compares them with Tire and Sidon, Math. 11.
upon the which God in times past had showed severe examples of his justice.
Yet even in this same City shone the light of the Gospel: and here would
Christ have a Church planted and endued with notable gifts. Herein appears
the truth of God, and his goodness toward sinners which turn unto him. For
so he long agone prophesied by Esaias it should come to pass: After the end of
seauenty years shall the Lord visit Tire, Esa. 23.
and she shall convert unto her reward, and she shall traffic with all the
kingdoms of the earth. And her traffic and wares shall be holy unto the
Lord. And in the.45. Psalm: And the daughter of Tire shall be there with a gift,
like as the rich also among the people shall make their supplications be^fore
thee. These things I say, this present place declares to have been fulfilled,
when Paul found christians there so fervent in faith and love. And this is a
notable example of Gods goodness, whereby we are taught how we should not over
hastily despair either of our selves, or of other men, seeing God would build
him a Church in such a City, as upon which he had in times before showed so
heavy an example of his justice, by reason of the sins and offenses of the
same.

Again Luke writes, Paul is admonished that he go not to Jerusalem.
how the brethren of Tyrus admonished Paul by the spirit, that he should not
go up to Jerusalem. This seems to repugne against that which Paul spoke in
the congregation at Malta, saying, he was bound by the spirit to go thither.
But these places are easily reconciled, if a man consider the figure called
Synecdoche, which is very common in the holy scripture, where the whole
communication of these disciples is atributed to the holy ghost, he being in
deed ye author but of one part only. For they by inspiration of the spirit
admonished Paul of the imprisonment and afflictions, which Paul was like to
find at Jerusalem. But the Counsel they gave him that he should not go up
thither, was of their own devise, because of a loving affection they wished
well unto him, but were ignorant of Gods determination. For many times it
comes to pass, that the Prophets through the revelation of God, understand
what is to come, and yet are utterly ignorant of Gods meaning, and the end of
his doing, which is the cause that many times they err in their doings,
whiles they are not contented with the revelation of God, but take the wisdom
of the flesh unto Council, whereof we have examples in Jonas and diverse
others. In the mean season mark how many ways God would have Paul to be
tempted. He draws him to Jerusalem, being bound by his spirit. In every
City and congregation, he tells him how he shall be laid by the heels and
imprisoned. And now come others endued with the spirit of prophecy, and
warn him that he go not thither. Whereto serve all these things? Uerily God
mente hereby to prepare his Apostle to the cross, by continual
premeditation, least he should fall from him thorough the manyfolde clamor of
the furious people, and entrappings of his enemies. Also he learneth us hereby
an example of christian constancy and obedience, which we must so earnestly
labor to have, that we must not obey men, though we see rare examples of
Gods holy spirit in them, if they council us any thing contrary to the will
and commandment of God. Add thereunto the unhappy end of that Prophet, 1.
Reg. 13.
which being seduced by an other Prophet under the pretense of Gods oracle,
eat meat in Bethell, contrary to the commandment of God, and was devoured
of a Lion. Learn also hereby to judge of the apparicion of spirits, by the
authority whereof Monks commonly use to prove their fictions of Purgatory,
and such other superstitions, which they know they can not prove by any
Scriptures.

Furthermore* perceiving that Paul followed rather the calling of God, than
their council, They of Tire accompany Paul to the ship very worshipfully.
and held on his voyage, they also yielded unto the will of God, and
accompanied him worshipfully with their wives and children out of the City.
Wherein we may perceive both a rare example of Christian charity, and the truth
of Christ's promises, which are to be seen in the tenth of Mark in these
words: Verily I say unto you, who so ever forsakes house, or brethren, or
sistren, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, Mark. 10.
or lands, for my sake and the Gospels, he shall receive an hundred fold now in
this time with persecutions, and in the world to come life everlasting. For
we know that Paul forsook all these things for Christ's sake. Therefore he
fyndeth every where brethren and sisters, which willingly serve him, both
with their bodies and goods. Yea he has their wives and children ready to
declare their good wills toward him. Moreover this place teaches us, that
Christians ought to assign and appoint all they have to the worshipping of
God, and also to be careful, that not only themselves be courteous and kind
toward the servants of Christ, but also to train up their families in the
performaunce of like duties. 1. Timo. 5.
Paul in an other place requires the same in the widow chosen for Church
affairs. And that which it becomes widows to do, may with more right be
required of others to do. But O detestable sloth of our days, wherein diverse
householders so bring up their families, that they teach them rather how to
molest strangers, to contemn and hate them, than duetifully to favor and
make of them. 2. Reg 2.
Let such remember what happened to the children, that vpbraided Helizeus with
his baldenesse, whom the scripture says, were woorried with Bears.

Last of all, the brethren of Tire kneel down upon the shore, and pray. The
Tyrians pray in open sight.
Where again we see, how prayer is commended unto us, whereof then there is
most need, when public and weighty affairs are in hand. But because we
have otherwheres entreated hereof, let us only here mark, how they
kneel openly upon the sea shore, which could not be but in the sight of all
men, who perhaps derided such kind of religion. But they which are truly
graffed in Christ, are ashamed neither of their faith, nor of their religion.
Mark. 8.
For they know what glory remains for them, which confess Christ before
this so adulterous and naughty a world. Would to God we would well remember
the same, and shake off that execrable cowardlynesse and fear, which we use
now a days in every thing, playing bopeepe like dissemblers, to purchase us
the favor of men.

Fourthly and finally, Paul with his company arriueth at Ptolemais, The most
happy course of the Gospel.
where again he made one days abode with the brethren. Therefore it appears
there was a Church erected in that place also. And surely it is worthy to be
diligently considered, how the doctrine of the Gospel in the space of so few
years, spredde so far and wide, that it established so many Congregations.
For if a man consider the order of the story, it seems these things happened
about the.xxiij. year after Paul's conversion. Therefore in the space of.xxiij.
years the voice of the Gospel was heard throughout Asia and Europa, and every
where left behind it most plentyfull fruit and increase. So we read in
times past the Prophets told and foreshewed it should be. These things
declare how happily such things proceed as are taken in hand by Gods
appoyntmente, howsoever the world wrastleth against Gods purpose and council.
They are fools therefore that fear the threats and enterprises of the
world. Let us meditate and think of these things in these days, and being
armed with constant faith, let us labor to set forth the kingdom of Jesus
Christ. To him be praise, honor, power and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.Cxxxviij. Homely.
THE next day we that were of Paul's company departed, and came unto
Coesarea. And we entered into the house of Philippe the Euangeliste, which
was one of the seven, and abode with him. The same man had four daughters
virgins, which did prophecy. And as we tarryed there a good many of days,
there came a certain prophet from Jury, named Agabus, when he was come unto
us, he took Paul's gyrdle, and bound his feet and his hands, and said:
Thus says the holy Ghost: So shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the manne
that owes this gyrdle, and shall deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles.
When we heard this, both we and other which were of the same place, besought
him that he would not go up to Jerusalem. Then Paul answered and said:
what do you weeping and vexing mine heart? I am ready not to be bound only,
but also to die at Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord Jesus. When we could
not turn his mind, we ceased, saying: the will of the Lord be fulfilled.
Afte^ those days we took up our burdens and went up to Jerusalem. There
went with us also certain of the Disciples of Coesarea, and brought with them
one Mnason of Cyprus, an old Dysciple, with whom we should lodge. And when
we were come to Jerusalem, the brethren received us gladly.
IT pleased God that Luke should most diligently describe how he would have
the Gospel of his son Jesus Christ to be commended and set out by Paul's
emprisonment and captivity, in so much that Paul hasted and hyed him to the
same. Hereby he meant to lay before all men, a president of steadfast faith and
obedience to follow. For we have hitherto heard how Paul hasted to Jerusalem,
one while by sea, an other while by land, and that through manyfolde dangers
and peril, where he knew he should be apprehended, and would not regard any
warnings of the Prophets, dehorting him from that, whereunto he knew he was
called of God. And Luke prosecuting the History begone, declares now what
he did at Coesarea, which was the last place that Paul made any abode in, and
then at length how he came to Jerusalem.

Philip, is a president of an Euangelike shepherd.
He begins the things done at Coesarea, with the description of their
Host, which was Philippe, one of the seven that were appointed by the
prim^tiue Church to have the administration and distribution of the Church
goods among the poor, as we heard before in the sixth Chapter. For the Church
at Jerusalem being miserably dispearsed by reason of the persecution there
raging, wherein Paul showed him self to be very cruel, Philipp^ came to
Samaria* and there sowed the seed of Gods word. And there he now had his
dwelling, and seems to have been the Minister or Bishop of that Church,
which Christ had there. And this is one of Gods rare judgments, that Paul
should now have him to be his host, whom before time he had caused to
forsake Jerusalem, and that which he there had. Howebeit in Philippe, Saint
Luke sets out to us a notable example of a sincere and an unfeigned
Shepherd, in few words comprising all that Paul requires in a Bishop, in
the first to Timothe the third Chapter, and in the first to Titus. First, an
Evangelist.
For first he says, he was an Evangelist he was therefore one meet and apt
to teach, which is the first and most necessary quality of a Minister. And
the degree or office of the Evangelists was a mean between the Apostles and
Pastors, Ephesians. 4.
as may appear by Paul. For they made their abode in certain places* yet not
being so tied unto them but that if necessity so required, they might repair
to places adjoining, and further off. Their name admonished them of their
duty and office, which as touching doctrine, was all one with the Apostles
and Pastoures, that is to say, to preach the gospel, and to enfourme men in
the doctrine thereof. For Christ would not have it free for the Apostles to
teach what they listed, but commanded them to preach the Doctrine which he
had taught them, which only in these days also ought to be taught in the
congregation. Furthermore, Secondly, Harborous.
Philip had an house and substance, able to suffice both his own need, and
also to harbor others in, which thing Paul also requires in a Minister. For
he receives Paul and a great company that come with him, and entertayneth
them courteously for a certain days space, which he could not have done
without some costs and charges. Therefore he was no beggar, or vagabunde such
as many malapert Comptrollers of the Ecclesiastical function, would have
Ministers in these days to be, who are either bewitched with envy, or
deceived with ignorance, not being able to make a difference between the
Apostles and the Pastors. And it is like he was very harborous, which was able
to entertain Paul and his company so courteously, which Paul had been the
cause of his exilement, as we declared a little before. Moreover, it is said he
had Daughters. Ergo, a wife also, Thirdly, Married.
unless (which were a wicked imagination) we will say he was an Whooremonger,
which yet perhaps the maintainers of filthy single life that Popery has
brought into the Church, would better like and bear with. They are convinced
both by this, and the example of other Apostles, which Paul plainly confesses
carried their wives about with them. j. Corrinth. ix. The same Paul appoints
a Bishop or Minister to be the husband of one wife, 1. Timot 3
that is to say, to be knit together in lawful wedlock, according to Gods
first institution. And it is a most vain gloss of them, which think the
ministry is polluted by Matrimony, and the company of a wife, Hebr. 13
whereas it is evident it was instituted by God, and is in it self holy and
undefiled. Therefore Paul truly calls it a doctrine of the Devil, that
forbids the use of marriage, because it is the property of the Devil, to
call Gods institutions either unclean, unprofitable, or pernicious. See the
first to Timoth^ the fourth Chapter. And the fruits of Popish single life, do
notably set forth the aucthor of this doctrine. Whereas it is manifest that
hereof uses to spring many times, whoredoms, adulteries, incests, and that
horrible vice of Sodomie. Last of al, Fourthly, Philippes Daughters were
Prophetisses.
is declared what quali^ied persons Philips daughters were, namely damsels
endued with the gift of Prophesying. We know, that this word Prophesying,
signifies many times the declaration of Gods word and the holy scripture. For
so Paul says that they that expound the scriptures in the Church, and refer
and direct all their sayings and doings to the edification, instruction, 1.
Cor. 14
and consolation of the Church, do Prophecy. 1. Cor. 14. He calls those
women Prophets, that sit in the Church and hear the word of God, whom he
commands to sit covered on their heads in the Temple. 1. Cor. 11
But whereas Lukes meaning was, to declare that Philips daughters had rare and
singular gifts, this Prophesying is to be understood of a peculiare gift and
virtue of the holy Ghost, wherewith God had endowed them. For what need was
it, to have noted that which al Christian women had indifferently, learned and
unlearned, every age and sex? And I pray you, who would have judged the
children of so faithful an Evangelist, to have been other than desirous of
Gods word? But here is to be understood a singular gift of Prophecy,
wherewith God meant to adourne womankinde also, in the time of Christ, according
to the Prophecy of Joel, that men might be the more attent to hear the word
of God, and that it might appear, that the merit of Christ appertained unto
women, as well as to them. In the mean season, it is manifest, that Philip had
a special care of the education and bringing up of his children, which
according to Paul's doctrine, 1. Timot 3
is a thing very necessary both for public example sake, and also for that it
is scarce credible, that he can well rule the congregation, that is not able to
govern his own house. And the example of Hely the priest declares how God is
offended with the Ministers of the Church, which use not to bridle the
untowardness and wantonness of their children severely. Read the first of
Samuel. 2.3.4. Chapiters.

Agabus tells Paul how he should be bound and imprisoned.
Moreover while Paul abode with Philip, a certain Prophet, whose name was
Agabus came from Jerusalem or Iewrie, which warned him again of the
enprisonment toward him, and that not only by words, but also by gestures and
signs after the manner of the ancient Prophets, thereby laying the thing, as
it were before his eyes. For with Paul's girdle, he binds his own hands and
feet, adding an exposition and declaration of his so doing, saying: the Jews
shall bind the man which owes this girdle at Jerusalem, on this wise. God
therefore would have Paul oftentimes admonished hereof, partly for that his
faith and constancy might appear the more, and partly for that we might
learn by this example, that present dangers be not always sufficient causes
for us to ^^ie, because God foresheweth them sometimes, not to the end we
should shun and avoid them, but to prepare us to the undertaking and
suffering of them.

And here is principally to be considered, both what Paul, and also his
Companions did, Paul's companions dissuade him from going to Jerusalem.
in this present and evident peril. Whereof the one part wept, and desired
him with tears, that he would not go up to Jerusalem, as may be gathered by
Paul's words. And surely they could not want reasons to persuade him
heereunto. For both he seemed to tempte God, and also to hazard not only him
self, but also to neglect the welfare of the Church, whom by this mean he
bereeued of his service and Ministry. But this is a zeal, commendable in
deed, but not according to knowledge, such as Christ sharply reprehended in
Peter, when he also dissuaded him from bearing the Cross, yet their affection
is to be praised, Math. 16
in that they are careful for Paul's safety, being far unlike to men in
these days, which bring Ministers in danger without a cause, and think that
they have well discharged their duties, if they can for a time redeem a
worldly peace, with the lives and blood of the Ministers. But Paul most
earnestly withstandeth them, and complayneth of them, saying: they grieve him
more with their weping, than with the remembrance of the danger. Therefore
Paul was not stony hearted, such an one as the Stoikes feign their good and
blissful man to be: Paul's constancy.
but he confesses plainly that Gods calling is more dear unto him, than
his life and body. The holy Ghost sets his Example before all Ministers, yea
before all Christians, to be followed. For unless we be of the same mind,
we shall little or nothing profytte in the way of Christ, because dangers
are at hand on every side to them that seek to serve Christ. And this is no
grievous thing to the true godly, 2. Tim 3
if they well wey the matter: for what more profitable loss can we have of this
transitory life and body, which shall in few months mouldre into dust, than
to give it for Christ's sake, whom we know died and rose again for this end,
Rom 14
that whether we live or die, we have him to our Lord and Protectoure? Which is
the cause that Christ bids us we should not fear the^ which are able to
kill the body, but yet have no power upon the soul, which is the better part
of man. And unto these reasons do Paul's companions also give place. For seeing
him so constantly to persist in his purpose, Math 10
they say: The will of God be fulfilled. So now they perceive at length, that
he is instigated heereunto by the calling of God. Therefore least they might
seem to strive against God, they commit them selves, and the whole business
unto him, following both the example and commandment of Christ. And surely
there is no more safe haven, for the godly to get them selves into, amidde the
raging and horrible tempests of these days, than the will of God. Which
because it is holy and wholesome, is able most effectually to recreate and
cheer the minds that are tossed with troubles and cares, with the
consideration thereof. Let us therefore after the example of these men, have a
regard only unto the same, and courageously suffer what so ever God lays
upon us, who for that he is faithful, 1. Cor. 10
will not suffer us to be tempted above our strength, but even in the middle of
temptation, will make a way, that we shall be able to bear it.

Now follows Paul's arrival at Jerusalem, An example of faithful friends.
where we have three things to be considered. First his friends accompany him
which hitherto had been his companions: and unto these are added new friends
gotten at Caesaria. In which place the truth of God appears, which uses to
join friends and companions to them that suffer danger for his names sake,
as otherwheres we have declared. Furthermore in them appears a notable
example of faith and constancy. For they were not ignorant what was like to
happen unto Saul. And there was great cause for their own part also to be
afraid. Yet they forsake him not, whom they knew maintained Christ's
quarrel, nor would not be driven from him by any waves, and ^ourges of
adversity. Let such mark this Example, as are pot friends, and as long as
fortune laugheth, will be companions with men, but if she begin once to lowre,
they forget all friendship and benefits, and turn their backs. The second is,
how the faithful there, provide Paul of a commodious lodging. For although
dangers were toward him, yet prudencie must be joined with religion, as Christ
teaches, who in dangers will have us to be wise, as serpents. His host was
one Mnason, a Cypriote borne, Mnason, Paul's host. Math. 10
and an old disciple or protestant, whereby is noted the perseueraunce and
continuance he was of, in the faith. And charity accompanies faith, whereof
this was a notable argument, that he would lodge Paul and his companions,
knowing what danger they were like to be in. This is the property of true
faith, that the nigher danger approaches, and the more vehemently it urges,
the brighter it shines. Charity is not suspicious.
Therefore our coldness is very worthy to be blamed, which in dangers
dissemble our faith, and plainly neglect the duty of charity. Last of all
the brethren at Jerusalem do gladly receive Paul, yet hereafter we shall
hear what evil rumors they spread of him. But thy brethren would not
condemn him without hearing of his cause. They are most worthy to be followed,
and teach us by their example, that we rashly believe not such as ill report the
brethren. For such as these for the most part, are the chosen instruments of
the Devil, which knows that the Church can no way be more grievously
disturbed, than by the division of the brethren. Let us therefore be mindful of
charity, which of all things abhors suspitiousnesse, and let us wholely
apply our selves to keep the unity of the Church unblemished, in Jesus Christ
our savior, to whom be praise, honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.Cxxxix. Homely.
ANd on the morrow Paul went in with us unto James. And all the Elders came
together. And when he had saluted them, he told by order all things, that God
had wrought among the Gentiles by his Ministration. And when they heard it,
they glorified the Lord, and said unto him: thou see brother how many
thousand Jews there are which believe, and they are all earnest followers over
the law. And they are enfourmed of thee, that thou teach all the Jews,
which are among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, and say, that they ought not
to circumcise their children, neither to live after the customs. What is it
therefore? The multitude must needs come together: for they shall hear that
thou art come. Do therefore this that we say to thee. We have four men which
have a vow on them. The^ take, and purify thy self with them, and do cost on
them, that they may shave their heads, and all shall know that those things
which they have heard concerning thee, are nothing, but that thou thy self
also walk, and keep the law. But as touching the Gentiles which believe,
we have written and concluded, that they observe no such thing, save only that
they keep them selves, from things offered to Idolles, and from blood, and from
strangled, and from fornication.
ALthough many false rumors were spread of Paul the Apostle, that chosen
vessel of Jesus Christ, whereby both his good name and doctrine was
grievously stained and impeached by his adversaries, yet Luke writes that the
brethren at Jerusalem, did friendly and courteously receive him, thereby
teaching us, that they had a more regard of charity, than of a few of
persons boiling in hatred, and he sets out to us, their example* for every
man to follow, which if we do not, all charity amongst men shall soon be
disturbed. It follows in this present history, what Paul and the brethren
at Jerusalem did. Which place for many skilles, that may serve for our
instruction, is very worthy of diligent attention and consideration.

First and formoste, Paul and his companions get them unto James* which at
this time was resident in the City, Paul goes to ye elders at Jerusalem.
and there in the hearing of the Elders, he declared what things he had done,
repeating in order, each thing that God until that time, had wrought by his
Ministry. Where we are first taught that order is a necessary thing in the
Church, and that every one must not entermeddle in every thing. Paul was an
elect vessel of Christ, and labored more than all the other Apostles, yet of
his private authority, he attempteth nothing in an other man's Church, but
before he set on any thing, he first goes to the Superintende^ts and Ministers
of the Church, and reverently saluteth them, and then proceeds to the
narration of his doings. This one example is suffisant, to convince the pride
of the Roman Bishops, which challenge to them self a supremacy and Lordship
over all Churches. The troublesome Anabaptists also are confuted by the same,
who although they no where plant any Churches, yet use they to disturb the
Churches planted by the labors and travails of others, hereby attributing
to them selves singular commendation, when they can by their frantic and
tauntiue chatterie, molest and trouble the godly Ministers, and bring them in
hatred and contempt with every man. Furthermore in this thing also Paul's
modesty singularly appears, in that he makes God the aucthor of all things,
in the discourse of his doings, and attributes nothing to him self, but the
Ministry only. For he knew that men planted and watered but in vain, 1. Cor. 3
unless God gave the increase. So in another place, when he had said, he had
labored more than all the other Apostles, he by and by adds: 1. Cor. 15
yet no^ I, but the grace of God, which was with me. This thing we have
elsewhere declared, must be observed in all manner of vocations. Psalm. 127
For except the Lord build the house, their labor is but ^ost that build it.
Except God prosper and favor commonweals, the cares and counsels of the
Magistrates are but in vain. Except by his spirit he work with our studies,
and sharpen the edge of our wit, all our reading and writing profits not.
Let us therefore be mindful hereof, and learn to have a lowly conceit of
our selves, with our studies intermeddle continual prayers, whereby God will
be sued unto, and have his gifts obtained.

Furthermore, of the Elders it is said, that when they had heard Paul's
travails, they glorified the Lord. This is a rare example of love, that they
envy not at the praise of their fellow Minister, and murmur not churlishly at
it, as commonly they do, which being void of all charity, are more desirous
of their own glory, than of Gods. For as Paul made God the author of the
things which he had so commendably done, so they also tickle not Paul with
counterfeit praises, but rejoicing in his doings, give the glory unto God. They
teach us by their example, how to judge of the labors and virtues of
Saints. We must know that they were men, subject to humane affections, and
casualties. If therefore they have done any thing passing man's power or
ability, we mu^ know it was the working of God, who of mere favor, did
vouchsafe to use their Ministry. Let us therefore rejoice in their felicity,
and follow them in yielding our selves to be Gods instruments, but let us
ascribe the whole praise of our doings unto God. And we thus imitating them,
shall truly honor them, and yet God shall have his glory remain whole and
sound, which those men wickedly violate, that cleave unto the Saints, and
make them aucthors and giuers of goodness, in such wise, that they ask help
and succor of them in distress. Look before in the third and fourtienth
Chapiters.

Now follows a notable Act whereof these Elders of Jerusalem were the chief
Counselors. The elders go about to free Paul from hatred
For they counsel him to take upon him the vow of a Nazarean, and that the
time of his vow being expired, he should according to the law, let him self
be purified, or dismissed of his vow, in the Temple: which thing gave occasion
to his wicked enemies, to take against him, and so to apprehend him, and cast
him in prison. But because in this doing, there are things which after a sort
are tolerable, and some by no means to be borne with, they are therefore the
more diligently to be examined. Wherefore for the better understanding of each
thing, we will more at large open this controversy. Paul taught that men were
justified through the mere favor of God, Rom 3 Galath. 3
by faith in Jesus Christ, which doctrine the Apostles, we see allowed and
approved with one consent in the xv. Chapter. But where Paul preaching among
the Gentiles, had much ado with them, that went about to iumble the law and
gospel together, and would have had the Gentiles brought to the observation of
Circumcision, and such like Ceremonies* therefore it was necessary, that he
should the more diligently entreat of the end and use of the law, and he was
enforced in lively wise, to open all things to the quick. Wherefore he plainly
taught, that the law and ceremonies thereof helped nothing unto justification,
because no man was able to satisfy the law, but that it was given to bewray
our corruption, and to bring us being conuicte of sin unto Christ, in whom
only the fulfilling of the law was to be found. He further said, that by
their opinion which attributed merit of justification to the law, Christ was
not available, and that such could not but be condemned, because they
wittingly procured to them selves the curse of the law. Hereof sprang these
kinds of locutions: The law works wrath: while the law endured, Romans 7 1.
Cor. 15 Galath. 3
Sin revived: The strength of Sin is the law. As many as are of the deeds
of the law, are subject to the curse. etc. These things seemed very
unpleasant to those, which were brought up in the law from their childehode,
and knew that God had appointed the same by Moses. And they that were Paul's
ennemies, took occasion hereof to slander him, saying he was a profane
contempner of the law, as though he simply and without respect, disallowed
the same: where as he improued not the law, but them, who invented a new end
and use of the law, and would have men saved and justified by the observation
thereof. Therefore all men envied Paul, even as in these days, we are called
the ennemies of good works, when we say they are not available to justify
and save by, where yet we leave them still their place, and teach that they be
duties which all men must needs pay, and perform unto God. Now these
things being premised, it shall easily appear what these Elders meant by their
talk, and what mark they shot at in their doing. Wherefore, we will now
view and examine all the parts of their saying.

The elders oration or talk.
First they plainly declare, that Paul's good name and fame was evil spoken of
amongst al men. For they say: It is reported that thou teach al men to
forsake Moses. etc. And this is to be much commended in them that they
dissemble nothing. For it is good to deal plainly with friends and brethren,
that if they have offended, it may be amended, and that they may be judged
faultlesse, if they be wrongfully accused. And it is a great fault in them that
will still accuse men, when they are absent, and flatter them when they are
present. And they also are very faulty, which suffer other to backbite the
brethren, and will not warn them, of whom they should beware. For so it
comes to pass, that slander breaks friendship every where, and a great
many know not, what cheefely to beware of.

Also they counsel him to make his purgation openly, bringing diverse weighty
reasons of that their counsel. For first they allege the multitude of
beleuers, all which had conceived an evil opinion of him. For they say: thou
see brother, how many thousand Jews there are which believe, and they all
are fervent folowers of the law. And they expressly call them believers,
least any man should think they would hold with obstinate and stubberne
persons. And they say, there are many thousands of them, declaring that the
salvation of so many, is not a thing to be lightly regarded. And surely it is
likely that Paul was cheefely moved with this reason, who was so careful for
his Countrymen, that he wished to be accursed for their sakes. They allege
also their zeal to the law, to the end it might appear that they were as
yet somewhat to be borne with, seeing violent remedies could little prevail in
such feruencie of zeal. Furthermore they reason of necessity, saying: It must
needs be that the multitude will come together. For where all men know thou
art come, the matter can not be dissembled. Therefore it is needful that thou
purge thy self hereof. And whereas by words thou shall little or nothing
prevail with them that are rooted in superstition, it is needful that thou
declare by some fact or other, that thou have hitherto been unjustly
reprehended. And these persuasions had been of no small importance, if the cause
had not ben such, as might rather have served to confirm the superstitious in
their error, than to win those that were obseruers of the law, as we shall by
and by declare.

For now follows the counsel, whereby they think Paul may maintain and
keep his good name and fame, we have four men (say they) which have a vow
on them, that is to say, Nazareans, The counsel of the elders is discussed.
whereof we entreated in the eightene Chapter, out of the sixth Chapter of the
book of Numbres. Join thy self unto these men, and cause thy self openly to
be shaven and purified with them according to the law. Which thing as it is
easy to be done: so thereby it shall appear unto all men, that thou have
hitherto been wrongfully suspected, and that thou ought to be taken for no
despiser of the law, seeing thou obseruest the Ceremonies commanded in the
same. This is that Counsel of the Elders of the Congregation at Jerusalem,
which outwardly might seem tolerable, and the same that Paul before did at
Cenchreae. But he that expendeth the thing very well, shall perceive a great
difference between them, and that the Apostle ought not to have yielded to
their devise, seeing he had so earnestly maintained and defended the profession
of faith and Christian liberty in other things of smaller importance. For
first of all, he had bound him self to the vow of a Nazarite, among the
Corinthians, 1. Cor. 9.
because he knew he should win thereby some weaklings, as he him self
testifies. And hereby faith suffered no detriment or damage, because the
only shauing of his head, delivered him from his vow. But here was required
a Sacrifice, which now had no more place left in the Church, for that the
veil of the Temple was long before rent in the death of Christ, and all
Sacrifices utterly abrogated. Again, the thing he did at Conchreae, was only
for the weakes sake, and could not be drawn to the Example and confirmation of
the Ceremonies of the law. But the end of this fact was, that Paul should
testify, that he liked the whole law with all the Ceremonies thereof. Hereof
what other thing could spring, but that the Jews should be confirmed in their
error, and they which had hitherto so profited in Christ, that they had
renounced the law, should be called back again, to the observation thereof?
Furthermore, if this had been done in the first beginning of the Church, it
might have seemed justly to have been done for the weakes sake. But seeing the
Gospel had now ben preached every where for two and twenty years together,
surely this was too great an indulgencie and bearing, whereby to confirm an
obstinate people in their superstition. Yea God declared by his judgment, that
he was displeased heerewith. For to say nothing how unhappily this counsel
fell out for Paul, God within few years after, did utterly overthrow their
City and Temple, the forge of all superstition, because they would not before,
make an end of their Leuiticall Ceremonies. Therefore these Elders being
deceived through ouermuche love they bare to their nation, counseled Paul
heereunto, and Paul over easily yielded unto them, who ought rather to have
used the liberty which he showed before in Titus cause, against Peter, Galath.
ij. Therefore they are greatly deceived, which by this Example, go about to
defend them, which think all things must be done, to win men's fau^ure by.
We know this thing ought to have place in such matters as are not derogatorie
to the confession and liberty of Christ. But where these things come in
hazard, we must not swerve one nails breadth from the way of truth. Wherefore
the error of most singular and holy men must not be taken for any Example,
but must rather cause us to be the warier, that we be not led awry by like
error.

Furthermore, in the last part, they prevent that which might be objected,
touching the Gentiles. For Paul's example seemed to prejudice them, and to
maintain their opinion that went about to bring in Circumcision and other
Ceremonies, among the Gentiles. This therefore they deny, saying: Touching the
Gentiles which believe, we have written heretofore, exempting them from all
observing of laws Ceremonial, so they abstain from things that are plain
profane, and in the using of their liberty, forgette not Charity, and
pollute not them self with the fellowshippe of Idolles, and Whoredom, and
offend no man with the unseasonable eating of strangled, or blood, which is a
thing both easy and profitable for them to abstain from. Read the fiftenth of
the Acts touching these points.

Here throughout all this doing appears the obstinacy of the Jews, and
how small prerogative the dignity of this world has in matters of religion,
seeing no where was found greater infirmity and weakness of Faith in the
Apostles time, than in the Church at Jerusalem, which might justly glory, both
in notablenesse of City, and in Christ's sermons, and in the first fruits and
springth of the Gospel. We are also taught, how greatly those supersticious
teachers of Ceremonies hinder the Gospel, which nourishe the weak in faith
with the long retayning of them, and with their bearing pull back the more
feruenter sort of Ministers. Let us therefore cast away such weak shores and
proppes of this doubtful and wavering flesh, and hold fast the verity of
faith, and being mindful of Christian liberty, let us constan^ly magnify
the Author thereof, which is the only begotten son of God, Jesus Christ our
Lord and Savior, to whom be praise, honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.Cxl. Homely.
THEN the next day Paul took the men, and purified him self with them, and
entered into the Temple, declaring that he observed the days of the
purification, until that an offering should be offered for every one of them.
And when the seven days were now almost ended, the Jews which were of Asia,
when they saw him in the Temple, moved all the people, and laid hands on
him, crying: Men of Israel, help. This is the man that teaches all men every
where against the people and the Law, and this place. He has also brought
Greeks into the Temple, and has polluted this holy place. For they had seen
with him one in the City, Prophimus an Ephesian, whom they supposed that Paul
had brought into the Temple. And all the City was moved, and the people
swarmed together. And they took Paul, and drue him out of the Temple, and
forthwith the doors were shut. As they were about to kyl him, tidings came
unto the high Captain of the Soldiers that al Jerusalem was moved. Which
immediately took Soldiers and vndercaptaynes, and ran down unto them. When
they saw the vndercaptayne and the Soldiers, they left smyting of Paul.
Because Paul the Apostle was evil spoken of among those of Jerusalem for his
doctrine about the Law, as though he had simply and absolutely condemned it,
with the precepts and Ceremonies thereof, as a thing of it self evil and
naught: the Elders of the Congregation councelled him how he should clear
him self of all such suspicion. And verily it is a thing worthy of praise in
them, that they are so careful for such a man's good name, but yet to be
disliked, that they give such council as repugneth with the plain profession
of faith and christian liberty. For this teaches us, that the Ceremonies of
the law and Leuitical worshipping, are by Christ abrogated, and that therefore
henceforth there is no more use of them in religion. For why should they be
accounted after Christ's coming among those things that apertaine to the honor
of God, seeing that God in time past would not be worshipped by the^, but
ordained the^ for figures of things to come, and of ye redemption which he had
promised? The holy Ghost sets out this example, neither for us to follow,
neither to diminishe the authority either of Paul, or the Elders, and
cheefely of James, but for that we should learn to suspect the wisdom of the
flesh, in matters of salvation and religion, and not to swerve one nails
bredthe, from the word of God. This shall the whole success of the matter more
fully declare, which now forthwith we shall cheefely consider.

Paul obeys the counsel of the Elders, having no small occasion, to have
expostulated with them, Paul takes on him the vow of a Nazarite.
that they had so long borne with manifest erroures and superstition. Yet he
modestly and friendly yeldeth unto them as well for that he would not seem
waiwarde and obstinate, as also for that he thought hereby to have occasion
with more fredome to teach the Jews. Wherefore he goes into the Temple with
those four men that had the vow on them, declares openly the time when they
would be purified, and procures to have a sacrifice offered for every one of
them. Now who sees not here a manifest error? why does he not, as he had
before time done, when he would bear never so little the dissimulation of
Peter? Why had he no consideration of the Gentiles, which might be maruellously
offended at this his doing? Thinks he there were no false brethren at
Jerusalem, which would privily epsy out the liberty of the Christians?
Therefore this example teaches us how greatly men err in Religion, when they
take the wisdom of the flesh over hastily to council. For Paul being
deceived hereby, recedeth from his former simplicity, and lays a stumbling
block in the way of those Gentiles which believed, and yet preuayleth never
the more amongst the Jews. For they who are not moved with the authority of
Gods word, a man shall in vain go about to move them with lenity and
council of the flesh. Therefore it is the safest way for us to acknowledge that
all matters in Religion appertain unto god alone, and that we have no
authority over them. Thus shall it come to pass, that we shall take nothing
upon us therein, but shall follow the word of God only, which he has
appointed to be both a rule unto us of faith and religion, and also of our
whole life. Look Numer. 15. Deuteronomy. 4. and 12. Chapters.

The succes of man's council is unhappy.
But let us at length see, what was the end of this fact and council. It
seems at the beginning, that this business would well succeed, because for
seven days together there appeared no danger. But lo, when Paul thought the
end was at hand, and him self in safety, troubles rise on every side, so as
he is in such peril of his life, as he was never before in the like. For
through the importunacie and naughtiness of a few of persons, the whole City
was in an uproar, and Paul being apprehended by certain sedicious persons,
had undoubtedly perished, if the Captain had not been moved by the singular
council of God, to come and rescue him out of the hands of such a raging
sort. But let us peruse every thing in order, that we may receive the more
instruction thereby.

The Jews are the authors of disturbance.
First it is declared that the Jews which came out of Asia were the authors of
all this tragedy. These are the same which we see many times before burned in
hatred against Paul, following and pursuing him into every City. For he never
suffered any persecution, but it was raised by these men. In these persons may
be seen the incurable blindness of that Nation, which Paul himself
bewayleth in the first Epistle to the Thessalonians, the second Chapter,
which at length was grievously punished by the just judgment of God. In the
mean season mark how paynefull and bold hatred of the truth makes men to
be. For these fellows follow Paul into all places, and stir up sedition in
a strange City, which they well knew, could not be done without evident
danger. But would God we had not in our days the like examples every where.

Moreover having opportunity thereunto, Sedition is raised.
they move and set all the people a running, as it were to the quenching of some
great fire newly begun. For they lay hands on Paul, and cry: Ye men of
Israel, help. etc. What needed any help or succor against him, that went
about neither secret sedition, nor plain force against any man? You see
therefore who they are that commonly be the authors of sedition. This fault
most times is laid to the Ministers charge, as we see every where. But if we
waygh the matter well, we shall see none other are the begynners hereof, but
those that hate the Ministers, and be their enemies. For whereas they can not
away with the light of truth, if they can by none other means, they will
extinguishe and put away the same with public tuine, as Catiline once said.
Refer hereunto that that is said in the 14.16.17.18. and 19. Chapters.

But because they would not seem to make such a do without some cause they
intermeddle with their sedicious clamours, The articles and points whereof Paul
is accused.
certain accusations. And first they accuse his doctrine, as a thing
prejudicial to the people of God, to the Law, and to the Temple. This they
seem to gather hereof, because Paul to bridle the vain affiaunce in the
fathers, which his Country men had, declared that the true Israelites were not
borne of the flesh, but of the spirit, and that all they were not by and by
to be accounted for the people of God, which were borne of Abraham, after the
flesh, except they believed in Christ, after the example of Abraham. Also,
because in reasoning of the true use of the law, he taught that justification
was not to be attributed thereunto, as we saw in the Sermon before going, and
for that he said the Leuiticall laws were abolished, by the coming of Christ,
and by the merit of his death. And least their accusation might seem to
consist but in bare words only, they complain them also of a fact by Paul
newly committed, namely that he had brought Gentiles into the Temple, and by
mean thereof, had polluted that holy place. But this was a most false and
slanderous reproach, yet found it credit with all men, because they had
seen one Trophimus an Ephesian in the City among Paul's companions. Thus they
suspecte that he had brought him into the Church. Again this place teaches
us, what things are commonly laid to the Ministers charge, even that they
wickedly sin against the elect people of God, that they impudently condemn
the laws and traditions of the Church, and that they are the subuerters of the
Church, and of all ancient religion. Thus we read Christ was accused. And
even the same did the enemies of truth, lay unto Stephens charge. And the very
same do certain persons in these days obiecte against us also: who are moved
no whit, neither with the respect of Gods Church, nor with the authority of
Gods Law, nor yet with any care or desire of true Religion. Yet such is the
hap of truth, that none is more impudently and effectuously slaundered, than
her Ministers. For where they are envied of the world, and condemned
aforehande in all men's judgments, most men easily admit and receive any
thing against them, and no man is ashamed of his lightness in so doing. But
let us patiently be^re that which we know not only the Prophets and Apostles
suffered, but even the son of God also.

Paul is in hazard of his life.
Moreover being not contented to have apprehended the man, and to lode him with
false accusations, they use plain force against him. For they draw him out of
the Temple, they lay upon him and beat him without ceasing, yea they go
about in shameful wise to kill him, yet first shutting the Church gates,
because they would have the Temple by no means polluted. Which example
teaches us, how far impiety, and hatred of Gods word proceeds. For
although it lies long hidden, yet when occasion serves, it will burste
forth, and it thirsts for nothing, but the blood of the Ministers, which
only is that thing, that assuageth and satisfies them. The examples hereof
are more abundant every where than need any long declaration. First and
foremost mark I pray you, the singular sanctimonie of these men, which will
seem to fight for God and his religion. For they have great care, that they
pollute not the Church with blood, and therefore they shut the doors. But in
the mean while they fear not to embrue their hands and them selves in
innocent blood. Such like things as these Christ vpbraydeth them with in the
Gospel, where he says they strain at a Gnat, and swalowe down a Camel. So
the Priests would not go into the Judgment hall, because they would not
profane their Feast day, but they could deliver an Innocent unto Pylate, and
with all manner of unrighteousness and importunacy require his blood. But how
this hypocrisy and dissimulation pleased God, appears hereby, that not many
years after he caused the Romans to destroy those bloody hypocrites, with
their Temple and ungracious city.

God sends one to deliver Paul.
Howbeit God ^ayleth not his Apostle, being in this danger, who when he
thought he was utterly cast off, sent him a deliverer and revenger, which he
never hoped or looked for. For the Captain moved with the clamor of the
Commons, and with the rumor of a sedition, was straight way at hand with a
garrison of soldiers and takes Paul out of the hands of these harebrayned
Commons. And here he played the part of a good Magistrate, which thing those
men have a sclender consideration of, that suffer harmless persons to be
oppressed with the violence of desperate people. Here haste thou to consider
the truth and fatherly care of God, which always preserves those that be his,
although somewhiles he seems little to regard them. And it is no great
matter for him to deliver them, forasmuch as he is able to bring it to pass,
even by those which are strangers from the faith and religion. For in this
place Paul is defended by the Roman soldiers. And it appears that Jeremy
in time paste was preserved by Nabuzardes, Iere. 39. and.40.
the public enemy of Gods people. Many like examples might be brought, the
end of all which is, that we should not despair in time of the cross and
tribulation, nor fly to unlawful means of remedy, but put all our care and
trust in God, and wait for his help and succor, which Paul at this time
fyndeth to be most effectual and ready. For the sedicious, whom neither
fear of God, nor shame of man could stay or hold back, as soon as they
espied the Captain and Soldiers, held their hands, and ceased smiting of
Paul. This is the property of all the wicked, that they are more stayed with
the fear of men, than of God, and therefore the Magistrate or officer is
necessary to bridle and keep under such unruly fellows. Let us therefore
live within the fear of God, and direct al our doings after his holy will,
who is able not only to deliver us out of the hands of the wicked, but also
from the jaws of Hell and death, through his son Jesus Christ our Lord, to
whom be blessings, honor, power and glory, now and ever. Amen.

The.Cxlj. Homely.
THen the Captain came near, and took him, and commanded him to be bound
with two chains, and demanded what he was, and what he had done. And some
cried one thing, some another among the people. And when he could not know
the certayntie for the rage, he commanded him to be carried into the Castle.
And when he came unto a Stayre, it fortuned that he was borne of the Soldiers
for the violence of the people. For the multitude of the people followed after*
crying, away with him. And when Paul began to be carried into the Castle, he
said unto the high Captain. May I speak unto thee? Which said: Can thou
speak Greek? Art not thou that Egyptian, which before these days made an
vproare, and leddest out into the wilderness four thousand men, that were
murderers? But Paul said: I am a man which am a Jew of Tharsus, a City in
Cicill, a Citizen of no vile City. I beseech thee suffer me to speak unto
the people. And when he had given him license, Paul stood on the steps, and
beckened with his hand unto the people: and when there was made a great
silence, he spoke unto them in the Hebrew tongue, saying.
WHere David a man after Gods own mind says: Many are the tribulations of
the just, and the Lord delivers them out of all. The same appears in this
History to be most truly said. For we have here how Paul was taken by the
furious multitude of the Jews, how he was buffeted and beaten, how he was
like to be killed among them, which burning in cankred hatred against him,
thyrsted for nothing so much as his blood. But lo, on the sudden God rayseth
up for him a defender, and delivers his Apostle by those which were strangers
from the faith and religion of God. But where we have in the last Sermon
entreated of the use and end hereof, we will now examine the history of
his delyuerie, which Luke most exactly describes, with all the circumstances
thereof.

First he declares what the Captain of the soldiers did. Paul is bound in
chains.
He first of all takes Paul out of their raging hands, and commands to
bind him with two chains, this does he not of any head, or overcome with
hastiness of anger, because al his doing declares manifest tokens of a
moderate meaning. But he does it partly for that he thought he was some evil
man, seeing every body so earnestly set against him, and partly for that he
perceived he could pacify the furious people no way more commodiously, than by
making them believe, that he should shortly be punished, according to his
deserts. In the mean season being mindful of his duty, he diligently
enquireth what he is, and what he had done. For this is the duty of a
Magistrate, to do nothing rashly, or upon head. For if he have once iniuried
him, whom he ought to have defended, then is there no excuse left for him.
Therefore Moses commands the Judges to hear both the small and the great,
yea and to search out the circumstances of all matters, that they offend not,
either through ignorance, or blind affection of the flesh. In the mean
while we have here diligently to consider the manner of this delivery. Paul
is delivered out of the present peril of his life, which the Jews put him in,
yet is he bound with two chayns, as though he were some grievous malefactor.
Howbeit God had been able at once to have set him clean at liberty: which
thing because he does not, it is certain that these chains were for Paul's
commodity, and that his captivity served the more to set out Christ's
kingdom. And this is always Gods continual custom, using in this sort to
moderate his benefits, specially when he perceives we have need to be
kept under and brydeled. This we find true many times in sickness, and in
other tribulations, wherein it becomes us patiently to suffer whatsoever God
sends, forasmuch as both his will is good, and we can not be exempte or
secluded from the care and protection of his divine providence by any
adversity.

But what do the people in the mean season? First they fill the ears of all
men with uncertain and confused noise, A description of sedition.
so that nothing could be certaynely known or perceived, which is a thing
commonly used in seditions, as has been said in the.xix. Chapter. Next, when
the Captain had commanded him to be bound, and to be brought into the
Castle, meaning there to hear the matter, they all follow most impudently
after, and preace upon him with such violence, that the soldiers are feign
to carry him on their arms and necks, for fear the Rebels might do him some
harm. At length they agree all in this, that they would have him put to death
and made out of the way. In which things, as Luke sets out to us a lively
image of sedition: so he teaches us, that none are more grievous enemies of
the truth and of the godly, than such as color their enterprises with a
zeal of godliness. Hypocrites are more cruel than the Soldiers.
For here a man may see both more equity and humanity in the barbarous
soldiers, than in the Jews, which would seem to fight for the Temple and for
their religion. For they would have killed him without hearing his cause, whom
the Captain made diligent inquiry of. They trouble and disturb all thing
with shouting and crying, where the Captain does all thing peaceably and in
quiet. These men impudently tread on him, whom the soldiers vouchsafe to
carry on their shoulders. What needs many words? they would neither have the
truth enquired, nor the cause tried, but would have him forthwith made out of
the way, to feed their wicked eyes with the sight of an Innocents blood. We
read how the like fell out in Christ's passion. For there was more equity in
Pylate and Herod, than in the Priests, and Scribes. And the Priests scorned
him hanging on the cross, whom the barbarous Soldiers testified to be an
Innocent, because of the wonders that they saw. There want not examples in
these days, considering it appears, that many because of their confession of
the truth, are more justly and gently entreated of Turks, than of the
Bishops and Monks, which will seem to be enflamed with the zeal of
godliness. But this is the lively portraiture of the devil cruelly raging
under the cloak of godliness. We are taught by these examples, that they are
not to be excused which wrong the faithful of Christ, under a pretense of
such a zeal. For this Christ prophesied long ago should come to pass. And
it is evident that Paul burned in the zeal of the Jews law when he
persecuted the Church. But for this cause he confesses him self to be the
chiefest and gretest sinner of all other. Timo. 1.
For God will not have us led with our own zeal, but requires of us
knowledge, that when we have learned to understand his word, we should do
that he prescribes and commands. Look the.xv. chapter of Numbers.

But let us return unto Paul, and see what he does, being compased about
with so many dangers. Luke reports one thing of him, whereby we may judge
both of his invincible steadynesse of faith, and of his coragious mind. For
in that fury and rage of the people, and confused clamor and shouting, he
meditateth an excuse, Paul meditateth how to rxcuse him self.
partly for that he was very desirous of his Countreymens utility, and would
feign have brought them unto good, and partly for that he would free
Christ's quarrel of all suspicion, being appointed a Minister thereof. And
this example of Paul is to be followed of all Ministers in their private
dangers, diligently to seek both the salvation of others, and the glory of
Christ. But it all be good to consider diligently all the parts of this
business. First, he rusheth not out after any rash sort to speak, as
sedicious persons use to do, but asks leave first of the Captain after a
modest and reverent wise. And he sets him not light, because he was a
soldier, but rather worshippeth him because of his authority and office. By
which example both the Popes and Anabaptists are confuted, whereof the one
simply condemn al Magistrates, and the other set them to kiss their fete, yea
they wickedly set their feet upon them. Moreover the Captain, See Josephus in
the ij. book, and ij. chapter of the Jews wars.
although he suppose him to be a murderer, answers him friendly, and
demands whether he be not that Egyptian, which not many days before had
raised up the people to rebel, and with his scattred co^plices robbed men in
every place as they went. For it was meet that they which would not embrace the
true Messiah, should be deluded by deceivers, as we have elsewhere showed. The
example of the captain techeth us to deal courteously with captives. For where
the end of imprisonment, is to bridle and keep under malefactors, for fear of
doing hurt, and for an example unto others, it were discourtesie and unjust to
pass these bounds by cruelty against him, whom we ought rather for humanities
sake to have pity of. Again we see in the captains demand what horrible
crimes God suffers his servant to be suspected and charged with, Psa 34.
and yet uses he to deliver them out of all. Wherefore there is no cause why
they should dismay us, but rather that we should follow Paul, who being
nothing offended with this unseemly demand, declares modestly and friendly
what he is, and by reason of his modesty (God so disposing the matter)
obteyneth leave of the Captain to say his mind. But if a man would compare
this Captain with the Monks of our days, and the Inquisitors of Heresy,
which cause the tongues of Martyrs to be pulled out, because they shall not
speak to the people, as they go to execution, it shall easily appear, how
much more wicked and cruel they be, than he was. But as soon as Paul had
gotten leave of the Captain to speak, strayghte way he beckened with his
hand to the people, and obtayneth silence of them also, and makes a diligent
Oration to them out of hand, which was no small token of a ready mind and
wit.

Here is to be considered both the power and truth of God. His power
appears in this, that he was in a momente able to calm and pacify the
minds of the raging people, to give ear unto him, whose death even now they
so desired. Of his truth this is a manyfeste argument, that he is not amassed
with all that shouting and buffeting, but has his wits and vtteraunce at
will, to declare his cause boldly and artificially before his most cruel
enemies. Thus is that saying of Christ fulfilled: Even in the same hour shall
it be given unto you what to speak. Math. 10. Mark. 13.
etc. Compare with our Paul being in chains, Cicero the father of the Roman
eloquence, A comparison between Paul and Cicero.
and thou shall perceive how much the spirit of Christ passes all industry
of man's wit, and long exercise of pleating. For he long agone being brought
in his Litter into the Hall, to pleate Milo his cause, when he saw Pompeyes
guard and harness glittering in every place of the hall, could scarce for
fear once open his mouth to speak. But Paul being bound in chains, and
feeling the ache of his late bobbes and buffets, among the weapons and armor of
the soldiers, the Captain standing by, pleateth for his life with constante
mind and mouth, being encouraged with the spirit of Christ, which he
promised to his elect to be their Advocate and comforter. Let us likewise be
emboldened with the meditation of the same, that we may without fear pleate
the cause of salvation and faith, before this world: for he in whom we have
believed, will not leave us destitute, neither of his spirit nor favor, which
is our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, to whom be praise, honor power and
glory, for ever. Amen.

The.xxij. Chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The.Cxlij. Homely.
MEn, brethren, and Fathers, hear ye mine answer which I make now unto you.
When they hard that he spoke in the Hebrew tongue to them, they kept the more
silence. And he says: I am verily a man which am a Jew, borne in Tharsus a
City in Cycil, nevertheless yet brought up in this City, at the feet of
Gamaliel, and infourmed diligently in the law of the Fathers, and was fervent
minded to Godward, as ye all are this same day: and I persecuted this way unto
the death, bynding and delivering into prison both men and women, as the chief
Priest does bear me witness, and all the state of the Elders: of whom also
I received Letters unto the brethren, and went to Damasco to bring them which
were there bound to Jerusalem for to be punished.
ALthough our Savior Jesus Christ would have his Disciples to be pacient in
bearing slanders and reproaches. Yet that lets not but they may both openly
and boldly protest, and defend their innocence. Yea many times necessity
constrains them so to do, least by their means, Christ and the Christian
faith be evil reported. This does Paul therefore in this place prudently
consider. We heard how the Jews accused him for a common enemy of gods
people, of his law and his Temple. Besides this, the Captain suspected he was
an Egyptian, and Captain of a many of cut throtes, that lately had made an
Insurrection. All which things seeing they were as well prejudicial to Paul,
as unto Christian religion and truth, therefore he passes them not over
without regard, nor holds not his peace like a block, but applies him
self busily to get license of the Captain to make his purgation: which when
he had obtained, he uses all the helps possible to help and relieve his
cause. For he makes a diligent and long discourse of all the things that he had
done, so that all the people might understand his doing, least he might seem
to have done any thing of lightness of head, or of rashness and boldness. It
shall be profitable, to harken diligently unto the Apostle, pleating in his
chains, and to consider all the parts of his oration.

First, he comprehends his beginning and proposition in few words. For he
calls them brethren and fathers, The beginning and proposition.
wherein he goes about to get their good will. It makes also for the same
purpose, that he uses the Hebrewe tongue, wherein he knew they greatly delited.
Then he promises to excuse him self, that they might understand he was
guiltless. But his modesty is very worthy to be considered, in that he does
vouchsafe to call them that were so many ways his professed enemies, and had
so iniuried him, brethren, and fathers. For he does it not either of flattery
or fear, but partly for that he was of the same nation, and partly, for that
he hoped in so great a multitude, there would some be found that were good,
or which would be converted and won by the doctrine of the word. Therefore they
are reproved by this example of Paul, that condemn the lawful and received
styles of honor, which the Apostle otherwheres commands us to use, where
he bids us to go one before an other in honor. Although we allow God such,
as through peuish flattery excede al measure, while they go not about so much
to honor others, as to profit themselves. In the mean season we are taught
our duty, that for a fewes sake, which have don us injury, we should not
condemn the whole nation. For what more grievous injuries ca^ be devised, tha^
those which the Jews did unto Paul? Yet he loves them, and reverently
speaks to the^. He wishes their health and salvation, and would have redeemed
it with the loss of his own. Yea being yet sore of the late stripes and blows
that they had given him, and being in bands, he takes them for his brethren
and fathers. Let them well try them selves after this rule, who being blinded
with hasty anger, and for a trifeling injury done by some rascal parson, use
to burden whole nations with sla^ders, and wish al evil to them, whereas it is
not lawful for a christian man, to revenge him of his enemy. What madness is it
therefore, to charge a whole country or nation for the naughtiness of one
person? But let us return unto Paul, The Narration.
who after he had premised this brefe beginning, comes to the discourse of his
doings, not like a vau^ter to bost of his virtues, but because it was so
requisite to his matter. For first beginning with his nativity, he puts
that wro^gful suspicion out of the captains head, that thought he was a captain
of hopelosts. The^ he makes answer to the Jews, who partly were offended at
the alteration of their old religion and partly took in il part, his preaching
the gospel among the Gentiles. The sum and end of his whole narratio^, is to
declare, that he had don nothing of his own head or authority, but al thing,
according to gods commandment and calling. Howbeit he so proceeds in his
narration, that he answers all such objections of ignorance, contempt of
religion or lightness, as might be made against him for professing the faith
of Christ, and taking upon him the office of an Apostle. Al which things we
shall consider in order.

Paul changed not his religion of ignorance.
First there are some which of ignorance, and want of understanding, are of no
consta^cie in religion, while for lack of knowledge, they are carried about with
every blast of doctrine. Therefore, lest he should be thought to be any of this
nu^bre, he begins with his bringing up and education. I was (says he)
brought up in this city, at the fere of Gamaliel, and was diligently informed
in the law of the fathers. It is not without a cause that he makes mention
both of the city of Jerusalem, and of his teacher, for in this city was the
most famous university of all that nation, and his master among the lawyers and
doctors, was of gretest authority, as we have already herd, chapter v. Therefore it
could not be, that he that had been brought up from his childhode in that
city, in the middle of their sacrifices, and under such a man, could be rude
and ignorant in the scriptures and religion. Moreover, Paul's example serves
trimly for all our enstructio^s, who having to entreat of faith and religion,
first of al puts away suspicion of ignorance and unskillfulness, hereby
teaching us, that no man ought to be ignorant in religion, and that their
opinion is not to be allowed, which affirm it is enough only to believe, and
will not suffer any diligent examination to be used in matters of religion. For
God will have us to be instructed from our infa^cie, as may be seen. Ex. 14.
De. 6. Ps. 78. And Abraham is praised for no cause so much, Gene. 18
as that he was so diligent in bringing up his family, in the knowledge of
Gods religion. Here have parents what to observe, who unless they infuse
religion into the tender minds of their children, shall never have them
tractable in their age. For that we prove by experience in graffes, horses,
dogs, and other beasts, the same we find in the education of children. But O
great sloth and ungodliness of us, which take such great pains in training
of hounds, and breaking of horses, and care so little how unruly and untoward
our children grow. Furthermore, it is a great token of modesty and love in
Paul, that he would make such reverend mention of Gamaliel his master, whom
yet he knew did err in many points, and through whose teaching, he learned
that preposterous zeal of the law. Yet he acknowledges himself beholding to
him, for as much as under him, he had at least, learned good literature. Then
how much more bound are we, unto such masters, as beside learning, teach us
godliness, and the tracke of true salvation? Heereunto refer the
commandment of God in the tables, touching the honoring of our parents.

But to persist in the narration of Paul, there are again other some, Paul
changed not his religion of wicked contempt.
which of a certain wicked contempt, pass unto other religions, persuading
them selves that men may be saved, under any religion. These men, while they
seem to allow all religions, they plainly overthrow all religion, and imagine
that God is some foolish ambitious body, delighted with diverse kinds of
players. Therefore least any might think Paul to be one of this sort, he
says, that he was zealous and fervent in the Jews ancient religion. I was
fervent minded to Godwarde, as you are all this day. Otherwheres he says, he
profited therein above all his fellows. Which example teaches us, that a
zeal is requisite in religion. For although Paul grievously offended in his
zeal, yet is he not by and by to be condemned. For God requires us wholely,
for as much as he will be worshipped of us, with all our heart, with all our
soul, and with all our strength. Therefore they are not to be allowed, which
think it a foolish thing, to contend with other in religion. As though it
were lawful to halt on both sides, and every day to change religion, as we
use to change money. But these men be such as God threatens he will spue out
of his mouth, Apoca. 3
because of their cowardly coldness.

Thirdly there are other, who being of nature inclined to novelties, Paul
altered not his religion of lightness and inconstancy.
upon every occasion, of never so small a gain, are contented to be persuaded
to any thing, or else will receive the same without any persuasion. Which as
they are a filthy and dishonest kind of people, so Paul shows himself to
be far diverse from them, saying: I persecuted this way unto the death*
binding and putting into prison all, both men and women. And not contented to
have put them in gaile, which in this City professed not Christ, I went with
letters of the Elders as far as Damascus, to trouble them also that believed
there. And of this his doing, he calls the Bishop and Elders to witness,
least any man should doubt of it. Hereby he declares that such a fervent
zeal, could not be altered suddenly, without some working of God, so that he
was called of God, and constrained to embrace the faith of Christ, as in the
things following more manifestly I will declare. This example of Paul teaches
us, that in religion we must cheefely beware we seek not our own advantage,
by taking the affections of the flesh to counsel. For they that so do, are
carried about with every wind, and although they sometime take hold of true
religion, yet they by and by fall from the same again, as soon as they perceive
it agrees not with their desires. Let us therefore cast away the blind desires
of the world and the flesh, and harken to the voice of God, which we must
follow, and embrace Christ, that being builded upon him, we may stand fast
against all tempests and storms, and so grow in him, that hereafter we may
reign with him in Heaven, to whom be praise, honor, power and glory, for
ever. Amen.

The.Cxliij. Homely.
AND it fortuned that as I made my journey and came nigh unto Damascus, about
noone, suddenly there shone from Heaven a great light round about me, and I fell
unto the earth, and hard a voice saying unto me: Saul, Saul, why per^ecutest
thou me? And I answered, what art thou Lord? And he said unto me, I am Jesus
of Nazareth whom thou persecutest. And they that were with me saw verily a
light, and were afraid, but they heard not the voice of him that spoke with me.
And I said, what shall I do Lord? And the Lord said to me: Arise, and go into
Damascus, and there it shall be told thee of all things, which are appointed
for thee to do. And when I saw nothing for the brightness of that light, I
was led by the hand of them that were with me, and came into Damascus.
THe Apostle Paul speaking in chains before the Jews, makes a diligent
report of the things by him done, not to the intent that of vainglorie and
ambition he meant to vaunt him of his virtues, but to put away wrongful
suspicions, and to make all men know that he took him not to the Religion of
Christ rashely and of his own head, but by Gods calling and appointmente, and
so preached the same unto the Gentiles. And to this end ought al those things
chiefly to be referred, which he yesterday spoke touching his bringing up,
profiting in the discipline of the law, of his zeal in Religion, and
persecuting of Christ's Church. For hereby every man might easily perceive,
that so fervent and earnest a defender of the law, and enemy of Christian
religion could not so suddenly be altered but by Gods power and working. This
thing he here proves now more evidently, where he declares the story of his
conversion, with all the circumstances in order, which story, because it is
otherwheres at large entreted, we will touch but such things only as make for
the state of this present cause, with a few other things, the rehearsal whereof
shall not be superfluous, and which to consider oftentimes, shall be very
profitable for us.

Alteration of religion, is to be excused by the word of god alone.
The first thing here to be observed, is that Paul excuses his leaving the
Jews religion for Christ's, by this one argument, that God was the aucthor and
Counselor of him thereto. Whereupon we gather, that they ought not to be
reprehended, which at Gods calling, forsake their old superstitions, and
embrace true religion, forasmuch as it is evident, that God commands nothing
but that that is just and wholesome, and we owe him obedience without delay.
For unless we thus think, we can not excuse neither Paul, nor the Apostles,
of lightness and inconstancy, who all following the son of God, changed
that religion, that they had been borne and brought up in. These things teach
us, how unjustly we are accused of our adversaries, for forsaking the Romish
Church, seeing we may answer them even as Paul here answered the Jews,
namely, that we have done nothing of our own head, but have altered our
religion, according to the appointment and commandment of Christ. For
although Christ used not the same mean and way with us, that he did with Paul,
yet we have heard his voice sounding in his word, and have followed him. He
cries: Come unto me all that travel and be heavy laden, Math. 11
and I will refreshe you. If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink.
I am the light of the world, he that follows me, walks not in darkness.
John. 7. John. 8. John. 10
I am the door, if any ^nter in by me, he shall be safe, and go in and out,
and find pasture. He that enters not in by the door, but climeth up some
other way, is a thief and a murderer. Again: I am the way, the light* and
the truth. No man comes to the father, but by me. John. 14
Heereunto belong the sayings of the Apostles, which being inspired with the
spirit of Christ, affirm with one accord, that in him only, salvation is
to be had and found. What wise man therefore will blame us, which following the
lively voice of Christ, have left the Romish sea, which has showed unto us
infinite ways of salvation beside him, yea which with her traditions has
brought us in dout of our salvation? How much more are they to be reprehended,
which wickedly despise Christ, calling us aloude unto him, with his arms spread
abroad, being like to those obstinate and unthankful persons, of whom he
complains in Esaias the Prophet. And if any man reject our excuse, verily he
sufficiently declares, that he is led with the wicked spirit of the Jews, who
disdained to hear Paul, defending himself with the same reason.

Secondarily, here appears the marvelous power of Christ, The power of
Christ in subduing of his enemies.
and the means that he was wo^t to use, in subduing of his enemies: where
three things are to be considered. The first is, how he suffers Paul to
approach near unto Damascus, before he declare any sign of his wrath and
judgment. And there is no doubt, but having the City in his sight, which he
thought was a Sanctuary for the faithful, he was altogether inflamed with
fury, the godly in the city miserably trembling in the mean while, for
fear, to whose ears the fame of this Wolf that hied him so fast, was comen
before. But even as he was ready to set mouth on his pray, the Lord was at hand.
For this is Gods property, to wink at many things in the wicked, and for a
time to bear with their attemptes, that while he chastises those that be his,
a pit may be dug up for their enemies in the mean season, and so his people
are the more gloriously delivered. See the Psalm. 94. Next of al, he easily
and without any do, Psalm. 94
lays this tyrant along, which came both stout in mind with manacings, and
with public authority. For with a lightning, he utterly dismaieth him. But
what is so easy unto God, as to throw lightning from heaven? And by and by
this furious Euceladus and Giant falls to the ground, whom neither his
company and retinue, nor the high Priests letters, could defend from the
wrath of Christ. And straight way, being become tame and gentle, he demands
what mighty Champion this is, offering to be at his appoytment and obedience in
all things. Besides this, he is not only made feebler in body, but also
stricken blind, in so much that he is feign to be led by the hand into that
City by others, to the which he came to fette out the Christians. Thus God
uses in wonderful wise, to disapoint and delude the enterprises of his
enemies, so that they which erewhile seemed to all men invincible, and as it
were to prescribe God, are laughed of all men to scorn. Examples hereof we
have elsewhere declared, the end of all which is this, that we fear not the
power of our enemies, but set our hope fast in God, who can so easily deliver
us out of their hands.

And to this end cheefely serve (which is the third point of this treatise)
the words of Christ, saying: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Again, I
am Jesus of Nazareth whom thou persecutest. For by these words he plainly
testifies, that whatsoever had hitherto been done against his faithful
people, was done unto him. For there is such a conjunction betwixt Christ and
us, as uses to be between the head and the members. Who would have thought,
that Christ had had any regard of his church, when Steven was so unworthily
stoned to death. Or when Saul burst open the doors, and carried both men and
women to prison? But yet Christ did not only see these things, and was sorry
for the calamity of his people, but was so affected, as though he had been
beaten and carried to prisone him self. Hereunto beelongeth that which he
says in the Prophet: Zacha. 2
He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye. These things as they
serve for the consolation of the godly: so ought they to fear all those which
think it but a light matter, to persecute the members of Christ, either for
their faith or religion, or else to injury them, or oppress them, by usury,
or other unjust means. For he hears the cry of his servants, and shows
himself a mighty revenger. In the mean season, Christ's example teaches us
what a compassion and affection ought also to be amongst us, which glory in
Christ our head, and do profess to be members all of one body. 1. Cor. 12
Romans 12
Let us therefore rejoice with them that rejoice, and lament with them that
lament.

An example of true conversion.
Last of all, here is set forth unto us a notable example of true conversion,
all the circumstances whereof it shall be very profitable to consider. And first
Paul himself is to be considered, who before he was converted, was like such
a wolf as Jacob the Patriark forshewed of. For burning altogether in rage, he
goes on to wurrie and scatter abroad Christ's shepefold, not once thinking all the mean while of his own conversion unto Christ. Therefore he rusheth in
furious wise into his own destruction, and undoubtedly had perished, if the Lord
reaching his hand from heaven, had not pulled him back. First, the beginning of
conue^sion springs of god.
Whereby we learn that the beginning of conversion springs of god, for we be
al in that state and condition that Paul was, for being of nature corrupted, we
follow the blind affections of the flesh, and being bewitched with intisements
of sin, we please our selves in our sinful doing, never thinking of
amendment, unless the spirit of god put us in mind thereof, for what can we
herein do, 2. Cor. 3 Iere 21 (...). 5 Ph^^ 2.
who of our selves are not able once to think well? Therefore the Prophet says
very well. Convert us and we shall be converted, and Paul testifies that God
works in us both the will and the deed, according to his good pleasure. This
part might be declared by many examples, but forasmuch as they are every where
easy to be seen to all the^ that read the scriptures, we will be br^fe. And
here the defenders of free will are convinced, which teach that a man may learn
and repent at his own voluntary pleasure. But if the beginning of conversion
proceed of our selves, then surely some praise of merit and desert is due to
our work, which cannot stand without the reproach of Christ. But if the
beginning of goodness proceed from God alone, why be we so proud, and brag so
much of fre will, seeing there is no use thereof in that thing whereof we stand most
in need, according to these men's judgment? But to let pass th^se matters let
us peruse the manner of Paul's conversion, which contains in it certain ex^ern
and outward things, Secondly, the manner of conversion.
and certain intern and inward. The things external, are Paul's abashme^t with the
lightning and throwing from his horse, and Christ's reproving him of his
heinous sin by his word. Inwardly Christ works by his spirit, and brings
down his haultie stomach. This is the solemn and common usage of God in
converting of sinners, and such as the corruption of our nature of necessity
requires. For where we wallow and delight in sin, it behooves us to be wakened
with some strange plage or calamity. And to this end, god sends us diverse
chastiseme^ts, such as are sicknesses, poverty, dearth, hunger, wars, and
whatsoever like adversities happen us either privately or publicly. Again,
whereas our flesh never judges rightly of sin, it is nedeful that the
ouglinesse thereof be bewraid by the word of God, which thing Christ declares
saying of his spirit, that it reproves the world of sin. John. 16
Unto these externe and outward things, God joins secret suggestions of his
spirit, whereby he twitcheth us by the ears of our conscience, and stirs us
up earnestly to think of repentance. And that god has observed this order from
the beginning of the world, he shall easily perceive in himself, that has not
utterly lost his senses. And what we have to do, Thirdly, the duties of
conuertites.
when God by such means as these allureth us, Paul's example declares. In deed
there appears in him some smack of carnal slothfulness, which being stricke^
to the ground, does not yet know his Lord. But this is worthy to be commended,
that when the Lord had told him what he was, by and by he demands, what his
will is, that he should do. For this is the saying of a true and humble heart,
submitting himself wholly to obey the will of God. Let us therefore follow this
example, which the holy Ghost would have put in writing, to serve for our
instruction. And when we are chastised, let us think we are chastised of the
Lord, who requires of us repentance. And let us do penance, not according to
our own brain, or as seems good in our sight, but according to Gods
appointment which we shall learn in his word. For after this sort adversity
shall serve to our amendment, and our amendment or conversion shall be
acceptable unto God. But if a man would compare these things with the usage of
our days, he shall easily perceive, how many ways me^ herein offend. For a man
shall find few, which when they are chastised, will acknowledge God to be the
author thereof, but the most part impute their misfortunes unto other causes.
And if there be any so touched with the feeling of religion* that they are
constrained to acknowledge the hand of God, yet is that feling very small, and
of little continuance, or else joined with superstition, whereby being deceived,
they do their penance but counterfetly, and for a little season, as God
vpbraideth the people of Israel by his Prophet. Hose. 6
And this is the chief cause of so many and so continual calamities, as are
in our days, which if we redress not, let us never look for better state.
The last thing in this treatise, is how Paul is sent into the City to
Ananias, of whom he requires more fully to be instructed. The causes of this
precept or doing, we have declared before, where ye may look for the same. See
the Homely. 63. chap. 6.
It becomes us to follow the example of Paul, that framing our selves
according to Gods calling, we turn from superstition and other sins unto
God, and hang wholly upon his mouth and word, fashioning our life and
conversation, according to his will. For so after we have happily ended this
life, we shall be coheires in heaven with Jesus Christ, the son of the ever
living God, to whom be praise, honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.Cxliij. Homely.
ANd one Ananias a perfect man, and as pertaining to the law, having good
report of all the Jews, which there dwelt, came unto me and stood, and said
unto me: brother Saul, receive thy light. And the same hour I received my
sight, and saw him. And he said, the God of our fathers, has ordained thee
before* that thou should know his will, and should hear the voice of
his mouth. For thou shall be his witness unto all men of those things, which
thou have seen and heard. And now why tarriest thou? Arise and be baptized,
and wash away thy sins, in calling on the name of the Lord.
Because all change of religion is odious, as arguing a light and inconstant
mind, therefore Paul so diligently excuses his leaving the Jews religion.
And first he declares, that he behaved himself therein with great zeal,
least any should think, he were fallen away of ignorance and lack of
knowledge, or of hatred of discipline, or of leuitie and inconstantnesse. And
he begins the History of his vocation in such sort, as it may appear,
that he was not only called by God, but also constrained. And now he adds
hereunto, how he was ordained unto the office of an Apostle, by the ministry
of Ananias* who was appointed of God to be the interpreter of this heavenly
oracle and vision. The principal use of this place, is to answer them which
suspected the story of his vocation, and said, that Paul was deceived by a
vain fantasy and delusion. The description of Ananias.


He begins in commodious wise with the description of Ananias, lest any man
might think he had given credit to any slender or light person of no
estimation. And for because the Jews would not have admitted the testimony of
any that had forsaken his religion, he first and formoste commends him for a
diligent obseruer and follower of the law, where he says, he is a godly man
according to the law. Unto this commendation, he joins the public
testimony of all the Jews, dwelling at that time at Damascus. Beesides this,
he declares how his sight was restored to him again, the chief use whereof
it seems God would have to be this, that Paul might know, that Ananias was
sent unto him of God. For who would accuse him of vanity, which being
admonished by heavenly Oracle, yea being utterly amassed, and following such an
expounder of the Oracle, had altered his religion? And Paul's example teaches
us, that of all things we must flee leuitie in religion, that we rashly
believe not every one. For as in religion consists the sum of our
salvation: so it appears there have been in all ages deceivers, which have
laid snares to entrappe the minds of the simple. And both Christ and the
Apostles abundauntly teach us, that such should arise in the Church after
them. Therefore the suggestions of the men of our days is to be lamented,
which in the most clear light of the Gospel, believe every spirit, contrary
to the bydding of John the Apostle: yea they take them to be the true followers
of the Apostles, which with scoffery and tauntes can quippe the Ecclesiastical
Ministers and Magistrates in secret, whereas them selves in the mean season
are neither learned nor honest. Again let us mark what the true commendation
of a Minister is, The true commendation of Ministers.
and of all that bear any public office. The first thing is godliness,
ordered and directed after the law of God, that is according to Gods
appointment. For it is not enough only to be godly, but we must frame the
same according to Gods word. Otherwise it shall be a zeal without knowledge,
such as the Jews and Paul sometime were deceived with. Again, they must
have a good testimony of them, amongst whom they dwell, and also of others
abroad, that the Gospel be not evil spoken of for their sake. See Paul
touching this point, in the first to Timothe, the third chapter. Unto this must
be joined a lawful vocation or calling, which thing if they feel not in them
selves, they shall neither boldly nor profitably discharge their duty. But it
is evident that the Prophets and Apostles, to whom we have given credit, were
such. For they following the word of God in all thing, have not swarued one
nails breadth from the same. And such was their integrity of life, that to
this day the Turks and Papists reverence their name. Concerning their calling
no man can doubt, seeing there are so many testimonies thereof extant in the
Scriptures. Therefore they are not to be accused of vanity, that have believed
them. Let us rather constantly stand by the faith which they have taught us,
as the which only is sufficient to save us.

Furthermore when Paul had described the person of Ananias, he reherseth also
by word what he said, Ananias Oration or talk.
because every thing therein made very much for the matter he had in hand. For
both he teaches, that God was the only author of all this business, and
declares the end wherefore he was called, and last of al exhorts him to be
baptized. Touching the first point, Paul is called of God.
he says: The God of our fathers has ordained thee before. Hereby verily was
Paul so certain of his vocation, that afterward he was bold to say, Gala. 1.
that he was ordained even from his mothers womb to preach the Gospel. He
calls him expressly the God of the fathers, to declare that he swarued not
from the right worshipping of God. Howebeit as these things excuse Paul's
turning from the Jews religion, and prove his doctrine to be true: so they
show that he was called through no deserte of his, but only of the mere
grace of God. For what was there in Paul, being a cruel enemy of Christ,
and imbrued with the blood of Steven the first Martyr, wherefore he should be
called? He him self truly says he is the greatest sinner of all others, and
confesses it was the benefit of Gods mere bounty and goodness that he was
made the Minister and Apostle of Christ. 1. Timo. 1.
And that we speak of Paul, is to be verified of all Ministers. For we are
all of like sort, so that if God prevented us not with his goodness, we were
not able to think one good thought. Hereof we have elsewhere entreated more at
large.

To what end Paul was called.
Now let us hear to what end God prepared Paul. First, to know his will.
He begins with this, for because Ministers must heerewith begin, who if
they understand not the will of God them selves, can never be able to teach
it to others. For although Paul was brought up of a child in the law of God,
yet was he hitherto ignorant of the will of God, which was wrapped and folded
up in the Law. For he thought that men were justified and saved by the Law,
being utterly ignoraunte of Gods will, John. 6.
which is, that every one that sees the son, and believes in him that sent
him, should not perish in his sins, but being justified by the merit of
the son, should have life everlasting. Therefore it was necessary that this
will should be revealed unto him* to the intent that he should not wander up
and down in the shadows of the law, being uncertain of his salvation.
Furthermore, where the wholesome will of God is only contained and learned in
Christ, Ananias by and by adds how he should know him, saying, that Paul
was ordained to the end to see that just. So he calls Christ, both for
that he is him self just and faultlesse, and also for that he makes all
those just that believe in him. In so much that the Prophet said long agone
that should be his name: Iere. 23.
The Lord our righteousness. But where it was the work of God that Paul knew
Christ, it is evident that none comes to the knowledge of him, except God
vouchsafe to reveal him unto him. For even by Christ's testimony: Math. 11.
None sees the son, but the father, and he to whom the father does vou^hsafe
to reveal him. Whereby again it appears, that our salvation proceeds of
Gods free mercy. Thirdly he says, he was ordained to hear the voice of his
mouth, and so should be taught of God otherwise than by his ordinary means,
Gala. 1. and.2.
which things otherwheres Paul chiefly urges against them which went about to
eleuate and diminishe the authority of his Ministry. This is verily a
marvelous benefit of God, and so shall it appear in deed to be, if we
consider that Paul was the enemy of God, and yet God does voutsafe friendly
and familiarly to talk with him. Let us also acknowledge the goodness of God,
which does voutsafe every day to speak unto those whom he might of right
repute as his enemies, and justly persecute them. In the mean season here are
all Ministers admonished of their duty: namely, to fetch their doctrine from
the mouth of God, that is to say, from the scriptures, and not to think it is
lawefull for them at their pleasure to charge the Church with new decrees and
ordinances. See what we have said elsewhere touching this point. Last of all,
he declares the office whereunto he was called of God, saying that the will of
God, the knowledge of Christ and his word, was therefore declared unto him,
because he should be a witness of Christ, whom he had both heard and seen,
unto all men. Thus it appears he was matched with the other Apostles, because
they had none other thing enjoined them, but to bear witness of Christ's life
and death, of his doctrine and miracles, and last of all, of his resurrection
and ascension. This name witness, comprehends in it the whole duty of an
Apostle and Minister, as we declared in the first Chapter, where you may look
for those observations which here for breuities sake are omitted. He makes
mention expressly of al men, to answer them which thought it an unmeet thing
for him to preach the Gospel of Christ to uncircumcised people. Also here may
be taken out a general doctrine, which admonishes al such of their duties, as
God has illuminated with the knowledge of his son, and of his will. That is,
to spread the same knowledge abroad every where, and to bear witness in all
places of Gods mercy and grace. This thing partly the rule of thankfulness
requires, that they should set forth the glory of God, who have felt of his
healthful hand and mercy, and partly brotherly charity, whereby we should
be as careful of others salvation, as of our own. With the which reasons, as
also with the express commandment of God, it appears Paul was moved in
such wise, that he could not intermitte his duty, though the Jews disdayned
him never so much.

Now remains the last part of Ananias oration, where he exhorts him to be
baptized, that he should openly profess the name of Christ, Paul is baptized.
and be grafted into his Church, according to Christ's commandment. And this
he urges with great gravity and weight: Why lingerest thou (says he) not for
that Paul meant to defer or shift off the matter, but to prick him forward
the more earnestly, being dismayed with fear and trembling in conscience.
Wherefore he adds this saying: Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy
sins in calling on the name of the Lord. Here we have to observe his manner
of speaking of the Sacrament, which declares the reason and dignity of
baptism. For Ananias meaning was not, that he thought sins were washed away
by water, which the Scripture every where teaches, are cleansed and purged by
the only blood of Christ. But because that washing which is made by the blood
of Christ, is outwardly shadowed and expressed by Baptism, it comes to
pass, that by reason of such phrase of Scripture sins are said to be
washed away by baptism. And because Paul should not think it a strange or
hard kind of saying, he adds thereto, by calling on the name of the Lord.
For by these words he is sent unto Christ, which being taken hold of, and
called upon by faith, bestows such gifts of salvation upon us, as the
sacraments use to figure and shadow out unto us. And as we must in using of the
Sacraments have a respect unto Christ, if we will have them to profit us:
so again we are taught, that they must not be condemned nor thought
superfluous by any means. For God has ordained nothing without great
consideration, whose intent is not to have his church ouercharged or clogged by
any means. Therefore Philip baptized ye Eunuch also after he had confessed his
faith. And Peter thought it good to baptize Cornelius household, when they had
received the holy ghost. Yea Paul, who^ the holy ghost secretly commends, is
here earnestly moved to receive baptism. These examples reprove the despisers
of Sacraments, which while they will seem too spiritual, do wickedly set light
the ordinances of God. Bu^ chiefly we have to mark Paul to follow his
example, and in Religion not to deal rashly or inconstantly, but being
rightly instructed in the truth, to labor diligently to keep and hold fast
the same. For so by labors and perils we shall come to the inheritance of
eternal life, which God the father of mercy has appointed us from everlasting
in his son Jesus Christ, to whom be praise, honor, power and glory, for
ever. Amen.

The.Cxlv. Homely.
ANd it fortuned when I was come again to Jerusalem, and prayed in the
Temple, I was in a trance, and saw him saying unto me: make haste and get
thee quickly out of Jerusalem, for they will not receive thy witness that
thou bear of me. And I said, Lord, they know that I prisoned and bet in
every Synagoge them that believed on thee. And when the blood of thy witness
Steven was shed, I also stood by, and consented unto his death, and kept the
raiment of them that slew him. And he said unto me, depart, for I will send
thee a far hence unto the Gentiles. They gave him audience unto this word,
and then lift up their voices and said: away with such a fellow from the
earth. For it is not reason that he should live.
Paul the Apostle (as has now oftentimes been declared) goes about in this
diligent and long discourse of his doings, to put away the wrongful suspicions
and reproaches wherewith his enemies burdened him. There were two things
chiefly which incensed the minds of the people against him: namely his turning
from the Jews religion, unto the faith of Christ: and that in preaching the
Gospel of salvation unto the uncircumcised Gentiles, he seemed to match them
with the Jews. For by these things they gathered, that he was the very enemy
of the people of God, and a profane and wicked contemner of the law and of
the Leuiticall service. To the first point he has hitherto answered, alleging
still this one thing, that he had done nothing rashly or of his own head, but
all things according to Gods commandment and calling: So teaching us by his
example what we also have to do in altering or defending our religion. And
now he proceeds to the second point, alleging the same argument, declaring
that he was called forth of God to preach unto the Gentiles, and
nevertheless, yet ceased not to love his Countrymen, which thing shall most
plainly appear by all the parts of that History, which he here rehearses.

Paul returns to Jerusalem.
For first he says, he returned to Jerusalem, verily to bestow his labor upon
them of whom he was borne, and of whom he was brought up and instructed. For he
makes mention of this journey for none other cause, but to prove and declare
that the fault was not in him, that he preached not the message of salvation
unto his own nation. Furthermore we declared before out of the ninth chap. of
his Epistle to the Galathians, that this journey of his was in the fourth year
after he was converted. Wherefore to let pass the supputation of the time, let
us consider the example of Paul, which teaches Ministers, that although they
be detters unto al men, yet ought they to have a special care of their own
country and nation. For this is the law of nature, that we be bound unto
those above others, amongst whom we have been borne and brought up from our
childhoode. This rule Christ observed also, when he offered the doctrine of
salvation even at the beginning to those of Nazareth, whose unkindness yet he
was not ignorant of. And that that is said unto the Ministers, the same must
all men observe, most to esteem their own native soil and country. Wherein it
behooves them to follow Moses, which chose rather to forsake the riches and
delytes of the Court, than his brethren oppressed with tyranny. Let them here
learn their wickedness which are grown to such impudency, that they can
find in their heart to sell the liberty of their country, laws and
privileges, and all other things, so they may get any private gain and
advantage thereby.

But let us return unto Paul, Paul prays in the Temple.
who after he was come again into the City, went into the Temple to pray. And
of the Temple he makes mention partly, because none should say he lay lurking
in a corner: and partly to put away the suspicion of polluting the Temple,
which opinion he knew many had of him. What he desired in his prayer may
easily be gathered out of the tenth to the Romans, where he says: he prayed
oftentimes for the Jews, that they might obtain salvation. And that this was
the very end of his prayer we shall plainly see by the communication following,
which he had with Christ touching the Jews. Again, Ministers are here
admonished of their duty, that is, with continual prayers to help, procure
an^ further the salvation of the people. For as the rule of faith and charity,
whereby they are bound to the flock committed unto them, commands the same:
so necessity also requires it, because it is evident that their labors are
but in vain, unless God give the increase. This the ancient Prophets
likewise saw, in whose writings are extant many prayers for the people. This
must Magistrates also observe, forasmuch as they are able to do dothing
without the aid and assistance of God, by whose spirit it is nedeful that they
be ruled and led. They have also to imitate the examples of Moses, David,
Solomon, Ezechias, beside infinite others.

Now at length Paul expounds the Oracle, Paul by oracle is sent unto the
Gentiles.
whereby he was commanded to go unto the Gentiles. He says he was in a trance
for the more credit and authority of the oracle. And he diligently reports
his talk with Christ, both whose persons must be considered. First, Christ
appears unto him, and byddeth him with speed to get him out of Jerusalem,
adding this reason of his commandment, because they will not receive the
testimony that thou bear of me. But if a man would consider these things
with the vocation of Paul* it shall appear that this was no small temptation
and trial of him. For he had heard that he was a chosen vessel of Christ, and
should be his witness unto al men. And it is no doubt but he conceived a
special hope of the conversion of his own nation, who^ he so greatly loved and
made of. And now he hears that al his hope was in vain. But thus God tries
the faith of his chosen, when success fails not out always according to
their godly wishes and endeavors. So Moses when he began to deliver and
defend his countrymen, found how they unkindly rejected him. So Helias after
he had overcome and killed the Priests of Baal, and thought all thing was hushe
and quiet, was feared a fresh with the new manaces and cruel attempts of
Iezabell. Let us, being taught by these and such like examples, not give over,
but keep our standing stoutly, and at length we shall not want occasion,
whereby to do profitable service unto God. But let us hear Paul, which seems
by his disputation with God to draw his head as it were out of the collar. For
calling to remembrance his former state and condition, he thinks it can not
be by reason of his sudden change, that they could be moved to believe the
Gospel. This is commonly seen in the scripture, that the holy men sometime
seem to contend with God, not of any froward and obstinate mind, but for that
they feel the faith confirmed by discussing and examining the diverse reasons
of things. For the which cause God gently permits the^ so to do: who, if he
should deal with us rigorously, would not once voutsafe to speak unto us.
Here is the superstition of such overthrown, as think we have need of
Saints to be our intercessours, because it is not lawful for us being
sinners to come in Gods sight, as they say. And yet he hears not only the
prayers of those that be his servants, but also the reasons and arguments
that they make, even contrary to his commandments. Yet we must beware, that
we abuse not Gods gentleness in contending, and so proceed unto murmuring and
stubborn disobedience: but rather let us wholly submit our selves unto God, to
whom it is mete that al our reasons do yield and give place. For he will not at
any time change his mind and sentence, as it were at our appointment, because
his counsel endures for ever. This Paul proves here in this place. For the
Lord urges his commandment, and expressly sends him unto the Gentiles,
not promising him any success of the Gospel among them, because he will have
us simply to obey him.

Paul is disturbed in his oration.
Furthermore, as Paul would have gone forward, and have declared a reason of
his doctrine, the Jews with furious clamours cry out upon him, yea required to
have him put to death. For as soon as they herd the Gentiles were mentioned,
they could keep patience nor modesty no longer. The cause of this their
importunity and unreasonableness was the proud conceit and opinion they had
of themselves. For where they claymed to them only the name of gods people, and
leaned upon the merit of their leuitical law, they thought it an heinous
offense for any man to match the gentiles, which were uncircumcised, and not
under the discipline of the law, with them in the state of salvation. So
arrogant and proud a thing is hypocrisy and dissimulation. Thus we know the
Pharisees sometime were offended with Christ, for that he preached salvation
unto publicans. So now adays the doctrine of the gospel seems a thing
intolerable to the monks and their adherents, because it shows salvation in
christ unto sinners, and techeth yt they are justified by faith only. For
hereby they see their inventions, wherein they put al their trust thrown down.
But let us confess the goodness of god, and not be grieved to have sinners
converted unto the faith, to be partakers of salvation with us, seeing that
Jesus Christ the only begotten son of God, and our savior did vouchsafe to
be hanged among thieves, and there purged the sins of the whole world, to
whom be praise, honor, glory and power, for ever. Amen.

The.Cxlvj. Homely.
ANd as they cried and cast off their clothes, and threw duste into the air,
the Captain commanded him to be brought into the Castle, and bad that he
should be scourged, and to be examined, that he might know wherefore they cried
so on him. And when they bound him with thongs, Paul said unto the Centurion
that stood by him: Is it lawefull for you to scourge a man that is a Roman,
and uncondemned? When the Centurion heard that, he went and told the upper
Captain, saying: what intendest thou to do? for this man is a Citizen of
Rome. Then the upper Captain came and said to him: Tell me, art thou a
Roman? He said, yea. And the Captain answered: with a great sum obtained
I this freedom. And Paul said: I was free borne. Then straight way departed
from him they which should have examined him. And the high Captain also was
afraid, after he knew that he was a Roman, and because he had bound him. On
the morrow, because he would have known the certentie wherefore he was
accused of the Jews, he loosed him from his bonds, and commanded the high
priests, and all the Council to come together, and brought Paul forth, and
set him before them.
ALthough Paul the Apostle has so answered the points of his adversaries
accusation, that it might satisfy all the godly well enough, as alleging the
commandment of God for all his doings: yet were the Jews so little
satisfied therewith, that they would voutchsafe to hear him no longer. The
chief cause of this their indignation was, for that he said God had sent him
unto the Gentiles. For thereby they construed that God had rejected them, as
unworthy of salvation, and thought the Gentiles were preferred before them,
which seemed to them a heinous matter, because the people of the Jews were
counted always to be Gods own children, and the Gentiles were counted for
unclean persons, and strangers from the kingdom of God. For this is the
property of all Hypocrites, that they can not abide to have sinners to be
coparteners with them in the society of salvation, as yesterday we heard.
Howebeit, Luke going forward in the History begun, declares furthermore
what was done, where we have to consider every person.

First, we have to speak of the Jews, The importunate malice of the Jews.
which with unseemly clamor require to have Paul put to death before he had
ended his Oration. Which is so much the more heinous a matter, for that they
desire to have their own countreyman to be tormented at the pleasure of a
profane and heathen soldier. Beside this they handle their matter with no
arguments or color of honesty, but with clamours, with casting away their
clothes, with throwing up of duste, and other like furious gestures and
braydes, such as braynesicke and mad persons use. Which example teaches us
how much hatred of truth is able to do, seeing it makes them whose minds
it has possessed, to forget all modesty, equity, and charity. For that that
here was done against Paul, was done before in the presence of Pilate in
Christ's cause. And there want not examples, whereby it may be proved how the
wicked use the very same in these days also. Furthermore this place teaches
us what arguments commonly are made and used against the servants of Christ in
these days, as well in their own quarrel, as in Christ's. That is to say,
shouting, threatening, punishments, fire, sword. etc. With these weapons they
have fought even from the beginning of the world, and with the same they fight
still even at this day. And this is a miserable blindness and perverseness of
the world, that where in profane and worldly matters all men praise and hold
with advised deliberation: in matters of religion, and the common case of
eternal salvation, many men think the matter should be handeled and
dispatched with unreasonable noise, furious braydes, vproa^es and rebellion.

Paul is commanded to be beaten with rods.
But what does the Captain in this great rage of the Jews* First he
commanded Paul to be had into the Castle, which thing was prudently done of
him, because there was no more effectual mean to apease the people, than to
have him out of their sight, against whom they boy^ed in such anger and hatred.
But by and by he offends in unrighteousness, commanding him, of whom as yet
he had no sure suspicion of any crime, after the accustomed manner to be
scourged and examined. For the Jews had proved nothing against him, and he had
heard Paul answer to his slanders very wisely. But herein he seems worthy
of excuse, because it was likely that he whose death all the people desired
with one consent, was not faultlesse. But if we admit such conjectures, who I
pray you then shall be innocent? who shall not be oppressed with sedicious
clamor? Therefore this was a grievous fault in the captain. And hereby let all
that bear office and be in authority learn, that they be not over cruel or
hasty in their tormenting and punishing of men. For as it is a grievous fault
shamefully to torment an innocent: so it oftentimes comes to pass, that men
being overcome with pain and grefe, confess they have don those things which
they never thought or meant. In the mean season thou shall mark the usage of
wicked Magistrates. They are of marvelous wit and foreca^ in politic matters,
and therein they pass for the most part the children of light. Yet have they
not true justice, but only a certain vain show of the same, wherewith being
cloked or covered, they use to handle matters in judgment after their own
pleasure and commodity. Hereof we have an example also in Pilate: and many
like are every where to be found in all hystories. But commonly the end of
these judgments is unhappy, as we shall shortly perceive hereafter. Let as
many therefore as be in office, labor to fulfill justice, forasmuch as the
judgments of God are committed unto them, and the Lord will one day require
the blood of his servants at their hands. We are also taught by this
example, what state the Saints in this world are in. They are accounted
among the wicked, and judged vilest of all men, whose bodies and life every man
freely scorneth and mocketh, as pleases him. This the prophets in times passed
fou^^d to be true. The same Christ also found him self, upon whom the
Prophet foreshewed the same should fall out. Psalm. 53. Luke. 22. And his
forerunner John was feign to satisfy and yield to the incestuous lust of
Herod and Herodias. Therefore let it not grieve us to be counted in the number
of these men, nor be offended with the unjust judgments of this world, seeing
it is evident, that God will maintain and continue the remembrance of his
servant, and so, that the fame of Innocents oppressed with slanders can not
long lie hidden. See Psalm. 34. Luke. 12.

But let us see Paul, whose life is here in ieoperdie, Paul defends
himself by the Roman laws.
does he hold his peace like a block? no. But he runs unto the law, and
alleges the freedom of the City of Rome, whereby he is defended and set at
liberty. For as soon as the Captain heard that he was a freeman, Citizen of
Rome, he commanded by and by to unbind him, and uses no torments upon him.
Therefore the patience of the Saints is no cowardlinesse or beastly
stupiditie or blockishnesse, as many imagine. In deed they are ready to suffer
any thing for Christ's sake, yet they neglect not such lawful defense, as is
agreeable with faith* For as it is lawful to use the other creatures of God,
even so is it to use the laws also, because the authority of them, depends
cheefely upon God, by whom it is manifest that Magistrates are ordained. But
alas how much more miserable is the state of the Saints in these days?
For although the Captain knew that it was a matter of religion that was in
hand, yet he suffers Paul to enjoy the privileges of Rome. But in these
days both laws and privileges are mute, if religion come once in question.
All this we may thank the Popes of, which teach me^ that it is lawful to
break promise with those that are suspected of herisy. Whatsoever else may be
said to this purpose, look for it in the sixth Chapter, where is described what
happened to Paul at Philippi, in a like matter or case.

At length follows the end of the first Act of this tragedy. The Tribune by
fear of laws, is kept under.
The Captain is afraid, not of God, but of the severity of the Roman
laws. This is the manner of all the wicked, preposterously to fear men more
than God. Howbeit, being desirous to amend the fault that he had made, and to
understand the matter more certainly, he brings Paul on the morrow before the
counsel* of whose uprightness and sanctimonie, he conceived a very good hope.
This Captain is of the number of those men, which now adays also, look for
much goodness at Counsels: whereas it is evident these many hundredth years,
they have deceived the expectation of all godly persons, because they are
summoned and governed by the^, which make marchaundise of all religion, and
through whose tirannie all Christendom is oppressed. Let us consider how
profitable a thing it is, severely to keep and maintain the public laws.
For although Claudius Caesar, in whose reign these things were done, was a
shameless beast, yet because the authority of laws stood enforce, there was
some defense left for good men. But whereas laws lie trodden under foot, it is
impossible for commonweals long to endure. Moreover, the example of the
Captain teaches us, what remains for them which to get the good will of
men, use to give hasty judgment: Uerily, even fear, shameful trembling, and
a foul confusion of all things. Therefore whosoever bear office, let them be
mindful of these things, and administer judgment with deliberation and
advise. And let the godly comfort themselves, in that they see wicked
persecutors may be so easily feared, with the power of Christ, to whom be
praise, honor, power and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.xxiij. Chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The.Cxlvij. Homely.
Paul beheld the Counsel, and said: Men and brethren I have lived in all
good conscience, before God until this day. And the high priest Ananias,
commanded them that stood by, to smite him on the mouth. Then said Paul
unto him. God shall smite thee thou painted wall. Sit thou and iudgest me
after the Law, and commaundest me to be smitten, contrary to the Law. And
they that stood by, said, reuilest thou Gods high priest? I wist not brethren,
that he was the high priest. For it is written, thou shall not curse the ruler
of thy people.
AS Christ our Savior appointed Paul to be a chosen and called vessel for
him self: so by his Example he teaches us al, what favor his faithful are
like to find in this world, and what their duty is in suffering adversity.
For as soon as Paul had once professed Christ, he found them his greeuousest
ennimies, for whose salvation he was continually banished. Uerily even the
Jews, for whose sake he wished to be accursed. And their rage burst out so
far, that they inflamed against him the Roman Captains, whom otherwise
they hated worse than a tode. This is the state that all the godly are in, to
prove their familiars and entierest acquaintance, most ennimies unto them,
whose hatred many times so burns, that they are not ashamed to ask help of
foreign ennimies against their Christian brethren. But Paul's constant and
fearlesse courage defendes himself and his cause, against all the assaults of
his adversaries, with the only word and commandment of God: whose Example it
is fit that we also follow* when like adversity urges us. Furthermore, this
is ch^e^ely (...) be marvelled at, and (...) ^onsolation, that in all this ad^
(...) business, Paul (...) more (...) the captain being but an heathen, and a
man of war, than in the (...) of hi^ (...), which claimed unto the (...), the
fame of al godliness (...). For the captain forbids them to use any
violence, and ^^liuereth Paul being in hazard of his life out of their furious
hands. Again, he permits him to allege the law for him self, and to enjoy
the (...) maine privileges. At length when perceived that this matter
cheefely concerned religion, thinking it belonged no longer to his hearing and
determination, he (...) in the profession thereof. For assembling (...) and
S^^iues, he being ^ Paul^ out unto them to have his (...) tried and examined
by law* And this was pruden^ly done, and not unjustly in as much as he was an
Eth^icke, but as we said yesterday he is he (...), because he has a (...)
hope in the holiness of the counsel, than ^t de^^^ueth. This thing the sequel
following abundantly declares, which shows how these Priests joined all
kind of impudent a^da^i^^e and hipocris^e together. But let us examine every
(...) in order.

Luk^ beginning with Paul, Paul is not afraid before the counsel.
teaches how he behaved himself in the Counsel. And first noting his
countenance and gesture of body, (...) he beheld all the be^che earnestly.
This was an argument of a^ ^resent and constante mind, wherewith it behooves
them cheefely to be armed* which defend the quarrel of truth least being
overcome with fear, they falsely forsake the same, and encourage the wicked
e^^imies of Christ, which commonly take heart and boldness unto them, of the
cowardlyne^se of the godly. In the mean season here appears the verity of
Christ's promises. He promises his spirit for an Ad^ocate to those that be
his, which shall both comfort them and ^eache them, if at any time they be
compelled to give an accoumpte of their faith, be^fore any Magistrate or
Counsel. Therefore being mindful of his promise, he forsakes not his
Apostle in so great and dangerous an enterprise, but armeth him with
invincible courage of mind. But for as much as these promises are general,
it beehoueth us also to take comfort of the same.

Then Paul begins his Oration, and boldly pronounces of his innocence. I
(says he) have lived in all good conscience, Paul's innocence.
before God vn^^ll this day. Which words are not so to be understood, as
though he g^oried, that he were clear of all sin, and able to stand upon
his own righteousness before the judgment seat of God, but he respects
the present matter, for his adversaries ^^^used him of his shameful falling
from ancient Religion, of impiety against God, and that like a public
ennemie, he had wickedly violated the Law and the Temple* and all the
Leuiticall service, and had gone about to bring the unclean Gentiles, into
the society of Gods people. Therefore, because none should be prevented
with these wrongful suspi^ions, and deny him their hearing, he clears him
self in the beginning, of any fault herein committed, saying: He has done
all things of a good conscience, as touching the Office of his Apostleshippe,
in so much that he was ^ble to call GOD to witness, of his integrity and
vpryghtnesse. Otherwise, he confesses him self every where, to be a sinner,
and to have need of Christ's merit and favor. So many times, holy men in
their private matters* use to allege their innocence, against such as
slander them, which notwithstanding, in the sight of God, humbly confesses
them selves to be unclean sinners: whereof we have examples in Moses, David,
and infinite others. This beginning of Paul's oration teaches us, that in
matters of religion, we must cheefely have regard unto our conscience, that
nothing be done through craft or dissimulation. For where we have herein to
do with God, which searches the hearts and raines, there is no place for
subtlety and crafty conueyance. And it shall be lawful for us to rejoice in
the integrity of our conscience, if we order our religion according to the
word of God, and walk diligently in his calling, and not after our own
devise and pleasure. Which thing if we endeavor to do, God will mercifully
pardon those daily slips of life, which we commit through the infirmity of the
flesh, because we turn unto Christ, and daily repent us in him.

An example of an Antichristian Counsel.
Moreover, when Paul had begoon his Oration, Ananias which was president of the
Counsel, commanded to smite him on the mouth: either for that he begone to
declare his matter, before he was demanded, or else for that by so bold a
defending of his innocence, he seemed to accuse them of unrighteousness and
iniquity, or else for that he left out those insolent and proud styles, which
other men used to flatter them with. For this kind of men are easily moved to
wrath, specially when they suppose their estimation is lightly regarded, which
they far prefer, both before the glory of God, and the public salvation of
man. Here let us mark what manner of Counsels wicked Bishops use commonly to
have. Paul was burdened before with slanders, whereby they thought to bring
him in hatred of all his nation. And when he was about to answer thereto in a
great concourse of people, they disturbed him with furious clamoure and
shouting: Now again, as he is about to make his excuse, they resist him with
open violence, and that in place of justice, whereof they would seem to be
great favorers. Such a Counsel for all the world was it, wherein Christ was
condemned, when Caiphas was president. And that was not much unlike, wherein
Steven was oppressed. Such also have been the Counsels of the Popes this many
hundredth years, as may be proved by that one Counsel of Constance, where we
read the holy Martires of Christ, John Husse and Hierome of Prage, were
condemned with like armoure and weapons. What we may hope for at the Counsels
of our days, appears abundantly by their indictions or Bulls. The craft
and impudency whereof who so perceives not, doubtless they are to be judged
void of common sense and reason.

Paul offends not in rebuking the high Priest.
But let us return unto Paul, and see how he took this injury. God (says
he) shall smite thee O thou painted wall. etc. In the which words it seems to
some, that he offended against the commandment of Christ, which bids us to
turn the other cheek, to him that smites us on the one. But he shall easily
be cleared of this fault, if we will weigh both his words and his person. For
he cursseth him not of any naughty mind or affection, but reproves his
sin, according to the office of an Apostle, and shows that God has a
punishment prepared for him. And first, he calls him painted wall, ever
following the example of Christ, which says all the whole pack of them were
like unto painted sepulchers, or graves. And by and by he renders a reason why
he so says, adding: Thou sit to give judgment according to the Law. That
is to say: Thou claymest unto thee power to give Judgment upon me, under a
proud pretense of Law, and commaundest me to be smitten contrary to Law:
therefore thou aunswerest not unto the person and name of a Judge, but under
the cloak thereof hydest an heart that cannot abide the truth, and that
thirsts for blood. Therefore God will strike thee although there be no man to
take vengeance on thee. These things (I say) Paul speaks, according to the
office of a Minister, and not of any reprochful or slanderous intent or
meaning. And it is no doubt, but he had a respect unto the example of Christ,
who when the Bishops servant smote him, turned not his other cheek, but
earenestly rebuked his stout and contumelious doing. And here in this place we
are taught, that the patience which holy Scripture commands, is not such a
kind of cowardlinesse, as gives the wicked leave to do what they lust. For
although we be commanded patiently to suffer whatsoever God sends, yet must
we not flatter the wicked nor dissemble Gods judgments. Also, here may all
they which are in office, learn a general doctrine and rule. For that which
Paul threatened unto Ananias, chanced not long after. For about the beginning
of the Jews wars, he was cruelly slain by Manaim, Captain of a sort of
rebellious Jews: being well worthy of such a death, who feared not himself,
to rebel against God: and they shall never escape the hands of Gods
vengeance, which follow him, in striving against God, and violently oppressing
them that be innocents, or else suffering them to be oppressed by other. The
Lord shall smite them, whom the Scriptures every where teach to be the only
and true president and revenger of al judgments. And although they be able to
fray men, yet shall they never escape the hands of God. We have examples in
Pharao, Saul, Achab, and many others, of whom profane hystories make mention.

But as Paul was declaring these things, by and by there starte forth
certain that rebuke him, Flatterers are the defenders of Tyrants.
but there was none that would reprehende the unjust force of Ananias. For as
tyrants take upon them to do what they lust: so they easily find flatterers to
defend their authority against al men. Whereby it comes to pass, that where
they do al men open injury, yet no man dare complain on them. A like tyranny
has the Clergy used many years in the Church. For where the Monks and
Priests molested al men at their pleasure, yet were they counted very holy: and
to have nicked them but in word only, was a very dangerous and heinous
matter. But Paul, by a feate Ironie and kind of scorn reproves this
tyrannous hypocrisy, saying: I wist not brethren that he was the high priest.
As though he should say: Who would take him for the high Priest, in whom he
saw nothing worthy such name and title. Deuteronomy. 22. and Exo. 22.
For if he be the high Priest why hears he not men's causes quietly, and with
indifferency? Otherwise I am not ignorant, How Magistrates may preserve
their authority.
that by Gods law no man ought to curse the lawful Magistrate. Read Deuter.
22. and Exodus 22. Magistrates are taught by this Ironie of Paul, that then
their authority is inviolable and safe, when they do their office, and show
themselves to be such, as al wise men may judge worthy of that honor. For
vnies they promote* the glory of God, refrain from violence, defend good
laws, and be an example of honest life, the same may be said unto them, that
Paul in this place obiecteth to Ananias. For who will take blasphemers,
bloudsuckers, lawe-breakers, drunkardes, adulterers, gamsters, ruffians, and
such like companions, for senators and rulers we know verily, that God of his
just judgment, sometime ordeyneth such, whose misgouernance, the godly in
temporal matters most patiently suffer. But if the same be not honored as they
would, let them not marvel, but acknowlede their fault and amend. For in so
doing, they shall have Jesus Christ, the king of kings and Lord of Lords the
defender of their authority. To whom be praise, honor, power, and glory for
ever. Amen.

The.Cxlviij. Homely.
WHen Paul perceived the one part were Saduceis, and the other Phariseis, he
cried out in the counsel: Men and brethren, I am a Pharisey, the sone of a
Pharisey: of the hope and resurrection from death, I am judged. And when he had
so said, there arose a debate between the Phariseis and the Saduceis, and the
multitude was divided. For the Saduceis said, there is no resurrection,
neither Angel, nor spirit. But the Phariseis grant both. And there arose a
great cry, and when the Scribes which were of the Phariseis part arose, they
strove saying: We find no evil in this man, though a spirit or an angel has
appea^ed to him, let us not strive against God. And when there arose great
de^bate, the Captain fearyng lest Paul should have been plucked asunder of
them, commanded the soldiers to go down, and to take him from among them,
and to bring him into the Castle.
GOd uses to exercise his chosen with diverse and grievous tribulations: but
again, he delivers them diverse and many times by means unlooked for, of
both which we have examples in every place. But among them all this is very
notable, which the holy ghost sets forth by Luke in Paul the chosen vessel
of Christ. For we have heard, how he was many ways laid wait for by the
Jews, and was many times in danger of his life. But God oftentimes raised up
new helps, which for the most part, were such as Paul once thought not of,
much less could have wished for, or required. For first, he was delivered
out of the furiouse Jews hands, by the Captain, and his Soldiers. Shortly
after, where he would have pleated his cause, he was defended from scourging,
by privilege of the freedom of Rome: at length, when the Captain had
committed both his matter and life unto most wicked Judges, God sends such a
division among his enemies, that they which not long before wished his death,
pronounced him innocent. These things ought to comfort us, that we through
cowardly fear give not over in time of temptation. For they confirm the
promises of God, whereby he every where promises to be the revenger of his
people. But where in this present place there are many other things also very
worthy to be considered, it shall be profitable to examine all the
circumstances of the matter, which is here rehearsed.

First and foremost, it behooves thoroughly to consider the cause of the
dissension, which Luke says was the diversity of sects among the Jews, Of
the sects of the Jews.
for some of his adversaries were Phariseis, and some Saduceis. And as touching
the sects of the Jews, there are many things written in Josephus, which
refers their beginning unto the time of the Machabees. And in deed the
approuedst authors testify, that they began under Johannes Hircanus the first,
for when the Priests applied them selves more to bear rule, than to care for
religion, diverse opinions began to spring about religion, by reason the
doctrine of Gods word ceased, which God had appointed to be still among his
people. Therefore three sects sprung up which divided the unity of the Church
and people of God. The first was that of the Phariseis, who not contented with
the law, ^hariseies.
followed traditions, and believed that righteousness and salvation might be
atteyned by works, besides being given to the study of Astrology, they taught
fatal destenie, not much differing in this point from the Stoikes. And these
men being cloked with the outward covering of works, were taken for the most
holy of all other. The second was the Saduceis, who denying that men were
subject unto destenie, attributed freewill unto them, Saduceis.
and although they seemed earnestly to commend the study of virtue, yet
opened they the window unto Epicure, and unto all kind of licentious living.
For they denied the Angels and immortality of the soul, and the resurrection
of the body. This sect of all other was in most authority, because it gave
more liberty than the sharp traditions of the Phariseis, and therefore was
very acceptable unto many. Of the third sect were the Esseni, Escenes.
who perceiving that the Phariseis and Saduceis measured or weighed virtue, but
by words only, and would not them selves express the same in their deeds,
lived a single life, would have no servants, had their goods common, gat their
living with the labor of their hands, and would not come at public service,
for fear of polluting them selves with other men's company. And because these
men were few in number, and sought not to be in office and authority, they
got them to dwell in pleasant places, set with Balsamum, where they planted
gardens, and studied Physic, whereby because they did men good, they gat great
commendation of virtue among all men. These men's vsages, the Anabaptists in
our days do greatly resemble, saving that they more disturb commonweals,
and fulfill their profession less sincerelye, because they run headlong into
all kind of beastliness, and are miserablye vexed and tossed with the
perturbations of envy and hatred.

Yet because this rule of the Essenes, was somewhat austere and unpleasant, it
had therefore (as we said) the fewer that followed it. This is the cause, that
the writers of the Gospel make mention only but of the two first sects. We
have to observe, what evil the covetousness of Bishops and idleness that
springs thereof, uses to breed: seeing these euilles so defourmed the
primitive Church. For the orders of Monks in Papistrie bredde of the like
beginning, abundantly teach us, that this is always the effect of those
vices. For the which cause we have the more need, to take heed in these
days, that the like or worsse happen not again. Also, the goodness of God is
to be magnified, which in so foul a scatterment of his flock, has yet
reserved some remnauntes in his Church, whereby the same at length might be
renewed again: as we see came to pass in the Papacy, where the Monks in
every place ruled the roste. For at all times, and in all places, there have
been found, which durst openly inuey against their hypocrisy and
dissimulation, to say nothing of those which have lien lurking in their houses,
and have thought it great wickedness, to be pertakers of their
superstitiousnesse. Here in this place, have thou what to answer the
adversaries, which ask if there were no Church before Luther and Zwinglius
days? Yes, we know there was a Church, but the same almost overwhelmed and
buried, such an one as we read, was before Christ's time among the Jews, and
such an one as was in the days of Helias, when God said there were seven
thousand left, which had never bowed the knee unto Baal, although Helias knew
not one of them.

Furthermore, as concerning this present History, we are taught, that
although the wicked be diversely divided, both in manners and religion, yet
they will easily agree together against Christ and the truth. For where they
all fight under one Prince which is the Devil, they cannot choose, but all
take him for their ennimie, which specially assaulteth his kingdom. Would God
that they would diligently consider these things, which seek their chief
praise and glory by dissentions and debates, which they practice against the
Ministers of Christ, taking their naughty affections unto Counsel. For
hereby they encourage the wicked ennimies of Christ, which think it an easy
matter to vanquishe them, whom they see contend so bitterly among themselves.
But hereof we shall have more commodity to speak else where.

Paul professes he is a Pharisie.
Now let us see Paul, who perceiving his band of adversaries, to consist of
so diverse sects, deuiseth a way by and by how to set them out among them
selves, and says: Men and breth^en, I am a Pharisey, the son of a
Pharisey, touching the hope and resurrection of the dead I am judged. Paul
seems to offend either in craft, or in denying of Christ and his faith,
seeing he professes to be of the order of them, who it is evident, were the
greatest ennimies of Christ. But he may easily be excused. For first, he was
enforced to seek such a shifte and escape, because he perceived he should
have no liberty otherwise to speak, and saw the matter was handled with open
tirannie, therefore he had rather have professed his faith plainly, and have
given an account thereof, as he began to do, but being interrupted, he takes
a new way.

Again, he confesses nor allows not the Phariseis opinion simply and in all
points, but in the Article of the resurrection, wherein they had a sound
judgment. He joins with them against the Saduces. And what he thought of the
other opinions of the Phariseis, and specially of their trust in works,
wherein they had such a pride, his Epistles every where abundantly declare.
Therefore Paul's example makes nothing for them, which for the more surety of
their life and estimation, will craftily draw backewarde in matters of
Religion, and receive and allow Articles plain repugnaunt to the faith of
Christ. We are yet taught, that it is lawefull for the godly, being
circumuented with wrongful judgment, to seek to escape them, as far forth
as they may do it without detriment of the truth: least by over rash
endaungering them self, they bring the truth in peril with them. Above all
things mark how Paul says he is judged touching the resurrection of the
dead. Howebeit the points of his accusation sounds far otherwise. But he
alleges the resurrection, because therein consists the principal point
and whole matter of faith and religion, as he declares in the first to the
Corinth. 15. And because the whole hope of the Saints stands herein, he
says he is judged also concerning that hope. For take away the resurrection,
and what else have the faithful, wherein to put any trust, because in the world
they see nothing but crosses and tribulations? Hereby it appears what we may
think of those which deny the resurrection. For both they pull down the
foundation of Christian faith, and set open the gate unto all wickedness of
life.

Howebeit Paul's enterprise succeeds very luckely. Paul's enemies fall out
among them selves.
For by and by the Phariseis maintain his part against the Saduces, and
making a sedicious noise on both sides, the Phariseis cry out of Paul's side:
We find no evil in this man, for if that a spirit or Angel have spoken unto
him, let us not strive against God. And herein verily they speak both most
godly and truly, and yet they deserve no praise before God therefore, because
they made this confession, not for any love they had to truth and equity, but
of a corrupt affection of mind. And this is a notable example, teaching us
what partaking is able to do, for being carried with the sway hereof, they
which a little before thirsted after his blood, become his defendours. This
thing uses to happen many times, both in religion, and also in other
controversies. But forasmuch as such judgments for the most part tend to
an evil end, it behooves us diligently to avoid the same. There are also two
things very profitable to be observed. The first is, how the consent of the
wicked can not long endure. For as they are tossed hither and thither like the
sea with uncertain affections: so God uses from an high to scatter and scorn
their counsels and devises, and that can he do with such dexterit^e and
handsomnesse, that sometimes he uses the help of most wicked enemies, in
saving of his servants. Thus the rods and incursions of the Philistines
were profitable unto David, while they kept back Saul from persecuting him.
And in our days, we have seen the Turks wars an occasion many times of the
Churches tranquillity and quiet. Therefore let not the conspiracies of the
wicked offend any man, but let us put our assured trust of salvation in God.
The other is, that they which take against that doctrine that God reuealeth,
strive against God. This is an horrible offense, but to common in these days.
For in defacing the Gospel, both Princes and Prelates of the Church chiefly
labor, whereas the son of God did first voutsafe to reveal it to the
world by his own mouth. But at length to their great confusion shall these
Gyaunts feel how much stronger God is than they, and how horrible a thing it
is to fall into his hands.

The Captain delivers Paul again out of the hands of of the Jews.
Furthermore, these clamours taken up on both sides, turn to open sedition, and
the matter proceeds so far, that Paul is feign to be delivered again by
the help of the Captain and Soldiers, and to be brought into the Castle,
which undoubtedly were moved thereunto by God, as they were at the first. Let
all magistrates follow the example of this Captain, and remember that it is
their duty to succor and def^nde those that are good. For the cowardlynesse
of such is to be detested* which either care not for the good, or else for
men's sakes deliver them to be tormented, wherein it is evident that Pylate
offended. Let them also mark, what to look for, when they commit the
ministers of truth unto the councels of Antichryst. For nether they shall be
constrained shamefully to forsake them, or if they will save them, to deliver
them with greater danger out of the hands of them which make it but a game
and pastime, wickedly to break public Laws and promyses. An example hereof
appears in Sigismunde the Emperor, circumuented with the craft and
tyranny of the Council of Constance, when he was not able to deliver John
Husse out of their hands, sent for out of Boheme by his letters of safe
conducte, and upon the faith of an Emperor. Howebeit howsoever things fare
in the world, let us imitate Paul, and constantly defend the truth, and
Jesus Christ our Savior and redeemer shall not fail those that be his: To
whom be blessing, honor, power and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.Cxlix. Homely.
THE night following God stood by him, and said: Be of good cheer Paul,
for as thou haste testified of me at Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness
also at Rome. And when it was day certain of the Jews gathered them selves
together, and made a vow, saying: That they would neither eat nor drink
till they had killed Paul. They were more than forty men, which had made this
conspiracy. And they came to the chief priests and Elders, and said: We
have bound our selves with a vow, that we will ear nothing until we have
slain Paul. Now therefore give you knowledge to the upper Captain, and to
the Counsel, that he bring him forth unto us to morrow, as though we
would know something more perfectly of him. But we or ever he come near,
are ready to kill him. When Paul's sisters son heard of their laying awayte,
he went and entered into the Castle, and told Paul.
Paul the Apostle in his second Epistle to the Corinthians, the first
Chapter, says: As the afflictions of Christ are plentyfull in us, even so is
our consolation plenteous by Christ. This is a worthy and comfortable saying,
confirmed with many examples, even from the very beginning, unto the which this
example here present told of Paul, may very well be adjoined. For we have
heard how he was hitherto vexed and molested with grievous perilles and
dangers. And many things happened unto him, which might have driven him to
desperation, being laid in prison by the Roman Soldiers, and with one
whole consent of the Jews required to be put to death, and saw none other
help or succou^e but such as he found in the Soldiers, men farthest off
from true Religion. But the Lord fails not his Apostle being in this
danger and distress, but most friendly comfort him being tossed up and
down with diverse cares, and by and by performs in deed that which he
promises in words, whiles in miraculous sort he delivers him out of the
hands of most cruel cutthrotes. Now because these things are written for the
instruction and comfort of all people, let us mark every point thereof in
order.

The first thing herein is a consolation, wherewith Paul's mind is confir^ed
and strengthened. For the Lord stands by him in the night, God comfort
Paul.
that is to say, by his angel to teach him how true it is that he said, he would
be with us until the end of the world. And he bids Paul to be of good
cheer, or to take a good heart unto him, because perhaps he began to doubt of
Gods care and good will toward him. And the cause he says to be, for that he
must bear witness of him at Rome also. Here it most euiden^ly appears,
that God neglects not men's matters and affairs, although he seem sometimes
to forget them. For how can he neglecte men, who forgets not the Sparrowes,
as Christ testifies. Luke. 12. In deed it might seem that God had no regard
of Paul, considering how all the world conspired against him. But seeing God
stands by him in prison, it easily appears, that nothing has happened
unto him hythervnto, either without the knowedge of God, or without his will.

But because we have examples hereof in every place, The manner of Gods
comfor^ing.
let us now consider the manner of Consolation: the bare words whereof
being wayed after the capacity of m^nnes reason, seem to declare that GOD
rather threateneth him, than comfort him. For he says: Be of good cheer
Paul: for as thou haste testified of me in Jerusalem, so must thou also
bear witness at Rome. Therefore the Lord gives him warning of new
trauelles, and new contentions: like as if a Physician should say to a sick
body: be of good cheer (O son) for thou haste new sicknesses coming, and
within these few days thou shalt have fresh doloures and greefes. Or, as if
one should encourage a Soldier weeryed in a late skyrmish, unto a more
grievous fight. Who would say this were a consolatyon or comfort? How be
it such a like thing it is that is here said unto Paul. For by making
mention of Rome, he puts him in remembrance of tediousness in iourneys, of
perils in navigations, and of a number of most cruel kinds of punishment:
forasmuch as Claudius was now Emperor, a very foolish and cruel man, and most
ready to punish g^^tlesse persons. But if we weigh the matter deeply, it
shall appear there were two things which might not a little encourage Paul:
the one was, that he perceived God had a care of him. The other, that he heard
he should be a vessel and instrument of glory, to declare the name of Christ
among the Romans also, who were Lords of the whole world. Here therefore we
are taught, whence to fetch comfort in adversity. Not in the fortunate
success of worldly affairs, or of hope to live idelly and easily, but of the
providence of God, and of that he does vouchsafe to make us vessels and
instruments of his glory. And this thing Christ teaches us, where he promises
to his disciples not prosperous success of their attempts, but says, nothing
shall happen unto them without the council of Gods providence. We are taught
also, that while God delivers and comfort us, he calls us not to
idleness, but prepares us to greater businesses. And he therefore recreateth
us with the taste of his truth and promises, to make us to return to our
business again the more cherfully, as we may see all godly men use to do.
Therefore it is a shameless error of them, which after they have tried the
aid and help of God, claim unto them self a certain immunitie and freedom
from all perilles and labors, or else give them selves altogether to the
desire of the flesh, and follow an vnvnbridled licentiousness both in saying
and doing.

God confirms his consolation ^y deeds.
Furthermore, because the Apostle was like to be molested with many perilles
before he came at Rome, God confirms his late courrage and manlynesse with a
fresh benefit, delivered him out of a great and unlooked for hazard. For
there had forty persons conspired his death, and had made a vow, that they
would neither eat, nor drink, till they had killed him. In whose wicked
enterprise, a man cannot tell, whether he may more wonder at their auda^itie,
or bloody minds. For beside that they intend and mean the death of a
guyltlesse body, which is contrary to the Law of God, they bind themselves
with an oath and vow, being not ignorant, how many things might happen or
chance, that might hinder and dashe all their attempt. But by their example,
we learn to judge of the boldness and audacitie of the wicked, and of all
them which mean to defend the Religion they profess* by force rather than by
Scripture. But let us return to these votaries again, who declare their
bloody intent unto the Priests and Counsel, thinking to have great thanks
at their hands, and desiring to have them partners of their enterprise. Give
you (say they) knowledge to the Captain, and to the Counsel, to bring him
forth unto us to morrow, as though we would know something more perfectly
of him, and we will be ready to kill him or ever he come near. Here appear
the crafts and traynes of the wicked, and how far the hatred of truth
proceeds. These men profess a zeal and ancient Religion, and can
wonderfully counterfeit Justice, yet in the mean season they can conceive a
device in their mind, void both of all reason and Justice. Howbeit Satan
has left this pollycie also in remembrance, for posterity, where it has
been seen, how the Ministers of Christ being oftentimes called forth unto
Disputations, have fallen into the hands of Murderers. And there want not
examples of our age, which teach us to be afraid of such sleightes in these
days also. Again, consider what great corruption there was at this time among
the people of the Jews, seeing men durst declare so wicked an enterprise unto
the Priests and Elders, who they knew undoubtedly would join with them in
their doing. Therefore they were all worthy miserably to perish together.
Which thing let all them look for like wise, which in these days labor to
gratify Antichrystes Priests, with sheading of innocent blood, and banishing
of the godly. And yet how vain most times their enterprises are, this
History following declares. For a nephew of Paul's being but a young
strippling, yet meet enough to interrupte their devise, chances through the
ordinance of God to understand their purpose. He declares all the matter
unto Paul, who sends him unto the Captain, and by his diligence and
industry this bloody attempt (as we shall hear hereafter) was quite dashed
and defeated. Thus God thought good to ratify his late promise, teaching us
all how easy it is for him to overthrow the devises of the wicked. For what
are wicked enemies able to do against him which sees all thing, and can arm
and set forth weakness against them? so he destroyed the wicked tyranny of
Pharao by Moses, that was thrown away in his infancy. So he delivered Sisara
and Holo^ernes, most skillful and valiant Captains, to women to be killed.
So by the wisdom of Daniell, being but a child, he reproves the filthy
lust of the Elders and Senators, and defends the honest and virtuous life
of Susanna. And here in this place by the means of a young springal, he
defeateth such a counsel and device as seemed scarce possible to be
disappoynted by any means, because it was taken in hand by most desperate
men, confirmed with the holiness of an oath or vow, and corroborated with the
authority of the Priests and Elders. Like kind of examples are in all
Hystories. By them it behooves us to learn the power of God, in whom let us
trust, and we shall less fear the tyranny of the wicked, and being bold
in the quarrel of truth, let us put all our hope and confidence in God only,
through Jesus Christ our Lord: To whom be blessing, honor, power and
glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

The.Cl. Homely.
AND Paul called one of the under Captains to him, and said: bring this young
man unto the high Captain, for he has a certain thing to show him. And he
took him and brought him unto the high Captain and said: Paul the prisoner
called me unto him, and prayed me to bring this young man unto thee, which
has a certain matter to show thee. The high Captain took him by the
hand, and went with him out of the way, and asked him: what is it that thou
haste to tell me? And he said: The Jews are determined to desire thee that
thou would bring forth Paul to morrow to the Council, as though they
would enq^^^e somewhat of him more perfectly: but follow not thou they^
minds, for there lie in wait for him of them more than forty men, which have
bound them selves with a vow, that they will neither eat nor drink till
they have killed him. And now are they ready, and look that thou should
promise. The upper Captain then let the young man depart, and charged him,
saying: See thou tell it out to no man, that thou haste showed this thing to
me. And he called unto him two under Capitaynes, saying: Make ready two
hundred Soldiers to go to Caesarea, and horsemen threescore and ten, and
spear men two hundred, at the third hour of the night, and deliver them
beasts that they may set Paul on, and bring him safe unto Felix the high
Deputy.
ALthough God never forsakes his elect, but according to his promises is at
hand with them always, and in all places: yet he mixeth many times
adversity with prosperity, because it is very profitable so to have them
kept in doing their duty, and to exercise their faith, that they may learn
to depend only upon him, and to ascribe all prosperity unto him alone. Many
examples hereof are every where. But chiefly in the Hystories of Moses,
David, and others, whereunto this example told here of Paul, may worthily
be referred. For we have heard how God appeared unto him, being grievously
and many ways tempted, and effectuously comforted him, promising him, that he
should not only escape the hands of the Jews, but also should bear
witness of him at Rome. But lo, or ever it was scarce day, forty men conspire
his death, and taking the Priests and Elders to counsel with them, so devise
the matter, that it seems impossible for him to escape. This appeared utterly
to be contrary to the promise of God: yet because Paul is not ignorant of
Gods usage and custom, he is neither feared with the mention of sudden
danger, nor God fails not of his promises: yea where he least hoped for it,
God sends him aid and assistaunce, as we shall now see. The use of all
these things is, that we should confirm our faith hereby, and not cast off
our hope when we see the success of things not agreeable unto Gods promises.
For although the Lord linger and tarry, yet can he not forget us continually.
But that we may receive the more utility hereby, we must diligently consider
every person.

Paul requires help of the Capten.
First of all comes Paul forth, who although he were confirmed with the
Oracle, yet he boasts not foolishely of Gods promise and providence, and
sets not all dangers light, but prudently takes hold of that one mean
that remained in man, and which he might safely use without breach of
Relygion and Christian faith, having a care how to make the Captain
understand all the matter by his Nephew: that he being admonished of his
duty, might convey him from the bloody hands of these conspiratours. And
because the matter might seem of more importance, and not be suspected by
reason of the age of the strippling, he joins a Centurion with him, to be his
spokesman and intercessor. By which example we are first taught how we should
use the providence and promises of God in adversity. For we must not doubt
but God by his eternal providence and counsel rules al things, and the same
can be stopped or hindered by no endeavor of any enemies. For he uses to
scatter the counsel of Nations, Psalm. 33.
but his counsel (as David says) endures for ever. Again, he promises to
be with his people, and to assiste them in all adversities, whose promises we
must assuredly believe. In the mean season, the remedies and means, which
both are lawefull of them self, and offered of God, must by no means be
despised or neglected, least by putting our selves over rashely in danger, we
seem to tempt God. For the same must be observed in all our doings, that is
used intillage and husbandry. For although all the increase thereof comes of
God, yet no man ought to neglecte husbandry without the great contempt of God.
Thus we read David used sometimes to fly, and sometimes other means which God
offered, very holyly, although he nothing doubted of the truth of God, which
promised him the kingdom. Likewise did Ezechias: yea Christ him self sticked
not to fly, while he knew his hour was not yet nigh: neither would he cast
him self down from the pynacle of the Temple, at Satan's bidding, although he
alleged the promise of God, which was of most authority with Christ. Yea he
furnishes his disciples with most large promises, yet he warns the same
diligently to beware of men. Math. 10.
Therefore the error of such as abuse the providence of God to maintain
their temeritie and licentious boldness, and under pretense hereof wickedly
contemn not only al forecast and wisdom, but such means beside as God has
ordained, is both shameful and wicked. We must rather avoid the
inconvenience of distrust, least we be overcome thereof, and turn unto
unlawful means: but in the mean while, using the lawful means provided of
God, let us commit all the success unto the good and holy will of God. For so
shall we walk safelyest in the middle of the way, avoiding as well too much
confidence as diffidence, Confidence and diffidence are two extremes in each
kind^.
as Paul does in this place both wisely and godly, and therefore is allowed of
God. This example teaches us moreover, that it is lawful for godly and
christian people to demand aid of the Magistrates, and to beseech them of
armed defense if need shall so require. Neither are such men to be harkened
to, that say Christ's kingdom must not be set forth by war, seeing we are
commanded not to resist evil. For we do not ask lawful defense of the
magistrate, because our meaning is by fight to enlarge Christ's kingdom, but
require his office and duty, which if he be a good magistrate, he ought not to
deny us, and which the godly people may use without the breach of faith and
religion. For it is evident that magistrates are appointed of god, and that for
good purpose, and that the sword is not in vain committed to them of God.
Read Romans 13. And God promised by Esaias, that kings should be Nourices of his
Church. As touching Christ's precepte, forbidding us to resist evil, he
mente not thereby to take from the Magistrate his lawful function, but
forbids private men greedy desire of reuengement, which uses to violate and
break public laws, and disturbeth all kind of amity, peace and friendship.
Therefore Paul does well in seeking the Captains aid, and he refuses not the
armor of the soldiers, whereby he saw the crafty awaytes of the Jews
might be prevented and repressed. And he had been in no fault if the
Soldiers and Conspirators had met and committed slaughter on both sides: but
rather all the fault should have light upon those wicked persons which were
the beginners of so wicked an enterprise. But if it were lawful for Paul to use
the defense and safeguard of the Roman garrison, then doubtless are they very
severe controllers of the faith which blame Ministers in these days, that
seek the aid and succor of christian Magistrates, and require of them that
duty that an Heathen Captain thought was not meet to deny to the Apostle of
Christ.

But let us let Paul pass, and come to the Centurion, whose intercession he
used. The Centurion courteously accomplisheth Paul's request.
He calls him unto him, and desires him to bring the young strippling unto
the upper Captain, which he accomplisheth very gently and readily. For God
uses to get his people favor in the sight of strangers, and by his secret
working procures them the good will of men. So Joseph in time pas^e was in
great favor with Potiphare. And we read that the Israelites easily obtained
of the Egyptians the costlyest things they had, because God had gotten his
people favor in their sights. These things ought to make us desirous of
godliness, because we see that the more duetifull we show our selves to be
unto God, the more gentle and favorable we find men unto us. For God can
easily at his pleasure get us the good will of men. Also we must imitate this
Centurion after his example, willingly to help those that be in affliction or
calamity. Read Math. 25. But O the detestable wickedness of our days, where
men are grown into such ungodliness, that a man shall scarcely obtain of
Christians that that Paul so easily obtained of an Heathen soldier. For many
now a days are ashamed of the Captiued for Christ's sake, and for this cause
only regard them not, least by doing any thing in their cause, they should
run in suspicion themselves.

The capten is ready to aid and assist Paul.
But let us see what the Captain did in Paul's cause, where in an heathen man
appear tokens of singular virtues, God doubtless working in his mind, which
meant to deliver his Apostle out of the hands and awaytes of these
conspiratours. First he uses a singular courtesy, not repelling the strippling
that came unto him, nor frowning when he herd the name of the Captive, but
takes him by the hand and leads him aside, and asks him friendly
wherefore he was come. Which example all men in office and authority ought to
use, seeing this is not one of the least commendations in them, to let all men
have an easy access unto them, and to hear their Subjects causes gently and
patiently. For in so doing they resemble the property of God, who of his own
voluntary and accord calls us, and has his ears open always to the
prayers of the afflicted. And doubtless, where a number for fear or shame can
not declare their minds before men in authority, it behooves to encourage
them with signification of humanity and good will, that their preposterous
shame or fear hinder them not. Again, the Captain joins wisdom with
courtesy, which may hereby be perceived, that he easily believes the young
man, although there were many things which might have caused him to suspect the
message. But where he had many times before perceived the maliciousness of the
Jews, and by their first proceedings easily understood what hateful minds
they bare unto Paul, he easily suspected there might be such among them as
the young man described: Yea such was his humanity, that he disdained not to
be counseled by the young man, warning him, that he should not bring Paul out
unto them. Here have Princes and Rulers also what to imitate. For as overmuch
credit which has in it a kind of lightness, is to be avoided, so must they not
be to hard of credit, specially if they hear probable reasons alleged. But
rather let them wisely and with present mind, be ready at all assayes, lest
(as it oftentimes happens) with their hardness of belief, they bring either
their commonweals, or else good men in hazard and danger. Finally, we may
see great industry and diligence in this Captain, seeing he omitteth nothing
making for this present business. For he wisely requires the young fellow to
say nothing of the matter, least the bewraying thereof might give the
Conspiratours an occasion to take a new way and devise. Next, he sends for
two Centurions, and bids them make ready such a band of men, as might
suffice for his purpose. He commands also to prepare beasts for Paul to
ride on. Furthermore, he appoynteth the night to carry him in, for avoiding of
tumulte. And gives them in their hands letters of commendation, to Felix the
President. All which things could not be done without great labors and
expenses. But he remembering his office, spares neither for pains nor charges,
to deliver a prisoner, as yet convict of no crime, out of the hands of
murderers. The like industry must Christian Magistrates use, in the defense
of good men, forasmuch as it is plain, that they are chiefly ordained for
that end. But the example of this Ethnicke reproves both the negligence and
iniquity of a great many persons which had leefer to deliver an hundred
ministers of the word to be slaughtered, than they would take such pains, and
be at such costs for their sake. Yet let the unthankfulness of this age,
fear no man from doing his duty faithfully. For although men cease from
doing their parts, and that there appears no help in them, yet will God
never fail of his promise, which uses to take those that worship him, out of
a thousand dangers, and that by means unlooked for, and will bring them at
length to the inheritance of heaven, through his son Jesus Christ, to whom
be praise, honor, power and glory for ever. Amen.

The.Clj. Homely.
ANd the Captain wrote a letter after this manner: Claudius Lisias, unto the
most mighty Ruler Felix, sends greeting. This man was taken of the Jews and
should have been killed of them. Then came I with Soldiers and rescued him,
and perceived that he was a Roman. And when I would have known the cause
wherefore they accused him, I brought him forth into their Counsel. There
perceived I that he was accused of questions of their law. But was not guilty
of any thing worthy of death or of bonds: And when it was showed me how that
the Jews laid wait there for him, I sent him straight way to thee, and gave
commandment to his accusers, that the things which they have against him,
they should tell before thee, farewell. Then the Soldiers as it was
commanded them, took Paul, and brought him by night to Antipatras. On the
morrow they left the horssemen to go with him, and returned unto the
Castle, which when they came to Caesarea, and delivered the Epistle to the
Deputy, presented Paul also before him. When the Deputy had read the Letter,
he asked of what country he was. And when he understood that he was of
Cilicia: I will hear thee said he, when thine accusers are come. And he
commanded him to be kept in Herod's Judgment hall.
SOme man might think the diligence of Luke the Evangelist superfluous, which
he uses in declaryng how Paul by mean of the Roman soldiers escaped
awaytes that certain murderers had laid for him, inculcatyng in his report
thereof, every small trifle almost, to the tediousness of the hearer. But where
it is evident, that he writ by the suggestion of the holy spirit, we must
think nothing superfluous that is told, by his authority. For hereby he
sets before our eyes, the infallible verity and truth of God, and the
invincible power, which he uses in defending his people. For he defeateth not
the enterprise of these wicked murderers delivering Paul after any common
and usual sort, according to his promise, but he so orders all the matter,
that he brings it about, by their help, of whom the godly hoped for no such
thing, for that they were enemies of the Christian faith, and perhaps of no
religion. But because God is truth it self, he can not break his promise:
And because he holds the hearts and minds of men in his hand, it is
therefore a most easy matter for him, to use the help of his enimyes, in
bringing to pass that he will have done. Therefore the industry both of the
Captain and Soldiers, must be ascribed to the power of God, which is in such
wise described, as a man might think they had coniured as well to deliver
Paul, as the other to kill him. The consyderation of all these things (as we
have oftentimes declared) serves for the confyrmation of our faith: Which
because it must diligently be shored and stayed up, by reason of daily
temptations, let us see how Paul was brought to Caesarea, to the Presidente
of Iurye, because every where there are diverse things to be found making for
the maintenance and upholding of our weak faith.

In the beginning he puts the coppie of the Epistle wherein Lisias the
Captain commended Paul unto Felix. The epistle of Claudus Lysias, the
Captain.
This Epistle teaches us among other things, what brevity our ancestors
used, in matters of weight and importance, where now adays in triftes, men use
too many words, whereof none other cause can be alleged, than for that all
faith and credit is buried, in whose stead lying, and false counterfeting
bears the swinge. This letter consists of diverse parts, whereof the first
is the superscription. This contains both the name of the Author, and also of
him to whom it was written, Who Felix was.
and declares who was Lieutenaunt over the Jews, at that time: Namely one
Felix, of whom profane writers also make much mention. This man, they say,
was of a bondeman made free by Claudius Caesar, and through foolishness of the
Emperor, advanced to such dignity, that he passed the Citizens and
Nobility of Rome in honors. Yet kept still his servile conditions, polluting
all places with filthye lust, whoredom, and murder. For Suetonius writes,
that he had been the husband of three Queens, which he had entyced to
marriage, partelye through the authority of Claudius, and partly by
whoredom and baudrye. Drusilla, daughter to that Herod which was smitten of
the Angel, Josephus in his.20. book of Antiquities Chapters.9. and.11.
as we heard, Chapter.12. he gate from Aniazus, King of the people called
Amazi, by the craft and conueyaunce of a certain Magitian of Cyprus. He
caused Ionathas the high Priest, when he thought nothing thereof, to be
cruellye killed in the Temple, by Cutthrotes sent thither of purpose. All
which are told to this end, that thou may see Paul's fortune, upon whom
God permitted so wicked a man to have power, but yet defends him, that he had
no hurt done to him by him. We are fools therefore to fear the power or
force of men, seeing God is able to bring down the hearts of Lions, and
make them to forbear his people, contrary to their nature and usage. Also
here appears what state that people is in, which having abused their
lybertye heretofore, have plucked the wrath of God upon them. Such it is
evident, the Jews have been, whom God had not only endued with liberty and
freedom, but also had consecrated them to his own self, and amongst all
Nations, chose them to be his peculiare people. But because they would not
obey the holy laws of GOD, nor be amended by the admonyshementes of the
Prophets and of Christ, and wyckedlye abused their gift of liberty, they
are now deprived thereof, and constrained to suffer such presidentes, as had
neither commendation of Nobility, nor fame of virtue, but were defamed and
evil reported, by reason of filthye lust and beastlye cruelty. And where yet
they would not amend for all these plagues, at length they were utterly
forsaken and shut out of the kingdom of GOD. These things such men ought
diligently to consider, as now a days also, abuse the prerogative of
liberty, and make of it an unbridled licenciousnesse both of saying, and
doing.

But return we to Lysias, the Captains letter, which after he had
superscribed it, begins the narration, The commendation of Paul.
with Paul's great commendation. For he declares that he was apprehended for
no demerite or fault that he had done, through the unreasonableness and
injustice of the Jews.

Next, he says he is a Citizen or freeman of Rome. At length he testifies he
is an Innocent, where he says he had done nothing worthy of death or
imprisonment, and that the Jews had made this stir and adoo against him for
no cause, but for their law and religion sake. This is a singular
commendation, but we must remember that these are the words of a Soldier,
and that he speaks after the manner of the Romans. For where they desired the
utter abolishment of the Jews religion, they cared not whether the presidents
defended the same or not. Therefore we see every where, that they little regarded
controversies in religion. But God commands a far other thing, which
appoints Magistrates, to have a special care of religion: for it is not
meet, that they whom God of his goodness has placed in such degree of
dignity, should suffer the honor of God to be either neglected or defaced.
Yet the craft of the children of this world appears in the Captain, which
so trimly dissembleth his error, committed in bynding and whipping a Citizen
of Rome, writing now nothing, but that that made for the getting of him praise
and favor. Here is chiefly to be marked, what a care God has of his true
servants, consydering he defends their innocence by testimony of their
enemies. Example hereof we now see every day, whereas they highly extol and
praise the Prophets and Apostles, which persecute their faith and doctrine
with deadly hatred. Why therefore fear we the slanders of enemies, or infamy
of the world.

Now remains the latter part of the Epistle which consists of a certain
preoccupation or answer to an objection that might be made. For lest Felix
might be offended for that an innocent person was not rather set at liberty,
than sent to him, with such cost and charges: He shows also the cause
hereof, he says he did thus, because of the waits that the Jews laid for
him, which Paul should never have escaped, if he had been set at liberty.
Therefore it behooved in this wise, says he, to provide for the safety of an
innocent, and to see public peace observed. Where again, the example of this
Captain puts Magistrates in remembrance of their duty, namely, to take
heed, that no man suffer violence or injury, because it is evident, they are
chiefly ordained to the end that good men should not be oppressed through the
insolency and pleasure of other that are wicked. Psalm. 72. Roma. 13.
Read Psalm. 72. Romans 13.

Paul is brought before Felix.
It follows what success this matter had, verilye a most happy, as God
ordered it. For the Soldiers faithfully fulfill the charge committed unto
them, and bring Paul safely unto Felix the President, and he, as though he had
changed his nature, becomes courteous and easy to be spoken to, and asks
him what country man he is. Which when he knew, he deferreth the hearing of his
matter until the coming of his accusers. For the law of nature teaches us,
that both parts ought to be heard before sentence be given: Let us remember,
that all these things so happened according to Gods providence. For it was his
working, that the Soldiers without grutching served Paul's turn, that they
were ready to defend him with peril of their life, that Felix accepts him
more courteously and friendly than his custom was, and causes him to be kept in
Herodes Judgment Hall, being an honest kind of prison. The use of these
things is to teach us that we must not pass much upon the enterprises of
men, but study only to please God, which can mollify barbarous men's
hearts, tame savage and wild manners, and turn our enemies hearts to love
us. Let these things embolden us with invincible constancy of faith, to
overcome the tyranny of the world, and so to live hereafter eternally in
heaven, with Jesus Christ our Savior, to whom be praise honor, power, and
glory, for ever. Amen.

The.xxiiij. Chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The.Clij. Homely.
AFter five days, Ananias the High priest descended with the Elders, and with
a certain Orator named Tertullus, which enfourmed the Deputy against Paul.
And when Paul was called forth, Tertullus began to accuse him, saying: Seeing
that we live in great quietness by the means of thee, and that many good
things are done unto this Nation, through thy providence, that allow we ever
and in all places, most noble Felix, with all thanks. Notwithstanding, that I
be not tedious unto thee, I pray thee that thou would hear us of thy
courtesy a few words. For we have found this man a pestilent fellow, and a
moouer of debate unto all the Jews in the world, and a maintainer of the
sect of the Nazarites, which has also enforced to pollute the Temple: whom
we took and would have judged according to our law, but the high Captain
Lysias came upon us, and with great violence took him away out of our hands,
commanding his accusers to come unto thee, of whom thou may, (if thou will
enquire) know the certainty of all these things, whereof we accuse him. The
Jews likewise affirmed, saying that these things were even so.
THe Evangelist Luke declares in this Chapter, how Paul was handled before
Felix the Presidente being sent to him, from the Captain, that was appointed
for the safegarde of Jerusalem, as we have heard before. In the which
Narration, first it is declared, how the high Priest and Elders, laid
matter of death unto Paul's charge. And albeit that Paul so declared and
opened his cause, that the Lord Presidente could find no matter of death
against him, yet he keeps him in prison two whole years together, and
because he would show the Jews a pleasure, leaves him bound in prison
still, till Pontius Festus succeeded him in the office. These things are
declared to this end, that we may learn thereby: what state the godly are
like to be in always in this world, and how the world continually hates
them, forasmuch as we see the Jews spare for no labor or costs, to bring
Paul being a most faithful preacher of gods word, to his confusion. But as
Christ prophesied these things should happen to his disciples: eue^ so he would
have yt he prophesied, proved and set forth by the examples of his apostles, yt
we should be the less offended, if at any time the like happened to us also. For
as the Apostles suffered al kinds of persecution and adversities: so they teach
by their example, what it becomes us to do, when we be tried by persecutions
and temptations. And this is ye cheef use and end of all this present matter,
and of the whole history following. But in this place, there is no more
rehearsed, but ye first act against Paul, all the circumstances whereof, we shall
now examine.

Paul's accusers are men of great power and authority.
He begins with the description of the persons, that appeared before Felix
the Lieutenaunt. And of one side stood Ananias the high Priest, the Elders,
and Tertullus a famous Orator, and greatly exercised in pleading, by reason of
his long practice. And on the other side Paul alone, and in bonds, and for
many causes before suspected. In this place appears again (as we have often
times already declared) who are commonly the chief enemies of the truth, and
of the ministers thereof, and with what weapons they fight, verily even they
which will seem to be the greatest mainteyners both of religion, and the
common weal: and amongst them, such as make marchaundize of religion. For the
history of the Gospel teaches us every where, that Paul's adversaries in
this place were even such. And these kind of men for the most part, use to
excel in experience, in wisdom, in vtteraunce, and in power and authority,
for the which cause they have many that favor them and follow them.
Contrariwise the ministers of truth as they be few in number, so commonly they
are of small fame and estimation, and contempned and despised of all men, as
who seem of bitterness of mind, or of ignorance, rather than of godliness,
and love of men's salvation, to withstand the world. But that it has always
been the godlies hap, in this world being but few and despised persons, to
cope with numbers in power and authority, is to be seen by the examples of
all ages. Thus Moses and Aaron were matched with the Magitians of Egypt, who
were favored and defended with the kings authority, and had all the
Nobility of Egypt on their side. So Elias alone encountreth with four
hundredth and fifty Priests of Baal, and with almost as many Chaplins of the
woods and groves, before Achab, a most wicked Judge. And we read that Micheas
not long after that, was feign to set himself against four hundredth false
Prophets. Here might also be alleged the histories of other Prophets, and
Apostles, and of Christ himself, which for breuities sake we omit, because
they that read the scriptures hitte on them every where. We have rather to
consider the end of these things, whereof we shall receive great profit and
utility. For first, they serve for the instruction of every man, that we
should not judge of faith or religion, according to the multitude or
authority of the^ that follow it, as we see now adays, men commonly do. But
if we grant the^ this, then shall not only Paul take the foil, who being but
one was accused by the priests and Elders, but also all the prophets with Christ
and his Apostles shall be in danger. Yea we shall prefer ye Turks before the
Christians, which far pass us both in territories and dominions, in multitude
of nations, in victories and other prosperities and success. Wherefore we must
rather herke^ unto Christ, which calls his faithful a little flock, and says,
ye few enter into ye narow gate, but heaps rash into destruction through the
broader way. Again, the co^syderation of these things does not little comfort
us that we be not afraid, Luke. 12. Math. 7.
although we alone be sometime constrained to stand against many both of
great power, glory, and authority. For he that in this place strengthened
Paul, will stand by us also being in like danger. For we have large
promyses, wherein he promyseth us the prompting of his spirit, a mouth and
wisdom, Luke. 21. Math. 10. Mark. 13. The Oration of Tertullus.
against which no adversaries shall be able to resist. See Luke. 21. Mat. 10.
Mark. 13.

But let us hear Tertullus the Orator, whose Oration consists cheefl ye of
three points. The first is the beginning, wherein he does not as
arteficiously, as craftilye, and impudently purchase him self benevolence and
good will, partlye flattering Felix to his face, and partelye the Jews. For
they say, they may thank him for the peace and quietness which they lived
in, and for that through his care and providence, so many miseries were every
day redressed. Again, they confess, they acknowledge this his goodness and
benefits, with thanks giuyng. Yet do they lie egregiously in both. For we
have heard before, how Felix governed the Country, as naughtely as could be,
how he did infinite things cruelly and unjustly, and in all places where he
came, committed Whoredom and Murder, and profane writers abundantly declare
the same. Again, it is evident to all men, that have but mean knowledge in
histories, that the Jews also, about these times, made often and many
rebellions against the Romans. And yet the most vain man is not ashamed to
lie, and by praising the tyranne, dishonestly betraye his whole Nation, whose
commendation he should most earnestly have regarded. But therefore do they
falsely commend their quiet estate of government, to bring Paul the more in
hatred with Felix, as though he were a disturber of public peace, and
tranquillity. And in them it easelie appears what the bitterness of hatred
is, once conceived against the truth. For where the world hates nothing so
much as the truethe, because the light thereof reproves their evil works,
therefore it can suffer and bear most cruel enemies, rather than the truth,
and they think tyrannes tolerable enough, so they will put to their help in
oppressing the truth. So they preferred Tiberius Caesar, a cruel and
voluptuous tyrant, before Christ our Savior, when they said they had none
other king but Caesar. Yea, they were not ashamed to prefer Barrabas a
Murderer, and Captain of a sect of Rebels, before Christ. And this untoward
and perverse inudgement is no new thing in the world. For we read that the
Israelites in the wilderness in time past, offended and withstode Moses
likewise maruellous^ie commending the servitude of Egypt by reason of the
Melons, Amonds, garelike, flesh, and such like things, Nume. 1^.
that land did abound in, and disdained that state of life in the which every
hour God declared new tokens of his benevolence and good will, like most
miserable and unhappy men. And would God we had not the like examples in our
days, where me^ wonderfully extol the great peace we lived in, in y^e time of
popery, and say yet the preching of the gospel has marred altogether, but in
the mean seson they can craftily disse^ble the bloody wars that the Popes have been chief procurers of this many hundred years, and will make no mention, of
such greeuaunces as have miserablye weakened both the goods and consciences
of men. Yea some men have so far exceeded in madness, that they have
thought it better to dally with their aunciente enemies, than to abide the
light of the Gospel. But these men, shall once find the same true, that the
unhappy nation of the Jews felt by the Romans, not many years after they
had driven away the Apostles.

Now let us return to Tertullus, which in the second part of his Oration
frames a grievous accusation against Paul, The points of his accusation.
consisting of three points. First, he says he is a seditious person, yea,
and woorsse than the plague it self, because he troubled and disturbed the
Jews every where in the world. And so they put Paul in fault of that
thing, whereof their selves were the chief doers. For the whole discourse of
this book teaches, that the Jews were the chief mouers of sedition
hitherto, both against Paul, and his companions. For hereunto may be
referred the sturres and tumultes which we have heard were made at Corinth,
Thessalonica, Ephesus, Antioch, Iconium, Lystra, and diverse other Cities. Next,
they call him a maintener of the sect of the Nazarits. Therefore accusing him of
schism and heresy, a fault in all ages compted the greatest in the Church.
Tertullus seems in contempt, to call the Christians Nazarites, as who had but
an obscure beginning, and of small regard or estimation. For it appears by
the first Chapter of John's Gospel, that the village of Nazareth was of small
or no account, forasmuch as Nathanael said to Philip, telling him of Jesus of
Nazareth: Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? And this is an old
policy of the Devil, to cause true religion to be suspected, as a vile thing
and of no reputation. By reason whereof, Iuliane the Apostata also sometime
called Christ and the Christians Galileyans. Thereby they accuse him of
polluting the Church, and under the name of the Church, they comprehend all
outward kind of religion. These things we at this day ought the more
diligently to observe, that we might understand what crimes are commonly
laid against the truth, and not be offended, if at any time we be called
seditious, scismatikes, heretics, prophaners of Temple and Images, Church
robbers, and subuerters of ancient religion. For as all these things ought
not to offend us, so neither must we by and by believe them which impudently
burden innocent and godly men with these crimes.

But because they would not seem to charge Paul, with false matter and
accusation, The confirmation of his accusation.
they produce witnesses. First, the Captain him self, whom yet they accuse
by the way, as seeming to importunate, to set a person at liberty, like
shortly to be punished, according to the law. Then again, they all affirm
Tertullus saying to be true. Where we have to behold an example both of great
audacitie and impudency. For they dare to accuse the Captain, and complain
that they are restrained from shedding of blood by him, who deserved great
praise therefore. So little the wicked repent them of their mischeeuous
deeds, that they continually hate them, which hinder or let their wicked
enterprises. Moreover, where first they were accusers, and next Judges of the
matter, now they are also witnesses, and will be believed in every thing, and
fear not the judgment of God, Prouer. 9. Deutero. 19.
which hates and abhors all false witnesses, and commands them to be
punished by the law of Talio, or suffering of like. These things serve for our
great utility. For both we may learn to suspecte such as now a days are
like unto these men, and shall the less be offended if the like happen unto
us. For Jesus Christ which was oppressed with like preiudices, lives and
reigns, and has overcome all the power of hell, and being ascended into
heaven, derideth the devices of his enemies, and most faithfully maintayneth
the quarrel of his chosen servant. To him be praise, honor, power and glory
for ever. Amen.

The.Cliij. Homely.
THen Paul (after that the Deputy him self had beckened to him that he
should speak) answered, with a more quiet mind do I answer for my self,
forasmuch as I understand that thou haste been of many years a judge unto
this people, because that thou may know that there are yet but twelve days
since I went up to Jerusalem for to worship, and they neither found me in the
temple disputing with any man, neither raising up the people neither in the
Sinagoges nor in the City. Neither can they prove the things whereof they
accuse me. But this I confess unto thee, that after the way, which they call
Heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers, believing all things which are
written in the Law and the Prophets, and have hope toward God, that the same
resurrection of the dead which they them selves look for also, shall be both
of just and unjust. And therefore study I to have always a clear conscience
toward God and toward men.
WE heard yesterday the points of a most heinous accusation made against
Paul, which the holy Ghost would have diligently written, as it was spoken
by Tertullus, partly for that the truth of the Apostolic story should not be
suspected, seeing the words of the enemies also are reported so truly, and
partly because we should not be offended when we hear the like objected
against us, or others, which follow the true faith. Now therefore let us
hear Paul the Apostle, which after Felix had made a sign unto him to speak,
puts away all these objections both boldly and truly. But before we come to
the words of the Apostle, we have two things to consider. The one is, the
example of Felix, which teaches us that in judgments both parts must be
heard. The other is in Paul, who being most grievously slaundered, yet
rusheth not forth impudently to answer for him self, nor is not led with
such rage to slander again: but abiding till he had leave given him of the
President to speak, pleateth his cause soberly and wisely. Let all the godly
do likewise, least they cause the truth whereof they stand in defense, to be
suspected, by reason of hastiness and railing: which many times such do as
will rather satisfy the passions of their mind, Paul's Apology or defense.
than follow the rule of reason.

These things being premised, let us proceed unto Paul's answer, which
consists in confuting of the objections made against him. In his beginning he
gets him the benevolence or good will of Felix, yet in such sort that he
privily quippeth his adversaries without all foolish kind of lying and
flattery. For he says he is the willinger to declare his matter before Felix,
for that he had many years been a governor of this nation, and for that cause
was well acquaynted with their natures and co^ditio^s. For this thing always the
defendant most desires, to have a Judge of skill and understanding, because
many times it comes to pass, that they, which otherwise are great favorers
of justice, offend of ignorance, which danger Paul confesses he is not in, ne
fears that Felix can be deceived by the Jews, whose impudency and sedicious
minds he well knew by many years experience. Here of learn we a general
doctrine, that Magistrates must be diligent in understanding of matters,
because they can not be excused by ignorance, if it be either gross or
wilful ignorance. For why should he who is Gods Uicar and Deputy, and has
his judgments committed unto him, be ignorant in any thing? Therefore let them
remember it is Gods judgment, and mark well the properties, conditions, and
doings of their people, and diligently examine the circumstances of al causes.
For so it shall come to pass, that either they shall not offend through
ignorance, or else if perhaps they commit any error by being deceived by
others, and not of slothfulness, their error may be excused. But would to God
they would often think of these things, which bragging of their glorious
titles and authority, give them selves wholly to filthy idleness, banketting,
dancing and hunting: so that they know better the caves and lodging of wild
beasts, and all instruments of filthy desire, than the manners, properties, and
conditions of their subjects. Furthermore, this ought we to observe before we
leave off this place, how God would suffer Felix* a most filthy tyrant* to
b^are rule so many years over his people. For this might seem to some men a
strange matter. But the incurable ingratitude of that people did well deserve
the same. For where God had set over them singular Captayns and shepherds, they
so disdayned them, that they would not once voutsafe to hear Christ the
eternal son of God. Therefore they now suffer that which God oftentimes had
threatened them, that he would take from them his help, and give them such
rulers as should more care for their own lust, and for covetousness, than
for the common weal of the people. These things may teach us what al they
have to look for, which despise either the gift of liberty, or godly
Magistrates, or faithful Ministers of the word, unthankfully and wickedly
after the manner of the Jews.

But let us proceed on in Paul's answer, and see how he puts away the
crimes laid unto his charge. He puts away the crime of sedition.
Amongst these the first is, that they said he was an author of Sedition,
whereunto they also join the polluting of the Temple, for that they made most
adoo about this matter. In refuting of these things he is very diligent. For
first, gathering an argument of the time, he proves it to be impossible that
he should raise any sedition, because it was not paste twelve days ago that
he came to Jerusalem. From which time take the days that he lay in prison,
and there shall be but one or two remaining. But who could be able within
two or three days after his coming, to make an universal sedition in so
populous a City. Again, I came not (says he) to make any tumult or
business, but to worship, and (as it shall hereafter follow) to succor and
relieve the faithful with the alms which was gathered among the Gentiles.
Therefore it is false that they say touching the polluting of the Temple. For I
neither taught in the Temple, nor in the Synagoges, nor called any assembly of
people together. Finally, they shall never be able to prove the things they
have laid to my charge. Which saying he utters with great gravity: for so
he accuses them, not only of lying, but also of false witness bearing. And
it is not disagreeing unto Christian patience, to put away accusations made
against us, though it be with the ignominy of our adversaries, when we see
the truth more in danger, than our own estimation. But it is much for our
learning, that Paul so diligently purges him of the crime of sedition. For
hereby Ministers learn, that they must diligently beware that they disquiet
no commonweals by moving any sedition, because there is nothing more
dangerous than the same, and God is delighted with unity and concord chiefly
above all things. But if the wicked, without any fault of the godly, raise
sedition, for preaching of the word, or else it rise of unknown causes and
authors, then that saying of Ambrose must have place: In his fi^the Book and*
33. Epistle to Marcellina his sister.
How it is in our power not to raise up or move the people, but in Gods power
to mitigate and appease them, being raised.

After this, Paul comes to the objection of Heresy: I confess (says he)
that I worship God after that manner and way that they call Heresy. But that
I should therefore be an Heretyke, or a Schismatyke, I utterly deny. For I
worship the God of my fathers, and I believe the Scriptures. etc. He puts
away the crime of heresy.
Here are diverse things for us to observe. First, he plainly confesses the
faith, whereof he was accused, and that before an heathen Judge. Therefore it is
not meet to separate confession from faith: nor it is not enough for thee to
believe in thine heart, that is, to conceive in thy mind a certain opinion,
but thou must confess thy faith in Christ before men also. For Christ can
not away with such worshippers as are ashamed of him, How Paul believed.
as has many times ben declared. Then he comprehends his faith in four
articles, in which all other articles are contained. First, he says, he
worshippeth the God of

Secondly he declares the form and manner of his worshipping, where Moses
and the Prophets bare witness. Therefore Paul woorshipped God through faith
in Christ, where all the Articles of our faith concerning Christ, are
comprehended. And there is none other kind of service or worship acceptable
unto God, forasmuch as God is made at one with us by him only. And whosoever
honoreth not the son, honoreth not the father. Also Paul's example teaches
us, that God must be worshipped according to the Scriptures, and not after the
inventions and traditions of man, because we are every where taught that
thereby he is worshipped in vain. See Esai. 29. Matthew. 15.



John. 3. And it can not be that they will pollute their conscience with
filthiness of sin, which believe steadfastly there shall be a resurrection
of the dead. Hereby it appears what Paul's faith was. And hereby he proves
that he ought to be taken for no heretic. As many therefore as by true faith
worship the God of their fathers, according to the Scriptures, and hold fast
the hope of resurrection and labor to keep a clean conscience, both toward
God and man, these be true followers of Paul and the Apostles, yea true and
right Christians, howsoever the unhappy world rage and storm against them.
Let us therefore stick to this faith (O brethren) and through the steadfast
hope of resurrection to come, stoutly pass through all tribulations, being
sure we shall one day have an eternal reward with Jesus Christ our Savior,
to whom be praise, honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.Cliiij. Homely.
But after many years I came and brought alms to my people, and offerings, in
the which they found me purified in the Temple, neither with multitude, nor yet
with unquietness. Howbeit there were certain Jews out of Asia, which ought
to be here present before thee, and accuse me, if they had ought against me: or
else let the same here say, if they have found any evil doing in me while I
stand here in the Counsel, except it be for this one voice, that I cried
standing among them: of the resurrection of the dead am I judged of you this
day. When Felix heard these things he deferred them, for he knew very well of
that way, and said: when Lysias the Captain is come down, I will know the
uttermost of your matter. And he commanded an under Captain to keep Paul,
and to let him have rest, and that he should forbid none of his acquayntaunce
to minister unto him, or to come unto him.
AS the holy Ghost would have the accusation which the Jews made against
Paul, diligently written, that we might learn thereby whereof this world does
always accuse the faithful Ministers of Christ: so as diligently does Luke
report the apology or oration that Paul made in his own defense. Whereby we
are taught how we should behave our selves in the like case. First and
formoste, he answers very diligently and boldly unto the crime of sedition
teaching us by his example, how the ministers of Christ above al things must be
free and clear from such attempts. As touching his faith, about the which they
accused him of heresy and schism, he plainly confesses the same, and
renders a reason or account thereof in few words, but yet very perspicuous and
plain. Whereby we gather, that confession of faith does most become the
ministers of Christ, which must so be declared, that the reason thereof may
appear unto all men which are led with any fear or feeling of God.

Now follows the crime of polluting the Temple, He puts away the crime of
polluting the temple.
in putting away whereof, Paul is very diligent, albeit he was not ignorant
that the use and majesty of the Temple was for the most part abolished by the
coming and death of Christ. And we must not think that Paul did bear with
the Jews herein, which as yet reverenced their Temple too supersticiously, but
has a respect unto the right use of temples, which christian men by n^ means
can want. For although the majesty of God can not be included or kept within
Churches, neither can the worship of God be tied unto them: yet outward
religion requires a certain place where the people may assemble together to
hear the word preached, and the Sacraments administered. And common reason
tells us* that places dedicated to these and such excellent uses, ought to
be kept from all kind of pollution: forasmuch as we read, that Christ once
commanded, that no man should carry any vessel or profane thing through the
temple. And it is very like that he has little devotion or religion, which
wickedly contemns or misvseth the places consecrated to religion. Which thing
seems to be the chief cause wherefore Paul used such diligence in pu^ting
away this objection. By this example we also are taught, that the Temples or
Oratories of Christians ought stoutly to be kept from all contempt and
profanation. Which thing Hystoriographers report that Constantine the great
and other Princes in times paste like unto him did, to their great praise and
renown.

But let us see Paul's apology, which first excuses him self by an argument
taken of the time. For he says, The unkindness of the world toward the
ministers of the Church.
he had been many years from Jerusalem. Whereby it plainly appears, that he
could attempt nothing against the Temple. Again he declares that the cause of
his co^mnig was not for the temples sake, but to bring unto the nedy brethren
of Iewry the alms that was gathered among the Gentiles. See what is written of
this alms in the Epistles to the Corinthians, especially in the 8. and 9.
Chapters of the.2. Epistle. In the mean season he accuses the^ of discurtesie
and vntha^kfulnesse, which so unworthily entreat one that had deserved so well
of the whole nation, and which brought unto them a fresh benefit and pleasure.
We have here to consider (beside the example of christian liberality, whereof
we spoke about the end of the.11. Chapter) the unkindness of the world toward
Christ's ministers, which is so great, that it wishes the destruction of those
that day and night labor for the salvation of al me^. Thus we read the
Sodomites envied Lot, for whose sake Abraham delivered the^ out of the
captivity of their enemies. And Moses received nothing of the Israelites but
raylings and threats, who forsook the delights of cour^ly life, and the
treasures of Egypt, for their sake. What chanced unto the Prophets, and after
them unto Christ our Lord, is more apparent than needs any long rehersall. But
that that happens here unto Paul, is very notable, which after his many years
travels, his so many wakefull nights, and alms gathered in every place to
relieve the need of the poor, has none other reward of them, whose salvation
he earnestly desired, and for whose sake he wyshed to be accursed, but strypes,
imprisonment, and all kind of contumelious handling. Why therefore are we
offended at the ingratitude of the world, which being altogether set on
mischief, knows not otherwise how to reco^pense the authors of their
salvation? But let us return Paul's arguments, which in the third place says
he was purified in the temple, and without any multitude of men raised or
unquietness. Whereby again it appears that he had not polluted the Church.
But if Paul's argument be true (as no Christian man will deny) it is also true
that the Temples are not polluted by them that are purified. But as many as
believe in Christ are purified, forasmuch as Christ has sanctified and
purged them by his blood, from their sins. See the fifth and sixth chapters of
the first Epistle to the Corinthians. Why then are we called now a days
prophaners of Churches, seeing we acknowledge Christ our savior, from the
heart, and to our power defend the ancient use of Churches? which is, to serve
for prayers, teaching of the word, and administration Paul lays this fault
upon the Jews of Asia, who as we heard before, were the begynners of all
this adoo, and were now absent. For this is the continual practice of all
seditious mates, that when they have raised a multitude, among whom good men be
most times in danger, they secretly convey them selves away, and stand out
of Gunshot, waiting the success of the matter. Would to God the poor
commonaltie would always remember this thing, when such rakehels as these
abuse their distemperaunce and boldness, to compass and bring to pass their
devises.

Paul's boldness.
Moreover, after confutation of these objections, Paul boldly provoke his
adversaries. If these men here (says he) will pleate the Asians cause, go
too, let them declare what evil they have found in me. I know they have
nothing to lay to my charge, except perhaps it be a business made in their
own Counsel, for the free confession that I uttered, touching the
resurrection of the dead. But with what face can they thus do, seeing they
shall be enforced to confess the resurrection them selves, except they will
altogether be wicked? the confidence of Paul, and his bold speech, which
declares a manifest argument of his innocence, is worthy to be considered.
The like it becomes all Christ's Ministers to have, and to persuade them
selves, that the world hates them for the truths sake only. For this shall
make them constante and bold against all dangers. See Peter in his first
Epistle, the third and fourth Chapters. Paul escapes the hands of his
enemies.


Now remains the end of this business, which was far other than the
Jews looked for. For Felix deferreth all the matter unto Lysias the Capraynes
coming, both for that he was not ignorant of the things concerning that way,
that is to say, stubborn and obstinate controversies about faith and religion,
and of the way ward and unruly conditions of the Jews: but also for that
they grounded their whole accusation upon the testimony of Lysias. In the
mean season he has a consideration of Paul, whose innocence he manifest^y
perceived. For he commands him to have rest, and permits his friends to
come and minister unto him. For certain acquaintance abode with Paul in time
of his captivity, of whose number it appears that Luke was: whose example
teaches us that we must not forsake those that are in danger for Christ's
sake, seeing that he takes whatsoever pleasure is done unto them, as done to
himself. Again Magistrates learn by example of Felix to beware, that for men's
sakes they be not to rash in judgment. For judgment is Gods, whose ministers
they must remember they are. Therefore let them follow his equit^e tempered with
long suffering. In the mean season let the^ not entreat prisoners to
discourteously, seeing that wicked malefactors have some pity to be showed on
them for humanity and manhoodes sake. Above all things let us mark the truth
of God toward those that honor him, and his power against his enemies. For
it is his work that Felix contrary to his nature (whereof we have oftentimes
entreated) is gentle and courteous unto Paul. And it is an easy matter unto
God, to mollify cruel hearts, and to get his people favor with their enemies
also, seeing he has full power upon all creatures, and even over the hearts of
men. Let none of us therefore fear men, nor do any thing otherwise than
becomes us for their sake. But rather let us labor to commend our selves
and our doings unto God, which is able to defend his servant in the midst
of their enemies, to assuage their moody minds, and atlength to take us from al
troubles into his kingdom, the inheritance whereof he has prepared for all
them that honor his name, through Jesus Christ: To whom be praise, honor,
power and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.Clv. Homely.
AND after a certain days, when Felix came with his wife Drusilla (which was
a Iewesse) he called forth Paul, and heard him of the faith which is toward
Christ. And as he preached of righteousness, temperaunce, and judgment to
come, Felix trembled, and answered. Go thy way for this time, when I have a
convenient season, I will send for thee. He hoped also that money should have
been given him of Paul, that he might loose him, wherefore he called him the
oftener, and communed with him. But after two year Festus Portius came into
Felix room. And Felix willing to show the Jews a pleasure, left Paul in
prison bound.
IT was a wonderful and a rare example both of Gods mercy and power, that
Paul found such courtesy and gentleness in Felix the President, whose
wicked tyranny, even profane writers have left reported in Hystories. But it
is far more notable that Luke reports here in this place. For Paul lives
not only in safety, but also fyndeth occasion to preach before him. Whereby
the truth of that saying of Paul appears: which is, that though the
Ministers of God be sometimes in prison and bonds, yet his word can not be
bound. For that that happened unto Paul, the same falls out in many Martyrs
of Christ also now a days, that they which are led bound unto the stake or
fire, preach the word of God boldly, to the terror of the wicked, and
consolation of the godly. But let us consider all the points of this place in
order.

Felix and Drusilla hear Paul.
First Paul's hearers are described, whom if we diligently mark, we may
plainly gather what the occasion was that Paul was appointed to make this
Sermon. For Felix, which had been absent from Caesarea for a certain days, was
now returned again with his wife Drusilla, which I think was the chief
procurer of this Sermon. For she was a Jew, and daughter to Herod called
Agrippa, who after he had stayne James the Apostle, was smitten by the Angel,
and suffered grievous punishment for his ungodliness and tyranny. First
she was betrouthed to Antiochus called Epiphanes, but not married, because he
would not be married after the manners and rites of the Jews. After that she
married with Aziazus king of the people called Amazi, from whom Felix the
President enticed her, and carried her away through fair promises, and by the
conueyance of a certain Magitian of Cyprus, as before was declared: wherefore
she became not only a filthy adultresse, but also wickedly transgressed the law
of God, and the religion of her forfathers, in living with a man uncircumcised.
All which things although she had unworthily committed, yet it is likely that
there was remaining in her some feeling of that pure religion, wherein she had
been brought up from her tender years. This seems to be the cause that she
was so desirous to hear Paul preach, whose doctrine every body spoke of.
Which thing she might easily obtain of Felix her husband, loving her so
entirely. Here by the way we may see what remains commonly for them which
make marriage with wicked persons, and boyde of true religion. For although they
being blinded either with the sting of concupiscence, or bewitched with the
glory of richesse and honor, go about to shake off all sense of religion: yet
the sting of conscience returns again, and the desire of faith so denied and
naughtely forsaken, kindles again, but commonly does them little good,
because they have so little regard of God, and their own salvation. Wherefore
we must think that it was not without a cause that God by Moses commanded
his people to abstain from marriage with Infidels, because he knew they were
hereby like to incur the present danger of their salvation. For the which
cause Paul also willing to confirm the old law, 2. Corin. 6.
forbids us to bear the yoke with unbelievers. Also it behooves us to mark
the goodness of God, which suffered the word of the Gospel, whereby life and
salvation is offered unto man, to be preached unto those that were polluted
with such filthy lust. He is therefore truly that God which desires to
have men saved, and wills not the death of a sinner, but rather that he
should repent and live. Here unto belong many examples of the Gospel,
wherein we read that Christ of a certain singular favor and familiarity,
offered salvation unto Publicans and Harlots. Which, as it serves for our
consolation when we be troubled with the suggestions of Satan, whereby he
calls the certayntie of our salvation into question: so also it admonishes
us of our duty, that we wickedly despise not the grace of god, which he so
lovingly offers unto us. For as the preaching of the gospel, is the cause of
salvation to them that believe and repent: so they are inexcusable before God,
which being without repentance, wickedly contemn it when it is offered: of
whose number we shall hereafter hear that Felix was.

But let us see Paul's Sermon which Luke reports not word for word, but
recites only the chief points: whereof may easyly gathered, The points of
Paul's Sermon.
what he said. These are three in number. First, Felix hears him entreat of
the faith in Christ. Furthermore as Christ is always constant in him self,
and is but one yesterday, to day, and for ever: Faith in Christ.
so there is always but one trade of faith in Christ, which ought not to be
changed. Wherefore we must think Paul spoke none other things at this time,
Roma. 3. Gala. 2, and.3.
but such as are contained else where both in his Sermons, and Epistles. The
sum of all which is, that men are justified and saved freely, without the
works of the law, through faith only in Christ. And as he labored to bring
the Jews unto Christ, from the affiaunce in works of the law: so is it like
that he entreated much of moral virtues before Felix, because they little
avail unto true Justice in the sight of God, but are acceptable unto God,
because of faith only in Christ: because we have occasion every where to
speak of these things, we will now tarry the less while upon them. This
mark, how the faith in Christ, must not be preached in corners and where no
fear of danger is, but must then be stoutly and freelye confessed, when we
percyue the world offended with us for the same. Therefore they are not to be
hearkened to, which account the confession of faith, among things indifferent.
For so they accuse the Apostles and holy martirs of Christ, of madness, which
were never more fervent in defendyng the faith, than when they saw it most
cruellye assaulted. Also the Anabaptists are confuted by this example of
Paul, which being apprehended by the Magistrates, can scarce be brought at any
time to give an account of their faith, and many times will neither confirm
their own opinions with any arguments, nor answer to the arguments made
against them. Howbeit Peter commands all Christians to be ready to give a
reason of their faith, to every one that asks them. 1. Pet. 3.
And Paul was so little ashamed either of his faith or doctrine, that he
disdayned not to preach the same, being in bands, before an heathen tyranne
and filthy adultresse.

Secondly, Paul reasons of Justice and Temperance. Justice and Tempepance
are the fruits of faith.
But under these two virtues are comprehended the true fruits of the faith that
justifies: and Justice we understand in this place to be that, that gives
unto every man that is his, and therefore comprehends under her, all virtues.
Christ commends this virtue, where he commands to give unto God the
things belonging unto him, and unto Caesar the things that are due unto him:
and hereunto is to be referred that, that Paul writes in an other place: Give
unto all men that is their due, Romans 13.
tribute to whom tribute belongs: Custom to whom custom is due: Fear to
whom fear aperteyneth: Honor to whom honor apperteyneth. etc. Temperaunce is
an impediment or stop against unlawful desires, and brideleth
voluptuousness, that we be not carried with the entisementes thereof, to sin
against God and Justice. Therefore whatsoever might be said touching the
exercise of virtues and good works, Paul did comprehend it, under these two
kinds: namely Justice, and Temperance. And these things must of necessity be
subject to the doctrine of faith, both because they be the true fruits as we
said even now, by the which faith is known, and also, because no man
should abuse the pretense of faith, to cloak his carnal liberty: against the
which many things are every where said, in the writings of the Apostles.
Furthermore Paul's prudencie joined with his free speech, is here to be
considered. For he reasons of such fruits of true faith, as cheefely were
wanting in his hearers. For we have declared before, that Felix did many
things like a tyranne in governance of the province, and had more regard of
his private advantage, than of public Justice. And Drusilla, like a filthy
adultresse married with an uncircumcised person, contrary to the law of God.
Therefore it was meet, to set these things before their eyes, that they might
plainly understand, how far off they were from the way of salvation. This
example teaches us what we ought to preach, and after what sort many men
would have the grace of God, and the faith that justifies, only preached. But
the wickedness of this world, and of our age, whereby we see all men every
where rushe into all kind of mischief, requires a far other thing.
Therefore these things must be reproved, least we preach the grace of God in
vain to them that yet understand not what need they have thereof. And we
must not regard, what the world would have, but what Christ commands, which
would have repentance first preached in his name, and then forgiveness of
sins. Luke. 24. Therefore they do neither godly nor wisely, which teaching
only the grace of God, and faith that justifies, before this unrepentant world
plant a licentious kind of life, causing men to live in all kind of security
and carelessness. But rather let them both be joined together, that men being
convicted of their wicked^nesse, may repent, and learn to seek forgiveness
of their sins, in the only grace of God, through faith in Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, Paul disputes of the later judgment, namely to confute that error,
The later judgment.
wherewith the Gentiles being most deceived, and made careless, believed the
world to be everlasting. Hereof sprang the opinion of Epicure, that said how
God regarded no things done upon the earth: Wherefore it was very needful, to
speak of the end of the world, and of Christ's last coming unto judgment,
least that which he had spoken of justice and temperance, might seem foolish
and to no purpose. We are taught, that this Article of the faith, is most
worthy to be marked, whereby we believe that Christ shall come to judge the
quick and the dead. For it comforts the weak, which are offended at the
proceeding of this world, while they behold how the ungodly rustie in
prosperity, and how the godly are punished and afflicted. For they learn
that there shall be one day a change, for the which cause* Christ calls his
coming, the day of our redemption. Again, there is no more affectuous way to
move men to do their duty, Luke. 21
and to refrain from sin, than when that day and severe countenance of the
judge is set before their eyes. Which is the cause that we hear Christ so
often make mention thereof* and the Apostles for the most part take their
arguments of exhortation and dehortation from the same.

Now remains it for us to see the effect of Paul's Sermon, The effect of
Paul^s Sermon.
which touching Felix, was altogether in vain. For in deed he is feared with
the mention of these things, but he thinks never the more of any amendment.
For he sends Paul from him, as though he had no leisure to hear him any
longer. This is the usage of the ungodly, which sometime for curiosity sake,
will hear the word, and are so far affected therewith, that for fear they
tremble in their consciences. But these are yet no tokens of a better
disposition, because the Apostle testifies, that the Devils use so to do.
James. 2. For as soon as they perceive that the word of God agrees not with
their humors and desires, they disdain any longer to hear it. So Achab
hated Micheas, because he never spoke such things as pleased him. Furthermore
Felix bewrays his reprobate mind again, by an other argument. For he looked
to have had money at Paul's hand, and purposed not to let him go without
some meede, whom yet he knew of right ought to be set at liberty.
Therefore he had law to sell, the cause whereof was covetousness, which all
other nations did reprehende in the Romans, as a thing insatiable. Let
Magistrates learn by this filthy Example, to beware of taking bribes in
judgment, which by the testimony of God uses to blind the hearts of the
wise, and to pervert the ways of the just. Exodus. 13. Deuterono. 16. This
covetousness has been the destruction of most flourishing commonweals,
and what hurt it does every where now a days daily Examples abundantly
declare. But Felix yet makes not an end of sinning. For perceiving that Paul
(which would neither burden the brethren, nor give any ill example) was slack
in offering of money, he seeks an other advantage of the innocent. For when
Festus his successor came* and he must give up his office, he leaves Paul in
prison, to the end hereby to pleasure the Jews, whom he had many ways
grievously offended, where we may see in what state the godly are, whose
patience the wicked abuse to their pastime, and seek occasion by them, to
gratify one an other. So Pilate and Herod wickedly agreed together to vex and
molest Christ. So the father of Drusilla beheaded James with the sweard, and
when he saw it liked the Jews, he went about to put Peter also to death for
their sake. But the wicked have not always that they desire, whom although the
vengeance of God punishes not by and by, yet he reco^penseth his slackenesse
with the more grievous punishment at length. It shall be our parts by Paul's
example, to learn to be constant in faith, and to be pacient in continual
afflictions, that at length having overcome al adversities, we may triumph in
Jesus Christ, to whom be blessing, honor, glory and power for ever. Amen.

The.xxv. Chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The.Clvj. Homely.
WHen Festus had received the office, after three days he ascended from
Cesarea unto Jerusalem. Then enfourmed him the high Priests and the chief of
the Jews, of Paul. And they besought him and desired favor against him,
that he would send for him to Jerusalem. And they laid awayte for him in the
way, to kill him. Festus answered that Paul should be kept at Cesarea, but
that he himself would shortly depart thither. Let them therefore (said he)
which among you are able, come down with us, and accuse him, if there be any
fault in the man. When he had tar^ied there among them more than ten days,
he went down unto Cesarea, and the next day sat in the Judgment seat, and
commanded Paul to be brought. Which when he was come, the Jews which were
come from Jerusalem, stood about him, and laid many and grievous complaints
against Paul, which they could not prove, as long as he answered for
himself, that he had neither against the law of the Jews nor yet against
Caesar offended any thing at all.
IN this xxv. Chapter and the next following, are described two grievous
enditeme^ts or arrainments, whereof the one Paul sustained before Festus the
new president and in the other he pleated his cause, before king Ag^ippa, and
Bernice the Queen. The first is the more notable, because under the color
thereof, the Jews had like to have brought Paul in great ieopardie, which yet
through the help of God he escaped, who promised him he would be his succor
and safegarde, for y^ he must bear witness of Christ at Rome also, before the
Emperor, as was declared before in the 23. Chapter. The chief end of all
these things is to teach us how God has a care for his people, ^uffring
them to be tempted many ways, but yet delivering them out of all temptations
as long as they follow their vocation, and put all their hope and trust in him.
Wherefore these things must cheefely serve to confirm our faith, A new
attempt of the Iew^s against Paul.
which thing that we may do to our great utility, we will consider every
thing in order.

First, here is declared a new enterprise of the Jews attempted to oppress
Paul by. For when Festus was gone to Jerusalem, to take an oath of allegiance
of the Citizens and inhabitants there, by and by the Priests and men of
authority came unto him, and accuse Paul, whom Felix had left in prison,
desiring the new President of his favor, that he might be brought to
Jerusalem to be judged, and that they might proceed against him, according to
the law of their Country. But in the mean season they were purposed privily
to wait him by the way, and to kill him. In this place may be seen how unquiet
in mind the wicked are, after they be once in^lamed with hatred of the truth.
For where always their naughty works are disclosed by the light thereof, it
can not be, that they can easily lay away the hatred once conceived. But rather
they boil and frothe in their minds like the raging sea, busily watching
every small occasion, whereby to extinguish the light of that truth, which they
so hate. And commonly the force of this hatred is such, that without any
regard many times to their private auailes, they only seek and desire how to
make the ministers of the truth out of the way, whose doctrine they perceive so
vexes and fretteth them. Both these things may be seen in this present
example. For we have heard how Paul was in prison whole two years. Howbeit
neither the continuance of time, neither the miserable state of captivity
could assuage their minds, for they could bear with any thing better than with
the doctrine of the truth. Wherefore they narowly watch every little occasion,
and spare neither for pains nor cost, to bring their desire at length to pass.
First therefore they begin to make their requests and petition unto the new
President against Paul, which they ought to have made rather in the behalf
of their common weal, and to have besought him of his friendship toward all
me^ in general. But they thought by this mean to prejudice Paul, that the
President might conceive he was some public enemy of his whole nation and
country, considering they labored so earnestly to have him punished. And we
must not think that hatred of the truth had so great force in these men only.
For it is the common guise of all that are ungodly, that if they might have
their wish never so much, yet nothing is more dear unto them, than to have the
lives of them who they know will withstand their impiety and naughtiness.
Heereunto belongs that, that the Evangelists write of Herodias, which when
she heard how Herod had offered her daughter the one half of his kingdom, yet
she required but only the head of John to be given her, because as long as he
lived and preached, she thought her reign should not only be unpleasant, but
all her life also. Many things of like sort might be reported, and examples
even of our days, but because they are every where to be seen, therefore we
think good to pass the^ over. Let us rather mark the use of these things,
which is, that we trust not over sone, those which have once conspired against
the truth. For although they can sometimes trimly dissemble and color their
hatred against the truth, yet the poison thereof lies hidden deep in their
breasts: as soon as occasion serves, will burst forth with might and main. And in
these persons has that saying of the Prophet chefely place, pronouncing that
the heart of man is froward and unsearchable. Again, Iere 17
here appears what the weapons of the ungodly are. First they counterfeit a
countenance of law and equity, in that they require to have him brought to
Jerusalem to be judged, which might seem an honest and just request, both
because all the business began there first, and also for that it seemed not
reason that they which were so many in number and authority, should be at so
great charges, and take such pain to journey so far for one man's sake. But
in the mean season, under this fair face of equity, they cloak an horrible
and bloody meaning, as was even now declared. Let us learn by this place,
to judge of those men which now adays do the like: whereof a man may every
where find more than are profitable in a Christian common weal. Luke. 22
John. 8
Uerily Christ says, that these men fight with the power of darkness, and
therefore are the ministers of the Devil, which was a lier and murderer from
the beginning. And Paul prophesied that Antichrist should reign cheefely
through lying and open force. Therefore, as many as resist the truth and the
ministers thereof with violent and treacherous sleights, it is evident, that they
fight for the devil, under the standerd of Antichrist, with whom (except they
repent in time) they shall hereafter receive the pay and wages of eternal
damnation.

Moreover, let us see how God disapointed the bloody devises of his ennemies.
God scatters the counsels of his ennemies.
For it was his woorking that Festus consented not to the desire and petition
of the Jews, whose request yet as shall appear hereafter, he made no small
account of. And surely there were great causes, that might have moved him to
yield unto the Jews. For he might both justly have suspected Paul, whom Felix
going out of his office, had left in prison, and it seemed that the request
which the chief of the Jews made, was not to be rejected: and again, he
might appear but slenderly witted, if in the beginning of his government, he
would procure him the hatred of a whole nation for one man's sake, and he a
prisonner, and of no reputation. But through the secret inspiration God, it
comes to pass that Festus had more regard of justice and of the Roman
laws than of the Jews nation. Wherefore he thinks good to keep Paul at
Caesarea still, yet permitting the Jews, according to order of law, to
proceed against him. It pleased God, to teach all them that be in office or
authority, by the example of this Gentile, what they have to do in like
case, verily to commit nothing either for favor of men, or respect of private
commodity, but to follow equity and law, which if it be not kept, it is
impossible that commonweals can continue in safety. Therefore let
Christian Kings and Princes be ashamed, both of their lightness and
unrighteousness, which now a days commonly condemn the maintainers of
Euangelical truth and faith without hearing, for the Popes and Bishops
pleasure: yea because they would seem very religious, they give them all power
against the faithful of Christ, so committing the sheep unto the Wolves. They
shall one day feel to their great smart, what they do, when both the bloody
Popes shall be punished, and Christ our judge shall require at the hands of
the Kings, his people committed unto their charge. But here have we cheefely
to consider God the aucthoure of all these things, whose woorking we even now
said all this was. For where he had said, Paul should bear witness of
Christ at Rome also before the Emperor, he would also perform his
promises, whose counselles, seeing no subtilitie of man is able to preuente,
it was easy for him to disappointe the enterprise of the Jews. And where he
has power over the hearts of men also, he now planteth such a will in
Festus, that he provides rather for Paul's commodity, than for the Jews.

And afterward when he would have gratified the Jews, he stops him by an
other mean from doing the same. Here may we take singular consolation,
considering we see that wicked men, and such as dance after the worlds pipe,
are subject unto the commandment of God, so that he has full power and
authority both upon their bodies and minds. Why therefore are we afraid of
their councels and devises? why fear we their power? why put we not our trust
rather in God, which is able to put in their hearts, new wills, or else
mightily to bind their hands?

But let us return unto the Jews, The Jews accuse Paul.
who according to the Presidentes commandment, go again unto Caesarea, and
make a grievous complaint and accusation against Paul, in the description
whereof Luke is the shorter, for that they were for the most part such things,
as had been many times before objected unto him. Here we have to consider the
Jews, the complainants, who first stand round about Paul, being brought into
the place of judgment (which was a thing contrary to the common order in
judgments) even to dismaye him with their outward show, and with their
authority to move Festus. This done, they bring out again the old points
of their former accusation, as may appear by Paul's answer. But it seems
they cheefely urged the crime of sedition, as though thereby he had committed
treason against Caesar. But although they lay many things to his charge, they
were yet able to prove nothing. Paul so pleading his cause, that it appeared
manifestly to all men, that he had offended in nothing, either against the law
of God, either against the Temple and service, either against Caesar. And what
arguments were brought on both sides, any man may easily gather by the
accusations aforesaid. Here may we see what impudency and boldness is in
the ennimies of truth. For what could they more impudently have done, than
again to lay to Paul's charge without proof or testimony, those things
whereunto Paul before had oftentimes answered? Yet where they wanted both
arguments and witnesses, they compass Paul about so boldly, as if their
authority only, ought to have prevailed in a matter of life and death. This
is the guise of the wicked, that they will be satisfied with no kind of
answers, but always recourse to their old slanders. This we find true in
these days, where our adversaries being convinced with so many arguments, yea
now with so many years experience, yet they impudently lay to our charge, the
crimes of seduction, sedition, blasphemy, and infinite such like. For why
should they be ashamed to lie before men, who are not ashamed to speak against
God? but in Paul's answer this is worthy to be observed, that he denies he
has any ways offended against Caesar, yet preached he that Christ was God,
and procured the people under the Roman Empire, to take unto them a new
faith, which thing Tertullian declares was unlawful for any man to do by the
Roman laws. How can Paul therefore say he offended not against Caesar? Here
we must know (O brethren) that religion is subject neither to Caesar, nor yet
to any other Magistrate, so that they at their pleasure, may decree what they
will therein. For it belongs unto God, and according to his word and
appointment, it must be ordered. And as Christ commands to give unto Caesar
that thing that belongs unto him: so will he have reserved for God also, that
that is due unto him. Wherefore he offends not against the Magistrate, which
without purpose of raising any tumult, defends the true honor of God,
although the Magistrate forbids the same. For when such Magistrates pass
their bounds, and will encroche upon Gods kingdom, they are not to be heard:
But rather Peter's rule must take place, which teaches us that God be must be
obeyed, rather than men. Here have thou what to answer to those, which cry
out, that we seditiously bring up many things, contrary to the proclamations of
Emperors: and say, that in matters of religion, we must simply obey our
Princes. Whose saying if it may prevail, then not we only, but also all the
Prophets, and Christ and his Apostles with them, shall be condemned: who, it is
evident preached the word of God, beat down superstition, and planted true
faith contrary to the commandments of Magistrates and rulers. There is no
cause therefore why we should regard these slanders: but let us rather with a
clear conscience hold on in the true faith, and with a pure mind serve our
savior Jesus Christ: To whom be praise, honor, power, and glory for ever.
Amen.

The.Clvij. Homely.
FEstus willing to do the Jews a pleasure, answered Paul, and said: will thou go up to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these things before me? Then
said Paul: I stand at Caesar's judgment seat, where I ought to be judged. To
the Jews have I no harm done, as thou very well know. If I have hurt them,
or committed any thing worthy of death, I refuse not to die. If none of these
things are whereof they accuse me, no man may deliver me to them. I appeal unto
Caesar. Then spoke Festus with deliberation: Thou have appealed unto Caesar,
unto Caesar shall thou go.
WHere Paul the Apostle speaking of his afflictions unto the Corinthians,
says he was made a gasing stock unto the world, and unto angels, and unto
men: that same may cheefely be perceived by the things which chanced unto him
in his last captivity or imprisonment. For now had he been four times
presented in judgment, to plead for his life. First, before the people at
Jerusalem upon the stairs, going up to the castle: secondly before the counsel
of the priests: And thirdly before Felix the President. After which follows
this new arainment before Festus the new President. Every one of them were
notable, by reason of the great dangers, that fell out in them, as we have seen
in their places: all which dangers he yet escaped through the help of god.
These things teach us what power God suffers the wicked to have upon his
elect, whom he yet delivers with a mighty hand out of all their
tribulations, because of their faith. Wherefore we must not be offended, if we
have the like happen unto us also. And this is the chief use of this place,
where we are taught how Paul escaped this new danger, where of the President
himself was the author, because no man should think that he was heretofore
delivered, rather by the benefit of men and power of the Presidentes, than by
the favor of God. Let us therefore consider each thing in order.

First we have to consider Festus, The iniquity and unrighteousness of Festus.
who perceiving that the Jews alleged no matter but mere slanders, and that
Paul was innocent: yet notwithstanding minded to gratify the^ with the
pleasure that they requested. Whereby it may easily be coniectured, that he was
either brybed, or else fair promised, seeing his mind was so altered upon
the sudden. But whether he had intelligence of the awayte they laid for Paul
or no, it is evident he did unjustly. Yet he cloketh his unjust dealing
marvelous craftily. For least he should seem to grant the Jews any thing,
but that was requisite and just, he demands of Paul whether he will go up
to Jerusalem, or no, and there he promyseth he will hear the matter, meaning
only to get the good will of the Jews hereby, and to avoid all manner of
hatred and envy. By this example we are taught, how easily they are corrupted
that want the knowledge and fear of God. For where by nature we are prone
unto evil, every little occasion sets us on cogge, unless we be pulled
back with the fear of God, as with a bridle. Hereof this Festus is a singular
example, which thus suddenly beguyleth men of that notable hope which they had
conceived of him. Therefore we must not put our trust in any such men. For
although sometime they show some notable signification and likelyhoode of
virtue, yet not long after they fall again to their old nature. For that that
we see here in Festus, the same the Scriptures report was in Pharao, Saul,
Achab, and diverse other wicked persons. This place moreover teaches us, what
a plague in judgment respect of persons is, when we go about to win the
favor of men. For hereby Felix obscureth all his former praise, and of a
most just Judge, which he seemed a little before to be, becomes a cruel
murderer, going about to gratify them which had in their mind devised the
death of an innocent man. We have like examples in the histories of all
nations. Therefore it is not without a cause, that both Gods law and man's
forbids Judges to have respect of persons. And surely it is meet and
convenient that they which are in Gods steed, should resemble Gods properties
and conditions: Romans 2. Ephe. 6. Acts, 10. etc
whom all the scriptures with one consent bear witness to have no respect of
persons.

But what does Paul, Paul apealeth unto Caesar.
which seems scarce able to escape this danger? he perceives whereunto the
matter tends, even by revelation of the spirit, which Christ promised
should be an advocate to his servants. Therefore he speaks freely and with
strong reasons, refelleth the unjust request of Festus. First, I stand
(says he) at Caesar's judgment seat: the^e I ought to be judged. Hereby he
declares that the injury should redounde unto Caesar, if he should be taken
from his judgment seat, and delivered to the Jews to be judged. This ought
governors of Countries, and all other inferior officers to imitate, knowing
that the faults they commit contrary to equity and law, redoundeth upon
those which have put them in office, and that they are therefore worthy at
their hands to be grievously punished. Hereof among the ancient Romans
proceeded that severity of censure, wherewith they thought good to bridle and
keep under the licenciousnesse of Magistrates. A notable example whereof,
Por^ius Cato showed upon L. Flaminius, whom he put out of the number of the
Senators because he beheaded a certain condemned person within his circuit,
appoynting a time to execute him at the pleasure of an harlot which he loved.
For those most grave and wise men would not have the majesty of their Empire
to be blemished or stained with the concupiscence of light persons. Now a
days, because preachers wink at every thing, tyranny reigns in every place,
and the authority of Magistrates decays every where: but hereof we shall
speak another time. Now let us go on in Paul's answer, who says in the
second place: To the Jews have I done no harm. Whereupon he gathers, that
it were not reason that he should be judged according to their laws and
privileges. Touching his innocence, he calls the President him self to
witness, which might easily perceive the same by his apology or defense.
Thirdly, he reasons by a strong argument called a Dilemma. If I have deserved
death, I refuse not to dye: but if not, no man has power to deliver me, being
innocent, to the pleasure of mine enemies. And so when he had alleged these
reasons, he appealed unto Caesar, both because he had no more hope in Festus,
and also because he knew by warning of the Oracle, that it was Gods appointment
that he should bear witness of Christ before Caesar also. By which example
we are first taught, that the godly are compelled by no rules of Christian
patience, to yield themselves rashly to the pleasure of the ungodly: yea
rather it is lawful for them to avoid manifest dangers, if so they may do
it with safe conscience, and the obedience which they owe unto Christ. Thus
where they would before have scourged him, he put them off by order of law,
and through counsel of the Captain he defeated the murderers that had
conspired against him. Therefore the error of them is foolish, which abusing
the words of Peter (where he bids us be ready to yield a reason of our faith
to every one that demands it) think the Ministers of the word ought to be
brought before Popish councels, there to render a reason of their faith, where
no reason is admitted, but plain tirannie reigns. Whose opinion if it be
allowed, then must we say Paul did unjustly, which chose rather to declare
his faith at Rome, than at Jerusalem. But he did therein both godly and wisely,
following the Oracle of God, whom the ancient doctors Athanasius and Ambrose
rightly followed, whereof the one would be judged only at Milane, where he had
taught and preached: the other could never be persuaded to commit his cause
unto suspected councels, but thought it more for his safety and praise to
flee, than to tarry among those, which he knew had long before conspired
against the truth. Moreover, this also is to be observed, that Paul so
shunneth this danger, that yet he has a diligent consideration of his
innocence. Let all they that are godly do the like, but specially they which
are ministers of the Gospel, least while they inco^siderately provide for their
life, they bring their good name in hazard, and so through their occasion
cause the Gospel be evil spoken of. Thirdly, he proves by a new example,
that that has been oftentimes declared, namely that it is lawful for Christian
men to wage their law, and to flee to the prerogative of Princes, when
necessity so requires. For Paul, which before had set the privilege of Rome
against open force, uses now the benefit of appeal, which can seldom be
done without some reproach of the Judge, and much more of the party plaintiff.
Therefore certain braynsicke persons abuse the words of Christ, and of Paul,
written in the.5. of Matthew, and in the first Epistle to the Corinthians the
sixth Chapter, where the right use of Judgments is not forbidden, but the
desire of private and unlawful revenge, and the insatiable lust of
contention, which gapeth after other men's goods, and disturbeth all kind of
charity, is bridled and restrained. Finally Paul's words conteyne in them a
general doctrine, chiefly appertayning unto all Magistrates: namely, that it
is lawful for none of them to commit an innocent to the will and pleasure of
others, or to purchase any man's favor with his death and blood. For whosoever
bear office and authority are the Ministers of God to defend Innocents, and
to punish naughty and wicked persons. Therefore whosoever do otherwise, they
are the Ministers of the devil, and fellows with Pylate and Herod, whereof
the one delivered Christ to the Jews to be crucified, and the other for an
whoores sake, beheaded John the Baptist. The President admits the appeal,
although unwillingly.


But let us return unto Festus, which being moved with Paul's sudden
appeal, and seeing him self disappoynted of his hope, debating the matter
with those that sat on the benche with him, answers at length with angry
mood: Have thou appealed unto Caesar? As if he should say, art thou so bold
to take Caesar for thy judge rather than me? well thou shall go unto Caesar. He
trimly expresses the usage of the wicked, who although they well know how
wicked they a^e, yet they will take it in very evil part if a man touch them
never so little therewith, or make any exception against their decrees. Yet is
he much better than many of the Princes of our days, who will suffer the
faithful of Christ to enjoy no benefit of law, or public equity. And verily
the severity that the Romans used in administering their laws, is very
notable, seeing that Festus after the appeal that a person of no estimation
had made, thought it was lawful for him no further to meddle in the matter.
The force whereof did long preserve their common weal, battered and ^ore shaken
with many vices. It were meet that Presidents in these days should be kept
under with like severity (as we erewhyle declared) which thing if the higher
Magistrates would observe, both should they be hated the less them selves,
and innocence every where should be the more mayntayned. But chiefly let us
observe the power and truth of God, whereby he defends his servant against
the assaults of their enemies. Let us in trust hereof, embrace the truth
with all our hearts, and having once taken hold of her, keep her fast, and
suffer our selves by no threats to be pulled from our savior Jesus Christ: to
whom be praise, honor, power, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.Clviij. Homely.
ANd after a certain days king Agrippa and Bernice came unto Caesarea to
salute Festus, and when they had been there a good season, Festus rehearsed
Paul's cause unto the king, saying: There is a certain man left in prison of
Felix, about whom when I came to Jerusalem, the high Priests and Elders of
the Jews enfourmed me, and desired to have judgment against him. To whom I
answered: It is not the manner of the Romans for favor to deliver any man
that he should peryshe, before that he which is accused have the accuser
before him, and have license to answer for him self concerning the crime
laid against him. Therefore when they were come hither, without any delay, on
the morrow I sat to give judgment, and commanded the man to be brought
forth. Against whom when the accusers stood up, they brought none accusation
of such things as I supposed: but had certain questions against him of their
own superstition, and of one Jesus which was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be
alive. And because I doubted of such manner of questions, I asked him whether
he would go to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these matters. But when Paul
had appealed to be kept unto the knowledge of Caesar, I commanded him to be
kept till I might send him to Caesar. Agrippa said unto Festus: I would also
hear the man my self. To morrow (said he) thou shall hear him.
GOD uses to exercise his people in this world with diverse and sundry
tribulations, but according to his wisdom and goodness he makes them serve
to the glory of his name, and to their salvation. A very notable example
whereof, is here set forth in this Story of Paul. For after his
apprehension at Jerusalem he had every day ministered unto him fresh occasion of
preaching. For first he was permitted to speak unto all the people standing
upon the stayres, gooing up to the Castle, whereof he never had the like
opportunity before. After that he protested his faith in the Counsel of the
Priests and Elders, which otherwise would never voutsafe to have heard him.
Thirdly, he made a long Oration, touching his vocation and office, before Felix
the President, which used many times to send for him, and to talk with him.
At length he gave an account of his faith and doctrine before Festus, as we
heard of late. And he so declared and opened his cause every where, that both
the Roman Presidents, and the barbarous soldiers might easily understand
his innocence: a thing surely much making to the setting forth of the
Gospel. And undoubtedly such seeds of faith were sown in the minds of a
great many, that not long after they brought forth rare and singular increase:
because the word of God (as Esai testifies) uses never to be preached in
vain. Moreover the things that follow must be referred to that we even now
said: whereby it shall be declared what occasion of preaching Paul had given
him before king Agrippa, and Bernice, and all the nobility of that Country.
And because it was a thing seldom seen, for Princes to hear a Preacher in
bands, therefore Luke thought good to pass over none of those things which
chanced in or about the same.

Agrippa and Bernice.
First he shows the occasion of all the matter, which was the coming of king
Agrippa and Bernice unto Caesarea to welcome Festus, being lately come from
Rome. And it was no marvel that the king showed him self so officious unto
the President, for it was evident that he had obtained the kingdom of the
Emperor, through favor, and so held it, that he must of force acknowledge
the Romans to be his lords and superiors. This Agrippa was son to Herodes
Agrippa, of whose tyranny and horrible death, it has been spoken in the 12.
Chapter. And Bernice was his sister, whom ( Josephus says) the people
suspected to have unlawful company with her brother. Wherefore to avoid this
suspicion, she married with Polemon, king of the people called Lysij, from who^
yet not long after she was divorced, and returned to her brother again, who
trusting in the amity and power of the Romans, made no account of the peoples
talk. This is a singular example of Gods goodness, which does voutsafe to
have the salvation that is purchased by Christ, to be preached by Paul unto two
persons borne of wicked stock, and polluted with incest. For their great
grandfather was Herodes the great, which laid wait for Christ, being newborn, and caused the babes of Bethlehem most cruelly to be murdered. Herodes
Antipas, brother to their graundfather Aristobulus, or as some think,
Alexander, being him self also defamed of incest, commanded John the Baptist
to be beheaded, and scoffed at Christ being sent bound unto him. Of their
father Agrippa, we spoke of late, who killed James, and cast Peter the Apostle
in prison* meaning to have put him to death also, but that he was delivered by
the help of an Aungel. Agrippa and Bernice borne I say of such progenitors as
these, hear Paul preach the Gospel of salvation. Whereby it easily appears,
that God is not so wayward nor desirous of revenge, to punish the children for
the wickedness of their fathers: but that his grace is stretched out to al men
that will truly repent and turn unto him. See what he says hereof himself in
the eyghtenth Chapter of Ezechiel. Whereunto also is to be referred, how
Christ was peculiarly sent unto those men, whose predecessors being many ways
unkind toward God, slew the prophets that were sent unto the^. And we see in
these days, that the grace of God, and the merit of Christ is most
courteously offered to meany which have horribly sinned. Therefore they which
Satan has taught to doubt of Gods favor and mercy, as though our sins were
greater tha^ it, let them learn comfort hereby. Also let these things serve to
instruct us, that we condemn no man rashly because of his auncestrie, seeing
that in the generation of Christ are numbered diverse diffamed persons, so that
no man need to doubt, but Christ chiefly belongs unto sinners.

But to return to our purpose, let us see for what occasion Agrippa was so
desirous to see and hear Paul. Festus communication with Agrippa touching
Paul.
This was (as it is said) certain days after his coming: which by all
likelyhoode were spent in pastime and banqueting. For Princes and noble men
have little care of Captives and prisoners. It is to be thought that Festus had
co^muned with Agrippa about Paul, supposing to be helped by his counsel in
such a difficulte and intricate matter. Therefore he begins in this wise to
declare the whole matter, but subtly and craftily, slyly disse^bleth, how he
would have gratified the Jews, as we shall see when we come to the place. For
his declaration consists of three parts, whereof we will orderly entreat.

In the first part he declares what Paul is, what the Jews requested, and
what answer he made them. He says Paul was a captive, left in prison by
Felix. Which thing he allegeth for this cause, that Agrippa should not think
he had caused him to be laid in hold. The Jews (says he) made request unto
me by their Elders and Priests, that I should give sentence of death against
him. Which thing I would not grant them. For I alleged unto the^ the manner of
the Romans, which was, to give sentence of death against no man for any men's
pleasure, but first to use all kind of search and lawful inquiry, so that the
accusers shall make informaiton openly, and the accused shall have time and place
to make his purgation and defense. Uerily the custom that Festus allegeth, is
very notable, whereby al magistrates are taught, that they must do nothing for
any man's sake, contrary to law and justice. For although humanity and
gentleness is a thing much commendable: yet it becomes Judges always to
have a special consideration of justice. Which thing, both the laws of God,
and al nations expressly command. Surely Solomon says, that God hates him
as much that spares a wicked person, as he that slays an innocent. Pro. 17.
But the untowardness of our days is much to be bewailed, where that that
Festus says was in use with the Romans, has scarce any place among
Christians. For we see it oftentimes come to pass, that the faithful people of
Christ for the Popes pleasure, are cruelly made out of the way without any
hearing of their cause. As many magistrates therefore as will truly discharge
their office, must see that judgment proceed lawfully and as it ought. Above
al things it is requisite in judgment that the accusers be present, that there
be no place for slanders and backbiting, which many times bring innocents in
much danger. That done, let the defendantes also have place to make their
lawful purgation, and let Judges think that they have two ears given them,
the one to hear the plaintiff, the other the defendant. But specially let this
rule have place, that right and law be not transgressed for any man's pleasure.
For where Judges be no private persons, they must know they are bound
indifferently to al men alike. Furthermore, as the equity of the Roman laws
deserves to be praised, so the impudency of the Jewish Priests is utterly to
be detested, which durst request that thing, which an heathen man understood
was neither right nor lawful. But where they which would seem to be most
holy, and the very pillars of Gods Church, thus did, might not the Gentiles
justly suspecte their religion? But would to God we saw not the like
impudency in the Monks and Bishops at this day, which use to make most
wicked decrees in Princes courts, and abuse the clemency of kings, to
establish their tyranny against the servant of Christ.

In the second part is declared, how Festus handeled this matter. As soon
(says he) as they came hither, Festus testifies that Paul is innocent.
I gave them audience strayghte way. And by and by I perceived he was
innocente. For they laid none of those things to his charge that I looked for:
but brought forth certain questions belonging to their own superstition, and
handled a certain cause of one Jesus, who Paul said, was risen again from
death. After this sort speaks the profane man most contemptuously of
sincere religion, which Paul yet handled both diligently and at large, as may
be gathered by Festus own saying. In him have we an example of all those,
which contemn and deride the mysteries of the word of God, and specially the
resurrection. In instructing of whom, although we little prevail, no man
must be offended, considering that Festus had so little regard of those
things, which Paul most gravely declared. Yet Judges have an other thing to
observe in this heathen person, namely to hear causes without delay:
considering that by unjust dilatories from day to day, many men are
circumuented: which because they are not able to be at such charges, are unable
to prosecute and follow their right. Principally, let us observe how Paul's
innocence is confirmed by many testimonies. For first we had Lysias the capten
a witness thereof. After that Felix. Now Festus. And within a little while after
we shall have Agrippa to make one with them. And although the wicked priests go
on in their accusation, yet they confirm Paul's innocence the more, for that
they are able to prove none of those things they lay to his charge. The like
case were the other Apostles in, as we have oftentimes seen. So the
Evangelists declare, that Pylate and Herod bear witness of Christ's
innocence. This makes for the commendation and dignity of the christian
faith and doctrine. Which who so now a days slaundreth, openly bewray them
selves to be worse than the Gentiles. It appears also by this place, what a
miserable state the Jews were in at this time, seeing a despiser of all
religion had the greatest authority among them, and they constrained to plead
their matters of religion before him. And this they may thank the wicked
priests, and their own wicked ingratitude of, which denied Christ to be their
king and savior before Pylate. The like state are a great many in now a days,
under the tyranny of the Turks: by whose example except we repent in time, it
is to be feared, that all they that now a days disdain to hear the word of
God, and refuse the judgment of the holy ghost touching faith and religion,
w^ll one day suffer the like. Finally, he declares why he kept him being
innocent in prison. Namely, because he had appealed unto Caesar. But here he
craftily dissembleth his own wickedness, which yet he can not otherwise do,
but by bewraying himself, while he confesses plainly, that he drove the
innocent to such an exigent that he must needs appeal unto Caesar. For he had
not purposed to gratify ye Jews to Paul's hinderaunce and prejudice* he would
never have appealed unto Caesar. But this is a common trick among great men and
magistrates, craftily to cloak their own faults, and then to make men believe
they greatly favor justice, when they most transgress the bounds and limits
of the same. Furthermore by this occasion it came to pass, that Agrippa was
desirous to hear and to see Paul, which thing was the occasion of a notable
sermon, which Luke sets forth in the chapter following. Thus we may see, that
through the providence of God, those things advance his kingdom, which we
least thought of. Why therefore do we trouble and vex our selves about our own
devises? Why do we not rather every one cast all our care upon God, and do our
duty? For so should it come to pass, that we should every where have occasion
to serve God, and in all our dangers and distresses should have Jesus Christ to
be our protector and defender: to whom be praise, honor, power and glory,
for ever. Amen.

The.Clix. Homely.
ANd on the morrow when Agrippa was come, and Bernice with great pomp, and
were entered into the Council house, with the Captains and chief men of the
City, at Festus commandment was Paul brought forth. And Festus said: king
Agrippa, and all ye men which are here present with us, ye see this man, about
whom all the multitude of the Jews have entreated me, both at Jerusalem, and
also here, crying, that he ought not to live any longer. Yet found I nothing
worthy of death that he had committed. Nevertheless, seeing that he has
appealed to Caesar, I have determined to send him. Of whom I have no certain
thing to write unto my Lord. Wherefore I have brought him unto you, and
specially unto thee O king Agrippa, that after examination had, I might have
somewhat to write. For me thinks it unreasonable for to send a prisoner,
and not to show the causes which are laid against him.
ALthough God have given unto man nothing more excellent and commodious, than
the word of the Gospel, wherein he offers us the incomparable treasures of
his grace, and the right way unto salvation: yet such is the untowardness of
this miserable world, that it hates and enuieth nothing so much, as the same
word. Which thing is the cause, that the ministers thereof are many times so
grievously molested and afflicted, and become (as it were) certain gasing
stocks unto all the world. But because we, upon who^ the ends of the world
are come, should not be offended at these things, forasmuch as it is evident,
that the world should exercise great cruelty under Antichrist their captain:
God therefore would have us instructed, partly by prophesies, and partly by
examples, whereby we might learn that no new or strange thing happens unto us,
but that the Ministers of his word have in all ages been so used in this world.
And yet that his word could never be extinguished through any attempts of his
enemies, for it endures for ever, and at al times brings forth condign
fruits, as the Scriptures every where declare. Many examples we have hereof,
and among them this one is notable, that Luke sets forth in Paul the
Apostle. For although he lived in bonds, and was constrained to appeal unto
Caesar, both by reason of the iniquity of his enemies, and the
unrighteousness of the President: yet before king Agrippa, before the
Captains, before the chief men of Caesarea, and the whole nobility of that
country, he so handles Christ's cause, that he both proves his innocence in
the hearing of them al, and leaves in their minds certain evident pricks and
stings of the word of God. But it shall be good to consider every thing in
order, as it is declared.

The Evangelist begins his narration with Paul's hearers, among whom are
first numbered Agrippa and Bernice his sister, Paul's hearers.
who (says he) came into the auditorie with all kind of princely pomp and
ostentation. After them come the captains of the soldiers, and other lo^ds
of the court, and as many as were of authority in the city, who^ Festus
thought good to have there present, to this end, that howsoever the matter fell
out he might the easilier avoid the envy of the Jews. Above al things we have
to consider Agrippa, who as we said before, was desirous to hear Paul. For
this desire proceeded more of a certain vain curiosity of mind, than of any
love unto the truth or salvation. In so much that he resembles Herodes
Antipas, brother to his graundfather, which also was desirous to see Christ,
but for none other cause, save for that he heard his miracles praised of so
many, a proof whereof he gives us, in that he comes to Paul's sermon, not
like a disciple or lerner, nor lays aside none of his princely pomp, but
brings all his courtlinesse with him for a show into y^ preching place. By
this example we learn what affection this world bears to the word of God.
Surely either it hates it, or at least contemns it, even of nature, as which
would not have his works reproved by the light thereof, and uses to prefer
earthly things before heavenly. Yet in the mean season it comes to pass
many times that some come to hear it, though not led with the desire of
salvation, yet with the affections of the flesh, that is to say, with
curiosity, or with hope of some gain, or of hatred to Popish doctrine, or
because they would not be thought to be ungodly or ennimies unto religion. But
because such come, not as learners, but as judges and comptrollers, and bring
with them, the opinions they have conceived before, it cannot be, that the
gospel does any thing profit them, the end whereof Paul says, is to
captiuate all the wisdom of the flesh, and to bring it in obedience to the
faith. Therefore we must bring with us, humble and lowly minds, and desirous to
learn, if we will receive any profit thereby. See Luke. 8. Again, we are
taught by this Example, what to judge of them, which come to Sermons and
Churches in pompous attire and array. These are like unto Agrippa and Bernice,
and give no little offense. For first, it is a great token of lightness in
them, that they remember not how they are but mire and clay, and that the
beginning of apparel proceeded first of sin, so that it were more meet for
us to humble our selves in them, than to show any pride therein. Another
occasion of offense there is, in that we be the aucthors, that other folishly
imitate us, or else conceive wanton imaginations, or else minister occasion to
the porer sort to be impacient, and to murmr against God. Therefore we
incur that horrible sentence of God, which pronounces that terrible woe
against such, as give other occasion of offense. Furthermore it is a token of
a certain beastly dullness, and of a mind too too untoward, to show pride
in the sight of God, where we ought to show most lowliness. For who would
not say, he were out of his wits, which should come before a Prince, to ask
pardon of his trespass in proud apparel, and with sturdie and lofty
countenance? And yet we come unto the Church, to ask forgiveness of our
sins, and to hear the word of salvation, in all insolent and proud
manner. Uerily Christ forbids us to be careful for needful apparel. With
what face therefore, can we make garments of such sundry sorts and devises to
set out our pride? See what Esaias says in his third Chapter at large, touching
this offense.

But let us consider Paul, Paul is brought forth in chains to preach.
which at Festus commandment is brought forth bound in chains, as
appears by his own saying: yet not as a guilty person before judges, but as
a teacher and preacher. Here in this sight or show, appears the wonderful
counsel of God, where an assembly of most honorable personages, glittering in
gold, purple and scarlate, abide the coming of Paul, looking like a
prisoner, pale and wanne, and dragging his chain after him in his hand. Yea
God offers unto him, being thus in bands, a singular occasion to behave
himself boldly in the quarrel of his name. Whereby it appears, how the
wicked can nothing prevail with their enterprises and devises. For what other
thing went the Jews about hitherto, but to take from Paul all occasion of
preaching; and so to extinguishe all his doctrine? But they so little prevail
hereby, that rather by their mean, he is brought before a great and honorable
assembly, before whom otherwise, he should never have had opportunity to have
preached. Let these things serve to comfort us, among the terrors of this
world. For why should we henceforth fear the world, seeing God is of as great
power in these days, to defend his people, and to promote his word? Chefely we
have in this place to consider Paul, which as the sequel declares, was bold
and courageous of mind: for he was not dismaide at the sight of the king and
the nobility. But he declares his matter so stoutly, that though he were in
bands, yet he put his auditors in no little fear, and greatly moved the king in
his mind. The like thing we saw happened before in Felix. These things teach us,
that Gods word can not be bound, although his ministers be in prison, and in
bands. For the authority or effect thereof, depends not upon man. For the
spirit of god blows where it will, and is not subject to the vain pleasure of
man. We are taught also, what we have to do in like case. Let us boldly defend
Christ's cause, and not pass a straw for the authority and tyranny of this
world. For the cause we have in hand is just and good, and upon it depends
all our salvation. And it is not our cause, but Gods, who can easily defend the
same. And it is not we that handle it, but the spirit of God which works and
speaks in us, according to the promise of Christ. Who therefore will withstand
the spirit of God? Who will think to prevail against it? Or who being
comforted and helped thereby, will let him self be overcome of cowardly fear?

Festus causes Paul to be diligently heard.
Last of all, Festus sets Paul before Agrippa, and the residue of his
hearers, and repeateth in few words his cause, and the end of this present
accusation. For this (says he) is he whom all the Jews required to have put
to death: which yet in his judgment had committed nothing worthy of death.
Howbeit, because he had appealed unto Caesar, he desired that they would
diligently hear him, and weigh every thing, that he might have some matter of
certainty, to write to Caesar of him. After this sort the Roman President
causes Paul to be diligently heard, which thing was not don without the
providence of god. In the mean season we have a new testimony of Paul's
innocence, which it behooved many times thus to be defended, because God forsaw,
that in all ages his doctrine should have grievous enemies. Here apeareth also
the incurable malice of the Jews, which ceased not to require an innocent to
be put to death. For thus they follow their forfathers at the hard heels, who
as we read, with like impude^cy required the death of Christ the son of god
Pilate being much against it. Therefore they are utterly overthrown by the just
judgment of God, and made a common example unto al men, as Christ many times
prophesied, should happen unto them. Moreover, we have to consider Festu^
saying, which thinks it a point of absurdity to send a prisoner, and not to
declare whereof he is accused, and wherefore he was put in prison. These things
teach us, that we must so deal with prisoners, that we may have full and
perfect certificate of all things. For we must not deal rashly in matters of
life and death. Seeing that an hethen man understood thus much, what shall it
become those magistrates to do, which profess the name and word of Christ? And
with what moderation of mind, becomes it us to entreat al captives, seeing we
know that whatsoever benefit or harm we do them, the same we do unto Christ
himself? But would to God our adversaries in these dais would use this equity
toward the servants of Christ, who think it but a sport to use all kind of
vncurtesie toward us without any cause. Howbeit let these things nothing
offend us, seeing we know that Christ also, was most discourteously dealt with. For
why, should the disciples or scholars, think to be in better case than their
master? Let us rather rejoice to suffer all kind of afflictions for the truth
sake, for this is the high way unto heaven, where the inheritance of eternal
life remains for us with our head Jesus Christ: to whom be blessing, honor,
power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.xxvj. Chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The.Clx. Homely.
AGrippa said unto Paul, thou art permitted to speak for thy self. Then
Paul stretched forth the hand, and answered for him self: I think my self
happy king Agrippa, because I shall answer this day before thee of all the
things whereof I am accused of the Jews, namely because thou art expert in all
customs and questions which are among the Jews. Wherefore I beseech thee to
hear me patiently. My living that I lived of a child (which was at the first
among mine own nation at Jerusalem) know all the Jews, which knew me from
the beginning, if they would testify: for after the most straightest sect of
our religion, I lived a Pharisey.
OUr Lord and Savior Jesus Christ talking with Ananias touching Paul, and
his ministry, says among other things: This is a chosen vessel unto me, to
carry my name before nations and kings, and the children of Israel. Which
words as they greatly commend the ministry of Paul: so ought they to stir
us up diligently to consider all those things that he either did or suffered
in his ministry: because it is evident that nothing therein chanced unto
him, without the singular providence of God. This is cheefely to be considered
in this present action, where, before king Agrippa, the Nobles of the Court,
and chief rulers of the Country, he defends his faith and doctrine with
such dexterity and constancy, that he moved his auditors greatly, and by his
example taught us of what force and efficacy both the word of God and faith
is. Which thing shall the more evidently appear, if we consider each thing in
order.

Paul has license to speak for himself.
First Agrippa is set forth which speaks unto Paul, and gives him leave to
answer for him self. This was without doubt, done through the advice of God,
which by this mean would have the gospel preached unto those men. For (where
as Paul says otherwheres) God will have all men to be saved, he will also
have the word of salvation to be revealed and preached unto all men. And this
his ordinance is so firm and stable, that it can never be stopped with any
enterprise of the tyra^s of this world. Whereof we have both testimonies and
Examples every where in the scriptures by the which we may confirm our wavering
faith in all adversities. But because we have spoken hereof oftentimes, let us
now observe the example of equity and justice, that the holy Ghost sets
forth in Agrippa, though otherwise an arrogante and naughty man. For he heard
how all the Jews required to have Paul put to death, and he saw nothing in
him, whereby to get any commodity or honor: yet is he nothing moved with the
judgment of the whole nation, nor thinks it not meet to have more
consideration of himself, than of public justice, but appoynteth to hear
Paul himself, and first offers him occasion and leave to speak. Let all
men that bear office, follow this example, and the more they see to conspire
against any man, the more diligently let them weighe and examine the matter,
least by their bearing and slothfulness, they set forward other men's
maliciousness. This is a thing now a days too common (the more is the pity)
that Kings and Princes ears are not open to the faithful of Christ, because
they think it meeter to hearken unto Bishops and to their adherentes, and so
being corrupt with prejudice, they think they can not be altogether
faultlesse, whom the spirituality so zelously and earnestly withstand.

Paul declares his cause without fear.
But return we unto Paul, who although he be compelled upon the sudden, to
pleate his cause in bands before so honorable an audience, yet he puts out
his hand for silence, and so begins his sermon, which as it contains in
it, all things belonging to the matter, so it shows no manner token of any
dismaide or troubled mind. Where we may see both the truth and also the
effect of Christ's promises. For Paul had both the promises general, and
also a peculiar, whereof we made mention in the beginning: namely that he should
preach the name of Christ before Kings and Princes. Wherefore having an eye
thereunto, he sets all dangers at naught, because he knew that Christ's
power was greater, than that it could be overcome or hindered by any attemptes
of the world. The argument of Paul's oration.
How be it, it behooves us also to take comfort of this example, because Christ
has promised his spirit unto all the godly, to govern their hearts and
mouths, when they shall be compelled, to give an account of their faith.
Furthermore, touching Paul's oration, it consists wholely of a narration full
of arguments, and trimly framed for defense of himself: for he declares what
trade of life he led of a child, and how he never gave any suspicion of
lightness or impiety. Again, how after he was called to the faith of
Christ, and to be an Apostle, he neither taught nor did any thing contrary to
the scriptures. Whereby he proves that the Jews hated him so deadly without
his desert.

Before his narration, he uses a short and pretty kind of beginning, whereby
he goes about to get the kings favor and good will, saying he is happy, in
that he must plea^ his cause before him, who was not ignorant in the Ceremonies
and Questions of the Jews. For Paul knew that it was in vain, to dispute of
grave and weighty matters before them that were altogether ignorant and
unskillful. Wherefore, as it is mete to have judges led with desire of
justice: so wisdom joined with understanding, is most necessary for them.
And it is meet that they should not only be skilful in politic matters, but
also learned in matters pertaining to faith and religion: the care and study
whereof, the scripture every where commends unto magistrates. For where they be
ordained of God, who has given them such power and authority, they are
taught by the very law of nature, to be careful again for the maintenance of
Gods honor and glory. Wherefore, God appointed the book of his law, for kings
continually to read in, and the same book stirs up all Magistrates
thereunto, with the Examples of most godly Kings, whom Agrippa here wisely
followed, and understood religion thoroughly. But now a days we are grown to
such doltishnesse, that kings think they are most worthy to be praised for
their religion, when they understand least thereof, and say it belongs
nothing unto them. This we may thank the tyranny of the Bishops of, which
perceived that their greatest power consisted in the ignorance of Princes.

Moreover, he begins his narration, Paul's childhode and education.
whose argument we have now declared of his childehoode or life before led,
calling the Jews to witness, how godlily and holily he had spent the same.
For where in other places, he writes that a Bishop should be commended even
of very strangers also, he therefore goes about to prove his innocence by the
testimony of his ennimies. And because it should not be thought he had led his
life in any corner, he says he was brought up at Jerusalem, where the seat
of Religion was, and the most famous university in all Iewrie. There he said
from his beginning he had led a life most commendable, even after the sect of
the Phariseys. For this sect was worthy to be preferred before all other,
because the Phariseis had the scriptures in most reverence, and excelled the
other sects in honesty of life. The greatest error they had, was, that they
maintained the righteousness and merit of their own works. Howbeit Paul's
scope and end is, to persuade Agrippa, that he had done nothing rashly, of any
wicked, light or wavering mind, seeing he had used from his childehoode, the
most straightest kind of religion.

It is not without a cause, that he declares he led his childhode so godlily.
Of what importance the godly bringing up of children is.
For thereby he teaches how much it avails to have public persons well
brought up in their childehoode. For although they ought not to be rejected,
which convert in their old age, yet are they much more to be preferred, whose
life before time has not been spotted or stained. For such will go more
boldly on in their wonted virtues, and are more able by their authority to
withstand the enterprises of the wicked: whereas the other sort return
again to their frequented vices, and being in danger of the vpbraidings and
reproaches of the wicked, by little and little, lose all their authority.
Beside that their counsel, although it be honest and godly, yet commonly with
the good it is suspected, who fear that they are led either with lightness of
mind, or else with some other le^de affection. Therefore, they that mind to
place their children either in office of the Church, or of the common weal,
must have a diligent regard of their education and bringing up. And here are
two points very necessary, that Paul tells of him self. The one is, that
youth must be brought up in such places where religion cheefely
flourishes, that with learning and experience, they may join also the taste
and favor of religion. The other is, that even by and by at the beginning,
they must choose such a kind of life, as has least occasion of vices in it.
For where youth even of nature is prone unto sin, occasions of evil must
be shunned and avoided, rather than sought for. Would to God the men in our
days, which cause their children many times to be brought up among such as
they know, are farthest from the true knowledge of Christ, would observe these
things: who are led with no care of religion, but of gain altogether.
Therefore out of such schools comes that kind of men which measures
religion according to friendship and commodity, and who bursting over the
bars of all godliness, fall headlong into all kind of mischief, and are
not only the destruction of themselves, but also of the Church and common
weal. This thing, Examples both old and new do teach us, whereby we ought to
be provoked, so to cause our children which we mean to set to Gods service,
to be instructed and brought up from their youth, that they may be profitable
both to them self, to the Church, and to the common weal, and at length
receive the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven, with Jesus Christ our Lord:
to whom be praise, honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.Clxj. Homely.
ANd now I stand and am judged for the hope of the promise made of God unto
our fathers: unto which promise our twelve Tribes (instantly serving God day
and night) hope to come. For which hopes sake, King Agrippa, I am accused of
the Jews. Why should it be thought a thing incredible unto you, that God should
raise again the dead?
PAVLE the Apostle in giving an accoumpt of his faith and doctrine, labors
cheefely to prove that he did nothing of rash mind, or of ungodly intent and
purpose. To the which end also he made mention of his childehoode, proving
that he was so brought up, and had so ordered his life, that he ought not
justly to be suspected either of any temeritie or ungodliness about religion.
By which Example we are taught among other things, that we must so trade and
train up our selves in Religion, that we may be able to render a reason to
every man after what sort we have lived therein even from our childehoode.
For as God is the tutoure and defendoure of all age, so it behooves that all
manner of age should be consecrated unto him. And we read that he requires
oftentimes, to have children brought up from their infancy in his law and
service. Which place reproves the shameful error of them, which say that
religion is a more weighty and intricate matter, than for lay men to meddle
with: whereas notwithstanding God wills that even tender age should exercise
it self therein, and whereas nothing pertains so indifferently to all men as
religion: for the which the scripture teaches that me^ were created even from
the beginning. But because we have entreated hereof in other places, let us
now go on in Paul's oration.

He somewhat breaking of his narration begun a little before, The state of the
whole controversy.
declares the state of the whole controversy between him and his adversaries
the Jews. For he says he is accused for the hope of the promise, which God
sometimes made unto the fathers, and unto the which the twelve tribes, that is
to say, the whole nation of the Jews, hope by their continual serving of God
at length to come. And being not content once thus to have said, he repeteth
the same he said again, saying: for this hope sake, O king Agrippa am I
accused, which words seem to have in them some show of indignation, whereby he
would express the indignity and heynousnesse of the matter. As if he should
say: who perceives not what great unrighteousness is in mine adversaries,
seeing they charge me of death, and accuse me of schism, whereas my doctrine
and faith depends upon that ancient promise of God, wherein all the fathers
in times past, put their trust: and whereof as many of the Israelites as worship
the true God, desire to be partakers, having none other end of all their
holiness and religion. Howbeit that hope of promise whereof he speaks, is
Jesus Christ the son of God, in whom only God has promised life and
salvation, from the very beginning of the world unto the fathers fallen into
destruction through the sin of Adam, as shortly after shall be declared more
at large. He plainly nicketh both their ignorance in religion, and also the
preposterous affia^ce which they had glorying in the covenant and promises of
God, and would be taken all together for his people, and yet did cast aside
Christ, through whose merit and intercession, those promises are ratified:
whereof we should have no utility at all, unless he were the maintainer and
defender of the covenant. But because as well the divine power of Christ, as
also the office whereunto his father appointed him, appears most evidently in
the resurrection of the dead (as Paul other where is declares) he omitteth
now the other Articles, and takes him to entreat only thereof as a thing
cheefely appertaining to this present controversy. For by this it appeared,
both that Jesus Christ which rose again from the dead, was the aucthor of
life and salvation, and also the error of the Saduces which utterly denied the
resurrection, was confuted. For it is very like that this sect at that time
did much prevail with many men: and that diverse of Paul's hearers were
infected with the same. For unless we grant this, Paul may seem too
importunate, which asks in angrye wise, why it should seem incredible to
them, that he said God should raise the dead again. And undoubtedly Paul
entreated of all these things more at large, and confirmed them with
testimonies of scriptures.

But Luke does but touch certain brief notes of every thing, to give us an
occasion the more to meditate thereof. And surely this place which the brevity
thereof makes obscure, The sum and order of this present place.
will be most plain, if a man would draw out thereof the propositions or
arguments, which Paul as it is evident more at large handled. Whereof this shall
be the first: Our controversy is touching the hope of the promise made by God
unto the fathers, and of the whole mean of our salvation. The second I teach
that this hope consists in Jesus Christ only which they constantly deny.
The third, I prove by the resurrection of him which declared that he was both
the son of God, and the aucthor of life, that all the mean of our life and
salvation consists in Christ. The fourth, neither ought the resurrection of
Christ to seem incredible to any man, for as much as it is a most easy thing
unto God in the end of the world, to raise all the dead again, as all the
scriptures declare he shall do. This seems to me to be the order of Paul's
oration, and the sum of al those things, which hitherto have been spoken,
which if we consider, it shall be very easy to explicate every thing more at
large. Also by the enumeration of certain principal points, he thought he
would make his hearers attent, because they should not think that he contended
with the Jews about a trifle, as Festus before had said. In the mean season
we have to consider certain common places falling out in this matter.

The faith of the Fathers, is a most ancient thing.
And first of all, we be taught what the faith and hope of all the Saints, and
of the whole church of God, has been in all ages. Uerily even such as has
depended upon Christ the son of God: which became man for our sake, and which
believes that all faith and salvation consists in him only. For this does
Paul in this place call the hope of the promise made sometime unto the
fathers. But the Catholic faith says, that all the promises are confirmed
in Christ, as Paul himself every where confesses, specially in the first
Chapter of the second to the Corinthians, and in the tenth Chapter of the first
to the same Corinthians, where he writes that the condition of the fathers of
the old Testament was allone with ours, so that he attributes to them
oursacraments also, which are baptism and the supper, 1. Cor. 5. Collos. 2.
eue^ as other where is he attributes to us the passover and spiritual
circumcision. Howbeit these things shall more evidently appear, if we consider
the promises of God, which he made sometimes unto the fathers. Adam.
Among these fathers, Adam is the first, who when he was thrust out of
Paradise into this vale of misery, had none other hope of salvation given him,
than that which is in Christ only. For the seed of the woman was promised unto
him, whose heel the serpent should lie in wait to s^ing, although in vain,
for as much as that seed should crush and tread down the serpents head. But
Christ alone may be called the seed of the woman, which without any commixtion
of man's seed, took flesh of the virgin Marie. The Devil that old Serpent
lay craftily in wait against his heel, that is to say against his humane
nature, and by his instruments brought to pass that he was slain upon the
Cross, but to his own utter hinderance and destruction. For hereby it came
to pass, that Christ when he died, trade down the head of the Devil, that
is, vanquished his rule and tirannie, by the merit of his death, and utterly
disarmed him of his force, and drove him out of his kingdom.

But seeing there is no doubt, but that Adam believed this promise; for as
much as he changed his wives name, and called her Heu^, as which should bring
forth them that should live: it is evident that he did put his whole hope and
trust in Jesus Christ alone, which was that promised seed of the woman.
Therefore Adam was a christian man, and believed that he and his posterity
should be delivered and saved from the tyranny of the Devil, through the
merit of Christ only. Paul in the.11. chapter to the Hebrews proves most
evidently, that Abel, Enoch, Noe, Abel Enoch Noah.
and the other fathers, as many as before the flood plesed god, were of the
same faith. After the flood we have chiefly to consider Abraham, with whom it
pleased God to renew his covenant, Abraham.
whom the scriptures call the father of all those that believe. Moses and Paul
bear witness that he believed God, Gene. 12. Roma. 4.
and how that belief and faith was imputed unto him for righteousness. What
he believed all men know: verily that the promise of God, which said, that in
his seed all nations should be blessed and saved, should be confirmed. And
that this seed was Christ, both Paul in the third to the Galathians, and
Christ him self witnesses. For Christ says: Abraham rejoiced to see my day,
and he saw it, and was glad. John 4.
This is to be understood of the contemplation and sight of faith only.
Whervppon we gather that Abraham also was stayed up by faith only in Christ,
and at length saved. Touching his offspring and issue, Isahac and Jacob, Isahac
and Jacob.
what needs it to speak, seeing it is manifest that the promises made unto
the father, are so oftentimes repeated unto them? yea Jacob when he lay a
dying, preached to his children touching the savior that was promised, and
plainly expresses his coming. And if we consider Moses, Moses.
it shall appear that he also had his respect unto Christ only. He sends
the people of Israel unto him, whereas he promises them a great Prophet,
which al men were bound to hear, as we understood before by the words of
Stephen and Peter. Moreover, that one Epistle to the Hebrews is sufficient to
teach us, that all the Ceremonies of the law, and the Leuiticall service were
but shadows of Christ, and of the things that belonged unto him. I omit the
testimonies of the Prophets for brevity sake. Let this suffice for them al,
Luke. 24.
where Christ teaches us that the mysteries both of his death and resurrection
were long before prophesied by Moses, the Prophets, and writers of the Psalms.
Therefore Paul very well professes that he teaches none other faith or hope
of salvation, than that which the fathers had, which believed the promises that
God had made.

Let us also observe how he complayneth that he is accused for this self
faith, and that of the Jews, The state of the true faith in this world.
which did most glory in the fathers and in the promises. This thing teaches
us what state the truth is in in this world: verily even such, that not only
the open enemies take against her, but also those that will seem to be the
most earnest followers of her. This we read came to pass in the time of the
Prophets long agone. And as Christ teaches us, they made much of the
Prophets tombs and graves, which yet hated their doctrine worse than a tode.
So when Christ came unto them, which every day looked for him, according to the
Oracles of the Prophets, yet they neither knew him nor received him. The same
we see falls out also, even in our days. For they that brag of the name of
Christ, and supersticiously worship the mother of Christ the Uirgin, and the
Saints with their relics for Christ's sake: the same persecute the true
faith of Christ and the doctrine of the Apostles: for no cause so much, as for
that it chalengeth to Christ only all the glory of our redemption and
salvation. And now a days every where among the Christians such men are
accused of ungodliness and heresy, as do teach that men ought to trust in
Christ only, and to seek all their salvation in him alone. Therefore we have
as great occasion in these days to complain as Paul had, who thought it
unmeet to be accused of the Jews for the promise sake made sometime unto the
fathers. But this is the untowardness of this world, whereat we must not be
offended, seeing it is both an old practice, and examples of al ages teach us,
that the true worshippers of God have always wrastled and striuen against the
same.

Let us observe moreover in what order, and after what sort Paul defends
both his faith and doctrine. The true trade of mainteining the
First, he alleges the promise or word of God, and thereunto he joins the
consent of the whole Church. For he names the twelve tribes together, thereby
plainly declaring, that he has no regard what a certain few of the Priests
think, but what the whole company of the faithful have believed in all ages,
according to the word of God. This is the best way of mayntayning and defending
the faith. For where man's traditions are of no authority with God, the word
of God must principally be brought forth, and by it a reason must be rendered
of all opinions. This foundation being laid, then must we also have an eye
unto the Church, not to the company of a certain few, which challenge to them
selves alone the name thereof, but unto that universal assembly and
congregation which we know has been from time to time, continually since the
beginning of the world: although sometimes it has been somewhat selde and
obscure, somewhile somewhat more in number and more evident, even as it seemed
good unto him, which chose us in his son before the foundations of the world
were laid. Therefore the error of our age is enormious and plain abs^rde,
where many by and by at the first choppe, will allege the consent of the
Church, constituting the same upon a certain sort of conspired
counterfaytes, that is to say, smered and shaven creatures of Antichryst, to
whom they make the word of God and the interpretation thereof to be in
subjection, and give them power to decree and appoynte what they will,
concerning the faith. Whom if a man would examine according to the marks of
the Primative Church, they shall so little be accounted worthy to be heads of
the Church, that they ought scarce to be taken for any members thereof.

Last of all we see that the Article of resurrection ought to be taken for
certain and assured, The resurrection of the dead ought not to be thought
incredible.
seeing that Paul alleges the same with a certain kind of indignation
against those that douted thereof, saying: Why seems it unto you an incredible
thing that God should raise up the dead again? As if he should say: Is it not
a maruayle that men should doubt of that which is every where proved by so many
arguments ^ For to let pass the Scriptures, the reason of Gods justice
requires, that the dead should rise again, and receive a recompense for the
things which they here have done: considering we see the wicked live mos^e
commonly welthyly in this world, and the godly in mise^ie. We have more over
examples appearing every year in plants, trees, and in every living creature.
Do we not read also that the first man was made of the earth* and how many
were raised again to life miraculously, first by the Prophets, and then at
length by Christ him self? But letting pass these arguments, Paul sends
his hearers to the consideration of Gods power only: verily to prevent this
mischief that measures the mysteries of faith according to the capacity and
reach of man's reason. It is also a ridiculous error, to think that
impossible to God, whereof we can not perceive a reason by and by. And this is
to be observed, not only in the Article of resurrection, but also in all
others, to the end we should subdue our reason to the obedience of faith.
Yet must we not bring in (as some men use) new and absurd opinions, under the
pretense of Gods omnipotency. For where we are certain of the will of God
according to his word, there it shall be lawful for us to reason of his
omnipotency: which thing thou shall in vain do, if thou do not first prove
that God is willing to do that which thou meanest. Furthermore, let us hold
fast the chief point of this place, that we trusting in the hope of the
ancient promises, worship God day and night, which has opened to us life and
eternal salvation in the promised seed Jesus Christ our savior: to whom be
praise, honor, power and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.Clxij. Homely.
I Also verily thought in my self, that I ought to do many contrary things,
clean against the name of Jesus of Nazareth, which thing I also did in
Jerusalem, and many of the Saints did I shut up in prison, and had received
authority of the high Priests. And when they were put to death, I gave the
sentence, and I punished them often in every Sinagoge, and compelled them to
blaspheme: and was yet more mad upon them, and persecuted them even into
strange Cities. About which things as I went to Damascus, with authority and
license of the high Priests, even at Midday (O King) I saw in the way a light
from heaven above the brightness of the sun, shine round about me, and them
which iorneyed with me. When we were all fallen to the earth, I heard a voice
speaking unto me, and saying in the Hebrew tongue: Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? It is hard for thee to kick against the prick. And I said, who
art thou Lord? And he said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest.
THe Apostle Paul declared yesterday the state of the whole controversy
between him and the Jews, teaching us that the contention was about no
trifle, but about the whole mean of our salvation: where he also proved that
he neither believed nor taught any thing, but that which God had promised the
fathers in times passed, and wherein the only hope of the Church of Israel, had
in all ages consisted. Where we learn that the faith of Christ was the only
and most aunciente mean, thorough which all the fathers in times passed were
saved. Furthermore, because Paul in the beginning of his narration said he
was a Pharisie, he returns handsomely to his intermitted narration again,
and declares the history of his conversion: the only scope an^ende whereof
is, to put away the accusation of leuitie, declaring that he was called by God,
yea enforced against his will.

Paul became a Christian against his will.
But to the end his narration might have the more weight and authority he
declares first how he was affected toward the Christian faith, and that in
such diligent ^orte, that he omitteth none of the things that he enterprised
against Christ. For first of all he promises the cause, saying: I was sometime
of the mind that mine adversaries be. For I was utterly persuaded that I ought
to do many things against the name of Jesus Christ. Whence sprang this
persuasion? verily of a blind and rash zeal of the flesh, which otherwheres
he attributes to all the Jews. Yet ^e makes not mention hereof, to extenuate
or excuse his offense thereby, but to teach us by his example how greatly men
fall, unless they order their doings according to the word of God. 1. Tim.
1. 1. Cor. 15.
For in other places he confesses that he was a most heinous sinner, and not
worthy the name of an Apostle. Whereby it appears how much more grievously
they offend, which being led with no zeal of God or good intention of the
mind (as they call it) but with their naughty affections persecute Christ and
his word. In the mean season mark how the enterprises of the enemies of the
Church are but a meare opinion, and vain conceypt of a blinded mind, which,
notwithstanding they seem at first well to succeed, yet they never have that
end they look for. Psalm. 7.
For as the Psalmist says: they travail with mischief, and are conceived
with sorrow, and have brought forth vanity and ungodliness. This thing
Paul confesses after a sort of him self, teaching the hearers by his
example what they may look for, if they begin to take against Christ, or
hold on as they have begone. Psalm. 2. and.33.
For which way can they prevail, whose devises and enterprises God scatters
abroad, and laugheth at them out of heaven?

The tirannie of Paul against the Church of Christ.
But least any man might think that Paul spoke more bostingly than truly, he
rehearses also his own doings, in molesting and afflicting the Church. I
put many of the Saints in prison (says he) being aucthorised by the
Priests, which authority they would never have given me, unless they had
seen me earnestly bente to advance and set forward their proceedings. He
calls the Christians Saints, because they were sanctified through the blood
and merit of Christ. 1. Corinthians. 5. Also when they were killed I pronounced
sentence of death upon them, and gat the consent of others thereunto. Beside
this, I compelled them when they had been whipped in the Sinagoges, and
tormented all manner of ways, to blaspheme (that is to say) to deny Christ, and
to recante those things which they had before spoken both well and godly.
Whereby it may be gathered, that the Church of Christ was never so well
established, but it had some chafe also, which winnowed with the F^^^e of
persecution, fell away. Finally, because I would spare no kind of madness, I
began to roue abroad into foreign Cities also, because I would leave no place
for the Christians to be safe in. The state of the church.
Herein we have an evident Image both of the persecutours of Christ, and also
of the state and condition wherein the godly and faithful be in this world.
For commonly these men are envied and hated of the Potentates of this world:
and chiefly of those which excel in name of Religion, and supremacy of the
Church, studying under this color and pretense to seek their private glory
and gain only. Then afterward these men have fit ministers for their
mischeuous proceedings, who to gratify their masters, let no occasion escape
or slip, whereby they may batter and assault the Church: and thereto they
spare for no labor. Hereof therefore proceed imprisonments, condemnations,
all kinds of torments, banishments, slaughters, Persecutours cause men to
blaspheme.
blasphemies, and infinite such other things as these cruel Kernes use to
devise against the godly. Whom in the mean season it behooves to mark better
what they do, why they persecute the godly for the faythes sake. Uerily they
compel the weaklings to blaspheme, whiles they deny their faith contrary to
their conscience, and confess they have erred through unhappy and ungodly
fear. For this thing Christ numbreth among the sins and blasphemy against
the holy Ghost. Luke. 12. And Paul expressly calls the denying of the true
faith blasphemy, whereunto he drove and enforced the faithful. Therefore what
other thing remains for those persecutors, but that horrible woe which Christ
threatens unto the^ that give occasion of offense? For what more grievous and
dangerous offense can any man give, than that whereby men are compelled to
sin against the holy Ghost? They shall therefore feel the heavy hand of God,
who now a days think this but a trifling matter. Moreover as in Paul's
former enterprises there appears a portrature of a raging tyran: so in the
confession of the same may be seen a very Christian mind, wholly enflamed
with the desire of Gods glory. For to what other end does* Paul rehearse
these his attemptes, but for that he knew they made to the setting forth of
the glory of God? For hereby both the authority of his mynisterie was
defended, and the great mercy of God commended, wherewith he embraced the
greatest offenders that are: yea even his enemies also in Christ Jesus. Read.
1. Timo. 1. And this is the chief cause why the godly use so often to confess
their sins, as we see in David and in diverse others. Therefore the ambition
of those men is very dishonest, who for the sauegarde of their own glory, will
either never confess their sins and grievous errors, or at least wise
wonderfully extenuate and diminish the same.

Furthermore, he sets the story of his conversion, The story of Paul's
conversion.
against his atte^pts against Christ, that by comparing of them together it
might appear he became a Christian man, not of any lightness or inconstancy
of mind, but even being compelled through the power of God. And hereunto
chiefly is to be referred the diligent declaration of all the circumstances.
For he alleges both the place and the time, and Christ's talk, and his
companions for witnesses, because no man should think that he had been
beguyled with any vain apparition or distraction of mind. But because we have
spoken otherwheres of converting unto God, and of the duty of those that
convert, it shall not now need to repeat the ^ame again. Let us now mark
the end of all these things, which was none other but the defending of his
vocation. Yet is it not in vain that he so diligently reports the words of
Christ, sharply reprehending his temeritie. For hereby he teaches the
hearers, that if they withstand the doctrine of the Gospel, they shall not
have to do with any mortal man, but with the son of God, which will punish
their bold enterprise, to their great loss and hinderaunce. These things
ought to serve for our comfort, that we abiding constantly in the true faith,
may clea^e fast unto God alone, among all the broils and enterprises of this
world, who has promised to all those that worship him, the inheritance of
the kingdom of heaven, in his son Jesus Christ: to whom be praise, honor,
power and glory, for ever. Amen.

The.Clxiij. Homely.
But rise and stand up on thy feet. For I have appeared unto thee for this
purpose, to make thee a minister and a witness both of those things which thou
haste seen, and of those things in the which I will appear unto thee,
delivering thee from the people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom I now send
thee, to open their eyes, that they may be turned from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of
sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is
toward me.
Because Paul knew that the Jews accused him principally of two points:
namely, for that he had forsaken the Jews religion, and turned to the faith in
Christ, and for that he had matched the Gentiles with the Jews, by preching the
Gospel among them: therefore he diligently declares the story of his
conversion, because that alone was sufficient to put away both the crimes.
Unto the first belong those things which have hitherto ben said, wherein he
declares, that he changed not his religion upon any light fantasy, but while
he was an enemy unto Christ, was compelled to yield unto Gods calling. The
second, he will confute in this place, where he renders a reason of his whole
ministry, even in the very words of Christ: which ministry he shows was
committed unto him upon this condition, that he should preach the Gospel, not
only to the Jews, but also to the Gentiles. But because these things belong
as well to our instruction, as to the defense of Paul, who may learn hereby
both the reason of the ministry ecclesiastical, and also the whole mean of
our salvation. Therefore every thing is to be considered in order.

Christ rayseth up Paul, who^ he had thrown down before.
The first thing we have to note, is, how Christ commanded Paul now
friendly to arise, and to stand up on his feet, whom erewhyle he had
horribly thrown down as his enemy, and persecutour. But this thing happened
not (as we have other where is heard) before his heart was pulled down, and
that he humbly enquired what the will of Christ was, and acknowledged him to be
his Lord. Which thing yet he would never have done, but that he felt in his
mind an effectuous working of the spirit of Christ. This truel^ is a notable
example of Gods goodness, which even then evidently declares it self, when
he seems to be angry. For he will not always be chiding with us, but
forasmuch as he desires to have men saved, he observes this scope and end
in his judgments, that he will have men rather instructed to salvation, than
destroyed. Neither will he draw forth his whippes and scourges, until he see
he can not prevail by his words. Neither yet does he beat us for any other
end, than to have us convert unto him, and to trust to be saved: whereof we
have both testimonies and examples every where in the scriptures, wherewith we
may confirm our wavering faith in all troubles and adversities.

But although it seem a great thing for Christ to give his cruel enemy
leave to arise, yet is this greater, and even to be wondered at, Paul is
called to the office of an ^postle.
that he appoynteth him to the office of an Apostle, which is the most
honorable and commendable function in the world. Yea he says, that he
appeared to him to this end, to make him a minister and witness of all the
things which he had both seen before, and should see hereafter. Here in
two words he comprehends the whole office, or duty of Bishops of the
Church. First he says, A minister.
that Paul should be a Minister, not a Lord and King. So are the Apostles
every where called, and such as must serve the whole Church publicly, in
setting before them the food of the soul, and in taking care for the affairs
of man's salvation. Read Matthew the.20. and.24. Luke the.12. Hereunto it
seems Paul had a respect, when he confessed he was a detter unto all men,
to the Jews and Gentiles, to the learned and unlearned. Roma* 1.
Hereby is excluded the great desire of bearing rule, against the which
Christ oftentimes in the hearing of the Apostles entreated at large, being not
ignorant that many afterward would come, which under the pretense of this
ministry, would look to reign like tirauntes over the Church. This done, he
says he should be a witness, A witness.
by the which name we read the Apostles were called also in the first chapter.
Thus it liked him more plainly to set out the trade of the ministry,
declaring also what things he should bear witness of: verily even of those
which he had seen, and which afterward he would reveal unto him. For Paul
had seen, and not seen only, but had also proved by experience that Christ
lived and reigned, and was an earnest defendour of his people. Whereby it was
easy for him to gather, that he was the redeemer of mankind, and not only a
mere man, but also such a God as he knew the Apostles preached that he was.
These therefore were the things that he should bear witness of. By this
place it appears (as we have else where admonished. For how certain and
infallible a thing the doctrine of the Apostles ought to be taken, seeing they
which published the same, were no runners about with pedlary wares, but the
very sworn witnesses of Jesus Christ, having their vocation confirmed with
infinite miracles. Therefore let al ministers remember they are witnesses, and
therefore must not preach new opinions at their own pleasure: but such things
as they find for certainty in the holy Scriptures, let them boldly bring
forth, God delivers his servants being in danger.
that no man be able to accuse them of falsehood or forgery.

Howbeit it might have seemed to Paul a grievous thing to be appointed to such
an office, as he knew even by those things only, which a little ^e^ore he went
about, was subject to infinite dangers. Therefore the Lord mixeth therewith a
consolation very commodious, and in season, wherein he promises to deliver him
out of the hands of the Jews and Gentiles. Thus by the way, as though he had
been doing of an other thing, he declares that he was sent also unto the
Gentiles, to bring them likewise into the society and fellowship of the
Church. In the mean season this place teaches us, that the Ministers must
look for hatred, persecutions, and all kinds of adversity in this world. For
except this were their state and condition, it should not need so often to
confirm them, neither with the consolations nor promises of Christ. These
promises must diligently be considered, for by them we are taught how Christ
never forsakes his people in their tribulations. And yet must they not so be
understood, as though he would deliver them from all kinds of adversity, and
set them in safety, or so preserve them, that they shall not perish in body.
For we read that Paul at the last was beheaded by Nero, and the other
Apostles also were cruelly put to death. But it is said that the Lord
delivers us, when in this present world he assisteth us with his spirit,
giving us constancy of mind, commodity of doing, and finally a mouth and
wisdom, against the which our enemies are not able to resist with any
probability of reason. Again, when he shoreth us up with consolations in
the middle of our afflictions, and translateth us out of the prison of this
body into the possession of his kingdom, and preserves our memory and good
name to remain to posterity. After this sort we know he delivered the holy
Martyrs, whose remembrance florisheth at this day, even among the enemies of
the faith. Which promises, seeing they are both general and always true,
there is no cause why we should suffer our selves to be feared or overcome
with any attemptes of this world. For who shall separate us from the love of
God. etc. Read the place. Romans 8.

To conclude, he adds the end of all these things, which is, that through
the ministry of Paul the eyes of the blind should be opened, The end and
use of the Gospel.
that they being illuminated, might convert from darkness unto light, and
being delivered from the power of Satan, might be reconciled unto God, in
whom they may receive remission of their sins, and inheritance of the king
dome of heaven through faith, with all those whom God has chosen unto him
self. These things conteyne in them the duty of Ministers of the word, and
the true use of the Gospel. For this cause, that thing is attributed unto the
Ministers, which is properly the work of God only, as is declared at large.
Therefore through the Gospel men's eyes are opened that they may see God, and the
way of salvation. By the Gospel men are converted from darkness unto light,
so that henceforth they which were occupied in the works of darkness, might
do the deeds of the light. For the christian Philosophy consists not in
vain speculations, but in practice, 1. Corin. 3.
which extends it self through all parts of a man's life. Again, by the
gospel men are brought out of the power of Satan unto God, to obey him and to
serve him. Finally the gospel offreth unto us ye forgiveness of sins, and the
inheritance of the kingdom of heaven. And we may not think that these things
stand in vain sound of words, but forasmuch as christ, which is the only
author of these things, is preched through ye gospel, they are truly
attributed to the preaching of the gospel, because the same gospel is not in
vain, but effectuous. Therefore the preching of the gospel contains in it the
cheifest and only treasure of our salvation. And the ministers thereof ought to
have this only end before their eyes, to bring men to be partakers of these
things, and not to lead them about as it were in a vain maze, and stagelike
pomp of preaching. Furthermore, The order and manner of salvation.
we have herein comprehended the whole order and manner of our salvation. For
where these things are given unto us of God, it is evident that we want them of
nature. Therefore of nature, we be blind to perceive any godliness, and by
our natural corruption we deserve to wail and mourn under the tirannie of
Satan. But by the goodness of God it comes to pass, that we be illuminated
by Christ, and be translated from the power of death and darkness into his
kingdom. For we being sanctified and justified by his merit, enter into the
kingdom of eternal life. And all these things (as we said ere while) God
offreth unto us to be received by faith, through the gospel: by the which
faith the scripture teach that we be purified and made righteous, because by it
only, power is given to us, to embrace Christ, and to receive this goodness.
These things might be declared more at large with their duties, whom Christ
has taken into the kingdom of his father. But because we have oftentimes
spoken thereof, it shall be sufficient, to show as it were with the finger, the
chief points of every thing. In the mean season we have here to bewail the
unkind and unhappy blindness of the world, which contemning so plain a way
of salvation, turn them to the most intricate Laberinthes, and pitfals of
eternal damnation. It is our parts to show our selves thankful unto God,
and with constant faith to hold fast the only author of these goodnesses,
which is our Lord and savior Jesus Christ: to whom be praise, honor, power,
and glory for ever. Amen.

The.Clxiiij. Homely.
Wherefore O king Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision, but
showed first unto them of Damascus and at Jerusalem, and throughout all the
costs of Iewrie, and then to the Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to
God, and do such works as become them that repent. For this cause the Jews
caught me in the Temple, and went about to kill me. Seeing therefore that I have
obtained help of God, I continue unto this day, witnessing both to small and
to great, saying none other things than those which the Prophets and Moses did
say should come: that Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first
that should rise from death, and should show light unto the people and to the
Gentiles.
PAVLE diligently reports the History of his conversion before Agrippa,
because thereby he was able manifestly to prove, that he became a Christian
man of no light head, ne yet preached the gospel unto the Gentiles of any
rash enterprise, but that God was the aucthoure of all the things which he had
hitherto done, who converted him when he was of a far other mind, and
commanded him to preach the gospel unto the Gentiles also. And after these
things thus premised, he declares what he did more over, and what happened
unto him, and thereof takes an occasion to preach to those that were present.

Paul obeys God contrary to the bidding of ye Priests.
First, he confesses plainly the obedience which he showed unto the
heavenly vision, which thing is diligently to be noted. For if we compare the
commandment of God, with the precepte that Paul received of the Priests,
we shall perceive they differed very much one from an other. For the Priests
sent him to Damascus, with public commission and authority, to bring those
faithful of Christ that were there to b^e put in bands and prisonne. But
God commanded him not only to cease of from his doing, but also to preach
the Gospel. Here therefore he says he obeyed the calling of God, and that
speedely and without all delay: and he is not ashamed to confess the same,
before those with whom he knew the Priests were of more authority than
he was. Therefore he teaches us by his Example, that we must obey God more
than man: and that we must make no delay, nor putting of, as soon as we be
certain what his will is. This rule who so ever follows, they dispatch them
self at once from great anxietie and care, and cannot do amiss.

The manner of true obedience.
Also we have to consider the manner of this obedience, which we may perceive
by the things, which Paul says he did. For he did those things which God
commanded him to do, and even as he commanded him to do them, preaching
the Gospel both to the Jews, and to the Gentiles. Therefore that is a true
obedience, when we accomplish the commandment of the Lord without all
exception. There are also which obey the Lord, but yet but in part only, and
as far forth as seems for their own commodity: whereof the Scripture
gives us Examples in the first of Saul, and Samuel the thirtienth and
fiftienth. But God is of a far other mind, Saul. 1 Samuel 13. and. 15
which forbids us to turn from his word either to the right hand or to
the left, either to put any thing to it, or to take any thing from it.
Therefore Paul did very well to take in hand the business appointed him of
God without any further deliberation, and to fulfill that that he was
commanded, according to the rule of Gods iniunction. Furthermore, while he
declares what he did, he teaches also what we ought to preach in the
gospel, and in what order to set it forth.

The points and order of Euangelike doctrine.
and subject to the wrath of God. Herewith we read that the Baptiste begun,
and Christ after him, who taught his Apostles to begin with the same. Whereby
it appears that they are but slender Gospellers in these days, that would
have this principle or beginning omitted. Moreover* the manner of true
repentance is expressed, Math 10 Luke. 24
which is to turn unto God. For as we in tourning from God,

Wherefore Peter in an other place, says he was sent of God, to give Israel^
repentance and forgiveness of sins. Where the error of those men is
confuted, which preach repentance without Christ, and send men to their own
works and merits. The third point of Paul's doctrine is that Paul. For
hereby we be taught, that good works must not be taken for merits, but are
required as duties prescribed, and due unto God: forasmuch as we are never
able to perform them, unless we be regenerated of the spirit and merit of
Christ, and be first converted unto God. Luke. 17
And although we do what so ever things we are bound to do, yet be we
unprofitable servants, as Christ himself teaches.

Thus in three points, Paul comprehends the whole gospel, Paul is laid
hold on, for his obeying of God.
and shows how he preached it in the same order. Now in this that follows,
he declares what happened unto him while he walked in this vocation, to the
end he would easily prove to every man, how unjustly the Jews dealt with him.
For this cause truly (says he) for that I endeavored my self to be obedient
unto God, the Jews took me, and would have killed me in the very Temple: and
had done it also, but that I was delivered through the present help of God. He
mentions the Temple and the danger of death he was in, to declare that they
were led rather of blind affection, than moved with any just cause: seeing
that neither the holiness of the Temple, nor public law and equity, could
restrain them from such irefull proceeding. This place teaches us, that the
obedience which the godly owe unto God, is the chief cause of persecutions.
For both the Prophets and the Apostles were hated of the world for none other
causes, but for that they labored to bring men unto God, by preaching the word
of God. And now a days the servant of Christ are in danger of persecuting,
for this cause only, for that they put their trust only in God through
Christ, worship him only, fear him only, and serve him only, as he
commands. But the heinousness of this matter is the greater, for that they
which labor privately and publicly to have al men saved, are so evil
requi^ed. In the mean season let this comfort us, that we hear Paul was
aided by God, and delivered out of the hands of most wicked cut throtes. For
this is a general rule, and we have promises every where which teach us, that
God delivers his people out of temptations, 2. Peter. 2 1. Cor. 10 Psalm. 34.
etc
and suffers them not to be tried above their strengthes.

Howbeit after Paul had sufficiently proved, that he was guiltless, and was
cast in prisone without desert, Paul preaches the gospel unto Agrippa.
then he turns him to Agrippa the king, and to the other heaters, and with
great boldness, begins his oration. And because it might seem a marvel to
any man, how he was so constant in doing his office, seeing he had so
oftentimes before been in adversity and danger of the Jews, therefore he first
shows the reason thereof: which was, that he was delivered through the help of
God, and therefore ought not to be slack in his office. Thus he ascribes unto
God the benifite of his delivery, whereof it seemed the captain was the
aucthor, because he knew the captain was led by the hand and spirit of God.
In the mean season Paul's example teaches us, that those which have once or
twice proved and felt the help of God, ought to be inflamed with greater
diligence, and not (as some use) to wax the more remiss and negligent, as
though they had fulfilled all their duty at once. For beside that we owe unto
God all kind of duty, the law of thankfulness requires the more faith
and industry of us, least we might seem vnki^de to God our benefactoure.
Again, because he would not seem importune in preaching unto them, Paul is a
detter unto all men.
he declares that he is bound in duty so to do. For he was detter unto
all men both small and great. Thus he stirs up their minds to think, that
the gospel appertained unto them also. This is very diligently to be
considered, that we hear the gospel is preached by the commandment of God,
to men of all states and degrees. For hereby we learn that there is no respect
of persons with God: yea that he would have all sorts of men to be saved.
Therefore he has appointed the ministers of the word to be the disposers and
stewardes of all his household. Let this comfort them that are compassed about
with troubles, and also teach both ministers and hearers their duty, that
neither the one at their pleasure get and procure them disciples after their
own calling, nor those other think they be at liberty, and not bound to the
rule of the gospel. At length he repeateth what he taught: verily none other
thing, but that that Moses and the Prophets had foreshewed in times past. The
sum of the gospel.
He comprehends all his doctrine in three Articles, which it is evident were
then most in controversy. The first was, that Christ was that savior that
was promised, should suffer death for us. For this, of all other things was
coumpted most absurd, as the words read in the twelfth of John, abundantly
declare. The second was, that the same Christ should rise again from the
dead, and that the first but not in order. (For we read that diverse other,
before Christ, were raised again) but in worthiness and in power, as the
aucthor of the resurrection and life of all men. The third was, that he
should illuminate with his word and spirit, not only the Jews, but also the
Gentiles. And that Paul declared these things with many places and testimonies
of scripture, the only exclamation of Festus shall afterward prove. And
surely there are every where extant many testimonies both of Moses and the
Prophets, whereby to prove all these things. Whereupon we gather again, that the
doctrine of the gospel, is no new thing, resting or consisting in a few of
persons, but of most antiquity, and allowed with the consent of all ages.
Furthermore, how in the scriptures are contained whatsoever things are
needeful to be believed, seeing that Paul was able to prove all the mysteries
of Christian faith by them. Let us therefore be contented with them only, and
constantly hold fa^^ the faith contained in them, that by the^ we may attain
to life everlasting, through Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom be blessing,
honor, power and glory for ever. Amen.

The.Clxv. Homely.
AS he thus spoke for him self, Festus said with a loud voice: Paul thou art
beside thy self. Much learning does make thee mad. And Paul said, I am not
mad most dear Festus, but speak forth the words of truth and
soberness. For the King knows of these things, before whom also I spoke
freely. Neither think I that any of these things are hidden from him, for this
thing was not done in a corner. King Agrippa* beleeuest thou the Prophets? I
wotte well that thou beleeuest. Agrippa said unto Paul. Somewhat thou bring
me in mind for to become a christian. And Paul said, I would to God, that
not only thou, but also all that hear me to day, were not somewhat only, but
altogether such as I am, except these bands. And when he had thus spoken, the
king rose up, and the deputy, and Bernice, and they that sat with them. And
when they were gone aparte, they talked between them selves, saying: This man
does nothing worthy of death, or of bonds. Then said Agrippa unto Festus:
this man might have been let lose, if he had not appealed unto Caesar.
AFter Luke has declared Paul's oration, he shows what effect it took with
the hearers. And this is a very worthy place to be considered. For in two
examples he describes two kinds of men which hear the word of God in vain.
The end and use of all these things is, that both ministers may learn how to
deal with such fortes of men, and also all others understand what to beware
of, if they will hear the word of God to their profit and commodity.

The first kind is set out in the example of Festus the Deputy, who is a
president of ungodly persons, Festus is a president of those which hear the
word with a profane intent.
and of those which have no knowledge nor taste at all, of any godliness.
Where we have first to consider Festus, and then Paul. He gave ear unto
Paul, declaring his visions, and proving all the mysteries of the christian
faith and man's salvation, by the testimonies of the scriptures, whereof he had
never heard any thing at all, as being a Gentile, which had more understanding
by all likelihode in wars, than in religion. Wherefore he supposes that Paul
in reasoning of such profou^d and difficulte matters, was mad, and like unto
those, that in their frantike fittes use to imagine with themselves, monstrous
and wonderful things, and so utter them without all reason: and very
importunately he interrupteth Paul in his speaking. Yet in this one thing he
is not altogether unreasonable, that he imputes the want of wit, which he
supposed to be in Paul, to ouermuche study of learning, vpbraiding him with
none other thing, as many use to do in these days. This example teaches us,
how little the word of god prevails with the^ which are led only with man's
reason. For this is their common property to count that a mockery, that passes
the reach of their capacity and reason. Whereas in the mean season they
understand nothing less than the things belonging to the spirit of God.
Therefore it cannot be chose^ but they must think the gospel of Jesus Christ
crucified, to be the greatest foolishness in the world: because there is
nothing so absurd, and void of reason, as to ask and hope for salvation in
him, which was hanged and died on the Cross among thieves and murderers.
Therefore that that happened unto Paul, preaching before Festus, the same we
read happened before unto the Prophets, and afterward unto the successoures of
the Apostles also, namely that they were taken for men out of their wi^tes. Yea
Christ himself was mocked of Pilate, what time he confessed he came into the
world to preach the truth. For Pilate thought him to be of the number of
those men which had labored long in vain to find out the truth, because all
things among men are doubtful and uncertain: why therefore are we offended,
because the gospel prevails so little in these days, seeing there is such
a multitude of men every where which blinded with the reason of the flesh, and
distract in their minds, receive the word of God into the way which the
infernal Iayes, that is to say, the affections and suggestio^s of satan, by
and by peck up? Paul constantly and modestly defends his ministry.
But what does Paul? Is he so feared with Festus importunate interruption, that
he holds his peace, and so through his silence confirms the sinister
suspicion, that they had of his being out of his wit? No. Yea, rather he boldly
defends the authority both of his ministry and of the gospel: I am not
mad says he (most dear Festus) but I speak the words of truth and
sobriety. Therefore he boldly puts such slander away, yet modestly and with
such reverence as is due unto Magistrates, least through impatiencie and ire,
and rendering of railing again, he should have declared he had been out of his
wit in deed. Therefore, after a wise sort, he utterly denies he was mad: and
those words which seemed unto Festus to be of a mad man, he declared to be
most true and uttered by him after no curious sort, but with as much sobriety
as could be, and this he proves by most credible witnesses, among whom first
he produces the King, who could be ignorante of none of those things, which
hitherto had been said concerning Christ: because they were not done in a
corner, or in secret, but in the most famous City of all nations, and at the
greatest and principallest feast of all other. Again, he calls all the
Prophets also to witness, who foreshewed that these things should so come to
pass, as he declared a little before more at large. And because his saying
should have the more waighte and authority, he boldly and freely defends
the authority of the Prophets. For he turns him unto the king, and says,
Beleeuest thou O king Agrippa, the Prophets? And not waiting till he had an
answer, he preuenteth it, adding moreover: I know that thou beleeuest. For he
knew well that the majesty and truth of the scripture Prophetical, was yet
such, even among the most corrupt nation of the Jews, that if any man called
it in dout, all men would take him to be an ungodly person. And it is to be
thought that Paul handled this matter the more at large, because Agrippa
confessed by and by that he was greatly moved with his words. Now be it here we
have certain things to be diligently considered, because they make not a little
for the common instruction of all men. Which is the best wai of teaching.
First, this place teaches us, that the best way of teaching is, that that
Paul confesses he had hitherto observed, where he says, he spoke the words of
truth and sobriety. For above al things, ministers must have a regard of the
truth, least they sell leasing, whereof Christ says the devil is the father,
under the pretense of Gods word. And in treating of the mysteries of truth,
let them use a godly and holy sobriety, giving heed only to such things, as
may edify men unto godliness: Least while they follow the curiosity of the
flesh, they both entangle themselves in unprofitable and hurtful questions,
and also offend the weak and ruder sort. Let them therefore remember that we
know but in part only, and our Prophesying is imperfect: but that hereafter
there shall come a day, when without all impediment we shall behold all the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven openly in the face of God.

Furthermore, Paul's words teach us, Christian religion is certain, and not
to be suspected of obscurity.
that the affairs of our salvation and Christian religion, are certain, and
that nothing of them is difficult, or to be suspected. For as none of the
things which happened unto Christ, was done in corners: so those things which
concerned Christ, and the way of salvation in him, were done in times past
publicly and openly among the Fathers. For the Patriarchs to whom the
promises were made at the beginning, were no rascalles or diffamed. Also the
delivery of the people of Israel out of Egipte, was a thing well known unto
the Gentiles. The publishing of the law with so many miracles, was a famous
and a renoumed matter, all which things were figures of the mysteries of
Christ. As touching the Prophets, no good man did ever suspect any falshoode in
them. Furthermore, all the Monarchies both of the Assirians, Persians,
Grecians and Romans had to do with the nation of the Jews, among whom the
affairs of salvation were taught. The voices of the Apostles did freely sound
abroad in all the world, in so much that all men knew both what they did,
and preached. This is a great dignity of our faith, which is to be found in
none other religion. This reproves the impudency of those men which now a
days call our belief in doubt and question. Furthermore this place teaches
us, The scripture of it self worthy of credit.
that the authority and credit of the holy scripture, is most certain, and
that we must suffer no man to call it in controversy. For seeing it is
inspired of God, it is unlawful to doubt of it. For this cause Paul puts
it ou^ of controversy that Agrippa believed the Prophets. And Christ having
to do with the Scribes of the Jews, attributes this unto them, that they
firmly believe, that life everlasting is contained in the scripture* John. 5.
How much more execrable is the impudeneie of our days, where some men
wickedly cavil and scoff at the scriptures, and other some wonderfully
deminishe the authority of them, while they contend they ought to be allowed
and confirmed by the judgment of men.

Furthermore, let us see the second kind of hearers of the word, Agrippa
is a pattern of those in who^ the cares of this world chooke the seed of the
word.
of whom we have a pattern set forth in Agrippa the King, and these are
such as being given unto the world, let the seed of the word be
ouergrowen with the cares and desires of the same. For he dare not deny the
Scriptures the authority whereof he knew was of God and infallible. He
sees also that those things which Paul says, are agreeable with the
Scripture. He feels also certain euidente motions of the mind, whereby he
was allured to take part with Christ: and he dissembleth not the same,
because he openly confesses, that he was somewhat persuaded. What lets
him therefore, that he goes not forewarde, and publicly professes Christ?
Uerely the unhappy liking that he had of the world, the ^rendshippe and glory
whereof seemed to him more excellent, than that he would forsake it and go unto
them, whom many men hated and envied, and other some thought to be out of
their wits. But would God we had no more examples hereof, than Agrippa in
these days, and that we heard not every where such as give the gospel a
singular commendation, but yet follow the doctrine of Antichrist still, for
fear of losing their heads and honor, or else for fear of putting their life
in danger. In the mean season there appears in these men what a divine and
wonderful force the Gospel is of, which wresteth out of them, even against
their wills, and strive they never so much to the contrary, the confession of
the truth: yet it nothing profits them, because they dare to set them selves
against the holy Ghost.

A very christian wish of Paul.
But as Paul very wisely and stoutly answers Festus, so (because he was able
to do no more) he sets against the words of Agrippa, a very christian
wish, and inflamed with great feruencie of charity. I would wish (says he) of
God, that not only thou, but also all those that hear me this day, were not
only in part, but wholly such as I am, these bonds excepted. And there is no
doubt, but that Paul wished these things, even from the heart: who otherwheres
prayed for the Jews both day and night, and wished to be accurssed for their
sakes. We are taught by the way, that it is not sufficient for us to believe in
part, but that there is required of us every day an increasing in faith, that
we may at length grow into a perfect man in Christ Jesus. And the opinion of
those men is not to be allowed, which suppose one or two Articles to be
sufficient unto salvation. For so all the other should be unprofitable and
superfluous, which thing should derogate much both from the wisdom of God,
and also from his goodness. Moreover Paul's wish teaches us, that Ministers
have no jurisdiction or power upon the minds of men, but that the spirit of
God only works in them effectuously. For why should Paul trouble himself in
vain wishes, John. 6 Math. 11. etc 1. Cor. 5
if he had been able to have turned Agrippa his mind. But see what is said
to this purpose, both by Christ and by Paul. And we must not let this
pass, how Paul excepteth his bonds. For although they were nothing
gree^ous unto him, and that he knew well the chief glory of his Ministry
consisted in them, yet he wished the quietness and peace of other men, as
far forth as it stood with the commodity of their faith and salvation. For
thus it becomes all men to carry their own cross patiently, and yet in the
mean season to provide for all other men's commodity and tranquillity, as
much as they are able. Hereby it appears with what spirit they are led,
which envy at all men's felicity, or else of rash judgment, condemn them
as no good Christians, who^ they see live in any commodious or wealthy wise.

The innocence of Paul.
After these things, Luke joins the end of all this doing, namely, how all
the assembly and auditorie brake up and departed, being never a whitte the
better by reason of the impedimentes before rehearsed. But this is wonderful,
that Paul is absolved and acquitted again by the consent of all men, and
yet for all that they set him not at liberty. Whereby it appears how
little the world regards the state of the Godly, whom they see afflycted
without deserte. The innocence of Paul so often times tried, makes much
for the setting forth of the dignity of the Christian faith. Which thing also
reproves the temeritie of those men which cry out in these days, that the
doctrine of the Gospel is sedicious, seeing that Paul, a most earnest
preacher of the gospel, was able so oftentimes to purge himself from the crime
of sedition, before profane and heathen Judges. Let no man therefore be moved
with the slanders of this world, but being constant in the doctrine of true
faith, let us boldly serve God, which defends those that worship him in the
middle of the tempests of this world, and gives them the inheritance of his
kingdom, by Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom be praise, honor, power, and
glory, for ever. Amen.

The.xxvij. Chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The.Clxvj. Homely.
WHen it was concluded that we should sail into Italy, they delivered both
Paul, and certain other prisoners, unto one named Julius, an under Captain
of Caesar's soldiers. And we entered into a ship of Adramicium, and loosed
from land, appointed to sail by the coasts of Asia, one Aristarchus out of
Macedonia, of the Country of Thessalonia tarrying still with us. And the next
day we came to Sidon. And Julius courteously entreated Paul, and gave him
liberty to go unto his friends, and to refresh him self: and when we had
launched from thence, we sailed hard by Cypers, because the winds were
contrary. And when we had sailed over the sea of Cylicia and Pamphilia, we came
to Myra, which is in Lycia. And there the vndercaptayne found a ship of
Alexandria, that sailed into Italy, and he put us therein. And when we had
sailed slowly many days, and scarce were come over against Cindus (because the
wind withstoode us) we sailed hard by the cost of Candy, over against Salmo,
and with much work sailed beyond it, and came to a place which is called the
fair havens, nigh whereunto was the city of Lasea.
THe Evangelist Luke in this Chapter describes the paynefull and dangerous
navigations of Paul the Apostle, The argument of the Chapter.
sent unto Rome to appear before Caesar. Where surely at the first sight,
such great diligence of the holy Ghost might seem vain and superfluous: but
if a man would weigh every thing thoroughly, he should perceive many things in
the same most worthy to be known and considered. For this History teaches
us what the state of the godly is in this world. It sets forth unto us in
Paul examples of patience and constancy, it teaches us moreover the
infallible truth of Gods promises. For although al things in the world seemed to
go cross with Paul, and to hinder him from coming to Rome: yet the truth of
God, which had promised he should be brought before Caesar, brusteth through al
these impedime^ts. There are yet besides this many other things full of comfort
and instruction, which we shall consider in their places.

Paul is brought to Rome among malefactors.
First, is declared how the Apostle was sent unto Rome, where mention is made of
one Julius a Centurion or p^^ie Captain, unto whom Festus delivered Paul
among other prisoners to be carried. Here is to be noted a singular diligence
of the Romans in administering the law, considering they take such pains,
and be at so great charges with sending of prisoners from one place to an
other. There are also diverse other examples of this thing, See Valeri. Max.
16. Book, and v. chapter. Esaias. 53* Luke. 22.
which gate them singular commendation and glory. Yea, it is evident that by
this mean chiefly they advanced the^ selves to so great a glory of Empire.
And the Scripture plainly teaches, both in the.lxxij. Psalm, and in other
places, that there is no more ready or commodious way than this, either to
conserve, or to enlarge Empires and kingdoms. For that that fell out so luckely
with the Romans, we read has been an help to many others, whereby to aspire
and climb up unto power and glory. Again, we know how most flourishing
kingdoms have suddenly had a fall, when justice and censure of public laws
has begun to be neglected. It behooves us chiefly to consider the case and
state of the godly: for Paul is joined with other prisoners, who without all
doubt were for the most part grievous and heinous misdoers. So the scripture
teaches us, that Christ was numbered with the wicked: which also many times
chanced unto the martyrs. With whose examples it behooves us in these days to
be encoraged, that we be not offended at the most unjust judgments of the
world. Moreover there appears in Paul's miserable case a singular docume^t of
Gods goodness, whereby it comes to pass that the pitiful company of the
prisoners has such a co^forter and cou^seler, through whose means we shall
hear at length how they were al saved. And there is no doubt* but Paul used al
manner of occasions to instruct and teach them the mysteries of christian faith
and religion, because we have seen hitherto how ernestly he desired the
salvation of al men. Thus God gives us singular occasion, even then to do well,
when he seems utterly to have no care of us. Hereunto also belong the things
following: where we are taught y^ god had a special regard of Paul in all these
dangers. For first he joins unto him most faithful companions, Paul's
companions.
to help and succor him with their presence and ministry. Among these was
Luke the writer of this history, as appears by the order of the whole story.
The^ next Aristarchus the Macedonian, a man without peradventure very rich,
Aristarchus
which was able to sustain so great charges. For he went out of Greece with
Paul to Jerusalem: and although he saw him apprehended by y^ Jews, yet did he
not forsake him, but for.ij. whole years together and more he did faithfully
help him, and now he acco^panieth him unto Rome. Thus god uses to aid and
succor his people, that they be not tempted above their strength: and when
they are utterly forsaken of men, he is their defender. This example of
Aristarchus is very notable, reproving flaterers and parasits which use to
measure friendship by profit, meaning to suffer nothing for the truths sake*
insomuch that they are ashamed of the martirs of Christ. But we must have a
respect unto God the rewarder, which recompenseth the faith of Aristarchus with
immortal glory and inheritance of the kingdom of heaven. An other argument of
Gods providence and goodness, we hear it is, that the Centurion is so
friendly unto Paul. The Centurion is Paul's fre^d.
For both he courteously entreats him, and when he came to Sidon he gives
him leave to go visit his friends, to recreat and refresh him self among
them. The like we saw before in Lysias the Tribune, and Felix the President. So
Abdias in times paste was a patron and protector of the Prophets, and Jeremy
had friends while he was in prison, that succored him, both with help and
counsel. Read the first of the Kings, the.18. chapter, and Jeremy. 38. Of
these things it behooves us also to take comfort, that we yield not to the
enterprises of tyrannes, but commend our selves and all our doings to God
only. Howbeit in this place we have to consider Paul, who being in a city
very full of people, and standing on the sea coaste, where he might easily
either have hid him self, or have slipped away: yet would use no such
opportunity and advantage of escape. The causes were, Paul would not flee, no
not when he might.
both for that he should have done unjustly, to have brought the Captain in
danger, which had well deserved of him, and also for that he had learned by the
Oracle, that he must go to Rome. We are taught by this example, that we must
not seek our own safety by any unlawful means. For if in our distresses
there appear no way of escape, but such as is repugnant unto charity, faith,
and justice: then is it certain that God has determined of us otherwise,
whose will and pleasure it is meet we obey, least while we make provision for
our body and goods, we lose our soul.

Now follows a diligent and long description of their navigations or sailing,
the course whereof let them that are desirous to know every thing, Paul's voyage
or navigations is full of danger.
search for in the Geographers tables. We have to consider how it was a
paynefull and dangerous voyage, seeing it is expressly declared that the
winds were against them. Howbeit God could easily have remedied these
incomberaunces, who by many examples has declared himself to be the Lord and
ruler of the sea. But thus it pleased him to have his chosen vessel tried, that
the glory both of his truth and power might seem the more evident. In the mean
season it appears what state our life is in: verily a troublesome state, and
like to a pilgrimage, wherein we see new travels and dangers every day
appear. But chiefly this is to be seen in the life of those that are godly,
which is continually assaulted with fresh cares and troubles. An example
hereof we have in Christ our head who as soon as he was borne found enemies,
whose awaytes and trecheries made the whole course of his life unpleasant and
perilous. Paul also found even the same, which wrestling a long time with the
crafts and awaytes of the Jews, is at length committed to the sea, an element
of all others most cruel, the perils whereof he had also before proved, as
appears by the eleue^th chapter of the second Epistle to the Corinthians.
Infinite other examples of this kind might be repeated if need so were. Let
us rather mark the use of these things, which is, to arm our selves with
constant faith, and to overcome al adversity, seeing it is evident that there
is prepared for us rewards of eternal rest in heaven, which we shall enjoy
hereafter with Jesus Christ: to whom be praise, honor, power, and glory, for
ever. Amen.

The.Clxvij. Homely.
WHen much time was spent, and when sailing was now ieopardous, because also
that they had ouerlong fasted, Paul put them in remembrance, and said unto
them. Sirs, I perceive that this voyage will be with hurt and much damage, not
of the lading and ship only, but also of our lives. Nevertheless the under
Captain believed the governor and Master of the ship, more than those things
which were spoken of Paul. And because the haven was not commodious to winter
in, many took counsel to depart thence, if by any means they might attain to
Phenices, and there to winter. Which is an haven of Candy, and lies toward
the South and Northwest wind. When the Southwinde blew, they supposing to
obtain their purpose, loosed unto Asson, and sailed paste all Candy, but not
long after there arose against their purpose a flawe of wind out of the
Northeast, and when the ship was caught, and could not resist the wind, we
let her go, and drove with the weather. But we were carried into an Isle, which
is named Clauda, and had much work to come by a boat, which they took up,
and used help, and made fast the ship, fearing least they should fall into
the Syrtes: and so they let down a vessel, and were carried. The next day when
we were tossed with an exceeding Tempest, they lightened the ship, and the
third day we cast out with our own hand the takeling of the Ship. When at
the last neither the sun nor stars appeared, no small tempest lay upon us.
All hope that we should escape, was then taken away.
THat that came to pass unto the son of God, our savior Jesus Christ, while
he lived on the earth, to be enured and exercised with diverse and daily
afflictions: the same Paul, both by his example in this place, and by express
words in other places, teaches us, to remain for all them which shall
follow his steps. For he that had now two whole years suffered to lie in
bonds, and to feel the greefes of imprisonment, and had tried day from day the
fresh awayts and trecheries of enemies, is now committed to a most fierce
element, to try the dangerous tempests of the sea, and at length to prove the
misfortunes of unhappy shipwreck. For it was declared in the Homely before
going, how he came out of Syria, unto the Isle of Candy by contrary winds,
and very dangerous sailing. But yet follows a description of a far greater
danger, which at length we shall hear ended with shipwreck, the order and
going forward whereof Luke has reported very truly and diligently, because
in this narration which at the first sight seems bare and barren, God
warns us of danger, and gives us counsel in time.
there fall out diverse things which serve both for our learning and comfort.

Amongst the which this is worthy first to be noted, that God admonishes
both the soldiers and Mariners in time of the eminent danger. For where
they had layne at anchor a long while in the fair Haven, near unto Las^a, and
winter now drew on. The Jews fast being now ouerpaste, which was used to
be kept in the seventh month, See Leui. 16.
which with us falls out between September and October, Paul diligently
exhorts them to put off their vow till an other time. Which thing it is
evident that he did not without the Revelation of the holy Ghost, because he
plainly foresheweth the dangers that afterward followed. And here we have
chiefly to consider, how God never for^aketh those that are his. For where he
would have all men to be saved, he warns them of dangers in time, that they
may take heed to themselves, and devise some means how to escape: and he
attempereth his warnings in diverse sorts. For sometimes he warns us by his
Prophets and preachers of his word, which is his most common way and usage,
and one of the chiefest tokens of his good will toward us: touching the which
thing see Amos the Prophet in his third chapter. Sometimes he reuealeth unto us
privately, by our friends and acquayntaunce, in what danger we be. He has
also his tokens of diverse sorts, which declare his wrath toward sinners.
Furthermore, he nippeth us sometime by the ear with the secret inspiration of
his spirit, and with our own conscience. And we read that some have been
admonished by the ministry of Angels: all which things are so common and
usual, that we need not declare them by any examples. Let us learn at the
least wise to acknowledge the goodness of god, and not to contemn faithful
and wholesome admonitions, least we be the authors of our own destruction. For
this is the end of the froward and disobedient, as the examples of these men
also shall afterward declare. But before we entreat thereof, we have somthings to
say of Paul. For we heard before how he was told by the heavenly Oracle,
that he should go unto Rome: which thing it is plain he firmly believed. Yet
he abused not the Oracle, to put him self in danger without cause, and so to
tempte God. But rather being admonished of the danger by a new revelation,
he believes it, and likewise admonishes other to have a regard unto them
selves. Whereby it appears, that the doctrine of faith and providence of God,
makes not men to be rash and tempters of God. For even as Christ requires
wisdom in those that be his: so when soever God offers us any lawful and
due means of escape, it is certain he would not have us to put our selves in
danger. Therefore it becomes us to use these means of auoydaunce with fear
and godliness.

Furthermore, Paul's wholesome counsel is not accepted, but to the great
hynderaunce and loss of them all is contemned. Paul's advise is despised.
Where it behooves us to consider the proceeding of all the matter, that we
may learn thereby how it comes to pass, that a great many despise
wholesome counsel, and procure their own loss, and sometimes destruction.
The first cause alleged in this place is, for that the Centurion thought good
to believe the governor and master of the ship, rather than Paul. And in
so doing, if a man would consider the reason of the flesh, he seems it did
very wisely, yet he erreth, and that fowely, because he esteems and regards
the counsel, not according to the cause, but after the authority of men,
otherwise he would easily have perceived, that it was not without a cause that
Paul said it was ieopardous sailing, considering the winter drew on. And
this is a very common error, specially if God give counsel by the Ministers
of his word. For, to give ear unto them, it seems to many men, not only a
grievous, but also a very heinous offense. And there are now a days every
where Achabes and Sedechiases, which disdain to hear the Micheases and
Ieremyes, and think they them selves can give best counsel, or else take
unto them other counselors, which they think are more agreeable with their
humors and conditions. Hereby most times it comes to pass, that in
dangers of war we flee unto barbarous Nations, and blouddy Souldioures, to
leagues of Princes, and to Fortresses and Holds: in sycknesses to Physicians
only, in need and poverty unto unlawful arts, and we give ear unto them
which we suppose have had good success heretofore in like enterprises. After
this sort men are wrapped in many euilles and incumberaunces, which they
might easily eschew, if they would admit the word of GOD only, and the
aduises and counsayles taken out thereof.

The other cause why they despised Paul's counsel was, for that the Rode or
Haven seemed not to them commodious inoughe to Winter in. For this cause they
drew up their Ankers, meaning to seek some more commodious harbor. The
same thing sloppeth up the way unto many wholesome counsayles, because we
be not content with present commodities, but seek others, in our judgment
better. For thus it comes to pass, that while we follow the insaciable and
blind affections of the flesh, we entangle our selves in the snares of
sin, and be authors of our own greatest myschiefes. This chanced unto
these Souldioures and Maryners, who despisyng the Haven that God had appointed
them, at length by Shipwreck lost all that they had, and were also in
hazard of their lives. We have examples hereof every where in Hystories,
among which, this one that we read of the Israelites is very singular,
which being weery of their present state and condition, desired to have a
king, and could be induced by no reasons, brought by Samuel, to keep still
that kind of policy or government that God had given them. Julius Caesar
writes the like thing of our Ancestors, the Heluetians, who being weerie of
their native soil and Country, went about to plant them selves in France, to
their great loss and hinderaunce. The use of all these things is, to make us
contented with the present state that God gives us, and to seek no further.
For by so doing we shall bridle the affections of the flesh, and keep our
selves in doing our duty. See what Paul has written hereof. 1. Tim. 6. But
to return again unto our men, there is a third thing that makes them stiff
in their purpose, because they thought the south wind was very good to go away
withal. And there is no doubt but a great many of them mocked Paul, as one
that would have hindered the towardness of such success by his counsel, if
they would have given ear unto him. But not long after they are grievously
punished for their disobedience. This is a very notable policy of the devil,
who commonly uses to make the beginnings of sin to seem easy and
prosperous, thereby to entise us the rather with the hope of good success. For
as sin flattereth and fawneth upon our corrupt nature: so in the beginning
the success thereof seems very fortunate: whereby it comes to pass, that
we being dr^nken with fortune, do wickedly despise all wholesome
admonitions, and many times with laughing clappe our hands, and hysse at them.
We^ have examples hereof every where, therefore we need not stand long
herein. Thus the things that put adulterers, dronkardes, soldiers, and all
kind of mischeeuous doers in good hope of marvelous success, are not long
after the causes of great calamities: which thing the contemners of Paul's
counsel, found true, as now shall be declared.

For not long after, arose a Northeast wind, The punishment of gods counsel
despised.
notable even by the proverb, which turns their whole ship hither and
thither round about, like as it had been a wheel. So they prove to their great
hinderaunce and loss, that such can not long well prosper or go forward, as
go about any thing against Gods forbode. For most times it comes to pass,
that when they think they are in most prosperity, some sudden and unlooked
for calamity quite ouerwhelmeth them. Whereof we have examples every day, in
adulterers, thieves, covetous persons, hired soldiers, and to conclude, in all
the ungodly, which the Prophet says, live not out half their days. And this
may be seen, not only in private men, but also in kingdoms and commonweals, which are enl^^ged by violence and unrighteousness against the laws
of God. For commonly some unhappy ruin throws them also down, even when
all men think they are in most safety, and that their power is invincible.
This thing the fall of the Assirians and Babilonians teaches us, the
overthrows of the Persians, the destruction of the Greeks, and that ruin of
the Roman Empire, which happened beyond the expectation of all the world.
Therefore there is no cause that either we should wax insolent, (...) proud
of our prosperity, or be grieved and offended at others. But rather let the
word of God be the squire and rule of all our doings, whose gu^^ing* if we
follow, we shall neither err from the truth, nor provoke the (...) of God
agay^^^ us.

Now follows a more diligent description of that danger that they procured
unto themselves. Man's power is of n^ force against God.
For a flawe or tempest of wind caught their ship with such violence, that
they were not able to withstand it, and therefore they let her drive whither
she would with wind and wether. And although they were carried unto the
Island of Clauda, and seemed then to be in good c^mforte, yet by and by after
they were disappoy^^^^ of tha^ hope and began to be in danger both of
losing their ^ote^ and wholesh^ppe also. By which example we are taught* that
their force is altogether in vain, whom God by his Justice persecuteth* For
w^ere^s God is the Lord of Hosts, he is able to arm eue^ the smallest* or
least things that are, against his enemies, so that they shall be able to
vanquishe and subdue them. Thus the w^nde, which is the vaynest and
vncertaynest thing that is, when God so pleases is able to subuerte and turn
all things vpside down. And we read how the soote of the Furnace, Frogs,
Lyce, ^imicies, Flies, and most small Worms were the conquerours of Pharao.
Let no man therefore trust either in his own strength, or strive against God,
going about to ^^nishe his sin. For although sometime the stubborn and
disobedient seem to have some hope of help: yet whatsoever helps they seek
for in the flesh, they are imperfect, deceitefull, and vain. The only and
certain way of help and salvation is, to turn unto God, and to be reconciled
unto him.

What happens to such as will lose nothing at Gods bidding.
Beside all these evils or distresses, they are compelled to cast out their
goods with their own hands. And now their minds are so much altered, that
where before they thought they did not ride commodiously enough by Lasea, they
are now feign of their own accord to throw out, even their necessaries, and
are careful how to escape with their life, where before their only rare was
for commodity and delights. This is commonly the state of all such, which to
obey God, will suffer no loss of any of the things which serve to maintain
their riot and pleasure. For at length they are compelled to spend and to
throw away all, and lose those things, without the which life can not be
mayntayned. For this is a common and true saying: That that Christ will not
take, the Chequer will rake. And most times such as will not hazard their
goods in the quarrel of faith and religion, are morselles for tyrants to tire
upon. Likewise they that will not bridle their gluttonous lust, and desire of
fraunching and feeding (as God commands them) are deliuere^ to the
Physicians and Chirurgians, to be vexed and tormented. Beside that, for the
most part such men are so troubled in their consciences, that they would be
glad to redeem the rest and quiet thereof with all their goods and riches, if
it were possible. Let us therefore dedicate our selves, and all that is ours
unto Christ, which promises a lyberall and bountiful reward to all them,
which for his names sake suffer loss of life, or worldely goods. Matthew. 19.
Mark. 10. Let us also cast away all those things that may hinder our
salvation, because we know that if that be once lost, it can never be
recovered again.

Finally, for a great many days, neither the Sun, nor the S^arres shyned,
Paul him self is in hazard with the despisers of God.
and so at length they were out of all hope of (...). And this is likewise a
common thing, that they which re^^^e to walk in the light of Gods word, are
wrapped in dangerous and deadely darkness. For we have none other Lode
star gi^en us, by whose leading we are able to hold our course and tyghte
way in the tempestuous Seas of this world. Here is to be observed how God
suffers Paul also to be in danger, and to be most grievously tempted
among these malefactoures, insomuche that he to ^^neth him unto prayer, and
has need to be comforted at God^ ha^^^, as the things followyng will
declare. This is the sta^^ of the godly in this world, which offends many
men, by^^^se (...) in such like peril and hazard, as the notorious ^^cked
vs^ (...). And yet is their state of a far other sort. For all things work
unto them for their profit and commodity, and being of a good conscience in
the myddest of their dangers, they know that Gods ears are open unto their
prayers: and staying them selves upon his promyses, they wait also for
strength of him to bear out the burden, and look for their delivery in due
time and season. Where in the mean season the wicked are troubled with g^^ltie
con^^ien^^, and for the most part their dangers are ended wy^^ their
destru^^ion. Let us therefore follow the example of Paul, and well mark the
loadestarre of Gods word, that if happily we chance to come in danger in this
unhappy world, we may yet have our hope of salvation firmly fixed and set in
God, who will not suffer his people to be tempted above their strength: and
will give us happy success, and deliver us out of all dangers, and at length
will take us into the kingdom of his son Jesus Christ: to whom be praise,
honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

The.Clxviij. Homely.
But after long abstinence, Paul stood forth in the midst of them, and
said, Sirs, you should have hearkened to me, and not have loosed from Candie,
neither to have brought unto us this harm and loss. And now I exhort you to
be of good cheer. For there shall be no loss of any man's life among you,
saving of the ship only. For there stood by me this night the Angel of God.
Whose I am, and whom I serve, saying: fear not Paul, thou must be brought
before Caesar, and lo, God has given thee all them that sail with thee.
Wherefore Sirs, be of good cheer, for I believe God, that it shall be even as
it was told me. Howebeit we must be cast into a certain Island.
WE declared of late, the horrible tempest that Paul and his company were
tossed in, which Luke says did blow so boysteously, that they had no more
hope of any escape or succor. But some man might here marvel, how Paul in
the mean season behaved himself, either toward God, whose promises seemed
here to quail, or toward his companions, which through their rashness and
disobedience, had procured themselves this evil chance. How be it, his talk
which the Evangelist reports in this place, does evidently declare all this
matter, which for many causes is worthy to be singularly considered.

First, the time is noted, and what case they stood in, Paul gives comfort
and counsel inaduersitie.
when Paul made his oration: verily even when they were greatly a hungered, and
in the midst of the perils that hitherto have been described. And it was not
without a cause, that he spoke not to them before this time, for while they
were troubled about their business, he should have had no commodity therefore.
But now being wearied both in body and mind, and being set down without
all hope of any succoure, he shows them both counsel and comfort in very good
time. Whereby we gather, that he despaired not, nor was not overcome with fear
in the middle of dangers, but by Prayers fled unto God, which so comforted
him, that he was able to comfort and strengthen others. By this example we are
taught, that we must not by and by despair in time of danger, but put our
whole hope and trust in God, which never forsakes those that are his, as both
his promises, and also the examples of a great many of men do abundantly
declare. Therefore this is a shameful error of those men, which as soon as
they see no more hope in man, either utterly despair, or else turn them unto
saints, and other unlawful means, and seek counsel and help at their
hands. But let us see Paul's oration being very short, according as the time
served, but yet such, as contains in it many things, most worthy to be
considered.

He modestly rebukes their former disobedience.
First, he vpbraideth them with their disobedience, whereby they procured
themselves so great a danger. And he begins therewith, partly to make them
know that their sin was the cause of this evil: and partly to teach them by
this present mischance to hear him the more willingly. This does he yet most
modestly, so that he seems rather to admonish them of their duty, than to
cast them in the teethe with their misery. We are taught by this place, to
reprove in deed the rashness and disobedience of those, which procure their
own mischefe: but yet we must not over bitterly vpbraide those that are
already afflicted, and miserable enough, least we heap sorrow upon sorrow, on
those that mourn. And verily, they are much to blame, who being not able while
things go well, to do any good by their own counsel, will in adversity
bitterly taunte and deride other men's devises, who as they are unjust judges
of other men: so they add calamity to calamity, a thing most disagreeing
from christian charity. Also Paul by his example reproves those men, whose
devise at the first being refused, will never afterward give any counsel
again, nor have to do with those, who before would not harken to their
counsel.

He comfort.
This done, Paul with great boldness of mind, comfort them. I exhort you
(says he) to be of good cheer, for there shall be no loss of any man's
life among you, save of the ship only. Where we have cheefely to consider the
dignity of Paul, who though he were in bands, yet far excelled all the
residue. For he seeming of all other the most miserable, was able alone, in
greatest ieoperdie and danger, both to comfort and counsel them. And this is
the very peculiare work of Christ, that in his ministers, when they seem the
most despised persons of all other, he does most gloriously triumph. The
examples of Martires teach us this thing, which being in the middle of fire,
and horrible torments, both by their voice and example, partly feared the
beholders, and partly moved them to like constancy of faith. Whereunto this
also is to be referred, that now a days also we see those that are given
altogether to the world and to sin, if at any time they be in sickness or
other danger, they will seek counsel and help, at the only ministers of
the word, whom otherwise they yet hate worse than the Devil.

He alleges the Oracle.
Furthermore, least Paul might seem some vain trifler or busy body, he
alleges an Oracle, saying: For there stood by me this night, the angel of
the Lord, whose I am, and whom I serve, saying: fear not Paul, thou must be
brought before Caesar, and lo, God has given unto thee, all those, that sail
with thee. Here every word has his weight, and teaches us diverse things
worthy to be considered. For first God declares unto us, his goodness, which
is so great that he cannot forget the same, not when he corrects us according
to our deserts. Neither is he always angry, but comfort us in the midst
of afflictions, and helps us with his counsel, that we be not tempted,
farther than we be able to bear* and he has also such a care of us, that he
has appointed the Angels to be occupied in safegarding us: whereof we have
hitherto seen diverse examples. Furthermore, Paul's plainness and simplicity
used about faith and religion, is to be considered, for we know he was
laid in bands for the faithes sake, yet he confessed the same freely, and
plainly. In so much that he boldly affirms, that he is not only the
servant of God, but also worshippeth him. This is it that Christ requires of
us, where he commands us to confess him before men. And we read how the
Martires also, did follow this example of Paul, who would not so much, as
dissemble their faith in Christ, much less flatly deny it. Moreover Paul's
words teach us, that it is not enoughe, for us to say we belong unto God,
for as much as it is evident, that the Devils also, are subject to his
commandment. But God requires of us all kind of woorship and obedience:
which except we perform, the professing of Christ's name, shall serve more
to condemn us, than to save us. Yet further this place teaches us, how
profitable it is to dwell among holy men and worshippers of God. For as God
gave unto Paul the lives of all them that were passengers with him: so is it
evident, that he has oftentimes spared many which have deserved destruction,
for a fewes sake that have been good. For every man knows what the scriptures
say of Noe, Lot, Moses, and infinite others.

And yet these Examples must not be racked, to the end to attribute godly
honor unto Saints, and to ask of them such things as belong only unto God
for to give. For the use of them serves to far other purpose. For God
partly makes the wicked beholding unto his servant, to the end they may
live the more safely and commodiously among them: and partly by such
testimonies commends their faith and religion. And as the godly use to be
profitable to those that live with them: so again a few wicked, when they are
let run at the long line, are most times the destruction of whole commonweals, as may be seen in the Example of Jonas, for whose sake we read that
both the Mariners and all the Passengers were in ieoperdie. Which things, if
all men would well mark and observe, the godly should both be better regarded,
and the company of wicked men should be more detested.

Last of all, Paul concludes his Oration, The promises of God must be taken
hold of by faith.
and bids them to be of good cheer. He adds this moreover: For I
believe, that it shall be, even as it was told me. And for that they should
the less dout hereof, he declares how and after what sort they should
escape: saying they must be cast out into a certain Island. Where we are
taught, that the promises of God must be received by faith, because so
they be ratified and confirmed: not for that Gods truth depends upon us,
but because he promises us his help and salvation upon this condition, that
none shall have it, but those only that believe it. In the Gospel, we have
examples hereof every where. Here is one thing very comfortable, that
although there be but a few that believe, yet God can easily discern
between them and the wicked, and has a regard of those that be his, as the
scripture teaches us it happened in times past to Iosue and to Caleb, whom
only God brought into the land of promise, because they only believed his
promises.

Let us diligently occupy our selves in the consideration of these things, and
whereas God offers us comfortes and counsels of salvation in these days also,
let us embrace them with steadfast faith: for so shall it come to pass, that
when we have sailed through the tempestuous sea of this life, we shall be
brought to heaven, the haven of eternal salvation, through Jesus Christ our
Lord: to whom be praise, honor, power and glory for ever. Amen.

The.Clxix. Homely.
But when the fourtienth night was come, as we were sailing in Adria, about
midnight, the shipmen deemed that there appeared some country unto them: and
sounded and found it.xx. fadomes. And when they had gone a little further, they
sounded again, and found.xv. fadomes. Then fearing least they should have fallen
upon some rock, they cast four ankers out of the stern, and wished for the
day. As the shipmen were about to flee out of the ship, when they had let down
the boat into the sea under a color, as though they would have cast ankers
out of the foreship: Paul said unto the under captain, and to the soldiers:
except these abide in the ship, ye can not be safe. Then the soldiers cut of
the rope of the boat, and let it fall away. And when the day began to appear,
Paul besought them all to take meat, saying: this is the fourtenth day, that
ye have tarried and continued fasting, receiving nothing at all. Wherefore I
pray you to take meat: for this no doubt is for your health. for there shall
not an hair fall from the head of any of you. And when he had thus spoken, he
took bread, and gave thanks to God, in presence of them al, and when he had
broken it, he begun to eat. Then were they all of good chere, and they also
took meat.
ALthough God suffers his servants many ways to be tempted, yet (as we have
oftentimes declared) he assisteth them both with counsel and comfort: so that
they be not overcome with temptations. An evident example hereof, we have in
this story. For where the tempest increased so vehemently, that there was no
more hope left in man, God sends his Angel unto Paul, to renew the former
promise: wherewith he was a fresh so confirmed, that he was able to confirm
and comfort others also. And God did not with vain words only hold the
miserable creatures in hope, but most faithfully performed that he promised: as
we shall see, when we come to the place. But before Luke comes thereunto, he
declares what was done in the mean season, and how some believed the promise
of god, and some not, touching every of the which points we shall speak in
order.

And first of all, we have to consider the Mariners, who being in the
Adriaticke sea, The incredulity and distrust of the Maryners.
and perceiving by certain marks, that the land was not far of, used all
the diligence that they could to get unto the shore. For letting down a
plumbet of lead, by a long line, they sounded for the depth of the sea, and
prepared all other things necessary for that present season, which might seem
to be a work of faith, considering they so buckled and framed themselves unto
the promise of God. But when they had cast out their plumbet the second time,
and perceived that the sea waxed very shaule, being stricken with a new
fear, and forgetting the promise and oracle of God, they go about dishonestly
to run away, for they hoyse over the boat, and get them down into it,
and make as though they would hoyse out the ankers aforeship: where as they
meant to provide for themselves, and to leave the passengers destitute of all
hope and s^^coure. Here appears the property of the flesh, and of all
such as purpose to follow the way and reason thereof. The property of the
flesh in dangers.
These men at the first are delyghted with the promyses of God, and frame
themselves accordingly, that is, when the success of things agrees with the
promyses, and when they think every thing will go forward and well. But
as soon as dangers begin once to appear that dashe their hope of success,
they plainly renounce their faith, and turn them to the counsels of the
flesh, and show themselves most dishoneste persons both toward God and man.
And that these Mariners did, we see the people of Israel did also, who when
they first heard that God had promised to set them at liberty, embraced
the device and counsel of God with great reverence. But Pharao vexed with the
demand or request of Moses and Aaron, began to handle them more seruilely
than before, then forgot they the promise of God, and fell to re^yling, saying:
The Lord look unto you and judge you, which has made the savor of us, to
stink in the eyes of Pharao, Exodus 5
and in the eyes of his servants, and have put a sword in their hand to sley
us. And the same people when they should go out of Egypt laden with gold and
costly apparel, took their journey joyfully. But when they came to the red
Sea, and saw the Host of their enemies hard at their backs, they by and by
accused Moses and Aaron, the faithful servants of God, of treason and
murder, Exodus 14. Again being miraculously delivered out of that danger,
they declared their joy of minds with singing. But anon after perceiving
want and scarcity of meat and drink, they turn again to their murmuring
and complaining. But what need we rehearse this of the Israelites, seeing we
have every where in these days the like examples? And this is commonly the
chief cause why men fall from the faith, and forgetting the commandments of
God, neglecte their duty. Let us learn therefore to abandon the counsel of
the flesh, which so disagreeth with the word of God, and in our temptations
have a respect only unto his word and not unto the flesh.: For the flesh by
reason it can see nothing, but the present state of things, does quickly
despair. But true faith grounded upon the word of God only, cannot fall
(...) f^lter, (...) knows that God is (...), of whose will she is certified
by his word. See the (...) of Abraham which Paul* handles in the fourth to
the Romans diligently and trimly. The properties of those that are too
confident or bold.
Again in these mar^^^^^ we may see, what the property of such bold and
confident persons is as despise^ (...), and refuse godly and faithful
admonitions. For thus we see they did before* where then persuaded the
Centurion to sail from Cand^^^ to the counsel of Paul. But when they had
brought both (...) and others in danger then were they like ^as^atdes afraid
(...) sought dishonestly to forsake their tackle and compa^^e. This is the
property of all those which are dronken in the (...) of their own wisdom.
The like parts also play seditious persons, and those that are aucthoures of
rebellion in commonweals, when dangers are on every side at hand, they
convey themselves away. Thus Chore when he had made a stir and vproare
through out the camp, he sets himself quiet in his tente. Number. 16. And
Absalon while his souldioures are in the fight, rides himself upon a Mule,
taking his pleasure and pastime, when all other were in danger. These examples
teach us to suspect such kind of men, and not to despise the wholesome
counsel of sage and sober persons, which we see agreeable with the word of
God.

Paul commands to stay the Mariners.
Now let us return unto Paul, who through the secret instincte of the holy
Ghost, perceiving the Mariners intent, admonished the Captain and
souldioures to disappointe this thing. Here we have diligently to consider the
words of Paul. Except these men (says he) abide in the ship, you can not be
safe. Yet God before this, had promised them all their safety, whose Counsels
can not be frustrate or made vain. How then can they not escape, except the
Mariners abide in the ship? Does the truth of Gods promise depend upon
the false Mariners? But Paul reasons not in this place of the absolute
power of god, who might easily have delivered them out of all danger, without
help either of Mariners or ship. But because he had no certain promise
of miraculous delivery, yea he was told that they must all be cast a land
into a certain Island: he thought the order of nature, and the remedies that
were at hand, were not to be despised, least by ouermuche confidence and
trust in Gods promise, he should make them to tempt God. Which Example
teaches us, that the providence of God and the faith that consists therein,
is no let unto the godly, to use all other lawful and ordinary means.

The right use of Gods instruments or means.
For God will have the order appointed by him to be observed, as by many
Examples may be declared. In sowing of corn the Scripture teaches us, that
nothing succedeth, except God give the increase. But the same Scripture
testifies, that God has appointed this order that the ground should be
tilled by our labor, and so must receive blessing from heaven, and be made
fit to bear corn. So in the governance of an house, we know that all
endeavor is superfluous, unless the Lord build the house. Prouer. 31
And yet in the scripture diligent and careful householders are commended: and
in setting forth the praises of a good huswife or matrone, the holy Ghost
might (...) almost too industrious and careful. Therefore Paul does well,
in thinking the Mariners ought not to be let go, although he nothing
dou^red in the promise of God: following the Example of Christ, who where he
certainly knew that he was commended to the ministry and tuition of the
Angels, could yet never be persuaded, to tempte God, in casting himself down
from the pinnacle of the Temple. Yet we must take heed, that in using these
lawful means, we attribute not too much unto them, and so swerve from the
way of faith, which teaches us to have (...) eyes ^^^l fixed upon god only.

But letting pass these men, let us consider the captain and the soldiers,
who obeyed the words of Paul, The faith of the captain and souldioures.
and by and by (...) asunder the ropes that the boat was tied with, and so let
the boat fall into the sea. This is a singular token of faith. For by this
means they spoil themselves of the boat, which might have stood them in great
stead, in the present perrill of shipwreck. But they had already learned to
their loss and hynderaunce, that there was no greater safegarde of life, than
that which Paul had taught them was in God. Therefore they thought good to
be obedient unto him, how soever the matter fell out. Let us follow the
example of these men, that though we believe not at the beginning, yet at
the leastwise being taught with our dangers and damage, we may believe the
word of God, and show our selves obedient unto the same.

Howebeit Luke again shows how Paul comforted them, Paul exhorts them
to take meat.
counselling them, furthermore how to do. For he exhorts them to fall to
their meat, alleging most weighty reasons of his so bydding. The first he
boroweth of the time. This (says he) is the fouretenthe day, which ye
have remained fasting and taken nothing. Hereby he declares the great
ieoperdie they were in, wherewith they were so encombred, that they had scarce
leisure to think of any meat: certaynely all that while they made no
ordinary meals or repastes. The second reason he boroweth of necessity.
For this is expedient for your health. Otherwise although ye escape drowning,
ye will dye of hunger. Thirdly he repeateth the promise of God, with great
trust and confidence: For there shall not one hair fall from the head of any
of you. And thus he answers the objection of them that might have said,
meat had been to little purpose or profit for them that shortly after must
perish and die, at length he provoke them by example. For when he had thus
said, he took bread and gave thanks to God in the sight of them all, brake it,
and began to eat, showing no token of any fearful or dismayed mind. Thus
he cheateth the minds of them all, putting them in good hope of life, and to
take their meat also, that they might be able to bear out the labors and
bruntes that were at hand: and here may we see the property of true faith.
For the nearer the danger of shipwreck drew, and the less hope appeared,
The nature or property of faith.
the more bold in mind Paul waxes: insomuche as he alone was able to
encourage and embolden all the other. Where also it appears that they which
are endued with true faith, are profitable not only unto them selves, but
also unto all others: considering we see Paul alone rules all things, and
comfort and counsels all men. Let us therefore learn to make much
of such men, seeing the Histories of all nations testify that the
contemning of such good men, has been the destruction of great numbers.
Moreover this is most worthy to be observed, how Paul in such a danger
going to his meat so hastily, forgets not to say grace, and that in the
sight of all men. The discipline of the Table.
This thing becomes the godly, yea it is of right required of all men,
seeing we confess in our prayer, that God fedeth us with our daily bread, and
that our^ meat cannot prosper with us unless it be blessed of God. Which
thing was the cause that Christ also commended this usage so often unto us, by
his own example. Let those Hogs therefore be ashamed both of their
unthankfulness and ungodliness, which go unto the table, without either
any reverence or gyuing of thanks, and scoffingly use to vpbrayde such men as
too supersticious, whom they see follow the examples of Christ and his
Apostles. These fellows are like one day to buy their stubbournesse full
dear. But let us remember the goodness of God, and do our duty as well in
adversity as in prosperity, and god will not fail us of his help, who has
chosen us to be his children, and made us heirs of his heavenly kingdom,
through his son Jesus Christ our savior: to whom be praise, honor, power,
and glory for ever. Amen.

The.Clxx. Homely.
WE were all together in the ship, two hundred threescore and sixtene souls.
And when they had eaten enough, they lightened the ship, and cast out the
wheat into the sea. When it was day, they knew not the land, but they spied
a certain haven with a bank, into the which, they were minded, if it were
possible, to thrust in the ship. And when they had taken up the ankers, they
committed them selves unto the sea, and loosed the rudder bands, and hoised
the maine sail to the wind, and drew to land. And when they chanced on a
place which had the sea on both sides, they thrust in the ship, and the
foreship stuck fast and moved not, but the hinderparte brake with the
violence of the waves. The souldioures counsel was to kill the prisonners,
least any of them, when he had swomme out, should run away. But the
vndercaptaine willing to save Paul, kept them from their purpose: and
commanded that they which could swim, should cast themselves first into the
sea, and escape to land: and the other he commanded to go some on bourdes,
and some on broken pieces of the ship. And so it came to pass, that they
escaped all safe to land.
GOd is faithful and true in his promises, but yet he suffers the faith of
his people to be tried sundry and many ways: not that he takes any delight in
our miseries and complaints, but because it makes greatly for the
confirmation of our faith: considering we see that the truth of God
overcomes in all things, and can be hindered no manner of ways. And to this
end is this history also to be referred, where God saves Paul and his company
from drowning, as he promised he would do, and yet in the mean season,
sometimes exercised their faith with diverse temptations. This shall most
evidently appear, if we consider every thing herein in order.

The number of them which were with Paul in the same ship, was two hundredth
three score and sixtene souls. It as is declared pleased the holy Ghost, to
have this number plainly expressed, partly for that the truth of God might
appear the more certainly unto us, and partly that the miracle of the
delivery, might seem the more evident. For where all men knew there were so
many in number, none of them could be lacking, but the residue must know of it.
And where in the danger of shipwreck, even a few use to hinder and let one an
other, while each man provides for his own safety, with the peril of an
other, God e^^dently put forth his hand, in that he brought so many together
safe and sound unto the shore. Hereby we may gather, that it is as easy a
thing for God, to save a number, as a few. For as he has all things in tale,
and his providence stretches it self, even unto hears and little sparrowes:
so is his power infinite and unmeasurable, and can be overcome neither with
multitude of those that have need of his help, neither with greatness of
danger. Thus brought he all the Israelites together safe through the red Sea:
which was as easy for him to do, as to deliver Moses only, being cast out
into the River of Nilus. In like sort he fed all the people of Israel
forty years in the wilderness miraculously, as easily as he afterward fed
Elias by the ministry of Ravens. Hereunto king Asa had a respect, when being
ready to join battle with an innumerable multitude of Ethiopians, he made
his prayer unto God in this wise: Lord, it is no hard thing with thee to
help, either many, or them that have no power. Parali. 14.
It is very profitable for us to acknowledge God to be such an one. For so
doing, we shall be feared neither with our own want of power and myserie, nor
with any multitude of dangers be brought into desperation.

Moreover, when all they in the Ship had taken meat, They cast their Corn
into the sea.
as Paul exhorted them, they lightened the Ship of all things in it,
insomuch that they cast the corn also over the board. For we heard before,
how they had cast out the Marchaundise and Tackle of the ship. And to this
pass did necessity drive these delicate persons, which contrary to the will
of God would needs seek a more commodious haven, and would not be contented
with their present state and condition. In the mean season, this is a singular
argument of their faith, which would throw over board their corn also. For
except they had certaynely believed that God would have saved them, they would
never have been persuaded to have cast away that succor of their life that
only remained. But this example is set out for us to follow, that we also,
when God so appoynteth it, should likewise willingly forsake those things,
without the which it seems our life can not be mayntayned. This we see
Abraham him self did, the Apostles, and many others, whose faith the holy
Ghost commends in the Scriptures.

Now follows the description of the wrack very brief, The description of
the shipwreck.
yet such as teaches us, that many things fell out therein, which had been
able to quayle the faith, both of Paul, and others, if they would have
harkened rather to the wisdom of the flesh, than to the promises of God. For
first although they see land appear a far of, yet they knew not whether it
were shore or not. They are ignorant also, whether they should come among
their friends or enemies: because many times it chances, that they that escape
shipwreck, light in vnharberous Countries, where they suffer more harm of the
barbarous people, than of the sea, which otherwise is a most cruel element.
Wherefore, the hope of succoure that showed it self so far of, had joined
with it no little fear. Again, when they had with all their might labored to
get to the shore, they run their ship into a place that had the sea on both
the sides, where the foreship stuck in the sand, and the stern with violence
of waves splete in sunder. And here the truth of Gods Oracle declares it
self, by the which it was fortolde that the ship should perish, which yet
seemed now like to come safe and sound to shore. Howbeit this ship may be
called a figure of those men, which contrary to the word of God seem happy
in their wickedness, as though they should never be punished therefore. For
commonly such men, when they seem to have escaped all danger, have a sudden
destruction, as diverse examples of such men do testify. See what is written
of these men. Psalm. 37. and.73.

The devise of the soldiers in killing the prisoners.
Thirdly, the Soldiers devise to kill the prisoners, least any of them when he
was got to shore should take him to his heels. And out of doubt they were
moved to take this bloody counsel for fear of the Laws. An example whereof
we had before in the Soldiers of Herod, whose hands Peter escaped by the
guyding of an Angel. Acts. 11. Howebeit this is great wickedness, that
they would not except Paul, or spare his life, through whose counsel and
prayers their life was preserved. But this is the propretie of the world, and
of all those that serve the world, that they quickly forgette benefytes and
good turns, and recompense them most times with heinous injuries. Therefore
they are very fools, which seek to please the world, and have not rather a
regard unto God, who is the only and most faithful rewarder of all men.
Moreover as concerning the Soldiers devise, the danger that Paul and the
others were now in, was more grievous than the Shipwreck it self, in so
much that all the prisoners were now in a most woeful case: and the promise
of God seemed vain, who had promised to save them all. But the Lord remedieth
this inconvenience in time also. For the Captain being desirous to save
Paul, withstoode the Soldiers devise, so that it took not effect. He
commands also, that as many as could swim, should first take the Sea, and
the residue follow them upon broken bordes and fragmentes of the Ship*
Hereby wisely providing that they should not let one an other in the
business and stir. And so it came to pass that they all escaped alive and
safe unto the shore, as God had promised should come to pass. The truth of
Gods promise cannot be let or hindered.
Here the verity of Gods promises is very notable, which we see can be
hyndered by no adversity. Surely hitherto all things might seem to have
conspired the death of Paul. For the Sea rages with great and main surges
and waves. The wind armed the air also to their destruction. The earth
holds fast the ship, driven and carried upon her. The lights and stars
of heaven withholde their shine from the miserable creatures. The false and
untrusty Maryners mean to run away, and the cruel soldiers devise in their
minds a bloody slaughter. But the truth of god, whose pleasure it was that they
should be saved, overcame all these things. Therefore these things ought to
comfort us also amyddest the dangers of this world. For experience teaches
us, that the world fares like a most troublesome Sea. But we have the
promises of God, who has assured us by his son, to be always present and
assistaunt unto his people. Therefore if God be with us, who can be against
us? For surely we being in safety under his protection, shall happily escape
through all troubles and dangers, and come to the haven of eternal bliss,
where the everlasting inheritance of the kingdom of heaven, is appointed and
prepared for us by Jesus Christ: to whom be praise, honor, power and
glory, for ever. Amen.

The.xxviij. Chapter upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The.Clxxj. Homely.
ANd when they were escaped, they knew that the Isle was called Milete, and the
strangers showed us no little kindness, for they kindled a fire, and received
us every one, because of the present rain, and of the cold. And when Paul
had gathered a bundle of sticks, and laid them on the fire, there came a
Viper out of the heat, and caught him by the hand. When the strangers saw the
beast hang on his hand, they said among them selves: No doubt this man is a
Murderer, whom though he have escaped the Sea, yet vengeance suffers not to
live. And he shook off the Viper into the fire, and felt no harm. Howbeit
they waited when he should have swollen, or fallen down dead suddenly. But
after they had looked a great while, and saw no harm came to him, they
changed their mind, and said, that he was a God.
IT has been declared hitherto how God had a care of Paul and his
Companions, as he promised him in the midst of the dangers and tempests of
the sea. It follows, how he delivered them afterward from drowning, and how
he ministered an occasion to Paul to preach the Gospel, first to those of
Melite, and then unto the Romans. Whereby we are taught, that Gods works are
perfect, and though we be tried every day with new dangers, that yet we must
not cast away al hope, but look every day for new benefits at Gods hands,
which uses to temper adversity with prosperity, and to raise up discouraged
minds, with effectuous consolation. It shall be profitable to consider every
thing in the order wherein it is described.

First, Luke declared into what Island they were cast alande, The hospitality
of those of Malta.
and how they of the Island received them. The Island was Melite which now a days
is called Malta, the place where the knights of S. John's order have their
residence, lying between Sicilia and Aphica. Luke commends the singular
humanity of the people of Malta* which received them and showed them al kind
of pleasure, according as the time and place required. Thus her^ is set forth a
notable example of love and hospitality for us to follow. For without doubt
these wrackwights were unknown unto the people of Malta, and there was no hope
of recompense to be looked for at their hands, who^ they saw spoiled of all
their goods. Yet because they see they (...) ^y^erie, and have need of their
help, they show them this ^^rtesie. And this is that thing that Christ
teaches us in the Parable of the Samaritane. Luke. 10.
Thus it behooves us all to do, without any respect of persons, or hope of
reward to come, to be loving and charitable unto those whom God s^ndeth unto
us to be succored and helped. And chiefly we mus^ r^member to be harberous
unto strangers, both for that they have need of many things, and also for
that the Apostle witnesses, that such doing has ^e^ to the great commodity
of many, who sometimes have received* Angels into their houses in likeness of
men. Hebr. ^3.
But this is a far more excellent and profitable thing, that they which
vouchsafe to take strangers into their houses make much of Christ, and receive
him in them. And surely God uses to recompense such courtesy and benefits
with temporal rewards also. For when the Sodomites were overcome in battle
by their enemies, and carried away as a booty and pray, they were delivered
again by Abraham for Lot his sake. And not long after we shall hear how the
people of Malta were by this occasion illuminated and lightened with the
doctrine of the Gospel, because they so courteously intertayned these
shipwracked persons. I will now say nothing of our Predecessors, who by reason
of their hospitality in Heluetia, did purchase themselves singular praise with
all Nations: whose steps if we follow, we shall also get unto our selves no
small utility and commendation. Here also let them seek comfort, which suffer
banishment for religions sake. For he that was able to get unto Paul, and the
other wrackwights, the good wills of the men of Malta, the same is able also to
get us f^^ends in every place, because he has the hearts o^ al^ men in his
hand, and all the world obeys his commandment. Mark. 19.
Therefore th^^ promise of Christ, which has promised a tennefolde reward to
those which have forsaken either house, either brethren and sisters, either
lands, either friends, for his sake, and the Gospels, shall every where be
fulfilled.

But God would not have Paul long to be unknown among the people of Malta,
Paul by miracle was known to those of Malta.
but strayghtway renowned him with a singular miracle, whereby he confirmed his
Apostleship, and offered him a notable occasion of preaching. It shall be good
to con^^der ^ue^y circumstaunce hereof. Amongst the which Paul first, as it
is written* gathered dry sticks together. And here let us consider how Paul
is busied in^eru^^e occupations, who being w^^ried with his bonds, and with
the late danger of tempest and shipwreck, had yet occasion enough to have
taken his ease and rest. But he well knew, that inpublike (...) to seek his
own quietness, but that all men, one with an other, (...) bound (as much as
in them lies) one to help an other. Therefore by his example the l^^y ^^bbers
of P^n^lope are reproved, who be^ing profitable neither for them selves, (...)
for others, seek to (...) of other men's la^ours. Which though they gl^ry in
the (...) and progeny of Paul, yet show they so little of Paule^ (...)
doct^^ne, or in their (...) it is (...) how they can abide (...) whom they
(...) so (...) ^^per, A vyper byteth Paul.
which b^ all (...) Paul (...) by the hand. This verily was a strange and
sudden hazard of life, wherewith both Paul might greatly have been put in
fear, and also gave occasion to the people of Malta to have a very evil
opinion of him. For straight ways they judge he was some manqueller or
murderer, whom the vengeance of God did persecute, and whom he purposed to
punish with some strange and rare example, although he escaped out of
shipwreck. For the Gentiles feign, that the goddess (...) which we call
Vltione or vengeance, is assistaunt with Jupiter, and punishes men for their
offenses, being taught even by the law and lore of nature, that God uses to
punish sins. And where murder has been counted even from the beginning of
the world, the most heinous sin of all others, they accused Paul of
murder, rather than of any other common sin, on whom they thought was showed
so rare and strange an example. Let christian men here be ashamed of their
cruelty, which follow and frequent wars for wages sake, and think it a
commendable thing to shed innocent blood, whereas we have beside the law of
nature the oracles of God, which teach us, that as many as hired with money
shed blood, and affirm that lands polluted with murder, can be purged none
other ways than by shedding the blood of murderers again, are accursed. Deuteronomy.
27. Number. 35. In the mean season let us mark in this place the wonderful
providence of God in governing the affairs of this world, which uses to set
forth both his own glory, and the glory of his people, by those things chiefly
which seem most to let and hinder them. For Paul had ministered unto him an
occasion of preaching by that that seemed most to be to his reproach and
slander. Thus it behooved, that Moses should first be thrown away, and
banished out of the court, or ever he were appointed to be the revenger of the
people. Whereof we have many other like examples, the use of which serves
partly because we should rashly condemn none, by reason of the afflictions
they suffer: and partly because we should not to soon be offended with the
adversities that happen unto us, seeing all things work unto the best for them
that love god. And those things that follow, teach us that it so happened unto
Paul, for he being nothing afraid with this soden chance, Paul shakes off
the viper without any hurt.
shakes off the Uiper into the fire, and felt no harm thereof: yea by this
means he finds Christ's promise true, which says, that those which would
believe should drive away serpents, and should drink potions that had poison in
them, and yet not be hurt. Mat. 16. Hereof also may be gathered a general
doctrine, that the old serpent has no power against them that believe in
Christ. For although he invade both our hands and feet, and blow the venom of
sin into our devices and works, yet he can not bite us to death, because we
be healed with the stripes of Christ, who through the merit of his death, and
majesty of his resurrection, has trodden down, and crushed his head to pieces.
But let us return to the people of Malta, The people of Malta take Paul for a
God.
who seeing Paul contrary to their opinion nothing hurt, knowing that the
biting of a viper was most present poisoning, by and by altered their mind,
and judged him to be some one of the number of the gods: doubtless being
deceived with the error of the Gentiles, which used to take the authors of
strange benefits, and workers of unwonted effects and miracles, for gods. Thus
Satan held them occupied in the consideration of secu^dary causes, lest if
they had climbed higher they might have come to the knowledge of the true God.
And so with one policy he thought both to get into the minds of the people of
Malta, and to make Paul to be honored as a god, meaning to hinder the faith of
Christ, whereby he knew his kingdom was chiefly assaulted. For Satan will suffer
every mortal man to be honored and worshipped as a god, rather than the true
god, unto whom only such honor is due. The cause is, that while men are
occupied in honoring of others, they run into manifest danger of their
salvation. But they that worship god only, casting away the yoke of the devil,
they find true salvation. Let no man therefore marvel, that the worshipping of
Saints, which we know were sometime the chosen vessels of God, is mayntayned
in the Popes kingdom with false signs and devilish disceytes. For it greeueth
not Satan that they are worshipped and inuocated, so long as he sees their
doctrine not regarded, which makes men to worship God only, and the inheritors
of life. And surely Satan his craft and subtlety is very great, who although
he were constrained in Paul's days to give place: yet afterward he planted
every where among those of Malta a supersticious opinion touching Paul, by
those who bosting in Paul's name and stock, The family or stock of Paul.
use to work many wonders, as well in killing as keeping up of serpents. But
their ungodliness is hereby easily confuted, in that they are so greatly
delighted with serpents, which it is evident, was the first instrument wherewith
the devil beguiled man. Let us mark in this place the inconstancy of the
people, a like example whereof, but in an other order, we saw before in those of
Lystra. For they took him for a malefactor, and would have stoned him, whom at
the first they said was a God. But these men account and take him for one of
the gods, whom a little before they said was a murderer. We have many like
things daily falling out, which teach us that the nature of the people is
always diverse and changeable. Fools they are therefore, and miserable people,
which think there is any trust to be given unto them, and put not their hope
in God only, which has given us his son Jesus Christ to be an earnest
revenger of all evil done unto us: to whom be praise, honor, power and glory,
for ever. Amen.

The.Clxxij. Homely.
IN the same quarters were lands of the chief man of the I Will, whose name was
Publius, which received us, and lodged us three days courteously. And it
fortuned that the father of Publius lay sick of a fever, and of a bloody
flux, to whom Paul entered in, and prayed, and laid his hands on him, and
healed him. So when this was done, other also which had diseases in the I Will
came, and were healed, which also did us great honor. And when we departed,
they laded us with such things as were necessary. After three months, we
departed in a ship of Alexandria, which had wintred in the I Will, whose badge was
Castor and Pollux. And when we came to Syracuse, we tarried there three days,
and from thence we fet a compass, and came to Rhegium. And after one day the
Southwinde blew, and we came the next day to Puteoli, where we found brethren,
and were desired to tarry with them seven days, and so came we to Rome.
NOtable and full of comfort verily is that sentence of Jesus Christ, which
says: There is none that forsakes house, Mark. 10.
or brethren, or sisters, or parents, or wife, or children, or lands for my
sake and the Gospels, but shall receive an hundred fold now in this life with
persecutions, and in the world to come life everlasting. And hereof Luke
sets us out an evident example in this history. For Paul, who for Christ's
sake and the gospels, had forsaken al things which are counted excellent and
profitable in this world, and now from shipwreck was escaped into the Isle of
Malta, found by and by innumerable brethren, sisters, parents, and most
faithful friends, with whom he had both house, and lands, and all kind of
goods in common. Yea, he that by reason of his bands seemed most miserable of
al men, in that shipwreck was of such estimation with the people of Malta, that
for his sake they pleasured both the mariners, the soldiers, and the
prisoners, and all the residue of Paul's company. And this shall appear more
plainly by those things that follow. For there is set forth in Publius, The
hospitality of Publius.
which was the chief man, or governor of the Island, a singular example of
hospitality. For he at his farms which were there near adjoining, courteously
entertained them for three days together. And his humanity is the more
notable, for that being a ruler and a rich man, he yet disdained not strangers,
in such manyfold afflictions, as rich men for the most part use to do, which
think other men's mishaps appertain nothing unto them. Then next, for that he
receives them al together, which could not be without some trouble and very
great cost. For we heard how there were in that ship two hundred, three score
and sixtene persons, and al escaped safe unto land. Let rich men, and they
that be in authority learn here their duty, not to think that God has
given to the^ alone so great gifts: but let them remember that they are
appointed but stewards. Wherefore let them be liberal unto those that have
need, so that their plenty may releue the others scarcity. And doubtless this
is a great offense of them, which forgetting their duty, have compassion on no
body, but pass over the cry of the poor with deaf ears, who at length,
according to the saying of Solomon, shall find the ears of god shut to their
prayers: yea at the latter day they shall have Christ to accuse them.

Furthermore, Math. 25.
the people of Malta receive a notable reco^pense and amends for their
hospitality, and that by the ministry of Paul. The reward of hospitality.
So that we may learn, there is no man so vile but may procure unto us great
utility, so that we show our selves courteous and liberal unto him. For God can
requite us by any man, and their reward uses not to be lost, that for gods
sake, or for Christ's, use to benefit any body. In this present place are
declared two rewards, which these men received of Paul him self. First, the
father of Publius received, who being sick of a Fever, and of a bloody Flux,
a disease utterly incurable, was restored to health by Paul's mean. That this
was a great benefit and pleasure, if we consider but the body only, no man
can deny, although we say nothing, how by this occasion he was brought
unto the faith. Where we must mark how in this cure Paul observed the
manner and order prescribed of Christ. For both he uses prayer, and laid
his hands upon the sick body. Whereby we are taught, that this miracle was
not wrought* through the power of Paul, but of God, which after this sort
would set forth his son Jesus Christ, as Peter and John have before
declared. For the Apostles wrought their miracles far otherwise than Christ,
which using his absolute power by his word only pronounced, drove away devils
and diseases. But the Apostles and other holy servants of Christ did the
same, by calling on the name of Christ. Here is the error of those men
confuted, which because of the Miracles that holy men wrought, think they
ought to be inuocated, and do not regard how God is the author of them, whose
honor and glory the Saints chiefly sought. See more concerning this matter
in the third and fourtenth Chapters. The second reward extended unto more
men. For the same of Publius father being healed, stirred up other men also,
so that they likewise were delivered from diverse diseases. The end and use of
all these things was, that they should understand Paul was the Minister of
Christ, which delivers us from infirmity both of body and soul: and that we
should therefore seek all salvation in his merit. But because we have
entreated hereof oftentimes in other places, let it now suffice briefly to
have touched these things.

But let us see the people of Malta, who Luke says, requited with great
thankfulness such great benefits. The thankfulness of the people of Malta.
For they also both greatly honored them, and when they should depart, gave
them whatsoever things were needful unto their voyage. These are manifest
fruits of faith, by the which we are also taught what we owe unto them, by
whose mean Christ and the light of the Gospel shines unto us. For where we
ought to esteem them as our parents, because we are regenerated through their
ministry, they deserve to be honored: yet not with godly honor, but with
such as we owe to our parents, and with such as it is mete for man to receive
of man. And surely Paul writes, that the Elders which govern well, are
worthy of double honor. 1. Timoth. 5. Mark then I pray you, and God will,
what ieoly gospellers they be that think them selves trim men, when they can
steyne the good name of Ministers with scoffs and quippes. And as children owe
unto their parents not only honor, but also necessaries whereby to live: so
is it necessary that the hearers provide the ministers of the same. This God
commanded in times paste in the old Testamente, as may be seen in the
eightenth Chapter of the book of Numbers, and in the five and twentieth chapter
of Deuteronomy. And Christ forbids his Apostles to carry money, or any other
provision with them, because they should live of the ministry of the gospel
like other laborers. And if it had not been right and lawful so to have done,
Math. 10. Luke. 9 and.10.
then should the Apostles have offended, which received these things. But see
more touching this matter in the first to the Corinth. the ninth Chapter.
Therefore great is the unthankfulness of those men in these days (to say no
worse) who giving nothing them selves unto the ministers, envy and craftily
beguyle them of the things that other in times past have given unto them.

Paul is carried in an Idolatrous ship.
But after the end of three Months they return to their voyage again by
sea, the course whereof let them seek in the Geographers Tables, that desire to
have further instruction in every such point. We have herein two things to
observe. The one is, that Paul and his company go on board into a ship of
Alexandria, which after the error of the Gentiles was thought to be under the
patronage and defense of Castor and Pollux. Through which example, many men
count imagerie and superstition among indifferent things, as though a
Christian man, touching the outward conversation, might use them without
offending of God. But we must likewise consider, that Paul did not this of
his own accord, but of constraint, neither also consented unto wicked
superstition, either winked at any thing for favor of men. Therefore the
example of Paul, makes not for the defense of those dastardes, that use to
dissemble in matters of religion, to serve the time. The other is, how after
they had fette a long compass about by the sea, they arrived at length from
Syracusa a City of Cicile in Italy. And at Putesti they find brethren or
christians, with whom at their entreatie, they tarried seven days. Where also
may be seen, The church at Putesti.
the charity of those brethren, which did vouchsafe at their great charges to
chearishe and make much of strangers so long a while: and also the courtesy of
the captain and souldioures, which for a prisonners sake, would stay so many
days. Here appears also, the might and power of God, which makes his
servants to be accepted and favored, and the majesty of the Sain^tes, which
cheefely triumphs under the cross and afflictions. For now Paul though he
were in bands, yet like a King and Emperor, has soldiers obedient at his
beck, and commandment. The like we have seen also, many times before, and
the Evangelists teach us, that the Baptist made Herod afraid. Why then are
we offended at the cross and afflictions? Let us rather constantly follow our
vocation, seeing the hand of God is able to defend us in the midst of our
ennimies, and look for a reward in heaven, which our savior Jesus Christ
has purchased us through his merit: to whom be praise, honor, power, and
glory forever. Amen.

The.Clxxiij. Homely.
ANd from thence, when the brethren heard of us, they came to meet us at
Appiforum, and at the three tauernes. When Paul saw them, he thanked God, and
waxed bold. And when we came to Rome, the under captain delivered the
prisonners to the chief Captain of the host. But Paul was suffered to dwell
by himself, with a souldioure that kept him. And after three days, Paul
called the chief of the Jews together, and when they were come, he said unto
them: Men, and brethren, though I have committed nothing against the people
or laws of the Elders, yet was I delivered prisonner from Jerusalem into the
hands of the Romans, which when they had examined me, would have let me go,
because there was no cause of death in me. But when the Jews spoke contrary,
I was constrained to appeal unto Caesar: not that I had ought to accuse my
nation of. For this cause then have I called you, even to see you, and to
speak with you: because that for the hope of Israel, I am bound with this
chain. And they said unto him: we neither received letters out of Iewrie
pertaining unto thee, neither any of the brethren that came, showed or spoke
any harm of thee. But we will hear of thee what thou think: for as
concerning this sect, we know that every where it is spoken against.
ALl Paul's affairs done in the time of his Apostleship, are very notable, and
for many skilles singular: yet the chief among them is, his bringing out of
Iewrie unto Rome, with so great a preparation, there to plead Christ's cause
and the christian faith before Caesar. For how rare and insolent a thing this
was, in the judgment of the world, it shall easily appear, if a man compare
Paul's person, being of small account and reputation, yea hated and envied
almost of all men, with the majesty of Caesar, and the whole Roman Empire,
whereof all nations and people stood in fear. For it could never have been
brought to pass, by any means of man, that either the Roman Presidents should
have taken so great pains in such a man's behalf, or that Nero the
Emperor, a man wholely set on fire with voluptuousness and tyranny, should
have suffered such an one to have come in his sight, or to hear him, unless
God had mightily stretched out his hand, whose affairs all these things in
doing were. This was the cause that Luke described all this voyage so
diligently, which the Lord, for many causes would have notified that the fame
and report of Paul going before, should excite and stir up the minds of the
Romans to hear him. And this present place teaches us that the success of
Gods devise was not in vain, wherein many other things recourse, the
consideration whereof is able singularly to enstruct and comfort us.

The Roman brethren, go out to meet Paul.
For Luke writes that the Brethren came out of Rome unto Appiforum, and to the
place called in the vulgar tongue Tipergote, whom when he saw, he gave thanks
unto God, and conceived thereby a greater boldness of mind. In this place,
above all other things, we have to consider God, by whose dispensation it is
certain, all these things came to pass. For it pleased him, that his
Servant should be confirmed by the meeting of these Brethren, that he
might afterward the more boldly wade thoroughe with Christ's cause. Whereunto
also is to be referred that we heard last, touching the Brethren of Puteoli.
For although Paul was bold inoughe, and ready to suffer, not only bonds,
but death also, for the name of Christ: yet was he a man, and wanted not his
temptations. And surely he might well have feared, that he should have
labored in vain in Christ's cause, in such a City whereas ungodliness and
tirannie reigned. God therefore to pluck this care out of his mind, moves
these Brethren to go and meet him, that he might see how there wanted not
such, as he might confirm by the Example of his constancy, and as would
help him with their Prayers in this conflicte. Let us therefore be
encouraged by this Example, and constantly hold on in our vocation. For
neither shall the godly zeal of Gods word want his fruit, nor God himself
fail us, who can most easily get us every where such as will take part
with us, both in labors and dangers.

The thankfulness of the Roman brethren.
Again, the brethren at Rome, are also to be considered. For we know how Paul
wrote an Epistle unto them before these things came to pass, in the which he
declares abundantly, both his good will toward them, and promises that
he would come unto them. Therefore for this good tournes sake, they show
themselves thankeful unto him, although there were many things that might
have discouraged them therefro. For first, he comes with no pomp or
worshipful train: but is brought bound like a malefactoure with other
prisonners. Who would not have been ashamed of such a man? Or who would not
have feared some danger by companying with him? Again, it was a thing of it
self dangerous among the Romans, to profess the Christian faith and
Religion, which during the reign of Tiberius (as Tertullian writes) was
condemned by public statute and decree.

Furthermore, these that met him, were not only in danger, but the whole
Congregation at Rome beside, for whom by this occasion, more diligent, and
earnest search and inquisition might have been made. But howesoeuer these
matters went, they thought it meet to declare their duty of love, to such
an Apostle which travailed so earnestly in the behalf of all men: and
therefore they had leiuer to incur any danger, than to be found flacke in
doing their duty. These things teach us what we owe unto the Ministers of
Christ, by whose ministry we are brought unto salvation, if at any time
they happen to be in danger for their faith and doctrine. Let us not be
ashamed of them being in bands, forasmuch as we know that Christ was
bound, and that the word of God can not be bound. Again, he will
hereafter accept it as bestowed on him, that is bestowed on them. At length,
we have to consider Paul himself also, of whom there are two things
affirmed.

First, he gives thanks unto God, Paul is encouraged or confirmed by the
meeting of the brethren.
which is not so to be understood, as though he had let the brethren
pass, and not once spoken unto them. For whereas their good will could not be
but acceptable unto him, it is no doubt, but that he also gave thanks unto
them. But cheefely he acknowledges the work of God, which stirred up their
minds to show them self so bold. Thus it becomes us also to do, to be
thankful unto men, and to recompense them as much as in us is: yet so that
we forgette not God, unto whom it behooves us to ascribe all goodness.

The second is, how Paul is confirmed a fresh with new boldness, when he
sees what vewers and beholders he is like to have in his conflict. Whereby it
appears, that holy men also, have need to be confirmed, as Christ teaches
by the example of Peter and the other disciples. For where he says, he had
prayed for Peter: he adds by and by, and when thou art converted, strengthen
thy brethren. They likewise which seem most perfect men, have need also of
doctrine and admonition, of exhortation and reprehension. Therefore great is
the ignorance and intolerable confidence of those, which forgetting they are
men, reiecte with great lothsomnesse, all kind of doctrine and correction.

Moreover, when they were come to Rome, the Centurion delivered Paul with the
other prisonners, to the Captain of the host. Paul is kept in an hired house
at Rome.
But not all after one sort. For Paul was not put in prisone, but was at his
liberty, to dwell in a private house, which he hired for himself, kept by one
souldioure only. Here reason requires we should speak somewhat in
commendation of the Centurion, whom hitherto, we have seen bare Paul so
much good will. But cheefely let us consider how God gave him the good will
of this Captain, as he did before get him the favor of Lysias the Captain,
of Felix, of Festus and others. Here have we cheefely to consider the state
of the godly. For in the world we see commonly, they are reputed among the
wicked, as it chanced also unto Christ. Yet in the mean season, Christ has
such a care of them, that they want nothing that serves either for their
own sauegard, or to the setting forth of gods glory. For to this end is Paul
permitted to dwell by himself, having but one souldioure only, appointed to
watch him, which is not so much his keeper, as a faithful defender. Where
also we see, that he lacked nothing that belonged to his living. Furthermore,
he had liberty to comfort other Churches abroad, by his Epistles or letters,
and also to call whom he would unto him, yea, to gather a Church or
congregation together in his lodging, as most evidently shall appear by those
things that now follow.

Paul calls together the chief of the Jews.
For three days after, calling before him the chief of the Jews, he reports
unto them, both his imprisonment and appeal, which was the occasion, that
afterward every day, more and more people resorted unto him: to whom he
preached the Gospel. It is a singular example of kindness and love, that is
set forth in Paul. For how many, and how heinous injuries the Jews had
done unto him, was well known. They also were the only aucthors of the bonds he
was in: yet has he still a care for their salvation, and does vouchsafe to
call them, and render a reason of his doings unto them. It is therefore most
true that he writes, how he prayed daily for them, Romans 10.9
and wished to be separated from Christ, so they might be saved. Math. 5
Let us follow the affection of so godly a mind, and according to the rule of
Christ, love even our ennimies, and learn with all diligence, to procure and
set forward their salvation.

He puts away wrongful suspicions.
Howbeit, as touching Paul's oration, it consists of such parts, as we shall
in order consider. First he answers the wrongful suspicions wherewith he
knew he was charged, as a seditious disturber of the Jews public peace, and
as one that had wickedly broken and infringed the ancient religion of the
fathers, but he most constantly denies them both: where he says he did
nothing, neither against the people, neither against the ordinances of the
elders. Thus, by his example, he teaches that it is lawful for Christian men,
to defend their cause and good name against slaunderers, least peradventure for
their sakes, the doctrine of the Gospel be evil spoken of. This also is well
to be marked, that the Ministers of Christ, neither offend against the public
peace, nor against the religion of the fathers, while they beat down the
superstitious affiance that men have in ceremonies and works, and faithfully
teach Christ's true religion. For the public peace is not disturbed or broken,
with the lawful reprehending of wickedness, but with wickedness it self, as
the Prophets every where declare. Again, it is evident that the faith which
stays and rests upon Christ only, is the auncientest faith of all other.
Therefore, they that labor to restore that faith again, and to purge it from
the superstitious traditions of men, are falsely accused of novelty.

He excuses his appealing.
In the second part, he renders a reason why he appealed unto Caesar: which
thing might have gotten him great hatred among the Jews. For they that
appealed, seemed partly to allow the authority of the Romans, against the
liberty of the Jews: and partly, it is of it self a shame, and joined with
the reproach of the judge, to appeal unto an other. Therefore, because they
should suspecte no such thing in him, he says he was constrained so to
do, not that he meant to accuse his nation before Caesar, but for the
sauegarde of his own life, which contrary to all right and equity, the Jews
of Jerusalem lay in wait to have. Where also we are admonished, that civil
or lawful defense, is not denied to Christian men, although Christ
forbids us to resist evil. For this ought to be understood of private
revenge, which although we be forbidden, yet the use of laws, and lawful
judgments, is granted unto all men: the which who so takes away, he must
needs also abrogate and take away all manner of Magistrates and Officers.

The third part, He declares ye state of the whole controversy.
comprehends the state of the whole controversy between him and the Jews:
for the hope of Israel (says he) am I bound with this chain. Thus he
calls Christ, in whom the Jews hoped for a kingdom and liberty, although
they rightly knew him not, while they dreamed of a worldly kingdom, and of
the liberty of the flesh, by wrongful understanding the Prophesies, which
thing was the cause that they persecuted him whom they hoped for, which God
sent unto them. This is a very common thing in the affairs of salvation, for
they that brag of the name of Christ, will wickedly refuse him, when they
think they shall lose any gain by him, or perceive the liberty of the
flesh brideled by him. In the mean season, this manner of Paul's speaking,
teaches us, that there is none other hope of salvation given unto man, but
that which is in Christ Jesus. For in him are all the promises of God
exhibited and fulfilled. Him only the fathers waited for. Moses and the
Prophets sent us unto him. And the Apostles knew none other Savior: in
whom if we also put our trust, we shall not be deceived.

Now follows the Answer of the Jews, which stands in two points. For
first, they give a notable testimony of Paul's innocence, The Jews bear
witness of Paul's innocence.
whereas they say, they neither received letters from any man, nor heard by
report any thing of him. For what should the Priests write any thing of
Paul, whose innocence they knew all men perceived? In the mean season here
appears the state of the godly, which though they be never so innocent, yet
easily find ennimies, by whose procurement they are either cast in prison, or
else banished their country. And whether of these two come to pass, the
ennimies being afterward careless, pass not, neither is there any man which
thinks the care of such persons belongs any thing unto him. And at
length they conceive farther hatred against them, and go about to put the
innocents unto death also. In the second part, the Jews show themselves
desirous to hear Paul's judgment, concerning the faith and religion of
Christ, although they knew that all men every where spoke against it. And
surely it is worthy of great comme^dation, that they are not so blinded with
the former judgments of other men to reiecte all declaration, and recoumpte
of faith, as now a days many use to do: who like Serpents stop their
ears, and so shut the door of the kingdom of heaven upon themselves: whom
if none other reason be able to move, let them at least be ashamed, in that we
see the Jews more indifferent and upright judges in such matters. But here
we have specially to consider the state of the Gospel* which in all ages,
every where has been spoken against. For the Devil, the Prince of this world,
cannot suffer the doctrine of Christ, because Christ most mightily subdueth
his kingdom. Likewise naughty and wicked persons, abhor the light thereof,
because they know it reproves their wicked works. And the iusti^iaries and
hipocrites flee from the same, as a thing that detecteth our natural
corruption, and ouerturneth the confidence of all man's righteousness.
Wherefore it cannot be chosen, but it shall have ennimies on every side. But
this serves both for our learning and comfort. For it stirs us up, to
prepare our selves to the conflicte. And that we promise not our selves
sluggishe idleness. Again it teaches us, that the power of the Gospel is of
God, and invincible, which has been able so many years, to withstand the
attempts of the world, and the Prince thereof. For if a man would consider all
other religions that ever were in the world, he shall perceive that they have
fallen of their own accord, and have come unto nothing, although no man ever
assaulted them with force of arms. But the Christian religion, which is drawn
out of the gospel, having had in all ages most fierce ennimies, which has
persecuted it with fire and sword, indureth yet unto this day, and shall endure
until the later day, when Christ shall come unto judgment, to recompense the
afflictions of his people with eternal joy, and to reward his enemies with
condign pains for their wickedness. Let no man therefore be offended with
the stubbernesse of them that speak against it, or with the fury of them that
persecute it. For Jesus Christ, the Bridegroom of the Church lives and
reigns, who can most easily deliver hi^ out of the hands of her ennimies. To
him he praise, honor, glory and power for ever. Amen.

The.Clxxiiij. Homely.
ANd when they had appointed him a day, there came many to him into his
lodging, to whom he expounded and testified the kingdom of God, and preached
unto them of Jesus, both out of the law of Moses, and out of the Prophets,
even from morning till night. And some believed the things which were spoken,
and some believed not. But when they agreed not among themselves, they
departed, after that Paul had spoken one word: well spoke the holy Ghost by
Esaias the Prophet unto our Fathers, saying: Go unto this people and say: with
your ears shall you hear, and not understand, and with your eyes shall you see
and no^ perceive* for the heart of this people is waxed gross, and with their
ears have they had no lust to hear: and their eyes have they closed, least
they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand
with their hearts, and should be converted, and I should heal them. Be it
known therefore unto you, that this salvation of God is sent unto the
Gentiles, and they shall hear it. And when he had said these words, the Jews
departed from him, and had great dispicions among themselves.
Although the Ministers of Jesus Christ, and Preachers of the Gospel, are
exercised with diverse tribulations, and are many times imprisoned and laid in
bands: yet the word of God can not be bound or shut in prisone, because the
spirit of Christ breaths where it pleases him, and is not subject to the
will or pleasure of man. Yea as the doctrine of Christ through his death was
the further enlarged, as he promised it should come to pass: so also it
increases through the afflictions and punishments of the Ministers. An
evident example hereof, is set forth in the History of Paul. For
although he had heretofore preached the Gospel abroad in many places of the
world: yet was there a great door opened unto him being a prisonner, and in
chains: in that he was permitted freely to preach unto all men in the City
of Rome, as it were in the sight and upon the stage of all the world, and that
with such success, that his doctrine pierced into the Emperors court also, as
may be gathered by the salutations or greetings sent to the Philippians. Phil.
4. Surely it was a strange and very wonderful thing, wherein men might
consider the providence and power of Christ, but that they will be blind in
the clear light. Furthermore Luke declares how this thing came to pass, and
out of many Sermons he choseth one, whereby we may judge of all the other. But
we shall speak of all the circumstances in order.

First, the Evangelist notes the time and place, saying: Paul preaches in an
house.
they resorted to Paul's lodging, upon a day appointed. For at those days it
was not permitted christians to have any churches: neither though they had had
churches, had it been lawful for Paul to have taught in them, being a
prisonner and in bonds. Therefore as in other places the Apostles preached in
private houses: so here also Paul assembleth them in the house which he had
hired, whereby we gather, that the worship and doctrine of god ought not so to
be tied to any place, as though it helped or auailed any thing to salvation.
For it is evident that the word of God has authority of it self. Also God
hears prayers in every place, so that we pray in faith, and lift up clean
hands unto him. Wherefore, if necessity urge us, we need be careful neither
for time nor place. Howbeit when we enjoy peace, and have Christian
magistrates, then we must have a regard unto order, which requires both time
and place. Therefore the examples of the primitive Church do nothing defend
the furious clamoures of the Anabaptists, because necessity in times passed
compelled them in their assemblies, to do diverse things contrary to our usage.

Secondly, here is declared the argument of Paul's sermon, The argument of
Paul's sermon.
with the order of teaching that he used. For he expounded the kingdom of God,
testifying and preaching unto them Jesus Christ. But by the kingdom of God,
we have oftentimes said the Gospel is understood. And hereof Paul could
not very well entreat, but he must also confute the error of the Jews,
which of the Prophesies wrongfully understood, dreamed that the kingdom of
their Messiah should be worldly. Wherefore they were to be taught that that
kingdom was spiritual, the beginning whereof in this world, is the whole
regeneration of man, and the newness of life, and the mark and end thereof
eternal felicity, which is prepared for us in heaven. And because the Jews
knew not the aucthor of this kingdom, he did teach them that Jesus Christ
was he: unto whom according to the office of an Apostle, he bears witness
plainly, and also exhorted all men to receive him. Let us here observe, how
the doctrine of the gospel, is called the kingdom of God: verily, of the end
and effect thereof. For it offreth unto us both the kingdom of God, and true
felicity, and brings us under the rule and governance of God, while it
subdueth all our reason and understanding, under the obedience of faith. Here
as many, as glory in the name of the Gospel, are warned of their duty. Let
them remember that the kingdom of God is preached therein, and therefore let
them have a care that God may reign in them, that the kingdom of the Devil
may be abolished, which we know Christ came in the flesh to destroy.
Again, the Ministers are admonished of the true trade and way of Preaching the
Gospel, unto the which these three things are necessary. First, they must
declare and open the mysteries of this kingdom, that the simpler sort be not
seduced by false imaginations. Then they must bear witness of Jesus Christ,
that all men may understand, how he is the aucthoure of this kingdom, and of
true felicity. Finally they must instantly exhort and persuade men, that
they despise not the salvation offered in Christ.

The fountain of the Apostles doctrine.
Thirdly, is declared the fountain whence this doctrine springs. For Paul
reasons of Christ, out of the law of Moses and the Prophets, proving that
in him were performed, whatsoever things they foreshewed of the promised
savior of mankind. Thus he followed the example of Christ himself, which
used many times to bring testimonies out of them. This place teaches us, that
no inventions of man, but the word of God comprehended in the scriptures, must
be preached in the church. For where the church is the household of God, it is
not meet that any other word should be heard therein, but the good man's of
the house. Which is the cause that all the Prophets and the Apostles, are
bound unto this commandment, as we have elsewhere declared. Therefore they
are not a little to be blamed, who either teach other Doctrine themselves, or
else hear and follow other: seeing this is the true mark of the Church, to
hear the voice of her husband only. Psalm. 45 John. 10
See Psalm. 45. John. 10. Moreover let us mark the consent both of the Old
and New testament, least we say (as some brainsicke persons do) that the
same belongs nothing unto us: and yet they both teach one self same
Christ, and one self same way of salvation, and we know nothing was
fulfilled in the new Testament, but the same was promised in the old. Whereby
it also appears that the faith of Christ is of most antiquity, and is the
only way and mean, whereby all the elect, from the beginning of the world,
have been saved. But because we have oftentimes otherwheres entreated
hereof, it may suffice for this time, to have breefely poynted to these
things, as it were with the finger.

Paul teaches all the whole day.
Fourthly, Luke declares how long Paul preached. Even from the morning until
the evening. Whereupon we may gather that they also disputed, and that Paul
aunsweared their arguments. For it is not like, that they which were as yet
utterly ignorant of Christ, would have heard Paul with such pacyence, but
that they would sometime have interrupted him in his saying. In the mean
season here is expressed an ardent desire, both in Paul, and in the hearers,
whereof we had a like example before in the twentieth chapter. This reproves
the slothfulness of our days, wherewith both diverse Ministers of the word,
and hearers also are sick and accrased, who think all labor and time to
much, that is spent at the sermons. But one day shall come that hunger of the
word, whereof we read in the Prophet. etc. Amos. 7.


Fifthly, the effect of so earnest and diligent a sermon is described. The
effect of Paul's Sermon.
For some believe, and some believe not. Yea a great disputation or contention
rises amongst them. Here we see what case the gospel is in, in this world. For
where Christ is set up as a mark or sign to be spoken against: it can not be
that all men can receive the Gospel with uniform consent. Let no man
therefore be offended with the paucitie or fewness of believers, nor with the
rank croppe of controversies in these days, seeing we hear that in times
passed, when the son of God him self, and the Apostles preached, there were
few that believed. Let this also serve to comfort ministers, when they see
they have little or nothing profited by their preaching. For then let them call
to their minds that saying of Christ: If they have kept my word, they will
keep yours also. John. 15.


But Paul severely rebukes their stubbornness, and threatens them with the
horrible judgment of God. Paul rebukes the stubbornness of ye Jews.
For Christ by his own example teaches us to deal so with those, whom the
mild and holeseme preaching of the Gospel can not move, who many times rang
in the ears of the Scribes and Phariseis grievous manaces, and that horrible
woe. So Paul likewise, because he would not seem to yield in any thing to the
affection of the flesh, alleges a Prophetical oracle out of the vj. of
Esai, declaring that it was no rare or new matter, that they so stoutly
resisted the Gospel. For their fathers in times paste had done the like, and
God had fortolde, that in the latter days, when the kingdom of Christ should
be revealed, men should do the like also. Thus he confirms those that were
weak in the faith, whom the multitude and authority of the gainsayers might
have hindered and offended. And herewith also he fears other, in that he
says, God had long agone ordained a punishment for them. This place of Esai
is very notable, and is the oftenest cyted and alleged of any other in the new
Testament. For all the Evangelists make mention hereof. Matthew in the
thirtenth, Mark in the fourth, Luke in the eight, and John in the twelfth
Chapiters. And Paul repeateth the same, in the tenth Chapter to the Romans.
Therefore we must not think the consideration thereof superstuous. For it
conteyneth in it three things greatly belonging to us also.

First, the sin of the Jews is described, in that they wittingly and
willingly are blind, and despise the known light of the truth: The Jews
unbelief was wilful.
like unto men, that having their perfect sight and hearing, make yet as if
they were blind and deaf. And that these were such, the Gospel in many
places teaches us. Would to God these only in times paste had been such, and
that we had not every where the like in our days also, who being convinced,
even by the testimony of their conscience, feign yet as though they could not
understand the mystery of the faith. Yet here appears the brightness of
Gods word, which is so great, that it mightily pierces both the eyes and
ears of men. For that word which God has set out unto us as a Candle, is
not dark and obscure. Therefore all the darkness is of man, a gross and
wilful darkness, as the things following declare.

The cause of incredulity.
Secondly, the Prophet describes the cause of this evil: namely, an heart waxed
gross. So calls he the mind which is indurate or hardened with naughty
affections, so that it can be moved with no admonitions or exhortations of men.
All such doings as this Christ expresses in the Parable of a marriage and
Gestes bydden to the marriage, wherein some had married a wife, some had
bought Oxen, some other farms, whereabout they being occupied, refused to
come unto the marriage. Hereby are understood such men as being addicted to
the flesh, and to earthly things, neglecte and despise things heavenly. Such
e it appears the chief of the Jews were, who had a greater regard to their
honor and advantage, than unto Christ and the kingdom of heaven: and now a
days there can scarce be showed any other cause of the Gospelles contempt,
than for that men study every where to heap up riches, and to fulfill the
pleasures of the flesh: so that they had rather lack Christ, than forsake
these their desires. Thus it appears, that all they which perish in their
incredulity, are inexcusable. For The light is come into the world, and
men have loved darkness more than it. etc. John. 3.
And Paul says, that a time should come, when men should not suffer the
doctrine of truth, but should get them selves false teachers, which
should speak things agreeable to their fantasy and affections. It is
euidente that this also has been these many years fulfilled, according to the
Letter, and at this day is so fulfilled, that a man shall find a great many
which shall confess, that in the Gospel is taught the true doctrine of
Faith and Religion, and yet will prefer the Popish Religion before it, both
because it bette^ lyketh the flesh, and also for that it is more acceptable to
the world. To speak nothing in the mean season of them which openly and with
great clamor testify, that they will neither hear nor suffer those that
shall teach better or holesomer doctrine.

Howebeit the Prophet pronounces the punishment that these men deserve, The
punishment of incredulity.
which is both manyfolde and horrible. For first, they are not converted,
that they may be healed. Therefore all hope of salvation is taken from them.
For where there is none other way of salvation, than to turn unto God, and to
be at one with him, it can not be but that all they that disdain the word of
God, whereby they are called unto this wholesome conversion, and whereby the right
way thereto is taught them, must utterly fall from salvation. Wherefore it must
needs be, that they must perish in their sins, John. 8.
as Christ threatens the Priests of the Jews. Then the next is, that this
salvation is translated and carried unto other. This god often threatens unto
the Jews, thereby to mollify their stony confidence. For where they were once
adopted of God, and became his peculiars, they thought it was impossible that
they should fall from their dignity. Yea they persuaded them selves that the
kingdom of God must fall, if God should forsake them. Paul therefore teaches
them that this affiance of theirs is most vain, because God could easily
translate his kingdom whole and sound in all parts unto the Gentiles. And this
he affirmed not of his own head, but as having a respect unto the Oracles of
God, whereby it was long agone prephesied, that it should so come to pass.
Hereunto belong the things read in Deuteronomy. 32. Deuteronomy. 32.
They have angered me with that which is no God, and provoked me with their
vanities. And I also will provoke them with those which are no people. I will
anger them with a foolish Nation. etc. See also what is said in Oseas, to
this purpose. And Christ says also expressly: The kingdom of God shall be
taken from you, Math. 21.
and given to a Nation which shall bring forth the fruits thereof. Now how
this came to pass and was verified, the whole order of this Book abundauntly
declares. And Paul in the tenth and eleventh to the Romans more at large
shows. And least any man should think the judgment of God stays here,
we must also mark that an horrible destruction, both of the City and whole
Nation, followed as Christ threat^e^, as soon as the doctrine of the Gospel
was taken from them, and carye^ unto the Gentyles. These things are worthy to
be diligently and continually observed, that we also may learn hereby what to
hope for, if we follow the Jews and become unkind unto God, and wickedly
wrestle against the doctrine of the Gospel, as they did. For God is constante
in his judgments, and the nation that does the like he uses to punish with
like judgments. Ierem. 5. And there is no cause why we should think that the
Gospel and kingdom of Christ shall fail, though we be forsaken, which
persuasion, as we said erewhyle, deceived the Jews. For God is able of stones
to raise up children unto Abraham. And there be diverse conjectures which
portende or show, that the Empire is like to return into the East, and that
the West shall be in servitude again, a^cording to the opinion of Lactantius.
Which thing, if it come to pass, In his.vii. book, and.xv chapter.
we shall see the kingdom of Christ greatly increase among the Turks, and
perhaps among the Jews also. Touching which thing Paul in the eleventh
Chapter to the Romans seems to prophecy some things, not altogether
obscurely.

But let us return unto Paul's hearers* which Luke says* went out, having
begone a great contention among themselves: The contention of the Jews about
the doctrine of the Gospel.
while some held on in striving against the doctrine of truth, and other some*
labored to maintain the same. And here that sentence of Christ is fulfilled,
which says, he would send a sword and division, whereby it should come to
pass, tha^ they which were before most intie^ and familiar friends, should
most bitterly contend one with an other. Yet let no man think this happens
through any defaulte of the Gospel, seeing the end thereof is to unite and
knitte us all together in Christ. Therefore all this comes to pass through
the naughtiness of the wicked and reprobate. Whose property it is, the more
earnestly they are urged with the word of God, the more to rage and become
mad, as the examples of Cayn, Pharao, Achab, Zedechias, and others, do
testify. But because the godly which know it is their duties to defend the
glory of God against all men, can not yield unto these men* hereof burst out al
these flames of contention. But by this present place it easily appears,
Paul profited somewhat with these men, because therewere that openly
withstoode these wicked persons. For the word of God is never preached in
vain, because it is of it self fruitful, and Christ has in all places his
people, which know his voice, and follow him. In the mean season we are
taught our duty, that if we will be godly and faithful persons, we must
constantly defend the quarrel of truth against all men. For God requires
such worshippers as are fervent and ardent in zeal, no warmlings and
dastards, which can wink at all kind of impiety, and can with pacient minds
and ears, suffer all the scoffs of the wicked, such as a man now a days
may find a number, who for this cause think them selves most worthy to be
praised for wise men and modest. But in deed they be very dullardes, and
destitute of all sense of godliness, which are not provoked with blasphemies:
and fools also, which so much esteem the friendship of the world* that they
deny unto Christ the duty of godliness. Therefore let us prepare our selves
to that wholesome conflicte and strife, which all the godly in this world must
suffer. For there is no cause why we should fear the power of this world,
forasmuch as we know we fight in his quarrel, which one day shall break in
pieces all the gaynesayers with a Scepter of Iron, which is the son of God,
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: to whom be praise honor, power and
glory, for ever. Amen.

The.Clxxv. Homely.
AND Paul dwelte two years full in his lodging, and received all that came in
unto him, preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching those things which
concern the Lord Jesus with all confidence, no man forbidding him.
OUr Lord and Savior Jesus Christ comfort his Disciples many times with
this argument, that he will not leave them destitute and succourlesse, but will
be present* with them until the end of the world. The truth of which
promises appears every where, as well at all other times, as also chiefly in
adversities, for the^ is Christ so nigh at hand unto his servants, that not
only he defends them mightily and faithfully, but also directs those
things which seem doleful and unfortunate unto their salvation, and to his
glory. Wherein the captivity of Paul may be unto us in steed of a number of
testimonies. Which in the beginning might have seemed utterly to have stopped
the course of the Gospel, howebeit the Lord so moderated it, that through the
same the doctrine of the Gospel was rather advanced, than hindered. For by the
occasion thereof, both the Roman Presidents, and Soldiers heard the
Gospel. And at length the preaching thereof filled Rome, yea the judgment
place, and the Emperors court. But because these things have been spoken of
before, other things which remain to be considered in this History must
briefly be run over.

First, the Evangelist expresses the time of Paul's captivity, saying: Paul
was in prison two years together.
that he abode two years together in an house, which he had hired of his own
charges, being guarded with that Soldier, of whom we made mention before.
And before that he lay in prison whole two years also, under Felix. And it is
like, that there ran some months between Felix his departure out of the
Province, and the time of Paul's sending unto Rome. Furthermore, we must
allow four months at the least for his Navigations and time that he spent in
Malta. Thus Paul's captivity endured five year, all which time he found this
one commodity, that he was not thrust into prison, but was in open ward,
whereby he had occasion to preach every where offered him. Here we have to
consider the state which the godly be in, in this world, who alone for the
most part, are counted such wicked persons as are unmeet to enjoy either
liberty or life. But in the mean season, what a sort of wicked and
slanderous men, trow ye, lived at their pleasure, under Nero, a most
ryotous tyrante? But Paul alone, as it were some public plague or calamity
of the whole world, is kept in prison. The like courtesy the Prophets in
times paste, and after them John the Baptist, and at length the son of God
him self found: who was put to death among thieves and murderers, and was
counted a greater malefactor than Barrabas the murderer. The end of all
which things is, that we should not be offended at the like in these days.
For it is not meet that the Scholars and servants state should be better
than the teachers and masters. Furthermore we know, that they which are
partakers of Christ's afflictions in this world, shall reign with him
hereafter in heaven. 2. Timo. 2.
Here appears also the infinite goodness of God, which preserved Paul so
long a time in open ward: verily for his electes sake, unto whom by this
occasion he would have his Gospel to be revealed. For this far passed the
hope both of Paul, and of all other the faithful. Because under Nero, a
most vicious and cruel tyrant, no man would ever have looked for the same.
Here therefore, let as many as walk in Gods calling, fetch counsel. For as
long as we be occupied in Gods affairs, and so as it is requisite for our
salvation, God will easily defend us, among most cruel enemies: who was able
to save Noah in the midst of the waves of the floude, which ouerflowed all
the world, and Jonas that lay hid in the belly of the houge Whale. And the
same when time shall so require, will translate us from all misfortunes into
the internal kingdom of his son.

Furthermore, let us see what Paul did in this two years space: Paul being in
prison, preaches and writes.
He received (says he) all that came in unto him, preaching the kingdom of
God, and teaching those things which concern the Lord Jesus with all
confidence, no man forbidding him. He did then the same in bonds, which he had
done before being at his liberty, because he understood he was now the
Apostle and servant of Jesus Christ, as well as before. And he did not only
preach, but also sent letters, now to one place, now to an other, and both
instructed and comforted the congregations abroad, insomuche as if a man
consider those times, we shall confess we have received more profit and
commodity by Paul's bonds, than of all his doings and sayings beside, while
he went at liberty oueral the world. For those times may we thank for those
singular Epistles, written as the holy Ghost endited them, to the Ephesians, to
the Philippians, to the Collossians, to the Hebrews, to Philemon, and the
second to Timothe. Which the Church until this day has kept and
preserved, as most singular and precious Jewels. Howbeit many things might
have feared Paul either to have written, or to have taught. For this doctrine
was the cause he was put in prison. Also he alone trauayled in this quarrel at
Rome. Likewise at the first meeting he found the Jews like unto them selves,
that is to say, stubborn and disobedient. Furthermore, that earnest desire
that he had to write unto foreign nations might seem to declare a mind
somewhat inconstant and unquiet. And it might be thought next neighbor to
sedition, to teach and confirm men in that faith and religion, which we said
before, was condemned by the whole consent of the Senate. Again, he was in
danger to be deprived at length of this liberty, and to have had more bonds
laid upon him, and to have been cast into some inner prison and dungeon. And we
must not think, that he was so blockishe, that he did not perceive and
consider these things. But he that knew that he ought his life unto Christ,
could not by these persuasions be pulled from doing his duty. And this is
verily a wonderful example, whereby we be taught how much we owe unto God, if
at any time we perceive we be helped and defended by him in the midst of
dangers and adversity. For then we must be feared neither with dangers paste,
neither with dangers present, or to come, but must be inflamed with greter
zeal, that by our bold defending the glory of God, we may show our selves
thankful to him accordingly. Therefore that reason of fleshly wisdom that many
in these days follow, is plainly foolish and perverse, which think we should
hold our peace because of enemies and dangers on every side appering, as though
it were in ye enemies power to hinder or further the course of the Gospel. Nay
it becomes us the more boldly to go forward with Gods quarrel, because we
plainly find his truth and power so apparent in the middle of our dangers. But
touching Paul's doctrine Luke says three things, Paul preaches the kingdom
of God.
which we must not let pass. The first is, what he preached: namely, the
kingdom of God, whereof we have intreted often times before. And here by way of
exposition he adds: teaching those things which concern the Lord Jesus.
Whereby we gather, that then the kingdom of God is preached, when Christ is
preached. For there is none other way to come unto that kingdom, than the same
which all the Scriptures with one consent show us to be in Christ Jesus. For
he only it is that has destroyed the kingdom of the devil, and the works
thereof, he only is the mediator between God and us. 1. Timo. 2. Colos. 2. Mat.
3. and. 17. John. 14.
He only has put out the hand writing of sin that was against us, and
purchased us the good will of his father. Therefore it is not without a cause
that he says: No man comes unto the father, but by me. These things only are
sufficient to disprove all other religions which show us the kingdom of God,
or any way of salvation beside Christ. Secondly is declared, Paul precheth
plainly.
how Paul preached with all confidence or boldness, that is to say, plainly
and freely, so that for favor of men he cloked and dissembled nothing. For he
was not ashamed of the gospel of Jesus Christ, as he testifies otherwheres.
Neither feared he the tira^nie of the world and prince thereof, because he had
learned of a long time to wrestle therewith. And verily Christ requires such
ministers as will do his business diligently, and leave nothing unto the
world, nor to the wisdom of the flesh, which under a fair pretense of
modesty, brings in a dastardly dissembling of the truth, and a denial of
the right faith. Paul's success.
Thirdly is declared the success that Paul had in his preaching. Which by
this only argument appears, was most prosperous or luckie, because there
was none which forbadde him to preach. And this me thinks is the greatest
miracle of all others, that God wrought to Paul. For always before this time,
whersoeuer he came, he found enemies, who either by secret awaytes, or else
by open force and sedition, always troubled him, and would hinder him in his
teaching, and at length drove him out of their Cities. But when he was brought
to Rome as a prisoner, there he teaches, being in bonds, where Nero, a
monster of mankind was Emperor, where both the Christian and Iewishe
religion was hated and envied, where all men were bewytched, either with the
vain superstition of the Gods, or with an Epicurious contempt of all
religion. Where finally the devil seemed to have the chief See of his
kingdom, there preached he Christ freely two years together, no man
forbidding him. Of which thing we can show none other cause, but that God
would bridle the minds of all men with a mighty hand, that though all would
not yield to the doctrine of the Gospel, yet they should not be so bold as
to withstand it. Thus in a City that was the Lady and maistresse of the
world, the Apostle being a captive, triumphs by preaching Christ crucified,
bringing many more unto the obedience of Christ, than any Emperor ever
subdued. The like we read happened in times paste, when Daniell, being led
captive to Babylon, defended the true Religion, both constantly and
prosperously. And although the chief of the kingdom were much against it,
yet first he instructed Nabuchodonosor, and afterward Darius, with some
knowledge of the true God, and was the author, that they did by public
Proclamations spread far and near the honor and glory of God over all their
kingdoms. Whereunto also this deserves to be referred, that when the Roman
Emperors used all kind of outrageous cruelty against the name of Christ and
his Church, yet were there many times found, even in their own courts, and
among the chief of them, such as greatly favored the Christians, and openly
defended the true religion. Some of which afterward, when the enemies of
Christ were taken away, were advanced to the Empire, as may be seen in the
Stories of Iouinian and Valentinian the Emperors. Thus Christ declares his
power where a man would least think. Nor it is no hard thing for him to
bridle the wills of men, because he compasses in the sea with bounds, which
causes the same to lay down his swelling waves and surges. Therefore as many as
are strong in him, Job 38. Ierem. 5.
let them hope for his present aid, and they shall never be disappoynted of
their hope.

Now what Paul did after the two years were expired, What Paul did after the
two years were expired.
Luke does not declare, ending in this place his history, according to the
instincte of the holy spirit, which would not have the Church ouercharged with
too many writings or books: and therefore he has written only those things
which may suffice for the instruction of our faith and life. Howebeit out of
Paul's own Epistles may some conjectures be taken, whereby it is declared what
he afterward did. For in his second Epistle to Timothe, and fourth Chapter,
he expresses plainly that he pleated his cause before the Emperor, saying he
was delivered through the benefit of God, when he was ready to be offered. And
writing to the Philippians, among other things he says: I hope shortly to
send Timotheus unto you, as soon as I shall see how my matters will go, and I
trust in the Lord that I my self also shall shortly come. And writing to
Philemon the Colossian, he says: Moreover prepare me a place to lodge in, for
I trust that through the help of your prayers I shall be given unto you.
Again in the.xiij. to the Hebrews, he says: Pray for us, and this I desire
you the more instantly to do, that I may the sooner be restored unto you. Know
ye that brother Timothe is delivered, with whom (if he come shortly) I will
see you. Yet before he was led prisoner to Rome, he was minded to go into
Spain, as the Epistle to the Romans in the.xv. Chapter declares. Of the
which things men gather, not altogether without a cause, that he was set at
liberty, and so returned through Greece, and Asia the lesse^, into Syria, and
when he had saluted the East Churches, went through Italy and France into
Spain. Thus according to the opinion of these men he preached the Gospel ten
years, after he was set at liberty: and at length being called back to Rome
again in the last year of Nero, lost his head, and received the crown of
Martyrdom, when he had preached Christ unto the most part of the world
seven and thirty years long together. But because our salvation depends not
on such points as these, I will not contend herein over much with any man.
And ^e thinks they deserve not very much of Christian faith and Religion,
which labor in searching forth those things which the holy Scriptures have
passed over in silence* For in so doing both the Scriptures are more
negligently handled, and the supersticious have occasion given them to be
occupied in doubtful and unprofitable questions, neglecting the doctrine of
the Apostles, and so being bewitched with fables, do grievously ^ire in matte^s
of faith and salvation* And surely, as God would have Moses sepulcher or
burial place, in times paste unknown, and the holy Ghost has left few
things in memory in the old Testament, touching the martyrdomes of the
Prophets: so in this present Treatise: Luke has described the ^^de, but of
two persons only, namely of Stephen and (...) the Apostle, being contented to
say this only of the residue, that they most constantly preached, and
confessed Christ in all kinds of adversity: ^o commending unto us the study
of the Apostles doctrine, which makes men followers of the Apostles, and
partakers with them of the heavenly inheritance. Wherefore we also in this
place must principally observe and follow* that fervent and continual
travail of Paul, in setting forth the glory of Christ. And we must not
be offended at his ^^de* For hereby Christ makes those that worship him
like unto him self in this world, to the end that hereafter they may be
partakers with him in heaven of his glory and kingdom.

A conclusion, with a repetition of the Premises.
Hitherto we have expounded this book, according to the grace of God given unto
us. We have seen therein the form, faith and doctrine of the primative Church,
which we also must keep and observe in these days, if we will be coumpted to
be of Christ his Church. For we must give no ear unto those, which say, that
many things are necessarily required about religion, and the way of salvation
that the primative Church lacked. Whose rashness, or rather impudency, I
know not whether a man may more marvel at. For herein they accuse the
Apostles, either of negligence, or of vntrustnesse: and fear not to prefer
themselves before those, whose examples the holy Ghost has set forth to all
men that will be counted the members of Christ, and attain to salvation in him
to follow. And who will think that they which continued whole eight and
twenty years, in the faith and religion taught by the Apostles, lacked any
of those things, without the which salvation could not be obtained? But if they
were saved without those things, which certain bold superstitious persons
afterward brought in, who will then deny us salvation, which follow their
steps? No man I think, but he that is led with the madness and frenzy of
the Manichees, will accuse all this book of falshode. We have seen also the
state, that the church is in in this world, being molested with continual
tribulations, whiles both open ennimies and false brethren, vex and disquiet
the same. We have seen the unworthy case that the Ministers are in, and how
slenderly the world requiteth them. We have seen also the mighty hand and
power of Jesus Christ, whereby he faithfully defends his Church in the
midst of the waves of persecutions, and by the cross of his servants,
most gloriously triumphs over the world and Prince thereof. Let us therefore
diligently use these things, to the instruction and confirmation of our
faith, that being strong in the same, and ouercomming al dangers, according to
the example of the Apostles and primative Church, we may come to the
inheritance of the kingdom of heaven, prepared for us from everlasting* (...)
Jesus Christ our King and Priest: To whom be praise, honor, power, and
glory for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
I fought be said amiss, remember man it spoke,
If well, do thou alone (O Christ) the glory take.

THE IVDGEMENT of S. Hierome upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The Acts of the Apostles seem to set forth but a bare History only, and to
weaue as it were, the infancy and beginning of the Church: but if we consider,
how Luke the writer of them is that Physician, whose praise is in the Gospel,
we shall at once perceive every word of him to be a medicine for the sick
and languishing soul.

IMPRINTED AT LONdon by Henry Denham, dwelling in Pater noster row, at the
sign of the Star.


