THE HAPPINESS OF PRACTICE. BY SAMVEL WARD, Bachelour in Divinity, and
Preacher of Ipswich*

LONDON, Printed for John Marriot, and John Grismond, and are to be sold at
their Shops in Saint Dunstans Churchyard in Fleetstreet, and in Paul's Ally, at
the Sign of the Gunne. 1621.

Dedicatorie.
Scriptures I have handled among you, endeavored to acquaint you with the whole
Counsel of God: and what is now the top of all my ambition, but to make you
Doers, of what you have been Hearers? Wherein consists the delight of
Husbandman? not in his plowing, sowing, or carting, but to see the Furrows
crowned, and Barnes filled with the fruit of his labors. Quu^ desideria bona
concipimus, semen in terram mittimus; quum vero opera recta incipimus, herba
sumus; quum ad profectum boni operis crescimus, ad spicam peruenimus; quum in
eiusdem boni operis perfectione solidamur, bonum frumentum in spica proferimus
Greg. in hom.
When we preach, we sow the seed; when we see good desires, then the corn
sprouts up; when people begin to do well, then it blades: but when they are
abundant in good works, then are the ears laden with corn; when steadfast and
perseuering to the end, then are they ripe for Gods barn. It was pride in
Montanus to ouerweene his Pepuza, (...). Eusebius. l. 5. c. 17.
and Tymium, two pelting parishes in Phrygia, and to call them Jerusalem, as
if they had been the only Churches in the world. But this is the commendable
zeal of every true Pastor, to adorn his own Lot, and to wish his Garden as
the Eden of God. Such shall you be, if GOD shall please to water the means you
have, with the dew of his Spirit, to continue and increase your love to hearing
and doing; to the muzzling of the mouths of all scoffers and scorners at
profession, to the joy, crown, and eternal happiness of your own souls,
and such as God has made watchmen over them, and of me the unworthiest of the
rest.

Samuel Ward.

THE HAPPINESS OF PRACTICE.
JOHN 13. 17. These things if you know, happy are you if you do them.
THE fastening Nail of the chief Master of the Assemblies, the great
Shepherds Pegge, driving home, and making sure, all his former counsels,
chosen as as a farewell cloze, making and leaving a deep impression of all his
deeds and sayings, as the last strong and loud knole of a Bell, that ends all
the Peales going before: A Text that puts life into all other Texts, urging the
life of them, which is the practice of them, and is therefore aptly and duly
pronounced by many at the end of their Sermons: A Sermon, upon which Text, the
world has as much need of, as of any one yet extant; the multitude of them,
as Statutes and Proclamations wanting yet one to enforce the observation of the
rest. The necessity of doing, was the scope of our Lords last solemn and
uncouth action, of girding himself with a Towell, rising from his Magisteriall
Seat, washing and wiping his Disciples feet. He had indeed two other
by-ends one mystical, intimated in his Dialogue with Peter, typifying the
great end of his descent from heaven, and begirting himself with our flesh,
viz. that he might totally wash our souls in the Bath of Justification once
for all, (...).
and partially in the Lauer of Regeneration so often, as we soil our feet in
the mire of this world by daily sins of infirmity. The other Moral, to set
his Disciples a pattern of humility and love, stooping to the meanest Offices
of mutual service, without emulation or affectation of priority, which he
foresaw, would else be the bane of their sacred function. But his third and
most principal aim, was by this his both verbal and real strange kind of
lesson, to learn them not so much what they knew not, as the use of doing that
they knew, else would words only have served the turn, and not so much ado
have needed, but he first does the things, and then expresses his intent, These
things if you do, etc. In this conditional benediction observe, first, the
object, on which Happiness is conferred, and to which it is confined. These
things: Secondly, the 2. acts required hereto; If you know: If you do:
chiefly, the chief of them is, If you do: to which happiness is foreannexed
specially: Happy are you, if you do.

These things.] The knowledge and practice of these things only, blesses,
these maine Arch-mysteries of Faith, and these divine and cardinal virtues of
love and humility, symbolized in their ablution, and not the doing or knowing
of all the natural, moral, or manual Sciences in the world besides.

If one knew all the Circle of learning, and knew, as was said of Beringarius,
all that was knowable, all the rules of Policy, secrets of State, mysteries of
trading, and could execute them all; yet in his such knowing and doing he might
not bless himself, were not happy, nor so to be reputed of Christians. The
right placing or misplacing of Happiness, is the Rudder of a man's life, the
Fountain of his well or ill doing; according to which, men take their marks,
and shoot right or wrong, all the actions of their lives. He that admireth in
his heart, and blesses with his mouth, any other Idol of Good, in stead of
this only true good, must needs miss of his end, and be a miserable man,
grossly mistaking his marks, as silly country people, that oftentimes give
terms of Honors and Majesty's to mean persons. So do most people, when they
transfer this transcendent word, and stately thing, Happiness, unto any
shadow of skill, save of these things, to which it is perpetually restrained in
Scriptures, Psalm 1. Luke 11. James the 1. Insomuch that Christ himself was
displeased when they bestowed it on the Paps and Womb of his Mother, in
comparison of hearing and keeping his Fathers will: Here then, and here only
is to be found the lost Jewel of Happiness, which well may we likened to a
Stake set up in the midst of a Field, which blinded men groape after, to make
the beholders sport at their wanderings.

Augustine tells of a Mountebank, that undertook in a City of great trading, to
tell every man his wish, which was in his fallible conjecture, to buy cheap,
and sell dear. But here, he who has made, and knows the hearts of all, tells
every man the end of his desire; and that which is more, shows him the way of
attaining them. Those things if you know, and if you do them, happy are you.

This first, If, prouidently premixed, and cautelously presupposed by Christ,
intimates, that knowledge must be the Pilote, Guide and Usher of Practice, else
superstitious deeds done by roat and random, the blind Whelps of ignorant
devotion, God regards not. Good works, the fruits of faith, and children of a
Believer that knows what he does, such are only pleasing in his sight. Christ
divinely foresaw the devilish policy of subtle worldlings, that would cry up
practice, to cry down knowledge, as cunning Papists will extol S. James, to
disparage Saint Paul, praise good meanings, and works, with an evil eye to
hearing Sermons, and reading good books, and carnal Protestants be ever
commending reading, to disgrace preaching; and another sort ever talking of a
good heart, a good meaning, and the power of Religion, ever disliking all show
and profession of it; which, if well observed, are the least and worst doers in
a Conntry. Which Satanicall Sophisme, Saint James deeply preuents; who, though
the chief aim of his Epistle, was, to urge Hypocrites to be Doers, and vain
boasters of justifying faith, to justify their Faith by their works: yet
forelaid this Caveat, Be swift to hear; Needful even in these hearing and
knowing times, wherein though knowledge cover the earth, as waters the Sea, yet
may the Lord have justly a controversy with the Land, or a great number at
least in it, like dry Rocks in the midst of this Sea, who have not a dram
of saving, and well grounded knowledge. But this is but a pre-requisite to the
maine thing here required, which happiness is intendedly fore-placed,
knowledge* being but a step to this turret of Happiness: Happy are you, if you
do them.

Here Is the labor, here is the difficulty, here is the happiness, in the
conjunction of doing with knowing, to practice that we know; to perform the
duties prescribed in the Gospel; to believe the things to be believed, and to
do the things to be done; the sum of Faith and Love, sweetly coupled in this
significant ablution of his Disciples feet.

Three noble ends Divinity propounds to her followers: the first and greatest,
Gods Glory; the second next to that, man's own content here, and salvation
hereafter: the last like to the former, the edification, and conversion of our
neighbors. In the attainment of these, is a Christians perfection, and
happiness, none whereof, bare Theorie shall ever more then come near. All
three, practice joined thereto, fully apprehends.

Of these three that must needs be the noblest, which God primarily intended in
the Revelation of his will to mankind, and Moses often tells us is, that we
might observe to do them: For if (as Wolphius reasons by a distribution) he
had given us his Laws to preserve only, he safelier might have committed them
to iron Coffers, and Marble Pillars; if only to talk and prate of them better
to Geese and Parrats; if only for Contemplation to Owls in Iuywoods, or to
Monks in Cloisters, and not to all sorts of people. His scope sure was not to
make trial of the wits of men, who could sharpeliest conceive; nor of their
memories, who could faithfulliest retain; of their eloquence, who could
roundliest discourse; but of their wills, who would most obediently do them.
This being his chief honor to have his Throne and command not in the Head,
and Brains, but in the strong holds of their hearts* and lives. For what shall
God reward thee, O man, but for that which men praise God for in thee? Now for
admirable gifts of Science and Learning, men may admire thee, but they give God
thanks only for the good they receive from thee. The Sun it self if it did
not shine and give warmth unto the creatures, were the glorious hiew of it ten
times more then it is none would half so much bless God for it. The men for
whom our heavenly Father is glorified, are such whose works shine before men,
who warm the loins of the poor, and with their knowledge are an eye to the
blind. I can hardly believe, that God ever made any creature only to behold,
neither Star, Pearl, Flower, or feathered foul, only to show their
glorious outsides; but to have influence, virtues, and qualities, beneficial
to mankind: much less a man to know only, or an Art only to be known, but
all to his glory, and man's service: which to effect, is all the glory of men,
and Arts. Some Sciences, I know, in comparison of others more operative, are
termed speculatiue: but not one of these, whose speculation tends and ends not
in some operation, by which man is profited, and God honored; specially
Divinity, which makes us his workmanship, not to knowledge, but to good
works, to the praise of his grace. Who commends a Schoolmaster, whose
Scholars can say and understand their Rules, but speak not, and write not any
good styles by them? A Captain, whose Soldiers can skill of Military terms
and orders, unless their Acts and exploits of War be suitable? Who praises
an horse that feeds well, but is not deedy for the race, or travel; speed, or
length. Little says the Scripture of the learning of the Apostles, but much of
their Acts. These are the richest, and usual styles of commendation in
Scripture. Moses a man mighty in words and deeds: Cornelius, a man fearing God,
and giving much alms: the Centurion, worthy of favor, for he has built us
a Synagogue: Dorcas made thus many coats for the poor: Gaius the Host of the
Church, etc. such benefactors their works shall follow them, and praise them
in the gates here, yea at the great Day obtain that Come you blessed of my
Father: for I was naked, and you clothed me: For such men God is blessed of
men, and such men shall be blessed of God in their deeds: and as the more
knowing without doing shall procure the more stripes, because God for them is
the more blasphemed: So the more doing with knowing, shall have double honor,
because God was doubly honored in them. Behold, I come quickly, and my reward
is in mine hand, to give every man according to his deeds. Blessed are they
that do my commandments. If you know them, and do not, miserable are you;
but these things if you know, and do them, you are the happiest men living.

The second branch of happiness, wherein doing has the advantage of knowing,
is in the personal benefit, consisting in the present sweetness, and future
gain accrewing thereby: some luscious delight, yea, a kind of rauishing
doucenesse there is in studying good Books, ruminating on good notions, not
unlike that which is in tasting and swallowing sweet meats, which made the
Epicure in Aelian, wish his throat as long as the Cranes, but all the benefit
is in the strength, and nourishment, it breeds after co^coction, when
thoughts breed works, and studies turn into manners; when the fat pasture
is seen in the flesh and fleece of the sheep. One Apple of the Tree of Life
has more sweet relish, then ten of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil;
which yet we fondly prefer in our longing, ever since our first Parents
teeth were set on edge therewithal. For instance, thou find thine ear
tickled with an elaborate discourse of temperance, but try the practice of it,
and tell me if it bring thee not in sundry real commodities to body and
mind, beyond a poor auricular transient titillation. Were it not for the
different energie, and efficacy in the heart and life, there might be
well-neere as much pleasure in reading the witty commendations of folly, or
pride, as in the sound Tractate of wisdom, and humility, I had almost said
in the language of fools, in the reading of Sir Philip, as Saint Peter.

All discourses of Faith, and Hope, are but dry things, in comparison of the
acts and practice of them, which are delicate above the Honey and the
Hony-combe, sweeter then the taste of any Nectar. Some say, the study of the
Law is cragged, that if the gain of practice did not sweeten it, few would
plot upon Ployden. But I believe, few would study Saint Paul, and preach as
Saint Paul did, instantly in season, out of season, (quaintly and rarely they
might for credit and preferment) but painfully, and profitably, I hardly
believe they would; fervently and feelingly they cannot, except the sweetness
of their practice drive and constrain them. Of all men I hold them fools,
that bend their studies to Divinity, not intending to be Doers, as well as
Students, and Preachers; not much vviser, such as will be professors of
Religion, and not practicioners. The Parables in the Talmud fits their folly
well, resembling them to such as plowe, and sow all the year, and never reap;
to the Grasshopper that sings all the Summer, and wants in the Winter: to women
ever conceiving, and ever making abortion, never coming to the birth; and best
of all, to that of Christ distinguishing Hearers into foolish, that build on
the Sand of Hearing, and professing, blown down with every puff of Trouble;
and the wise, that build on the Rock of Doing, vnshakeable. Search all the
Scripture, and see, if any Covenants, or Grants, were made to Knowing, and not
all to Doing. Is not the ancient tenor of the Law, Do this, and Live? and the
Gospel, Believe, and live: which implies an act to be done; and that act
implying sundry co^sequents and fruits of it. He that does my Fathers will,
he is my Brother and Sister: Not every one that says, Lord, Lord; but he
that the does my Fathers will. To him that does ill, shall be tribulation and
anguish to every soul, of Jew and Grecian: to him that does well, shall be
honor and peace, upon all the Israel of God. Unto whom shall that Euge be
given at that great Day, but to the doer? and in what form? but, Well done,
thou good Servant, that have not buried thy Talent in a Napkin. He himself
expresses the manner: Behold, I come quickly, my reward is in my hand, to give
every man according to his works. Blessed is every one that does my
Commandments, that he may eat of the Tree of Life, and enter through the
gates into the City. In all which, happiness in this life, and that to come,
is conferred upon the living acts and exercises, not upon the dead habits of
any grace whatsoever. In all labor there is abundance, but in the conceits of
the brain, and talk of the lips, nothing but emptiness and misery. If one
could do as much as Master Stoughton prints, and many credible witnesses
report of the young Gentlewoman of nine years old, that can say every syllable
of the new Testament by heart, and upon trial, not fail in returning a line
without the right Chapter and verse, and yet practice never a jot nor tittle of
it, happy were such if they had never heard word of Gods Word. If one should
take pains to get together a great number of songs, curiously set,
artificially composed, yea, and knew how to sing or play them, and yet never
heard them sung or played, what pleasure had he of them? The practice and use
of all operative Arts is all in all, in Divinity, the chief of all: which else
is as the Vine, excellent only in the sweet juice of it, otherwise fit not so
much as Pin or Pegge.

Next to Gods glory, and a man's own good, a Christian places much happiness
in winning and edifying others: to which purpose, a speechless life has more
life in it, then a liueles speech. In 1. Cor. 1. 10 (...).
I rrisistable is the Suada of a good life, above a fair profession.
Chrysostom calls good works, unanswerable Syllogismes, invincible
Demonstrations, to confute and convert Pagans: withal, tells us they have a
louder language then the Sun and Moon, whose sound yet goes over all the
world, publishing Gods glory, not in Hebrew, Greek, or Latin, which many
barbarous Nations understand not, but in an oratory they can better skill of.
An Archer puts not more force into an Arrow he shoots, then the life of the
speaker into his speech: whence it comes, that one and the same Sermon, or
counsel, in several men's mouths differ, as much as a shaft out of a Giants,
or Child's shooting. Miracles (says he) are now ceased, good conversation
comes in their place: the Apostles might have preached long enough without
audience or acceptance, had not their miracles, as Bells, towled to their
Sermons, and as Harbengers, made way into men's hearts for their doctrine: by
such weapons they conquered the world, as Gedeons soldiers, Theodo. in Iud.
(...)
the Midianites carrying in one hand the burning Lamp of a good life, and in
the other, the loud shrill Trumpets of preaching: otherwise plain men will
answer as Iouinian, to the orthodox and Arrian Bishops, contending about the
faith: Of your learning and subtle disputations I cannot so well judge, but I
can well mark and observe, which of your behauiours is most peaceable and
fruitful, and as one Moses, renowned for piety to Lucius, reputed an Arrian
Bishop, tendering the confession of his faith to clear himself: Ruffinus
eccles. hist. lib. 2. c. 10.
Tush, says he, What telst thou me of the faith of the ears? Let me have the
faith of the hands: I will rather go without my installment, then take it of
hands imbrued in blood, bribery, and injustice, as all know, and report thine
to be. Arguments are dark, and persuasions dull things, to lives and actions,
and most people are like Sheep, easilier following example, then led or driven
by preceps and rules. Let any man make proof of both. Let a Gentleman or
Minister persuade Parishioners to contribute liberally to a Brief, and set a
niggardly example, and see how much less will come of it, then if he said
less, and gave more. What else moved Christ, and the Prophets so frequently
to use that potent figure, which Rhetoricians, from the special usefulness of
it call (...), that is, when the Orator seconds and enliues his speech with
some action: as Christ, when here in my Text, he girts himself with a
Towell; and elsewhere, when he took the Child, and set him in the midst of
the Apostles; the Prophet, when he took Paul's Girdle; and the old Divine in
Dorotheus, that bad his Auditor pluck at a great old Tree, which he could not
stir, and at a young Sprout easily plucked up; to show the difficulty of rooting
out an old habit, in comparison of the beginnings.

The reason is, words are but wind, and vanish into the wind, leaving no print
or impression, more then a Ship in the Sea, in comparison of actions which men
take marks and notice of. This same inartificial argument of examples, though
Scholars less regard it, as having less art in it, yet is it all the
country-mans Logike, as the Martyr that answered Bishop Bonner, My Lord, I
cannot dispute, but I can dye for the truth, moved the spectators as much, as
many learned discourses. By this, Christ demonstrated to John's Disciples, his
Messiasship, Go and tell, not what you heard me preach, but saw me do, how
the blind receive sight, etc. If I do not such works as none other has done
before me, I desire not men to believe in me. By these courses, Peter would
have Christians win their Neighbors; and Wives their Husbands, rather then
by tutoring of them. Then would Neighbors follow one another to the right
Religion and true Church, as Tradesemen do to those Markets where they see
them gather wealth, yea imitate their lives, and bring forth fruits as Jacobs
Sheep, if they saw their rods speckled with works, as well as with words. Thus
Monica, Aug. Confess. lib. 9. cap. 9.
Saint Augustines famous Mother, taught one of her neighbor Gentlewomen,
complaining of her churlish Nabal, and wondering how she won her perverse
husband. Why, says she, I observed his mind, pleased him in all indifferent
things, forbore him in his passions, gave him all content in diet, attendance,
and so have made him first Gods, and then mine by degrees. These are the arts
and charms that if now used by Preachers and professors, would convert
multitudes of people, and cover multitudes of sins, and cause themselves to
shine as stars. These things mind and exercise. These things, if you know,
and do, you shall save your selves, and those you live withal, and so be
every way happy men.

Thus in all these 3 references, you see, that Doing, only brings in the
happiness; without which, all our Knowing makes and leaves us, but
dishonorable to God, uncomfortable to our selves, scandalous to others in no
nearer terms to happiness, then Balaam, Judas, and the Devil himself, who
the more they know, the worse for them: the more sin, and the more punishment:
they do but teach God how to condemn them. If knowing made up happiness, 1.
Use of reproof.
England were an happy Nation, our times as happy as ever any: but if doing be
required, great is the felicity of both. Of which shall I complain in the
words of Seneca? Malint disputare quam viuere.
Men now adays choose rather to discourse, then to live, study styles, rather
then deeds; Scire vt sciantur.
or in Bernards, Men desire knowledge, to be known by it: or as Anacharsis
taxed the Athenians for using their money, Nummis ad numerandum, scientia
adsciendum.
to count withal; and knowledge, to know withal: or as Tully of the
Philosophers, Cum Philosophorum vita miserabiliter pugnat oration.
that their lives and their discourses miserably crossed one another: the truth
is this, a plethory, and dropsy there is of hearing, and reading; a dearth and
consumption of doing; most ever gathering, never using: not unlike some old
University Droanes, ever in studying, and learning, never preaching, or
venting their studies. Like tedious Musicians, ever tuning, and never playing;
or like the Changeling Luther mentions, ever sucking, never battling; or like
dying men, and sick of apoplexies, having their senses, memory and speech:
but no faculty Loco-motiue, no power to stir hand or foot. Few (I confess)
troubled in these times with the deaf and dumb spirits, but most having
withered hands, and dried arms, and lame feet.

This same want of doing what we know, what does it else but make common
people blaspheme God? doubt whether all Divinity be but Policy, and the
Scriptures a Fable? Verily, the Atheism of the times has this for the
principal fountain and pretext. There was a woman lately living, much spoken
of in some parts of this Land, living in professed doubt of the Deity, after
illumination, and repentance hardly comforted; who often protested, that the
vicious and offensive life of a great learned man in the Town where she lived.
occasioned those damned doubts. This opens men's mouths, and gives the hint of
all blasphemies, scorns and scoffs of Religion. Such as he broke upon the
Jesuits, whom in foreign Nations they call Apostles. The old Apostles,
indeed, showed the world Heaven, left the earth to earthly men, got Heaven
themselves: but we are more beholding to our new ones, they show us Heaven,
leave it to us to purchase, and coozen us only of earthly possessions in the
mean time. This made Linacre reading upon the New Testament, the 5. 6. and 7.
Chapters of Saint Matthew; and comparing those rules with Christians lives, to
throw down the Book, and burst out into this protestation, Either this is not
Gods Gospel, or we are not Christians, and Gospellers. Questionless, the
more any men know, or profess to know, and the less they do, the more do
they dishonor God.

And what are such themselves the better for their knowledge, but as the
Preacher experimentally speaks: He that increases such knowledge, adds
sorrow. Their folly I cannot better express, then Erasmus in his Dialogue of a
carnal Gospeller, whom he calls Cyclops Euangeliophorus, a swaggering Russian,
affecting yet the name of a Gospeller, whom he describes, having by one side
hanging a bottle of rich Sack, and by the other a Testament of Erasmus his
Translation, richly bound and boffed, the Leaves gilt over as fair as his life
was foul, and conditions base. This man he discouers by certain
Interrogatories, to have no inward knowledge or affection to the Gospel, nor
better proof of his love thereto, then that he carried it always about him,
and had laid it upon the pate of a Franciscan, that had railed on Erasmus, and
the new Gospellers. To convince him; he asks him, What if he were tied ever
to carry the bottle at his Girdle, and never to taste of it; or but to taste
only, and never to drink it down: His answer is, that were but a punishment
Tantalus-like. But what if he did, as his manner was, drink deeply of it?
He then answers, It would vvarme his heart, refresh his spirits, cheer his
countenance: So says he, would that little Book, if thou did eat it
down; concoct, digest, and turn it into nutriment in thy life, and practice.
My meaning is not in this Relation to tax Biblecarrying, which I hold a
better grace then Rapiers, or fans of Feathers, but only to show the foppery of
them that carry them in their hands, or in their memories or understandings, as
Asses do dainty burdens, and taste not of them, have no fruit of them
themselves. Verily, a man knows no more rightly then he practices. It is said
of Christ, he knew no sin, because he did no sin; and in that sense, he
knows no good, that does no good; he that will obey, shall know my Fathers
will; and such as will not do what they know to be good, shall soon unknow
that which they know, and become as if they never had known any such matter:
it being just with God to punish shipwreck of a good conscience, with loss
of the fraught of knowledge; according to that imprecation of the Hebrews,
that if they should abuse their skill in music, their right hand might forget
his cunning, and their tongue cleave to the roof of their mouths. From which
just Judgment I persuade my self, it comes to pass, that many become in
matters of Religigion, mere skepticks, because they would not be practicks,
and that the commonest Religion of our times, is Socrates his uncertainty. Men
know nothing now a days. It is become a disputable problem, Whether the Pope
be Antichrist, Rome a good Church; whether a man may worship God before
pictures, play upon any part of the Sabbath, as well as upon the Week days;
whether election be of foreseen faith; whether the True Believer may
Apostatize? Shortly, I think, whether the Scripture be Scripture; and whether
there be a God, or no? To conclude, a good understanding have all they that
do thereafter: and cursed are all such as know these things, and do the
clean contrary.

Cursed (I say) are they, because they lay a stumbling block before others
both vveake ones within, and bad ones without, such I say, as know God, and
yet deny him in their lives, and are reprobate to every good word and work;
such as buy by one balance, and sell by another, Orig. in. Deuteronomy.
have a form of knowledge, which they prescribe to others, and live themselves
by contrary Rules. Of such I would I could speak with as much detestation, as
Paul writes of them: friends in show, Phil. 3.
but enemies in truth to the cross of Christ. Unclean beasts, for all their
chewing of the cud, repeating of Sermons, because they divide not the hoof;
walk without all differences, and judgment; as if GOD had given them their
lights to tread in puddles, and gutters withal, to walk and wallow in the
mire of all filthiness; which makes men mislike, not only their persons, but
the very Religion which they retain too: Some few wise and grounded Christians
will do as they say, and not as they do: hear them, because they sit in the
chair of Moses; but the greatest number will loath their sayings, for their
doings; as men the good light of a Candle, for the ill savor the stinking
tallow yields, resolving as the Indians of the Spaniards, whateuer their
Religion be, they will be of the clean contrary; if such go to Heaven,
they will go to Hell. I wonder with what face such can call themselves
Christians, Greg. Nyssen. de nomine Christiani.
or with what ears hear themselves of called. Does any man look to be
called a Carpenter, that never squared Timber, or erected frames? What if never
so skillful? I say of all such skill, as Cato of superfluous vselesse trifles,
They are dear of a farthing, that are good for nothing.

Oh rather let us al lay claim to that honorable name, do the works of
Christians, and thereby approve our selves to God and man, as the Angel to
Manoah, who being asked of his name, made answer, It was wonderful, and did
wonderfully, ascended in the flame, and made good his name by his action. Here
is the labor, and here lies all the difficulty, the Maxims and Sanctions of
things to be done, and believed, are but few, contained in brief Summaries,
but the incentiues, motives, directions, repoofes, Sic Epicttetus de
Philosophia.
and such like appurtenances of practice: these make volumes swell, these
lengthen Sermons, and multiply books. The art of doing, is that which requires
study, strength and divine assistance. Do the sins that swarm in our times,
proceed from ignorance, or incontinence rather, and wilfulness? It were happy
if men had that Plea, if the light were not so great, the times and the Nation
had not sin. May we not use the Apostles ordinary increpation and
exprobation? Know you not, that Idolatry, Swearing, Sabbath-breaking, Drinking
and Whooring, are sins? Know you not that for these things comes the anger of
God? Is any so simple, that he knows not the ten Commandments, and the
sum of the Gospel? yet how desperately do men rush upon these Pikes,
carelessly, wittingly, and willingly, seeing the Gulf, and yet leaping into it?
Many condemning themselves in Medeas terms, see the better, and yet follow the
worse, having no heart to leave that they see to be evil: as if men thought
that ignorance only should condemn, as if God should only come in flaming
fire, to render vengeance upon poor Pagans, Savages, and Indians, or
Heretics, that know not the truth, and not much more upon his own servants,
that knew and refused to do his will.

The Infidel disputes against the faith, Aug. lib. 4. contra Donat.
the impious lives against it; the one denies it in terms, the other in
deeds; and therefore both shall be held as enemies to the faith, and never
attain salvation: of the two, it is worst to kick against the prick; one sees,
then to stumble in the dark at a block, one sees not. But here is the chief
cause of all impiety, illuminatio^ is easy, sanctification is hard to flesh
and blood, requires crossing and mastery, yea crucifying of our lusts, wills and
affections, which is not done without much prayer and travel; and therefore men
neglect that, and content themselves with the easier and cheaper work. Upon
this therefore do I wish Christians would set prices, and spend their studies,
even about the art of doing. But how shall we attain this facility and faculty
of doing? I answer, to wish it, and heartily to desire it, is half; yea, and
the best half of the work, as Socrates was wont to say, He that would be an
honest man, shall soon be one, and is past the hardest part of the work. To
affect goodness above cunning, is a good sign, and a good help, and step to
be such an one, especially when this desire breeds prayer for power to do,
knowing that without Christ, we can do just nothing, but lie becalmed and
unable to move or promoue, as a Ship on the Sea, a Mill on the Land, without
the breath of his Spirit. And this I commend as the best and first general
help of practice, that every morning, and in the enterprise of all thy
affairs, thou acknowledge thine own disability, or rather deadness to every
good work, and commend thy self to the work of his grace, for the will and
the deed: for preventing, and subsequent; operating, and cooperating;
perseuering, and perfecting grace: entreating him not only to regenerate thee,
and give thee new Principles of motion, but to renew his inspiration upon every
new act of thine, that by Christ, or rather Christ by and in thee, may do all
things, pray as if thou had no will, vow as if there were no grace, that is
seriously both.

Secondly, in the use of all means of practice, when thou go to hear,
read or meditate, pray and desire, thou may light upon profitable and
pertinent Themes, Books, and Sermons, applicatory, and leuelling at thy self
and Orations, as if made for thee rather then for any body else: desire not to
gather Flowers, but Pot-herbes, and Fruit. Charms are said to have no effect,
unless one go with a belief unto them, I am sure no means ordinarily will
do thee any good, unless thou go with a mind to be bettered by them.

Thirdly, in the use of these, attend to thy self as well as to the matter,
have one eye and ear fixed on what is said, and another on thy self; lay thy
self to the rule, and say, What is this to me? how do I and that agree? Be
not as little children, who while they are looking in the Glass, think only
it is the babies face, and not their own: observe not in hearing a Sermon, the
pleasing sound of the Pipe, but how thou dancest thereunto; in reading of the
Scriptures, at the end of every period, ask thy heart, How do I practice
this? or, How does this reproof tax me? This promise comfort me? When thou
art well persuaded to do any thing, resolve thoroughly to do it; and when
resolved, dispatch, and execute it speedily.

Fourthly, after the Sermon is ended, stay not, as the common manner is, Now
the Sermon is done: but consider it is not done, till thou have done it; after
reading and hearing, do as men do after dinner; sit awhile, con^oct it by
pondering of it, digest it, and after draw it out into action. So do such as
learn Music, or writing, they play over their Lesson, write after the Copy:
this I think Paul meant, when he says, (...), I exercise my self to have an
inoffensiue conscience, etc. Most err grosely in the fail of this, thinking
it enough to retain it in memory, to repeat it over, serving divinity as
absurdly, as the countryman his Physike, who being bidden to take his bill or
receipt, took it home, and carried it in his pocket, and after, finding no ease
upon his complaint, being directed to take it in posset-Ale, put the bill in a
Cup, but never took the ingredients prescribed into his body: and look how
much good his Physike did him; so much good will divinity do us, taken into
our memories, and tongues, and no further.

Fifthly, in all thy talk, discourses and counsels to others, lick first thine
own fingers: that wiseman is a fool, that is not wise for himself; and yet
many such there be, that can preach and write good books, like Tusser, that
wrote well of Husbandry, and was the most unthrifty husband himself that ever
water wet.

Sixthly, and lastly, in all thy privy reckonings with thy self, which must be
duly observed at the cloze of every week, month and year, less and more
solemnly, observe what thou have done, consider if thou should keep a Diary
or Iournall, as many thriuing Christians do, what acts it would record, when I
go out of the world; what, shall the world say, has this man done singular,
or memorable? Take such accounts of thy self daily, as Masters of their
Iourni-men and Apprentices: as Pharaohs Taskmasters, of the Israelites: Where
is the work done this day? lest thou be as Huntsmen and Faulconers, that have
toyled all the day, and have no quarry or roast at night.

A word of Application.
IF now at the end of my Sermon, my several Hearers and Readers would do as
Saint John Baptists did, ask what shall I do? and what shall I do? You have
said much in the general of Doing: What say you in particular to this Nation,
and to the several conditions of men in it?

I answer: What can I say to these knowing times, which has not been said
before me? What new doctrine unheard of before, is it possible for me to
broach? I will therefore say no more, but, Do that which you know you should
do. If you know that Baal be god, if Rome be the Church, let us return to it
again: If you know that Swearing, Sabbath-breaking, and fashion-following be
good things; let us all fall to do these things. But if God has given us the
Truth, and the light, let us walk in it, and work by it, while it is to Day;
lest if we play Revel and riot, by it the Candlestick be removed, and the
light put out: if purity, sanctity, and sobriety be known to you to be
good things, and pleasing to God, Happy are you, if you do them.

Certain things there are known, and acknowledged, at all hands, as meet to
be done, that an able Minister might be provided for every Parish, that Popery,
swearing, and drunkenness would be suppressed. But why are they ever spoken of,
and never done? How did they in superstition maintain so many idle bellies?
How was the head of the beast cut off at the first in this nation? Is it harder
for us to cut off the friggling tail of that Hydra of Rome? How was the
infinite swarm of Rogues and Beggars suppressed by good Laws? Verily, nothing
is hard to industrious and active spirits, God assisting: and now it is high
time, and GOD looks that these things should be done.

To the Reverend Clergy, and such as carry holiness in their fronts. Let such
be sure to have Thummim, as well as Vrim on their breasts; their right thumbs
and feet anointed with holy oil, as well as their right ears; their
fruitful Pomgranats on their skirts, as well as their Bells to ring and make a
sound withal, lest they be as tinckling Cymbals to Gods and men's ears. You
know better then I can tell you what should be done: Happy are you if you do
what you know.

To Nobles and great Persons: It Is not your countenancing of Religion will
serve the turn, which yet were well, if many of you would afford but your
practizing of it, not the having of a Chaplain to say and do you such service
as Ahabs four hundredth did; but a faithful Michaiah, to direct you what God
would have done, whom you may hear as Cornelius did Peter, with an intent to
obey, not him, but the message he delivers out of Gods Book unto you.

To Gentlemen: For Gods sake do something, besides Hawking and Hunting, and
living upon your Lands, and Patrimonies. You have better means of knowing, and
doing, then meaner men. Happy if you do what you know.

To Lawyers, and Soldiers: I remit you to Saint John's counsel, which will
serve you both; and happy should they and their Clyents be, if they would
practice it, be content with their wages, and do no wrong.

To Merchants and Tradesmen: If you believe there be a Country and City,
that lies Eastward, a new Jerusalem, where there are rich commodities, as rich
as any in the East Indies; send your Prayers and good Works to factor there
for you: and have a stock employed in Gods banks, to pauperous and pious
uses, and think of Religion, as of tradings that will bring no gain, unless
diligently followed, and practiced; it is not a nimble head, but a diligent hand
that makes rich.

In a word, to all hearers and goers to Sermons: Play not the fools as most
do: hear not, to hear: go not to Church as many now adays do to
Universities and Innes of Court, neither to get Learning, Law, nor money, for
mere form or fashion, or as boys go into the water to play and paddle there
only, not to wash and be clean. To all sorts: I say not a word more; but do
that which you know to be good, and happy are you.

Breuis predicatio, longa ruminatio, actio perpetua
Denique, quid verbis? opus est spectemur agendo.
A POSTSCRIPT.
REader: If thou had read over a Treatise of Physic, Policy, Mathematics,
or any other mystery, earnestly promising thee health, wealth, or special
benefit; would thou not long till thou had made some trial of it in
practice? Here if thou will be persuaded to do the like, without all If or
and, Happy shall thou be. To conclude, before thou be tired, consider well,
much Reading is a weariness to the flesh, but much Doing, a refreshing to the
Spirit. The general complaint of the world is, that there is no end of making
many Books, because there is little or no fruit in those that read them, but
as the grass on the house top, which withers before it comes forth, whereof
the mower fills not his hand, nor the glainer his lap, neither they which go
by say, The blessing of the Lord be on you: or, we bless you in the Name of
the Lord. Thou therefore who desire to be a wise Reader, one of a thousand,
read to some purpose; that is, intend, of a Reader, to become a Doer, So shall
thou auert this curse and reproach from thee. So shall God and man call thee
blessed; and blessed shall thou feel thy self in so doing. Do them: and so
he has done,

That lays no heavier burden on thee then on himself; nor wishes other
happiness then to himself:

SA: WARD.

FINIS.

