Pan his Syrinx, OR PIPE, COMpact of seven Reeds: including in one, seven
Tragical and Comicall Arguments, with their diverse Notes not impertinent:
Whereby, in effect, of all things is touched, in few, something of the vain,
wanton, proud, and inconstant course of the world. Neither herein, to somewhat
praise-worthie, is praise vvanting.

By William Warner.

Vel volo, vel vellem.

AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Purfoote, and are to be sold at his shop
ouer-gainst Saint Sepulchers Church.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Sir Georg Carey Knight, Knight Marshall of her
Majesty's most Honorable ^or should, Captain of the Jsle of Wight, Son and
heir apparent to the right Honorable the Lord of Hunsdon, my very good Lord
and Master.
IT had (Right Worshipful) no sooner entered my thought to handle some
Argument, at the first, chiefly for mine own exercise, but that I found my
self thereunto (vn-worthie though a Wrighters creadit) less sufficient for
form, then prevented of matter: for hardly discourse we that argument, whereof
something before, to the like effect is not extant. As for the common text,
Love, I esteemed the same, especially by one man, so exquisitly anotamized,
that to others travailing in the like, being bereft the flesh, muscles, veins,
sinews, blood, and bowels, only remain the bones for their exercise: and to
work on so hard a subject, were (think I) to be as vain as the Alchimist,
who in seeking to perfect wonders for covetousness, does little else then work
himself a Beggar, with cunning.

In suspense therefore of such my purpose, I happened into place, where at one
time to visit a sick Gentleman, were assembled a Divine, a Courtier, a
Physician, a Lawyer, a Ciuilian, and a Countrie-man: every of which busying
them selves about the sick, had left in an out-ward Chamber something or other
of their ordynarie Attire: anon entered the seventh man a merry conceyted
Youth, who finding in one place such variety of Apparel, and severally one
after an other attyring him there withal, behaved himself so formally, from
the Pulpit to the Plough, from Paul his Epistles, to Ovid his de art amandi,
Galen his de sanitate tuenda, Littleton his Tenures, Justinean his Pandectes,
and Virgil his Bugloges, that with no small delight to those present, he not
only seemed the same in substance whom de did counterfect in action, but by
those his merrimentes, did also minister to the weak gentleman such occasion
of extraordinary motion, and vio^ent laughter, that by the breaking of an
Impostume he shortly recovered.

I then observing how these diverse actions, thus delivered by one Actor,
wrought, because of variety, to the Inspectors a cause of mirth, and to the
diseased a cure of his malady, yet both coming by chance, emboldned my self
in the like manner, though differing in the like matter to huddle up (rudely I
fear) my following Medlie.

The Patronage whereof most humbly I offer unto your good Worship, with the same
hope, which sometimes happened at Rome beyond hope to the poor Cobbler, whose
Crow, not for Aue Caesar which to pronounce she was purposely taught, but for
opera and impensa periit, which came aptly and unlooked for, was therefore
accepted of Caesar.

But if nothing herein shall happen either profitable by chance as it did to
the sick, or pleasant by chance as it did to Caesar, it will then less boot
me to say my labor is lost with the Crow, then repent me of rashness as it
once did an Ape, who so much presumed of his furde iacket, that needs he would
imitate the Bear to dispoyle the Bees of their honey: when, silie Ape (an
adiect improper to an Ape, if not environed of Bees) no sooner had he touched
the Hiue to have tasted the honnie, but that the Bees were as nimble where they
found bare, as was Jack at his ba^quet: putting him, to late, in
remembrance, that behind he lay open to sightes, and naked to stinges.

Yet (which best is) by so much the less fear I a rough Air, by how much the
more I sail under a calm Lee, and he that intermedleth not in Tiresias his
doom, neither awaketh Juno to him, neither needs he sleep to Jupiter.

Only, if your Worship impute not this a presumption, that I hope after a good
sentence, where I should fear a grave Censure, such tolleration may add fresh
Reeds to his Pipe, and he pipe otherwise to your praise, that with no less
affection then duty, wishes vnvnto your Worship all happiness, not
prejudicial to true happiness.

William Warner.

To the Reader.
SHould I be curious in applying the form, or rather deformity of Pan, the
Pastoral God, to the learned my skill might seem no less absurd, then to the
ignorant the sense obscure. Let it therefore suffice for the purpose, that the
Nymph Syrinx, in Arcadia, in flying Pan his loving pursuit, was by
intercessions (as poetically it is fabled) transformed into an heap of Reeds,
which being stirred with a gentle blast, and Pan hearing them to yield a soft
mellodious sound, with seven of the same Reeds, framed to himself the Pipe
after her name called Syrinx: proportionably to which number, I, a Puple of
such a Tutor, have also sorted out this my Music. Music I call it, though
Midas, not for his ears, does the second time dare to term it melodious:
neither, I think any, except perhaps Satirs, will vouchsafe to hear it: for
only Mercury his Pipe must bring Argus a-sleepe, and Ganymedes wring the
grapes, if Jupiter taste the Nectar: yea, so forcible is a first Conquest to
deter from a second Encounter, that now Pan, and his Puples hold themselves
very well content, so they can their Plain-song, that Apollo can descant.

And yet, let his coy Prophetise presage hard euentes in her Cell, let the
Athenian (...), or Man-hater bite on the Stage, or the Sinopien Cynic bark
with the Stationer, yet, in Pan his Syrinx, will I pype, at the least to my self.

Unto whose rude Hermonie if, for variety, any T^molus shall listen, then let
such an one imagine, that piping of love some Polephemus is a wooer: If
handling Argument some Coridon an Interlocutor: or howsoever it be, some
Fanus, or the Author an Actor: as not daring to be so venterous here, as was
one vainglorious els-where, that in trying his Text, as it were by the Touch,
to be thought a learned Clearke to an unlearned Auditorie, having rapped out a
round deal of Welsh, such, quoth. he* are the very words in Hebrew.

But so far off am I so to resemble, so to desemble, that might I utter my
scarce indifferent, for exquisite, yet would I not offer the same for
excellent: only to keep a-loose from Laborinthes, in which Minotaur is redier
with a Club, then Ariadne with a Clue, suffices to me, might also (courteous
Reader) such my considerate fear satisfy you. But what? to father my book on
Pan, whose bad nature affords not so good nurture, as to fear an offense,
when all, in deed, is nothing more then a fault, and thus submissiuely, to
crave pardon for mine own taken pains, and that, perhaps, of such who will
soonest mis-like, what they cannot make like, were as if an Ass should bring
forth a Gennet, Pan a child altogether unlike the father, and for my self in
decorum to degenerate: for Pan being clownish, not courtish, should not sing
cunningly, if he sing kindly: and why? only to be fine, were in him a fault:
but in vain is it, I know, that I fear such offense.

But whether wander I? suffiseth it not, that willinglye I have straightened my
self to time, but that I also wilfullye so tie my self to one rude Master,
that I degresse not so much as in good manners? not so, but if (curtious Reader)
not calling into Account my worthiness, which claims less then you should
grant, you accept of my willingness, which is more the^ you can guess, he
that expects only such courtesy, and rests most desirous to deserve it, is
also therefore and still shall be, yours as he may,

W. Warner.

Arbaces. Calamus primus.
Cap. 1.
AT what time Zamieis Ninias, the fifth Emperor of Assiria, son of Ninus, and
Ascolanta Semiramis, had in battle vanquished th'accursed son of his father,
and common enemy to mankind Cham, otherwise called the Egipsian Saturn, and
son of Noa, then usurping over the Bactrians: part of his Navy (upon
occasion) returning by Schythia, was so dangerouslye tossed with storms and
seas, that they which seemed even now most glorious and insolent victors,
appeared then most miserable and desolate wretches. Nevertheless, after long
despair of their lives, great loss of their treasure, and extreme danger of
both, the disparkled fleet of the Assirians arrived at Niniuie, one only ship
excepted, wherein were embarked more then a hundred brave soldiers, over whom
one Sorares was captain.

Not far from that place whereas the mountains Taurus and Caucasus begin the
headsprings of all the Asian Seas, which take their sundry names according to
the channels, whereinto the scattered waters fall, there lies an Island, no
less obscure for the situation, then unfrequented for the infertilitie
thereof: into this Island, the ship of Sorares was by tempest driven. Where
having landed his men, and repaired his wetherbeaten Uessell, he determined a
further search into the Island, as well to learn what commodities might there
be found, as also to keep his soldiors occupied, until time might serve more
conveniently for their departure away: and therefore marching from his ship in
good order, he pearsed a great part of the same Island, wherein he found
nothing but myrie bogges, or stiepie rocks, not worth the discovery, much
less the travel or hazard of a conquest: and he made it no wonder that he
found no people there to defend it, seeing he himself thought euery^day a
year, until he had left it.

At the length, sending the wind to be more favorable, then their discovery
profitable, his purpose was to retire his men, and forthwith to have wayed
anchor. But whilste he rested in this resolution, the Assirians might epsy
(descending toward them from a mountain) two men altogether unweaponed and
naked, saving that their pined bodies were in some parts disorderly covered
with a few unhandsome rags: their looks seemed wild, their countinaunces full
of heaviness, their color swarth, their hear and beardes long, loathsome, and
vnkembde, and (to describe them in a word) being men in shape, they seemed
monsters in show: but yet such monsters, as were rather to be pitied for their
penury, then to be feared for their cruelty.

These being come before the Assirians, albeit their savage demeanor sauoured
more of the place of their present abode, then of the civility (small though
it were) of the country wherein they were bread, yet remembering that they were
men, and that they were to deal with men, the one of them, whose name was
Arbaces sometimes a Duke in Media, had these following speeches.

Cap. 2.
MOst happy people (to whom othewise I should have given a contrary
salutation, had not I desscried your ship, a friendly instrument to rid you out
of so fruitless an Island) I would not have you imagine that wanting swords
to expel you, we endeavor by words to cerrifie you. We are but twain (as you
see) and the only inhabitants of this vninhabitable Island, yet twain a greater
number then that the plenty of this place is able to satisfy, not for that we
are covetous desiring all, but miserable having nothing. Our food is roots,
grass, and leaves, our lodging a Cave framed by nature out of the hard
quarrie, our bed moss, our apparel only such as you see, and the same the
unhappy spoils of our hapless companions: yet these are trifles in respect
of a tragedy.

And for that you have partlye some experience of the place, though better
cheap by all, then we that have paid therefore to the vttermoste, I leave you
to judge how it does battle, by the view of our forlorn personages: saying in
a word, that hell is no hell in comparison of this, or that this is hell it
self without any comparison.

In that we live we are not ungrateful to the Gods, but in that we are not
dead we account our selves unfortunate: for had death been plyant to our
petions, the end of our lives had been long since the end of our sorrows. But
hope ouercomming despair, for that in the one is possibility, in the other no
remedy, knowing that as the Gods have power by justice to punish, so they have
will by mercy to pardon, and considering that Fortune is painted with two
faces, frowning with the one, and smiling with the other, that winter does bite
but summer burnish, we have made necessity a virtue, continuance a custom,
and patience our protector.

Whence we are our language bewrays, what you are your Ensigns do manifest,
but what we demand, rests as yet untouched.

We will not fear to speak, though you spare not to strike, abundance of
hardness has made us hardy, the worst of your malice can be but death, and
the best thing may betide us, shall be change of our lives. We are Meades, not
monsters, civil people, not sauadge Ilanders, banished from home through your
prosperity, and betrayed here through our own practices, once flying your
enmity, and now following your friendship, as men enforced to the first by
your wrongs, and constrained to the later through our own wretchedness. With
this courage nevertheless (ye Assirians) we sollicitate your favor, that if
the old rancour of your grudge, be not yet qualified with the new spectacle of
our present calamities, our sides (know ye) have not as yet taken so much the
property of these hard Rocks, but that they will easily give entrance to your
revenging weapons. Albeit, by the way, it might be said, that as you are to
deal roughly with those that stand against you in combat, so ought you to
deal mercifullye with those which at your feet lie prustrate, for in the one
your courage is not more magnificent, then in the other your charity
meritorious: and though it be glorious to overcome by battle, yet is it more
glorious to be overcome by pity. For (alas) shall men whom nature has endued
with reason, and united in original amity, by occasion of any corrupt
accident, continue more malicious than unreasonable or senseless creatures?
Does not the Plantane profit the toade in disburdening her of the superfluity
of poison? and the same nevertheless, stand us in steed to many good
purposes, or does it derogate any thing from virtue, if by our industry we
better the vicious? or shall we cut of those limbs that are now sound,
because the same were once sore?

Well, if remembering what we have been, you will not conceive what we would be,
if our humble submission be thought an insufficient reconciliation, if you
fear us that have neither will nor power to harm you, if you will not (which
is the sum of our suit) deliver us from hence, that of our own accord are
fallen into your hands: if (I say) it be your pleasures that we shall not weep
for unexpected kindness, whom you shall not enforce to dread for any practiced
torments, then assure your selves, you cannot be more tirannous, then we
patient, and our death shall be more dishonorable to you, then our graves
discontenting to us.

The only thing we crave is to be conuaied out of this Island, a small petition,
and easily performed: the poizinesse of twain will not be burdenous to your
bark, and the hyer for our passage shall lighten your hearts. But to what
purpose should I use more speeches, if you be merciful enough is said, if
merciless much more will not serve.

Cap. 3.
HOw rufully these words were uttered by the miseble Meade and how effectually
the same wrought in the hearts of the Assirians, the passioned gestures of the
one did testify, and the pitiful regards of the other witness. Let it
suffice, that the silly souls were pitied, their pensiveness comforted,
their bodies appareled, al former enmity pardoned, and liberty promised.

But see what an evil event followed so good an hansel. In the night before
the Assirians should depart, Sorares calling diverse the chief of his soldiors
to suppe with him in his cabben, enuited amongst the rest the two Meades, and
after supper ended, he entreated the miserable Duke to declare by what mishap
they chanced into that harborlesse Island, whereupon Arbaces proceeded in this
manner.

Albeit (good Sorares, and you the rest of our benefactors) the remembrance of
our passed sorrows will be little less then a present death to our spirits,
the which without anguish we cannot rehearse, nor you without pity hear,
yet shall you not find us dainty to answer your request, whom we have found
so forward to yield us relief.

Above two hundred years of mine age are already passed, a short time, if not
lengthened out with continual sorrows, the root thereof chiefly springing
from Assiria: and yet (good Sorares) think not that having cause to curse your
countriemen that banished us into this Island, that therefore we will cease our
prayers for you, by whom our delivery is promised, seeing why we should
malice you we can render no reason, but why we should honor you we have good
occasion.

The purportie of this my speech is to be construed to this purpose, that as
we are not to accuse you for our received injuries at the hands of your
predicessors, so is it not necessary that in malice you become their
successors: for if we shall make their old controversies, our new quarrels,
it will follow, that first the world and all things shall cease to be,
before strife and discord shall cease to grow. But hitherto I have been rather
tedious to your ears, then aunswering to your demaundes, yet pardon my
beginning, and with patience carry an end.

It is a world to note the wondrous alteration of all things, even of late
days, for omitting to speak of the time before the general deluge, I will
only glaunce at the superfluity of this our present age.

It has been, yea within the time of my rememberaunce, that men thought
themselves more sure in their wild Caves, then now safe in their walled
Castles, better conte^ting themselves with the unforced fruitfulness of the
earth, then now satisfied with their fruitless compounds enforced by art, the
simplicity of nature prescribed unto them an absolute law, but overmuch
curiosity now, subuerteth both law and nature. What speak I of part? when it
is manifest that no sooner gold and silver the Ambassadors from hell, had
insinuated themselves into the hearts of men, but that a general subuertion
was made of all.

Nemroth then taking upon him an unknown title, not ever heard of before in
all the world, much less in Caldia, became a king in Babylon: who, by
suttletie having wone the hearts of the vnpollitick people, by that means got
them under the yoke of servitude. Nemroth being dead, his son Belus hunting
after greater superiority than was by his father newly exacted, pretended by
wars to dilate his dominions, whose dreadful purpose being by death made
frustrate, his son Ninus, your late Emperor and our then persecutor, did
execute. Making his new invention of war and battle not only terrible to
those that did taste it, but horrible to us which as yet did not feel it.

After a while it came to pass, that we who hitherto did only hear much
mischief of war reported, did now suffer the effects of that, which of long
time we feared: for Ninus landing an army of soldiers in Media, obtained an
easy victory against us bad warriors, and in respect of holds, armor and
artilerie, a people utterly naked.

Ninus being thus conqueror, and we conquered, our king Farnus, his wife and
vii. children murdered, continual likelihoods of an universal slaughter still
appearing, and the desolation of the whole country being generally expected
for, diverse Nobles of Media, and others not of the basest calling, to the
number of 100 and upwards, of yt which number, and the whole number now living
we two are, having conuayed into a ship the gold and cheifest treasure of our
slaughtered king, and rather trusting to the incertaintie of the seas, then to
the inhumanitie of the Assirian soldiors, in an unlucky hour hoisted up our
sails, leaving with tears our wasted country, as men compelled to search
after some new habitation.

The seas we passed were numberless, the sorrows we suffered were grievous,
the dangers we escaped were perilous, how far we had sailed we account not,
how far we should sail, we knew not, where to ariue we were ignorant, and
all places (if far enough from the Assirians) seemed to us indifferent.

In the end, being no less unfortunate in our seafaring, then inexpert in the
new art of navigations, seeing our vittels to waste, our vessel to leake, and our
tackling to fail, such was then our comfortless despair, that having no hope
at all to escape the threatening waves, it did only forthinke us that we
forsook our natural graves, in our native country, to finish our lives
without honor amongst the merciless surges. But cork wants wait to sink,
and lead is over heavy to swim, we were not so happy as to suffer shipwreck
on the seas, being predestinate to sorrows on the shore.

At the length we espied this Island, and making to the same, nere about the
place where this ship now rides, we stroke sail: and (unhappy men) so joyful
to us seemed this our ariuall, that then promising to our selves security,
when we did but newly enter into our sorrows, we leapt from out our ship, with
minds never to reenter the same, kissing the very earth that first received us
a shore: this happened about midday, but before night, our mirth was thus turned
to moan.

Not having, as yet, made any sacrifice to the Gods, before search of the
profit, or disprofit of the place, any consideration care or forecast of
afterclaps whatsoever, we began to vnfraught our ship, laying our gold and
treasure on the next shore. Scarcely had the last man brought the last burden
from the ship, but that a contention fell betwixt two of the noble men
(severally before time noted of Ambition and Avarice) about the division of the
same treasure. And such was their madness, that albeit their present plight
rather required lowly tears, than haughty titles, yet Ambition not yielding
an ynch to Avarice, either of them sought by far discentes to fetch their
petigrees from Iapeth and Madus, of whom we are the offspring, as nere as
possibly they might.

Amongst the inferior sort, there was one Chebron, a lusty taule fellow, of a
hot choleric complexion, and an invincible courage: he seeing the
controversy, that now began more and more to increase, bending his brows and
laying hand on his weapon, spoke many words much displeasing to either of the
contentious compettitours. And were it not (Sorares) that I should cloy your
ears with over long a discourse, I would also repeat his words, the which I
yet remember, as (in my conceit) well worthy the noting.

Here Sorares interrupting him said: If (good my friend) it shall not be
troublesome for you to speak, it shall not be tedious for us to hear, our
days work is done, and it is yet but early nights, let those that will
sleep, as for my self I am provided to wake.

And were I also able (quoth. Arbaces) to counterfeite the magnanimity that then
appeared in his countinaunce, I would not willingly pretermit the same, but
these were the words that Chebron then used.

Cap. 4.
JF so be (my dear friends and countreimen) the invasion of the Assirians, the
ruin of Media, and our late passed perils, had been to me by oracle or
otherwise revealed, I then would have made you acquainted before hand with that
which was threatened to follow: so might we either have pacified the Gods by
prayer, encouraged our selves to abide the danger, or else before it had
happened have dyed for sorrow: but, contrary to our expectations we have avoided
the outrage of our foes, and though hardly yet safly escaped the seas.

But now, if I that cannot divine as a prophet, prenosticate as an Astrologer,
invoke as a Nigromancer, observe as an Augur, interpret as a Dreamer,
calculate as a Wyzarde, or cast figure as an Arteste, should say unto you,
that the mischiues yet behind, are more and greater than whereof we have
already our shares, you (perhaps) thinking it impossible, would esteem it as a
fable, and account me as a fool.

O people for your inconsiderate peeuishnes to be pitied, are your eyes clear
and yet will you counterfaite blyndnes? have you your senses, and yet will you
seem sensles? and seeing imminent destruction, dare you nevertheless be
desperate? have you been overcome by men, between whom and you ought to be an
equality, and yet are you feareles of monsters, between whom and you
consists no indifferency? muse not at that which I have spoken, for you are
likely to find more the^ monsters, being to encounter with Ambition and
Avarice, the one by presumption, would rent the gods from the skies, and
the other rest discontented to possess their seats, and unless both be
incountred, neither of both can be conquered, such is their vndeuisible
properties.

Know ye not (my friends) that the ambitious person, neither having gentry to
elate him, revenues to enrich him, personage to adorn him wit to advance
him, good qualities to prefer him, or any one virtue to commend him, if by
the benefit of fortune her blyndnes, he attayneth to dignity he forthwith
becomes a lordelike tyrant, a vainglorious Magnifico, careless of other men's
profit, and arrogant of his own preferment: his countinance is fastidious, his
speechloftie, his meditat^ons asspiring, not brooking his superior, nor
bearing his equal, to his inferiors burdinous, to all men cumbersom and not
remembering his old friends that forgetth his newselfe.

If beggars thus set on horseback ride a galop, let us then make account, that
these claiming by gentry will ply the spur. Briefly what can I say more, the^
in effect is already experienced? see you not or are you willingly blind? how
these two gallants only remembering what they sometime were but not
acknowledging what they presently be, make no question of our safety, but fall
to quarrels for their private superiority: not considering y^ fire once
squenched forgoeth both heat and brightness, that grass once mowed, loses
both sap and greenes, and that a noble man exiled, if not of noble birth, yet
of authority and honorable estimation stands disgraded.

But let it be that banishment is no dispargement to birth, yet should we for
our own assurance, respect the sequel, and have an eye to their inclinations
whom we admit to rule. For mine own part I carry this opinion, that had these
men no other fault, yet are they therefore unfit for government, because so
forward to govern: authority should be denied to such as desire it, and
offered to those that refuse it, for a wise man and one well minded, never
receives an office, unless thereunto compelled, as foreseeing yt the same to
his body shall be a travel, to his conscience a care, that he shall be marked of
all, envied of many, and cannot but dance in a ne^^. But such as are these our
high minded intrudors (whom we may therefore call ignoble, because not
virtuous, as having already dashed at home against the rocks of ignomie, and
now here entered into utter shipwreck of the small remain of their credit,)
these I say chaleng preeminence not for deserts, but of duty: exacting yt of
us through ambition, which they can neither discreatly discharge, nor we
dangerles dispose: and yet like as violent waters are prone to often eruptions,
beco^ming shallowest within their ordinary channels, so proud persons are
evermore capable of higher dignities, though not well able, to exercise their
present mean offices: still does the proud man flatter himself in that that he
would, not esteeming of himself in any point as he ought.

There is hardly that thing so good, but there may be a better, or that thing
so bad, but there may be a worser: the wild olive is sauerie, but the ripe
fig is sweeter, the Tiger mangleth with her teeth, but the Baselique
murdereth with her eye: there is no beauty without some blemish, nor any
blemish that is not either natural, or necessary: no perfection with some
imperfection, and yet the same imperfection either to be cured, or tolerable:
only Ambition, until of it own self it be devoured, is bloodlesse for
blushing, and intractable for taming, penury does not decrease it, and plenty
does increase it, in well doing it is insolent, in ill doing impudent.

As for the other monster Auerise, a little varying from Ambition in quality
of affection, but not in quantity of affecting, this (I say) is still hunting,
but evermore hungering, still praying, but continually pining, still getting but
never gaining, and still hoording, but never having. For as the hollow spoute
receaueth much water, and yet retains nothing but air, so the covetous man
gathers much wealth, and yet possesses nothing but cares, and only he of all
monsters, in his ravenous devouring is insatiable: for whereas commonly all
other vices by old age are impaired, his only vice is theerby repaired, the
nerenesse of the grave the rather adding to nigardise.

O most miserable man, to whom is wanting as well that which he possesses, as
that which he wants, he hungereth after that which he coueteth, and fears
to lose that which he emoyeth, and as in adversity he craves prosperity, so
in prosperity he fears adversity, in his superior he dreadeth force, in his
inferior he m^strusteth theft, such (I say) is his wretched estate, that he
presently suffers all and so much as he fears. Therefore is it a true
saying, that nothing may be wished more harmefull to a covetous man, then long
life. And (trust me) if we consider with what toil wealth is got, with what
danger it is kept, what charms in using it, what detriment in abusing it, and
with what anguish we leave it, then shall we find more profit in poverty,
then quietness in riches.

One thing it is to be happy, and an other to be rich* but detestable is the
exchange, when to follow gold we forsake the Gods: as no doubt does the
covetous man, of whom what should I more say? but that his life is detested of
many, his death desired of all, and being dead, the poor man curses, his
heir rejoices, the saints weep, and the devils laugh.

How harmeful (ye Meades) these two monsters have been, all the world has
found, we have felt, and more shall feel, except being yet but young Snakes,
they be cut off, before they grow to be old Serpents.

If these two iollie Champions had been well counceled, and not so couitous, or
more pollitick, and less proud: then this unnecessary strife should have
been the last thing of a thousand, for our behoofes much more necessary:
Neither would they have persuaded themselves to be Kings not being assured of
subjects, nor have contended for a kingdom, not having conquered an Island.

Alas how much more unfortunate are we in transporting these relics of
gentry, and small remnant of treasure into Scithia, then in leaving the blood
of our friends, and masses of wealth behind us in Media.

But if you can be content to cherpe in cages, that may sing in the bushes, if
you can digest that these feast with full dishes, whilste you shall fast with
empty bellies, that they sing whilst you sorrow, that they be adorned with
chains of gold in token of their superfluity, whilst you shall be fettered
with yrons, as pledges of your necessity. If it be your pleasures to make them
your Lords, and you to become their slaves, yet shall you understand that
Chebron has set an hier prise of his freedom, then to exchange it for such
bondage. And though it be not my meaning to be superior to the worst here, yet
think I my self equal to the better of these two, and he which has deserved
any thing at all, has deserved more then either of them: only their new
courage seems strange to me, so well acquainted with their late cowardice.

Are not these the men? or were they then metamorphosed, from Egles, to Owls,
or from Lions to Lambs? that whilst we applied the pumpe, reeling up and
down the ship could naught else but purge: that whilst we labored on the
hatches, lay quaking in their cabbens? Yes verily, these jolly fellows are the
very same, to one of which (for not above one may be received into a kingdom)
you may resign the pleasures of your ouerpassed perrils: as for my self, I
more account of liberty then esteem of such policy, and am more zealous of
your welfare, then careful of mine own safety, fearing more a coming then
our common scourge.

Cap. 5.
THus much Chebron with a courageous countinaunce spoke, and was about to have
said more, but that he espied one of those two against whom he thus enuaied
(impatient of his speeches) to aim a dart against his head: wherefore the same
anger that before had occasioned him to speak, and then had tied his tongue,
moved him now to use his weapon, the which he pierced into the bowels of him
that threatened the flinging of the dart: and with the like success he also
dispatched the other standing amassed in beholding his dying companion, saying:
happily you shall find hell a gulf as vnrepleatable, as your selves have been
men insatiable.

Believe me (Sorares) whether it were the vigorious force of magnanimity, that
then proceeded from him (for I may term him magnanimious, whom neither
flattering, nor frowning fortune can alter, that prefers mediocritie before
superfluity, a common profit before a private gain, and an honorable death,
before a thraled life) or whether it were the tim^rous astonishment then
planted in us, that gave spurs to these his proceedinges I know not: but most
certain it is* that like as ye shepherd enters into the Coote, there
sequestring from amidst the flocks, what sheep it pleases him to appoint to
the slaughter, so Chebron, even in the middle of us, on these two performed
this tragedy so courageous was he, and so amassed were we.

Anon, as our appaled spirits were revived, we began diversely to construe of
Chebron his words, and to conceive of his deeds, and being amongst our selves
divided, one part protested that he had well done, an other company detested his
deed, and some not intermedling at all, stood as newters. The more that
Chebron entreated the factious accomplices with reason, the more they threatened
him and his adherents with rigor, so that seeing them desperately addicted to
assaute, he unwillingly provided to resist: whereupon they fell from brawling
to blows, and from wrangling to wounds, and he that now kills, is himself
by and by killed.

Whilst we yet persist in this same frantic mutiny, making horrible havoc
one of an other: Those before named persons which either for fear durst not,
or for policy would not be dealers in this quarrel, these men had laden
themselves with great store of the treasure, and minding whilst we were thus
busted in the fray, to have made a mart of our miseries, dr^w ^owards the ship,
with purpose to have sailed away.

But a common soldier, a factio^s fellow, smelling ou^ this their pretense,
and getting aboard before any of these stinche^s might enter, had fyred the
same in sundry places, the which having of it self sufficient of
combustable matter, was quickly consumed.

This we espied, and as we could not then intend it for the fray, so remained
we so far of from squenching the flame, that it rather rejoiced us of the so
preventing of those dastards, (as we did then term them) then once thought on
the misery that hereof ensued, for having gold we vainly persuaded our selves
not to want any thing. But by this means those that would thus have fled,
were now enforced to take a part in our civil fight.

Still persevere we in mangling and murdering one an other, until Chebron and
his adherentes had utterly confounded the adverse party, and that of an hundred
men and more that arrived here, within five or six hours only xvi. remained
unslain, yet we (though so small a number to divide so great a booty) in the
sharing had well nere begone a second broile, and that day (I would we had
been so happy) had been the last to us al, had not night prevented our
harebraine proceedings, and darkness stayed our desperateness. But daylight
thus failing us* every man bestowed himself upon a several pile of the heaped
treasure, keeping a wakefull and suspicious watch, of all that night.

As soon as the gray morning appeared, and that we beheld the wooluish
aspects of our own selves with blood embrued, the dead carkases of our
slaughtered companions, and looking toward the sea, remembered the burning of
our ship, and perishing of our vittailes, then, then, our furious fearcenesse
was changed to fearful fantisies, and our headie rashness to helpless
repentance. But what dwell I longer on this mischief, the matter being much
more dolorous that rests yet vnresited.

When our hands were thus ouersoone filled with blood, and that our eyes had
over late emptied their tears, although our sore limbs require rest, yet our
sharp appetites hunger for food: and therefore as well pricked forwards by
hunger, as desirous to be instructed what a profitable plot we had picked out
for our here abode, we discovered into the farthest circuit of this Island. But
the same seemed abhorred of the gods, and we found it utterly abandoned of men,
beasts, fowls, fruits, and every other thing necessary for man's behoof:
and (worser then so) we being shiplesse, and on every side with main Seas
environed, did also remain hopeless of our delivery from hence.

Now in this melancholy, every man laid violent hand upon Chebron, fathering
our woes upon his late inuectiue words, whereby (in my conceit) he rather
intented quietness than pretended any such quarrels: howbeit our mutinous
minds altered with the time and troubles, made a new construction of his
zealous meaning, and do what he could, we pressed him to death under an huge
heap of gold, whose bones under the pile are yet extant.

After this, some of our company not able to abide the extremity of this
climate, the stench of the air, and stirilitie of the Island, by mutual
consents, made mutual dispatch of their own persons, and shortly after
vntimelye death finished the lives of the residue, who being far more fortunate
in dying, then we in suruiuing, left only us two the unhappy inheritours of
these unspeakable calamities.

Thus have you heard (Sorares) the effect, though not the full of our tragical
ariuall, and to morrow we will gratify you with so much gold, as shall
partlye counteruaile your great courtesy, though not comparable to the
conceived comfort of our promised delivery.

Arbaces thus finished his lamentable discourse, and Sorares dismissed the
whole company every man to his lodging.

Cap. 6.
THe next morning Arbaces and the other Meade his fellow conducted the
Assirians unto the piles of gold, being in a manner ouergrowne with moss and
rust, with which booty the Assirians with merry hearts and many hands, had
quickly fraughted their ship.

But vnceasable are the mischiefs that gold procures, and insatiable are the
minds of covetous men.

Sorares being thus spead of this booty, and having consulted with his
countrymen of a further inquisition, began now to exact at the hands of the
poor Meades a greater pray then wherein they could satisfy their auerise,
hunting after that which was not there to be had, and (seeking as it were) to
extort fire out of water, they would not be persuaded, but the guiltless
souls had reserved unto themselves some greater treasure: denial might not
acquit them, nor entreaty save them from tortures: so that having already
passed some, to them were threatened other greater except they would promise,
what (poor wretches) they could not perform.

But in the end, this diuilish devise of the Assirians hastened their own
detrament: who thus dreaming of hidden treasure, for searth thereof, had
scattered themselves, without any one man remaining aboorde into every corner
of the Island. When in the mean time, Arbaces and his fellow remembering how
hardlye they had been hampered, and were still endangered under those
ungrateful men, whom they had even now so bountifullye enriched, taking
therefore that time as a fit opportunity to avoid their mynasses, boorded the
vnmanned ship of Sorares: and cutting the cables, launch out at the pleasure of
ye winds and the waves.

The Assirians anon (contrary to their expectations) perceauing their ship
aflote, ran like mad men up and down the shore, where by outward signs, and
sorrowful gestures, as wringing their hands, howling out, and beating their
breasts, they signified such apparent motions of their perplexed minds, that
even the two Meades, experienced of the self same distress, and moved with
compassion toward the ungrateful people, endeavored in all they possibly might,
to return back again in their succor: but all in vain, do what they might,
contrary winds resisted their merciful meaning, carrying them quite away
with an inualuable fraught of that treasure, which (as before) had chiefly
procured all their troubles.

Whom we leave safely to ariue in Sarmatia, and Sorares with his covetous
Assirians shut up in the barren Island, as meritorious possessors of so
miserable a possession.

Of all which, of their success, and of other not impertinent accidents, more
remains hereafter to be read, in that which is herein prosecuted.

Thetis. Calamus secundus.
Cap. 7.
IN this mean while, after that Zamieis his imperial fleet (except that
ship of Sorares) was arrived in Assiria, albeit the va^quishing of ye Bactrians
moved a common mirth to al, yet the lack of Sorares and his company caused
particular moan to some, and that especially to Atys and Abynados, two brave
youths, the sons of the same Sorares, whom at his departure to the Bactrian
wars he had left at Niniuie.

These two youthful gentlemen and brethren took the miss of their father
with such impatie^ce, that neither intised with their pleasant welfare at
home, nor dreading whatsoever dangers might happen them abroad, nor yet
dissuaded by any their dearest friends, did voluntarilye vow themselves to
continual travels, until either they should hear tidings of the life or
death of their father, or at the least wife, their own days should be
determined by their unknown destinies.

In this purpose therefore, accompanied with diverse other gentlemen, whose
friends were also missing, in a well paueished ship they launche from Niniuie:
and having sailed through many seas, were now entered into that channel, whereas
the river Arexes leaving the sea Caspium, does glide by the deserts of
Scythia. Here on the top of an hill, they descry an ancient castle, and
minding there (as in diverse other places before) to learn tydinges of that
whereunto their travel te^ded, they came ashoare: and whilst the rest were
otherwise busyed, Atys and Abynados went unto and entered the castle: wherein
they found no living creature, but yet respecting the small ostentatio^ and
curiosity of that nation, bravely furnished with all things necessary.

At the last, entering into an inner room, as it were a parlour, in the middle
whereof on an harth was a great fire, looking up by chance into the roof,
they epsy hanging smocke-dryed three quarters of a man, as it seemed to them,
not long before so dismembered.

If erewhile the air abroad was grievous for cold, or now the fire here
comfortable for heat, this horrible sight made them forgetful of both: what
might be deemed of this monstrous spectacle they stand not to descant, neither
durst they hazard to stay the enquiry, but esteem it better policy to fear
and fly what they did not yet feel, then to feel what they did fear and
might fly: and therefore, such was their post-haste to be gone, and so great
their fear in running away, that though to others they ran as Hearts, yet to
themselves they crept as Snayles, thinking every threashoole a thicket, and
every rishe a ridge in their way.

But whilst they thus skudde in their amasednes, at the foot of the hill they
were encountered by the Lord of the castle, waited upon with a number of
servants, some of them laden with sundry beasts by them newely chased in
those deserts.

The affrighted gentlemen being now come into the presence of the Scithian
Lord, at whose hands they only expected some rare tyranny, not looking
amongst those barbarous people, especially in that place, to find at all any
civil intertainement, were by him nevertheless courteously saluted, and at the
length more upon importunate entreaty on his part, then any willingness of
their own (for his fair speech might not shake off their fearful
conjectures) for that night entertained his guestes.

Cap. 8.
WHen the Scythians had (according to their cookri^) dighted the venson they
had killed, part whereof they boiled in beasts hides, and other part they
broyled on the coals, and when the Scythian Lord had sat a small while at
supper, he rose up suddenly, vnlocking a strong door opening into that parlor,
and then sits him down again at the table.

Anon after this came forth a Lady most ritchly attired, in gesture so
comely, in countinaunce so lovely, in face so amiable, in body so
proportionable, and in every part so formal, that nature might not possibly
work more beauty in any creature, or any creature better become such largess
of nature: howbeit, as the hanginge up of a net directly against the son,
does partly obscure the brighnes of his beams, so pensiuenes seemed somewhat
to diminish the featured regardes of this beautiful Paragone.

Hard by was provided a side boorde, and there (having made low courtesy) she
sits her down: presently whereupon her mess was furnished, only with two
or three broyled collops, cut from of the dead man his quarters, and before her
was set water in his skull: then one of the servants taking a ribbe out of a
box, poundreth the same very small, and puts it into the water.

Better, or other victuals then these (sweet soul) she got not, and albeit
her puling appetite disdayned so loathsome a diet, yet either must she thus
feed, or elsepine without food: so that rather enfeebling then filling her
weak stomach with these dainties, she sheddeth more tears then the quantity
of water she drinks, and feeds as sparingly as her fare was homely, for
soon was she satisfied and as suddenly put again under lock by her over
ungentle jailer.

No marvel though Atys and Abynados were now afresh drowned in their dompes,
and had small liking to their meat, who not yet freed of their former fear,
saw new occasions of greater dread: they pity the Lady and doubt their own
safety, wishing her at large, and themselves out of ieopardie: for (think
they) seeing this tyrant handles thus ungently so gallant a Lady, making the
murdered carcases of men meat for those whom he has reserved to further
misery, what shall become of us wretches, how are we intrapped, and what death
has he for us prepared?

The Scythian Lord perceauing by their outward shows their inward fear,
cheereth them up with a curtious welcome saying: gentlemen, you (perhaps) from
whence you are come, accustomed to fare more finely, cannot acquaint your
selves to feed here so grosely, yet we that are the chiefest in Scythia do
covet no better, and could be contented with worse, not esteeming anything or
any more to be needful, but only that and so much as is presently
necessary: full furnished tables (say we) breed feeble surfets, but mean
repastes make healthful persons.

We know that few things suffiseth nature, that superfluity is a mere
vanity, that overmuch meat so^teth the senses, that heavy cups make light
heads, that curious Cooks make careful masters, that prodigality ends in
beggerie, and that gluttony is opposite to virtue, and yet (alas) what foul
flies, what fish swimmeth, or what beast paseth that man buryeth not within
his bowels? howbeit man that so often deuoureth death in other creatures, is
himself at length by death devoured.

With others, change of services and costlye intertainement, is an occasion of
seldom meetinges, slender familiarity, and therefore small friendship: but
with us Welcome covers the board, Temperance marshalleth the dishes, and
friendly Acceptance sets on the voider: and only he whosoever that seeks
a sumptuous host, is in Scythia accounted a saucie guest.

As for dainty food or any like effeminacie, it is as rare here, as elsewhere
common. The thieves affright us not for our money, the mothes harm not our
wardrops, the waspes waste not our ioncates neither make we our stomachs
Apoticaries shops: but hunger makes al meats to us right sauerie, and thirste
sheare water as pleasant as Nectar we feed for the most part but of one dishe
and that not very dainty, we use but one coat and that not very costly, and
possess but one house, and that (as you see) homely: yea and I speak now of
the best, not of the most, that lack of thus well, and yet like as well, not
wanting any thing, that content themselves with every thing: poverty yielding
us this advantage, that whereas for wealth, other nations be invaded with
war, the lack thereof keeps us at home in peace.

Neither fear we to fight, if occasion shall serve, for although we shun all
causes of controversy, yet know we how to revenge proffered injuries: and
that can all Asia well witness, whom we even we the Scythians, have three times
in open fields conquered, and our bows made them three times unto us
tributorie.

All this while the two breethren continue dismayed, by reason of the sightes
they had lately beheld, taking taking small delight in those his speeches:
whereupon their gentle host brake of his former argument, and spoke to his
guestes as follows.

Cap. 9.
WEre it not (gentlemen) that I my self am pa^tlye privy to some sufficient
cause of your sadness, I could not but judge you either very sollitarie, or
somewhat sullen (but trust me) my self a stranger in an other place as you
are here, and seeing that which you have here seen, could not but imagine and
fear as much, or more then you have feared: but the reason why I have suffered
these your dumps and not resolved your doubts, was because I gladly would
have ouerpassed that in silence which will be more grievous to me in resitall,
then what you here beheld has been to you dreadful, herewithall the water
stood in his eyes, and adding a small pause to the sheddinge of a few tears,
he thus proceeds.

You shall understand (quoth. he) that the cursed owner of yonder same dismembered
quarters, was almost from his cradell to me and mine a vowed enemy, by whom I
often received much skaeth, but could never acquit my self of his envy.

Know ye also, that the same Lady, whom you beheld even now in this place,
was (without superstition be it spoken) the adored goddess of mine amorous
devotions, the emperious Mistress of my martired heart, and the only she
that held me in loyalty: whose beauty was my bliss, whose sweet
countinaunce was my sole comfort, and to whom more then to my own self I
lived.

shall I tell you? for her sake was I paciente of all labour^ ^enterous of al
dangers, careless of all cumbats, and desperate of all deaths: for in love is
nothing dificile, but as the Hunter plyeth his Hounds, the Falkner his Hawks,
and the Fisher his Angle, forgetting the pain through delight of the pastime,
so the lover prosecuteth his love esteeming all labors and troubles but
trifles, in respect of the inning hope of his amarous harvest: yea and by how
much deeper love has taken foundation, by so much the more sweeter is it in
operation, sau^ring altogether honey, and not senting gaul.

What shall I say? so pleasant, and steadfast was our mutual love, until on
her part violated, that it might have been made a question whether of us was
the lover, or which the beloved, our two hearts being (as it were) to either
body common.

But as good Ladies are sometimes over lightly affiansed, so light wantons are
often over firmly fantasied: nay (alas) it is commonly seen that trust has
the fairest tract leading to treason, and that in security we find greatest
sorrow.

This yonkar (whose guile has been thus rewarded with a deserved guerdon) when
now no farther hope was left for the exercise of his malicious madness against
me, applied then mine own weapons to work unto my self wounds: soliciting
secretly by loving nay lustful tables this wicked woman.

Wicked may I well term her: and wo-man, for that sext is an apt Etymologia.
Ah gentlemen or ever I pass to my penance, which will be the ripping up of
Thetis her inconstancy, either suffer me to chewe upon my melancholy, and
(perhaps) choke, or else give passage to my choler, so happily to ease mine
heart with a chafe: which chafe I wish may be to you a caution, as the cause
thereof is to me a corasiue: for though Thetis is not every woman, yet
follows it not but (...) woman may prove a Thetis, and then were (...) other
Philosophy but implication, yet wom^^ might justly be termed monsters in
nature, as some (how cu^ningly or curiously I judge not) do note them.

But what talk I of their natures, that can tell much more of their manners, O
that I had bent more careful in avoiding their company, and less cunning in
deciphering their conditions.

What else are they (I accuse not all, and may not excuse a many) but
inevitable plagues, convenient noysances, natural temptations, couited
calamities, household hostility, and dilectable detramentes: whom we cannot
want without offense to the gods, nor hold without damage to our own parsons:
if she be fair she is wooed and reddily checketh, if foul she wooeth and
ever chooketh.

Good wine lacks no tasters nor fair women suitors, with an easy price and
an iuie bush bad wine also is uttered: if she be poor then over chargeable to
him that shall keep her, and then she flincheth: if rich, ouercurious for him
that shall catch her, and then she fleeceth: outwardly with art is she
pullished, howsoever inwardly polluted: her face painted, her beauty borrowed,
her hair an others and that frissed, her gestures enforced, her looks
premeditated, her back bolstred, her breast bumbasted, her shoulders bared, and
her middle strait laced, and then is she in fashion, when most out of fashion.

Besides her attire, eyes has she to entise, tears to excuse, looks to
attract, smiles to flatter, embracements to provoke resistaunce to yield,
frowns to delay, bec^es to recall, lips to inchaunt, kisses to inflame, and
all these to poison, applying thus to every member and motion a several art.

Se prieth in her glass like an Ape, to pranke her in (...) gaudes like a
puppet, but being pruned (as she (...)) to the purpose, yet does she but
hurt nature with art, and mar form with fashion, and is like to the gloe
worm, that is bright in the hedge, and black in the hand.

She discovers that sometimes willingly, which she would seem to have
done unadvisedly, she promises one thing, and performs an other, professes
chastity, but practices the contrary: love her and you loose her, make
strange and you win her, offer and she disdayneth, deny and she dies,
praise her and she pranketh despise her and she powteth, but (O devil) if
taken tardie, then her tongue utters such art, that either she auoydeth
cunningly the suspicion, or leaves the matter doubtful in suspense.

Tears has she at commandment, and those of two sorts, weeping often for
anger, and seldom for sorrow; of her two extremes, Love and Hate, her love is
a minute, but her hate a monument. As redily does she leave as rashly she
does love, being as prone to mutabilitie as desirous of variety, changing for
pleasure, but choosing for profit: and if at one time she has twenty sundry
^lyantes, yet can she please each man with a contrary countinance, and
dismiss them all at her pleasure, having sotted their senses, and soaked them
of their substance.

For small goodness she claymeth great commendations, but for great evil,
hates any controulemente: having charge over all she complains of
servitude, being abridged of part she exclaymeth of mistruste, if she be
wise (at the least in her own conceit) then with a pre^^se singularity she
will ouerrule all, if foolish, then with a peeuishe simplicity she will not
be ruled at all, the first will be to bravely minded, the latter to baselie
manered, the one opinionate, the other obstinate, but both combersome.

Politically is she wone, and peeuishly is she (...), either does not the
rich man's daliances feed (...), or the poor man's diet fit her dalyaunces:
(...) imperious, impatient, importunate, selfewilled, thankelesse, and full of
revenge.

Shun (young men) I say shun, except out of golden cups you will drink
poisoned draughts, to be guests in the guiles of these sweet sower Panthars:
otherwise make account to find them such waiward fools to please, and such
foolish wantons being pleased, that if in winning they did travel you, in
wearing they will utterly tire you.

But see, lavish fellow how rashly has my tongue run counter? and overmuch
choler (I fear me) has so mistempered my wits, that it is doubtful whether I
have used decorum in words. If therefore any modest matron, wife, or maiden had
been here present, either I would tha^ have spoken in the book, or could be
contented to bear a Faggot for any probable heresy: and no doubt they would
pardon my glibbe tongue in respect of my gauled heart, for blameless may loosers
chaufe.

Well, best is no women are here to trauerse my choleric alligations, for
hardly find we any pleading so formal, wherein the judge (especially if
laboring the cause) cannot, or at the leas^ does not assign errors.

Cap. 10.
THis my digression gentlemen (quoth. the Scythian Lord) has longer detained your
teeth from your victuals, then ye discourse it self might have displeased your
ears for the villainy: and yet would I borrow your patience a little farther,
for as I have spoken some what of the infirmity of the feminine sex being the
matter wroughte, so would I breefely touch the impiety of lust, the mean
wo^^^ng, by both which I have been wronged, and by (...) you may be warned.

From his freating frenzy, though of most vile and base condition, neither the
mighty Potentate, nor the mean pessant, the valiant victor, nor the cowardly
curle, have been or be exempted. And the reason why it so easilye overcomes
and so extremely outrageth, is for that it promises to them trust whom it
kills with blindness, leading men even with willing cords to the pleasant
court of vanity, being guarded thither by conducte of Abundance and
Prosperity: in which court Gluttony does diet them, Letcherie does chamber
them, Pride does apparel them, Sloth does accompany them, and Folly in all
things follows their humors. But whilste Tediousness does here persuade
that none may come to heaven unless they journey barefooted upon sharp
pointed booking, Security dryueth on his sleepie Chariote, and brings them
to Hell, as it were on soft Featherbeds.

Like as fire works wood altogether into fire, so Lust wholly alienateth man
into lasciviousness: for if once it enters the eye, it anon scaleth the head,
and at length sacketh the heart, and then (alas) the heart by degrees readily
delights, consents, fulfilleth, continues, despayreth, confirms,
commends, and not (but too too late) repents the act.

This lascivious passion (I say) besides that, that it brings wealth to
want, great possessions into small purses, it also effeminates the mind
enfeebleth the body, slandereth the person, and endangereth the soul: yea it
leaves the body in such debilitie, that it makes the same altogether v^apt to
any good action, and so infe^teth the mind, that it utterly dishaboreth even
the least motion to ame^dment, so that body, mind, and man, become wholly
vicious.

Lust having forerunners, Heat and Wantonness: companio^s, Scurilitie and
Uncleanness: pursuers, G^erfe and Repentance: whose matter is Gluttony, whose
(...) is Pride, whose sparckles is Ribaldrie, whose (...) Infamy, whose ashes
is Filthiness, and whose end is V^r^is and vmbra, flagillum, frigus, and
ignis,
Demonis aspectus, celerum confusio, luctus.


And albeit the pleasure passes away in a tri^e, no soon: done but forgotten,
and the punishment is permanent, yet so delightful is the present sweet, that
we never remember the following sower.

Cap. 11.
FRom whence then may we fetch tried medecin to apply to this untoward
malady, when Agnus Castus is so geason to cure, and Mandragora so common to
procure, believe me my guests, for the avoiding both the mischief it self,
and the inconvenience growing thereby, six rules are especially to be observed
as maximies.

The first whereof is Sobriety in diet, for it is often (...) that in wine
many things are done unadvisedly, Saturitie working access to venerie, and
they have been at a wanton banquet willingly conquered, that but even now
disdained parlie with the assailent. The second is some bodily labor or
studious exercise in some honest action, whereby is prevented all such lewd
toys, and vain meditations, whereunto the mind, never but well or ill
occupied, is easily entised: for idleness is to a living man a sepulcher, but
labor the minds medicine.

The third is decentnesse in attire and outward ornaments, the which we are to
use for cold, not for color, as couerings of our nakedness not as
allurements to licentiousness: for with the Gods, to intend is to trespass,
to will is to work, and in either the offense all one.

The fourth is discreetely to restrain the liberty of our senses, not so to
look on the sun that we dim our eyes with the brightness, not so to touch
the berrie, that we (...) blood with the brier, not so to taste home, that we
bless^^g of the Be; not so to hear melody, that we neglect modesty, nor so
to smell sweet odours, that we sen^e not vnsauer is ordoures: but so to see,
touch, taste, hear, and smell the intising lullabies of beauty, and
flattering preparatiues to Venus, that by forecasting the inconvenience, we may
the easilier escape the mischief: for repentance was never but a looser.

The fifth is, Sieldome words, and those with sobriety, not by evil speeches
to corrupt good manners: for what contenteth the ear, to that readilye
consents the heart. And because (if for no other cause) he that is still
accustomed to speak ill, is by good reason suspected not to do well,
Ribaldrie is therefore not slightly to be reproved: for well it is said, that
the minds image is the tongue, and sometimes of words spoken but in meriment
have proceeded occasions working to a mischief.

The sixth and last is, To conquer opportunity, whenever we are offered the
executing of our purposed lewdness: for albeit we find the person pliant to
perform, the place apt for performaunce, and the time convenient for
performing* yet at that very instant should we remember, that we ought not to
do all that we would, nor so much as we may, but only that which is
lawful and honest.

But (my good guest) for so much as I cannot but confess that this inordinate
petulancy, delightful evil, and sweet poison, Lust, is far more easy to be
controled of all, then corrected of any one, as an infirmity naturally (if I
may so say) proceeding from our corrupt flesh, and the opposite thereof more
current in praise, then conuersante in practice, I will therefore here lay a
straw, and proceed to the matter from which I have thus far digressed.

Cap. 12.
ARmatrites and Thetis (for Armatrites was his name) what by sending and
resending of often tables and tokens (as I began to tell you) had concluded
upon their dishonest enterprise, and making sure of min^ absence* had many
meetings at this my castle: where not simply contenting themselves with
shameless coiture, they had also sorted the platform how to have murdered me.

The night came wherein my death was determined, in which Stratagem disloyal
Thetis should have none execution. But as we lay a^bed amorously ^oying, as is
the trade of Lovers, she suddenlye fetched a deep sigh^, great plenty of
tears then also brasting from out her eyes: whereat I no less amazed then
grieved, as he tha^ esteemed himself so long distempered, whilste I deeme^ her
in any thing disturbed, making my preparati^n with a pair or leash of kisses,
did earnestly demand the cause of such her passions: but she not able of a
long time to utter any word for weeping, at the length clasping her arms
about my neck, and repaying my kisses with more then double interest, shifted
me off with this ^leeuelesse answer.

Ah my loving Lord (quoth. she) for so much as to disclose the cause of these mine
extraordinary tears, the which privately concern mine own self, and
nothing at all touch you, would be but the new remembrance of an old sorrow,
the which by scilence may be in time suppressed, by resightall in memory the
deeper impressed, may it therefore please you of pardon, in that I am
unwilling to rehearse that, which I would (if it might be) so willingly forget.
I being blinded with love, and overtaken with her dalyaunces, and not minding
to urge her any father then should stand with her own contentinent, questioned
with her no longer as touching this matter: but for that I perceived her mind
to be perplexed, I my self was woonderfullye disquieted, and so lay musing of
all that night, without sleeping any one wink.

(...) (believe me) if ever any man were beholding to sorrow, the^ I of al
other have best cause to commend sorrow which kept me awake, and waking alive.

For albeit he^ mischievous mind (I wot not how relenting) did seem now
almost reclaimed from such her murtherous intent, yet (as she her self
afterward confessed) her new and erreuocable zeal to Armatrites had so
ouermastred reason, that after a long combat betwixt piety and cruelty, as
she that would not have attempted any thing to the annoying of me, could she
otherwise have attained to the inioying of him, was fully resolved to have
finished my life, if happily of all that night she had taken me napping.

But I not doubting at all any such wrong measure, having over night appointed
with my huntesmen to be early stirring, as soon therefore as day appeared,
taking a lovers leave an hundred times at her lips, and leaving her a bed
departed toward the desert: where by a strange chance I got intelligence of
such their false packing.

Cap. 13.
ARmatrites had a very beautiful concubine, who (I know not by what means)
finding out ye new hau^e that her sweet heart used to Thetis, seeing her self
(as it seemed) to be now scanted of that pleasure which before time she
possessed, and therefore not meanly offended at such his treachery, when by
no means she could intise home again Armatrites, waxed then stark mad with
anger, and not minding to die in his debt, that so discurteouslye had given her
the gleeke, but envying alike both him and his new chosen tr^ill, sought
opportunity to revenge her on them both.

Scarcely had I gone three furlonges, but that I met her posting toward this
place, and although before time I knew her very well, yet anger had now
estranged her countinaunce: but she with ^hese homely salutations thus renewed
our old acquaintance.

Think not thou Wittole (quoth. she) that thy gay titles, or thine used or rather
abused authority amongst us in these parts, shall so hinder my tongue, but
that I dare to tell thee a troth: how comes it to pass, that thou which
oughest to be a punisher of offe^ders, art now become a fautor of offenses? that
thou which art so zealous in doing justice abroad, art so partial in winking on
vices at home? If the law maker may also be a law breaker, it will be to small
purpose that I accuse thee of the often meetings of Armatrites and Thetis at
thy castle, thy countinaunce bolstring their incontinency. But if the breach
of law in the magistrate, is more offensive then in the mean subject, for
that by his course the unskillful company are chiefly directed, then tell me
(thou Pandar) how can thou excuse thy self of injustice, or avoid the
reproach of this trumperie.

What is it possible that the ancient enmity so long time continued betwixt
Armatrites and thee, should thus suddenly be grown to so familiar an
atonement, as that thou can be contented not only of an old foe to make a
new friend, but also so kind hearted as to hold Thetis with him in coparcinerie?
thou challenging thy property by night, and he cha^bering her as properly by
day: it is (belike) his office to keep her warm in bed, whilst thou (as
warrantable for thy head, as thy game for their horns) art hunting abroad.

And look thou man so grimme, as if thou were offended I should charge thee
so deeply? do thou blush, as if but even now ashamed of the bawderie? or
art thou dumme, as if thou would plead ignorance in a matter so manifest?
if thou art offended I am careless of thy displeasure, if ashamed, it is not
without good occasion, if thou have been or did counterfeite to be
ignorant, now say not but thou art sufficientlye warned, yea so warned, that
even now the time serves for trial.

What therefore does let (unless thou art well enough pleased with such
patcherie) to proceed in punishment against so detestable harlots? Oh that I
had the slitting of the strumpets nose, and these nails of mine the scratching
out of their eyes.

Cap. 14.
WHilst she yet persisted in harping forth this and such like untunable
hermonie, I neither rashly crediting the unsuspected accusation, neither yet
obstinatelye yielding to the partiality of mine own affection* leaving her in
the middle of this her mad music, returned home long or ever I was looked for,
and rushing suddenlye into the chamber, I found the naughty packes in bed
together.

Who perceiving me, and being evil ^payed of the presence of so boisterous a
Chamberlain, began to rear themselves vprighte in the bed: but as
Armatrites sat hanging down his head as it were dead in the neast, not so
much ashamed of the beastly fact wherewithal he was taken, as fearing the
disadvantage whereunto his evil fortune had now brought him, I at one sweep
pared off his head, even hard at his sweete-harts side. She looking for the
like, and I meaning no less, sitting bathed in the gushing^out blood of her
paramour, and bitterlye bewayling the breach of her loyalty toward me, did
of her own accord constantlye humble her self to dye, offering her naked
breast to be pierced of my threatening weapon.

But had I the heart (think you) to bestow my weapon in that beautiful bosom
of hers which I accounted even now the increase of my solace, and de^rease of
my sorrows? no no (howsoever you think my head worthy or unworthy the
arming) yet will I not omit a verity: thrice my heart fully purposed her death,
and thrice mine hand weelded the Weapon to have berefte her of life, but
thrice both heart, and hand fainted and failed in performance thereof.

In the end casting down my partial weapon, and withdrawing my self into an
other chamber, after that I had a good while deliberated of the matter, and
ouerchildishly lamented the manner, I resolved upon this determination, that
is, that the miserable woman should still live, detesting nevertheless
utterly to dispense with her lewdness: and therefore for punishment I enjoined
her this penance, never to taste any other sustinance, until time she has
buried within her own bowels, the whole carcass of her lybidanous parramour.

This penance in my displeasure have I unadvisedly vowed, and this vow at
more leisure have I repented, for the suffering is not greater to her, then the
sight thereof grievous to me: and were it so (what shall it advantage me to
dissemble) that I could without offense, absolve my self of the vow I have
taken, I would most willingly dissolve her from the woes she tastes: but
forasmuch as vows made to the gods, are not to be revoked at the discretion
of men, I esteem it better, that she by correction become hereafter penitent,
then that I by infringing my oathe, and she by escaping unpunished, become
either of us reprobate.

Thus the Scythian Lord with wet cheeks finished his tale, and Atys and
Abynados were freed of further dread, though not a little grieved of so amiable
a Lady her infelicitie.

But after their honorable host had frankly given in commandment, that the
dry booles should be plentifully controwled, and yt the wine with often
quaffing had now animated their courages, in the end the parsonable proportion
of Thetis was rather wantonly remembered then her penance by them with any
extraordinary pity regarded: for they were well, and all was well, and so it
commonly fares with churles, that forget in their chaires the succurles in the
cold.

Thus what with long watching and deep drinking, sufficient quarrel being
ministered to the pillow, each man did sacrifise to the god of Ebona, under the
harmeles protection of whose drowsy deity I now leave them.

But if any shall inquire farther as concerning Thetis, my answer must then
relish after the Oracle at Delphos, that evermore left the certainty of
things to uncertain euentes, and howsoever it happened with or contrary to
expectation, yet still the event made good the oracle: it may be, and perhaps
not, that Pan hereafter in a second part will pipe more of Thetis, until
when, take what I tender for present payment, and what I promise as a desperate
debte.

In the mean, time being desirous to keep others waking with some exercise
that may happily tend to their sollace, whilst I leave Atys and Abynados*
sleeping, as the best remedy for their surfets, I shall make resitall of some
matters canuased a shipborde, whilst they two are thus entertained of the
Scythian*

Belopares. Calamus tertius.
Cap. 14.
THe long tariance of Atys, and Abynados being thus intertayned at the castle,
caused those in the ship diversely to descant of the matter, every man giving a
several verdict as touching ye presumed cause of their absence: and by howmuch
they were assured of the fierce manners of the Scythians, by so much they feared
the safety of the two breethren.

But betaking the gentlemen, and the whole company of the soldiers, and
sailors aborde, to their natural rest, you shall be partaker, only of the
communication that passed between the master, the masters-mate, and the
Pylot, whilst these three, not upon any necessary constraint, but of their
voluntary consent, undertook to furnish the watch for that night, in their
own parsons.

The Moon wanted nothing of her parfit light, the clearenes of the sky, and
brightness of the stars adding as it were a second moon in the firmament,
tempestious Orion threatened no storm, neither was any a^er or element
contrary the silence of a general calm: these comfortes, being in part
countercheckes, against the fantastical conjectures of the three careful
watchmen, moved them in walking all the night up and down the hatches, to
discourse many arguments, and participate diverse strange adventures: and
after the ripping up of many dangers, distresses, and shipwrackes which them
selves before time had hardly escaped, the evil fortune of Sorares, and his
company after whom they were then to enquire, with the present absence of Atys
and Abynados then newely missing, did give occasion unto the Maisters-mate to
burst out into these speeches.

My poor parents (quoth. he) dying long ago, left me to the wide world, a raw
thing God wot, and very young, without either wealth, friends, or wit: so that
being left in this dangerous estate, I continewed many years as desperate a
race, and had I not chanced by hap-hassard, before my too much liberty had
made me ripe for the rope, to have gotten into a gally, I had (no doubt) ear
this day, with the prise of my neck, paid tribute to the gallows, and
therefore considering that I have begone seafaring in youth childishly, have
practiced it since desperately, and must now continewe it of necessity, I
need not greatly blush, though I speak somewhat against mine own profession,
to the practice whereof, I have been thus by chaunce-medly constrained: but
were mine ability such that I could live and leave it, as I am forward to
disable and mislike it, I would sooner receive a poor Cottage within the
compass of one small City, then a Safe Conduct, or (if it might be) a Charter
to compass the great and rich Ocean.

But leaving to speak of my self, I cannot muse enough at those wild
yonglinges, or witles fondlinges, whom neither the affairs of their prince or
country compels, want of liberty at home constrains, lack of
maintenance enforces, traffic abroad occasioneth, hope of profit in^yseth,
or any other necessary cause procures thereunto, can notwithstanding be
contented to leave their native country and parents, in whom and by whom they
have been bread and fostered, their wife and children, unto whom they are by
law and nature united, their friends and kinsfolk at whose hands they are to
receive counsel and comfort, and in straung countries to consume that their
liuelihood and substance, which them selves living, might with joy possess,
and dead, their posterity should by law inherit.

Being only carried away, with a fond desire to view unknown nations, and
curious monumentes, setting forwards in iollytie, but sailing forth in
ieoperdie, launching out in their ruffes, but hayling in, in their rags: yea
they are ignorant, that when after this order they fraught the ship with their
wealth, they vnballace their heads of wit, exchanging their warm gowns for
cold iackes, their soft pillowes for hard couches, their sweet chambers for
stinking cabbens, their brave walks for the bleake hatches, their sweet wine
for stale water, and their fine dainties for gross diets: if sickness falls
(which seldom fails) Physicians love not the seas, and therefore physic
not to be found in ships, as for Chyrurgions their skill is in wounds, but
not in vrines, so that the poor patient has (perhaps) leave to live as long
as he may, and no man lets him to die as soon as he will: where sometimes
he finds this friendship, that to rid him of languour, in stead of aqua
vitae, they minister aquam marinam, toplinge him over shipboorde, some life yet
remaining, and then as the sea is his sepulcher, so perchance a Rascals purse
is his treasury.

Neither does so happy an end as this happen to all, for sometimes the ship
runs a ground, and then both ship and man perishes, sometimes it lights
on a rorke, and then speed they no better, sometimes they are boorded by
Pirates, and then it happens them worser, sometimes through long tempest,
victuals consume and they famish: sometimes a storm drives them perforce
upon the costs of their enemies, who either make them bondslaues, or (which
is rather to be wished) dispatch them with torments: sometimes are they cast
ashoare, either in deserts where wild beasts devour them, or else among
such people as make food of their carcases: sometimes the meeting byllowes do
clean ouerwhelme them: sometimes the following waves do quite ouerturne them,
and evermore a thin boorde only is betwixt them and perishing: so that what
with these, and many such lamentable accidents, are they continually
endaungered, the fear much more tormenting, then the death it self would be
grievous.

And yet (forsooth) all these notwithstanding, some in a bravery must sail
unto Mymphis, there to vewe the Piramides: some unto Babylon, to see the walls
of Semiramis: some unto Caria, to gaze on Mansolus his tomb: some unto
Ephesus, to behold the temple of Diana: some unto the islle Pharos, to suruay
the tower Pharos: some unto Olympia, to look one the yuorie image of Jupiter:
some unto Rhodes, to pry on the monsterous stature of Phoebus: some into one
country and some into an other, and all in the end returning (if ever they
return) more bitten with their expenses, then bettered by their experience:
ouermaistred by strange manners, that could not be masters of their own
affections.

For as they wilfully leave their friends and Country, so (which often
happens) unwittingly they forsake their gods and religion: if in Assiria they
adored Adad and Adargatin, in Babylon Belus, and in Caldia Ori masd^: the same
must worship in Egypt Osyris, and Isis, in Persia Mithra, in Ausonia Faunus,
in Mesopotamia, or Hebron a god called Iehoua: and as in these, so amongst each
sundry people must a peculier god be adored: so that let them account of the
rest to be but toys, and trifles, yet this cannot be but a chooke-bone, and
scruple to their consciences.

And as after this manner their religion is altered, so in like sort their
manners prove alienated, being enforced, or rather easily intysed, to apply
their behavior according to the several places of their present aboade: in
Persia to revel in bravery, else no man for their company: in Scythia to
live over begerly, else to proud for their society: in Arabia to follow
Venerie, else excluded their familiarity: to be short, in Parthia they must
vomit with drinking, in Thratia live by filchinge, in Lydia practice gaming, in
Sibaria sleep and idleness, in Caspia cruelty and dissembling, etc. Neither is
it an easy matter to pacify their native gods (to such an extraordinary care
when it chances) whose worshipping they have thus estraunged, or to leave
those vices which with such facility they have learned: but rather it is to be
doubted, that by the first they shall be unwillingly cast behind, whilst by
the latter they are willingly overtaken: for vanity which is sought for so
eagerly, is not shaken off so easily, ver^ue seeming painful, and therefore
rejected even in the bloome, but vice pleasant, and therefore affected even in
the fruit.

Neither are these all the evils that grow by such travels, for whereas this
unadvised Uente^or did trafique abroad by way of exchange, he retayleth at
home for reddie coin, naie of a Chapma^ he becomes a Merchant, and in his
own country uses outlandish utterance, there to make return of his
far-fetched vices: And as one rotten sheep infecteth be it never so great a
flock, so one newfangled Traueler impoisoneth, be it never so many folk: and
therefore it follows, that such traueling is harmefull to the Traueler him
self, hurtful to others, and

Cap. 15.
ANd quoth. the master intercepting his words, we have enough and to much of
your ands and yfs, unless marshalled after a better order: why how now
Belopares (so was his name) have thou thy self confessed that the gallie saved
thee from the gallows, and yet will thou deliver so badly of sea-farers? art
thou a sayler, and yet of sailors a scorner? and do the seas bring thee thy
living, and the same also breed thy misliking? trust me had thou hidden thy
base petigree, yet should we have conceived in our minds, what we had not
received in our ears, thy gross error is much, but thine unseemly terms
more then thine errror.

Thou ought (Bellopares) to observe, that as men are borne under diverse
plannets, so are they of diverse dispositions, not all (ywis) tender hearted
Venerians, nor slowbacked Saturnists, but some are valiant minded Iouialists,
and others wise imprising Mercurialists, etc. who with their valor can make
each climate their con^trie, or with their wisdom shift warely in every
company, or else (if ye worse fall) conquer cross fortune with Magnanimity.

Thou say they leave great felicity at home, and commit them selves to much
misery abroad, reckoning that for a folly, which in deed is a rare virtue,
for what greater virtue, then to despise inchaunting pleasures, I mean pomp
and riches the nurses of sensuality, which be either got by wrong, spent by
riot, kept with care, consumed by envy, or lost by casualties: so yt (if
comparison should be made) I might prove that the seas are not more displeasing
for perils, then the land perilous for pleasures, to attain, and maintain which
pleasures what mischiefs may be numbered, that are not there attempted? Men
there for the most part, are either idle and so utterly unprofitable, or else
neither idle, nor yet well occupied: some fall to banquets with the
appurtenaunces, and some to bickering with the inconveniences, one blazeth the
borrowed beauty of some Circeis, another deformeth himself with fashions: the
Usurer he fleeceth, if not fleaeth the gentleman* the gentleman he racketh, if
not ouerreacheth the farmer* the farmer he hourdeth, and so hoysteth the
markets: every man shifteth for one, and that one sits on the skirts of some
other, and himself in his own light: in few, the court wants not
flatterers, nor the city extortioners, the Priests avarice, nor the Laity
Ambition, the bars plaintes, nor the benches delays, temples Non-residents,
nor Theaters superattendants, schools sects, nor laws quilli^s,
Hermaphrodits maintenance, nor Soldiers immunity, good men maligners, nor ill
men bolsterers, Cormera^ts cruelty nor Beggars impacience, the rich malice,
nor the poor misery, Brothels ribalds, nor Prisons offe^dors, the Devil
work, nor the Gallows use, and yet for brevity I omit a milion of mischiefs,
whereof in the end, to their own prejudice, the Actors only feel the accidents.

Because therefore that Beauty bewitcheth none, but her busy inspectors,
Couitousnes catches none, but such as are hopled with golden fetters,
Gluttony entertaineth none but current guests to his banquets, nor Pride
pranketh up any but intruding courtiers, seeing (I say) that by following the
tract, we fall into the trappe, and by senting the bait we swallow the bayne,
have not those (think you) reason? are not they happy? nay are not they to be
honored? that eschewing these mollifying instigations to vanity, and ensuing
mortif^ing contemplations to eternity, loath such security in brave cities and
beautiful palaces, and like better a life solitary, amidst the rough seas and
wrestling surges: where their fair fingers are not (as occasion serves)
priuileged the foul cables, so that their hands being excercised with labors,
their thoughts be not enueigled with idle fantasies: and the rather for that
opportunity being taken away, no hope remains here to practice, what vainly
they might purpose: but on the Seas, in a calm they use mirth with modesty,
in a storm they pray patiently, and at all times live as if they should die
hourly: and if any peril happen, then such peril (say I) prepares Saints to
Heaven, whereas pleasures (feel some) procure souls to hell.

And yet (Belopares) let us not aggrauate the danger otherwise then the case
requires, for as I cannot deny but that perils happen here sometime, so (if I
shall speak no more then troth) I must say they chance but sieldom, for which
of us three, that have been sailers almost al our days, cannot alredie assure
our selves to die laden with as many white hears, as commonly the oldest
Citizen that dies, not so much as having vewed the Seas.

Thou also give out, that they must worship new gods, and forsake their old
religion, but I say that wise trauailers pass by safe conduct, and amongst
their league friends, are from those matters exempted, either keepimg aloof
from where they doubt in these things to be sifted, or else being there rashly
or violently arrived, matters may be avoided with such discretion, that
without prejudice to their gods, or offense to their own consciences, they may
reverently pray in a strange temple, to their known god whose altars are
absent, and yet do no reverence at all to the unknown god whose Image is
present: for though there be necessity that they kneel by the shrine, yet is
it not necessary that they kiss the Saint: in zeal, not in show consists
devotion, and a speedye return is in such case the surest resistaunce: or if
sifted beyond gods-forbod, then a godly martyrdom is a glorious enlargement.

And not in this only have thou shot wide, but in the rest also missed the
white, that is, in judging so of trauelers, I say not Land-leapers (whereof in
deed, there are not a few, which leave their country, not for the number of
vices which there abound, but for the misliking of a few virtues, which they
are neither willing nor able to obaye, such as suck corruption as fast from
the vicious, as the Toade poison from the earth) but I mean, thou art to be
controuled, in judging so absurdlye of men betaking themselves to painful
travels, either by their prowes and actiuitie (wanting the like occasion at
home) to purchase renown: by their skill, and venture to discover obscure
people, and places beneficial to themselves, and commodious to their
countries, or else upon any other good, or the same intentions before
remembered: yea were it no more, then to get experience, learn languages, or
to avoid idleness: for such as are these men, do not peize their
prosperity by the quantity of the external pleasures they forgo, but by the
quality of the eternal virtues they pursue.

As for the sundry vices frequented in those countries, by thee severally
named, my answer is, that out of bitter shelles we have sweet kernels, that
in one and the same place, are had presidents both of vice and virtue, and one
and the same man may be helped or hindered by either example: the well disposed
Trauailer does learn to immitate in the good their commendable qualities, and
to abhor in the badd their condemnable manners, applying both presidents,
good, and bad, to one virtuous purpose.

More might I say (Belopares) and more would I say, were it not that I know the
lawdable thing to be of sufficiency enough, not only to contend, but also to
defend it self, against al vituperating detractions whatsoever: and therefore I
conclude, Such a Trauailer is well advised at his going out, well amended at his
returning home, profitable to himself, not prejudicial to others, but well
meriting of all.

Nay, quoth. the Pilot (undertaking to be a stickler in the strife) no more of
this matter, enough is as good as a feast, and too much of one thing, is good
for nothing: here is a business (in deed) as if all the (...) nothing but
swallowing whirlepooles, and all the shore nothing but consuming whirlewinds.

But might I moderate your contention, you should divide this sentence betwixt
you, that neither sea nor shore are less perilous the one than the other, and
yet neither of both dampnifying farther than is permitted by inevitable
Destiny, or more truly the Giver and Guider of destinies, who having made both
land, seas, and all therein, and with them us, has (no doubt) reserved to
himself ye prerogative of a Creator, over his creatures, to dispose of all
things after his own pleasure: neither do I think there is any necessity
that the trauailer, or any other violently become vicious, except the same
volentarily desist to be virtuous.

Nevertheless I dare not be curious in these contingents, that cannot yield
any absolute reason of the members, motions, and senses which I daily carry
about me in mine own body, neither yet of things inferior to my self, as why
the Adamant draws iron, and lets lie a Feather, with a thousand such like:
only let it suffice that we receive, and receiving, let us be thankful to the
gods that are the giuers, and wholly to their significat and secret wills
refer all our actions: least by being ouer-curious, from the Moon we fall
into the mire, and not only loose our labor, but for presumption be punished
with Prometheus. It shall be less necessary that we be well learned, then
that we have well lived, and he knows enough, that knows himself not to
know any thing: and therefore (balking such laborinths) suffer me, I pray you,
to cut of your arguments with a familiar example or two not much impertinent to
this your present controversy, whereof I my self have been no small part, and
wherein (perhaps) mine experience may more prevail then al your arguments.

Cap. 16.
WHilste I was yet a lad and kept in India with my father, I chanced to wander
into a great desert not far from home, where childishly colting up and down,
on a sudden a terrible Lioness had caught me betwixt her paws: well might I
cry out for help, but not any creature was in way to hear.

The Lioness having whelps in a den, not far from the place where she had
thus found me, and minding (belike) to have made a merry banquet amongst her
young devils, hayled me apace with her churlishe Claws, (wherewithal she
pinched me shrewdly) toward her ^enne.

But see the chance, an other fierce Lioness hap^^^ to range that way, who
meeting betwixt that and home, with my boistrous hostess and me her bloody
guest, presuming at the least wise to be a partner, if not a sole possessor of
so delicate a boo^y, began to catch at my tail, thinking so by main force to
have recovered me out of the others claws: but my first Customer loath to
forgo her carriage, one while standing upon me, and an other while traversing
round about me, rescued me a long time by that means.

In the end either of them being so much the more eager, by how much they both
suffered for food, began so fiercely to assail each other, that through
earnestness of fighting, they had withdrawn themselves from me, a great
distaunce of ground: I seeing that, and (as young as I was, not letting slip
that advantage, fear making me forget how pitifully I was wounded) did start
up in a trise, and was gone in a turn, never daring to look behind me,
until I had gotten my Fathers house over mine head, leaving the two Lions
miserably tugging and tearing one an other, either of them purposing to have
devoured me, whilst I (thankefully be it spoken) had thus happily deceived them
both: of which hard escape, these scarres (he showed them scarres) will be
during my life, mindful tokens.

Thus have you heard how strangely my life was preserved on the land, and now
shall you hear how miraculously I escaped death on the seas.

Cap. 17.
THe first, and the worst voyage that ever I made was into Cicyona, to show the
horrors whereof, words will rather seem deficile, than matter defective.

Three days we sailed with a favorable wind, but on the fourth, arose as it
were a foggie miste from out the Seas, anon the blackness of the sky might
not be seen for the darkness of the air: dreadful flashes of lightning
seemed to have fyred the Seas, terrible vollies of Thunder threatened the
shaking of yt heavens, and sundering of the earth, shewres of rain poured
down, as if there should have been a second general Inundation, the roaring
winds skuffle so boisterously from each corner as if Boreas, Auster, Zephirus,
and Eurus had been at ods within themselves, or at one again us: and our
selves wretches were at our wits end, neither seeing for the dark, nor hearing
for the dinne how any thing should be amended, and yet too too well knew we
that every thing was amiss.

One while the ship mounteth so high, that scarcely we discern the hollow
waves from aloft, an other while it sincketh so low that hardly* we descrie the
ouer-pearing Billows from beneath* and though we did account it midday by
course of the time, yet might we compare it to midnight by occasion of the
storm: what shall I say? not one of us knew what to do, and yet every man was
doing something: one plieth the pomp until for weariness he faints,
another ladeth out water until for weakness he falls, this man (in vain)
repaireth the cracking tacklings, that man (at an adventure) re^teth down the
sails, some pour forth their prayers, some impatiently torment their own
persons, and some vow sweet insence and oblations, the married man he gives a
pitiful farewell to his absent wife and children, the batcheler names his
parents, friends, and whom he best loves, here stands one fast clinging to a
loose board, there another clean stripped to abide his chance, and every man
disorderly did that thing, whereunto the extremity of his passion did
presently direct him.

Diverse days together were we thus continally tossed, having by chance,
sea-roome at will, but at the last our ship being driven perforce upon a
shallow, stacke so fast that the only help remaining was to vnballance it: the
Gold, Jewels, precious stuff and Treasure then cast into the Seas, as it was
much, so was it not to be valued: but to tell you to whom the same
appertained, and to what use they should have been employed, requires over
long a discourse for this time, the which hereafter at the like leisure you
shall also understand.

Unvaluable (as I said) was the Treasure then floung ouer-boorde, more than
sufficient to have ransomed a king from the captivity of his foes, but nothing
at all helping to redeem us from the cruelty of the Seas: yet might we have
gotten our ship afloate with that cost, we should have thought our selves to
have wone by our loss: but (alas) that not sufficing, we were also constrained
to cast ouer-boord our prouigion of victuals: and so getting at length into the
deep, our ship that now wanted her full Ballace, was a fresh in far worser
sort than before, tossed amongste the Waves with the blustering Tempest: the
which was so extreme, and lasted so long, that (in effect) we rested utterly
hopeless ever to attain land: and the rather, for that through fasting and
feeblenes, we had small use or none at all of our fainting limbs: yet life
being a sweet thing, and hunger a sharp sauce, we fead upon whatsoever beast
we then found aboard: and afterward the pitch from the cables, the leather
from our shoes* yea more homlier matters than I may reuerentlye speak of, we
made food for our pining carcases: but these also decayed, the storm
continued, and famine increased.

What might we now do? food we had none, yet likely to famish: labor we could
not, yet resting should perish: die we might not, yet living did languish:
never were men wrapped in more misery, or distressed so vnmeasurably. This
(alas) is grievous enough that you have heard, but harder was our hap than thus.

Whilst we stood rufullye gazing one upon an other, more like to ghosts
departed, than men living, our good General Menophis, a noble Duke and
victorious Captain, under whose fortunate conduct we had diverse times before
prevailed in many a hot Encounter, being now (...) of an unhappy Embassage
from India into Cicyona, looking as ghost-like as any other, and supporting his
weak body with a short Iauilin pight in the middle of the Hat^hes, spoke to
us as follows.

Cap. 18.
WEre it so (my evermore courageous, but now comfortless companio^s) that we
once again were in ye champion fields of India, enclosed with the warlike bands
of Semiramis though five times doubled, yet would I put you in hope either to
march after them in a second pursuit, or at the least to make from them the
first escape: but (alas) small is the council that I am now able to give, yet
somewhat the comfort that thereby you may gain, but no conquest at al is here to
be got, knowing that to entreat, or threaten the churlish surges, were more
than Folly.

Only give me leave in this my last, I say my last and unaccustomed
exhortation, to prevail, and then assure your selves, that if this aged
carcass of mine sufficiently instructed not to fear death, to be sold into
perpetual bondage, or to suffer death it self might be in ought availeable to
you, I would account such bondage a freedom, and such death a flea-biting: for
how I have been, and am affectioned toward you, may well appear in this, that
I a Duke by birth, and your General by assignme^t, was notwithstanding the
first, before the meanest here that did want to eat, and not the last of this
company that did feel the famine: and yet were you eased of this misery, I
should not be impatient of much more sorrow.

Listen therefore I say, how I your careful Captain, not occasioned now (as
often times heretofore) to instruct you how and in what manner you ought to
fight, am at this time (after a far differing sort) to admonish you, how and
in what manner you are to die.

It either needs not, or boots not, to be offended with Fortune, that can be
no other then mutable by name and nature, neither is Fortune, whom it pleases
the irreligious people to entitle a blind Goddess, any other in deed, then a
by-name drawn from the Originals, and Events of our mortal actions: but it is
the undoubted gods themselves whom we have by some means unadvisedly offended,
it is they that punish, and them must we pacify, as those of whose aid we
should never despair: for though persecution procures a death to the body,
yet a conscience dispairing assures death to the soul: miserable is
distress, more miserable distrust, but most miserable then to fear, when we
cannot hope.

Nevertheless, let us not make our case so desperate, but that (whatsoever
shall betyde us, life or death) we lay hold-fast on patience, the only
touchstone of virtue, being pleasure unto pain, comfort to correction, wealth
unto want, and death unto death, vanquishing altogether with suffering and not
with striving, then which is nothing more victorious, no not death it self:
for who are those that death conquereth? even such fools as dread him, and
unto whom the only remembrance of death is an horror, such (I say) as
willingly become Ghostes, whilst they fear their graves, fearing more in sense
then they may feel in substance, and not thinking their pain will be either
not great, or not long.

What should be the cause, that men having Nature their undoubted Author,
Reason their assure^ Instructor, and Experience their continual Perswader,
should nevertheless or ever death comes, little better then die through the
only fear they conceive of death? unless doting to much on their wealth, which
they are loath to leave, or else hoping to little of the merciful gods, who
then forgive an ill life, when they find a good end: with whom it shall be never
to late too shake hands, as esteeming whatsoever is done well enough, to be done
soon enough.

Yea the rather (my loving companions) have we no cause to dread death, or
wish life, that are to die at the appointment of the gods, and not by the
judgment of men: for to the Person worthily condemned, death is a double
death, it being far more miserable to deserve it, then to suffer it: and yet
though it be in the power of men, to judge men, (which I also think to happen
but at sufferance of the gods) Nature does assure death unto al, not granting
to any one his life by pattent, but at pleasure: and that in such sort, that
not the wysest man living can say, there, then, or thus I shall die, and yet
sure he is that die he shall.

Seeing therefore (my good friends) that death is so certain, as nothing more
sure, and the order of his coming so unsure, as nothing less certain, and
that an honest death is the goal of our lives, how happy are we (if we could
conceive of our happiness) that shall die with such favorable opportunity of
repentance? well deserving of our country, lamented for of our friends, not
laughed at of our fooes, yea then when life is yrkenot some unto us: and that
not on Ieobets, as do Malefactors: not in Prisons, as do Captives: not in
Corners, as do Cowardes: not in Quarrels, as do Cutters: not in Chains, in
our enemies Triumphs: neither yet suddenly, then which no death is more
dreadful: but in a ship which does argue us venterous: in the Seas, not to be
subdued by Co^querours: in our Prince his affairs, as loyal subjects: with
famine, which confounds Mo^sters: with fame of former prowess, and by
prayer, which shall revive us.

What can we wish more of the gods, or what should I say more to you, whose
delivery is not desperate, but eue^ to sense impossible, and unto whom
(forlorn Souls) death the end of all wretchedness, ought especialy to be
welcome? Certes no more remains, but to entreat you (whom henceforth I shall
never more exhort) to be patient without grudging, penitent without wavering,
prepared without dispayring, dying to the flesh, and living to your souls, yea
lastly, remember I beseech you, that we are no sooner borne into the world,
but that we live to die from the world, and therefore ought rather to love
whether we must necessarily, then from whence we must of necessity. Thus not
able to comfort you as I would, but willingly to counsel you as I may, no
more rests but that I wish the continuance of so grievous a life, to have
deliverance by a godly death.

This said, ye noble Duke turns his face, and we might perceive how the
tears trilled down his cheeks: at sight whereof, we that did always reverence
him for his Gravity, obey him for his Authority, love him for his Lenity, and
honor him for his Liberality, could not but for company weep.

Cap. 19.
JMmediatlie as he had delivered such his exhortation, one of our weak fellow
soldiers suddenly faints, falls down and dies: but lo, an horrible
thing (yet considering that hunger breaks stone-walles, and necessity
suffers no restraint at that time to be tolerated in us) no sooner was the
breath out of the miserable man his body, but that stripping him out of his
clothes, like famished dogs, every of us rent some one piece of his starued
carcass: whereupon we fed as of such delicate fare, that no gold might have
bought the smalest portion thereof: and so pleasant seemed this unnatural
refection, that we (erwhile at point, every man to have tired upon his own
flesh) did now (as crows the carren) watch the like opportunity in our
fellows: growing in the end generally to this conclusion, that each day Lots
should be cast and he upon whom it so lighted, suffer such gentle death as him
self would choose, if not as we should devise, and his body to be equally
divided amongst the Suruiuors: neither would Duke Menophis our good general,
be exempted out of this deathfull Lotterie.

Diverse days were past, and diverse Martyred souls had performed this hard
Composition: in the end the lot fell to me, so that die I should, and (in
good sooth) die I would, neither did any of us all desire to have lived: being
persuaded either to perish (and that shortly) in the drenching waves, or by
this casual cruelty, or else in the end by famine: and (which was not the
least of our griefs) who could willingly abide, to see the butchered bodies of
their dear friends, before their eyes, and whilst the flesh yet panted, to be
mangled into small gobbits, and dealt about the blooddie ship for the others to
feed upon? So that therefore, with greater patience then I now live I then
prepared to die, mine hungry companions in the mean while, as eagarly whetting
their stomachs on their teath.

Being almost at point to have given my watchworde, to him, that standing at my
back, should have smitten of mine head, even at that very instant, a mighty
Byllowe mounting up into the ship, had almost ouercouered the hatches with
water, so that the whole company (the ship being now in great danger) were
feign to leave me at my prayers, and I also to leave praying, and all at once
to fall to their business.

In which mean time, a dapper Lad of mine, and as loving a boy as might serve
any man, perceiving ye storm somewhat to decrease, and the thick clouds
beginning to break, had (of his own accord) clymed the Mast, from whence, or
ever breathing time served again to have fallen in hand with me, the finishing
of whose life they purposed to have made their next work, the boy suddenly
cries: Land, land, land, rejoice my hearts I discrie Land: but hearing such
news it was needelesse to bid us reioise, in my purse I had a round sum
which I gave ye boy for his tidings, and each of us rewarded him bou^tifully.

By this time were the Seas iolyly calm, and the skies perfitly clear,
wherefore (as it stood us upon) taking time whilst time served, and as well
as we might supplying our brooken tacklings, we ^are the shi^tes from of our
backs, to patch up our ragged sails, and clapping on as many as our ship
might bear, a merry wind (contrary to al hope) did shortly bring us a shore:
though not in the same place where we should have arrived, yet in such a place
whereas we were co^fortably relieved. Thus as you may see, Land, Seas, and our
selves are subject to one and the same God, and not to Chance.

THe three sorrowful watchmen, sorrowful I say because not a little grieved at
the absence of the two brethren, having with this and such like talk driven
out the night, when the morning Star had a prittie while appeared, brake up
their watch: and anon Atys and Abynados hallow from the shore, who being made
ou^ unto with the Boat were merrily received aboorde: Where report of new
matters was diversely handled, and occasion of more straung adventures (as
orderly does follow) was offered.

Pheone. Calamus quartus.
Cap. 20.
Having thus brought Atys, and Abinados from the Castle to the ship, being
bravely under sail, well furtheed with a smooth da^gerles Sea, and a gentle
whisling wind: and when the two brethren had recounted al they had serve, and
the three watchmen the effect of that they had said: Belopares did then
challeng the Pilot of his last-nights promise, which was to declare the then
property, and purposed imploiment of those riches, in that unlucky viage (as
before remembered) cast ouerboorde.

In deed (answered the Pilot) I assumed such a matter, and am ready to requite
me of that promise, and now you shall have it as my self did receive it,
as well from the eye as the ear, and thus it was.

In the beginning of King Selchim his reign, cha^ced great wars between him
and the Indians, but in the end Selchim prevailing, receiuied in hostage
Staurobates the King of Jndia his only son: this lusty young prince during his
abode in the court of Cyciona, became intierly enamored on Pheone, a gallant
and beautiful Lady, and sister to King Selchim: who also with equal love,
subjected her liberty to his liking.

When this sweet passion long time, had mutually increased betwixt them, and
yt it was certified to Staurobates, yt his father was dead, and that the
Jndians attended his coming and Coronation: Staurobates did both easily
obtain a return into his country, and withal King Selchim his glad consent,
to match with Pheone.

But the young Lovers not esteeming it sufficient, solemnly to have plighted
their faithes each to other, did also secretly bind up ye bargain, with a
nights lodging: either of both then severally receiving, and delivering two
such Paunes, as neither of both might after possibly redeem.

Now when love had caused Staurobates long to linger in Cicyona, and that his
urgent affairs called him fast away, he sorrowfully taking his leave of
Pheone, departed with this promise, that before a certain time (soon after
following) were expired, he would send ships to waffe her into India: vowing
that nothing except death, should hinder that his resolution, no nor death it
self, but that by the time prefixed, news of such hinderance should be
returned: and so taking her a Jewel from off his finger, and whispering
certain words in her ear he took ship, the one gasing toward the shore,
and the other after the sails, so long as shore or sails might be discried.

Staurobates at his home coming, found his country invaded by ye armipotent
Virago S^miramis, whom (which never happened her elsewhere) he incountred,
wounded, and lastly chased her mighty troops from out his Territories. wholly
delivering himself in a short time of ye Assirians.

Scarcely was the armor cold from of his back, and the Scepter warm in his
hand, but that (remembering his promise) he dispatched the before named Duke
Menophis to Cicyona, from thence to safeco^duct his betrothed Lady: sending by
him great store of treasure, part whereof presents for King Selchim, part gifts
for diverse of his Nobility, and the residue for the honorable furnishing of
Pheone.

But by that time the wars at home were appeased, and (as you have heard) our
dangerous sailing avoided, and after so long famishment and bad diet, our
selves in health and strength recovered, the time before appointed on was
expired, and yet of all this while Pheone heard no tidings from Staurobates:
wheresoever supposing yt he had been unmindful of his promise, or at ye least
purposed to give her the slip, it is said, she fell into these Exclamatio^s.

Cap. 21.
ANd is there no remedy unfortunate, foolish, and forsaken wench but that thou
must answer so dear an interest, for the cheap love of his so momentarie
love? must it follow of necessity, because thou were credule^t, that he
therefore must be inconstant? is such the event of his lamentable looks, smooth
words, and often oaths? ah Staurobates, Staurobates, who would have thought so
youthful a Leacher, could have cou^terfaited so artificially a Lover? but I
perceive (alas, to late I perceive) that men make not their false hearts privy
to that which their fair tongues seem rufully to plead: and therefore nature
has left our weak sex in most wretched condition, suffering us ouer-feruently
to love, and giving it to men even kindly to chaung, making us as wyers for
their wresting, wax for their working, and fools for their flouting.

Howbeit before they obtain, then we, who but we, and only we are Idols
worthy their sacrifices? they plie us with pitiful epistles, they provoke us
with premeditated eloquence, they attire them by the book, and speak not but
in print: what have we they praise not? nay, what lack we praiseworthy they
feign not? why our gloves, yea our slippers, nay the very earth wheruppon we
then tread has (say they) virtue, or else (know we) they flatter: a simple
kiss on our hands, is the^ restoritiue to there hearts: but (good gods) for a
lovers fee at our lips, they dance in the Air, they cast down their
Gau^tlets, they couch their Spears, they spur their Steedes, they enter ye
Lists, yea we rather want wherein to employ their labors, than they in what to
please their Ladies. But, Dissemblers, though they leuel at our parso^s, they
shoot at our portio^s.

And be it so that they prevail, then whether they love still as do a few, a
little as do many, or not at all as do most, what other reckoning can we
cast-aways make? but that the first day of their recovery, is ye last date of
our liberty: that the ielous eyes of the hot lover shall be over attendant,
the emperious mind of the lukewarm ask too much attendaunce, and the third
sort (having deceived) shall leave us to our Cares, as Ravens having disclosed*
do their young to the Air: saving that Ravens after a while return as revoked
by love, where these would never retain us at all, if not resisted by law.
Thus play they Foxes, and we prove flattered: they Scorpions, and we stinged:
they Devils, and we tempted: but who worser than thou Staurobates? and yet were
thou present (changing Churl) I know thou could aleage no cause of such
strangeness, nor I for any crime of mine (except perhaps for trusting thee too
much) be justly challenged: as for my beauty, had it been sometimes baser, my
fortune had been at this time far better. Ah Pheone, desolate Pheone, how
may thou wind thy self out of these evils, or find redress for such
injuries? complain to thy brother? why, admit by war he enforce Staurobates
to wed thee? yet no war can enforse Staurobates to love thee, and then much
better martired, so then married: and should thou resolve (which thine
overmuch folly will not suffer) to accept his disloialtie as an acquittance of
all love, yet so deep is he in thine heart, that for his loss thou could not
but languish: and more than so (and too much by so much) who then should father
the fruit of thy growing womb? but only Staurobates, whom thou rash wanton,
over credulent of vows, did entertain simply as an husband, but not, as the
heavens can witness, willingly as an adulterer: howbeit through this thy
beastly foolishness, were the crime apparent, as it may not be here concealed,
my self am shamed, mine Honor stained, and my death in law deserved.

What does it (alas) advantage me now, to have been Daughter to the famous King
Aegialeus? the Sister of Selchim, or that my beauty, education, and
entertainment have heretofore allured mighty Kings Wooers, worthy personages
Suitors, and the World wonderers? that must now live obscurely (the Gods wot
where, and how poorly) the most wretched Relict of so notorious a Dissembler,
or else die a shameful death for my violated chastity: O well had I been if
happily interred, or at least wise, by so infamous an Epitaph not suruiued.

But what beat I the air with succes^esse words* Why do I not rather convey
my self into India, where (perhaps) when I shall manifest unto Staurobates the
distress wherein I am here left, when I shall humbly prostrate my self at his
feet, whom I never wittinglye offended, when he shall behold the tears
continually gushing from out those eyes which once he loved, when my tongue
shall discourse a lamentable tale, and my sorrowful gestures affirm the same
to be credible, when I shall charge him with his promises and vows, and lastly,
when I shall disclose (my folly, but his fault) my great belly, Then (which I
shall account amends for all wrongs) Love, Pity, Fear, or Shame shall again
win, for whom I now wish.

But (fool) what words are these? will thou herein also bewray thine error?
troth it is (Pheone) the gods accept the humble complaints of oppressed souls,
but Staurobates not therefore will confer with poor Suitors: the Gods be
merciful, but he maiestical, and ouer-proud a Physician to minister unto so
mean a Patient: does he not now disdain of thee that art his equal? and
shall he not then as a Runagate forbid thee his presence, as frantike command
thee to scilence, as offensive enjoin thee punishment, or as combersome
adiudge thee death?

O succourlesse estate of mine. O world not loved but for my womb, and it the
Map of al my sorrows, for which nevertheless and not else I yet live, as
expecting a comfortable child, in place of so unconstant a Father. And yet,
Staurobates, thou can not work to Pheone such ill, but that Pheone wishes
unto thee so well as not for her greatest wrongs, to crave the meanest revenge,
yea (to pleasure thee yet more) as my love is already remote from thine heart,
so of my person I henceforth deliver thine eyes: O unkind Staurobates, ah
unhallowed Pheone.

With such like passions as these being tormented with ielosie, though in deed
not threatened any such ieoberdie, did Pheone a while drive forth the time:
until in the end, not able any longer to hide that swelling sickness, which
she knew to be other than a Tympany, one morning betimes, she secretly windeth
her self from out the Court in disguised apparel, not to be recovered by any
search, or heard of by any inquiry.

After which her departure, within less than a seuen-night Duke Menophis and
we ariue at Cicyona: but intelligence being there had of this evil news,
making short tariance there, we resaile (with sorrow enough) to India and
certify to Staurobates our evil adventures on the seas, with the heavy
tidings of Pheone her missing.

Staurobates, who had pitifully heard the report of our mishaps, and took most
patiently the loss of his so great treasure, hearing now such news of her
whom he loved as his own life, fetching pitiful sighs, and eftsoons falling
into perilous sownes, could hardly be revived, wanting little but that he had
presently died: and long after, remained at point utterly to have forsworn
wiuing, by reason that Fortune had even then so awkly adnihilated his
Commencing, when having already his Grace, he accounted himself a Graduate.

Cap. 22.
BUt what is it that time does not determine, or at least wise diminish? diverse
years after (he yet continuing a broken batchiler) when his pensiuenes was
grown from a wound to a skarre, he arrived at Cicyona, there familiarly to
visit his old friend, and brother in law that might have been King Selchim,
who gladly gave him entertainment answerable to his magnificence.

During the time of Staurobates his now abode in Cicyona, Marpissa King Selchim
his only daughter and heir, a perfect blossom of beauty, a matchless Parago^
for personage, perfected by Nature, and pullished by Nurture, and one whom
Envy it self could not in any wise impeach, occcupied so great a portion of
now more hers than his own heart, that Pheone was the^ diszeased, but Marpissa
seized, the Aunt dismissed, but the Niece admitted, the one lacked, but the
other loved.

Staurobates therefore, first moving Selchim of this match, and there
prevailing, did secondlye make love to Marpissa, but there failed: howbeit like
a wily wenche, she finely smootheth him off with such delatorie answers, that
cunningly she leaves her self at liberty, and gives to him nevertheless
cause to play on the bridle, for he assured himself of nothing more, than
that he had gotten a wife, when she persuaded herself of nothing less, then
to take him for husband.

There was at that time in the Court, attendaunt upon a young Duke, which Duke
had been, in vain, a long suter to the Princess, one Crisippus, known to be
no other than a ritche Merchants son of the same City where the Court than
lay, but yet a youthful Gallant, and a brauing Courtier: he at the
commandment, and in the behalf of the Duke his master, used often repair
to Marpissa, and had much conference with her as touching the same Duke his
love. But she careleslye neglecting the courteous proffers of the master, did
contemplatiuely respect the comely personage of the man, who being scarcely
xviii. winters old, both for actiuitie, manners, and well making, was (at ye
least wise in her eye) not second to any.

This Crisippus, I say, this affiansed factor, and favored Soliciter, was the
only sleping Endimion secretly kissed of Phoebe, and (so far-forth as her love
wanting a second consent, might extend it self) to Galatea an Acis, to Venus
an Adonis, and to Marpissa the first of her love, or the last of her life.
Wherefore after that she had with earnest and long endeavor sought to resist
vndesistable love, at the length taking courage boldly to persist, she enters
with her-self into these Arguments: What reason have thou (Marpissa) to contend
with Love, that is both restless and unreasonable, adding so to fire fuel?
or what stand thou upon these ouer-curious points, thy fathers displeasure,
Crisippus his Pettigree, or thine own Modesty? when the first may be pacified,
or else by means avoided, for from whom we are derived by birth, to the^ what
can we more return than reverent minds? but to whom we are driven by love,
from the^ what may we less withold than our own parso^s? yea Marpissa thou
may also reverence as a daughter, and love as a wife, and yet the later not
prejudicial to the first. Secondly, and as concerning Crisippus his Pettigree,
or Poverty, what is that to be respected? seeing thou do delight in his
parsonage, not descant of his parentage, whose virtue does counteruaile the
want of Nobility: for better the man lacking wealth, then wealth lacking the
man. Thirdly, what should thou be more nise than wise? that art therefore
to be pardoned because in love, and who is ignorant that love respects no
persons? for howsoever in all other things happens a superiority, yet Nature
that has given to us alone Birth, one Breath, and one Death, in this one only
thing remains vncorrupt, and is to all alike indifferent, making Phoebus a
Sheapheard, and Hercules a Cot-queane: but admit the Discord, yet marriage
makes the Concord.

Marriage (quoth. I) yea but all the craft in catching, and cunning in keeping: I
marie Marpissa, this was sweetly spoken if fair words might win him, but
Crisippus is no Pigeon to be taken with a bean, nor a child to be intised with
a Ball, he may be perhaps a Lover, but not love for loss, and will more
esteem a dowry that is bountiful, than a Kings Daughter though beautiful.
Alas Marpissa, what dowry can thou bring him? Ah, Death, if he be taken:
Banishment, if he escape: and Poverty, howsoever he speedeth? Wherefore if thou will love him, then lean to love him, but that (alas) will never be, except
thou also leave to live. Nay, rather move the question, and afterward dispose
of thy self according to his answer: they are more than miserable, that seek
a sword to perish on the point, before a salve to apply to their pain: the
vexed parson that in most anguish, cries out to be delivered of grief, the
same would not with the least violence, be then dispatched of life: speak
Marpissa now, or else never speed, sue to him for love, that perhaps would,
but fears to attempt thee in the like: thou shall, no doubt, obtain, he is
neither discurteous, nor timorous, and so constant a Partner shall the rather
make him venterous of the peril.

Cap. 23.
LVpus in fabula, laboring yet in these passions, she perceived Crisippus
dancing attendance, about the pursuit of the Duke his love: whom (more for
that she had now a new plea of her own to plie, than upon any will to hear
the old pleaded cause of his master, the which she had already both in
thought, and by word dismissed) she calls into a withdrawing chamber, where
giving him intertainment more than usual, but yet no more than stood with
modesty, they enter into this Dialogue.

Mar. WHat news Crisippus? My Lord your Master is (I hope) satisfied, and not
offended, with the return of my late answer: if then your hither Repair be
not his Reply, but your own preferment, give me leave to intrude my self a
dealer in your demand, and doubt not of my diligence to whomsoever, and for
whatsoever in your behalf.


Cr. Neither is it possible, Madame, my Lord should be satisfied, being so
unfortunate in your love, or your Ladyship offensive to him that only to you
has vowed all duty: as for my hither Repair, it is humbly (as before) to
prosecute his Succor, whom you may presently esteem the very Substance of
sorrow: and lastly, for the recept of such your so gracious offers, unworthy
Crisippus says himself disabled, to measure part of that thankfulness to
your Ladyships ear, which without all measure, is contained in his heart.


Mar. Few thanks may serve, where benefits are so small: but Crisippus as it
would not hurt me to be more amiable, so would it help the Duke to be less
amorous.


Cr. As touching your Ladyship I answer, that to a Perfection a Supply were
needless, but as to my Lord I say, that persuasion, or disswasion were
bootelesse: for so far off is he from being clear of that, which to all
lovers is common, that the^ he forces most for you, when he hears himself
least favored of you: and yet to couple up at the loss, would, says he,
argue an idle Huntesman.


Mar. But to be still at loss is tedious hunting.


Cr. Yet hope of finding rebateth from such tediousness.


Mar. You speak in clouds, Crisippus, how mean you that finding?


Cr. As does my Father find my Mother, sometimes at board, sometimes in bed.


Mar. A brief construction, but all the better for Staurobates thinking to
find me so.


Cr. And this a bad comfort, and all the worser for my Lord threatened to loose
you so.


Mar. Well, Suresby well, I perceive were the case yours, you that are for an
other so earnest, would be for your self importunate.


Cr. What I could be (Madame) that rests, but what I should be that is
evident, wiser (my thinks) then to run on so sleeuelesse an errand, or
prosecute so bootelesse an action.


Mar. Yet even now you maintained, that a man perseuering in love, may prevail
at the length.


Cr. Then did I argue for my Lord as a Lover, now do I answer your Ladyship
as Crisippus, who in loves May sees included no end.


Mar. But in the same May is expected an end: and in the Ebb not to watch
the Tide, is to loose the Tide through negligence.


Cr. But in the Ebb, say I, such a watchman may swealt with heat, starve
with cold, or tire with tariance: only he watches well that finds the tide
fit for his passage.


Mar. If to try the constancy of men we linger a while, is it not (think
you) good policy?


Cr. Yes, if in that while, to kill me with languor you account it no bad
victory.


Mar. But should women consent lightly, their Lovers would conceive over lewdly.


Cr. But because they are Lovers, therefore ignorant that coy wenches, are, for
the most part, cunning wanto^s.


Mar. As who would say, when men be wilful in love, women must then be
witless in choice.


Cr. Wilful fools in-deede, are fair Gamsters, pitiful Soldiers, and
faithful Lovers, and (under your Ladyships correction be it spoken) so wise in
their choice oftentimes are women, that whilst they desire to be woed, and
disdained to be wone, it fares with them as with Hobbyes, that turning tail
to the Lark, make winge to the Dorre

Say (Crisippus) we be Hobbies, so you serve us as Falkners, granting us to
seize, where we happen to sousse: as sweet a morsel ywis to Juno (had their
love ben current) was Ixion as Jupiter, and to Jove, Io as Juno, and the reason
is, love feels no lack: howbeit such doings make not to us for documents:
you speak of disdain, but where I pray you, were constancy to any, should
we be alike courteous to all? and (yet forsooth) if we remove any for
comeliness, we anon are rebuked for coins: when (credit me Crisippus) in love
diverse things may diversely hinder, amongst which not always Obstinacy, but
sometimes and chiefly want of Opportunity, for they that bandon the ball mark
not ever the Chase: my self for example may (and perhaps do) bear an
especial liking to some one man, but look not (think you) my parents, and
friends to like or mislike of the match? yes Crisippus, put case your self
might win me without their Consent, yet I guess it would grieve you so
doungerously to conclude.


Cr. Be this coins, or be it co^lmes, sure I am that love it is not: for love
straineth curtesitie with friends and parents, shakes hands with wealth and
pleasures, yea it bids life and all farewell, love (if love it be in deed)
is of such efficacy.


Mar. Tush Crisippus, you now talk of Apollo his laughter.


Cr. And why not Madam, of Apollo his love? he with infinite others have done
the like: why my self, were I a lover would do no less: but what better
president then that of my Lord? who presently is at point to perform fully
as much, or might any thing be more then loss of breath, ready also for your
love to fulfill that more. If therefore not offending good manners, I might guess
in jest, at what I wish in earnest, I would level at my Lord to hit your
Lover, that one especial man I mean standing (as is partly confessed) so
highly in your Ladyships favor, because then he, no man has better deserved
the good hap of so gracious a Lot, as is the prize of your Love.


When Marpissa had thus privily felt Crisippus his pulses, although not beating
so amorously as she did wish, yet bringing opportunity to utter what she
would, not omitting therefore so good an occasion she says.

I cannot tell (Crisippus) whether I may think you Cauilous in threatening
kindness where none is, credule^t, in believing what at no time was, or constant
in pursuing, what shall never be: but me-thinkes your labors already lost in
the Duke his behalf, might long since have dissuaded both him, and you from
groping after a Shadow, as much more now, Staurobates being a Competitor, from
gaping after a Substance: nevertheless not tired with a dead effect you harp
still to a deaffe hope.

That I may therefore remove such errors (besides that my father no longer ago
then yeasterday last, promised me in marriage to Staurobates, which Banes also
I mean to forbid) I swear by youder Sun, I have been, am, and mean to be
so far off from matching with the Duke, that henceforth I protest never more
to talk with him, or with any other soliciting his love: wherefore (good
Crisippus) cease to counsel him, or entreat me any further herein, and let
him also suffer himself to digest this, a final answer.

But Crisippus, although silence (may you perhaps think) would be more seemly
in a Maiden, yet because I am urged by love violently, by your demand
willingly, and by posting occasion of necessity, to direct you as it were by
the hand to my heart, I will not in danger be dainty: but reveal to you the
man, said to have subdued my liberty. What should I more say? nay what might I
with modesty less say, or at the least, suffer you to aim before I name? the^
yt (here tears drowning her words, gave a short pause to this yt follows (thy
self) my dear Crisippus art that one who^ I long time have loved, do love,
and will love.

And if this thing seems ambiguous for likly-hoode, or strange for love, then
for further trial command me, yea presently command me, for that the
shortness of the time promising an ouer-speedy marriage betwixt Staurobates, and
me can suffer no long delay, to disrobe my self of this rich attire, and so
disguised to follow thee wheresoever my Conductor.

Doubt not my sweet friend (I would I might as well call thee husband) but
that making an easy escape from hence, we may live as contentedly elsewhere:
and being lawful wedded (for that is the bounds of my love) mutually have
fruition of loves delight, and that not in want, I being provided of Jewels a
light carriage worth abundant of wealth, neither may they want that faithfully
love: much is it that I leave, but much more would I loose, only to win thee
to my self: for Crisippus, from the first day that I viewed (God grant I may
say, luckely viewed) thy face and personage, I wholly have settled my self only
thine own, wherefore neither scorn, nor fear to enjoy what only is thine, or
at the leastwise, let her presently understand thy pleasure, whose good, or
badde days wholly consist on thy good, or bad answer.

The tears thus stopping her words, she wringeth his moist fist amorously
betwixt her delicate hands, and having dried her eyes, thus proceeds: if
happily Crisippus, you find ought of modesty escaping my tongue, impute the
same to the integrity of love, ye necessity of spedy dispatch, the answer of
your own question, and to your own late speech against coyness. And so
Maidenly bashfulnesse, hardly restraining a conjunction of lips, she ends
to speak, and begins again to weep

Cap. 24.
CRisippus, albeit he did palpably behold, feel and hear this angelical
Temptatrisse, and her sweet Incantations, yet stood he still like a headless
fly, meruelously amassed, and hardly parswading himself but that he had seen
some vision, or in a dream heard that melodious hermonie, or rather accounted
by him (an unpracticed Songster) iarring discord, as by his answer appeared:
for feeling perfectly that he did wake and not sleep, that he looked on her
with open eyes, that had thus lovingly laid open to him her heart, because he
had never yet received prest-mony, or thought to have marched after loves
Onset, a beautiful blushing made him seem more lovely, but his ignorance in
love to answer thus absurdly.

When Serpents (quoth. he) but hiss, then no man so foolish as to trust them, but
until women sting, few men so wise as to mistrust them: your grace (I know)
expects an answer, and I fear more to offend rudely, then that your
Ladyship will pardon redily.

Is it possible that you so beautiful a Lady, the only daughter and heir of
a king, forsaking those personages, whom for their worthiness in every respect
you might well fantesie, should forsake them, and your liberty, and betake you
to me, that am (as you know) no more, if so much, then a poor gentleman, the
son of a Merchant, whose wealth in his storehouses is more then his gentry
with the Heralds, and my countenance (such as it is) in the Court, more the^
the coin he can leave in his Coffers, with whom: you cannot live but in exile,
and danger? is it possible I say, you should so much embace your self, as to
embrace so homely an husband as is Crisippus? no Madam, no, Crisippus fears
he should clime to high, if Marpissa should f^l so low, or perhaps has learned
by others ^osse, that a pleasant foe does esily supplant.

Yet (pardon me Madam) I will not judge, but that your Ladyship may intend the
same love, you outwardly pretend: which admitted, what else follows? but that
you prising so cheap your love should be ouergreat a Loser, and I buying so
dangerous abargaine a sorrowful Gainer: for kings have eyes that pearce into
every Cra^nie, ears that hear in every company, and hands that stretch
into every Country, in whose affairs but only to aim, is little better
then to hold the Wolf by the ears, or to walk upon right narrow Bridges,
over most deep Foordes,

Seeing therefore (Madam) that such love would be so much loss to you, such
danger to me, and so prejudicial to us both, let it suffice, that I humble
even the knees of mine heart, to acknowledge your so rare bounty, and
vouchsafe the same to impetrate pardon, for denial of so unprofitable
proceedinges.

When Marpissa heard him make this unkind Conclusion, a bitter Acceptance
(thought she) of so bountiful an Offer only replying with cutting sighs, and
shaking her mistempred head, as who should say, ah dessolat wentch I, and
hard-hearted wreatch thou, she sorrowfully departed to her lodging, whether by
the tears trickling from down her eyes, she might have been tracted: leaueing
Crisippus all alone in the same place, where they had thus talked of this evil
hanselled love: who seeing her thus suddenly gone, returned then to the Duke
his lodging, certifying to him the evil success of his suit with Marpissa.

Well quoth. the Duke (setting a good face on a bad matter) what remedy but
perforced patience? they that may not love where they would, must leave when
they may: and for ought I see the loss would be light, were the fondness of
mine affection less, for it is commonly seen, that praying Haggardes, and
peevish women as they are caught when they would not, so they check when they
should not: Thus did he smooth Brag, and smite Beauty, when his thought might
well have controuled his tongue, bidding Crisippus farewell, whom love did thus
welcome to his lodging.

Cap. 25.
HIs Pedantie (the weather being moiste) brought dry slippers to put on his
feet, the Master (his wits being on wol-gathering) having more need of warm
carchifes to bind on his head, the which was now become a hiue of bussing
Bees, not standing as he thought, on his shoulders, but hanging by Geometry:
he knows not sweet yongling, what love means, and yet he loves, he would
not love, and yet could not but love, yea and that so fervently, that having
acquainted himself but a small time with the Copesmate of love, Solitarines,
he might have been used in a Co^sistorie of lovers in place of an Anothomie:
being so much ye more wretched, by how much him self was ye Author of his own
wretchedness* in forslowing goulden Opportunity, the smiling handmaide of Fortune.

But as love did triumph over Crisippus, so the same fury did tyrannyse over
Marpissa, who (a tolerable fault in that sex) lived with as small felicity,
as she loved unfortunately: but yet not utterly hopeles of better success, she
thought it labor not altogether lost, to finish that reply in written tables,
at their last departure begone only by pitiful gestures: the which purporting
many loving arguments, enterlaced also with some desperate conclusions, were by
her messenger delivered to his perusing.

When Crisippus had (with joy enough) viewed and reueiwed those plausable
lines, he by the same messenger thus reanswered in, writing, her letters.

SO often do I accuse my self of cowardice (most worthy Lady) as the hardines
of the silly Snaile meets my remembrance, whose courage is such, that the
boulde worm is seen, venterously to clime the tops of the most loftiest
Towers, when (to say troth) I through Timeritie have baulked the proffered
bounty of you: a Lady then whom lives not any more lovely: in excuse whereof,
I infer the cause not to be any mislike of the matter, but a mistrust of the
manner, no defect of willingness, but my too too unworthiness, no light accepta^ce
of your so rare beauty, but the unlikelihood of so strange bounty: wherefore
seeing that fear only has been my fault, I hope your curtious nature (sweet
Lady) will make a favorable construction of my childish error, for the which I
have already performed such extreme penna^ce, that had I not conceived hope of
life by your writing to day, death no doubt had taken away both hope and life
before to morrow.

For my passed simplicity I ask pardon, and of my following fidelity I crave
trial, forgive the one, and affie in the other: to whatsoever affairs, you
shall employ my service, to that only office shall I apply al duty: and what
you henceforth account but an error, that same shall I conclude an heresy:
only live (Marpissa) to continue your love, or Crisippus dies to end his
langour.

Your Graces more willing then worthy, Crisippus.


From this day forwards, they enjoyed the benefit of many amorous meetinges,
and in conclusion, of their unsuspected familiarity proceeded a secret
marriage.

Anon after the time drew fast on, wherein a marriage should have been
consummated betwixt Marpissa and king Staurobates: but she and Crisippus rather
careless of their lives, then inconstant in their loves, fled together from
the Court, more privily, then prouidently as happened: for long were they not
absent but by and by missed, the Ports, Havens, and whole Country being
narrowly laid for their apprehe^sio^: so that not able to flee far, yt were
pursued so fast, they might not be more covertly hid then they were curiously
sought, and in the end as crookedly found.

When the two Loves were brought into the presence of the two kings,
Staurobates (sweating in a new chafe, as cast in his second account) sends
as fierce looks at Crisippus that had so forstalled his marriage, as did
Selchim a stern countinaunce at Marpissa that had thus disobeied his meaning,
who adding these following speches, proceeded also to a terrible sentence.

Cap. 26.
WHy suffer I the presence of thee so dishonest a child, by whose practice I am
become so dishonored a father? why have I been so careful of thy welfare,
that art so careless of thine own preferment? were it not (thou impudent
Strumpet) that I rather shun to be noted of impacience, in giving the bridle
to my just anger, then doubt to be charged of injustice, in punishing so unjust
a Trespasser, this heart of mine could redily consent, these hands willingly
contriue, and these eyes g^adly behold that thy carcass (mine only deed)
dead beweltered in blood before my face, and trampled upon with my feet: but
live harlot, I say live yet a while, that have already lived over long to me,
and no less vnluckely to thine own self: that I am offended and thou the
offender thou shall anon feel, if (contrary to kind) the deuowring wild
beasts in the deserts shall not show more courtesy, then I justly occasioned,
pretend pity.

Believe me, thy light looks have made me before now suspicious of thy loose
life, as always more fearful to prevent ye danger yt might proceed of thy
wa^ton gestures, the^ careful to recover thee of any thy sicknesses, esteeming
it less difficile to encounter my open enemies in battle, the^ easy to
countermaund the secret Assala^ts of they beauty.

This fear is incident to careful fathers, that are sped of such amorous
daughters, for whom, and that or ever they are judged marriageable, besides
dowries more then easily disbursed, thankfully accepted, or profitably
employed, must also be provided husbands, least they (impatient of tariaunce)
procure unto themselves Paramours: yea rather than such have (with a
vengeance) should be hindered by non-sufficiencie, the loving Pigeons will
first or grow in their Shoes, or walk on their Toes, or add to their Years
or subtract from Childishness, or if yet disabled) suffer perhaps a large
trial, before a long suspicion: better knowing to entertain a Lover at
Thirteen, than to obey a Father at Thirty. Let us proffer a wealthy match,
and a man personable, the simpring Saints will then, on Gods name, live still
maidens, or have change of excuses not to marry, when anon after themselves
fantasing or flattered of some Jack or Clinchpoupe (bag they first, or beg
they after) must, in the Devils name, marry, or not live patiently Maidens:
thus their first and chief study is husbands, and their last, and least care
huswiferie.

But (am^^^us Peate) seeing thou did refuse to be a Queen to Staurobates,
and have rather chosen to be a Queen to Crisippus, whilste the one does
abhor thy lightness, the other shall abie his liking. Wherefore my sentence
is, that of thy death the sauadge Monsters do execution: yet to thee, before
thou pass to this punishment, the heart of this Leacher thy Lover (a gift, no
doubt, more precious than the price) shall be delivered, that as living on
lust, I cannot term it love, of two, framed one mass of wickedness, so
(perhaps) dead, the bowels of one Beast, to either heart may afoorde one, and
the same Tomb.

Then commands he that Crisippus should be forthwith bound, and his heart (a
present for Marpissa) to be car^^ed from out his body: When the afflicted
Lady, hardlye obtaining audience to utter these few words, said.

Alas, my dear Crisippus, how dainty a dowry haste thou found my love? how
merciless a father in law has thy wise given thee? I would the price of my
life might purchase thy liberty: but (alas) I wish too well, to obtain so
well, let it therefore suffice for a poor comfort, that thy Marpissa is gladly
thy deaths Companion.

Crisippus hearing these sweet speeches to proceed from her, that had the
present Possession, and promised Reuersion of his heart, not being suffered to
acquit words with words, did only manifest the integrity of his unremovable
love, by often kissing the deadly Instrument, that should anon bereave him his
heart, promised to Marpissa as a present.

Cap. 27.
THe brute of this severe sentence, thus passed upon Crisippus and Marpissa,
brought thither many pitiful beholders to have seen the threatened Tragedy.
Amongst the rest, whilste this beautiful Couple prepare to offer up their
lives, as pledges of their constant love, a very fair, and most comely woman,
who heretofore had been Nurse to Crisippus, and ever after until that day, had
been entertained in the service of the Marchantman his father, the tears
abundantly steeming from out her amiable eyes, in great anguish casts her
self at the feet of the two Kings, and says.

I^ so be (merciful, or merciless kings) you grant unto me a silly woman
like liberty of speech, as you have given cause of sorrow, then shall I commend
your clemensie toward me, that cannot but condemn your cruelty toward these
two, whose answering ages, combyned affections, agreeble complections, and what
so else, and more then you know of gaining by equality love, are in either so
co^currant, as (in my judgment) you might rather wish what is already happened,
then withstand that which is now helpelesse.

But least I also swallow up that in scilence, which uttered, may, perhaps,
rebaite from their sorrows, I shall now (as enforced thereunto) disclose long
hidden secrets. You will mutter when I shall Affirm, but marvel when your
selves cannot but Confirm, yt Crisippus may claim no less Nobility from his
Progenitors, than Marpissa Honor by her Parentage, that he is an Husband not
unworthy such a wife, that ye Issue (Selchim) of thy fathers child is not of
more roial blood, nor ye Son (Staurobates) sproong from thy loins more noblier
borne, you will muse (I say) when your selves shall avouch this that I auarre:
Wherefore let it not ought agrauate to his punishment, that Crisippus, ignorant
of his right parents, acknowledges himself the son of a Merchant, or that
from these homely paps of mine (less pleasing then in times passed) he has
sucked nourishment: but know Selchim, that he is the natural son of Pheone
thy neglected sister, she the contracted wife of unconstant Staurobates, he
the unnatural father of condemned Crisippus, and my self ( Selchim, and
Staurobates) the same Pheone whom (happily) either of you has longer lost,
than lacked, and the one of you (no doubt) longer lacked then loved, albeit,
Staurobates, at thy departure, and at the delivery of this Ring, thy
flattering tongue could then whisper: That mine absence should be bitter, and
the delay of my presence Death.

Now therefore, if the one of you will deal gratiouslye with his desolate
Sister, and the other gently with his well deserving Lover, and either of you
naturally with your distressed Children, the^ at the least, be to the^ mere
Strangers, rather than so merciless Parents: yea remember (Staurobates) thou
may not retain Marpissa but by lust, Pheone being already entertained thine
own by Law, whose life ought to stand betwixt thee, and a Bigamus.

By this time, and whilst she was yet speaking, Staurobates having perfectly
fixed in the eyes of his memory, the well known face and countinaunce of the
amiable Oratrisse, giving a sign to the Tormentors for stay of Execution,
earnestly imbrased the Heroical Nurse, saying: Well may thou divine of the
prosperous success of thy demand, when no creature living can be so welcome
to this place, as art thou the Demaunde^t. Think not that the homeliness of
thine habit, unworthy thine honor, or any alteration whatsoever has so
begiled my senses, or estranged my love, but that I gladly acknowledge my self
the husband of Pheone, and thy self the only she whom Staurobates accepts
for wife.

Ah Pheone, had not thy misdeeme been more than my misdeeds, then had not not
thy ielous love happened so much to both our prejudice. But now well is me, and
thrice happy be this hour, wherein I re^ew whom I never did but love, nor
ever will but honor, thee my dear and only beloved Pheone.

And then as he aleaged in his excuse, those reasonable causes before touched,
king Selchim no less joyful to hear tidinges of his Sister, than was
Staurobates glad to hau^ found his wife, imbrased her with as much love for a
brother, as did the other for an husband, she as naturally resaluting, and
reconciling her self to either.

Crisippus and Marpissa were now delivered from bands, and after many joyful
tears, their passed marriage was also gladly confirmed by either parent,
espe^ially Staurobates demeaned exceeding great joy, for the recovering of his
unknown son: of whom, and of her own absence, Pheone in effect this
reported: That at Staurobates his departure into India, she finding herself
ouer-taken with his daliances, that had left her neither Maid, widow, nor
wife, and not hearing from him according to appointment, did therefore as well
to avoid the law, which was death, as the shame of her fault, which was her
great belly leave secretly the Court, and in the Deserts was delivered of
Crisippus: whom (being at point otherwise to have perished) she swatheled up,
decking him with much gold, and many rich Jewels, and laid him in a Path, by
which a homely country Matron usually passed, to milk her Cattle in those
Deserts, her self in the mean while, privily watching the event of this her
devise.

And how this good woman finding so fair a Boy, and so fat a booty, presented
the poor fisherman her husband with such her findings: when thereupon
herself (simply araied) repairing unto their Cottage, and asking a
entertainment became Nurse unto her own son. The^ lastly, how the Fisherman
by this windfall greatly enriched, and long sithence become a Marchantman in
that City, not having any child of his own had adopted Crisippus (being
utterly ignorant of any other Parentage) his Son. This she told, and a general
Plaudiat dissolved ye joyful assembly.

HEre is (quoth. Abynados) love upon love, and lovers by huddles, a discourse
(trust me) frivolous in telling, fruitless in hearing, but most foolish in
Action: such love being (in my conceit) so far off from love, that I rather
think it a doting Frenzy, and enemy to Reason, rouing headlong upon
Impossibilities: for were it that such loving fools could temper their
Extreme, with a Mean, then would they love with more discretion, or leave
with less damage. For not improperly may love be compared to the sore called
an Oncom or Fellon, which beginning at the fingers end, and by sufferance
falling into the Joint does hazard a Mahem, or at the leastwise a Cure: so
love beginning at the eye, and by sufferance descending to the heart does
threaten life, or at the leastwise Reason: as the one therefore at the first
is to be scalded, so the other is presently to be suppressed, for without a
timely violence, either Malady is incurable. With such like discourses did
Th'assirians cut the calm seas, and descrying a strange ship at anchor not far
off, upon occasion, did also the like, riding as nere to the unknown ship as
they cold: where not omitting to enquire after those in Quest of whom they
thus sailed, occasion of that which now ensues, was taken.

Deipyrus. Calamus quintus.
Cap. 28.
IT happened that after many gentle salutations passed and repassed on either
part, it grew in the end to such familiarity, as neither Company doubted at
their own pleasures friendly to boorde and reboorde each others: and whilste
the rest feast merely, and are tied to the Can by the teeth, Atys made a long
and lamentable report to Tymaetes the Lycian Captain (for the strange Ship was
of Licia) of the miss, or rather loss of Sorares, and his company, saying
thus has Fortune assailed the Father, and now assauteth the Children,
triumphing his on Bale, and threatening our Bliss.

And no marvel, answered Tymaetes, considering that Fortune is only constant
in inconstancy: and as touching Bliss, it may be your opinion is heretical,
for that true Bliss, in deed, performs a perpetuity, whereas the
flattering pleasures of this world, cannot promise one hours certainty, and
therefore it may not be aptly termed Bliss, whereof a change is to be
doubted: and yet to attain, or rather to attempt the sweetness of a clear
conscience, to exercise Uirtue, to combat with our Affections, to eschew evil
and do good, to love all and hate none, and to live in the world as not of the
world, are (no doubt) great arguments of blessedness, but no full assurances
of Bliss, for that none may be said blessed, until his last gasp has
dissolved him from his natural infirmities, and then, and not before follows
blessedness, the stipend of virtue.

As for worldly Prosperity, I esteem the same nothing less then prosperous,
as a thing whose sower never fails, and whose sweet ever fleeteth, as a
spur to wickedness, and a bridle to well-doing: yea what glorious Titles, or
wealth can this Step-dame of Virtue bequeath us, yt perish not with, or before
the Possessors: so, yt were not ye followers of Fortune more blind tha^ their
Guide, of the two Prosperity, and Adversity, they would accounte the later as
the more necessary, because it opens the eyes of the heart that Prosperity
stops, and oftentimes redeemeth Virtue as it were out of a filthy Dungion.

But to wish Adversity is less needful than necessary: for so infinite,
and inscident are the Calamities that follow us even from our Cradles, that well
may we wish either not to have been borne, or quickly to die, and so many are
the wrongs that men inflict upon men, that to revenge all were impiety, and
to suffer all impossible: wherefore injuries (think I) not honestly to be
dissembled may discreetely be revenged, or at the worst, to seek or work
revenge is so much the less infamous, by how much the offered occasion
thereof is injurious. That I should thus mention injuries you may perhaps
muse, but whether there be cause or no I make you my Judges, thus standing the
case.

Cap. 29.
AFter the continuance of long, and wastfull wars between the Lydians, and
the Lycians a Truse for certain years was concluded, for assurance whereof,
either side did deliver their Pledges: the king my Father, (for a King is my
father) sent into Licia a Noble man his Nephew, called Deipyrus, whom he had
not long before preferred to a Dukedom, and otherwise highly advanced: and
the other king sent into Lydia a Noble young Gentleman called Xenarchus, whose
Father is king of Cilicia, and also at this present usurps in Lydia, whereof
my father only retains the name of king, but he the kingdom: and that by
means of a Rebellion moved by the same Deipyrus, after his return from
hostage, whereof thus follows the circumstance.

Deipyrus partly of his own aspiring courage, partlye suborned with rewards by
my father his enemy the then Lycian king, but cheefely for love of Eurymone
the same king his daughter, with whom and him aw-lesse love had already united
hearts, did secretly gather a rebellious Army, and suddenly besieged my (...)
in his own City. Who seeing his Citizens not able to hold wage with the
Besiegers, after long resistance, leaving behind him in the City the Queen my
mother, and with her two Infants their children, conuaied himself into Cylicia,
there desiring assistance against the Rebels, the which, in an ill hour, he
easily obtained. But or ever any rescue might be conuaied into Lydia, my mother
fearing to stay the Sack of the City, and entry of the foe hourly expected
for, flead privily with her two infants, into a great Forest not far from
the besieged City: where roots and such wild berries as the place afoorded,
making an exchange of their wonted fare, hardly lingered the soul in their
bodies. In the mean while, the king of Cilicia la^ded his men, rescued the
City, and pursued with great slaughter the flying Rebels: but mine uncle
Deipyrus the chief Captain and conductour of these traiterous Rebels, by
chance recovered the before named Forest, and by that means escaped the
sword of the Pursuers.

Long had he not wandered here, but that he heard the pitiful shriekes of a
woman, wherefore making to the place from whence the sound came, he perceived
a Lady likely to have been abused by two straggling soldiers of Cilicia: in
whose defense at once he assailed them both, and in the end valiantly chasing
them away delivered her of their purposed treachery: which done, not knowing
who^ he had so rescued, he demanded what she was, and how it fortuned her and
her two infants, to wander so daungerously in the same Forest.

My miserable mother (for it was my Queen mother) not knowing in that case,
the man unto whose questions she was then to answer, drying her dropping eyes,
and falling at his feet, when she had stilled her yonglinges who with their
pretty golles hugging about her neck cried out (which her self wanted) for
food, not daring to bewray what one she was, said.

Cap. 30.
LIke as (good Sir) no deserts other then your own valor, persuaded you
erwhile to use courage in my defense, even so the defect of mine ability
(respecting my wretched estate) may dissuade you from all hope of any small
Recompense, only accept of her poor thanks that shall ply the gods with often
prayers, that they hearing my wish, may furnish my want with a reward for your
merits, otherwise I continually rest your disabled debtor.

But in that you ask what one I am, alas Sir, see you not yt I am a most
desolat woman? not borne to beg though now less happy the^ a Beggar, who late
did want nothing, and now have nothing, not long since as wealthy, as I now am
wretched, able to have harbored the best, but now more harbourlesse than the
worst: and therefore feel I affliction so much the more burdenous, by how much
I once possessed abundance: for no want more miserable, then to have been
wealthy.

Who is it that feels not, or at the least wise hears not, unto what
spoil, and penury the Rebels have now left all Lidia? to avoid whose
outrageous proceedinges, I have chosen with these my poor infantes, to linger
out our dying lives in this Forest, though death (no doubt) would have been to
us misers, far more sweeter.

Woe, yea endless woe, befall that ungrateful Traitor Deipyrus, the unnatural
ruin of his natural Country: oh that once, or ever these eyes of mine shall
leave this light, I might see the Caitiffe in like distress (if like might be)
as presently am I, or that the Uillaine were as near my reatch as even now are
you: then would I awhile adiorn these womanish tears, and with these hands
(unaccustomed to such deeds) claw out his treacherous eyes: but (alas) to wish
vengeance is nothing less then to be revenged, for had I the hap to possess
my wish, I have the heart should perform my will, or might my curse procure him
hell, my bless should never prefer him to heaven: well leaving the Reprobate
to a Million of mishaps, which (I doubt not) will insi^ently ensue his
misdeedes, may I, good Sir, request your name, and withal the present estate
of our beseiged City?

Deipyrus with no small remorse, noting the pitious distress of the unknown
Queen my molher, and hearing him self to himself, so evil spoken of and
banned wist not what to say, as one but even then overtaken with the
guiltiness of his own Conscience, which is evermore a severe Accuser, and to
the impenitent person a most terrible Judge: but in the end after some
astonishment, he made her this answer.

Lady quoth. he (as perceiving in her many arguments of Gentry) by good reason
suffer we losers to chafe, neither is it a new thing, that a wronged woman in
like bitter terms does utter her passionate stomache: Deipyrus (I must
confess) being the common enemy to his Country, has incurred a common curse
of the Lydians, whose chastment being generally desired of all, shall privately
be revealed only to you. The same man, Lady, whose infamous Attempts, has
returned the Attemptor a just guerdon of his deserts, and he whose punishment
would be unto you such pleasure, presents himself before your eyes, as
hardlye distressed as your self have desired: and whosoever you are, that
Deipyrus has so much offended, the same as humbly prays you of pardon:
offering also into your hands mine own weapon, upon mine own head to wreake
your vengeance, if it shall so please you by death to shorten my penance: or
else as your Bondslaue in your business to employ my whole endeavor, if by life
you think good to lenghten my punishment: for as I would not die a desperate
Murderer, Tormentor, and Traitor to mine own person, so wish I not to live a
despised Runnagate, Reprobate, and Recreant to mine own Country: wherefore you
being the Judge, the grievous spectacle of these your pyning Infantes mine
Accusors, and my self (which of it self is sufficient) pleading to the
accusation guilty, if you pronounce sentence of death, you do but Justice
without partiality, the executing of which sentence, shall be the accomplishment
of you desire, and the reward of my deserts.

Cap. 31.
WHen Deipyrus had after this sort finished such his speeches, recounted to
her after what manner the siege was raised by the king of Cilicia, delivered
into her hands his naked sword, and solemnly vowed not to resist her dome: as
touching his life, or death, mine enraged Queene-mother grasping the yielded
weapon in her hand, was fully resolved to have sheathed the same in the bowels
of Deipyrus: when by and by altering her purpose, by reason of his strange
submission, and waying his luck with her own loss, she thinks him already
over severely punished, and her wrongs sufficiently revenged: yet anon casting
her pitiful eyes upon her pyning Babes, rufully hanging about her their
helpelesse Mother for food, not there to be had, her myldenesse was now
converted to madness, and as one utterly resolute on his death, in conceit
she imagined him already dead, so fully was she bente to bereave him of life:
but even at the very pushe, from out her vnhardie hand she letts fall the
harmless weapon, and accuses her self of ingratitude, shall I (thinks
she) return so graceless a recompense, in lieu of his late so gracious an
enterprise? is it not much more gain to me, that I am delivered of Rauishmente
which had been incurable, then lo^^e in that I am disgarnished of Riches which
are recuperable? yes, yes, the virtue of the first, is more then the error of
the latter, why then should I not admit the one, and remitte the other.

Thus reasoning with her self, as one offended with his passed Conspiracies,
pacified by his present Contrition, and grateful for his late profitable
Combat, she dissembleth the first, accepts of the second, and thanketh him
for the third: only desiring his assistance to puruaie for their succor,
until hearing of more quietness abroad, they might with less danger leave the
comforles Forest.

Whereunto he redily co^discented, building the^ bowres, killing the^ victuals,
and in what he possibly might in their relief imploing his whole industry,
not knowing of all this while who they wear, unto whom he became so careful
an Attendant: albeit by circumstances, he might have been induced to the
knowledge of his charge, for my Mother somewhat to be disburdened of the
burning sorrows, of her bursting heart (for working vessels and woeful
hearts, the one by vent the other by words, are delivered from breaking)
taking occasion, in the hearing of Deipyrus to speak of the king my Father,
would sometimes use these and such like speeches.

I would Deipyrus, you could give as good warrantie of the King his welfare,
as I a promise, with a performance betwixt him and you of an Atonement: but
(alas) notwithstanding your discomfiture, I am not so comforted that I rest
feareles of Cilician practices, well might the good King speed, what evil
so-euer I suffer, who not prospering, I, mine, and many perish, and therefore
dare I say, that with greater disease for his woe, or gladder desire of his
wealth, his Queen, and wife cannot labor than presently do I, that neither
in the one nor the other do give place to his best wel-willer.

Thus did she often make her moan a far off, not daring in plain terms to
disclose her self, remembering how dangerous it is to repose confidence in a
reconciled enemy, and in that point showing her self better advised then was
my Father: who giving credit to the feigned shows of a friendly foe, did
learn by the prise of a dear sallarie, the proof of a dry desembler, and
how to clime up by the Breare, is to be clawed with the Bramble: for my Father,
making account to be re-established in his kingdom, received from ye Cilician
king this cross answer.

Sir quoth he, your plentiful thanks are superfluous, and your proffered
liberality needelesse, for that you perhaps, will think me unworthy so much,
whilst I think my self worthy of more, and therefore may you proportion your
thanks as it likes you, seeing my portion shall be as it lists me.

Is it an easy matter (think you) to transport an Army out of Cilicia, to
hazard our lives in Lydia, and having incountred and conquered the enemy, to
convert the glory of the battle, and gain of the booty to the profit of
others? no, no, I may profit you but not prejudice my self: Let it suffice
that I have corrected your Fooes, and that your self escape unrevenged of our
ancient emnitie: over and besides which undeserved friendship, I give you a
Ship in all things well furnished, with sufficient treasure to supply your
expenses: and thus knowing my mind, the sooner you be packing, the safer may
it be for your person: as for Cilci^a I have Xenarchus my son there to
govern, and here in Lidia want not soldiers to engarison.

Unto whom in few words my Father thus replied, that justly condemning his
pretense, and despysing his proffers, it lastly rested that Fortune his foe,
might one day cry quittance with falshoode his friend: and so only
accompanied of three or four o^ his faithful servants, (as doubting the
worst) fled secretly into the before mentioned Forest, not knowing the same to
be the Receptacle of Deipyrus, much less of his missed wife and children, but
least of all, that the same his traitorous Nephewe did in such sort minister to
their necessities.

Cap. 32.
WIthin this Forest, in a pleasant Glade, the sheepeherdes to take Wolves and
other ravening beasts, haunting their Flocks had dug a very deep and
dangerous Pit, laying boughs slightly ouer-twhartes, and artificially
covering the same over with green Tur^es, so that the subtilitie thereof might
hardly be espied: into which Pit Deipyrus ranging abroad, to seek after
sustenance for him self and his charge at unawares slipped: and seeing no
possibility of deliverance from thence complains after this manner.

Sower is that sweet which decaieth in the blossom, but sweet is that sower
that dies in the budde: ah happy man Deipyrus, that being forworne with
Correction, have at the length weryed Fortune with correcting, and shall anon
present death with the glad delivery of thy ioylesse life: and that not
suddenly amongst the impenitent Pikes, but slowlier then thou would
amiddest this Pit, wherein appears the great mercy of the good gods, in
respect of the small merits of sinful men.

O that the secret bowels of the earth that denies not to bury me, as no
doubt the upper face thereof disdayneth to bear me, could as well conceal my
vile faults, as it does cover my vicious flesh: then should my Treasons which
now seem odious to the heavens, infamous to the world, hurtefull to many,
dangerous to the most, detestable to all, and burdinous to mine own
conscience, then (I say) might such mine offenses su^cease to survive deceased
Deipyrus, which (alas) will then be hardly ripe, when I shall be happily rotten.

Nevertheless, I am not now to dread the worst of mercylesse men that slowly
forget, but to hope the best of the merciful gods that swiftly forgive: now
am I to sit upon my self as Judge, and against my self to pronounce
judgment, that the Gods seeing me impartial in mine own case, may (as no
doubt they will) spare me for the same cause: for it more stands us upon to
confess, then to defend our follies. It is, alas, a common imperfection to
offend, but an unwonted perfection to repent, and why? the first springs
from Nature, but the other from virtue: yea Nature (whereunto we easily
incline) is in effect Security to Sin, and fear of worldly shame bids us
justify our selves: when (in deed) to live in Security is not to die in
safety: for meet it is that ye honny which seemed pleasant in the mouth, be
converted to bitter wormwood in the stomach, and utterly abhorred of the
soul.

Does not the pleasantness of the fruit, make amends for the bitterness of
the root? the hoped for joy in the harbor, moderate the suffered perils on
the Seas? and the will to be released of the malady, assuage the sharpness of
the medicine? and shall not I that groan with Repentance in mine heart, hope
thereby to gain refreshment to my soul? yes verily yes, so to hope wins an
effectual hire: that we be Contrite it is necessary, that our Contrition be
equiparent to our Transgressio^s more necessary, but if the quality of our
Repentance exceeds the quantity of our offenses then is the same most
acceptable.

But (wretches that we are) flesh and blood persuade the contrary, saying we
scarce trip, when (in deed) we stumble down right, that the crime is very
light when the same is most weighty, that we shall live long, and may at
leisure repent, when in a moment we are taken away or ever we think to amend,
and so in the end perrish desperately that persist diuelishly: for as therefore
the gods are greatly delighted with Repentance, so are they grievously
displeased with Procrastination.

It only remains then, that I embrace thee (O sweet Repentance) a burden so
much the less ponderous, by how much thou increasest in greatness: to the
pricked conscience thou art the perfect consolation, and the only counterchaunge
to deserved confusion: with thy feet only we run to mercy, and without thy
wings fly we not from vengeance: thou (I say) do reprehend mine errors,
and therefore will I apprehende thy virtues, never giving thee over, until (by
death at least) I comprehend thy sweetness.

Whilst Deipyrus most desirous to have died, spoke yet more in the dark pit,
one while remembering the distress of his guidelesse Charge, left at randon in
the dangerous Forest, and often naming (whom he made account never more to
see) his dear Eurimone the king of Licia his daughter, whose love was the
greatest part of his interprised lewdness, but never forgetting with a
penitent heart, and bitter tears to send forth his humble prayers, as his
souls Harbengers.

It chanced my Father and his Company to wander along the same Glaede, and
(not doubting at all the subtilitie of the place) one of them fell hedlong into
the same covered Pit, lighting so boisterously upon Deipyrus, that he bore him
down to the earth in a sown: the other only astonished with the fall, and not
receiving farther harm: after a while feeling, but not seeing the panting body
of a man lying prostrate, wrought such means that he recovered Deipyrus out of
his trance.

By which time my Father and the others above had letten down wythes, and
other devises which they had framed for the purpose, so drawing up the man that
was newly fallen into the pit: who (not a little joyful of so speedy
delivery) advertised them, how there was yet remaining behind an other person,
to him unknown.

Whereupon letting down the second time, they drew Deipyrus up into the open
air, that wel-nere of a day and night before, had scarcely discerned any light
of the sun or stars.

Cap. 33.
BUt when the king my father beheld the plight of Deipyrus, and the same
perceived the presence of my Father, it was a world to note the alteration of
either their Countinances.

Espetially Deipyrus consumed with the pensiveness of his heart, infeebled
through weakness of body, and confounded in the guiltiness of his own
Conscience had better cause often to change his color, then (as it happened) to
dread my fathers cholor: Wherefore only accusing Fortune for such
extraordinary malice, and exclaiming of Death for that peramptorie delay, he
fell flat to the earth as one utterly berefte of sense: the Tender of whose
dolorous passions, might have been pleaded in full Acquittance of all passed
Trespasses, had Envy it self followed the Action, and Rigor occupied the
place of Judgment.

My father (contrary to all expectation) ouercomming Ire, and being himself
overcome by pity, not without watrie eyes, lifting up Deipyrus that shamed to
look him in the face, said.

If (Deipyrus) thou werte vnsuspitious of my nature, mindful what I once was,
and not ignorant what I now am, thou would not suppose the Accident of the
last, to cause an Alteration in the first, that is, not think me a merciless
Beggar, whom thou did know to be a pitiful King, neither would thou
doubt the authority of the second, seeing I that late might have commanded thee
to Judgment, do not now dare in any place to demand Justice, and without Law
to determine a wrong, is in Law to decline from right: nevertheless, but even
now, did I think it a very hard thing to hold my tongue in anguish, harder to
hold my hands in Anger, but hardest of al to forgive mine Enemy: but
Sufferance the hearts Physician, (I wot not how prevailing) tells me now,
that Anger should be as short, as the same is sudden: that hasty Wroth is an
harmefull Councellor, betwixt too much and too little not observing a mean:
that the end of Wrath is Shame or Repentance, or both: and that the same
evil may easily be avoided, if but a small time it be deferred: for time, I
perceive, does moderate Ire, and better man is he that wisely subdueth his
Fury, than he that with armor sacketh a City: neither is any Revenge more
valiant, than to pardon a foe that is vanquished.

It is I say, Deipyrus, but even now, that no such Argument could have
persuaded what moderation my self do now prosecute: and no marvel if my
patience was then moved, when thine Ingratitude was so manifested: for
easilier do we suffer a wound fastened by a Foe, than sustain a wrong
offered by a Friend, as esteeming the first, trespass, but the latter, Treason.

With more grief than gain I see, by thine example (unadvised Nephew) I see
it, that Envy drinks up the greatest part of her own poison, and that whilst
the mind flies higher than it should, in time the man falls lower than he
would: neither do the same Effects, ever follow the same affections, for brave
Intentes have often times base Events.

Well (Deipyrus) seeing by thy death I may not recover my loss, it shall
suffis^ if by sparing thy life I may so reobtaine thy love, for be assured, my
kindness is yet as much as our kindred: and to thee I gladlye participate this
comfort whereof my self am not yet destitute, that is, No degree of misery
may exceed a Superlatiue, and when Mischiefs are at the highest pitche, then
either succeeds an Amendment, or of necessity an End: for at the worst, ye
hardest Winter of joy has death a Bound.

But not to hope beyond hope, say I (Deipyrus) is contrary to courage: Fortune
is said thus to have spoken of her self: Dicit Fortuna, si starem rota sub vna,
Et non mutarer, non tunc Fortuna vocarer.
And why then should I think it impossible, that did sometimes on the very
top of the Wheel vaunt Glorior elatus, though anon Decendo mortificatus, and
now Jnfimus axe teror, in time to add Rursus ad astera feror?

Cap. 34.
NOw after diverse loving imbracinges, and that many kind tears had caused a
long silence, my Father advertised Deipyrus and the rest, that first his
intent was to seek out his Queen and two children, affirming their miss to
touch nearer than any other his misfortunes, and then to enterprise somewhat in
recovery of his detayned kingdom.

Whereupon Deipyrus did tell my father of the Lady, and her two Infants, over
whom (as before) he had taken charge in that Forest, and was very desirous
before their departure from thence, to have succored the distress of those
three.

But hereunto my Fathers answer was, that in their own case delay might be
dangerous, Lydia (says he) at this day affords more than enough such
distressed wanderers, whom not to be able to help it greeueth, and for whom
to hurt our selves were not requisite: he that once flies may again fight:
whilst the Prince lives to hope, the peoples case is not desperate: Jupiter
would not then rescue Danaes, when he was to resist Saturn, neither let us so
admit pity, that we omit matters of greater importance.

Deipyrus who seemed thus answered, but in his pitiful mind not satisfied,
undertaking (as he that made himself best acquainted with that forest) to
conduct his company the nearest way to the Sea, did of purpose lead them
directlye to that place, where he had before left his helpelesse Charge, and
there he found them all three pitifully weeping, and utterly destitute of
comfort.

No sooner did my father behold this sight, but (as it were at once, overtaken
with extreme joy, and extreme grief) he forthwith sowneth: my mother also
(for by this time she knew him) endeavoring to give him succor falls also
into the like trance: but either of them being anon recovered, and nothing
omitted in passion, word, or action insident to so unlooked for, loving, and
lamentable a meeting they consult of their safety, and how to proceed in their
Enterprises.

In the end, induced by such profitable and discrete reasons as Deipyrus then
aleaged, they all bend their journey toward Licia: where they were no sooner
arrived, but they heard report of the Lician king his death, and perceived great
provision to enthronize in the Soueraintie Eurymone, Deipyrus his Lady and
lover.

Deipyrus not a little joyful of these tidings, and affying in his Lady her
Constancy, with the rest of his company (unknown to all that met them)
repaired to the Court: and when he had disclosed himself, and his distressed
friends to Eurymone, she comforted them with such honorable and hearty
entertainment, as did both give a perfection to their hope, and a defection
from all heaviness: taking (according to their former covenant of love)
Deipyrus to husband, who ioyn^ly at this day, rule king and Queen in Licia.

And there have my deprived parents euersince lived in such prosperity, that
their exile might be said an Adua^cement: in whose quarrel also Deipyrus for
the recovery of Lydia, has long time maintained open and sharp wars
against the king of Cilicia: toward whom to entreat of diverse weighty
affairs given me in charge, I am now sailing.

Cap. 35.
BEfore the courteous knight Tymetes had fynished this his speech, Atys and
Abynados had espied in the Lycian Ship a very fair Target, whereupon was
curiously engraven, and in lively colors purtrayed the terrible Image of
enraged Semiramis, in such manner as she behaved her self, when being informed
of the beseeging of Babylon she rushed from out her tiring Chamber, her eyes
seeming to sparckle fire, in her hand brandishing her weapon, and her flasking
hair losely wauing upon her bare shoulders, as having vowed not to bind up
the same her disordred Tresses, until she had utterly expelled the Besiegers:
the which (notwithstanding the great strength and number of her enemies) with
fortunate expedition, she performed as valiantly in deed, as she had vowed
the same courageously in word. The two brethren (as I said) earnestly viewing
this Targat, could not persuade themselves, but that the same once appertained
to Sorares their Father, in whose hand when he disankered from Niniuie they had
seen it: and therefore after they had opened their thoughts, and moved some
questions concerning the same, such was Tymaetes his answer.

In Sarmatia (quoth. he) a warlike nation in Scithia, from whence I now come, and
whether I am shortly to return rules an uncle of mine, of whose gift I
received this Targat: the which together with an infinite mass of Treasure,
Apparel, Armor, and other Ornaments after the Assirian fashion came to his
possession, through the ariuall of a distressed Ship being driven into his
Country, wherein remained only two Meades, and the same very aged and impotent
persons: of whose adventures I am not able to make any further Report, saving
that they seemed to take great unkindness, of the avarice, and cruelty of
certain Assirians, whom they had left shiplesse in a barren Island: but being
nevertheless most desirous of their delivery, mine Uncle has promised to
satisfy them therein, as soon as the season of the year serves, to cross
those blustering and dangerous Seas: and trust me, Gentlemen, it is not
unlikely (whereof I thought not before) but that these Assirians may be your
parents, and friends after whom you make this inquiry: if therefore (for I
imagine it shall be worth your labor) it may please you first to sail with me
into Lydia, and after to resaile into Sarmatia, I promise you my company
thither for your conduction, and my credit there for your countinaunce.

The Assirians gathering much hope of such Tymaetes his comfortable tydinges,
and thankefully accepting what he courteously offered, disanker with him and
sail into Lydia: neither could they sail much awrie, that to find out
Sorares they knew not when, were to seek they wist not where.

To shorten therefore their sailing, in Lydia I now land them: where to leave
them (sielie souls) in the deck, were for me, of rarer matters than yet
mentioned to live in your debt: of which the Tragedy now ensuing shall partly
discharge me.

Aphrodite. Calamus sextus.
Cap. 36.
NOt long after they had taken land, Xenarchus a most dear friend and second
himself to Timaetes, and Timaetes such and the same to Xenarchus, betwixt whom
(notwithstanding the deadly enmetie, and impacable discord so long time
continued, and daily increasing betwi^te the two kings their fathers (for
Xenarchus, as is before-sayde, was Son to the King of Cilicia) Nature in
respect of the Symphatie of their minds, in two bodies seemed to have planted
but one and the same heart, immediately I say, as Tymaetes had set foot on
Shore, he met Xenarchus ready to have taken Ship: who after many friendly
greetinges, said.

It fares with me (friend Tymaetes) as with one that having delightfully
dreamed, is therefore displeased with such delight because the same was but a
dream: I that scarsely have time to put forth my hand for a wel-come, must
find leisure to pour forth my tears for a fare-wel, otherwise in showing my
self a dutiful friend* I should be thought a disobedient Son, and to us
either twain the damage might (...) all one. I have (T^maetes) more news then
time to t^ll it* only think it stands us upon to be circumspect, of our
tri-partite familiarity begone with Mazeres, least thereby out by-parted
friendship be called into question by my Father: for I perceive, the Hawke now
begins to check, that er-while came so freely to fist: thou may try
him, but do not trust him, so farfoorth esteeming Mazeres thy Friend as thou
still make accounte Mazeres may be thy Foe, for the Countinance may double
with the Conscience: and therefore do Flatterers praise us because they would
prize us: by this much thou may anotomize a meaning. I hope to find thee
here, at my return from Cilicia, mean while let friendship, and often
recourse of Letters make us present in minds, that are absent in persons: and
thus sorrowfully taking their leaves, they departed either of the^ his several
way.

When Tymaetes, Atys, Abynados, and their company had bestowed them selves in
Sardis, in which City the Court then lay, and after Tymaetes had conferred
with the King, and whilst he attended his deferred answer, they with the
less tediousness to pass forth the time of their aboade in Lidia, one while
frequente the delectable Springes, sweet Groves, and brave prospectiue Hills,
dedicated to the Meonian Muses, and another while do as much wonder at the
glittering Rivers Pactolus, and Hermus casting on shore their goulden Sands,
as delight in the musical Quier of Swannes that sweetly sing on the banks of
Enister.

But never could they glut their hungry eyes, in beholding the Ridlike fair
Troops of Lidian Lasses, amongst whom in generally, nature might rather seem
for her own learning to have borrowed beautiful Presidentes, then able upon
them to have bestowed brauer Perfections: in furtherance whereof the gentle
Planettes, temperate Climates, wholesome Situation, fertile Soil, and what not?
were in all things occurrant: so that not without good reason, were the
Nymphs of Meonia called terreue goddesses, as well in respect of themselves as
their allotted Paradise: and not only to the ^oconde Venerian, but even to the
melancholic Saturnest it might have moved delectatio^, to have viewed these
lovely Wenches, with their yealow Tresses dependant shadowing their iuorie
Shoulders: and how their short Frockes of silk girte to their small Middles,
being sometimes, amiddest their wanton daunces, whisked up by the wind
discovered their demie buskins, smothly planted with backels of goolde to their
dainty Ancles, and eftsoons bared their white knees.

Atys (as it seemed) delighted with these day Stars and nightshades, the
chief Principles (no doubt) of his Astrology, remembering the Scythian Lord
his late unanswered inuectiue against this sweet sex, and now (though out of
season) feeling himself thus amorously animated to speak somewhat in their
defense, said to Abynados, in the hearing of diverse Ladies, and gentlemen as
follows.

Cap. 37.
LIke as (says he) the dead Sea Asphaltus in Syria is indifferently commended,
in respect that no living Creature may therein miscarrie, as condemned in that
no mouable Substance therein does engender, even so our Scythian host (in mine
opinion) showed himself no more courteous by his bounteous intertaining of
wanderers, then currish by his biting inuaying against Women: not unlike as if
a Moile being tickled with a Hornet in the tail should lash out at random with
the heels, or as if Hellen beguiling, Lucrecia should be banned: when (in
deed) we are not to esteem worser of women, then do hunters of Unicornes,
who though they goore with the horns, yet are they got for their horns: Bees
with honnie have stinges, and we all have our faults, admit the goodwife play
soul, should therefore the goodman play the fool? I say no, because he
beginning the quarrel at home, to civil unquietness may so add impudent
perseverance, and then household iarres shall bid his good-dayes goodnight:
but in any case if Venus be found in Conjunction with Mars, let Vulcan show
his cunning only in concealing, and rather sleep to Beagles, then awake
Bandogges: otherwise for Iusticers he shall but find gibers, and those that will
rather be alike detected, then alike suspected: for when things are published
for common, they are then practiced for current, and then what with first
Playfeares, and last Smel-feastes in vain shall Iunos heardsman watch Jupiters
Hecfare.

The Fox most of all mistrusteth the Fox, neither is the deceiuer fearelesse
of deceit, and were it not (think women) that jealous men did them selves
falsely enter, they would not suspect women to bear men to many: wherefore
(silly souls) play they, fair or play they foul seeing themselves alike
suspected, they hold it but good reason to requite such open sorrow, by the
aduau^tange of some privy sollace, and will venture if but for a Revenge.

Thus see we that jealous men, do the rather help forwards the secret escapes
of women: besides which may be added, that with importunate suits, charming
words, intising gifts, opportunity of time, and place, and by a thousand other
devises of sufficiency to move mountains, their good, but not deified
natures, the which to cercu^uent me^ never cease to fish for oportunities, be
labored.

It rests then, seeing the Eye, the Ear, and the Conceit are the only
surfets of such sickness, that I see, and I see not is a sovereign emplaister
to one so wounded, not to see, nor to desire to see an especial preservative
against such maladies, but he that will neither see it, hear it, nor believe
it, shall have more then can physic warrant, never to die with swallowinge of
Fly-bloes, and except his stomach be more then squeimish, the fish overflowed
of the Bird Aspra, not at all feel the same contagious. Let it suffize, that
women as they be subtle in counsel, so are they secret in conuaiance, for he
that first blows to vncupple, shall be the last that comes into the fall:
but to him that curiously searceth a knife, wherewithal to cut his own
throat, I say Argus his head to be well worthy Mercury his handling: well
thus have I briefly, not as I could, alleged the best, for those against whom
might be objected the worst.

Cap. 38.
BUt what shall I say to those stoicall Prescisians, or rather supernatural
Hoddipeakes, that bark out their raylinges against the excellency of all
Women in general? shall I term them fleshly lompes without Life, Fires
without Heat, Ghostes without Substance, or Shadows without Sense? not so,
but as the beast Chimer has a Lions face, but a Dragons tail, so those
beasts have continent words, but unchaste works, and seem devout, when (in
deed) their devotion is nothing less then their seeming: for they fare with
Women as do Riders with their Horses, who spur them not to run from them, but
to run with them, or as Lapidaries with their precious stones, that hew them
not for anger, but for advantage.

Some of which sort, live not single as pretending to live chaste, but deny
marriage as preventing a charge, or (like the Fox that will eat no grapes)
have not Wives because they hate them, but hate Women because they cannot have
them: and some other whose affections no doubt could afforde them to love, did
not their infirmities enforce them to leave, play therefore the envious Dog
in the Manger: but much more safer were it, say I, for such Hypocrites to be
justly reproved for incontinent sinner, then falsely reputed for chaste livers,
for then the disclosing of the one might procure them humble Spirits, whereas
the dissembling of the other puffs up their hawtie Stomachs: whom if we
should admit to be such as they seem, yet far more commendable is poor
Matrimony, then proud Chastity.

It is, trust me, ridiculous to hear, how these Monsters would monsterfie the
Manners, and Ornaments of Women, which they receive naturally, or apply to
beautefie: as if (forsooth) like Sheep, seeing water they must needs thirst,
or green Meadows fall to grasing, when in troth, not the Wardrop, nor the
Woman, but their own wanton inclinations, sets Flax easily on burning.

And yet (Ladies) these are they who give forth, that your natural beauties
are no other then artificial shadows, if you keep in, then say they you are
serving your Customers, if you walk out, there seeking for Clyantes, if bravely
appareled then Players, if meanly attyred then Paltockes, if you be merry
then immodest, if modest then sullen, if you keep not company then proud, if
you keep company then light, if easily caught then over kind hearted, and as
ready to check, if wisely deferring your choice then ouercruelly minded, and
too tedious the suit, if you will not be courted at all then disdainefull, if
any be admitted to conference then suspected, if you be rich they woo your
dowries, if poor they way not your virtues, if beautiful they covet the
fleece, if not they cast off the Croone, if soft sprighted they doubt new
Competitors, if sharp witted they dread old Copesmates, if you tell them of
profit they term you Pratlers, but should you be silent when they are
careless, then will not they be to^gue-tied to call you bad Huswifes: in a word
(I wot not with what fury moved) in all things they oppose them selves to
your virtues.

But I may say, and say truly, that next to the gods we are most beholding to
women: for if to be borne into the world be a benefit, even from their strained
wombes we are proceeded: if to be fostered up, and that with their blood be
kindness, even from their stretched pappes was it sucked: if charie attendance
(being of our selves noisome, and helpelesse) be charity, even with their
often filed hands were we cherished: what shall I say? more works in us to
our behoofes, the nature of our mothers, then the influence of the Planets: for
admit we the operation of Luna in our feeble Infancy, of Mercury in our
unstable Childhood, of Venus in our effeminate Adolescencie, of Sol in our
flourishing Youth, of Mars in our stayed Manhood, of Jupiter in our temporate
Seniorie, and of Saturn in our decripite old age, or the dominion, or
constellation of the twelve Signs, or any the Stars at al times, yet who
knows not, that every of these successiuly continue but their seasons?
neither is there any inevitable necessity, others then our own sensitive
appetites, that does violently draw us to the several dispositions of the
Planets, for the Wise man ^s said to govern the Stars.

But the inseperable operation, and natural inclination of the Mother toward
her Son, is a disposition unremovable, and without end: for can she forget
a part of her own flesh? no, but even from the Spring of our Infancy, to the
Summer of our youth, the Harvest of our Manhood, the Winter of our Old Age, yea
after our funerals, and in our Children, her tender care of us does rather
increase, then in any part deminish: so that (if we remember our selves)
vnrequitable are the duties, where in we are most deeply indebted to our
mothers: and yet many times, such is our unthankfulness, that what they
prodigally delivered without mean, we nigardly repaie with scanted measure,
and such is often the corrupt nature of man, that where he owes most, there he
loves least: besides which of their co^mendatio^ remains as follows.

Cap. 39.
IT is moreover to be noted, that Nature whom we must grant to be perfect in
all her Actions, foreseeing that without the help of women, the depopulatio^
of the world would follow, to the intent therefore that men should be the more
capable of their Imbracementes, has infused throughout the whole linaments of
their delicate bodies, and sweet faces such abundance of beauty, that we
seeing the excellency of the same, to shine in our eyes like precious
Carbuncles, hoisting up the sails of our hope, and drawing near unto them in
the Ships of our hearts, become after many pleasant perils, first Marchantes,
and then Masters of such inualuable Jewels: though not at all times, with such
speed as we would, yet with a more profitable suit then we wish: without
crossing is no cowning, by the labor some acquiring of women, we are, say I,
not a little profited in valor, and wisdom: for when they have thus set our
teeth amorously on edge, it stands us upon artificially to whet our wits:
that our tongues hunt for eloquence in presence to delight, and our heads for
inventions, in absence to deserve: in our dealings we then must be circumspect,
in diet temperate, and in apparel desent, with all which love does furnishe
us, and by all which love is furthered. Add also hereunto, that their love
teaches us to be valiant in Chivalry, and venterous in Arms, to think fear
a fault, and nothing impossible, to exercise all things, to enterprise most
things, and in somewhat to be exquisite.

Nay be it so (which may be denied) that by wooing we are losers, yet does it
follow (which all must confess) that by wining we are gainers: who attaining
at ye length to be possessours of our couited prises, command in triu^phwise
our subdued Troubles, to follow like* chained Captives our victorious Chariots,
yea and by how much grievous we accounted the foughten Conflict, by so much the
more glorious we esteem the fulfilled Conquest

But now if I, that am in deed a fresh-man, and bad Sophister, should in
hearing of those who have proceeded Masters in that Art, reason of the Briding,
the Bedding, and many other Meriments insident to Marriage, I should prove my
self a Dotrell, in comparison of a Doctor: for Practitioners not Puples must
occupy Pulpits, and to frame a Commentary, that cannot make a Construction,
were to propound a Problem, and to expound the same with an Oracle: wherefore
omitting to Paraphrase upon such mysteries, I will (Ladies) after an Epitome of
the great blessings of wedlock, make a sparing Conclusion of your unspeakable
Commendacions.

That the gods them selves, were the first Institutors of Marriage it is
probable, that thereby our fleshly Appetits be not only qualified with a more
civil Coiture, the^ might seem brutish and offensive to nature, but also the
world multyplied with a legitimate, no bastardly Propagation must be granted:
but (which is more) marriage, no doubt, being a thing miraculously confirmed,
through a mutual partisipation of whatsoever they possess, and free
Community of their own persons, being as I may term it, by Transplantation
two in one flesh, works one and the same will, wish, love, liking, or
disliking, affection, defection, and affliction betwixt the man, and woman
coupled in Matrimony* especially the wife, by a more inscrutable, pliant,
zealous and profound forwardness in Consent is at all assaies, and in all
things flexable to the nature, conditions, dispositions, will and estate of her
huband: in prosperity a partner of his wealth, in adversity a partaker of his
woe, and in both a comfortable companion: in health she fills him with
delightful sollace, in sickness she follows him with duetifull succor,
and in all things is a constant cou^cellor, and concealor of his purposes: be
he poor or be he rich with her virtue, dowry, or diligence she increases
and maintains his substance: to the noble, and innoble she bears heirs to
inherit their discending possessions, Sons to eternise their deceased
Progenitors, and Children to comfort their distressed Parents. In a word, it
is commonly seen that being unmarried, we are inconstant in thoughts, and
incontinent in works, or if neither of both, yet suspected in either of both,
but being married, of contented minds and convenient manners, or if not such as
we should, yet unsuspected for such as we are: because marriage not only is
pleasant, and affable to the good, but also does credit and countinaunce even
the bad.

Ah sweet Ladies, no longer would I live than I honor you, but sooner would I
die than I shall hate you: otherwise old age, should draw my head to join with
my feet, and a loathed life make me glad with my nails to scrape mine own
grave, and nevertheless still to live in sorrow, rather than to die a Recreant
in your service: and that I speak this for fashion, or flattery, or that I
ground mine opinion upon an imperfect foundation let not any imagine: for
Nature it self by an vnrepelable law, does inioine us to your love, and
amongst men by a lawdable custom, your honoring, hallowing, reuerensing, and
protecting is especially provided for.

To conclude therefore, such as are priers after the small, or natural faults,
escapes, and infirmities of women, I wish never to be partakers of the profit,
pleasure, and bounty of women: and no doubt, I have already my wish, for
not to excuse the first, is not to use the latter.

Cap. 40.
BRother (quoth. Abynados) I commend your skill, in that you have chosen the
better side, framing your answer in a place dangerlesse of a Reply: and the
rather for that by long continuing your matter, you have I conjecture,
discontinued our memories: as for your Method it is sufficient, because your
meaning may be supposed: neither do I think you flatter women in jest,
because I know you favor them in earnest.

Indeed (quoth. Atys) in that we be brethren, by your own shrifte you may the
easilier search me: but had I couited praise, as the same is contrary to my
pretense, yet brotherhood is a bad color to Bracerie, for had I solicited any
to support my sayings, of all others I would not have suborned your soothings:
not only because of our nere aliance, but (which your self have confessed)
because of your non^san memory: for how should a blind man judge of colors,
or any think you to deliver a good sentence, having so gross a censure: yet
well did you in not arrogating to your own shittle wit, had you not derogated
from the sensible capacity of others.

Amongst brethren, Friends, Advocates, and Orators (quoth. Tymaetes) it is common
to have like brawling, without bu^^iting, and bickering without blows: and in
such quiet quarrels bread through emulation, and not begone upon envy, the
ears perhaps may itche, and the tongue scratche, but with the sound ended all
stomach: for mine own part Atys howsoever Abynados like, or mislike of the
matter, what I cannot amend by words, I admit by signs, and therefore
without more, in token that I gladlye gratify your Commendation as concerning
women, I pass my full Consent therein, under this Seal of Confirmation: and
therewithal he fastened a sweet kiss upon Aphrodite her soft cherie lips.

This same Lady was daughter to the king of Cilicia, now usurper of Lydia:
whose fortune, had it been proportionable to her feature, should have left her
lagge to none in bliss, as she out-went all others in beauty: her love
toward Tymaetes, though it appeared later then her brother Xenarchus his
friendship* yet had not that ran the faster, this might have given the turn:
but for that her love might not out^strip his friendship, I leave the Corse
indifferent, and Timaetes thus far an happy man in friend, and lover.

Then Aphrodite with blushing cheeks, and softelye voice said to Tymaetes,
Sir would I cauell I might say your Confirmation to be voidable, no print
appearing of the impression: and for you to allege the seal over soft, or
the ware too hard will not be pleadable: neither to have sealed before witnesses
shall, I fear me, fall out for Atys his security, or your and my safety: for
though my self am not squaimish of your orderly kisses, yet it may be, there
is one gone out that will be quarilous for such open kindness. You are not (I
trow) to learn, that love and Principality brook no Copartners, and therefore
Mazeres as touching me, no Compettitour, howbeit in your love no Cor^^all: but
to win Atlas his Apples behooves charms for Dragons, to woo Ladies in Mollosse
sops for Cerberus, and to convey Aphrodite into Lycia wariness in Lydia.

So turning to Atys, with a more audible voice she says, I have heard, that
whilst the vainglorious Crow opened her beak to sing, ye flattering Fox
obtained a booty by slight, but if you (Atys) have let slip for the like
suppose, you must leap short of the like success: in every clownish Auditorie
our praise, or dispraise is made so common a Text, that if Venus be at the
toungs end, Cupid is at the tails end: yea sometimes from her bosom they
leap so deep into his belly, that their hasty ingresse has hardly a
regresse: thus I say Atys, the plenty of your Retorick has bred a scarcity
of Regarders. What man, we can digest Porke, yet may you clay us with Pewits:
say might you without shame, and swear may I without sin, that women are
not so precisely good, as you pretend to make them, neither so perfitly badde,
as I intend you mean them. I will ask you a Ques*

But here alas, or ever she might add, tion, the surplusage of the word
Question, she was (good Lady) enforced to conclude a Periodus, not being come
to the Comma: for (invited to this bitter banquet by Mazeres, whose madding
jealousy had hamered this mischief, as not disgesting such familianitie, which
contrary to his liking, had even now passed betwixt Tymaetes and Aphrodite) the
cruel king her father, and a many his Servant with unsheathed swords, and
threatening looks suddenlye rushe into the place, where this guiltless Company
were thus securely chatting: who after many opprobrious speeches, hailing
Tymaetes, Atys, and Abynados from thence, cast them all three into a most vile
dungion: where had not Aphrodite by stealth, with extraordinary meat amended
their ordinary meals, they might have abated their fatness with fasting, not
fennel.

Cap. 41.
News of Tymaetes his immartial imprisonment, was anon conuaied into Licia,
whereupon the deprived King his father, accompanied also with his nephew, king
Deipyrus, suddenly landed an huge Army of Lician soldiers in Lydia, girting
Sardis with a strong siege: howbeit the impregnable situation of the strong
walled City without, and the abundance of men, victuals, and Artilarie within,
might have discouraged the Besiegers to Assail, as the same encouraged the
Besieged to resist.

And therefore after two months, the barbarous usurping king, as it were in
despightfull ostentation to show how little he forced or feared his enemies,
causing Tymaetes laden with yrons to appear on the walls, and wauing to the
Licians as though he purposed a parlie, when the father of Tymaetes was come
within his hearing, he said.

Because Tymaetes is the man (ye Licians) for whose enlargement your Armies
now occupy Lydia, if therefore his delivery may suffice, be not then
hopeless, for Tymaetes shall you anon have, although headless: and if you
shall determine to recompense me for the deed, think not but that the stoutest
in your Camp, shall die in my debt.

Herewithall three or four Ruffens, whom he had appointed Instruments for
that butcherie, fettle themselves about their business: Mazeres also
prosecuting the murder to effect.

This hearing and seeing the King his Father, who as it were breathing out the
sorrows of his soul, thus says: And may not mine already sustained
wrongs, suffice to glut thy sauadge woodnesse, but will thou also add the
butcherie of my Son, my dear, and only Son? that the death of the Child
may salute the decease of the Parent: alas, do not so, suffer thy cruelty to
have an end, that my miseries may have some mean. Thy self having a Son,
should be acquaynted with the tender affections of a Father: but if not
therefore, yet know that my self was once in thy present Dignity, and thy
self art ignoraunte of thy following Destiny: wretch that I am, what is past
my now adversity makes me to remember, as no doubt, what is to come thy now
Prosperity causes thee to forget: think, think, the Heavens may one day be
to thee, and thy Xenarchus, such and the same as presentlye they are to me and
my Tymaetes, and therewithal consider, what wrack of felicity would follow
thee a Childlesse Parent: O that thou would, as in troth thou should,
apply this not impossible possibility to thy self and thine, then might I
boldlye appeal from my self to thine own sentence, with assured hope of my
Son his safety.

If therefore, the example of my fall, the uncertainty of thine own Fortune,
the Supplication of a King, the Peace of thy Country, the submission of a Foe,
the intercession of a father, the tears of an old man, the regard of Justice,
or the innocence of Timaetes may now prevail, with my tongue I protest it,
with my heart I vow it, and mine Act shall perform it, that his ransom shall
be the resignation of mine whole interest, to this my detained kingdom.

But if none of these, any of which might be of sufficiency, neither the Gods
that shall punish the tyranny, nor the world that shall speak of thine
infamy, nor the blood that shall cry for vengeance against thee, nor thine
own guilty conscience that shall at last accuse thee, if none of these I say,
can work thy flintie heart to a fleshlye substance, yet know that the Lycians
not without the assistaunce of other nations, will, I am sure, vow the last
drop of their dearest blood to revenge such inhumane cruelty: yea pity thine
own people that shall buy his death over dearly.

Cap. 42.
WHen thus much was spoken in vain (for Tyraunts are the less tractable, by
how much they are entreated) Tymaetes, rather dying in the greef of his father,
then dreading the death wherewithal himself was threatened, with much ado spoke
as follows.

I am (dear father) enjoined an over grievous penance, that being patiently
resolved upon a simple death, do now also by your impatience live a dying
life, whereby my death is rather doubled than deferred: but (which is more, and
which is worse) must I alas, in this extremity, must I hunt for comfortable
sayings to appease your discouraging sorrows? You are not I know advised
how you envy my good hap, because not advertised how you hinder my sweet
hope, which hope is death, and Death the Salve for all sorrows, and the
Deliverer of the immortal Soul from the Prison of this mortal body: neither
is it the ill Death but the well dying we are to account of: for not the
stifling Halter of Hemp, or sinking pillow of down, do in any thing help or
hinder our passage to Heaven.

Be not grieved in that your Son is punished, but be glad in that he
has not deserved such punishmente: were I guilty, perhaps my death should
disquiet you the less, when in that I am innocente you ought to be quieted
the more: as Nature does move you to lamente the death of your Son, so let
reason learn you the quality of your Seed which is mortal: if because I am
young you wish my life might be prolonged, I answer in not dying old my
Sorrows are abridged: if you can-not (as perhaps you do not) digest the
bloodye Triumph of your dishonorable Enemy, than do not (as no doubt you
do) double his Ambition, with the bootelesse expense of your over humble
petitions: for think not that this Tyraunte, who can not lengthen his own
days one momente, can of himself shorten my date one minute, but that the
Gods (for so I hope) ready to accept of my soul, have made him an instrument
to separate it from the body.

Wherefore (good Father) seeing that death is both necessary, and also
ouertaketh us all of necessity, seeing I auarre the one by trial, neither
may you avoid the other by trauarse, with the reuerente duty of a Son I
require it, and without the partial affection of a Father I beseech you to
grant it, that your impatience may not drive those bloody tears to my
heart, which (not with a desperate mind I speak it) this butcherlye penance
shall never draw from mine eyes.

More might he not be suffered to speak, but his head being stricken from off
his shoulders, was together with his bleeding body, at commandment of the
Tyrant cast over the walls, amongste the sorrowful Licians to the view of
his sowning Father: which dead body of Tymaetes was anon solemnlye interred, in
the accustomed Sepulchers of his Ancestors sometimes Kings of Lydia, nere
adjoining to Sardis.

Cap. 43.
Winter was now at hand, and the Licians perceauing themselves rather wasted,
then their enemies weariried, prepared therefore to break up their Siege,
intending at the next Spring to have returned, with all the forces they might
possibly levy.

But in this mean while at Sardis arrived Xenarchus, son to the Tyrant, and
Friend, as before, to Tymaetes, who after intelligence had of Tymaetes his
death, and Mazeres his Treachery, desirous to be dead with the one, and quit
with the other, he attended from thenceforth opportunity for both: and that
so, as the Licians themselves before their departure might be ey-witnesses,
that even Death had not yet dissolved their friendship: and lo, how occasion
offered it self to this enterprise.

Aphrodite his Sister that she might there spend her tears, where she dared
to have shead her blood, had (not regarding the danger of the encamped enemy)
escaped out of Sardis, and amongst the Lydian Sepulchers was espied pitifully
to passionate her self, over the Tomb of Tymaetes.

Now to rescue her out of that place and peril, Mazeres that for her love would
have labored even Dis himself, desired Xenarchus his assistaunce: the match
was made, and only they two alike weponed and unknown to any, issue out of the
City to fetch home (as was pretended) Aphrodite.

The self same day also, had Xenarchus secretly practiced the delivery of
Atys and Abynados out of Prison, and through a privy vault issuing out of the
kings palace, conveyed them into the Subburbes: who not minding rashly to
fall into the hands of the encamped Licians, had now hid themselves amongst
the aforesaid Sepulchers.

When Xenarchus, and Mazeres drew near to this place, Xenarchus suddenly
betook him to his weapon, and to Mazeres, demanding the cause of his so doing
he makes this answer:

What Mazeres, do thou make a question, as ignorant of a quarrel? or
think thou to excuse in words, a treason already executed in works? could
thy love toward my Sister make thee disloyal to my friend? and shall not the
faith I owed to my friend make thee mine enemy? yes Mazeres yes, though
until now I have dissembled my grief for his death, yet this opportunity
happening, I will not longer suspende revenge for his wrong: howbeit so would I
be reue^ged, that neither wish I to be conqueror, nor yet would I be
conquered, only that we both die of mutual wounds I desire it, and thou do
deserve it. I know thy courage is haughty, and my quarrel honest, be
therefore venterous in this, as thou art valiant in all things else, and
condiscente to join in so knight-like a Combat, with so indifferent a
Combattant, who ouercomming, or being my self ouercommed do assure thee of
this comfort, that thy self art the last man shall see me living: the reason
hereof (if thou seek a reason) is, the soul of Xenarchus at once labors
to salute the ghost of Tymaetes, an withal to keep an Obbit to him with thy
life, by whose only means his death was prosecuted, and against whom his blood
cries vengeance.

To excuse my self (replied Mazeres) by love, were to accuse love of homiside,
to argue against such your friendship, were the rather to agrauate your
enmity, and to deny the challenge, were to distrust mine own manhood, so
that in excusing I should accuse as I will not, in persuading I should not
dissuade as I would, and in agreeing to you I should disagree with you, as I
must: but alas my Lord, advise your self better, and deal not so outragiously
with him that friendly, not fearfully beseeches you of patience: for if the
loss of my life might revive Tymaetes, or pleasure you, Tymaetes should live,
and you be pleased, mine own hands should hasten it, your weapon not hasard
it: But seeing it may not so be, or if my submissiue words may not prevent
your vnintreatable fury, then know Xenarchus, that Mazeres is a Knight, no
Coward: but were I a Cowarde, yet Cowardes in like extremities be desperately
valiant, and being enforced to fight, naturally will rather kill then be
killed: when, if it should so prove (as in fight the victory is uncertain)
that by evil hap you perrish one my weapon, then alas, howsoever it pleases
you to flout me, or fear me with the promised comfort of your death, wherein I
should conceive nothing less then comfort, and whereof again and again I
entreat you not to enforce the occasion, you may assure your self of this
comfort from me, that your dead bones shall more persecute me, then your
living body can punish me, the one I may not fly, the other I do not fear:
the reason is (if you demand a reason) if my death be not the prise of your
blood, yet must I of necessity forsake Lydia, the which to leave were
intolerable, and so forgo Aphrodite, whom not to love is impossible.

Now when Xenarchus would admit no excuses, others then by Combat to discide
the discord, the two knights so valiantly give the charge each on the other,
that whilst both strike, both seem rather to shrink with the blows then to
shun the weapons, either of them showed enough of courage, neither of them were
to seek of cunning, and fret more with scorn to be wounded, then feel the
smart of their wounds.

In few, after many breathings, Xenarchus disaduauntaging himself by his over
fearce and desperate fight received a wound, whereof fainting he falls to the
earth, and then persuading himself of no other hope then present death, he
charitably forgave woeful and wounded Mazeres the deed: and constantly
embracing him indeuouring all in vain to give succor, desired to be conveyed
unto Tymaetes his Tomb, there to offer up his last gasp, a sacrifice to his
friends ghost: in performance of which his request, Mazeres showed himself no
less dutiful, then doleful.

Cap. 44.
WHilst perplexed Aphrodite (discheuiled as she was) washed her Lovers Tomb
with her lamentable tears, bewayling his untimely destiny, and esteeming the
date of her own life over dilatorie, lifting up her flowing eyes she espied
Mazeres, supporting thetherwards the imbrued body of her dying brother: at
sight whereof, when wepings gave passage to words, she thus cries out.

Now woe, and out alas, woe is me forspoken Aphrodite, how happens it my dear
brother, that I view thee a second burial? and what see I more? do thou
Mazeres, mischievous Mazeres by a new murder add to my living martirdom? if
thou, I say, if thou the tormentor of me, and Traitor to mine, either in
respect of ye love thou pretendest to owe me, or in reueng of the hate I
protest ever to bear thee, wilt show me pity by being pitiles, for so much as
the gods seem deaffe and not to hear me, and the destinies dull and not to
help me, use once more thy murtherous weapon to dispatch me of life, that
otherwise may never be eased of grief: oh how aptly in one Tomb may thou
bestow three murders: leave not (alas) leave not hapless Aphrodite so utterly
helpeles, that also present death be exempted her succor.

As Xenarchus (for yet he lived) with fainting tongue endeavored to pacify his
sister, and acquit his inforsed foe Mazeres of his self procured death, Atys
and Abynados hyding them selves (as before) amongst the sepulchers, and
hearing those well known names, lamentable terms, and the voice of out-crying
Aphrodite, partly to assist her unto whom they supposed Mazeres to offer force,
partly to revenge the death of the curtious knight Tymaetes, and withal to be
meet with Mazeres for their own private quarrels, as not a little affrighthed
at the noise ran forth to see what had happened.

But when they perceived their late deliverer Xenarchus, to lie there alive
more then half dead, and by him standing their late betraier Mazeres smoking
in blood, without any further words, they fearsly ran upon twise-wounded
Mazeres, plying him with wounds to whom it well pleased to die: who also being
thus spead of his deaths wound, and aiming with his dying eyes to gasping
Xenarchus, did with him yeald up the ghost, either in the bosom of the other.

This new occurrant gave to Aphrodite fresh occasion, thus to continue her
former lamentations, in these words:

What, do thou yet live (Aphrodite) long since the beginner, and not yet the
ender, or at the least wise the fourth actor in this unfinished Tragedy? O my
dear brother Xenarchus, and (which art more deerer to me then a brother) my
sweet Tymetes, content your selves, yea a very little while be contented,
with these wasted tears, the whole remain that continual weepings have left
me, and with these cold and comfortles kisses, the last that ever Aphrodite
shall give you. Neither think thou Mazeres, that I deem thee utterly unworthy
my weping, that (which has undone us all) did esteem me altogether worthy
thy woing, I cannot but lament thee dead, that living could never love thee.

Which said, bestowing two kisses, on the two Corses, and two hundred on the
watered Marbell that enclosed Tymaetes she forthwith entered the Lician camp,
and careless of her own safety, rushing into the Pauilion of ye two kings her
fathers enemies, when they rather gased on her beauty, then gessed of her
business she disclosed her self: and (as much as in her lay) stirs them
up ^o revenge upon her Tymaetes his death, for whose only love he had
forgone life: Aprodite (says she) is as dear to her Father, as was Tymaetes
to his, and therefore the revenge though it be small, yet it is somewhat.

In the mean time whilst she yet spoke, in came Atys and Abynados, reporting
the pitiful spectacle then to be seen at the Tomb of Tymaetes: to the view
whereof the Kings and Captains hyed, and after them Aprodite followed. But
she perceiving the gracious father of Tymaetes to be so far off, from seeking
such revenge for the death of his Son, that he did not only bewail bitterly
the dead bodies of Xenarchus, and Mazares, but spoke to her so comfortably as
if she had been his own daughter, being now the rather overcome with the
surcharge of this kind sorrow, standing a while speechless, and anon sinking
down upon the dead bodies, did (good Lady) without any violente act
finishe her life, not unlamented for, even of her Fathers enemies.

The next day three costly Hearses were provided for the three dead bodies,
and whilst the burial rights were with much business in doing at the
tragical Tomb of Tymaetes (for all four were bestowed in one Tomb) the
beseiged Tyrante, not yet knowing what had chanced, as he stood on the walls
of the City, mused at the great solemnity then in hand by the Beseigers.
But when (after inquiry made) he understood the same to be the Funeralles of
Xenarchus and Aphrodite his two children, and of Mazeres his favored friend,
he presently fell into a desperate frenzy busily seeking, in that his madness,
for weapons whereon to perish.

Whereof being prevented, and shut up safe (as they thought) in his Chamber,
the Tyrant impacient of life, when all other means failed, swallowed down his
throat red burning Coals: and after he had languished certain days in
horrible anguish, dyed to the contentment of the most or all, that lived to the
comfort of a few or none.

SArdis and therewith whole Lydia, after the death of the Tyrant, what through
the remiss negligence of the Cilician Garrisons, who being left without a
Governor would easily admit no government: what through the ready diligence
of the Citizens, who gladly labored to restoore their Country from foreign
servitude to wonted freedom: and what through the politic conduct of Atys
and Abynados, who in the dead night brought the Lician Armies into the City,
through the same vault whereby themselves had (as before) escaped out of the
City, was now possessed by the good and rightful king Tymaetes his father.

Who being reestablished in his royal dignity, did anon with indiferent
ears, and and upright sentence daily determine the Controversies of his
people: to which godly exercise, the former wars and troubles, did furnish
him with more then sufficient of ungodly matter, leaving in manner all things
in a confused estate: for new Conquestes do commonly abrogate old Customs:
and when the Soldiour puts up his sword, the Advocate then put seth up the
coin.

Amongst many other Controversies, and complayntes that came then in question,
this one presently to be handled in the discourse following, I esteem not
unworthy resightall.

Opheltes. Calamus septimus.
Cap. 45.
THe King in walking up and down his Palace, perceived an homely
Countryman, making often proffers to have spoken somewhat unto him, but
evermore, at the very pushe, fearfully staying at ye toungs end, his purposed
words, which when the good King had a long time together observed, him self
coming to the silly man, and minding to cut off the simple silence of the
same his timorous Sutour, spoke to him as follows.

Father (quoth. he) mine own experience teaches me, that the Country is
ouercombersome for us that be Courtiors, and thy presence in this place
shows that the Court is ouercurious to you that be Countrie-men: howbeit let
not our Courtly stateliness, which we account convenient for the place,
out-dashe thy Country bluntness, which we esteem kindly to the person: but
if thou have any thing to say, let me then understand who has wronged thy
right, that can, and will undertake to right thy wrong.

When the king with this encouragement, had set the poore-mans tongue at
liberty, Philargus (for so was he called) framed his complaint in this order.

LEt not my gracious Lord (says Philargus) take offense at the boulde
intrusion of so base a person, your Majesty's Subject, who not finding any one
friend to prefer my Suit to your Highness, am my self enforced to be the
preferrer, and pleader of a most true accusation against a most false offender,
whose lofty countenance being much, does carry out his lewd conscience being
more.

For know (gracious Lord) that I finding mine ability insufficient to fee an
Advocate to attempt an Action, much less to hold wagge with so wealthy a
defendant as is mine Adversary, endeavored by personal petition to move, if
it had been possible, my own pytifull cause before the pitttylesse
Magistrates: but (alas) as if distressed poverty, had been over small
punishment to me otherwise oppressed with wrongs, at their very doors, I
found a certain scornefulnesse to infecte even their Porters: of whom after
long business, and some-tymes a brybe getting license to enter the Gates,
again at the Skreenes began my second suit, both coyer for intertaynement,
and costlyer for justice: for wanting greater gifts to offer, I found the
smaller grace to obtain, what my Suit? yea both Suit, and speech, and hope to
speed. And (which is more) the Seruing-men, Chaumberlaines, and Doore-keepers
of these great men, or Magistrates, looking for more cappes and knees then mine
unnurtured education could redily affoorde, received mine obeisance, without
regard of my business: yea they that took it for a countenance to pluck
off the boots of their Master, though it a discredit to have conference with
me so poor a miser. But in trifling the time in thus speaking of the bastard
pride of these base brave Fellows, being (in deed) but Waspes in comparison of
Bees who though they buze fearfully, render sometimes honny, I may seem in
friuilous by-matters prolirious to your Majesty*

After many lofty looks, and churlish checkes of these brybing Grooms,
leaving the comfortless houses, I attended my times in the cold streets: but
now also, whether it were that I met the Maiestrates in merry talk with my
betters, my lamentation came then out of season to interrupt their laughters*
or that no such thing happened, yet at the least the very Mule-keepers would
shoulder me to scilence: or if himself chanced to look over the shoulder
(perhaps offended with my monefull plaints) it was either to dismiss me as if
Bacchus should answer Codrus, or else to direct me from Ixion his Wheel to
Belides their Tubbes, or (as I might term it) from himself that did terrify
mine eyes with looks, to others that should tear out my heart with Law: and
yet in the end nothing at all done, but I undone: my purse in all things
making to their Law, but their Law in nothing to my purpose: so that if Hell
might have an Hels Hell, my self, Wretch, even on earth have suffered that
Hell

In the end with importunate plying, some of them shaked me off with the Uisour
of pity, appointing a day wherein to hear my cause: but the appointment is
unperformed, the day past, and the hearing yet, and I fear me ever to come:
and why? Not because I want sorrow whereof to complain, but Silver wherewith
to corrupt. And (O good Gods) that men should with such peevish euasions
nourishe their palpable errors, because mine Adversary is rich, and
Worshipful, some make it a consequent, that therefore mine Accusation is
rash, and wrongful: so that these men in respect of their mutual clawing one
of an other, are not unlike may I say to Mules, or rather to cruel Bears
with whom amongst themselves, biting is barred: but in respect of the
justice they should do us, not unlike to the Beas^e Hiena within whose eye is
contained a Precious Stone, which neither they for fierceness will depart
with, nor we for fear dare attempt to recover.

Thus mighty men speak the word, and al hear them, when miserable wretches
shead their tears, but not any help the^: our Plaints must be, Should, and
Would, because men yt are vnder-rule, but their Pleas are, Shall, and Will,
because men that can overrule. Our grievous affections fatigate dull senses,
and tire Capacities, but their golden Dum-showes are effectual even to dim
sightes, and deaffe ears: one and the same course is in us dilatorie, in them
orderly: to us a Dimission, to them a Decree: for Judgments against them have
they Errors with them* for Sentences Repreeues, and for Repreeues Pardons. But
what alas do we (if we do aught at all) then sear Hydra her heads, and
sweat in Hercules his Perils? plucking upon us twenty troubles, by proceeding
to one Trial: and though they eat us as bread, and sell us for shoes, yet
upon whom should we complain that either cares, or not corrects: the
Adversary so he way down right, wayeth not at all the wrong: the Lawyer so he
has a fee, disgesteth the foil, and fathereth the crime on the cause, the
Magistrate he says, Nole me tangere, and angere, least the incarnate God
prove an vntimelye Devil.

Thus (may it please your Majesty) when all were tried, and I was tired, and
that they lacked pity, and I likely to perish, I was by good hap advertised
by some that spoke as they spead, to appeal from those officious persons, or
adiourning Maiestrates that hear not without hire, to the Court and Nobility
there who hear such Suitors with more expedition, and help them with less
expenses.

This advise made me hardy, but the accident thereof makes me happy, in that
your highness vouchsafes the hearing of it in your own person, which
(unworthy wretch) I durst not so much as in thought to have hoped for.

Opheltes (most gracious Sovereign) Opheltes more fortunate to dignities, than
faithful in his dealinges, is the only man giving occasion to this my
Complainte: whom being present in your Court, may it please your Majesty
personally to call to this Controversy, that hea^ing how, and wherein I shall
charge him by accusation, ^e may (I would he might) clear himself by
answer: for rightful Causes fear not indifferent Trials.

Opheltes was then called, who appearing, Philargus thus proceeded.

Cap. 47.
THe Cilician Tyra^t lately usurping in this your kingdom (most gracious Lord)
pursuing, for what offense I know not, the death of this ungrateful Gentleman,
enforced him for sauegard of his life, secretly as a Fugitive to skulke in
every corner: in his wandering he happened (unhappily may I say) upon my poor
Cottage, unto whom utterly unknown to me, and the clothes on his back
scarcely covering his bare, I gave for very pity, such intertainment as my
small ability would then suffer, plucking off his old rags, and putting on
him new Russets.

Now whether it were, that despair to regaine the estate he lately had forgon
made him resolute, or fear to go farther and speed worser, diligent, or that
necessity made him virtuous being naturally vicious, I know not, but this I
found, that shortly he settled himself with such towardness to our country
Affairs, and homely fare, that the best husbandman was not more cunning at
his work, nor the worst Hine less choice of his meat: so that finding him
more diligent than a Servant, and no less dutiful than a Son, by the one I
received commodity, in the other I conceived comfort: such was poor Opheltes
who then did not shame to be my servant, but such is not prosperous Opheltes
that now does skorne to be my son in law. And yet, though his present Honor
has altered his former honesty, this is the man, and the self same Opheltes,
unto whom not having a Coat to his back, Coin in his purse, Food for his
belly, or Couerture for his head, I gave both Apparel, Money, Meat, and
Harbor.

And more than so, I have, or rather, I fear me, I had but one only Child a
Daughter, whom Opheltes long wooed, at length wone, and with my consent did
wedde: howbeit, wretched Wenche, many a lusty Youth, and rich Francklines
son in seeking her beauty (such as it was) togethers with her inexorable
love, lost their unregarded labor: only Opheltes had the hap to make her an
unhappy Wife. Yea, my dotage extended yet a degree farther, so well did I
think of the man, that utterly dispossessing my self, I wholly possessed him
of mine intiere substance: neither did I soon recant what now too late I
repent, but for the time was rather tickled with a vain joy, seeing him
honestly to increase his wealth, heartily to entreat me, and husband-like to
use my Daughter his Wife.

But no extremity has eternity as the world turned to better, so this
Wretch changed to worser: for no sooner was the Tyrant, his Foe, dead, and
your Majesty, his Friend reseazed of your Royal Diadem, but that he
suddenlye made sale of almost all that was ours, and by your Highness means,
and my money recovered his own: since which time much have we heard of Opheltes
now the exquisite Courtier, but nothing at all of Opheltes the late expert
Carter: pardon me (I beseech your Majesty) that notwithstanding all other
injuries, would not thus speak to his disgrace, did he not still prosecute
me with Disdain, which even Wretches digest not.

There is in this City a stately and secret Courtizan called Phaemonoe, a
fair dame in countinance, but a foul devil in conversation, abou^ding in
riches, but abandoned of honesty, whose lascivious daliances (as since my
repair hither I have been told, and my self in part can testify) has so
far estranged Opheltes from the duty of an husband, that by circumstances
it may be intended, he has not so much as once remembered his Wife: unto whom
since his departure, he has not voutchsafed succor, sight, or sending too.

Mine own pinching need, my Daughter her pitiful lamentations, and his
unkind absence from us both, roused up mine aged Limbs, vnwieldye God wot for
such iournies, to seek after him whom unwitting to us we had lost, and
unwilling to himself in the end I found, (if to loose an egg, and find a
Cockatrice may be termed a finding): for in very troth, Opheltes was so far
off from being found the same Opheltes he lately was, that when he with many
surly looks, stern words, and scoffing aunsweres had dismissed me his
presence, as a dispargement to his acquaintance, I for the time not trusting
mine own Eyes, began also to make a doubtful pawse, in acknowledging an
undoubted person, until at length, I perceived it to fare with me as with the
poor Sparrow, that hatcheth her own destruction. Wherefore minding with
patience to bear this wrong, and brook my loss, I returned home to my
comfortless house: But here (alas) a greater woe had almost berefte me my
wits, Alcippe, woe am I, my Daughter Alcippe was lacking, and yet still is
missing, she (what else should I imagine) impatient of such causeless
unkindness, has (God grant my fear be false) either secretlye wrought her
own destruction, or else at the best, which is badde enough, for ever abandoned
me and mine house, as the memoratiue Springes that a fresh should flow to her
sorrows: by thus much your Majesty may conceive more. If therefore this man
his treacherous Ingratitude deserves to be punished, or mine unsupportable
Calamities be worthy of pity, let then Justice recompense his mallace, and
mercy relieve my myserie.

Philargus thus concluded, Opheltes could not avoid the Accusation, and the
king in this wise proceeded to se^^tence.

Cap. 48.
J Have (Philargus) given ear, and will anon give ease, otherwise Justice
should be less, which ought to be so much, tha^ an Intermediu^ to my scepter:
for whilst we rule with justice we retain the Tittles of kings, if not, we
recover the names of Tyrants: in what therefore may we better discharge such
our Charge, than in brideling the jaws of the mighty Oppressor, and in wiping
tears from the eyes of the poore-man oppressed? for mine own part I have
always carried this opinion, that not to do justice to others is to bring my
self in danger of judgment: knowing that the Prince ought to be the peace of
his people, to the Orphant a parent, to the succourlesse a refuge, to good men
a Protector, to ill men a terror, and to al men indifferent, who in respect of
the cause should reiecte the person, giving to every man that which is his,
and for this cause are we called Gods.

Even this Preamble, Opheltes, ought to be fearful to thee that are faulty
to thy self: fie graceless man, fie, does not almost every post in my Palace
flourish with these sayings? Do as thou would be done unto: Show piety to
thy Parents, and love to thy kindred: Have peace with men, and war with
Uices: Be faithful to thy friends, and to all men just: yet by so much has
thy lewdness digressed from these Lessons* by how much unlike works differ
from like words. But out of a legion I will only single a leash, and those
are, thine Ingratitude, Disdain, and Adulteries.

If, Opheltes, I may say him ungrateful that is ready to receive and careless
to repaye, and him graceless whom the gentle ^^ane of a Friend of a Debtor
makes an Enemy, what may I then say ill enough to thee? who did
franckly receive without loan, but do falsely requite without love:
forgetting that Courtesies received by tale should be returned in gross: that
to be grateful for a little is a preparatiue to more: that still to be
thankful and confess a benefit, is still to strike from off the skoare with
our Benefactoures* and in troth, then to render thanks and give fair
speeches, nothing is delivered with lesser charge, or recaued with greater
acceptance.

But certain it is, a second Fiend has brooded this first Fury, proud
Disdain I mean, whom false Honor has begotten in dishonorable Bastardie:
for why, that same Honor has an imperfect, or rather a prodigious body,
wherein Humility is not ingrafted a member, which wanting, Promotion in an
evil man is contrary to Preferment, because rising to Honor he falls from
Virtue: and dishonorable is Dignity used vndiscreetelye, but to be glorious
and not Uain-glorious, to have power and to want Pride, not with too much
austeritie to provoke hate, nor with too much alacrity to procure contempt,
but in all things to affecte a mean, is honorable in respect of the man,
and honest in respeccte of his manners* contrariwise, to have the best degree
and the basest mind, the majesty of a Prince and the manners of a Pesaunt, a
conquering tongue and a cowardlye hand, much prattle and no proof, outward
gravity and inward lightness, a white head, and a green heart, high
Authority, and indiscreet Government make Honor mosterous, and contrary to
it self. To thee therefore, Opheltes, not unaptly may I allude the Fable of the
Ass, who carrying on his back the Image of Isis, and seeing the people to
fall down and worship, forgetting his holy burden supposed himself to be so
honored, and therefore in a bravery began to yerke out at his Driuer, because
as the rest he did not reverence: but by that time his Master had well cudgeled
his hide, the foolish Ass could then remember that to Isis, not to an Ass
such honors appartained: even so (Opheltes) thou that do carry the Image,
but not the Saint, the Uisour of honor, but not the virtues of honor, to
rebate from thy vainglorious conceit in carrying of honorable Titles, art by
grievous correction with the Ass to be taught, ye worthy Titles without
verteous Conditions are but as Pictures, in respect of the Persons. Think not
much that so grosely I compare an Ass to a Ge^tleman, but know that such
disdainful Gentry is worthy so worthless a comparison.

Could Philargus whom thou have made poor with thy wrongs, poison thee with
his words? or was his sight to thee a Serpent, by whom thy self were adopted a
Son? If so (as thou should think nothing less then so) then neither
admitting benefits, and forgetting such aliance, tell me, Opheltes, is it
sufferable thou should be more cruel then a Monster, or less civil then a
man? the fiercest Monster is familier with Monsters of the same kind, and what
art thou for a man, that thou should be fastidious of the acquaintance of
men? If thy bravery could not have brooked his beggerie, at the worst, a secret
Relief might have dispatched a bashful Beggar: or if couitousnes hardneth
thine heart, yet did thou degenerate from a Nygard, in not showing a
courteous look where thou would not bestow a charitable alms, seeing it is
usual to every pinche-penie rather to veil three Bonettes, then with one
halfe-penie to advantage a Beggar. But (wicked man) Disdain it is that has
transformed thee from a man to Devil, otherwise thou would have remembered,
that never any man lost by being humble, or that any ever wone by being
haughty: neither had thou forgotten, that as Poore-men have want to
exercise their patience, so Rich-men have wealth to practice their charity:
which lacking, horrible is that Audiat wherein such a Rich-man is Accomptant.

Thou should have thought (and the rather by thine own experience) that
although we flourish to day we may fall to morrow, and as Stage Players
change our parts from the Kings Scepter to the Beggars Scrip: that the
dispysed may rise, and the dispiser may fall: naie admit that Fortune, the
common flatterer, should still favor, yet what else gayneth the disdaynefull
person? but this, that his superiors point at him in the streets, his
inferiors giere at him in corners, his equalles figuratively do ride him, and
whosoever does fear him not one does friend him: the best way therefore to be
rich is to despise riches, and the mean to be glorious is to contemn glory:
for he that is neither proud in wealth, nor impacient in want, is poorly
rich, and richly poor,

As for the pomp of the world, and the peoples favor it is nothing else then
a smoke, and vanishing Air: and as Snow begins and ends in water, so
man, how bigly soever he brave it, began in earth and shall end where he began:
seven foot of ground is allowed to the King, and the like quantity allotted to
the Beggar, and both the one and the other putrefie in the grave: though we
lack nothing in sight, yet have we nothing in certainety, seeing all things
be transitory, and our selves mortal. Where are the gra^e Senators, the
wealthy Cytizens, the wise Philosophers, the famous Orators, the valiant
Captains, the deified Princes, and amiable Ladies? are they not all converted
to unsavory Donghils, or utterly consumed to dust? do they not feed worms in
their Coffens that bread worms in their carcases? look into their Sepulchers
whether it be possible to discern the Master from the Slave, the Rich-ma^
from the Beggar, the King from the Subject, the Champion from the Coward, the
Lady from the Beldam, the foul from the fair or one from an other.

If such be our end, as such it is, if our felicities here be generally subject
to Casualities, and our flesh in the grave suffers indifferently Corruption,
with what reason the^ do we despise those through Pride, betwixt whom and us is
no difference in the pit? saving yt the poor leave not behind him like
contentions for their heirs, or carry with them like pampered Carcases for
the worms, nor commonly like dangers for their souls, because unto whom most
is committed by him most is omitted, howbeit with him it is most rekoned: when
if the account fall not out orderly, what does it advantage to have lived in
delices and dignities? when that which is mortal shall be tumbled into a hole,
and that which is immortal be tormented in hell: where the issue shall be not of
Riches but of Righteousness, not of costly Decking, but of charitable dealing.
Thus see thou, Opheltes, that in prosperity to be secure is dangerous, but
at any time to be disdainful odious, that honor stands not without
humility, that humility teaches a man without oversight to have of himself
an insight, and that in a poore-man it is grateful, in a richma^ glorious.

It rests now of thine incestious and incontinent life, wherein I will be
short, because the same wickedness is generally had in such detestation, that
should not I reprove it, the beastliness of the fact it self might impugn
it: for who is he that wants a parramtorie comdemnation against a violator of
marriage? Wherefore thus to conclude, seeing, Opheltes, that the now calm
spreading thy sails in the broadest Seas may not incite thee to gratytude,
neither the passed Storm that enforced thee to creep under Philargus his Lee
dehorte thee from dysdayne, nor yet the dishonor pursuing the offense deter
thee from adultery, that I may therefore, amend by justice, what is helpeles
by entreaty, this is my Sentence: That Philargus (in lieu of his loss) be
presently possessed of the one half of all yt is thine, and the rest to be
confiscate at my pleasure, unless within one year next thou safely bring
forth Alcippe thy wife, his daughter: wherein failing, to thee I adiudge
perpetual banishment.

Poor Philargus, forthwith enjoyed the benefit of this sentence, and the king
finding by further conference and trial, yt he neither wanted Gentry to match
with his grauety, nor yet discretion to deal in matters of estate, after a
short time, advanced him to high Offices in public government. In whom, then
profiting with double praise, that is, by wisdom which evermore commends it
self, and Authority which unto whom soever it happens, wise or witless,
never wants favorers, or at the leastwise flatterers, was verefied this
saying, wisdom without riches, and authority is as a Diamonde, raked up in a
donghill. It follows now, that somewhat be said what in this mean while
became of Alcippe, and also what afterward befell to her, Opheltes and
Phaemonoe.

Cap. 49.
JMmediatly after that Philargus was (as before) departed from home to seek
after Opheltes, Alcippe for the same cause left also her fathers house, and
came unto Sardis: where understanding of her husbands common haunt to
Phaemonoe, she got her self by means into her service, that so at the least,
she might behold him by stealth, whom only she ought to have held by right:
how often (good soul) did she inwardly devour her tears with patience (a
rare patience, and in her sex a black Swanne) whilst standing upon her own
unworthiness, and to her self then seeming over simple a wife for so surly
an husband, she neither durst hazard to dysclose her self, nor yet was so
happy to be acknowleged of him, for a Fly was not then an Egles flight,
Opheltes not stouped but to Phaemonoe: as for Alcippe, being in his eye but as
a Sipher in Augurisme, she might come to him unregarded, and pass from him
unremembered: yet wanted she not patience to suffer his unkind prankes, nor
diligence to further with her Mistress his vnwarra^ted pastime, yea so far
as etc. extended: so that contenting her self with part and not contending for
the principal, she sticked not upon the Substance, but was satisfied with ye
shadow, Phaemonoe had the game, Alcyppe naught else but the gase: all which (in
respect of the necessity) she did gladly view in silence, as dreading
otherwise, to lose the advantage of that sorrow.

But when (as before is said) Philargus had brought Opheltes in displeasure
with the king, and discredit with the people, and that his surfited
Prodigality was thoroughly purged with a coinlesse Uomit, it came now to pass,
that Phaemonoe her love did suddenly labor of a Consumption, his new want
disabled him to pay for his shot, and her old wont disalowed him to run on
the scoore: yea and that with such contemptious coyness, and unkind disdain
did she handle him, that had not will utterly ouer-ruled his wit, even such her
entertaineme^t, might easily have allaied the heat of his inordinate passions,
and stayed the frenzy of his madding dotage.

The which notwithstanding, the miserable man (and the more miserable in
respect of this his disalowable affection, then in that beggary had brought him
on his knees, and the king his sentence of banishment, stood presently upon
execution) would by no repulse surcease to houer, where by no request (made he
never so fair a pitch) he could seize.

Now with the increase of his lawless desire, ensued the decrease of the
lymited year, wherein he was either to bring sorth Alcippe, or failing thereof
to forsake his country: what remedy then remains but of two evils to make
choice of the lesser? but could Opheltes so do? no, his unruly humor had
brought him so far out of square, that he rather does hazard to be hailed to
death (for death was insident to his tariance) out of the slanderous house of
a shameless harlot, then with assurance of life, to use the benefit of the
more favorable sentence which was banishment: and yet (inchaunted wiser) what
else did he with ye price of his deadly adventure? the^ buy the emptying of his
eyes of restless tears, and the sundering of his heart with continual sighs,
at her hands, and in her presence, whose wilful coyness was such, that
neither would she hear him patiently, nor answer him but proudly.

The year was now finished, longer the^ which Opheltes was not to make aboade
in Lydia, when Phaemonoe, not brooking the cumbersome haunt of so beggarly a
Guest, with outrageous terms flatly forbadde him her house, threatening
otherwise, to procure against him the execution of the king his Sentence*
wherefore withdrawing him self into a solitary place, with bitter terms
among, he complains in this manner.

The time was, yea (ungracious Castaway) the time was, that bearing an heart
vndismaied of banishment, thou did also find hap, unlooked for, to recover
thy liberty, but I that without craving in aid of any, could then recover my
self from the treachery of Fortune, am not now by the assistance of any
Fortune, to be rescued from the tyranny of mine own folly: such a god is love,
or rather such a devil is lust that only is strong to my discomfiture, and
wants not force to draw me, even willingly to destruction: but (for of
things before hand done I am privy, and of an action already in framing well
may I prenosticate) as moisture is insident to water, so is mishap an appendant
to my destiny: yea it is evident (I say evident, because as heretofore my
life, so at this instant my death shall affirm my latter Astrology
infallable) that the favorable Aspect of no Planet, has been quallefying to
the luckles Star of my Nativity, and therefore have I found all fortunes,
prevailing to the drifte of this Catastrophe: an end (in deed) base and
beastly, when the matter thereof is Lust, the mean a Strumpet, and the manner
a violen^e stopping of mine own breath. But what should thou longer live
(Opheltes) having so good opportunity, to perform the prodigious execution of
thy Destiny, and by one death to end infinite sorrows? In saying this, and
whilst he resolutely hastened to have strangled himself, by good hap in came
Alcippe: who discrying the melancholy pretense of her miserable husband, and
seeing the despair whereinto he was then falling, with vapored eyes offers
this kind duty, to the only Seeds-man of all her sorrows, saying.

Cap. 50.
IT is (quoth. she) contrary to manhood, even in extremyties of evils not to
be constant, but wilfully peevish, and perverse is he that forgoeth comfort,
whilst he forsakes counsel: although the man be termed foole-hardie that
dares to follow the advise of a woman, yet believe me (Opheltes) as it is
not incredyble, but that a Mouse may gnawe a Lion out of a ginne, so is it not
impossible, but that I may at the least, give intermission to thy grief.

Long did I practice thy cure, but therein perform no other then mine own
care, in preferring thy bootelesse love to mercylesse Phaemonoe, but I now
find, and I would thou could also feel, that longer to bleed of that
vain, is to leave thy body bloodlesse, thy head witless, and thy friends
hopeless of thy recovery: what meanest thou, Opheltes, to strain out a gnat
and to swallow up a Cammell? tearming her unreasonable in hating thee so deadly
that loves her so dearly, and not espying thy own greater madness, in loving
her so dearly that hates thee so deadly.

It might have suffised for a rebuke once to have intermedled with a Curtizan,
and for a reproach great enough that so badde a woman should blushe at thy
company, without thus dying a Reprobate, by still dooting in thy passed, and
purposed wickedness: leave of therefore, if not not for shame, yet to avoid
sin: and know that then are the gods severe in correcting when men are
secure in offending: yea (if for nothing else) yet therefore should Opheltes
be weaned from lewdness, because Phaemonoe is wedded to lightness: thou were
not her first choice, neither shall thou be her last change: for the love of
an harlot is not so tied to any one, but that the same lies open to every one
(Beggars and Banished-men by prouiso excepted) and thou being in the same
predicamente, art therefore under the same Exception concluded: wherefore it is
mere folly in thee to look for other of custom, or to hope for better of
courtesy.

But whylest our words be not plausible, our counsels seem not profitable:
and with strong reasons to resist love, were, perhaps, to labor my self mad
with reason: For such love (if I may so mis-tearme lust) as it is easlier
received, so is it hardlier disgested then the Taint Borestes, that swallowed a
Myte swells a Monster: if therefore, Opheltes, thou will not be declaimed
from Phaemonoe it rests then ye Phaemonoe be reclaimed to thee: which to
contriue asks cost, for kindly it is for such Hawks to soar from an empty
Fist: but Opheltes lacks, will you say, and is therefore helples, but Alcippe
lives, do I say, and therefore not hopeless, she lives, in deed, to profit
thee with a triple benefit, to restoore to thee thy liberty and to recover for
thee the moity of thy living, to which only Rise is Phaemonoe in sequens. Admit
therefore Alcippe to stand thee in this steed, whose patience, I know, is so
liable to thy passions, that to work thee a second delight, she will endure be
it a second deuorse.

At the naming of Alcippe did Opheltes sigh, and turning his face lets fall
plenty of tears, making at the length unto her, whom not yet he knew to be
Alcippe, such answer.

The tydinges (says he) are most joyful to Opheltes that Alcippe is yet
living, but ^eeing it is current in each man's mouth, and also confirmed in mine
own mind, that my falsehood toward her does rather merit a most shameful
death, then the acceptance of such undeserved assistance, I am much more prone
to ^atefie the first doom by mine own hands, then apt to receive the latter
grace by her help: wherefore I beseech thee to declare to Alcippe, that dying
I wish unto her all good fortune, who^ only I have made altogether infortunat:
but know that thy counsel as touching Phaemonoe, is like to an after-showre
that falls when flowers, and roots are already wythered: I am determined to
die, and my det^rmynation shall not be changed, for why, to live vnexiled and
wealthely should be much less pleasinge to men, then to die from inward
vexation and outward infamy. Only be assured (gracious Damsel) that I
account this the last, and not the least of my miseries, not to be able to
recompense thee for thy passed and present kindness, for the which the heavens
grant thee, what I, besides thanks, have not to give thee.

Cap. 42.
ALcippe not a little discouraged at this wilful answer of his, as her last
refuge, made her self known to her husband, whom with hearty tears, she
entreats to use her if not as a wise (of which name she said her self
unworthy) yet at leastwise, as an instrument to discharge him of the kings
Sentence, and as the mean whereby to recover his extented lands, and
suspended liberty.

To be short, Opheltes now acknowledging her, seemed confounded with shame, and
in conclusion being wholye conquered with the consideration of her so rare
patience, policy, constancy, and (which was not inferior to ye rest) her
beauty, confessed his falsehood, repented him of his folly, craved pardon for
both, and vowed following loyalty: and hereupon from wondering and weeping,
fell they to kissing and embracing.

In which mean while, Phaemonoe (by evil adventure) entered the place, who
perceiving their mutual tears, and admiring their unusual familiarity,
whether it were offended therewithal, or fearing least Opheltes, after the
time prescribed for his banishment, being taken in her house might so turn
her to damage, or that jealousy, frenzy, or malice incensed her so to do, it
shall not matter, but howsoever it happened, she railed so out of square upon
Opheltes with words, and fared so roughly against Alcippe with blows, that
(after much sufferaunce) he not able longer to endure the one, or digest the
other, his Melancholy being now converted to Choler, whilste Phaemonoe thus
persisted to outrage, did in his fury stab her to the heart, in such sort that
of the same wound she presently died.

Immediatelye after the deed done Opheltes was apprehended, who as principal,
and Alcippe as Accessarie were brought before Philargus, then being in great
Honor, and a Iusticer in Sardis: who understanding of the fact, and (with
grief enough) acknowledging the offenders, because he would not be thought
ouer-forward in doing justice against Opheltes, neither to slack a Iusticer in
revenging the death of Phaemonoe both (as before) his enemies, but chiefly
because nature would not suffer him to sit in judgment against Alcippe, his
own, and only child, with a heart therefore melting with sorrow he dismissed
both Prisoners his presence, referring their cause to be determined by the king
in his own person: Philargus (good old man) in the mean while, by so much
suspending his joy in that he had found his Daughter, by how much he feared to
loose her again, being now to be arained of murder.

But the matter being thus brought before the king, upon ye ripping up of al
Circumstances, the death of Phaemonoe was though worthy her dishonest life,
Opheltes and Alcippe were acquitted by the king, and he received again into
favor, Philargus is made a joyful father of Alcippe, Opheltes is reconciled
to him and enriched, and every thing amiss was now amended.

BUt that I may now reduse your memories, and retire your ears to the history
whereof I principallye entreat, that is, of the cause and event of Atys and
Abynados their Quest and travels, you are to remember that Arbaces the old
Meade and his Companion, leaving behind them in their place Sorares and his
Assirians, are (as before is said) escaped out of the barren Island, from whence
they safely arrived at Sarmatia: and from thence again, as pitying the
distress wherein they had left Sorares and his company, and for their delivery
they are already resailed to the barren Island: unto whom and to Sorares, Atys
and Abynados whom we are now to ship from Lydia, happened as immediately does
now follow.

Arbaces. Pars Calami primi.
Cap. 52.
AFter that Atys and Abynados had made long abode in Lydia, having received
great intertainmente and Gifts of the king, they ship themselves and their
company, cheefelye directing their Course toward Sarmatia: but as they had
no absolute knowledge there to find those persons for whom they sought, so in
this their sailing they did not precisely observe any direct course, but
entered now an^ than into such adjacent Seas, Creekes and Channels, into which
likelihoods, profit, pleasure, or necessity did carry them. So that in riding
upon the flood Tanais, which does divide the Scythians from the Sarmatians, thy
coast by a very pleasant and dilectable Island: here did they land their men,
in purpose to have taken in fresh water, and other prouigion. But far had
they not forraged from their ship, disorderly roming (as vnsuspitious of that
which happened) when the Ilanders who from the next mountains had espied their
ariuall, lying a great number in ambushment, had suddenly enclosed them in on
every side, their barbarous darts and weapons for the most part, bearing (to
the great terror of the Assirians) the bloody tokens of some very late
slaughter.

What cold the Assirians now do, or rather what did they not that valiant and
courageous men should have done? many they slew, and some of them were slain:
but in the end, the multitude of the Ilanders prevailed against the manhood of
the Assirians: who being thus captiuated were anon committed to bands, and than
brought before the Gouernesse or rather Goddess of those Ilanders.

For such was the superstitious error of the people in those idolatrous days,
that whosoever had extirped Tyraunts, ciuiled Nations, confounded Monsters, or
else by prowes, wisdom, Invention, or by any extraordinary good, profited
any common Wealth and Country, the same living was magnified for more than a
man, and dead canonised a God: so that easier was it the^ for men to make Gods,
then for such their Gods to make men.

By this means therefore it came to pass, that those Ilanders had already in
deuosion, deified their Gouernesse Dircilla: for such as was Pallas to the
Grecians, and Isis to the Egyptians, so and such was she to this people: and
albeit years (for now was she very aged) had wrought a natural decay in her
beauty being yet more then ordidinarie, neither place, time, nor troubles had
so empayred the Majesty of her looks, or impugned the magnanimity of her
heart, but that armed much to the Amazonian fashion, she seemed more warlike
the^ Penthisilea, or rather more terrible then Bellona her self.

In such wise issuing out of her portatiue Tent, after she had twice or thrice
shaked her yrefull Lance, in sign of her unappeasable fury against the
Assirians, she left unto the wretched Captives the same comfort, as if they
had presentlye beheld the head of Medusa: and as the fierceness of those her
looks had enough of fear, so the delivery of these her words had nothing of
hope.

Are (quoth. she, to the Ilanders) the bands, and captivity of these ungracious
people sufficient (think you) to warrant your safety? or have I pleasure
(suppose you) to see their bodies yet breathing, upon whose Ghosts also, were
it possible, we should do execution? was I yesterday deceived in those
Assirians whom I commanded you to execute, as the Espials and Agents of some
other their Accomplicers? or think you by intercepting of them, and these you
have disappointed their Confederacy? no, no, be ye assured that the expedition
of their Treasons, does not only consist upon these two Companies: esteem
therefore all haste over little, until you have mingled their blood with the
bowels of the others, their Explorors: otherwise it will come to pass, and
that before you look for it, but not sooner than I (experienced of their
treacheries) fear it, that these Rouers and Robbers of ye whole world, being
by their tyrannous countrymen (already perchance at point of their ariuall)
rescued out of our hands, shall stand them in no small steed to the cutting of
your throats, and the conquest of this our Island.

Have you forgot how yester-day, even the sentence of death could not pluck
down the courage of their Companions? and why? forsooth reason had they to
hope, that expected this help: and mark you not also how the careless
countinaunces of these our Thrals, do not so much argue a contempt of death,
as the like hope that their armed Confederates are already marching to their
rescue? once again therefore I say, let your have in putting them to death,
cut off their hope in purposing upon life: of life said I? yea and having made
a massacre of your lives, and pray of your Country, to survive you in the one,
and succeed you in the other.

To Atys Abynados, and to the rest this her Sentence seemed no more severe,
then to be charged of Confederacy with before executed Assirians strange: but
therein to have been guilty or not guilty was all one, it suffising to
Dircilla her wrath, and their deaths only that they were Assirians: unto
which people (the occasion why hereafter following) she had vowed her self a
deadly enemy.

Cap. 53.
WHilst she was yet speaking, diverse of the Ilanders (as purposing a general
slaughter) in great fury ran to a Cave not far of, and anon return, rigorously
driving before the^ certain Assirians, whom the day before they had taken
forraging in the Island, and of whose deaths Dircilla their Gouernesse, had
before given them in commandment.

But the Ilanders, being naturally pitiful, altogether unacquainted with
sheading of blood, and dwelling as it were in a world by themselves, had never
till then seen Ship or Stranger: and therefore, had not the fierce words
and wrath of Dircilla more prevailed, then the inhumanitie, or malice of those
harmless people, the Asserians had not only not been assailed and captiuated,
but also, such admiration rid their beauty and bravery strike in to the hearts
of the idolatrous Ilanders, that either they had easily believed them to be
Gods, or at the leastwise durst not have made proof of their manhoods. But
Dircilla commanding, whose words to them were as Oracles, they feared not to
enterprise, were it never so rare, or great an Adventure: only herein (as moved
with compassion) they had borrowed of their usual obedience, in that they had
not, according to her commandment the day before, done execution upon those
firste-ariued Assirians.

Wherefore Dircilla, contrary to her thought, seeing them yet living whose death
she had commanded, one while firing her froward eyes upon the miserable
Captives, and anon casting her frouning looks upon the Ilanders, after she
had, with sharp reprehentions, re^uked them of disobedience, and reproved them
of foolish pity, and that her words had now made them altogether as
pitiless, as her own purpose was cruel, she caused both the first, and last
company of the Assirians to assend the top of a steep Rock, from whence to
be floung down headlong, was the death whereunto they were all adjudged, by
this angry Virago.

Great was the general lamentation that the Assirians then made, and no less
the admiration that either company had of this their heavy, and unexpected
meeting, and that amongst so barbarous a people: howbeit of all this time, on
neither part was any acquaintance taken, for they all seemed strangers one to
another. But anon, as the friend imbraceth his friend, and each man encourages
his fellow, with patience and constancy to leave his life, and as Atys and
Abynados plie them, now to one place, and then to an other, still with godly
exhortations, strengthening the ^^^^ting courages of some their fearful
Countriemen, amongst the first-ariued Assirians, they espied Sorares their
father. But, alas, the manner of this their dismal meting was so much the more
lamentable, by how much more the same might have been joyful, had they not
been crossed by this misfortune: there might one see ye Sons to want all
tokens of gladness in saluting their Father, and the Father furnished with all
signs of heaviness in intertaining his Sons: and the skilfullest Painter in
making a several Counterfeit to every sorrowful countinaunce, either should
have been grounded in variety, or else have painted more then one Agame^non,
under a vale, ^emon^^ the death of Iphigenia. Yea so pitiful were the confu^ed
Cries, and this doleful Spectacle, even to the Ila^ders themselves, that moved
with compassion, they made no have at all to do execution, as was the severe
commandment of their Gouernesse.

But Dircilla only constant in her cruelty, and the rather, when she perceived
the ministers of her wrath thus suddenlye inclined to mercy, being set in a
double chaufe, did single out from either company of the Assirians two of the
most aged persons: and then hardly withholding her Fist from their faces, and
her Lawnce from the bosoms of her own people, used these following speeches.

Cap. 54.
HOw far off (foolish and ungrateful people) I am even from any tirannous
thought whereof it seems you have me in ielosie, the self-witnesse of these
two ancient murderers, may happily fit me with a sufficient purgation: for as
I persuade my self that al Assirians generally are fleshed with blood, so I
easily conjecture that these two, in respect of their years, should be parties,
or at the least wise privy to those murders whereof I shall now speak: yea,
although a godless life has commonly a graceless end, yet it may be that
these old Hou^^sides (whom if you shall spare, a natural death will shortly
dispatche) will at the last penitentlye confess, what at the least I
perticularly express. But if it fall out against my guess, yet either shall I
make the very name of an Assirian odious in your ears, or by reporting my just
quarrel, prove my self guiltless of tyranny. Omitting therefore to be
curious, as touching the treacherous ariual of ye Assirian Armies into Media my
native country, under conduct of their butcherous Emperor Ninus, it shall
suffice that my weeping eyes somewhat easing my heart, shall anon license my
tongue, in few, to touch with what bestial cruelty they ordered their bloody
Conquest. These mine (...) ^ehelde the royal Pauilion of king Farnus my Father
consumed with fire, which way soever I looked the country abroad was al a
flame: here might I see an heap of Meades newly slaughtered, there the
Assirians to persevere in sleying: this Uillain murthereth a Matron over the
dead body of her son or husband, yt Ruffen haileth, by her fair hear, some
noble Uirgin to rauishme^t, death or captivity: one sundereth the impotent
olde-man in sport, an other ^^eaeth the strong-membred yong-ma^ in dispight:
yea in every corner was such murdering, sacking, captiuating, racking,
rifling, and horror what not? that death seemed least damage that the poor
Medes then sustained. If the rehearsal of this common Calamity will not
suffice. I have also a particular complaint against the Assirians: who (then in
which they might not have perpetrated greater cruelty) having puposely made
the King and Queen my parents eyewitnesses, of the most miserable condition
of their Subjects and Signorie, did also, even in their sight, murder seven
young Princes their children: and (least in any one thing, they might seem not
to have outraged in tyranny) with the lukewarm blood of the children they
mingled also the blood of the parents: leaving me of their fruitful issue
the only Remain. But more then this, and (who was fully as dear, or dearer
to me then parents, brethren or country) in this bloody business I lost by
death or captivity, I wot not which, Duke Arbaces, ah Arbaces my husband, who
not long before had made me a mother of an unfortunate Son, was then bereft
me. Also when the Assirians should depart, mine harmefull beauty procured my
shipping toward Assiria, for why, the Emperor had in his purpose appointed
me one of his Concubynes: with which purpose of his I, desolate I, became so
perplexed, that from thenceforth breaking truce with my patience, I was rather
to seek of a desperate practice then a consenting (...) to have perished, in
so much, that the motherly care of my Babe then hanging on my breast, had not
bayled me from death, if a worser occurrant had not withstood so an good
occasion: for by the commandment of Ascolanta the Emperisse (being now envious
of my beauty, and waxing jealous of her husbands liking) I was all alone set
a shore in this Island, by which means I also for-went my sweet Infant: and
until now, my desartes more (as appears) then your devotions, have given me
here intertainment. It is not vainglory (I ^peake not now to these Assirians,
whom I worthily malign, but to you the Inhabitants of this Island, whom
unworthily I have profited) yt moves me thus to vau^t deserts, but your own
unthankfulness that will not value my merits: for meet though it be, that you
vouche the heavens for the matter of your wealth, whereof you long were
ignorant, yet amiss were it not, to vouchsafe me a prerogative in ye manner
and use, as first delivered unto you by mine invention. I found you without
Gods, without Religion, without Laws, or Government, naked, wild, brutish, and
beast-like, feeding on Roots, harboring in Bushes, fear full of your own
shadows, and to discribe you in a word, Monsters wrapped in man-like habbites:
but in these through mine industry you have now Reformation, and were it not
that prouender does prick you, and fulne^^ ^ake you foolish, only you, might
be said an happy people: and that, ywis, not so much in respect the natural
pleasure, and plenty of this your popilous Island (through aterrestriall
Parradise) as in that mine expe^ience and plat-forme has warned you, and might
have armed you from the Incursions of these Tyrants, the common Skourge to all
pleople: against whom, not without cause as you have heard, my tongue long
since has proclaimed deadly Foade, neither, in seeking reueng, shall mine heart
break Couenante, with the diseased ghostes of my murdered friends. But (on
Gods name) be it so, that nether Media for example, my self for merittes, the
(...) their mischieues, our law for justice, you for duty, (...) I for
authority, be it so, I say, that none of these have that weight of argument,
to win you revenging Instruments, to wreake my teene upon these Tyrants: yet
at the leastwise, be provident for your own safety, and prevent your own
euilles, by punishing these your apparent enemies: of whom the question is not,
whether they all have iumped upon one devilish Attempt, that is, the conquest
of you and your Country (all circumstances directly approving such consequent)
but, because according to the mind of the offender we are to measure offenses,
and for that there may be mercy in punishing, and cruelty in sparing, let us
see whether of the, two, pity or punishment is in this case more requisite.
If this offense of the Assirians had been committed through ignorance,
infirmity, provocation on our part, through rashness (for sometimes rashness,
and such like infirmities are in some men as sicknesses) if privately against
one, or a few, or by your known foes, then I deny not, but that mercy might
have borrowed of Justice: but I will clear them (as men that will not offend but
in the highest degree) of these petite faults, and charge them with capital
crimes. They (least herein they should degenerate from Assirians) of pretended
mall^^^ without matter, have hoysted their sails to foreign winds, and used
their unpeaceable weapons against unknown people: not for Enmity, but for
Ambitton, not ignorantly by chance, but advisedly by counsel, not rashly, but
resolutely, not against some, bu^ against all, not because you deserve war,
but because they despise peace: yea, had not I forewarned you, as having had
trial of their trecheries, you should have fealt their wounds before you
could have feared their words: and after they had glutted them selves with
Slaughters, Rauishments, Sacrileges, Burninges, Spoylinges, and all kind of
Mischieues, the Ruins of your Island should not have priuileged the
Suruiuours of you, from their intolerable Slavery. If this much, which might
suffice for me to charge them, and for you to correct them be yet insufficient,
then have I also Reason, and Honesty Coparswado^s hereof. Reason I say, because
better afew be punished then yt a multitude should perish, and Honesty,
because in yt you may, and will not, you take upon your selves the Offense of
the Offendoures, and betray the good whilst you boulster the badde: for
Impunitie is the Spring of Carelessness, the Mother of Insolency, the root
of impudency and the Nurse of al Transgressions. For shame therefore, Sirs,
inchaunt your harmefull pity, and remember that not to correct is to consent
to the Crime. Better it is that I remember you of the peril, then you repent
you of your pity, for if you stay until Experience, the Philosophy of
Fools, has taught you what I have toulde you, then, to your costs, you shall
find that the Assirians be men enemies to mankind, not to be made your
friends by Compulsion or Composition, whose enmity comes of Custom, and
not by occasion: even this disgrace, if they escape, that their lives and
liberties were in your power to give, or take is unnatural for their natures
to digest, for which (were there no other cause) their cankared Stomachs shall
requite your sufferance with the abuse of you patience: it is a thing
impossible. ^o reconcile an heart hardened with pride and malice to honesty.
But what? is it dece^t that I plead before mine own Uassails? that I entreat
as a Subject whom I should command as a Sovereign? my s^fferance, I see, is
cause of your stubbornness, and my courtesy of your contempt: At my first
coming when I might have had adoration as a Goddess, I was not then so hautie
as to take it, and now that I should have obedience as you Gouernesse, you are
not so humble as to give it: thus deal you with me as did the Frogs with
Jupiters Rafter, you make me a Stock, but beware these Storks. And truly,
seeing you have not deserved why I should be longer careful of you and your
welfare, and for, that by disobedience, you will needs inflict upon your
selves so grievous a punishment, I also give my consent (a revenge too great I
confess) that these our Captives be anon delivered to their ships: that, being
insufficient of them selves, they may inuit from Assiria the destruction, and
ruin of you, your wives, your children, your goods, and your whole country:
for enough have the Assirians seen in this our Island, to allure hither
multitudes of Inuadours.

Cap. 55.
THese her words, had now so incensed the minds of the Ilanders against the
Assirians, that every of them was clearly resolute in the death of his
Prisoner: but for that one of the two old Captives, whom Dircilla had (as
before) singled out, and whom her words had now especially touched to the
quick, was suddenly bereft his senses, and fallen in a sown: And for that the
Ilanders stood upon expectation of some further confession, to be delivered
by the second olde-man, who was already, in way of answer to Dircilla, entered
into some and these following speeches, therefore until he should end, the
deter^^^ed slaughter received a second adiornement.

I protest (quoth. this aged man) by whatsoever God has ^ar^ of us and this
Country, by the Sun, and the holy Fire of Caldia, and as every of these
shall, in this life, comfort my withered Carcass, more fit for the worms the^
the world, and do good to my Soul, when it shall leave the wearisome prison
of this my body, I shall, Lady* neither dissemble for fear, accuse for envy,
or excuse for affection, but as touching that wherewithal we are now charged,
utter all that I know, and know all to be troth I shall utter.

For my self therefore I say, that most true and too true it is, that the
Assirians, then conducted by Ninus, committed such and the same before
remembered outrages, slaughters, and spoils in Media, neither were you deceived
in guessing some of us to be privy, or parties to that bysines, wherein (to
say troth) my self was no small part: but how? not (alas) as a Spoyler with
the Assirians, but as a Sufferer with the Meades, for Media is the place of my
bearth, Assiria only of mine aboade. And for these Assirians, mine own
company I mean, I say, Lady, that not charging them with the faults of
their Ancestors, or any further then wherein them selves be guilty, you, but
especially yours have greter cause of kindness, then of any cruelty: for
proof and better credit whereof, besides my former protestation, somewhat it is
(whom since my hither coming I have not heard named) that I know you to be
Dircilla, wife and Lady to the Duke Arbaces: but more, that I the speaker of
these words am Orchamus brother unto the same your husband: and more then so,
the man unto whose care, when suddenly, at the commandment of the Emperise,
you were snatched from out your Cabben, you commended your young Son, saying:
Ah good Orchamus, if thy fortune prove better then ye destinies of al thy
friends, be a Parent to thy poor Nephewe, whom with more grief* I leave an
Orphant, the^ to have seen hi^ ^uried: I well remember the words, and,
me-thinkes, I yet see those very weepinges which pierced mine heart, a^ this
our lamentable separation. Since which time (Dircilla) I have not only been
careful to answer the same your trust, but also, beyond expectation, I found
Fortune and opportunity therein assisting. For no sooner was the Assirian
Fleet aryued at home, but that Ninus (not a little displeased at your loss,
the which by the Emperise, and her ministers was smoothly cloaked with a
colorable excuse) but that Ninus, I say, caused your Son to be nursed and
nurtured with prince-like attendance: and when his age served, who then of
greater credit and courage, or a more notable Captain then was Sorares,
amongst the Assirians? But in the return of the imperial Navy from the
Bactrian wars, by occasion of a sudden tempest then happening, Sorares your
Son, my nephew and all the company aboorde his ship, were lost from the
rest, in the Sea Caspium. Now when this heavy news was bruted at Niniuie, I,
Atys, and Abynados, his two Sons (for he has made you a gra^dmother of these
two Gentlemen) and these other, his, and our friends, vowing our selves in his
continual Quest, have three years already, travailed many Countries and Seas,
to find out Sorares: through occasion whereof, as also to take in fresh water
and other necessaries, and not upon any such purpose as you pretend, we are
aryued in this Island, and lo, yonder-same (he pointed to Sorares) is the man
far sought, but vnluckely here found, if finding him we loose our selves,
and with the end of our labors, make also an end of our lives.

Cap. 56.
JN few, what with this talk, and other more effectual tokens, Dircilla being
brought to her Creed, and left in de profundis, rather musing at their meeting
being so straun^^, then mistrusting the matter being credited, or ever she
might embrace Sorares, or reply to Orchamus, was interrupted by the second
Olde-man, the other of the two singled-out Captives: who in a joyful ecstasy,
suddenly clapped her (frowardly disdayning his imbracinges, as not yet cooled
of her former chaufe) betwixt his braune-fallen arms. But when he saw her
looks, not unlike to those in the picture of Proserpina, newly rapted by
Pluto, it entered then his thought, that rashly to jest with Saints or
edg-tooles, might prove dangerous: wherefore as doubting the like reward, that
had Aesops kind Ass, vnkinde-like imitating the wanton Spanniel, for the time
therefore charming such his kindness, anon he found opportunity, thus to
change her coyness.

I give place, said he, to the time, but not to Dircilla, whom these arms
(pythlesse though they now be) once could, nay often did, not violently but
willingly embrace (may I so blabbe) even in the bed of Arbaces: blushe not,
Dircilla, blushe not, the sport was lawful, howsoever the report may seem
over liberal: and if (for poverty parts friends) you disdain to
acknowledge such acquaintance, yet at the least for Arbaces his sake, deal
mercifully with these your Prisoners. As for my self, could I plead no other
protection then that I am old enough not to fear death, it might suffice: but
nether did I hope so well as I have here found, neither do I fear so ill as
I am here threatened: Orchamus (for so your countenance promises a consent)
has already found grace, because he is brother to your husband Arbaces, and
therefore not likely is it, that Arbaces him self speaking for him self, or
rather for me, shall speed worser then does Orchamus: neither do I make it a
doubt, but that Sorares son to Arbaces and you, is alike dear to either
parent: and of the saffetie of Atys and Abynados his sons, natural love I
presume tendereth a warrantize: but now generally, and briefly as touching all
these Assirians, my self, Dircilla, will be their Borrowe, if Arbaces his
Bail may deliver them of their Banoes.

To make short tale, Dircilla now hearing, and seeing sufficient to the
acknowledging of her husband, unable then to moderate her sudden joy, and in
respect of her years and whom even now she seemed, unlike to her self, she
lightly clasped Arbaces as ready to embrace, as to be embraced betwixt her
arms: who mutually mixing their joyful tears, with loving kysses, were
either of them long time bereft the use of their tongues: of which pleasant
passions Orchamus, Sorares, Atys, and Abynodos were also glad Copartners:
neither were the bystanders, as well Assirians, as Ilanders exempted for idle
inspectoures (...) evil appayed Actours in this joyful Accident.

After therefore more then a little joy on all sides ouerpassed, by reason of
this happy meeting thus disclosed, wherein (after many years, and every
person severally scattered in a sundry Country) the Husband had recovered
his Wife, she her Husband, both their Son, he his Parents, him his sons,
he them, the brother his brother, the kinsman his kindred, and the friend his
friend, and (which more is) after extreme miseries attaining to such
inspeakeable joys, yea and at that instant, when nothing was less hoped for
then life, after (I say) this joyful meeting, the Prisoners were all set at
liberty, and bountifully feasted by Dircilla, and her Ilanders. And then every
of the Meades severally reported what had befalne them, since their chasing out
of their country (as before) by Ninus.

First Arbaces told of their tragical ariuall into the barren Island, and how
he and his fellow, suruiuing the rest, after they had been long shut up there
in great misery, did deliver themselves from thence (as in the beginning of
this Book is remembered) in the ship of Sorares, whom then, or before this
very time he knew not for his Son: then shows he of their safe ariuall, and
good intertai^ment in Sarmatia from whence, having obtained a ship and men,
as pitying the distress wherein they had left Sorares and his Assirians, and
for their delivery, they again resailed to the barren Island: then lastly how
they had no sooner taken Sorares, and his miserable soldiers aboard, and put
their ship again to the Seas, but that a sudden storm, drove them perforce
upon that same pleasant Island, wherein this their ieoberdious joy thus happened.

Sorares, Atys, and Abynados did (in effect) no other then i^terate the former
report of Orchamus: and now was it come to Dircilla her turn to speak,
whose words, containing a more pitiful, profitable, and pleasant discourse,
then a curious delivery, thus follow.

Cap. 57.
WHen, Arbaces, the Mariners had landed and left me post alone in this Island,
the day was far spent, and my wits almost at an ebb: then was thy name rife
in my mouth, and (though also in vain) the extincte names of my dead parents,
and brethren: yea mine eyes with fear, and my heart with love, did both twain
follow those envious Sails, whereby Sorares my son, then an Infant, was
carried Captive into a strange Country, from me his helpelesse mother: and
when mine eyes might no longer accompany him through distaunce of Seas, yet
did my heart ariue with him even in Assiria. Anon with fresh supplies did
sorrows confusedly succeed sorrows, being in number so great, and in nature
so grievous, that one of my then passions might have set twenty toungs a work,
one of those toungs have constrained a milio^ eyes to tears, and the least
cause of those tears have killed ye wepers heart: neither did it alone suffice,
yt I thus sorrowed for things past, but I also feared a world of woes not
unlikely to have followed. Here perceived I a pleasant Island, but unmanured (as
might seem) of people: retire back I could not, go forwards I durst not,
behind me raged the wide seas, before me mustered the wild Deserts, and on
either side, heard I the unacquainted noise of dreadful Monsters: and yet
(troth to say) I less doubted the fierceness of any Monster, that could but
devour my body, then the falsehood of men (if any were) that might have abused
my beauty: for, besides that mine Attire, not vnbeseming the daughter of
Farnus, was then very gorgious, and mine age (I being then in the flower of my
youth) answerable to mine Attire, my beauty also (though I say it) was then
suitable to both, in commendation whereof, thy self (my Arbaces) did, in
those our altian days, affect overmuch the figure Hyperbole, and with the
Ilanders here, was ye same not a little effectual to win me favor: but this
brave brag to such as now hear me, and did not then see me, will, no doubt,
seem more audatious in report, then autenticall for credit, yet do I speak it
in this place, where err ^ cannot without controulment.

These fears, I say, and a thousand like fantasies thus oc^upying my
thoughts, suddenly I heard a boisterous rushing amongst the next boughs,
four of these Ila^ders anon disclosing themselves unto my view: every of them
held in his right hand a cragged Dart, and in the left a great quantity of
raw flesh: at sight whereof (and a greater horror then so) when, not meanly
affrighted, I beheld how gluttonously they crammed down their M^wes, the same
f^esh yet reaking in their teeth, and how their Chaps, beardes, breasts,
arms, hands, and whatsoever gri^^^e part of them leaves had left bare, were
al besmeared with blood, though death was then the least of all my fears, yet
(believe me) the cruelty prefigurated by this sauadge Spectacle, did strike
to my heart such incomprehensible terror, that if, at the least, sorrows had
not bereft me of sense, in comparison hereof, the sufferaunce of a simple death
had been no death, or in no part so dreadful.

Now, whilst I apply this horrible presidente to feed my new fear, and
rather dreaded, then doubted, that anon their imbrewed hands should seize, and
their rauinous teeth tire upon me and my flesh, and I so receive an unnatural
burial within their bowels, the barbarous people had espied out me: who then,
as Dear newly brought to the stand, with Countinances indifferently
inclining to admiration and fear, stood a great while aloof off at gaze. Anon
seeing me to approach them nearer and nearer, after many Satirlike freakes, with
nimble feet and swift flight, they skud away into the nearest woods, wildly
boulting through the Thickets, and with incredible facility, mounting and
dismounting the sharp and steep Roches. then (a strange and preposterous
course might it seem, if not in so desparate a case, that the Hare should
follow the Hound) as I fearing pursued them flying, with purpose, at lest by
falling into their hands, to have died from such miseries, in casting my eye
aside, I perceived ye Ca^^ and carcass of a Bear, the which these men had
newly slaughtered, and upon whose disme^bred limbs (as might seem) I had even
now seen them feeding. This fact of theirs as it seemed to participate a
fearce and bestiall courage, so such their food did argue in them a defect of
humane conditions, and both it, and whatsoever else I here beheld, presented
over skatheful sights to me, even now so wealthy, and wanton a Lady. Thus
hitherto did I salute penury at the Threshold, seeming to me an intolerable
hansell.

But whilste I thus lingered a dying life, Night, the discomfortable Register
and Remembrencer of all miseries, had taken place of the opposite, and
ouershadowed all this Country: then fleeted many thoughts in my mind, not
only of present ieoberdies, but also of passed joys: and by how much more nise
and delicate education, or to be exact from so royal parentage made once to
happiness, by so much more penury, and distress added now to perplexity
and impatience: for what thing can happen more unkindly, then that pleasant
and good causes should vary in perverse and bad effects? or what leave we
with more grief, then what we possessed with most joy? I that lately had all,
or more than I could readily ask, could not ask now any one needful thing I
might possibly have, but as in better times I had superfluity with supplies,
so in this change of fortune I suffered necessity with decrease: Beggars know
in what, and by whom to be relieved, but (alas) even beggerie did by so much
better mine infortune, by how much I neither knew to beg, nor found of whom
to receive, and (whereof Beggars are not restrained) it lay not in my choice to
make change of the place, whatsoever in charity I found in the people.

But by that time, the torture of two or three of these daily terrors, and
nightly torments had racked Virtue ^^om Necessity, I tried this Cross both
possible to happen, and found the same in event profitable: for as the Horse
late pampered up at the full manger, and anon turned out to grasing, does not
willinglye forsake his bare pasture, again to return to his sweet Prouendor,
so I, (although my sufferaunce came at first by constraint, yet constraint
growing to a custom, and custom to a confirmation of patience) used the
Liberty of these Woods, as a Supersedias against the World: yea when my Flesh
was mortified, and my Spirits quickened, I could then consider, that Virtue and
Riches sieldome couple in one body: and when I was so far secluded from the
vain delights of the world, that neither mine eyes might see the^, mine ears
hear them, nor my heart hope for them, I then easily deuerted from the
Compounds of Education, and reuerted to the Simples of Nature: and in so needye
a life, I remembered my naked birth, and conceived the like of my grave. Thus
profit we in divine Uirtue, when we decay in human presumption: and herein
only differ we from brute beasts, that they naturallye know not themselves,
but such ignorance in us works unkindly to brutishness.

Now, credit me, Arbaces, all seemed th^^ vain which before time I had in
most value: for I remember (and I think the world is as it was) that in our
Heads, Hears, Habbits, and behauiours, Uarietie so squared out Fashions
according to our own Fantasies, that whilst Nature seemed a Dotarde, and Art
an Infant too-bad became a Bravery: that our faces so borrowed of Phao his
Box, that the interest exceeding the loan, Beauty with some became a
Banquerupt: that our Feet (proud Fools) so tr^ad upon the earth as if earth,
disdained to touch earth. But smile I must to remember, how some with a Mask,
a Scarf, or a Plume, could as formally keep their old or black and bad faces
from sight, as did others their beauty from Sunne-burne: neither could
ought be^ tolerated in young, fair, and noble Dames for their pre^rogatiue,
that was not anon taken up by old, foul, and mean Drosels for pride, so that
we becoming May-ladies, they would anon counterfeit Maid-marians: and yet
these Apes in purple, in our fashions, gate, and niceness, followed us in
nothing so effectuallye, as did some men effeminatelye, whose locks were so
like trimmed, beauty so tended, and all their ornaments so woman-like
tempered, that only to have taken their Swords from their sides, and then to
have given them Fannes in their hands, had been altogether to resemble, with
whom they did altogether desemble, women.

This did I then remember, and the vanities ^hereof seemed most ridiculous:
alas, would I think to my self, that sometimes was as nice as the nicest,
with what foolishness frequent we our bodies to costly balmes and curious
ornaments, which after a few days Death presents to the Grave, and the Grave
to the Worms? and why are we remiss and careless in beautifying our souls,
fit presents for the Gods themselves, with incorruptable virtues.

If (more th^^kefully be it now spoken, than the same was then accep^ed)
adversity would offer unto other Ladies, or to whomsoever, the same opportunity
to contemplate and consider of the World, as was, and is allotted to me, Beauty
would seem Uanitie, the loss of Riches, the recovery of quietness, a Ransom
from Fortune, and a discovery of our selves: and we our selves should
appear to our selves, no other then Examples of weakness, Spoils of Time, the
Game of Fortune, Patterns of inconstancy, Receptacles of misery, Marks for
Envy, in conception loathsome, in birth helpelesse, in youth witless, in age
wretched, of life uncertain, of death sure, and consequently, well shall they
that thus say: Post hominem vermis, post vermem f^tor and horror
Sic in non hominem vertitur omnis homo.
Cum f^x, cum limus, cum res vilissima simus,
Vnde superbimus? ad terram terra redimus.
Therefore should we behave our selves here, not as though we live only for our
bodies, but as though we could not live without bodies: neither so to follow
the world, that we also fall with the world, which being ours, we are not our
own. But hitherto have you not heard, how I fell in with these Ilanders: the
order whereof I shall now tell you.

Cap. 58.
THese considerations (my dear Arbaces) at the first urged of necessity, and
then used as necessary, besides the place it self, which seemed a second
Elysium, or of pleasure, and plenty Nature her Storehouse: wherein each Hill
might seem a Parnassus, each Ualley an Edon, each Grove a Tempe, and each
Water a Tagus: and more-ouer (which did not a little delight) with these the
people also, the men and nimble Ladds of this Island, unto whom, if we grant
their then Attire and wildness, and from these other except their (...)*like
Members and Manners, they should seem right Fani, or Satirs: or rather, in
respect of their personages (might not the Comparison seem Sacralegious to
his Deity) in steed of Darts, arming them with bow and quiver, such as was
said lusty Nomius in the fields of Thessalie.

And what shall I speak of mine own Sex? whose louelye faces were such as you
now see, and whose beautiful bodies, because I descried them little better
then bare, had the discovery been yours, might, perhaps, otherwise have
delighted your wanton eyes: believe me, so Nymph-like were their faces and
fashions, that whether it were, in beholding the calm seas, that they tripped
on the Shore, they seemed such as are reported the Nereides: or that they
floung themselves into some pleasant Fountain, they resembled the Naiades: or
that they kept the ayrsome Mountains, they represented the Oreades: or that
amongst the Woods casting themselves into a ring, they daunced their
Roundiloes, or gathering sweet Gayes, they decked themselves with Flowers, or
that they couched their white sides on the soft Herbs, in these also they
might have been taken for the Dryades.

By assistaunce, I say, of these, that is, Patience, Time, Place, People, and
this sweet and vnthreatned Liberty (the only remembrance of thee Arbaces,
and of Sorares my son excepted) I made not only a resistaunce for the time,
but at length a final conquest of Fortune. And having secretlye, and
sufficiently observed the harmless manners and dispositions of these people,
and in all things reformed my self to their fashions, when opportunity served,
I fell in with the rest, and behaved my self so formally that (no one
suspecting to the contrary) I was taken for an here-breede Ilandresse: but by
this means chanced my Credit, and Authority.

Having (...) little and little crept in acquaintance, after a while (as moved
so to do, by reason of my cold attier and coulder lodging, more natural to
them then usual to me, albeit both to the^ and me tolerable enough, because
then this, no Climate may be more temperate) I happened one Evening, a great
number of the Ilanders being then present, with a Flint-stone to strike fire,
and therewithal to kindle an heap of sticks and other dry matter: but lo (a
thing vnthoughte of) they who never before had seen Fire, but supposed the
same to be some miraculous Accident presently derived from the Son, which
they worshipped for their God, as people therefore ravished of their senses,
and holding both it and me in reverent admiration, they offer divine worship:
which I refusing, by many familier instaunces, informed them in this and other
matters: so far-foorth nevertheless, aduauntaging my self by such their
superstitious inclynations, as in their uncivil manners, diet, apparel,
dwellinges, provision, religion, and such like, might tend to the more easier
Reformation: in which thing I dealing with them by degrees, and according to
their Capacities, did in time, profit them to a more civil Perfection. And
then, whereas they believed me a Goddess, I removed also that profitable
Error, but might not renounce the Government of them, and their Country:
which charge, with a general consent, would I, or would I not, they have cast
upon me.

Cap. 59.
AS Dircilla thus parled, and whilst the Riualles sat yet banqueting in her
Bowers, they discryed a great flame assending from out the Sea, whereof Arbaces
desirous to know the reason, was thus answered: that certain of the Ilanders,
ignorant of that that was happened, finding his sheep in the Docke, had fired
both it and all the ballace therein, being a great Masse^ ^^easure: with which
news Arbaces seeming much disquieted, was in conclusion by Dircilla thus
appeased.

Ouer-passed Damages, quoth. she, have made me provident in following dangers,
and therefore (albeit at this time, ignorant of this action, wherein thy
presence, Arbaces, might have been a countermaunde to our Custom) yet
generally before time, as concerning the Assirians, have I commanded such
burninges and ambushmentes: as a thing profitable to our peace, and in
performaunce easy, and to that end continually have maintained watches in
every our Costs: by which means no Reporter has allured hither Inuadours,
and our own people, keeping within their own bounds, remain vncorrupt of
strange manners and practices. But alas (and then tears were joined to
words) what means, Arbaces, this thy troubled countenance for thy burnt
ship, as though thou would resaile without me, that in this place have vowed
my burial: to those white hears of thine, and to one so unfortunately crossed
of the world, delightful rest should, me-thinkes, seem more agreeable, then
doubtful travels.

If thou, being then a Prince, and young, could not in Media avoid the
Assirian tyranny, if the Treasure (I cite thine own report) from thence
transported into the barren Island, causing such effusion of blood, and in the
end only possessed of two, had no virtue because no use, if after thine own
delivery, in waffing also from that imprisonm^nt Sorares thine unknown son,
and his companions, the Seas ruled thy Stern, and the storms were thy Pilots,
if I say, in Youth, in Age, in wealth, in want, on Land, and on Sea, thou
have experienced such incertaintie and perils, and lastly if after all these,
yea and that when no other then a foul death was expected, thou have recovered
thy Wife, thy Son, thy sons Children, thy Brother, and with them a Kingdom,
yea a kingdom for ^^easure matching Boeotia, and for profit comparable to the
best part in Nabathia, why then do thou not, I say, renounce those old
perils, and rest contented with these new pleasures? of which though three
parts were wanting, yet, believe me, Arbaces, a contented mind is better then
a kingdom, and the world, at the best, worser then a Parasite.

This she said, and Arbaces having already assented in himself, did easily
consent to her, as one not so much turned by words, as tired with the world:
who, as also Orchamus, Sorares, Atys, Abynados, and all the Assirians esteem
themselves rapt up into a third heaven, so inspeak- was the joy of such their
meeting, and the pleasure and plenty of this their Island. And thus to
conclude, those whom I found in Charons Boat I now leave in Jupiters
Boosome.

FINIS.
Sat velle, si non posse.
Imprinted at London by Thomas Purfoote, and are to be sold at his shop
^uer-against S. Sepulchres-Church.


