CHRIST In the Clouds, OR GODS coming to Judgment.

A short Treatise, very necessary in these evil and dangerous times, for all
those which desire that the day of the Lord, may be their day of joy.

MAR. 13. Verses 35.36. Watch, for ye know not when the Master of the house
will come: whether at Evening, or at midnight, or at the Cock-crowing, or at
the dawning: lest he come suddenly, and find you sleeping.

LONDON, Printed for F. Coals, at the upper end of the Old Bailey, near
Newgate, 1635.

Christ in the Clouds: or Gods coming to Judgment.
EPicurisme and Atheism are two sins most heinous and deadly: the Atheist
believes there is no God: him David confutes, Doubtless there is a God which
judges the earth. The Epicure believes there is no Judgment after Death: him
Solomon does seem to instruct, Remember that for all these things thou must
come to Judgment. There is no Christian, I think, Mat. 24.3
but believes that there shall be a day of Judgment: But when this day shall
come, none knows, for of that day and hour, no man knows, neither the Angels
of heaven, but my father only. But although no man's reach is able to determine
when that day and hour shall be yet it may plainly be demonstrated and shown
both from the Prophets and Apostles, that this judgment day is near at hand,
and will most suddenly come upon us. It is the mercy of the holy Ghost to man,
in holy Writ to insert these caueats, and to put man in mind of the Judgment
day, and three special causes.

1 That we may be terrified from sin. 2 That we might be admonished to the true
and sincere worship of God. 3 That we might be strengthened in our faith, lest
that great and terrible Day should come upon us unawares, and so find us
unprovided.
Since the foundation of the world, we know the time; when the dissolution of
the world shall be, we are altogether ignorant: yet we may justly Prophecy and
presage thus much, since sin and impiety is now come to that height, that it
can by no succeeding ages be aggrauated, and that virtue and godliness are so
despised and vilified among impious men, that they can never hereafter be less
esteemed: Who cannot then perceive, or is so dull sighted, that is not able to
apprehend and foresee the dissolution to be at hand? Now is that Prophecy of
Hosea verified; There is no truth, nor mercy, Hosea 4.
nor knowledge of God in the Land, which appears by the cursing, lying,
murders, thefts, and adulteries which now abounds: Mich. 7.
So that now, as the Prophet Micah has it: The godly man is perished from the
earth, and there is no just man among the sons of men. Thus Hosea, Micah, nay,
all the Prophets do agree in one, whereupon says Saint Ambrose: When righteous
men perish from off the face of the earth, the earth must needs perish also,
because the godly are the pith and marrow of earth. For as a tree without pith
and moisture soon dries up, so the present world must needs decay, when the
righteous that should uphold it, are not to be found in it: for this cause, as
the Prophet Esaias has it: In the City is left desolation, and destruction is in
the gates thereof, because of their manifold iniquities.

Christ Jesus himself said, As in the days before the Flood, Mat. 24.
they were eating and drinking, marrying, and giving in marriage, until the
day of the flood came and took them away: So also shall the coming of the
Son of man be, by reason of profaneness and too much security. Suppose that
this Prophecy shall be fulfilled upon our present times, and that God will say
to us, as he did to Noah, I will destroy you with the world. O unhappy and
miserable shall that man be then, that has not God for his guide. But to the
end we may the better discern, that we are they, upon whom the ends of the
world must come, there is no better a sign among those which Christ himself
gave before, than this: Namely, That the Gospel of the Kingdom shall be
preached in all the World, for a witness to all nations, and then shall the
end come. Which is as much as to say according to S. Chrysostom: To accuse and
reprove those that would not believe the Gospel. The same it is of Hillarie:
The Apostles being dispersed throughout all the world, and the Gospel
preached, then shall the fall of Jerusalem, and the end be. Nevertheless,
there are both learned and unlearned of this opinion, that since the world, so
long after these prophesies, has continued as before, that the end is not
near, and that the world should continue still immutable; but let them
persevere in their opinions. For since S. Ambrose, Cyprian, Chrysostom, and
Saint Gregory were of opinion, that since the Gospel, in their time was
preached to all Nations, long after their time the world could not endure;
surely then it is most probable, that this is the age in which the end must
come. Now that we may have some proof that the world cannot endure long,
because the Gospel is said to be preached to all Nations; hear Saint Jerome,
who was of opinion that there was in his time, no Nation that was ignorant of
the Gospel of Christ: for he says; Although they have no Preacher, yet they
cannot but hear the opinion of the Faith of their neighbor Nations.

This Prosper confirms: No part of the world is without the Gospel of Christ,
some of all sorts, and of all Nations have knowledge of Christ: I could induce
a Cloud of opinions: but let Ambrose serve for them all: The Gospel is
preached, that the world may be destroyed. To conclude this point, since
probably by this great motive we are induced to believe that the end is at
hand, and that the day and hour thereof is uncertain, it should stir us up
to a more holy course of life, lest that our desolation and confusion overtake
us unawares.

But to the end that we may the better understand and believe, what has been
before showed, the word of God is a most firm argument to inform us of the
truth of Christ's sudden coming, and that this present Age, is the last Age of
the world; for the Spirit expressly says: 1 Timoth 4. That in the latter end
some shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and
Doctrines of Devils, speaking lies in Hypocrisy, and having their consciencce
feared with an hot iron, etc. And again, know this also, That in the last
days perilous times shall come; for men will be lovers of their own selves,
covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful,
unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers,
incontinent, despisers of those that are good, highminded, lovers of pleasure
more than of God, having the form of godliness, but denying the power thereof.

Thus far the Apostle, which words S. Cyprian handling, says, All things
that were foretold, are fulfilled, and the end of the world drawing near: The
Prophesies are come to pass, both in respect of the men, and the minds; for
now (if ever) is the perfection, or rather imperfection of all the sins, the
Apostle names to be the fore runners of the end. Why doubt we then, that the
end is not at hand, or why fear we not rather, that a sudden end will prevent
our procastinated Repentance? As bodies are sick before death, and as
infirmity and sickness are the true forerunners of a separation between the
Body and the Soul: Even so fares it with the world, it now langnisheth, and
is corrupt, it now lies sick, and therefore it must needs come to confusion,
and to an end. For deadly sickness is a forerunner of death; all things now
suffer their defect, and let no man wonder at it, for man now is borne in such
defect, in respect of the birth of man in former times: but what is wanting in
the present condition of man's body, is supplied in the faculties of his mind,
and what is defective in the strength of his members, is complete in the
ripeness of his understanding, which is for the most part employed not in
liberal, but in devilish arts; not in the study of learning, but of pleasure.
Only wit and maturity is resident in man, the only Idea and representment of
the Image of God in man. What can we otherwise but think, that the time is at
hand, wherein mortality shall put on immortality; wherein the burden of the
flesh being laid aside, the glorious body of the Church shall be coupled to
her glorious head, the communication of Saints shall be consummate, and Christ
shall enjoy his Spouse in continual love and union? In the mean time with
Paul, Unhappy men that we are, Romans 4.^4
who shall deliver us from this body of death, that we may pass secure to the
body of life.

Then let every good Christian in these wicked times wherein destruction hangs
over our heads, with good Hezekiah pray, Lord I am oppressed, do thou
undertake for me; and since the day of destruction is so near us, we entreat
thee since it is expedient for us, that thou would teach us so to number our
days that we may apply our hearts to wisdom: Psalm. 39.
And since thou have pronounced that servant happy, who^ his Master when the
came, found vigilant and watchful: Grant, Lord, we beseech thee, Luke 12.37
that since it is manifest, that long it cannot be before thou come, that we
may be fitted and prepared for thy coming, and be found with oil in our
Lamps, and so in happiness enter thy Bride-chamber with joy: and let us, good
Lord, think the Day most near, lest while the day of death or judgment be
thought to be far off, it prevent the improuident, and while long life is
expected, it quickly forsake the wicked and guilty persons. Our minds are very
desirous, if we could, to know the day of death, and dissolution. But if we
could attain to the knowledge thereof, what would it profit us, suppose the
consummation of this world to be after ten, twenty, or forty, or a hundred
years, what is this material? is not the term of life the consummation of
each man? Why then are thou so troubled about the last day of judgment, since
^s thy end leaves thee, Judgment shall ^ind thee, and how suddenly death shall
find ^hee, thou art altogether ignorant: For as ^n other things not regarding
things per^aining to our souls, we altogether are ^usied in things common,
saying: This man is an Adulterer, this man a Thief, ^his man a false-hearted
fellow, that man proud, but no man has a care or feeling of his own sins far
worse.

So does every man neglecting his own and; he would feign learn when the
general day of dissolution shall be, which Day whether it be near or far
off, it does nothing concern us, so each man regard his ^euerall end. For
since thou art borne, it is most certain thou must dye, and it is cer^ain after
death comes, that Judgment may be far off, yet thy last day is at hand.
Therefore prepare thee for this day: for if ^his day find thee unprovided, the
day of ^udgment shall find thee so likewise, when ^hou shall rue for it: Psalm.
50.
Consider this all ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pee^es, and there
be none to help: For our God shall go, and shall not keep silence. A fire
shall come before him, and it shall be ^ery tempestuous round about him, for
God himself is Judge. And the Day of Judgment will quickly be at hand,
prevent the speed thereof: It will speedil^ come, prevent it I say, be thou
speedil^ converted. And as the Prophet Daui^ advises us, let us run before
the fac^ of the Judge, with confession of our fault^ and true contrition for
the same. And the reason why thou know not his coming is, that thou may
always be prepared for it: for it is in thine own power how thou may
expect his coming, h^^ therefore defers his coming, that whe^^ he comes he
may not daunt thee. Behold, he is not yet come, he is in Heaven, thou art on
earth; he deferres his coming, do^ not thou defer this time of repentance
lest it for ever, though too late, repent the of his coming: For in that day,
it will be too late to repent; therefore pray no^ that his Kingdom come, which
thou fear coming, but rather correct thy self that thou pray not against
thy self: Today he calls upon thee, that he may not in that day condemn
thee. He that shall then be thy Judge, is now thine advocate and he now calls
upon thee, that tho^ would lead a godly life Let us therefore set the day
of Judgment before ou^ eyes, which way soever we go, let v^ carry the memory
of it with us, and i^ will bring this profit with it, that we shall not only
meditate on the horror and de^truction of that day, but also wish for the
^ccomplishing of the same, which makes ^he wicked to tremble when they hear it
approaches.

Thus Chrysostom says: Let us from among our selves repeat these things, and
with others, there shall be a resurrection, (...) day of Judgment, and a time
of examination for all our works, whether good or bad: and this will cause
that the minds ^oth of good and bad, be not conversant in ^he vanities and
pleasures of this world, and be not tempted to any wickedness, ^ut rather to
undergo any thing to be imposed upon them here, than to incur the ^ore-seene
punishment of everlasting fire ^ereafter.

This made David cry out: Establish my flesh in thy fear, for I have been
afraid to ^eare thy judgments. To conclude this ^oint since we all must
appear before ^he Iudgement-seat of Christ, that every ^ne may receive the
thing done in his body according to that he has done, whether it be good or
bad, and knowing the terror and Justice of the Judge of al men, that shall
judge the World in righteousness, and considering the punishment that then
shall be imposed on the wicked: That shall be turned into Hell with the^ that
forget God. Let us hear and follow S. Hillaries advise, In all the course of
ou^ lives, the memory of the last and great Judgment is to be planted and
grafted i^ our hearts, for happy is that man that dot^ what he must do in
remembrance of the last day and why? Eccl. 7.36.
hear the words of Jesus the son of Sirach; Whatsoever thou take in hand,
remember thy end, and thou shall never do amiss.

Thus much shall suffice, there shall be a day of Judgment, and that that Day
i^ near: Now somewhat remains to be^ spoken of the manner of this Day, and
the terror thereof, that the wicked being touched with the understanding of
the same, might be driven nearer to God: I^ that day (says S. Paul) every man's
work^ shall be made manifest, for the day shall declare it, because it shall be
revealed by the fire, and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it
is. The time is now come when Judgment must begin at the house of God, and if
it first begins with us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the
Gospel of God? and if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly
and sinner appear? where will they hide themselves in that terrible ^ay,
wherein there shall be nothing, but weeping and gnashing of teeth, howling,
^amentation, and repentance too too late? when the foundations of the
mountains shall be moved, and the land shall be ^urnt with fire; when as S.
Peter says, The Heavens shall pass away with a great ^oyse, and the firmament
shall melt with ^eruent hear, the earth also and the works that are therein
shall be burnt up: when, ^s God himself said in the Gospel: Mat. 24.29
The ^unne shall be darkened, the Moon shall ^ot give her light, the Stars
shall fall from Heaven, and the powers thereof shall be ^haked: Where will the
wicked then be^old themselves, where will Adulterers, ^runkards, where will
cursers and swea^ers appear? where will the luxurious, ^eceiuers, proud,
unclean and filthy ^ersons be found? what, unhappy as they ^re, can they then
plead for themselves, to ^ppease the anger of the just Judge of heaven and
earth? surely nothing. Howl ye therefore, O ye wicked that forget God, ^r the
day of the Lord is at hand, and it shall come as a destruction from the
Almighty; for the Lord shall lay the Land ^esolate, and shall destroy the
sinners ^hereof out of it, he will punish the world ^or their evil, and the
wicked for their iniquity, he will cause the arrogancy o^ the proud to cease,
and will lay low the hautinesse of the ambitious worldling (...) what fear,
and what horror, what terror and amazement shall there seize upon, and possess
those that are marked out for eternal destruction? In the Name of God le^ us
therefore while we have time, rouse ou^ selves up; whiles there is time, let us
correct and amend our selves that we neue^ be brought to these Tortures of
body an^ soul. Let us rather preferring the simp^city of the Dove, and the
chastity of the Turtle, with the spiritual feathers o^ graces, lift our souls
up into heaven b^ our prayers, that so we may be alwaye^ ready to resign our
souls and bodies into the hands of our Redeemer, with joy an^ alacrity of
spirit.

But that we may the better hear and understand the terror of that day, to
avoid the same, we will hear the Prophets what they foretell. Gird your
selves and lament you priests, how leye ministers o^ the Altar, lie all night
in sackcloath ye^ Ministers of my God: For the meat offering, and the
drinke-offering, is with holden from the house of God. Alas (...) for the day
of the Lord is at hand, and as (...) destruction from the Almighty shall it come
Blow a trumpet in Zion, and sound an alarm in thy holy mountain, let all the
inhabitants of the land tremble: For the day of the Lord comes, for it is
nigh at hand; a day o^ darkness and of gloomings, a day of clouds, and thick
darkness; for great is the day of the Lord, and very terrible, sure it is a
great day wherein so great a God greatly to be praised, and to be feared above
all gods, shall come to judgment, and ^o reward all men for their doings. It Is a
great day, after which there shall be us change of time, no course of days
shall fol^ow; which day in it self shall contain either everlasting
condemnation, or salvation without end.

It is a very terrible day, and the Prophet Malachy, seems to give the reason
of ^t. For behold, the day comes, that shall burn as an Oven, and all the
proud, and all that do wickedly, shall be as stubble, and that day that comes
shall burn them up, ^aith the Lord of hosts; leaving them neither root nor
branch: And as the Prophet David has it. Our God shall come, and shall not
keep silence, a fire shall devour before him, and it shall be very
tempestuous round about him, he shall call to the heaven from above, and to the
earth below, that he may judge his people. For God is Judge himself; who,
therefore will endure the fury of thi^ day, where the strong shall be thus
weakened and oppressed, and where she proud, and all that do wickedly, shall be
burnt up as stubble? who will not stand astonished, where the root with the
branch shall be plucked up and consumed? what wicked man, what sinner then
dares to appear where the just shall scarce be saved? Per. 4.
But many men, partly out of dull stupidity, and partly being oppressed with
crosses and vexations of this life, do little esteem of the terror of this
last day, and do seem as being prepared for this day, very earnestly to wish
and desire the same: But the Propht Amos 5.18. does threaten these men, saying,
Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord, to what end is it for you? The day
of the Lord is darkness, and not light, as if a man did fly from a Lion, and a
Bear met him; or went into the house, and leaned his hand on the wall, and a
Serpen^ bit h m. You do, says he, very evil to your selves, in that you do
so rashly desire the day of the Lord, for ye shall not walk in the light of
Gods countenance, because ye have not been children of the light, but
children of darkness. There noisome darkness shall come upon you, whatsoever you
shall then assay, you shall not shun terror, you cannot avoid horror: and if
you may shun the face of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, that you render not
account for your sins; yet that Bear the Devil will run upon you, meet you
and punish you for the same. Or if you escape this Bear, and enter into the
house of your conscience to consider the evils you have committed and the good
you have omitted, the tormenting worm will seize upon your conscience, the
worm that Esaias 66. speaks of, The worm shall never die: And the Evangelist
Mark 9. did testify the same; Their worm dies not, their fire never goes
out, their torments are endless, neither is there in that day any partiality
to be used. For the Kings of the earth, Gentlemen, the rich men the great and
chief Captains, the mighty men every bondman and every freemen, shall hide
themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the mountains, and shall say to
the rocks and mountains fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that
sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. For she great day of
wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand. But when the Son of man shall
come in the Majesty of his glory, and the holy Angels with him, before whom all
Nations shall be gathered: He shall then separate them one from another, as she
shepherd divides his sheep from the Goats, and he shall set his sheep on
his right hand, and the goats on the left hand; and the King shall say to them
on the right hand, Mat, 25. Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the world: but to them on the left hand
he shall say; Depart from me you wicked into everlasting fire, prepared for
the devil and his angels, and those shall go into everlasting punishment; but
the righteous into life eternal. To conclude this point hear she Counsel of
our Savior Christ: Take heed, lest at any time your hearts be ouercharged with
surfeting and drunkenness, c. 2. 34
and cares of this life, and so that day come upon us unawares. For as a snare,
it shall come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole earth: watch ye,
and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things
that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man. Since therefore
all these things are suddenly expected to be fulfilled, and all that read the
Scriptures may hear this, both from Prophets and Apostles, nay, and Christ
himself: That it is a terrible thing to fall into the hands of the living God;
It is a wonder, that since all things (as the Apostle says) shall be
dissolved, that now at length we become not pure, and walk in an holy
conversation and godliness, looking for, 2 Pet. 3.11
and hasting unto the coming of the day of God. Wherein the Heavens being on
fire, shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat. It is
a wonder that we do not deny all ungodliness, and worldly desires, and lusts of
the flesh, the glory of the world, the deceitfulness of riches, and the
choking cares of all earthly things, and exercise our selves in all sobriety
and godliness, looking for that blessed hope, Tit. 2.3.
and the glorious appea^ance of that great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.
It ought therefore to be our ^rst and chiefest care, in these dangerous and
wicked times, not being drowned in ^he employments of this world, to have a
^are of our own salvation, and to make ^ure the anchor of our hope and says,
that ^ur souls suffer not eternal shipwreck. ^et us not persuade our selves
that the lord is not near. Let us not say with them that Peter reprehended;
where is the pro^ise of his coming? For since the fathers ^el asleep, all
things continue as they were ^nce the Creation: for how long these things shall
continue, the Lord of Hosts by the Prophet Haggai does declare. Yet once, it is
a little while, and I will shake the heavens and the earth, the Sea, and the dry
land. Now the Apostle Peter gives the reason why he is not yet come. 2 Pet. 3.9
It Is his long suffering, says he, to vs-wards, not willing that any should
perish but that all should come unto repentance; wherefore account that the
long suffering of the Lord is salvation, and be diligent, that you may be
found of him in fear, without spot and blameless; we must be diligent and
watchful: the Grecians are gone aside, we have a Sinon in us that will yield
the place to them: we must continually watch, and have always an eye to the
watch, holding our weapons in our hands, unless we be minded at all times to
be surprised, and yield at the pleasure of our enemy. For the day of the Lord
comes as a thief in the night, in which the Heavens shall pass away with a
great noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat.

Therefore be ye ready, for in such an hour as you think not, the Son of
man comes. Now, they that defer the coming of the Lord, and say with that
evil servant, My Lord delayeth his coming, Let us eat and drink, be
drunken, let them know, The Lord will come in a day when they look not for
him, and in an hour when they are not aware, and will cut them asunder, and
will give them their portion with the unbelievers and Hypocrites; where there
shall be weeping and wa^^ing and g^ashing of teeth. Now, Luke 12.3
they that know these things, and prepare not themselves, neither do according
to the Will of God, shall be beaten with many stripes: as the same Apostle
Saint Luke has in his Gospel pronounced. Let us endeavor therefore, that when
the last day comes, we may say with S. Paul I have fought a good fight, 2 Timothy 4.7
I have finished my course; I have kept the Faith: henceforth there is laid up
for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord that righteous Judge shall
give me that day: but is this crown laid up for thee alone (O Paul) not only
for me (he says) but also for them that love the Lord Jesus, and expect his
appearance.

Oh that this would take some impression in the hardest of hearts, that do
sing a temporal requietem here unto their souls, lest while they think the
day of the Lord farthest from them, it on the sudden come upon them, and so
they be found in a condition too late to be amended, and by no means
whatsoever to be avoided.

To conclude all, gird up the loins of your minds, be sober, and hope to the
end for the glory that is to be brought to you at the revelation of Jesus
Christ, as obedient children, not walking after your former lusts of ignorance,
let your loins, I say, be girded, and your lights burning, and you your selves
like unto them that wait for the Lord, ^uk. 12 15
when he will return from the wedding, that when he comes and knocks, you
may open immediately: blessed is the servant, whom, his Master when he comes
finds so doing, of a truth, I say unto you, he will make him ruler ever all he
has Take ye heed, watch and pray, for ye know not when the time is. For the
son of man is as a man taking a far journey, who left his house, and gave
authority to ^^s servants, and to every man his work ^^mmanding them to waith:
Watch ye therefore, for ye know not when the Master comes, at even, at
midnight, or at the cock crowing, lest coming suddenly, he find you
sleeping, and so cast you into prison, there to remain world without end. From
which, the Lord Jesus keep us all, and that for his mercy sake alone. To whom
he rendered all honor, glory, praise and thanksgiving, now and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

