THE LIFE OF FAITH IN DEATH. Exemplified in the living Speeches of Dying
Christians.

By SAMVEL WARD Preacher of Ipswich.

LONDON, Printed by Augustine Mathewes for John Marriot and John Grismand, and
are to be sold at their Shops in Saint Dunstons Church yard, and in Paul's
Alley at the Sign of the Gunne. 1622.

TO HIS DEAR AND LOVING MOTHER.
I Honor Augustine much for honoring his Mother so much after her death,
whose name and example had otherwise lain in obscurity. But I like better, and
wish rather to follow the piety of Nazianzene, who gave himself to the
performance of all Christian Offices to his loving Mother. God has so blessed
the former part of your life above the lot of most women, with two such able
guides, as have so stored you with Spiritual and Temporal furniture, that you
need not the aid of any your Children. Nevertheless, Grace and Nature will
be ascending and expressing themselves, though in weak services. REVBEN when
he found but a few Flowers, must bring them to his Mother LEAH. ESAV when he
takes Uenison, gratifies his aged Father withal. SAMPSON finds home by the
way and presents of it to his parents. Here is a Posie gathered out of old
and new Gardens; this sauory meat has God brought to hand, here is sweet
out of the strong. Let your soul eat and bless. The use and fruit of them I
wish to every believer, especially in age and sickness: but the handsell and
honor of them (if any be) to your self, whom the Law of God and Nature binds
me to honor above others. Long may you live to bless your Children with your
daily Prayers, especially your sons in that work which needs much watering.
Yet every good Christian in years cannot but desire to be forewarned against
death approaching, and that is the aim of these endeavors. God prosper and
bless them as the former: and send me my part in the benefit of these (as he
has done of them) in the time of use.

Your Son in all duty, desirous of the birthright of your love and
blessing. SA: WARD.

THE LIFE OF FAITH IN DEATH.
THat which has bin already spoken of the Life of Faith, is to the natural
man above all Faith. And yet if that be all it can do, then is all little
better then nothing. Say it could fill the mind of man with all content,
satiate his life with all delight, and sweeten the bitterness of all
afflictions, yet if for all this, there lurk in his breast a secret and
slavish fear of Death, the least piece of this leaven but in a corner of the
pecke, is enough to sour the whole lump of his joys: the least dram of this
Coloquintida will mar the relish of all his sweetes: and make him cry out,
There is death in the pot. And, Oh Death, how bitter is thy mention and memory?

Ask Nature, and call to Philosophy, and see if they can afford any aid* must
they not confess themselves here quite posed and plunged? has not death set
and foiled their whole army: for poverty, shame; and sickness, and other such
petty Crosses, some poor cures, and lame shifts have they found out: but when
death comes all their courage has failed, and all their rules have left them
in dark and desperate uncertainties. It is possible for Pharaoh with much a do
to stand out the storms of Hail, the swarm of Flies and Lice: but when once
the cry of Death is in the houses, then is there no way but yielding: his
Enchaunters and Mountebancks could abide the cry of Frogs and other such
vermin; but this Basiliske affrights them. Only Faith takes it by the tail,
handles it, and turns it into an harmless wand, yea into a rod budding with
glory and immortality.

Quartane agues are not so much the shame of Physic, as Death is of all
natural skill and valor. Death is Faiths evil. Faith only professes this
Cure, undertakes and performs it with the least touch of Christ's hand: and
that as familiarly as the richest Balm does the least cut of the finger. Faith
turns fears into hopes, sighings and groanings, into wishings and longings,
shaking and trembling into leaping and clapping of hands.

Alas, all troubles are but as Pigmyes Dr. Tailor. Tho. Hawks.
to this Giant, who defies all the host of Infidels: holds them in bondage all
the days of their lives: and makes their whole life no better then a living
Death and dying life. Only Faith encounters this Giant, singles him out for her
chief prize, and grapples with him not as a match, but as with a vanquished
underling: insulting over him as much as he does over the sons of unbelief:
sets her foot upon the neck of this King of fears, and so easily becomes
Conqueror and Emperor of all petty fears, which are therefore only
fearful, because they rend to Death; the last, the worst, the end and sum
of all feared evils. Here, and here only is the incomparable crown of Faith:
here only does she evidently and eminently honor her followers, and difference
them from all others with a noble livery of true magnanimity and alacrity.

It is true, if we had windows into the breasts of men, a difference one
might see in the inward bearing of adversity: but for the face and outside,
both may seem alike hardy, both may seem alike resolute: But when it comes to
the point of Death, then the speech, the behavior, the countenance, palpably
distinguish the dull patience perforce of the worldling from the cheerful
welcome of the Christian. Let Death put on her mildest vizards, come in the
habit of the greatest sickness, to the stoutest Champion on his own Down bed,
yet shall his heart tremble and his countenance wax pale. Let her dress her
self like the cruellest Fury: Come with all her rackes, fires, strappadoes,
wild beasts, all her exquisite tortures: Faith will set a woman, or a child
to make sport with her, to dare and to tire her, and her tormentors.

Alas what do they tell us of their Socrates, their Cato, their Seneca, and a
few such thin examples which a breath will rehearse, a few lines contain
their poor ragged handful, to our Legions, whose names or number one may as
soon reckon as the sand of the Sea shore: theirs a few choice men of
heroycall spirits trained up either in arts or arms: Our of the weakest sexes
and sorts, only strong in the Faith: theirs either out of windy vainglory
childishly reckoning of a short death and a long fame, or out of blockish
ignorance venturing upon Death as Children and mad men upon dangers without
fear or wit: Ours out of mature deliberation and firm belief in Christ: who
has drunk out of Deaths bitter Cup an eternal health to all mankind, taken
the gall and poison out of it, and made it a wholesome potion of immortality.
Faith here proclaims her challenge and bids nature or art out of all their
Soldiers or Scholars produce any one, who having free option to live or die,
and that upon equal terms have embraced Death: Whereas infinite of hers have
bin offered life with promotions, and yet would not be delivered expecting a
better resurrection.

If any shall challenge these for Thrasonicall flourishes, or Carpet vaunts, I
appeal and call to witness not the Cloud now, but the whole sky of
witnesses, such I mean as have dyed either in the Lord, or for the Lord, who
in the very point and Article of Death have lived, and expressed lively
testimonies of this their life, partly in their incredible sufferings, partly
in their admirable sayings. For their Acts and Monuments if they had all been
penned, all the world would not have contained their Histories: the very sums
would swell to large Volumes. The valor of the Patients, the savageness of
the Persecutours, striving together, till both exceeding nature and belief,
bred wonder and astonishment in beholders and Readers. Christians have showed
as glorious power in the faith of Martyrdom as in the faith of Miracles. As
for their last Speeches, and Apothegmes, pity it is no better mark has been
taken, and memory preserved of them. The choice and the prime I have culled out
of ancient Stories, and latter Martyrologies, English, Dutch, and French. The
profit and pleasure has paid me for the labor of collecting, and the like
gain (I hope) shall quit the cost of thy reading. Sweetly and briefly they
comprise and couch in them the foundation, the marrow of large and manifold
precepts, prescribed by the learned Divines for preparation against Death. The
Art of dying Beza. Perbins. Hall. Byfield.
well is easier learned by examples then by directions. These chalk the way
more plainly, these encourage more heartily, these persuade more powerfully,
these chide unbelief with more authority: if some work not, others may: some
will affect some, some another. Read them over to a sick or to a dying
Christian, if they quicken not, if they comfort not, it is because there is no
life of Faith in them: if there be the least spark, these will kindle it,
cherish and maintain it in the door, in the valley, in the thought, in the
act of Death.

The Living Speeches of Dying Christians.
PART. 1.
OLd Simeons Swannes Song, Lord let thy servant depart in peace, etc.

The good Thief, the first Confessor. Lord remember me when thou come into
thy Kingdom.

Steven the first Martyr, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit, forgive them etc.

Peter the Apostle: None but Christ, Nothing but Christ.

Andrew the Apostle: Welcome Oh Christ longed and looked for. I am the Scholar
of him that did hang on thee, long have I coueted to embrace thee, in whom I am
that I am.

Polycarpus to the Proconsull, urging him to deny Christ, I have served him 86
years, and he has not once hurt me, and shall I now deny him?

When he should have been tied to the stake, he required to stand untied,
saying: Let me alone (I pray you) for he that gave me strength to come to
this fire, will also give me patience to abide in the same without your tying.

Ignatius, I am the Wheat or Grain to be ground with the teeth of Beasts, that
I may be pure Bread for my Masters tooth; Let Fire, Rackes, Pulleyes, yea and
all the Torments of Hell come on me, so I may win Christ.

Lucius to Vrbicius, a corrupt Judge threaning death; I thank you with all my
heart, that free me and release me from wicked Governors, and send me to my
good God and loving Father, etc.

Pothnius Bishop of Lions to the President asking him in the midst of torments
what that Christ was, answered, If thou were worthy, thou should know.

Cyprian, God Almighty be blessed for this Jail delivery.

Ambrose to his Friends about him, I have not so lived, that I am ashamed to
live longer, nor yet fear I Death, because I have a good Lord.

And the same to Calligon, Valentinians Eunuch threatening death, Well do you
that which becomes an Eunuch, I will suffer that which becomes a Bishop.

Augustine, Boughs fall off Trees, and Stones out of Buildings, and why should
it seem strange that mortal men dye?

Theodosius, I thank God more for that I have been a member of Christ, then an
Emperor of the world.

Hilarion, Soul, get thee out, thou have seventy years served Christ, and
art thou now loath to dye, or afraid of Death?

Vincentius, Rage, and do the worst that the spirit of malignity can set thee
on work to do. Thou shall see Gods Spirit strengthen the Tormented more then
the Devil can do the Tormentor.

Iubentius and Maximinus, We are ready to lay off the last Garment the Flesh.

Attalus answered to every question, I am a Christian: being fired in an Iron
Chain, Behold, oh you Romans, this is to eat man's flesh, which you falsely
object to us Christians.

Basil to Valens his Viceroy, offering him respite, No, I shall be the same
to morrow; I have nothing to lose but a few Books, and my body is now so
crazy, that one blow will end my torment.

Gordius, To the Tyrant offering him promotion; Have you any thing equal, or
more worthy then the Kingdom of Heaven?

Babilas dying in Prison, willed his Chains should be buried with him; Now
(says he) will God wipe away all tears, and now I shall walk with God in the
land of the Living.

Barlaam, holding his hand in the flame over the Altar, sung that of the
Psalmist: Thou teach my hands to war, and my fingers to fight.

Iulitta: We Women received not only flesh from men, but are bone of bone,
and therefore ought to be as strong and constant as men in Christ's cause.

Amachus, Turn the other side also, Least raw flesh offend. The like Lawrence.

Symeones, Thus to dye a Christian, is to live, yea the chief good and best
end of a man.

Marcus of Arethuse, hung up in a basket, anointed with honey, and so exposed
to the stinging of Waspes, and Bees, to his persecutours that stood and beheld
him; How am I advanced, despising you that are below on earth.

Pusices to Ananias an old man trembling at Martyrdom: Shut thine eyes but a
while, and thou shall see Gods light.

Bernard, Fense the heel void of Merit, with Prayer, that the Serpent may not
find where to fasten his teeth.

The second part.
EDWARD the 6. King of England, Bring me into thy Kingdom, free this Kingdom
from Antichrist, and keep thine Elect in it.

Cranmer Archbishop: Thrusting his hand into the fire: Thou unworthy hand
(says he) shall first burn, I will be revenged of thee for subscribing for
fear of Death to that damned scrowle.

Latimer Bishop: To one that tempted him to recant, and would not tell him his
name: Well (says he) Christ has named thee in that saying, Get thee behind
me Satan; And being urged to abjure, I will (says he) good people, I once
said in a Sermon in King Edwards time confidently, that Antichrist was for ever
expelled England, but God has showed me it was but carnal confidence.

To Bishop Ridley, going before him to the Stake: Have after as fast as I can
follow: we shall light such a candle by Gods grace in England this day, as I
trust shall never he put out again.

To whom Bishop Ridley: Be of good heart Brother, for God will either assuage
the fury of the flame, or else strengthen us to abide it.

Bishop Hooper; to one that tendered a Pardon upon recantation; If you love my
Soul away with it, if you love my Soul away with it: one of the Commissioners
prayed him to consider that life is sweet, and death is bitter; True (says
he) but the death to come is more bitter, and the life to come more sweet; Oh
Lord Christ I am hell, thou art Heaven, draw me to thee of thy mercy.

John Rogers, to one that told him he would change his note at the fire; If I
should trust in my self, I should so do, but I have determined to dye, and
God is able to enable me.

Being awakened, and bidden to make haste to Execution, Then (says he) shall
I not need to tie my points.

John Philpot, I will pay my vows in thee O Smithfield.

Thomas Bilney: I know by sense and Phylosophie, that fire is hot and burning
painful, but by faith I know it shall only waste the stubble of my body, and
purge my spirit of it corruption.

Glouer to Augustine Brenner: He is come, He is come, meaning the Comforter
Gods Spirit.

John Bradford: embracing the Reeds and Fagots said; Strayte is the way, and
narrow is the gate, and few that find it. And speaking to his fellow Martyr:
Be of good comfort Brother, for we shall have a merry Supper with the Lord
this night; if there be any way to heaven on Horseback, or in fiery Chariots,
this is it.

Lawrence Saunders: I was in prison till I got into prison, and now (says he
kissing the Stake) welcome the Cross of Christ, welcome everlasting life: my
Savior began to me in a bitter Cup, and shall I not pledge him?

John Lambert: None but Christ, none but Christ.

Baynam, Behold you Papists that look for miracles, I feel no more pain in
the fire, then if I were in a bed of Down, it is as sweet to me as a bed of
Roses.

Hugh Lauerocke comforting John A Price his fellow-Martyr, said unto him: Be
of good comfort my Brother, for my Lord of London is our good Physician, he
will cure thee of all thy blindness, and me of my lamenesse this day.

William Hunter to his Mother, For a momentany pain I shall have a crown of
life, and may not you be glad of that? To whom she answered, I count my self
happy that bare such a Champion for Christ: and thee as well bestowed as any
child that ever I bare.

Adam Damlip to his fellowprisoners, wondering at his cheerful Supping and
behavior after the message of his execution: Why (quoth he) think you I have
been so long in the Marshallsea, and have not learned to dye? And when they
told him his quarters should be hanged up; then (said he) shall I need take no
thought for burial.

Priests wife to one offering her money, I am now going to a Country where
money bears no Mastery: when sentence was read; Now have I gotten that which
many a day I have sought for.

Kirby to Master Wingfield pitying him: Be at my burning, and you shall see,
and say, there is a Soldier of Christ: I know fire, water, and sword are in
his hands, that will not suffer them to separate me from him.

Doctor Tailor; I shall this day deceive the worms in Hadley Church yard, and
fetching a leap or two when he came within two miles of Hadley, Now (says
he) lack I but two Styles, and I am even at my Fathers house.

Walter Mill urged to recant at the Stake; I am no chafe, but corn, I will
abide Wind and Flayle, by Gods grace.

Bishop Farrar, to a Knights Son bemoaning his death: If you see me stir in
the fire, trust not my doctrine; And so he stood holding up his stumps, till
one Gravel struck him down with a staff.

Rawlings to the Bishops: Rawlings you left me, Rawlings you find me, and so
by Gods grace I will dye.

John Ardley, If every hair of my head were a man, it should suffer death in
the Faith I now stand in. The like Agges Stanley, and William Sparrow.

Thomas Hawks, being desired to give a sign, whether the fire was tolerable
to be borne, promised it to his friends: and after all expectation was past,
he lift up his hands half burned, and being on a light fire, with great
rejoicing, strikes them three times together.

Lawrence Ghest to his wife meeting him with seven children on her hand: Be
not a block to me in the way, now I am in a good course, and near the mark.

The Lady Jane Gray requested by the Lieutenant of the Tower to write her
Symbol in his book before her beheading, wrote this, Let the glassie condition
of this life never deceive thee, There is a time to be borne, a time to die;
But the day of death is better then the day of Birth.

Alice Driuer, when the chain was about her neck: Here is a goodly Necker
chief, God be blessed for it.

John Noyes kissing the stake: Blessed be the time that ever I was borne for
this day. To his fellow Martyrs; We shall not lose our lives in this Fire, but
change them for a better, and for coals have pearls, etc.

Julius Palmer: To them that have the mind linked to the body, as a thieves
foot to a pair of stocks, it is hard to dye indeed; but if one be able to
separate soul and body, then by the help of Gods spirit it is no more mastery
for such a one, then for me to drink this Cup.

Elizabeth Folks, embracing the Stake; Farewell all the world, Farewell Faith,
Farewell Hope, and welcome Love.

Roger Bernard, being threatened whipping, stocking, burning; answered, I am no
better then my master Christ, and the Prophets, which your Fathers served after
such sort, and I for his names sake am content to suffer the like at your
hands: so immediately he was condemned, and carried to the fire.

Thomas Sampal, offered a pardon in the midst of the fire: Oh now I am thus far
on my journey, hinder me not to finish my race.

Latimer Bishop, when they were about to set fire to him, and Bishop Ridley,
with an amiable countenance, said these words: God is faithful which does not
suffer us to be tempted above our strength.

Bishop Ridley to Mistress Irish the Keepers wife, and other friends at Supper,
I pray you be at my Wedding tomorrow, (at which words they weeping) I perceive
you are not so much my friends as I took you to be.

Tankerfield, when he had put one Leg into the fire. The Flesh shrinkes and
says, Thou fool, will thou burn and need not? The spirit says, Hell fire
is sharper, and will thou adventure that? The flesh says, Will thou leave thy
Friends? The Spirit answers, Christ and his Saints society is better. The flesh
says, Will thou shorten thy life? The Spirit says, It Is nothing to an
eternal life.

Joyce Lewis, When I behold the ouglesome face of Death, I am afraid, but when
I consider Christ's amiable Countenance, I take heart again.

The third part.
JOHN HVS to a Countreyman that threw a Faggot at his head: Oh holy
Simplicity, God send thee better light. You roste the Goose now, but a Swanne
shall come after me, and he shall escape your Fire; Hus a Goose in the
Bohemian language, and Luther a Swan.

Hierom of Prague, Make the fire in my sight, for if I had feared it, I had
never come hither: while it was making, he sung two Psalms.

Anonymus on his deathbed, Now Phlegm do thy duty, and stop thou my vital
Artery. Now Death do me that friendly office to rid me of pain, and hasten
me to happiness: To a Friend of his that willed him to have his thoughts on
heaven: I am there already.

Claudius Monerius being cauilled at by the Friars for eating a breakfast
before his execution. This I do that the flesh may answer the readiness of the
Spirit.

Michaela Caignoela, a noble Matron, seeing her Judges look out of the
windows, said to her fellow-Martyrs: These stay to suffer the torment of their
Consciences, and are reserved to judgment, but we are going to glory and
happiness. And to certain poor women weeping, and crying, Oh Madam, we
shall never now have more Alms, Yes hold you (says she) yet once more; and
plucked off her Slippers, and such other of her apparel, as she could with
modesty spare from the fire.

James Delos, to Monks that called him proud Heretic; Alas, here I get
nothing but shame, I expect indeed preferment hereafter.

Madam la Glee, to one Chavique, that vpbraided her for denying the Faith; Your
cursed faith is not worthy the name of Faith; she put on her Bracelets, For I
go (said she) to my Spouse.

Marlorat to friends that called him deceiuer; If I have seduced any, God has
seduced me, who cannot lie.

Castilia Rupea, Though you throw my body down of this steep hill, yet will
my soul mount upwards again; your blasphemies more offend my mind, then your
torments do my body.

Christopher Marshall of Antwerpe, I was from eternal a sheep destined to the
slaughter, and now I go to the Shambles, Gold must be tried in the fire.

Vidus Bressius, If Gods Spirit says true, I shall straight rest from my
labors, my soul is even taking her wings to sly to her resting place.

The Duke of Wittemberg and Luneburgh, Many have been mine errors and defects
in Government, Lord pardon and cover all in Christ.

Picus Mirandula, If Christ's Death and our own were ever in eye, how could
we sin? Death is welcome, not as an end of trouble, but of sin.

Martin Luther, Thee Oh Christ have I taught, thee have I trusted, thee have I
loved, into thy hands I commend my spirit.

O ecolampadius to one asking if the light offended him not, I have light
enough here, laying his hand on his breast; And to the Ministers about him, Let
the light of your lives shine as well as your Doctrine.

Francisco Varlute, Paul and Peter were more honorable members of Christ then
I, but I am a member; they had more store of grace then I, but I have my
measure, and therefore sure of my glory.

Peter Berger, I see the Heavens open to receive my Spirit; And beholding the
multitude at the stake, Great is the Harvest, Lord send Laborers.

John Mallot a Souldior; Often have we hazarded our lives for the Emperor
Charles the fifth, and shall we now shrink to dye for the King of Kings? Let
us follow our Captain.

John Fillula to his fellows: By these Ladders we ascend the heavens, now
begin we to trample under seet, Sin, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil.

Thomas Calberg, to the Friars, willing him to repent at the last hour: I
believe that I am one of those Workmen in Christ's Vineyard, and shall
presently receive my penny.

Robert Ogners, Son to his Father and Mother at the stake with him: Behold
millions of Angels about us, and the Heavens open to receive us. To a Friar
that rayled, Thy Cursings are Blessings: And to a Noble man that offered him
Life and Promotion: Do you think me such a fool, that I would change
eternal things for temporary: To the people, We suffer as Christians, not as
Thieves or Murderers.

Constantine being carried with other Martyrs in a Dungcart to the place of
Execution: Well (says he) yet are we a precious odor, and sweet savor to God
in Christ.

Fran: Sanromanus a Spaniard: Work your pleasures on my body, which you have
in Chains your Captive: but my soul is even already in heaven through Faith
and Hope, and upon that Caesar himself has no power.

Joan the Marshals wife of France to her Husband at the Stake with her: Be of
good cheer, our Wedding was but a shadow, an earnest and Contract of that
solemn and blessed Marriage, which the Lamb will now consummate.

Anne Audebert of Orleance: Blessed be God for this wedding girdle (meaning
the Chain) My first Marriage was on the Lords day, and now my second to my
Spouse and Lord CHRIST shall be on the same.

John Bruger, to a Friar offering him a wooden cross at the Stake: No (says
he) I have another true Cross imposed by Christ on me, which now I will take
up: I worship not the work of man's hands, but the Son of God, I am content
with him for my only Advocate.

Martin Hyperius, Oh what a difference there is betwixt this and eternal fire!
who would shun this to leap into that?

Augustine of Hannouia to a Noble man, persuading him to have a care of his
soul; So I will (says he) for I presently will lay down my body to save my
Conscience whole.

Faninus an Italian kissed the Apparitour that brought him word of his
Execution; To one reminding him of his Children; I have left them to an Able
and Faithful Guardian: To his friends weeping, That is well done, that you
weep for joy with me: And to one obiecting Christ's agony and sadness to his
cheerfulness: Yea (says he) Christ was sad, that I might be merry; He had
my sins, and I have his merit and righteousness: And to the Friars offering
him a wooden Crucifix, Christ needs not the help of this piece to imprint
him in my mind and heart, where he has his habitation.

George Carpenter, All Bauaria is not so dear to me as my wife and children,
yet for Christ's sake I will forsake them cheerfully.

Adam Wallacke, a Scot, to a tempting Friar, If an Angel should say that which
thou do, I would not listen to him: is the Fire ready? I am ready; Let no
man be offended, no Disciple is greater then his Master.

John Burgon to his Judges asking him, if he would appeal to the high Court:
Is it not enough that your hands are polluted with our Blood, but you will
make more guilty of it?

Frederick Anuill of Bearne, to the Friars that willed him to call on the
Virgin Mary; three times repeated, Thine O Lord is the Kingdom, thine is the
power and glory for ever and ever; Let Us fight, Let Us fight. Auaunt Satan,
Auaunt.

Godfrey Varal of Piedmont; Hangman do thine office, my death will be
fruitful to my self and others.

Halewine of Antwerp, and Harman of Amsterdam, to the Markgraue of Antwerpe,
offering mittigation of Torments upon abiuration, We are resolved these
Momentany afflictions are not worthy that exceeding weight of glory that shall be
revealed. Peter and Nicholas Thiesse^ brethren, used the like speech.

Annas Burgius in the midst of his torments: Lord forsake me not, lest I
forsake thee.

Peter Clarke with the root of hi Tongue plucked out, pronounced audibly (to
show that none ever wanted a tongue to praise God) Blessed be the name of God,
as of old Romanus the Martyr, mentioned in Prudentius.

Godfrey de Hammele, to one that called him Heretic, No heretic but an
unprofitable servant, yet willing to die for his Lord, and reckoning this death
no death but a life.

Bucer, No man by talk shall withdraw my mind from Christ crucified, from
heaven, and my speedy departure, upon which my soul is fixed. When one advised
him to arm himself against Satan's temptations; He has nothing to do with
me: God forbid but now my soul should be sure of sweet consolation.

Tremelius, a Christian Jew, Let Christ live, and Barrabas perish.

Ferdinand Emperor: If mine Ancestors and Predecessors had not dyed, how
should I have been Emperor? I must that others may succeed me.

Frederick the third Elect. Palate. to his friends about him, wishing him
recovery, I have lived enough to you, let me now live to my self, and with my
Lord Christ.

Leonard Caesar: Oh Lord do thou suffer with me, Lord support me and save me.

Windelmuta, to one that told her she had not yet tasted how bitter Death was:
No (said she) neither ever shall I, for so much has Christ promised to all
that keep his word, neither will I forsake him for sweet life, or bitter
death.

Henry Voes, If I had ten heads, they should all off for Christ. God forbid I
should rejoice in any thing save in his Cross.

The Minister of Brisgo, This skin which scarce cleaues to my bones, I must
shortly have laid off by necessity, how much more willingly now for my
Savior Christ.

Adolphus Clarebachius: I believe there is not a merrier heart in the world at
this instant, then mine is: Behold, you shall see me dye by that Faith I have
lived.

Alexander Cane: when a fools Cappe was put on his head: Can I have a greater
Honor done me, then to be served as my Lord CHRIST before Herod? Lord, seeing
my Persecutors have no mercy, have thou mercy on me, and receive my soul.

Almondus a Via, My body dies, my Spirit lives. Gods Kingdom abides ever. God
has now given me the accomplishment of all my desires.

Giles Tilman, urged to know what he believed of Purgatory. Purgatory and
Hell I leave to you, but my Hope is directly to go into Paradise: Neither
fear I this great pyle of Wood, whereof some might have been spared to warm
the poor, but will pass through it purged for my Savior.

Peter Bruise: I thank God, my broken leg suffered me not to fly this
Martyrdom.

Marion the wife of Adrian, seeing the Coffin hooped with Iron, wherein she
was to be buried alive. Have you provided this Pasty-crust to bake my flesh in.

Lewis Paschalis: Its a small matter to die once for Christ, if it might be, I
could wish I might die a thousand deaths for him.

John Buisson: I shall now have a double Jail delivery; one out of my
sinful flesh, another from the loathsome Dungeon I have long lain in.

Hugh Stallour to John Pike his fellow Martyr; Yet a little while, and we
shall see one another before the Throne, and face of God.

Levine de Blehere, To his friends that offered to rescue him by tumult: Hinder
not the Magistrates work, nor my happiness: Father, thou soresawest this
Sacrifice from eternal: now accept of it, I pray thee.

Christopher Fabrianus: First bitter, then sweet; first battle, the victory
when I am dead; every drop of my blood shall preach Christ, and set forth his
praise.

Francisce Soet: You deprive me of this life, and promote me to a better,
which is, as if you should rob me of Counters, and furnish me with Gold.

Guy de Bres: The ringing of my Chain have been sweet Music in mine ears:
my Prison an excellent School, wherein Gods spirit has bin my Teacher: all my
former Discourses were as a blind man's of colors, in comparison of my present
feeling. Oh what a precious Comforter is a good Conscience.

Dionysius Peloquine, To the Inquisitour telling him, his life was now in his
own hands. Then said he, It were in an ill keeping. Christ's School has
taught me to save it by loosing it, and not by the gain of a few days, or
years, to lose Eternity.

Lewis Marsake Knight, seeing his other brethren go with Halters about their
necks, which they offered not him because of his dignity; Why I pray you (quoth
he) deny me not the Badge and ornament of so excellent an order, is not my
cause the same with theirs? which obtaining, he marched valiantly to the Stake
with them.

Simon Laloeus to one Siluester his Executioner; Never saw I man in all my life
whose coming was more welcome to me then thine. So cheerful was his death,
that Syluester amazed at it, left his office, became a Convert and a Christian
himself, went to Geneua for further instruction in the Gospel.

Kilian a Dutch Schoolmaster, to such as asked him if he loved not his wife
and children, Yes (said he) if all the world were gold, and were mine to
dispose of, I would give it to live with them, though it were but in prison;
yet my soul and Christ are dearer to me then all.

Giles Verdict: Out of my Ashes shall rise innumerable Christians, which
Prophecy, God so verified by the effect, that it grew a byword after his
death, That his ashes flewe abroad all the Country.

Anthony Verdict brother to the former, condemned to be eaten with Beasts, to
prevent the like Proverb: said to his Father, Oh Father, how has God enabled
you, to have two Sons honored with Martyrdom.

John Barbevill, to Friars that called him ignorant Ass: Well, admit I were
so, yet shall my Blood witness against such Balaams as you be.

Francisce Coluer, to his two Sons massacred together with himself: Sheep we
are for the slaughter; this is no new thing, let us follow millions of Martyrs
through temporal death, to eternal life.

By all these which are but an handful of Christ's Camp Royal, it
sufficiently appears they had their Faith fresh and lively in the face of this
graund enemy, and by Virtue of their Faith, their Spirits, Wits, and Tongues,
untroubled, vndismayed; insomuch that an ancient witness of the Christian
Bishops, that they did more ambitiously desire the glory of Martyrdom, then
others did Praelacies and Preferments. And a late mortal enemy of theirs,
bade a vengeance on them, for he thought they took delight in burning. What
then shall we gain by them? I remember Master Rough a Minister, coming from
the burning of one Austo, in Smithfield, being asked by Master Farrar of
Halifax, where he had been, made answer, There where I would not but have
been, for one of my eyes, and would you know where? Forsooth I have been to
learn the way: which soon after he made good, by following him in the same
place, in the same kind of death. Now if one President made him so good a
Scholar: What dullards and non-proficients are we? if such a cloud of examples
work not in us a cheerful ability to expect and encounter the same
adversary, so often foiled before our eyes. Yet least any should complain,
that examples without Rules, are but a dumb and lame help: I will annexe unto
them a pair of Funeral Sermons, opening a couple of Seals revealed to John
in his second vision: The first, affording us sundry Meditations of Death and
Hell; The second, of Heaven, and the happiness of such as dye in the Lord, and
rest under the Altar.

The use of them I chiefly dedicate and commend to old sick persons, such
especially, as die of lingering diseases, affoording them leisure to peruse such
themes, though I forbid none, but to all I say, Come and see.

THE LIFE OF FAITH in DEATH.
REVEL. 6. 7. 8. (...). Come and see.

And behold a pale horse, and his name that sat on him was Death, and Hell
followed after him, and power was given unto them, etc.


COme and see. Were it some stately, some pleasing, yea or but some vain sight
such as Mordecay riding on the kings Horse in pomp with the Royal Furniture:
or but a company of Players, riding through a Market, A Drum, a Trumpet, or the
least call would serve the turn, to draw us out to the sight: But these being
serious, yea to nature somewhat hideous and odious Voices, like unto Thunders,
are given to the beasts to call beholders. The Crier in the Wilderness is
willed to cry this Theme aloud in the deaf ears of men. A Boanerges with all
the vehemence and contention of his voice and affections, will be too little,
unless God boar the ears, open the eyes, and persuade the hearts of men to
Come and see. Yet is it but our folly to be so shye of this sight, for though
it be sad, yet is it of all the sights under the Sun the most necessary, the
most profitable; Though we turn away our faces and close our eyes, yet see it
we must, and see it we shall, never the less, never the sooner, never the
later. Nay, the truth is, see it we never shall, but with closed eyes. Thou
tender faint-hearted man or woman that art so loath to meet with a Corpse or
Beer, to see a skull, or any thing that minds thee of Death, shall thou by
this means protract or escape thy Death? No, let me tell thee praeuision is
the best prevention, and praemonition the best praemunition. That which is
commonly received of the Basiliske, is here no conceited Story, but a serious
truth. He that sees it before he be seen of it, may avoid the deadly poison of
it. He that sees it before it comes, shall not see it when it comes. He that
mannageth an horse at an armed stake, fits him to rush into the maine Battle
without fear. And would thou with Joseph of Arimathaea, walk every day a
turn or two with Death in thy Garden, and well foreacquaint thy self
therewithal, thou should have, if not Enochs, yet every true believers
Privilege, not to see Death, not to taste of Death, viz. in that ougly form,
distasteful manner, which other the sons of Adam do, who because they will
not see the face of it, must feel the sting of it. To dye well and cheerfully,
is too busy a work to be well done ex tempore. The Foundation of Death must
be laid in life. He that means, and desires to dye well, must dye daily.
He that would end his days well, must spend them well, the one will help
the other. The thoughts of thy end as the train of the Foul and Rudder of a
Shipp will guide thy life, and a good Life will lead thee to a peaceable end,
that thou shall neither shame or fear to dye. In a word, Platoes Philosophy in
this, is true Divinity: that the best mean, and whole sum of a wise man's
life, is the Commentation of Death, not every fleet and flitting flash, but
frequent and fixed contemplations. Death is the knownest and vnknownest thing
in the world: that of which men have the most thoughts and fewest Meditations.
Be therefore persuaded to Come and see: that is, come that thou may see.
Come from other objects, infinite and vain spectacles, with which the eye is
never glutted. Draw near and close to this that thou may see it thoroughly.
Wipe off the Clay, Spittle, and Scales of thine eyes, that thou may clearly
behold the nature, quality, and consequents of Death. No mortal wight but has
some blushes of mortality, such as go and come, but if they would suffer them
to lodge in their minds, they must needs stir some affection, and leave
some impression in the memory, and produce some effects in their lives.
Socrates had a gift that he could fasten his eyes many hours on one object
without change or weariness: Half so stayed a thought of ones mortality,
might bring a man to immortality. It is not beauty seen, but looked on that
wounds. I meet with a Story of one that gave a young Prodigal a Ring with a
Deaths head, with this condition, that he should one hour daily for seven
days together look and think upon it: which bred a strange alteration in his
life, like that of Thesposius in Plutarke, or that more remarkable, of Waldus
the rich Merchant in Lions, who seeing one drop down dead in the streets
before him, went home, repented, changed his life, studied the Scripture, and
became a worthy Preacher, Father, and Founder of the Christians called
Waldenses, or poor men of Lions. In Conference and Confessions many one has
acknowledged to my self the like: some that by dangerous sickness of their
own, others that by fear of infection in times of the Plague, and general
Visitation, others by the death of friends, as by shafts that have fallen near
them, have been awakened, affrighted, and occasioned to think deeply on their
ends, to provide against their ends, to attend the Word, which has proved the
mean of their conversion and salvation. And this I think should be enough to
persuade young and old, one and other to Come and see.

But what now are we come out to see?

Behold, First the Seal opened.

Secondly, the Horse issuing out.

Thirdly, the Color of the Horse.

Fourthly, the Rider and his Followers. Death and Hell.

This horse is under seal. Seals we use commonly to confirm and conceal,
to make things sure and to keep things secret. And thus death as all Gods
judgments are said to be sealed. Job. 35. and that with a firmer seal then
of the Medes and Persians: In which sense this Horse Zach. 4. issues from
between two brazen mountains, that is Gods inevitable, unalterable Decree:
he rusheth not out, rangeth not abroad at the will of man or Satan, at hap or
by blind Destiny, but at the pleasure and by the appointment of the great
Master of these Gods horses, Jesus Christ, one of whose chief royalties is to
keep the lock and key of Death and Hell, Revel. 1. else would he be ever
trampling under feet the sons of men. Look how naturally, and continually
the Sea would ouerwhelme the whole Earth, if the waves were not bounded by
providence: So would this horse overcome the Inhabitants of it, were he not
tied short, and restrained by his, and our Lord. You see him here limited to
the fourth part of the Earth, else had not one been left alive: For all are
sentenced, and have deserved to dye, and it is favor that all dye not. In a
word, men dye not by chance, course of Nature, influence of Stars, but then,
and therefore because it is appointed. A million of Aethiopians perish in one
day, in one battle, 2. Corinthians. 14. not because all were borne under one
aspect of Planets, but because such a slaughter was sealed of God. And though
there be one way in, and twenty out of the world, yet all falls out as God
determines and disposes. That Christian which believes this, though he may
desire David's Arithmeticke to number his days aright, that is, to know the
breuity of them: yet will he never study the black and senseless Art of
calculating his birth and death. None but fools are curious and inquisitiue to
know that, which is under Gods privy Signet. We are all as Soldiers sent to
Sea with Commission under seal, not to be opened till we come to such and
such a point. To guess and conclude, we shall dye at such an age, in such a
Climaterical year, what is it but to make a league with Death, not unlike to
that frenzy Merchant that would make and strike up matches of hundreds and
thousands with parties absent as if they were present. A fond itching humor,
and such as would for the most part (what ever we think) do us hurt rather
then good, if the day and hour were far off, it would breed security: if
near hand horror. Sicknesses are sufficient summons and warnings. Mark such
as sentenced by Judges and Physicians foreknow their death, yet without
special grace fore-fit themselves never the more carefully. Some deaths
indeed (as some Clockes give warning before they strike) which symptoms and
signs infallible: and so extraordinarily God gives to some Moses and Hezekiahs
a presage, and hearts to prepare: but general God has seen this the best for
us, that it should be for the general most certain, for the particular most
uncertain, to him sealed, to us concealed: of which he would have us make
these uses.

First, for our bodily health not to be too careful, nor too careless: with
all our Physical diet and miserable anxietie, we cannot add one cubite to
the length of our days, or measure of our health. We are all sealed up no
otherwise then the measure of our wealth, of our crosses and blessings, for the
having or avoiding of which: the means we must use without carking care, or
cowardly fear, cheerfully relying on Christ, the Lord Keeper of the Seal,
not wittingly and desperately preventing that sealed date by surfeits of toil
or pleasure, by wilful neglect of diet, contempt of Physic, by grief or by
melancholy: nay, not by haste to glory with Cleombrotus the Heathen, or with
hasty selfe-murthering Christians, such as Augustines times were full off: but
with Job patiently all the days of our life, during the term of our sealed
lease, till the very day and date expire, and appointed time of dismission, and
dissolution come.

And secondly for our souls provision, not to do as most that have set days
of truce and peace, and in which they hang up their Armor a rusting, and their
Beakons vnwatched: but as people that live in perpetual hazard of war, have
all things in a daily readiness for service at half an hours warning, upon
the least Alarm: Who would live one hour in infidelity or irrepentance,
least in that he be taken napping as the foolish Virgins, and that rich fool
that reckoned of many years, and had not one night to continue. Grant it were
enough to repent and believe the last day of life, yet how can a man be sure to
do that, unless he do it every day: considering that every day may for ought
he knows, be the last. The seal may be opened in a day and hour one least
thinks of it, as it is to most that dye.

Lastly, when ever this Horse comes to fetch away us, or any of ours children
or friends: A believer stamps not, and rages not, as mad Marshall Birom:
murmures not, repincs not as the wild Irish men without hope: expostulates not
with Destenie, as Alexander for his Hephestion: but with Aaron, lays his hand
on his heart and mouth for his sons sudden Death, knowing what God has
sealed, shall be and must be. If the Dreams of a blind fatal necessity could
quiet Heathens, how much more should a Christian be cheerful at the disposal
of a wise and loving keeper of the Seal. A minute sooner or later it shall not
be, then he has foreseen and foresealed for thy especial good, who has
times, and seasons, and seals in his ordination. Worthy was the speech and
resolution of an understanding Divine. If Christ has the key and seal of
Death, then a fig for Death. This though it be an ordinary notion, yet well
digested, it is a singular stay to a believer.

The Seal being thus opened, Come and see the Creature that issues forth.
Behold an Horse, a fierce a strong, a warlike, a speedy Creature so described
by God himself, Job 39.

Look therefore how easily Iehu stamped Iezabell into pieces: and Tamberlaine
his Troops of Horse the Turkish Footmen, or as the sturdie Steed dashes out
the little Whappets brains, so easily does Death with the least kick and
spurn of his Heel the haylest Complexion, the stoutest Constitution,
tryumphing like an Emperor over all sorts of people, treading in the necks of
Kings and Princes, as Joshua over them in Cane insulting in the terms of
Rabshakeh, Where is Hamath? the 2. Kings 19. 15. Ezekiel. 32.
Kings of Arphad, Iuah, and Sepharuaim? Elam, Meshech, and Tubal, whose fear
was upon the living, are they not descended into the grave? made their bedds in
the slimy valley, and laid their Swords under their heads? Where is Goliath
with his brazen Boots? Has wisdom delivered, Strength rescued, or wealth
ransomed any out of my fingers? For all their Confidence, have they not gone to
the King of Fear? How can it be otherwise, seeing Death comes as an armed
Horseman, upon naked Footmen: no encountering, no resistance, no running away,
no evasion by flight. This winged Pegasus, posts and speeds after men, easily
gives them Law, fetches them up again, gallops and swallows the ground he
goes, sets out after every man as soon as he comes into the world, and plays
with him, as the Cat with the Mouse, as the Gray hound with the Badger,
sometimes he follows fair and a far off, lingers aloof and out of sight:
anon he spurs after, and by and by is at the heels in some sickness, and
then it may be gives us some breath again, but in the end ouertakes us, and
is upon us with a Ierke, as the snare over the Fish, or the Foul. Absalom
could not outride him: Pharaohs Chariot wheels fell off in this chase.
Jonathan and Saul, swift as the Egles, strong as the Lion, yet how were they
slain with the mighty? What then is the course the Christian takes? He neither
foolishly thinks to resist, or escape, nor yet cowardly swounds, or crauenly
yields: but as a valiant Footman that espies an Horseman pursue him in a
Champion, stays not till he come upon him, but addresseth himself for the
encounter: so does a Christian in his best health and prosperity, put on his
armor, get him the Helmet of Salvation, the Shield of Faith, and learneth the
use of them betimes, before he be unapt to it in sickness or age As the
Parthians teach their very Children to handle the Bow, the Scythians the Dart,
the Germans the Spear: and so it comes to pass, that belieuers are not
surprised, as worldlings often are, with milk but in their breasts, without
Oil in their Lamps, and all in vain then fondly cry out to this Horseman to
stay his stroke. As the rich Fool Gregory relates of, who entreated Death to
stay till the next morning, Truce but til to morrow, and I will be ready for
thee. A Christian wisely considers, that he has no morrow, and therefore
while it is called to day, is ready for this Horse, who never sets any certain
day of his coming.

Behold also the color of this Horse (...), the color of the withering leaf,
pale and wan: Symbolizing and noting the effect he has first upon the living,
whom he appalles, as he did Baltashar, whom all his Concubines and Courtiers
could not cheer, nor all his wine in the bowls of the Temple fetch color
into his countenance. See we not often Prisoners at the Bar wanne away, and
dye as white as a cloth at the Sentence of death pronounced on them. Many gulls
and gallants we may hear sometimes flight off Death with a jest, when they
think it out of hearing, and some wish it and call for it, as Gaal for
Abimelech, but when it comes in good earnest, they are not able to look it in
the face, with the blood in their cheeks. Some foolishly set a face on the
matter, on their deathbeds, lest neighbors should censure when they are gone
for Cowards: hypocritically paynting their faces as Iezabel did, affronting
Iehu out of the window, God knows with a cold heart, and if her paint had bin
off, a pale face should one have seen underneath it. Whereas Christians having a
good measure of faith to warm them at the heart, change not their countenance
nor have their color any whit abated, but as is recorded of Mistress Joyce
Lewis at the stake, and sundry other Christians, even of the fearfullest by
nature and sex, looked as fresh and cheerely at the hour of death, as at their
marriage.

A second effect of this pale horse is after death, bereauing the bodies of all
blood and color, making them liuelesse and wan carkases, and so lays them a
rotting and mouldring among the worms their sisters, till the fashion of them
be utterly altered, the beauty consumed, and shape turned into rottenness. Oh
how grievous is this to such Absaloms, Iezabels, and Rosamonds, have set much
by their painted sheathes and pampered Carkases, whose belly is their God, and
yet their end must be corruption. Dust they were, and to dust they must
return. Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vanity, when the pale Horse
comes, there is no remedy. Here only Faith has an Antidote comforting her
self with these sayings: This base and vile body of mine must be thus
served, that it may be transfigured and made conformable to the glorious
Standart Christ's body, more glorious then the Sun in his brightest hew. It
must thus be sown in pale ignomy, that it may rise in glorious beauty. What
if I lose a little Vermillion red mixture of Fleame and Sanguine, shall I not
recover a radiant resplendant luster? Can the Alchimist with his Art, cause a
dry withered flower to show it self again for a space, in it natural verdant
shape and color: and cannot God that made me first of Clay, and that Clay of
nothing, reduce and refine the same after it has been in the Earth? as the
Chynois do the materials of their curious dishes for many scores of years,
that when it is thoroughly deficate, their posterity may temper and frame some
vessel of excellent service withal. Certainly my Redeemer lives, and with
these eyes I shall see him, as he is most admirable to behold, and my self
like unto him in my degree. Ten thousand times more comely, then is here
possibly for to imagine, the most personable Creature that ever the Sun saw:
when the body shall be enriched with those excellent Dowries of
Impassibilitie, Claritie, Subtlety, Agilitie.

Oh, but heeres yet a more fearful Spectacle behind, then all that has yet
come in sight. Hell, even Hell it self in the worst sense, not the grave of
the body, but of the soul. For John sees here principally the Judgment of the
wicked, that were slain for the contempt of the Gospel, by the pale Horse,
for not yielding to the White and his crowned Rider. And their woeful state is
here opposed to the happy condition of the Martyrs under the Altar.

Well then, behold also, even Hell the Page and follower of Death, attending
him where ever he goes among the wicked sort. Whence it is that they are so
often coupled in this Book, Death and Hell. Look as the Foxes wayt upon
Lions, Carrion Crows upon armies, Gaolers or Serieants for a prey: so
diligently does the devil on death for a booty. No fowler does more cunningly
stalk behind the Horse, or creep behind brakes and hedges, to get his aim at
the shye Fowls. No Serieant hides his Mase, no Angler his hook more warily:
knowing that else Hell should never swallow so many.

Alack, alack, we silly Fish see one another caught, and ierk't out of the
Pond, but see not the fire and Frying pan into which they come. In this
consists the Devils chiefest policy, and our grossest simplicity, and even
this is the cause of our sottish and foolish living and dying.

Oh that my head were a Fountain of tears, to weep for, and bewail the
stupiditie, yea the desperate madness of infinite sorts of people that rush
upon Death, and chop into Hell blindling. How brutish and beastly are the
preaemises and conclusion of the Epicure and his brood, Let us eat and drink*
for to morrow we shall dye? Who knows whether the soul of the beast descend,
and man's ascend, who ever saw the one go downward and the other upward, and
then what matter if the life of the one differ not from the other? What need a
man care whether he be a Sadduces Swine, an Epicures Horse, or himself? The
one many times has less care, and more pleasure then the other, if Death be
the last line, the full point, and final cessation of the Creature. These
^ruits thank Phylosophie that (...) taught them not to fear any such
Hobgoblins spirits, or old Wines tales, as Hell. But such Phylosophie Socrates,
Plato, and the wiser sort even of the Heathen have hissed out of Schools as
belluine. Yea, the most savage and vnlittered people, the less soiled with
Art, the more confidently do they out of Natures instinct, and divine
impression, conclude of an eternal place of well and ill being after death for
the souls of men. But these Monsters wilfully shut their eyes, deface and
obliterate these stamps, and principles of nature, and so dance hood-winke into
perdition. Miserable it is to see how boldly and blindly they think and
venture on Death: Theramenes, he writes Books in praise of Death, as the end
of all calamities. Augustus, he dies in a jest, calling for a Plaudite.
Tiberius ^n dissimulation. Diogines hearing Antisthenes cry out in his pains,
Who shall ease me? offers him a ^nife to dispatch himself withal. Caninus
called to execution, bids his Fellow remember he had the best of the Game. The
Earl of Kildare seeing his Writ of Death brought in when he was at
shouelboard, throws his cast, with this in his mouth: Whatsoever that is, this
is for a huddle. Little list would these blind bayards have for such idle
mirth, if their eyes were opened to see this follower of Death. How pitiful
is the frenzy of those brave Spirits, as they deem and term themselves (as
much as they scorn pity) our Duellists I mean, who as if they never had
heard of Hell, are as Prodigal of their lives, as Cocks or Dogs are of
theirs, pouring them out upon every drunken quarrel. I pity not the loss
or miss of such, good for little but to se^ in the front of a Battle, or t^
stop breaches and Canons withal: but I pity the loss of their souls, who
serve themselves, as the Jesuit in Lancashire, followed by one that found his
Glove, with a desire to restore it to him: but pursued inwardly with a guilty
conscience, leapes over an Hedge, plunges into a Marlepit behind it, unseen
and unthought of, wherein he was drowned. I marvel not, that they fear not a
Rapier, or Pistol, Who would not choose it before a lingering and paineful
sickness? Were it not for the afterclaps of Death? No Coward need fear the
encounter of it alone in a single combat. But Death has a Second, a Page ten
times more dreadful then himself, with whom we have to begin, when we have done
with Death, which is but the beginning of sorrows. Death is pale, but his
follower is a black Fellow, a terrible monster never enough feared. In which
respect, how lamentable also is the blindness of all selfe-murderers, who make
Death the remedy of every grief, and cure of every violent passion: If they
find themselves inwardly vexed, or perplexed in Conscience, they seek Death
as a present ease; not considering how they leap out of the smoke into the
flame, out of the flame into the fire, out of a curable momentany disturbance,
into an endless inrecouerable woe, (without the extraordinary mercy of God) to
which usually the Devil speeds them, that he might get them into his
clutches, and so pass out of doubt, all means of prevention and evasion by
Faith and Repentance.

Oh senseles Achitophell, how did thy wisdom fail and befoole thee, when
thou set thine house in order, and disposest of thy goods, forgettest thy
soul, hangest thy self, which durst thou, or would thou have done, had but
one believing thought of an eternal fire come into thy head? How blockish is
the manner of dying of many a Naball, who stricken with the fear of Death and
Hell, become as insensate as stocks and stones, have no mind nor power to
think of one thing or other: Cannot abide to hear any mention of the danger
of that which they fear, whose senses the Devil bewitches and benumms, lest
they should see and avoid: such was Jews the eleventh, who straightly
charged his Servants, that when they saw him sick, they should never once
dare to name that bitter word Death in his ears. So do Cowards and Crauens
shut their eyes, and choose rather to feel blows, then to see and shun them.
Little better is the common course that most people take. Scared some are with
a confused, and preposterous fear of Death, and flashes of Hell in their
Consciences, and yet take no course to get pardon and Faith in CHRIST: but
either taking it to be some melancholy humor, send for merry companions to
drive it away: or being given up to hardness of heart and impenitencie,
wilfully shake off all thoughts of repentance, shut their eyes and ears
against all good advise, and desperately put all at adventures, and chop into
the jaws of that roaring Lion. Some of them ridiculously fearing Death, they
know not why, more for the pangs of it (which often are less then of the
Tooth-ake) then for the Hell following: like fools that fear the thunder
Crack, and not the Bolt; the Report of the Piece, and not the Bullet; the
Serieants arrest, and not the Gaolers Imprisonment: Labor to escape Death
which they cannot, and Hell which they might. Others of them scarred with some
terrible apparisions, affrighted, as Cardinal Crescentius a little before his
death, with a black Dog in his Chamber. A Presage and Preludium of Hell
approaching: they cry out they are damned, the Devil, the Devil, do they
not see him, etc. And so Spira-like, desperately and disconsolately depart in
hellish horror. Other of them a little wiser, and yet little the better for
it, admit a cold thought or two, and it may be a little parley about the
matter, but when they have fetched a sigh or put all upon a Lord have mercy on
them: trust it shall go as well with them as with others, even as God will
have it: and think they do much if they send to a Minister to pray with them
or for them: never giving all diligence to make their salvation sure, and to
escape so great a condemnation.

Oh if we could consider how fearfully such find themselves deluded, when
their souls awake, worse then Jonas in the* Tempest, even in a gulf of fire
and brimstone. How would it awaken and arouse us to foresee Death and Hell in
their shapes, and to fore-appoint our selves thoroughly, not against the first
Death which we cannot, but against the second we may, if we get our part in
the first resurrection.

This Text, me thinks speaks to every sick man bound on his bed with the
Cords of Death, as Dalilath to Sampson: up and arise, for the Philistims are at
hand: Death is at the door, and behind the door, the Fiends weight to fetch
away thy soul. Bellarmine is of opinion, that one glympse of Hell were enough
to make a man not only turn Christian and sober, but Anchorite and Monk, to
live after the strictest rule that can be. I am of belief, that Gods spirit
cooperating a through meditation of it, might be a mean to keep one from it.
For a man to wish to have a sight of it, or that one might come thence and make
report of the intolerable and unutterable pains of it is superfluous,
superstitious: and if it should be granted, yet being not Gods ordinance and
allowance, it might go without his blessing, and do one no good. Thy best
course is well to ponder what we that are Gods Ministers report of it, out of
Moses, the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles descriptions. And if God mean
thee any good, our warning may do thee some good. Popish writers are too bold
in making Maps of Heaven and Hell, as if they had surueyed them and their
regions, and inhabitants: but most I think are one the other hand to brief
and summarie in their meditations and writings. To paint it in it own native
colors is impossible, or by any contemplation to comprehend the horror of it.
Shadows and parables the Scripture uses, by which thou may and ought
to help thy conjectures, and to work on thy affections withal, after this or
the like manner.

Here God has allowed thee on his earth a pleasant habitation, commodiously
situate in a good Air, richly decked with furniture, compassed with
delightful Gardens, Orchards and Fields, where thou have liberty to walk and
ride at thy pleasure: How would it trouble thee to think of being laid up all
thy life in some straight and loathsome prison, by this consideration how ill
thou will brook to be cast into a doleful disconsolate Dungeon, to lie in
utter darkness, blackness of darkness in eternal chains, in little ease
for ever.

Here a great part of thy contentment, is to live among good Neighbors, with
a loving wife, with cheerful companions: and loath thou art at any time to
be long in the house of mourning, to be among melancholy malecontented,
complaining feeble or brawling people in Hospitals, or Bridwels, or Bedlams.
How will then thine ears endure to be tired with continual howling,
scritching and gnashing of teeth, to live among Dogs, Enchanters, unclean
Birds, reprobate Spirits, worse then so many Toades, Tigers, or Serpents.

Here if thy Father should in displeasure bid get thee out of sight, or thy
Prince banish thee his court and presence, as David did Absolon, for some
offense, thou would take it heavily: how shall thine ears tingle to hear
God say, depart out of my presence, Go thou cursed into the lake prepared for
the Devil and his Angels.

Here thou shrinkest to think of the gout, colic, stone, or strangurian,
shiuerest to hear of the strappado, the rack, or the Lawne, how then will thou bear universal tortures in all the parts of thy body, exquisite anguish
and pains, such as of which the pangs of childbirth, burnings of material
fire and brim stone, gnawings of chestwormes; drinks of Gall and Wormwood are
but shadows; and to which they are all but sports and fleabitings, even to
the torments thy body shall suffer for it sins against the Creator.

But have thou ever here in this world tasted of a troubled spirit, of the
grief and fears of a wounded Conscience possessed with bitter things:
stricken and pierced with the venom of Gods arrows, fears of the Almighty: by
these thou may make the best guess how it will fare with thy soul when God
shall power all the vials of his wrath into a vessel of his fury, and vex the
soul in his sore displeasure, scourge thee with the rods of scorpions, make
thee drunk with the gall of Aspes and Cockatrices, make thy mind heavy unto the
death, holding it ever in those Agonies, which made his own Son sweat
cloddes of water and blood. Oh how fearful a thing is it to fall into the
hands of God, who is a consuming fire. Think of it whiles there is hope, you
that forget God, Heaven, and Hell, least you come there where there is no
redemption, no hope of ease or end, which is that that makes Hell, Hell indeed:
For if all these pains might have an end, were it after million and millions
of years, as many as there be sands in the Sea shore, yet might thou
nourish some miserable comfort of a release in the long run: But this night
has no day, this Ague no intermission, his death no death to end it withal.

Here thou would be loath to lie on the Rack from morning to night, to be
wroung with the Colic for a few days or hours, to be haunted with a Quartan
from Michael to Easter: Oh then add eternity to insupportable torments, and
let thine ears tingle, and thine heart melt to think of it. Were it not for
hope in small pressures, we say heart would burst: Oh then this word ever and
ever, if thou could duly believe and consider it, how would it break that
hard heart of thine, which knows not how to repent, nor cares to prevent the
wrath to come.

What think thou, are these things tales and fables, is Hell but a name and
word, a scarbug for to keep fools in awe? Has not God, think thou, a day
of reckoning, a prison and power to punish Rebels and Traitors, or are not his
punishments like to his Justice, infinite and eternal? Know these things to be
as true as God is truth, save that they are short of the truth it self. Why
do thou not then take thy soul apart, and ruminate of these things by thy
self, judging thy self here, that thou may not be condemned in the world
to come. Art thou afraid of a melancholy fit, and fear thou not this gulf,
and whirlpoole, and sorrow? Art thou not loath to be tormented before thy
time, and fear not to be tormented time without end. I wonder how the
souls of wicked men and unbelievers go not out of their bodies, as the Devils
out of demoniaks, rending, raging, tearing and foaming. I wonder how any can
dye in their wits, that die not in the faith of our Lord Christ. Verily if
these things move thee not, thou art in a worse plight then Foelix and
Baltashar; yea, the very Devils themselves, who believe them; yea, quake and
tremble to think of them. How feign would I snatch thy soul out of this fire?
Undoubtedly know, that if this warning do thee no good, it is because thou
art of old, justly ordained to perish in thy impenetency, and to be a
firebrand in these everlasting flames. Now on the contrary, if thou be a
vessel of mercy and honor, it will do thee no hurt, but drive thee to
Christ, in whom there is no condemnation: who only is perfectly able to save
and deliver thee out of this Lake. If thou be est already in him, it will
cause thee to rejoice in thy Lord and Savior, who has delivered thee from the
fear of two such enemies that now thou may with the Ostrich in Job despise
the horse and his rider, and triumph by Faith over Hell and Death: O Death
where is thy sting! Oh Hell where is thy victory! Death is to men as he comes
attended: To Dives he comes followed with Devils, to carry his soul to Hell:
To Lazarus with troops of Angels to convey him to Abraham's bosom. So that we
may in earnest say, that Death is the Atheists fear, and the Christians
desire. Diogines could iestingly call it, The Rich man's enemy, and the Poor
man's friend. This, this is that which makes death so easy, so familiar and
dreadlesse to a belieuer; he sees Death indeed, but Death is not Death without
Hell follow him: and Hell he sees not, but only as escaped and vanquished, and
therefore is said not to see Death. Now (says the belieuer) comes death and
the Prince of this world with him, but he has no part in me: all the
bitterness and tears of death lie in the fear of Hell, which, thanks be to
Christ has nothing to do with me, nor I with it, and therefore I taste not of
death: now comes Gods Sergeant pale death, whom I know I cannot avoid: but
this I know, he comes not to arrest me to carry me to prison, but only to
inuit me to a feast, attend and convey me thither. Let such fear him as are
in debt and danger, mine are all discharged and cancelled: he comes with his
horse to take up me behind him, and to fetch me to my fathers joys, to a
Paradise as full of pleasures, as he carries the wicked to a prison full of
pains. Pharaohs Baker and Butler were sent for out of prison, the one to
promotion, the other to execution: he that had the ill Dream, expected the
Messenger with horror, the other longed for him with comfort. The latter is my
case, therefore though I be reasonably well in this world, as a child at board,
yet home is home, therefore will I wait till this pale horse comes, and bid
him heartily welcome: and with him the Angels of my Father, who have a charge
to lay my body in a bed of rest, and to bestow my soul under the Altar, as it
follows in the next seal, which is so pleasing a vision, that we need no
voice or preface, such as we had in the former, inuiting us to Come and see:
the very excellency of the object it self is of force enough to draw, and hold
the eyes of our minds unto it.

The second Sermon.
VERSE 9. And when he had opened the first Seal, I saw under the Altar the
Souls, etc.
WHen Death has bin viewed in the palest, and Hell in the blackest colors that
may be, yet if we have Faith enough to see Souls in their White roabes under
the Altar* there is comfort enough against the horror of both; enough to enable
the belieuer to despise and trample over them ^ooth. In the opening of this
fifth Seal, I hope to find more sollid Antidotes, more lively Cordialls,
against the fear of Death, then in all the dead and dry precepts of
Bellarmines doting Art of dying. For this part of the vision was showed John of
purpose to sweeten the harshnesse of the former: that his spirit grieved and
amazed with the sight of the calamities and mortality under the persecuting
Butchers, rather then Emperors, might yet be relieved and refreshed with a
sight of the blessed estate of such as died either in, or for the Lord.

Wherein was proposed to his sight, and to our consideration these seuerals.
First, the immortal subsistence of souls after their separation from the
body. Secondly, their sure and secure condition under the Altar. Thirdly, their
dignity and felicity clothed with white robes. Fourthly, their complete
happiness at the last day, when the number of their brethren shall be
accomplished.

Of all these, Christ meant John should take notice, and al believers by his
testimony to their full consolation.

First, John being in the spirit could see spirits, men indeed clad in flesh,
can hardly imagine how a soul can have existence out of the flesh. Eagles can
see that which Owls cannot: so is that visible and credible to a spiritual
man, which to a natural is invisible, incredible. And yet even natures dim
eyes have been clear enough to see this truth. Nature I say, pure and mere
nature, not only the Platonists and other learned ones, who resolutely
concluded it, and aptly resembled it, to the distinct being of the waggoner
after the breaking of the Coach: the swimming out of the Mariner in the wreake
of the ship, the creeping of the snayle out of the shell, the worm out of the
case: not unto the learned Grecians, and ciuilized Romans: But even the rudest
Scythians and unlettered Savages; yea, though there be many Languages, and
sundry Dialects in the world, yet is, and has this ever been the common voice
of them all, That souls die not with the body. And howeuer the bodies
resurrection has to them been a Problem and Paradoxe, yet is the souls
eternity an inbred instinct sucked from natures breast; or rather an indelible
principle stamped in the souls of men by the finger of God. And indeed, to
right reason, what difficulty or absurdity is there in it. What lets me to
conceive a being of it in the Air, in the Heaven, or in any other place as
well as in the compass of my body, is not one substance as capable of it as
another? Can it live in the one, and not in another?

Has it not, even whiles it is in the body, thoughts, motives, passions by it
self, of it own different from the body, many cross and contrary to the
disposition of the body, cheerful ones when that is in pain or melancholy:
Choleric ones when that is flegmaticke. Does it wait upon the body for joy,
sorrow, anger, and the like? does it not more often begin unto it? Not to
speak of Martyrs innumerable, who have been exceedingly pleasant in the
midst of torments, as if they had been spirits without flesh. How many
ancient stories and daily examples have we of chereful minds in distempered,
pained, languishing dying bodies? Reason will then conclude, that the Soul may
well be, and be sensible after death without the body, which even in the body
can be well, when that is ill, cheerely when that is hurt, or sick, grieved
and troubled when that is in perfect temper and health. And on the contrary,
small reason have we to think it sleeps out of the body, which never
slumbers in the body, or that it is seized by death out of the body, which
never was overcome by sleep, which is but deaths Image, and younger brother in
the body, but ever was working and discoursing in the deepest and deadest
sleeps of the body.

Besides, is it likely God would enrich it with such noble and divine dowries
to be salt only to the body, to exhale with it as Bruits do. The admirable
invention of Arts, Letters, Engines, the strange fore-casts, prospects and
presages of the understanding part, the infinite lodgings, the firm reteinings
of the memory, do they not argue an immortality: Do men ingraue curiously
in Snow, Ice, or transient stuff?

What means the great anxietie of men about their suruiuing name, if the mind
perished with the body, if Death were the cessation of the man, and
destruction of the whole substance. What should nature care for an ayery
accident without a subject, whereof no part of him should be sensible.

What means the very fear of Death, if that were the end of all fears, and
cares, and sorrows, if nothing remained sensible, and capable of any thing to
be feared.

Lastly, the fresh vigor, the vnimpayred ability, that nimble agilitie of the
mind in sickness; yea, many times the freer use of the faculties of it in
the confines, yea, in the act and Article of Death, then in former health, do
they not tell the body, the soul means not to fall with the carkase (which
has the name of falling) lies not a dying with it, but errects it self,
means only to leave it as an Inhabitant does a ruinous House, or as a
Musition lays down a Lute whose strings are broken, a Carpenter a worn
instrument unfit any longer for service and imploiment: and as a Guest makes
haste out of his Inn, to his long home and place of abode.

Loath I am to mingle Philosophical Cordialls with Divine, as water with wine,
least my Consolations should be flash and dilute: yet, even these and such
like arguments have taught all Phylosophie (the brutish school of the Epicure
excepted) to see and acknowledge that the soul is not a vapor, but a spirit,
not an accident, but a substance, and elder and more excellent sister to the
body immixt and seperable; a guest that dies not with it, but diuerts out of
it, intending to reuisite and reunite it again unto it* self. But Divinity
certainly knows all this to be most certain that it is a particle of divine
breath, inbreathed into the red lome at the first, not arising out of it, but
infused from heaven into it, and therefore may as well exist without the clay
after it, as it did before it: and when the dust returns to the dust, heaven
goes to heaven, both to their originals, the soul first, because first and
principal in every action, the body after as an accessory and second, and so
the day of death to the body, is the birth day of eternity to the soul.

This vndying, and everliving condition of the soul, thoroughly rolled in the
mind, firmly embraced, and undoubtedly apprehended by Faith, works admirable
effects as in life, so in the approach of death. Seneca that saw it but through
Clouds, cranies and creuises with yfs, and ands, yet professes that when he
thought but a little of it, and some pleasant dreams of it, he loathed
himself and all his trifling gratnes. But most divinely, and resoluedly*
Julius Palmer: He that has his soul linked and tied to the body, as a thiefes
feet to a Clogge with guyues and fetters, no marvel he knows not how to
dye, is loath to endure a Division: but he that uses, and can by Faith
separate the spirit from the body, to him it is to drink this: and with that
drinks off a Cup of Wine in his hand, and within a while after, as cheerfully
drinks of Deaths cup in the sight of the same Witnesses. Even Socrates himself
sweetened his Cup of poison, with this discourse of the souls immortality, to
the amazement of the beholders. Such Souls indeed as place all their
felicity to be in a full fed, and well complexioned body, and to partake of
the senses corporeal delights, has not accustomed it self to it own retired
delights of obstracted meditations, knows not how to be merry without a
play-fellow, no marvel though it be as loath to part with the body, as a
crooked deformed body to part with rich robes and gorgeous apparel, which were
it only ornaments. But such noble and regenerate spirits as know their own
Dowries, have inured themselves to sublimate contemplations, and to have their
conversation in Heaven, whiles they were in the body: such I say, though they
do not Cynically revile the body as a Clog, a prison, a lump of mire, etc. but
know it to be the Temple of the Holy Ghost, yet are they willing, yea and sigh
to be unclothed, to sow it a while in the earth, being a dark and thick
lantern, hindering the clear sight of it, till they may reassume it
clarified, a spiritual, an Angelified body made apt and obsequious to all
divine services, to Celestial Offices without weariness, intermission, and
such like vanity, which here it is subject unto: as willing as David to lay
aside Saul's cumbersome Armor, and to betake him to such as he could better
weeld and command at pleasure.

This is the first and lowest help Faith has to comfort the soul withal in
the approach of Death; when the strong men buckle, the Keepers of the house
fail, they wax dim that look out at the windows, when the whole outward
man decays: that the inner man ages not, faints not, languisheth not, but
rather lifts up the head, is more fresh then formerly, and excepts to be
unburdened, and to be at liberty, freed from Corporeal tedious unpleasing
works of sleeping, eating, drinking, and other meaner drudgery, that it may
once come to higher and more spiritual employments better suiting with it
native condition: even as the Lion longs to be out of the grate, and the
Eagle out of the cage, that they may have their free scope and fuller liberty.

Under the Altar.
Now if this much revived John (as no doubt it did) to see the Souls
continuance after Death, how much more to see their safety and rest under the
Altar: that is under Christ's protection and custody, under the shadow of his
wings. Who makes them grateful to his Father, couers them from his wrath,
safeguards them from all molestation, procures them absolute quiet and
security. The phrase alluding to the Altar in the Tabernacle, which gave the
Offerings grace and acceptance: and partly to the safety of such as fled from
the Auenger to the Altar. Christ is our Altar, and all the Souls of such as
dye in his Faith, are as Stephan bequeathed to him: he presents them to his
Father, shelters them from accusation and condemnation, gathers them as the
Hen her Chickens under his wings, being fully able to keep what is committed
to him from all disquiet. He that could keep the three young men in the
Furnace with whom he walked, yea their very garments from the violence of fire:
The Israelites and their apparel in the wilderness: Jonas in the Whales belly:
how much more easily now he sits at the hand of his Father in Majesty and
Glory, can he defend saved and glorified souls from all External and
Internal Annoyance, and settle them in absolute peace with him in his
Paradise, according to his frequent promise to such as overcome, they shall sit
with me upon thrones.

And long white Robes were given unto every one.
If John had seen souls at rest, though in poor and mean condition, yet
were a corner of an house with peace to be preferred to a wide Palace with
disquiet: A poor diet with green Herbs with quiet, to a feast with stalled
oxen, and crammed fowls, sauced with bitter contention. But behold, he sees
not naked, beggarly, ragged souls, but adorned with white Robes; that is,
endowed now, and glorified with perfect righteousness, purity, clarity,
digtie, and festiuitie: of all which white apparel has ever been an Emblem
and Symbol in Divine and Humane Herauldry, a clothing of Princes in their
great solemnities of Coronation, triumphs and ouations, says Eusebius: so was
Herod arrayed in cloth of silver, with which the Sun beams meeting, made
such a glister, as amazed the people that styled him a God: so says
Tertullian, were they wont to dignifie Servants at their Manumissions with
white Apparel, in token of their new liberty and preferment. At feasts great
persons were wont to change their guests ordinary clothes with a white
Synthesis, a color fit to express alacrity. Christians, the whole Easter
week wore white apparel. All the graces the souls had here in this their
infancy of Regeneration, were but stained and polluted clouts: their knowledge
dark and obscured with ignorance, their memories clouded with oblivion, their
wills and affections tempested with mutinies and perturbations, their habits of
holiness and charity, sullid with defects and infirmities, their delights duske
and parti-colored and spotted with mixture of sorrow: all their apparel black
and sad russet at the least; but there purer then the Crystal, whiter then
the Snow, or then Fullers earth is able to make them. The Lillyes, and Solomon
in all their Royalty not like unto the meanest of them. Call us no more Marah,
may they say, but Naomi. For fullness of beauty is conferred upon them, God
becoming fullness of claritie and light unto the understanding, without error
or darkness, continuation of Eternity to the memory without forgetfulness,
multitude of Peace to the Will and Affections without disturbance or disorder:
the superior part of the Soul, pleasing it self in the blessed vision of
God, and the inferior satiate with the fruition of rivers of pleasures, and
variety of monthly fruits. All this joy increased by the aemenity and
magnificence of the place being Gods Palace, built and prepared for eternity,
for the honor of his Majesty, and habitation of his Saints, all shining like
precious Jasper: enchanted by the full quire of Angels and communion of holy
men, excellent when they were on earth, now perfected in their virtues, and
freed from frailties, never mourning, but ever singing and lauding their
Creator with Alleluiahs without defatigation or satietie: all this made up and
consummate by the addition not of a number of years, but of eternity
vncountable, unalterable: incomprehensible. What are the chief miseries of
this life, but the sordid apparel of the Soul, the black thoughts, the
speckled fantasies, dark oblivion, royled, soyled affections, all the habit
of it squalid, iagged, and tattered. Now then was Joseph loath to change his
prison-ragges, or Hester her old and mean Clothes with stately and royal
array? Promise a Child a new Satin suit, and see whether he will not long for
it, and call for it; see whether he will cry when you bid him lay off his
Russets? Whence is it then that men dye so dully, so unwillingly, so heavily?
or whence can it be, but because they do not lively and certainly believe,
and expect these white Robes for their souls. When the beauty of a man's mind
is here obfuscate and defaced with melancholy Tentations, and opake
Imaginations, with yellow choler, with pallid fear, with ruddy shame, with
sable despair; oh what would he give for a candid calm, and serene state of
his mind? and when again it pleases God to afford him sunshine holidayes of
joy and tranquillity, wherein his mind is clad, and decked with golden, silver,
and precious ornaments of peace, meekness, temperance, patience, Oh what an
Heaven would he think he had here on earth, if all his days were but such
days! whereas this a Christian may well assure himself of, that what ever
grace does here prepare and begin, there glory will absolve and perpetuate for
matter of sanctity, purity, and alacrity of the mind, typified in these white
robes: yea further for matter of dignity and triumph, which then shall be most
complete, where they shall see Christ at that day come in the glory of the
Father with millions of his Angels descending and bringing down his heavenly
Jerusalem, meeting them half way in the clouds, and there auenging them of
their enemies, sitting with them as assessors upon thrones, to judge the
Angels, and the world of wicked ones, and such as have insulted over them on
the earth, in which they shall then without any malignity of envy, anger, or
appetite of revenge, take amirable and unspeakable content and comfort, yea
reck on it as the accomplishment of their inchoate glory, for which they are
here said to long for, and groan under the Altar, till the number of all their
brethren being consummate, God shall openly acquit and applaud them, condemn
and confound their opposites. These, these are the only, stately, and Kingly
dignities: the meditations whereof are onlyable to beget and foster true
heroical and Christian resolutions against the fear of Death and Hell,
otherwise unvanquished. To conclude then, to the man that would both in health
and sickness nourish ever in his breast undaunted and more then conquering
thoughts of these two enemies, instead of Bellarmines many frivolous and
tedious rules: I prescribe but these two practices of Faith. The first is to
work in his mind a settled and undoubted certainty: and the second a lively
and frequent representation of them.

Were heaven nothing else but an haven of rest, we know how welcome the one is
to a Sea-sick weather-beaten traveler, and may by that guess how desirable
the other should be to a soul that long has been tossed in the waves of this
world, sick of own sinful imaginations, and tired with external tentations.
The happiest soul that ever has sailed over this Euripus, in the best ship,
in the healthfullest body that ever was, never had so calm a passage, but that
it has had cause enough often to wish it self on shore. What with self
groaning fantasies, and iniected temptations, how little respit or rest is
here to be found? Is there any Palace or Tower here so high or strong, that can
keep diseases from the body: how much less cares, sorrows, fears, and
Satan's assaults from the Soul? Were there but such an Island, as some have
dreamed of here on earth, that might free our bodies or minds from disquiet,
but for the space of the moment of this life, how would people covet to dwell
in it? In the times of the late wars in Netherlands, how did the Boares
forsake their Farms, and fly into walled Cities for security from dangers?
What violence then should our heavenly Jerusalem suffer of our wishes and
desires? were it but for the sweet and amiable name of peace whereof it is
denominated, having indeed the God of Peace for the King and Keeper of it: Walls
many Cubits high, into which no Zenacherib can shoot an arrow, nor the Dragon
Beast, nor the false Prophet to seduce or to accuse: strong gates and bars
excluding all enemies and annoyances, and so affording perfect tranquillity to
all the Inhabitants, out of which they insult ten times more saferly, then the
Iebusites over the blind and lame, over the pale horse and his riders, Death
and Hell. Consider and compare a little the simplicity of the worldling with
the wisdom of the Christian, the happy stabilitie of the one, with the woeful
uncertainty of the other at the time of their departure. Even Foxes and Hares,
and other such vermin fore-acquaint themselves with Muses, Thickes and
Burroes, into which when they are chased and hunted, they may repair for
safety: but these fools while they live in health and prosperity, never think
of the evil day, and when away they see they must go, how vnshystable are
they? Some of the meaner sort, they take care for their winding sheet: or if
richer, for a marble or painted sepulcher, which yet cannot preserve their
bodies or names from putrefaction: the superstitious sort to be buried in a
Friars Cowle, or under an Alter of stone: the desperater sort, wishing the
Mountains might cover them from the wrath of the Lamb. An harbor or
receptacle for their souls they never think of; whence it is that they are as
loath to have them turned out of their bodies, as Hagar and Ismael to be out of
doors, and exposed to misery and dangers; or rather as Cain, to be cast as a
Vagabond out of Gods presence, fearing lest every one that met him next, should
cut his throat for a cursed Caitiffe. And indeed what else can they look for,
but instantly to be devoured of the roaring Lion, that waits at the door of
Death, to fetch away their souls into the place where there is no night nor
day. Only the wise beleuer, he has provided a Sanctuary, or City of refuge
against time of danger, has learned wisdom of the Conies, who though a little
nation, yet wise and forecasting, have their refuge in the Rocks. Christ is the
believers Rock, and his strong Tower, his Altar, and therefore he fears not
what Death can do unto him. Christ has assured him on his word, that he
shall have all, tears wiped away, and the Spirit secured him that he shall
rest from his labors. In which regard he is so far from lingering and
hankering after a continuance in this Baca of tears, this wilderness of fears,
that he studies rather to enter into this rest, Cries out with David, Woe is me
that I dwell in, Meshek and Kedar, when I think of peace, there is war at
hand: With Jeremy, Woe is me that I dwell with a contentious people. With
Elias, I am weary of my life, an end good Lord. Or with blessed Simeon, Now
Lord let thy servant depart in peace, into that land of peace; here I have
seen that there is no peace to be had: all here is vanity and vexation of
spirit. For a minute of peace, months of vanity, for a dram of honey, pounds of
aloes and gall. Souls here find no resting place for the soles of their feet,
till they come to the mount Ararat, whither their works follow them, where
their sorrows leave them. And so conclude with Vidus Bressius, Oh that my
soul had I the wings of the Dove to fly and make haste to that mountain of
God, and hill of tranquillity and eternity. Thus the one dies howling, the
other singing, because the one knows he changes for the better, the other for
the worse: the one takes Death for a gulf of sorrow, the other for a port of
liberty and ease: the one because he is stripped for a scourging; the other
because he lays off his clothes to go to bed after his toil.

If Queen Elizabeth whiles she was a prisoner in her sisters days could have
been fully assured, and had clearly foreseen her own long; glorious, and
prosperous reign ensuing, would she have wished her self a Milke-maid for the
present? No, it had bin impossible. All our fears and doubts arise from
infidelity and the uncertainty, or else from the deadness and dullness of
our hopes. To put life into which, there can be no better, no other help, then
first to ground and root our Faith in Christ through the word and spirit: And
then of ten to be setting before our eyes a state and condition happy above all
that Cities, Kingdoms, Crowns, Pearls, and Jewels, Marriages, Feasts, and all
other Metaphors and Parables of Scripture do but shadow out unto us. Which
supereminent and super abundant felicity, Paul that had been an eye witness,
not able to describe, much less to amplify, sums it up, An exceeding
exceeding eternal weight of Glory.

A superlatiue transce^dent phrase such as is not to be found in all the
Rhetoric of the Heathens, because they never wrote of such a Theme, nor with
such a Spirit. If any of us had but half the strength of Paul's Faith, or life
of his hope, or cheerful fore-imaginations, which he had of this felicity,
woe could not but have the same desires, and longings for our dissolution and
fruition of them. If we thoroughly believed and remembered this to be the state
of our selves and dead friends, would we* or could we so fear for our selves,
or mourn for them in Blackes, whiles they are in whites, as Jacob for Joseph,
thinking him devoured by some evil beast, when he was Lording it in Egypt. No
verily, but think of it, and look for it we would with the same affections
that Children do for their plays, Prentises their freedom, Spouses their
marriage, Laborers their wages, Husbandmen their Harvest, Heirs their
Inheritance, Princes their Kingdoms. Among many thousands, I choose to
instance and end with Monicah and Augustines examples* the mother using this
speech to her son; All that I have desired to live to see, is that which I
now see: thee my son a Christian. And now what do I any longer in this base
and impure world? And he of his mother: What cause have I to mourn for a
mother, of whose happiness I may be so well assured.

When I awake, I shall be satisfied.

Write, O Christ, these Meditations in our hearts, imprint these Patterns so
fast in our memories, that we may all the days of our lives have frequent
fore-thoughts of our appointed change, chiefly in that last and solemn day of
our death, when the Prince of this world will be busy, and we shall be weak,
let thy Comforter then bring them to mind, that by faith we may overcome, and
having the Arc of thy Covenant in eye, cheerfully pass through the waters of
Jorden, and so take possession of that land which flows with all variety of
delights, without either end or sacietie: even so Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

FINIS.

