TWO HISTORIES OF IRELAND.

The one written by Edmund Campion, the other by Meredith Hanmer D r of
Divinity.

DUBLIN, Printed by the Society of Stationers. M.DC.XXXIII.

(...) els-where these Histories do afford to the knowledge of former times,
and the good use which may be made of them by any who have leisure, desire, and
ability to erect and polish a lasting structure of our Irish affairs, I am
embouldned to present them to your Lordships patronage, whose government I
beseech the Almighty so to bless; that it may be a long happiness to this land.

Your Lordships ever humbly at commandment. JAMES WARE.

THE PREFACE TO THE SVBSEQVENT HISTORIES.
WHat variety of choice matter the affairs of this Kingdom do afford to an
Historian, especially since the middle of the reign of King Henry the VIII.
any one that is but meanly versed in our Histories can testify: But if we
consider how little has hitherto bin published, we cannot but blame the
slownes of our learned men, who have (for by-respects) forborne to take pains
in so worthy a subject. England has had the happiness that some parts of her
History have bin lately excellently performed, by the right honorable Francis
late Viscount St. Alban, the right Reverend Francis Lo: Bishop of Hereford, the
most learned William Camden and others. Some will hereafter, I hope, do the
like for Ireland: In the mean while we are to accept of these tastes, the one
left unto us by Edmund Campion, and the other by Doctor Hanmer, who died (of
the plague at Dublin in the year M.DC.IIII.) before he had finished his
intended work: out of whose collections, what now bears his name has bin
preserved by our most Reverend and excellently learned Primate. Other helps
(to pass by those which are already divulged) may be plentifully had by him
who will undertake this task, out of the ancient and modern records, both
in this Kingdom and in England, as also out of diverse manuscript Annals and
Chartularies, which are yet extant among us, besides those authors of English
birth, as John Wallingford a Monk of St Alban, Thomas Wike a Canon of Osney,
and others, (which I have seen) in that excellent library and treasury of MSS.
antiquities, gathered by Sir Robert Cotton knight and Baronett deceased, who
do only obiter touch upon our affairs. An intention there was not long since
by Sir James Ley knight then Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench in Ireland,
(afterward Lord high Treasurer of England and Earl of Marleburgh) to have
published some of our country writers in this kind, for which end he caused
to be transcribed and made fit for the Press, the Annals of John Clynne a
Friar minor of Kilkenny, (who lived in the time of King Edw. the 3.) the
Annals of the Priory of S. John the Evangelist of Kilkenny, and the Annals of
Multifernan, Rosse and Clonmell, etc. But his weighty occasions did afterward
divert his purpose. The copies are yet preserved, and I hope ere long with
other Annals and fragments of the same nature will be divulged. We come now
to the Authors in hand.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT DUDLEY, Baron of Denbigh, Earl of Leicester,
Knight of the noble Order of the garter, and S. Michaels, Master of the Queens
Majesty's horse, and one of her Privy Council, high Chancellor of the
University of Oxford, my singular good Lord.
THat my travail into Ireland, might seem neither causlesse, nor fruitless,
I have thought it expedient, being one member of your Lordships honorable
charge to yield you this poor book, as an account of my poor voyage, happily
not the last, nor the most beautiful present that is intended to your Honor
by me, but surely more full of unsavory toil for the time, then any plot of
work that ever I attempted, which I write, not of vanity to commend my
diligence, but of necessity to excuse mine imperfection. For whereas it is
well known to the learned in this land, how late it was ere I could meet with
Gerald of Wales, the only Author that ministers some indifferent furniture to
this Chronicle, and with what search I have been driven to piece out the rest
by help of foreign Writers (incidently touching this Realm) by a number of
brief extracts of rolls, records and scattered papers. These things (I say)
considered, I trust this little volume shall seem great enough in such barren
shift, and my defect in penning the same shall be imputed partly to my haste, who
must needs have ended all before I should leave the land, and am now even upon
point of my departure. So as to handle and lay these things together, I had not
in all the space of ten weeks. Such as it is, I address and bequeath it to
your good Lordship, for two causes. First that by the patronage of this Book
you may be induced to weigh the estate and become a patron to this noble
Realm, which claims kindred of your eldest ancestors, and loves entirely
your noble virtues: The fame whereof is now carried by those strangers that
have felt them into many foreign countries that never saw your person.
Secondly because there is none that knows me familiarly, but he knows
vvithall how many vvayes I have been beholding to your Lordship. The regard of
your deserts and of my duty has easily won at my hands this testimony of a
thankful mind. I might be thought ambitious, if I should recount in
particular the times and places of your several courtesies to me. How often at
Oxford, how often at the Court, how at Rycot, how at Windsore, how by letters,
how by reports, you have not ceased to further with advice and to countenance
with authority, the hope and expectation of me a single Student. Therefore in
sum it shall suffice me to acknowledge the general heap of your bounties,
and for them all to serve your honor frankely, at least wise with a true
heart: Let every man esteem in your state and fortune, the thing that best
contenteth and feeds his admiration; But surely to a judgment settled and
rectified, these outward felicities which the world gazeth on, are there, and
therefore to be denied, praiseable when they lodge those inward qualities of
the mind, which (saving for suspicion of flattery) I was about to say are
planted in your breast. Thirteen years to have lived in the eye and special
credit of a Prince, yet never during all that space to have abused this ability
to any man's harm, to be enriched with no man's overthrow, to be kindled neither
with grudge nor emulation, to benefit an infinite resort of daily suitors, to
let down your calling to the need of mean subjects, to retain so lowly a
stomach, such a facility, so mild a nature in so high a vocation, to
undertake the tuition of learning and learned men. These are indeed the
kirnels for the which the shell of your nobility seems fair and sightly;
This is the sap, for whose preservation the bark of your noble tree is
tendered. This is the substance which makes you worthy of these Ornaments
wherevvith you are attyred, and in respect of these good gifts as I for my part
have ever bin desirous to discover an officious and dutiful mind toward your
Lordship, so will I never cease to betake the uttermost of my power and skill
to your service, nor to beg of Almighty God your plentiful increase in
godliness, wisdom and prosperity. Fare you well: From Dublin 27. May, 1571.

Your Lordships humbly to command. EDMUND CAMPION.

To the loving Reader.
AT my times of leisure from ordinary studies, I have since my first arrival
hither, enquired out antiquityes of the land, wherein being helped by diverse
friendly Gentlemen, I have given th'adventure to frame a Story, which I bring
from the very first original until the end of this last year 1570. I follow
these Authors, Giraldus Cambrensis, who devideth his work into two parts, from
the first (which is stuffed with much impertinent matter) I borrow so much as
serves the turn directly, the second which contains two books, and
discourses the conquest of Henry Fitz Empress, I abridge into one Chapter:
where Cambrensis ends, there begins a nameles Author, who in certain
short notes contains a Chronology until the year^ of Christ 1370. From
thence to Henry the Eight, because nothing is extant orderly written, and the
same is time beyond any man's memory, I scamble forward with such records as
could be sought up, and am enforced to be the briefer. From Henry the eighth
hitherto, I took instructions by mouth, whatsoever I bring besides these
helps, either mine own observation has found it, or some friend has
informed me, or common opinion has received it, or I read it in a pamphlet,
or if the Author be worthy the naming I quote him in the margent. Scottish
Histories I used these twain, famous in their times, John Major, and Hector
Boethius. For English, wherein the state of Ireland is often employed, because I
am not in place to examine the ancient, I have credited these late writers,
Fabian, Polidore, Cooper, Hall, Grafton, and Stowe: diligent and thankes-worthy
collectors. Touching the rest of all sorts, from whose books I pick matter to
my purpose, they are mentioned as they fall in ure, which here I list not to
reckon, being loath to fill the page with a rank of empty names. Irish
Chronicles, although they be reported to be full fraught of lewd examples,
idle tales, and genealogies: Et quicquid Graecia mendax audet in historia, yet
concerning the state of that wild people specified before the conquest. I am
persuaded that with choice and judgment, I might have sucked thence some better
store of matter, and gladly would have sought them, had I found an interpreter,
or understood their tongue. the one so rare, that scarcely five in five hundred
can skill thereof, the other so hard, that it asks continuance in the Land, of
more years then I had months to spare about this business, my special meaning
was to gather so much as I thought the civil subjects could be content to
read, and withal to give a light to the learned Antiquaries of this Country
birth, who may hereafter at good leisure supply the want of this foundation,
and pollish the stone rough hewed to their hand. Notwithstanding as naked and
simple as it is, it could never have grown to any proportion in such
post-haste, except I had entered into such familiar society, and daily
table-talke with the worshipful Esquire James Stanihurst, Recorder of Dublin.
Who beside all courtesy of Hospitality, and a thousand loving turns not here
to be recited, both by word and written monuments, and by the benefit of his
own Library, nourished most effectually mine endeavor. It remains that I
request my Countrymen to bend their good liking to my goodwill, and the English
of Ireland to favor the memory of their noble ancestors, both twain to
deliver me from all undue and wrong suspicions, howsoever the privilege of an
history has tempered mine ink with sweet or sour ingredients. Verily as
touching the affairs and persons here deciphered, how little cause I have
with any blind and corrupt affection, either ways to be miscarryed, themselves
know best that here be noted yet living, and other by enquiring may
conjecture. Farewell. From Droghedah the 9. of June. 1571.

CAMPIONS HISTORY OF IRELAND. The First Book.
CAP. I. The Site and special parts of Ireland.
IRELAND lies a-loofe in the West Ocean, This Book includes the first part
of Cambrensis, divided by him into 3, distinctions. Which was delivered me, by
James Stanihurst.
and is deemed by the later Survey, to be in length well-nigh three hundred
miles north and south: broad from East to West one hundred and twenty. In
proportion it resembles an egg, blunt and plain on the sides, not reaching
forth to Sea, in nookes and elbowes of Land, as Britain does.

Long since it was divided into four regions, Leinster East, Connaght West,
Vlster North, Mounster South, Lagenia. Conatia. Hultonia. Momonia. Medi^.
and into a fifth plot defalked from every fourth part, lying together in the
heart of the Realm, called thereof Media, Mead.

Each of these five (where they are framable to civility, and answer the
writts of the Crown,) be sundred into shires and counties, after this manner.

Leinster.
In Leinster lie the counties of Dublin, Kildare, Weixford, Catherlagh,
Kilkenny, King and Queens cou^ties, these two lately so named by Parliament in
the reigns of Philip and Mary, An. Philip and Mar. 3o. and 4o.
having Shire-townes accordant, Philipstown and Marryborrow.

Septes, Irish of name planted in these quarters, they reckon, Irish families
taken out of S. Henry Sidneys collections.
the Birnes, Tools, Cauanaghes, which is the nation of Macmurrow, Omores,
Oconnores, Odempsyes, Odun.

Dublinum.
Cities of best account, Dyvelin: the beauty and eye of Ireland, fast by a
goodly river which Cambrensis calls Avenlifius. Lib. fl.
Ptolomy Libnius, they call the Lyffie. The seat hereof is in many respects
comfortable, but less frequented of merchant strangers, because of the bard
haven. Kildare has Kildare and the Naass. Weixford has Weixford and Ross.
Kilkenny has Kilkenny the best dry town in Ireland on the Southside of the
river Suirus, Suir fl.
also Callan and Thomastowne.

Mead.
Mead is divided into East and West Mead, and the counties of Longford. Here
dwells ancient Irish families (sometime Princes and Potentates) Omalaghlen,
Irish families.
Mac-Coghlan Obrien, Omulloy, Omadden, Macgoghigan, the Fox. This whole part,
and the vein of Finegale in Leinster, are best employed with husbandry, and
taken to be the richest soyles in Ireland.

Connaght. Galvia.
Connaght has as yet but the county Clare, the town of Athenry: and Galway, a
proper neat city at the sea side. Herein Turlogh More Oconner was a peer, and
parted the whole betwixt his two Sons, Cahal, and Bryen Oconnor. In it are
now chief Irish, Irish fam. Ororicke*
Breni Oreli, Breni Oruarke, Oconnor Sligo, Odoude, Ohara, Macphilippin,
Mac-dermot, Oconnor-donn, Oconnor-Roe, the O-kellies, Macglomore, of Langues,
L. Bermingham, Omaly, Mac-william Euter, Oflaherty, Clanricarde.

Vlster.
Vlster wherein Oneale and Odonil are chief Irish, contains the cou^ties,
Louth, Down, Antrim, one moity of Droghdah (for the rest is in Mead) chief
town of Louth Dundalk, of Down, Down, and Carlingford, of Droghdagh,
Droghdaghe, of Antrim, Cnockfergus called also Cragfergus.

This part is dissevered from Mead and Leinster by the river Boandus, which
breaks out beside Logh-foyle, Boyn. fl. Lacus ^oilus.
a bogg between Ardmagh, and S. Patrickes Purgatory. Cambrensis reputeth the
bogge at 30. miles in length, Did. 1.
and half so much in breadth, and the same once firm Land, to have been
suddenly overflowed, for the bestiall incest committed there, unfit to be told.

In Mounster lie the counties of Waterford, Limericke, Mounster.
Cork, counties Pallatine of Tipperary, Kerry, and exempt from privilege the
Cross of Tipperarie.

Waterford has Dongarvon, and Waterford full of traffic with England,
France, and Spain, by means of their excellent good Haven.

Limericke has Kilmallocke lately sacked by James Fitz Morice, and the City
Limiricum, coasting on the sea, hard upon the river Shannon, whereby are most
notably severed Mounster and Connaght. Shanon. fl.


Cork has Kinsale, Yowghall, and the City Cork, Tipperary has Tipperary,
Clonmell, Fidderstown, Irish families.
Cassell. Mounster was of old time divided into East-Mounster, Ormond,
West-Mounster, Desmond, South-Monster, Thomond. Here dwell Obrenes,
Macnemarraes, Mack-ma^ownes, and one sept of the Offlherties.

In these quarters lies the Countries of O-Carroll, O-Magher, the white
Knight, Mac-Ibrine, O-Gaunaghe.

Waterford contains the Powers, and Deces.

Cork the Barries Lands, Imokillie, Carbarrie, Maccarty-more, Maccarty-reagh,
L. Roches lands, Osulivan, Muscry, L. Courcy, and diverse more, some of Irish
blood, some degenerate and become Irish.

Limericke has in it the Knight of the valley, William Burcke, Mac-Ibrine
Ara, part of the white Knights Lands, Cosmay, Obrenes, and upon the edge of
Kerrie the green knight, alias the knight of Kerrie.

Leinster butteth upon England, Mounster and Connaght upon France and Spain,
Vlster upon the Scottish Islands (which face with Hebrides) scattered between
both realms; wherein at this day, the Irish Scot Successor of the old
Scythian Pict or Redshancke dwells.

Bishops in Ireland. Bern. in vita Malach. An. 1148.
The spiritual Jurisdiction is ordered into 4. Provinces whereof the primacy
was ever given (in reverence toward Saint Patricke their Apostle) to the
Archbishop of Ardmagha, now called Ardmagh, which custom was since confirmed
by Eugenius the 3. who sent withal 3. other prelates to be placed, one at
Dublin, one at Cashell, and the last at Tuam. To these are suffraganes in right
29. and all they inferior to the Primate of Ardmaghe: Province of Ardmagh.
under his province are the Bishopprickes of Mead, Derry, Ardagh, Kilmore,
Clogher, Down, Coner, Clonmacknoes, Rapho, and Dromore.

Dublin. an. 1212. S. Pat. book of Recorde^*
Under Dublin (whereunto Innocentius 3. united Glandelagh) are the Bishop of
Elphine, Kildare, Ferne^, Ossorie and Laighlein.

Cashell.
Under Cashell are B. of Waterford, Lysmore, Cork, and Clone, Rosse, Ardigh,
Limericke, Emely, Killalo, Ardferte.

Tuam.
Under Tuam the B. of Kilmaco, Olfine, Anaghdoune, Clonfert, Mayo. In this
recount some diversities have happened by reason of personal and real union
of the Seas and for other alterations.

An old distinction there is of Ireland into Irish and English pales, English
pale.
for when the Irish had raised continual tumults against the English planted
here with the Conquest. At last they coursed them into a narrow circuit of
certain shires in Leinster, which the English did choose as the fattest soil,
most defensible, their proper right, and most open to receive help from
England. Hereupon it was termed their pale, as whereout they durst not peep.
But now both within this pale, uncivil Irish and some rebels do dwell, and
without it, Countries and cities English are well governed.

CAP. II. The temporal Nobility.
BY conference with certain gentlemen, attendants upon Sir Henry Sidney, Lord
Deputy, (who excels in that knowledge) I took notice of the most noble
English families in Ireland, which here ensue with their surnames as they
stand at this present.

Gerald Fitz Gerald Earl of Kildare, this house was of the nobility of
Florence, came thence to Normandy, and so with earl Strangbow his kinsman,
(whose Arms he gives) into Wales, near of blood to Rice ap Griffin Prince
of Wales, by Vesta the mother of Morice Fitz Gerald, and Robert Fitz Stephens:
with the said Earl it removed into Ireland, one of the special conquerors
thereof. Flatsbury.
One record that I have seen, names a Geraldine the first Earl of Kildare,
in anno 1289. But another says, there dyed a Geraldine the fourth Earl of
Kildare in anno 1316. the family is touched in the sonnet of Surrey, made upon
Kildares sister, now Lady Clinton.

From Tuscane came my Ladies worthy race,
Fair Florence was sometime her ancient seat,
The western Isle whose pleasant shore does face,
Wild Cambres cliffes did give her lively heat.
His eldest son Lord Gerald, Baron of Ophalye, I read the Geraldine Lord of
Ophalye, in anno 1270.

Sir Thomas Butler, Earl of Ormond and Ossorye: the Butlers were ancient
English Gentlemen, preferred to the Earldom of Ormond in the first of Edward
the 3. Anno 1327. which fell upon heirs general, Stowe.
lastly upon Sir Thomas Butler Earl of Wilshire, after whose disfavour it
reversed to the name of Pierce Butler, whom little before King H. 8. had
created Earl of Ossorye. Theo. Butler was Lord of the Carricke. Flatsbury.
An. 1205. And Earl of Tipperarie 1300. or sooner: the Latin History calls
him Dominum de Pincerna, the English Le Bottiller, whereby it appears that
he had some such honor about the Prince, his very surname is Becket, who was
advanced by H. le 2. in recompense of the injury done to Thomas of Canterbury
their kinsman.

His eldest son Lord Butler, Viscount Thurles.

Gerald Fitz Gerald, Earl of Desmond, Morice Fitz Thomas a Geraldine, was
created Earl of Desmond the same year: soon after that the Butler became
Earl of Ormond. The Irish say, that the elder house of the Geraldines was made
Earl of Desmond, though Kildare be the more ancient Earl.

His eldest son L. Fitz Gerald of Desmond, Baron of Inshycoin.

Sir Richard Burcke, Earl of Clanriccard, a branch of the English family, de
Burge Lord Burgh, who were noble men before their arrival into Ireland.

His eldest son Vlioke Burghe Baron of Donkeline.

Conegher Obrene, Earl of Tumond: the name of Earl given to Murroughe Obrene
for term of life, and after to Donoghe Obrene, An. 5. Edw. 6. now confirmed to
the heirs male.

His eldest son Lo. Obrene, Baron of Ibrecane.

Mac Cartimore, Earl of Clarcar, created An. 1565.

His eldest son Lo: Baron of Valentia.

Viscount Barrie.

Viscount Roohe.

Preston, Viscount of Gormanston, whereunto is lately annexed the Barony of
Lounders, their auncestour Preston, then chief Baron of the Exchequer, was
made Knight in the field by Lionell Duke of Clarence, Lieutenant of Ireland.

Eustace alias Powere, Viscount of Baltinglasse, Lord of Kilkullen, to him and
his heirs male An. H. 8.33. Their ancestour Robert le Powere was sent into
Ireland with commission, and in his Offspring has rested here since An.
1175. Powere alias Eustace is written Baron of Domvile An. 1317.

Sir Richard Butler, Viscount Mongaret, to him and his heirs males An. Edw.
6.5.

Viscount Deces.

Lord Bermingham, Baron of Athenrye, now degenerate and become mere Irish,
against whom his ancestors served valiantly in An. 1300.

Sir Richard Bermingham was Lord of Athenrye. 1316. Baron of A^ry. Baron of
Ardigh.


John Bermingham Baron de Atrio dei, Anno 1318.

Mac Morice alias Fitz Gerald, Baron of Kerye.

Lord Courcye a poor man, not very Irish, the ancient descent of the Courcyes
planted in Ireland with the Conquest.

Lord Flemmynge Baron of Slane, Simon Flemmynge was Baron of Slane in Anno 1370.

Plonket, Baron of Killyne: this family came in with the Danes, whereof they
have as yet special monuments.

Nugent, Baron of Delvin.

Saint Laurence, Baron of Hothe.

Plonket, Baron of Doonesawny.

Barnewall, Baron of Trimleston: they came from little Britain, where they
are at this day a great surname, upon their first arrival they won great
possessions at Beirnhaven, where at length by conspiracy of the Irish, they
were all slain, except one young man, who then studied the common Laws in
England, who returning, dwelt at Dromnaghe besides Divelin, and his heirs are
there at this day: from thence a second brother remooved to Sirestone, and so
to Trimlestone, and married the Lady Bruns, who caused him to be made Baron.

This writes the Lord of Donsany.

Edward Butler, Baron of Donboyne, given to Edmund Butler esquire, and his
heirs males, An. 33. H. 8.

Fitz Patricke, Baron of upper Ossory, given to Barnabie Mac Gilpatricke, and
his heirs males, An. 33. H. 8.

Donnate Clonnaghe Mac Gilpatricke, was a peerless warrior in Anno 1219.

Plonket Baron of Louthe, to Sir Christopher Plonket and his heirs males, An.
33. H. 8. This Barony was an Earldom in An. 1316. appertaining to Bermingham.

Oneale, Baron of Dongannon, to whom the Earldom of Terone was entayled by
gift of H. 8.

Powere, Baron of Curraghmore.

Mac Suretan Lord Deseret, whom Sir Henry Sidney called Jordan de Exeter. This
was Lord in the time of Lionell Duke of Clarence, An. 1361. now very wild
Irish.

Murroghe Obrene, Baron of Insickeyne, to him and his heirs males, An. 35. H.
8.

Mac Costilaghe, L Nangle, whom Sir Henry Sidney called de Angulo, now very
Irish.

Mac William Burcke, Lord of eighter Connaght, now very Irish.

Baronets.
Seintleger, Baronet of Slemarge, mere Irish.

Den, Baronet of Pormanston, waxing Irish.

Fitz Gerald, Baronet of Burnchurch.

Welleslye, Baronet of Narraghe.

Husee, Baronet of Galtrim.

S. Michell, Baronet of Reban.

Marwarde, Baronet of Scryne.

Nangle, Baronet of the Navan.

English gentlemen of longest continuance in Ireland are the race of those
which at this day, either in great poverty, Gentlemen most ancient in Ireland
of English blood.
or peril, do keep the properties of their ancestors lands in Vlster, being
then companions to Courcy the conqueror and Earl of that part. These are the
Savages, Iordanes, Fitz Symonds, Chamberlaines, Russels, Bensons, Audleyes,
Whites, Fitz Vrsulyes, now degenerate, and called in Irish, Mac Mahon the
Bears son.

CAP. III. Nature of the soil, and other incidents.
THe soil is low and waterish, and includes diverse little Islands, environed
with bogges and marshes: Highest hills have standing pooles in their top,
Inhabitants (especially new come) are subject to distillations, rhumes and
flixes, for remedy whereof they use an ordinary drink of Aquavitae, so
qualified in the making, that it dries more, Aquavitae,
and inflameth less, then other hot confections. The air is wholesome, not
altogether so clear and subtle as ours of England. Camb. part. 1.
Of Bees good store, no vineyards, Io. Bohem. lib. 3 c. 26. Munst. lib. 1.
contrary to the opinion of some writers, who both in this and other errors
touching the land, may easily be excused, as those that wrote of hearesay.

Cambrensis in his time, Did. 3.
complains that Ireland had excess of wood, and very little champaigne
ground, but now the English pale is too naked: Turffe and Sea-coales is their
most fuel: it is stored of kyne, of excellent horses, and hawks, of fish and
foul. They are not without wolves, and greyhounds to hunt them, bigger of
bone and limme then a colt. Their kyne, as also their cattle, and commonly what
else soever the Country ingendreth (except man) is much less in quantity then
ours of England. Sheep few, and those bearing course fleeces, whereof they
spinne notable rugge mantle. The country is very fruitful both of corn and
grass, the grass for default of Husbandry (not for the cause alleged in
Polychronicon, lib. 12.32.
) grows so rank in the north parts, that often times it rotteth their Kyne.
Eagles are well known to breed here, but neither so big nor so many as
Books tell. Cambrensis reports of his own knowledge, Barnacles.
and I hear it averred by credible persons, that Barnacles, thousands at once,
are noted along the shoares to hang by the beakes, about the edges of putrified
timber, ships, oars, anchor-holdes, and such like: which in process taking
lively heat of the Sun, become water-foules, and at their time of ripeness
either fall into the sea, or fly abroad into the air. Aeneas Sylvius (that
after was Pope Pius the second) writes himself, Anseres arborei
to have perceaved the like experiment in Scotland, where he learned the truth
hereof, to be found in the Islands Orchades. Horses they have of pace easy, in
running wonderful swift. Therefore they make of them great store, as wherein
at times of need they repose a great piece of safety. Volat. lib. 3. de grege.
This brood, Raphael Volateranus says, to have come at first from Arturia the
country of Spain, between Gallicea and Portugal, whereof they were called
Asturcones a name now properly applied to the Spanish Iennet.

I heard it verified by Honorable to Honorable, that a Nobleman (offered and
was refused) for one such horse, an hundred kyne, five pound Lands, and an Airy
of Hawks yearly during seven years. In the plain of Kildare stood that
monstrous heap of stones brought thither by Giants from Affrique and removed
thence to the plain of Sarisbury at the instance of Aurel. Ambrose King of
Britain. Camb. did. 1.
No venomous creping beast is brought forth or nourished, or can live here,
being sent in, and therefore the spider of Ireland is well known, not to be
venomous.

Only because a frogge was found living, in the Meadows of Waterford, lib. 1.
Anglor. hist. cap. 1.
somewhat before the conquest, they construed it to import their overthrowe. S.
Bid writes that Serpents conveyed hither did presently die being touched with
smell of the land; and that whatsoever came hence was then of Sovereign virtue
against poison. He exemplifieth in certain men stung with Adders, who drank
in water the scrapings of Books that had been of Ireland, and were cured.

Generally it is observed, the further West the less annoyance of pestilent
creatures. The want whereof is to Ireland so peculiar, that whereas it lay long
in question, to whether Realm, I Will of Man.
(Britain or Ireland) the I Will of Man should pertain, the said controversy
was decided, that for so much as venomous beasts were known to breed therein, it
could not be counted a natural piece of Ireland.

Neither is this property to be ascribed to S. Patrickes blessing (as they
commonly hold) but to the original blessing of God who gave such nature to the
situation and soil from the beginning. And though I doubt not, but it fared
the better in many respects for that holy man's prayer, yet had it this
condition notified hundred of years ere he was borne.

CAP. IIII. Of the Irish tongue and the name Hibernia, Ireland.
I Find it solemnly avouched in some of their pamphlets, that Gathelus,
Gathelus. Simon Brecke.
and after him Simon Brecke, divised their language out of all other tongues
then extant in the world. But considering the course of enterchanging and
blending speeches together, not by invention of Art, but by use of talk, I am
rather led to believe (seeing Ireland was inhabited within one year after the
devision of the tongues) that Bastolenus a branch of Iapheth who first seized
upon Ireland, brought hither the same kind of Speech, some one of the seventie
two Languages, Epiph. cont. heroes. l. ^. tom. 1.
that to his family befell at the dissolution of Babell, unto whom succeeded
the Scithians, Grecians, Egyptians, Spaniards, Danes: of all which this tongue
must needs have borrowed part, but specially retaining the steps of Spanish
then spoken in Granado, as from their mightiest ancestors. Munst. l. 2.
Since then to Henry Fitz Empress the Conqueror, no such invasion happened
them, as whereby they might be driven to infect their native language,
untouched in manner for the space of 1700. years after the arrival of
Hiberius. Irish tongue.
The tongue is sharp and sententious, offers great occasion to quick
apothegmes and proper allusions, wherefore their common Iesters, Bards, and
Rymers, are said to delight passingly those that conceive the grace and
propriety of the tongue. But the true Irish indeed differs so much from that
they commonly speak, that scarce one among five score, can either write, read,
or understand it. Therefore it is prescribed among certain their Poets, and
other Students of Antiquity.

Hibernia.
Touching the name Ibernia, the learned are not yet agreed. Some write it
Hibernia, and suppose that the strangers finding it in an odd end of the
world, wet and frosty, took it at the first for a very cold country, and
accordingly named it, as to say, the winter land: Another brings a guess of
Irlamal, Irlamale Fab. part. ^. cap. 32.
of whom because I read nothing, I neither build upon that conjecture, nor
control it. Thirdly, Hiberus.
they fetch it from Hiberus the Spaniard. Most credibly it is held that the
Spaniards their founders for devotion toward Spain, called then Iberia, and
the rather for that themselves had dwelled besides the famous river Iberus,
named this land Iberia, in Cign. cant.
(for so John Leland, and many foreign Chroniclers write it,) or Ibernia,
adding the letter n. for difference sake, there being a rich City which
Ptolome recounteth called then Ibernis, Pliny writes it Iuuernia. Ibernis.
Iuerland. I^^land.
and from Ibernia proceeds Iberland or Iuerland, from Iuerland by contraction
Ireland for so much as in corruption of common talk, we find that v, with
his vowell, are easily lost and suppressed. So we say ere for ever, ore for
over, ene for even, nere for never, shoole for shovell, dile for devil. At the
same time it was also named Scotia in reverence of Scota, the wife of Gathelus,
ancient Captain of those Iberians, that flitted from Spain into Ireland.
And the said Scota was old grandame to Hiberus and Hirimon, after the Scottish
Chronicles, who in any wise will have their Countrymen derived from the Irish,
Io. Ma. Sco. l. 1. c. 9.
and not from the Britains.

CAP. V. Dispositions of the People.
THE People are thus inclined; religious frank, amorous, irefull, sufferable,
of pains infinite, very glorious, many sorcerers, excellent horsemen,
delighted with Wars, great almes-givers, passing in hospitality: the lewder
sort both Clerks and Laymen, are sensual and loose to leachery above
measure. The same being virtuously bred up or reformed, are such mirrours of
holiness and austeritie, that other Nations retain but a show or shadow of
devotion in comparison of them. As for abstinence and fasting which these days
make so dangerous, this is to them a familiar kind of chastisement: In which
virtue and diverse other, how far the best excel, so far in gluttony and
other hateful crimes the vicious they are worse then too badde. They follow
the dead corpse to the grave with howlings and barbarous outcries, pittyfull
in appearance, whereof grew (as I suppose) the Proverb, to weep Irish. The
uplandish are lightly abused to believe and avouche idle miracles and
revelations vain and childish, greedy of praise they be, and fearful of
dishonor. And to this end they esteem their Poets who write Irish learnedly,
and pen their sonnetts heroical, for the which they are bountifully
rewarded. But if they send out libells in disprayse, thereof the Gentlemen,
especially the mere Irish, stand in great awe. They love tenderly their foster
children, and bequeathe to them a childs portion, whereby they nourish sure
friendship, so beneficial every way, that commonly five hundredth kyne and
better are given in reward to win a noble man's child to foster. They are
sharpe-witted, lovers of learning, capable of any study whereunto they bend
themselves, constant in travail, adventerous, intractable, kinde-hearted,
secret in displeasure.

Hitherto the Irish of both sorts mere, and English, are affected much
indifferently, saving that in these, by good order, and breaking the same,
virtues are far more pregnant. In those others, by licentious and evil
custom, the same faults are more extreme and odious, I say, by licentious and
evil custom, for that there is daily trial of good natures among them. How
soon they be reclaymed, and to what rare gifts of grace and wisdom, they
do and have aspired. Again, the very English of birth, conversant with the
brutish sort of that people, become degenerate in short space, and are quite
altered into the worst rank of Irish Rogues, such a force has education to
make or mar. It is further to be known, that the simple Irish are utterly
another people then our English in Ireland, whom they call despitefully
boddai Sassoni's, and boddai Ghalt, that is, English and Saxon churles, because
of their English ancestors planted here with the Conquest, and sithence with
descent has lasted now 400. years. Of this people therefore severally by
themselves I must entreat. Yet none otherwise then as they stand unfiled, and
serve their accustomed humors, with whom I join all such as either by living
near them, or by liking their trade are transformed into them.

CAP. VI. Of the mere Irish.
TOuching the mere Irish, I am to advertise my Reader, that he impute not to
them the faults of their Ancestors, which here I have noted for two causes.
First, that when the same are read in Cambrensis, Solinus, or others, he
confounds not the times, but may be able distinctly to consider their manners,
then different from these days. Secondly, that it may appear how much Ireland
is beholding to God for suffering them to be conquered, whereby many of these
enormities were cured, and more might be, would themselves be pliable.

In some corners of the land they used a damnable superstition, Old customs of
the Irish.
leaving the right arms of their Infants males unchristened (as they termed
it) to the intent it might give a more ungracious and deadly blow.

I found a fragment of an Epistle, wherein a virtuous Monk declares, Epistle
of an Irish Monk.
that to him (travailing in Vlster) came a grave Gentleman about Easter,
desirous to be confessed and howseled, who in all his life time had never yet
received the blessed Sacrament. When he had said his mind, the Priest
demanded him, whether he were faultlesse in the sin of Homicide? He
answered, that he never wist the matter to be heinous before, but being
instructed thereof, he confessed the murder of five, the rest he left
wounded, so as he knew not whether they lived or no. Then was he taught that
both the one, and the other were execrable, and very meekelie humbled himself
to repentance.

Solinus writes that they woonted (because they would seem Terrible and
Martial,) to embrue their faces in the blood of their Enemies slain. Strabo
the famous Geographer, who flourished under Augustus and Tiberius Caesar, more
then fifteen hundred years ago, tells (without asseveration) that the
Irish were great Gluttons, eaters of man's flesh: and counted it Honorable for
Parents deceased, to be eaten up of their Children, and that in open sight
they meddled with their Wives, Mothers, and Daughters: which is the less
incredible, considering what Saint Hierome avoucheth of the Scots their
Offspring and Allies, and what all Histories do witness of the Scithians
their ancient founders. See Strabo lib. 4. Geograph.

Although since the time of Saint Patricke, Christianity was never extinct in
Ireland, yet the government being hayled into contrary factions, the
Nobility lawless, the multitude wilful, it came to pass that Religion
waxed with the temporal common sort cold and feeble, until the Conquest did
settle it, especially in cases of restrainte and Discipline. The Honorable
state of Marriage they much abused, either in contracts, unlawful meetings,
the Leviticall and Canonical degrees of prohibition, or in divorcementes at
pleasure, or in ommitting Sacramental solemnities, or in retayning either
Concubines or Harlots for Wives. Yea even at this day, where the Clergy is
fainte, they can be content to Marry for a year and a day of probation, and
at the years end, to return her home upon any light quarrels, if the
Gentlewomans friends be weak and unable to avenge the injury. Never heard I
of so many dispensations for Marriage, as those men show, I pray God grant
they be all authentic and builded upon sufficient warrant.

Covenant and Indent with them never so warily, never so preciselie, yet they
have been found faithless and perjured. Where they are joined in color of
surest Amity, there they intended to kill. This ceremon^e reports
Cambrensis. The parties to be coupled in League, meet at Church, become
God-septes, or Al^ies, bear each other on his back certain paces in a Ring,
kiss together holy reliquees, take blessing of the Bishop, offer each to
other a drop of his own blood, and drink it up between them: Even in the
doing hereof, they practice mutual destruction.

They have been used in solemn controversies, to protest and swear by Saint
Patrickes Staff, called Bachal esu, which oath, because upon breach thereof
heavy plagues ensued them, they feared more to break, then if they had sworn
by the holy Evangelist.

In Vl^ter thus they used to Crown their King, a white cow was brought forth,
which the King must kill, and sees in water whole, and bathe himself therein
stark naked, then sitting in the same Caldron, his people about him, together
with them, he must eat the flesh, and drink the broth, wherein he sits,
without cup or dish or use of his hand. So much of their old Customs. Now a
few words of their trade at this present.

Clear men they are of Skin and hue, but of themselves careless and
bestiall. Their Women are well favored, clear colored, fair handed, big
and large, suffered from their infancy to grow at will, nothing curious of
their feature and proportion of body.

Their infants of the meaner sort, are neither swadled, nor lapped in Linen,
but foulded up stark naked into a Blankett till they can go, and then if they
get a piece of rugge to cover them, they are well sped. Linen shirts the rich
do wear for wantonness and bravery, with wide hanging sleeves playted, thirty
yards are little enough for one of them. They have now left their Saffron, and
learn to wash their shirts, four or five times in a year. Proud they are of
long crisped glibbes, and do nourish the same with all their cunning: to crop
the front thereof they take it for a notable piece of villainy* Shamrotes,
Watercresses, Roots, and other herbs they feed upon: Oatemale and Butter
they cramme together. They drink Whey, Milk, and Beef broth, Flesh they
devour without bread, corn such as they have they keep for their horses. In
haste and hunger they squese out the blood of raw flesh, and ask no more
dressing thereto, the rest boyleth in their stomachs with Aquavitae, which
they swill in after such a surfeite, by quarts and pottles. Their kyne they let
blood which grown to a jelly they bake and overspread with Butter, and so
eat it in lumpes.

One office in the house of great men is a tale-teller, who brings his Lord
on sleep, with tales vain and frivolous, whereunto the number give sooth and
credence. So light they are in believing whatsoever is with any countenance of
gravitie affirmed by their Superiors, whom they esteem and honor, that a
lewd Prelate within these few years needy of money, was able to persuade his
parish: That S. Patricke in striving with S. Peter to let an Irish Galloglass
into Heaven, had his head broken with the keys, for whose releife he obtained
a Collation.

Without either precepts or observation of congruity they speak Latin like a
vulgar language, learned in their common Schools of Leach-craft and Law,
whereat they begin Children, and hold on sixteen or twenty years conning by
roate the Aphorisms of Hypocrates, and the Civil Institutions, and a few
other parings of those two faculties. I have seen them where they kept
School, ten in some one Chamber, grovelling upon couches of straw, their Books
at their noses, themselves lying flat prostate, and so to chaunte out their
lessons by peece-meale, being the most part lusty fellows of twenty five
years and upwards.

Other Lawyers they have, liable to certain families which after the custom
of the country determine and judge causes. These consider of wrongs offered and
received among their neighbors, be it murder, or felony, or trespass, all is
redeemed by composition, (except the grudge of parties seek revenge:) and the
time they have to spare from spoiling and proyning, they lightly bestow in
parling about such matters. The Breighoon (so they call this kind of Lawyer)
sits him down on a bank, the Lords and Gentlemen at variance round about
him, and then they proceed.

They honor devoute Friars and Pilgrims, suffer them to pass quietly, spare
them and their mansions, whatsoever outrage they show to the country besides
them. To rob and prey their enemies, they deem it none offense, nor seek
any means to recover their loss, but even to watch them the like turn. But
if neighbors and friends send their Cators to purloyne one another, such
Actions are judged by the Breighoones aforesaid.

Toward the living they are noisome and malicious, the same being dead they
labor to avenge eagerly and fiercely. They love and trust their Foster
Brethren more then their own. Turlogh Leinagh Oneale that now usurpeth, is
said to repose in them his greatest surety.

Strumpets are there too vile and abominable to write of, which not only
without fear, but also without remorse do advance themselves in numbering what
noblemen have had liking to their bodies. He that can bring most of his name
into the field, base or other, triumphs exceedingly. For increase of which
name, they allow themselves not only whoores, but also choice and store of
whoores. One I heard named which has (as he calls them) more then ten wives,
in twenty places.

There is among them a brotherhood of Carrowes that profess to play at Cards
all the year long, and make it their only occupation. They play away Mantle
and all to the bare skin, and then trusse themselves in straw or in leaves,
they wait for passengers in the high way, invite them to a game upon the
green, and ask no more but companions to hold them sport, for default of
other stuff they pawn portions of their glibbe, the nails of their fingers
and toes, their privy members; which they lose or redeem at the courtesy of
the winner.

Where they fancy and favor, they are wonderful kind, they exchange by
commutation of wares for the most part, and have utterly no coin stirring in
any great Lords houses. Some of them be richly plated: their Ladies are trimmed
rather with massy Jewels, then with garish apparel, it is counted a beauty
in them to be tall, round and fat.

The inheritance descends not to the Son, but to the Brother, Nephew, or
Cousin german eldest and most valiant: for the Child being oftentimes left
in nonage or otherwise young and unskillfull, were never able to defend his
patrimony, being his no longer then he can hold it by force of arms. But by
that time he grow to a competent age, and have buried an Uncle or two, he also
takes his turn, and leaves it in like order to his Posterity. This custom
breeds among them continual Wars and treasons.

CAP. VII. The most ancient Inhabitants of Ireland.
In praefat. l. 1. dec. 1.
THe honorable Historian Titus Livius, yields certain privilege to
antiquity, and will have it held excused, if percase for advancement of their
Cities, they strain a point of truth, and derive a first foundation from one
or other, of their supposed Gods: wherefore though I can no less do then
reject a fable concerning the arrival of Noes Niece into this Island, yet this
kind of forgery being somewhat universal, seeing every Chronicler paineth
himself, to fetch his reckoning with the farthest let him hardly be pardoned,
who led by relation of his elders, committed first to writing so dull a tale.
As for the multitude of writers that agree thereon, they are in effect but one
writer, seeing the latest ever borrowed of the former, and they all of
Cambrensis, who affirms it not, but only alleges the received opinion of
Irish Histories, yea rather in the foot of that Chapter, he seems to
mistrust it, and posteth it over to the credit of his authors: so then if the
greatest weight hereof do consist in Irish antiquities, which the learned here
confess to be stuffed with such implements, notoriously felt to be vain and
frivolous, I trust I shall not seem contentious, nor singular in damning such
a fable, not only false, but also impossible. Thus they say, In the year of
the world, 1536. The Patriarch Noe began to preach vengance upon the people for
their accursed lives, to build his Arc, ^o inform his kindred and special
friends severally, that within few years the earth should be sunk in waters,
if they amended not. This did he before the general flood one hundred and
twenty years, when every man foreslept the monitio^, Cesara*
only a Niece of his named Cesara misdoubting the worst, and hearing her Uncle
prophecy that all should be drowned for sin, determined with her adherents,
to seek adventures into some foreign Island, persuaded that if she might
happily find a Country never yet inhabited, and so with sin undefiled, the
general sentence of Gods anger should there take no place. Whereupon she
furnished a navy, and fled into Ireland, with three men, Bithi, Laigria,
Fintan, and fifty women, left unto her after many shipwrackes. The shore where
she landed, and where she lies entombed, is at this day called Navicularum
littus. The very stones wherein the memory hereof has been preserved from
the violence of waters, were said to be seen of some. Within forty days after
her footing in Ireland, the deluge prevailed universally, and all this coast
was cast away. An. Dom. 1656
Now to ommit that part of this device, which is too flat, and ridiculous, if
we consider that before the flood, no part of the Earth was known, nor touched
beside Syria, Rab. Isaac. in Genesis 5.
where the first age dwelled, that sailing was then utterly unheard of in the
world, the first vessel being by Gods own direction wrought, that she might
have sped at home, would she repent with more ease and surety, that Iapheth
with the Hebrews, and Jason with the Greeks, were the first pilots: that the
Records hereof graven in stone, is but a borrowed invention from Josephus.
These things I say considered, it will be no hard matter to descry the falsehood,
wherein I would be more exquisite, were it worth my labor. We need not so
ambitiously run to Cesara, to beg a forged evidence, seeing without her
help, Ireland must be confessed to have been known and peopled with the same
kindred, even with the first Islands of the world. For within three hundred
years after the general Flood, immediately after the confusion of tongues,
when Iapheth and his posterity, imboldened by the example of Noe, adventured by
ship into diverse West Islands, there was in his retinew one of his progeny, Anno
mundi 1957. after the best authors, which make 300. years, and not 100,
between Noes flood and Babe^l.

Bastolenus. Clem. recogn. l. 4.


Bastolenus, who conceiving stomach and courage at the late success of
Nemrodus, Ninus his kinsman (then newly intruded upon the Monarch of Assyria)
and wandered so far West, intending to rule without compeeres, till Fortune
cast him and his people upon the coast of Ireland. There he settled with his
three sons, Languinus, Salanus, Ruthurgus, active and stout gentlemen, who
searching the Land through and through, left their own names by three notable
places, Languini stagnum, mons Salangi, since named S. Dominicks hill, and
Ruthurgi stagnum. Of Bastolenus is little remembered, save that in short space
with many hands working at once, he plained a great part of the Country, then
overgrown with woods and thickets. This posterity kept the Land under the
government of these three sons and their offspring, about 300. years.
Together with Bastolenus, arrived in Ireland certain godless people of the
stock of Nemrod, worthily termed a giant, Giants first in Ireland.
as one that in bodily shape exceeded proportion, and used his strength to
win soveraigntie, and to oppress the vveake with rapine and violence: That
lineage ( Chams breed) grevv to great numbers, and alvvay bethought them of
getting mastery, wheresoever they tarryed. One cause was their bodily force
ansvvereable to their hugeness of quantity: Clem recognit. l. 4.
another the example of Cham Zoroastes, that magitian, and Nemrodus, Ninus his
Nephew, which two in themselves and their progenies, were renowned throughout
the world, as victorious Princes over two mighty Kingdoms Egypt and Assyria.
Thirdly they maligned the blessings bestowed upon Sem and Iapheth, counting it
necessary for themselves, to stir, and prevent Dominions, lest the curse of
slavery prophesied by Noe should light upon them, as notwithstanding it did at
last. Genesis 9.


Thus irked, they began to kick at their Governors, and taking head, set up a
King of their own faction, nourishing the same, and annoying the Subjects
incessantly, the success on both sides was variable, quarrels increased, the
enemy caught handfast, and every day bred a new skirmish. It seemed
intolerable, and very necessity compelled them to try their whole force in one
Battle, either utterly to weed out the Giants, or to die free. Peace therefore
concluded among themselves, for any private grudge hitherto maintained, all
sorts brake truce and amity with the Giants, and straited them up so, that from
all corners of the land, they must needs assemble into one field and fight for
the better, maynelie they tugged certain hours, but in conclusion the lawful
Kings prevayled, the miscreants done to death. See now the mockery of Fortune,
Victors they were, and promised themselves a security: Anger and insolency
over-turned all, for what with spoiling the dead carcases, what with murdering
the remaynder of that generation, man, woman, and child, in all parts of the
Realm, vouchsafing them no buryall, but casting them out like a sort of dead
dogs, Anno mundi 2257.
there ensued through the stench of those carryons such a mortal pestilence,
infecting not only the places where they lay, but the air round about by
contagion, that beside those few which by sea returned homeward, few escaped
alive, and hereby hangs a tale, From this plague (say the Irish) was
preserved Ruanus the Giant, who from time to time kept true record of their
histories, Ruanus, who is of some thought to be Fin Macoole.
else utterly done away by sundry casualties of death, war, spoil, fire,
foreign victories, and he (forsooth) continued till the year of Christ 430.
and told S. Patrick all the news of the country requiring of him to be
baptized, and so died, when he had lived no more but two thousand and forty one
years: which is above twice the age of Methusalem. Had it been my chance in
Ireland, Genesis 5.
to meet and confer with this noble Antiquarie, he might have eased me of
much travel. These things I note for no other purpose, but that the simple
stumbling upon such blind legends should be warned to esteem them as they
are, idle fantasies, wherewith some of their Poets, dallyed at the first, and
after through error and rudenes it was taken up for a sad matter.

CAP. VIII. The several Inhabitants of Ireland since Bastolenus.
OF an infinite number of Giants slain, certain hid families lurked and
escaped the common mischief, whom at length penury constrained to forsake
their dens, and to pilfer for meat, when they perceived the murraine of men
and beasts, and that none gave them resistance, they waxed hardy, and
searching the land, found it wel-nigh desolate, wherefore they harbored
themselves in the clearest coast: and easily subduing the poor souls
remaining, revived their blood, and became Lords of the whole Island 60. years.

Genesis 10.
Among the Sons of Iapheth, Genesis recounteth Magog who had now planted his
people in Scithia within Tanaris, from whom at this day the Turks are
descended. They hearing the hard hap of their fathers line, cast out by the
collateral branches of Cham, the late King of the Bactrians, their odious
neighbors, Anno Mundi ^^17.
sent into Ireland Nemodus with his four sons, Nemodus.
Starius, Gerbavel, Amimus, Fergusius, captains over a fair company, who
passing by Greece and there taking up such as would seek fortunes, finally
landed here, held the country, multiplied, but not without continual war
upon the Giants aforesaid, who in the end vanquished and chased them thence
again into Greece, after 216. years, from Anno mundi 2533. from which time
until the coming of Dela his sons, the Giants possessed it peaceably
without foreign invasion. But themselves being disordered, and measuring all
things by might, seditiously vexed each other, nor were they ever able to frame
a commonwealth.

That espied five brethren, sons to Dela the Grecian, Ann. mundi 2714.
notorious Pilots, named Gaudius, Genandius, Sagandius, Rutheragius, Slanius,
the posterity of Nemodus expulsed successors, The sons of Dela.
who fortified their navyes, and finding the Country but weak, wanne it
entirely, rooted out the old enemy, divided the Island into five parts, and in
each of them severally reigned, for better contentation of all sides, they
agreed to fix a meare stone in in the middle point of Ireland, to which stone
every of their Kingdoms should extend, and be partakers of the commodities
then chiefly found in that soil. These are also supposed to have invented the
distribution of shires into Cantredes, Cantredes.
every Cantrede or Barony, containing an hundred Towneships, wherewith the name
and use of hundreds, well known in England, might seem to accord.

Variance for the chiefty set the four brethren at a low ebb, and then
Slanius perched over them all, encroached every way round about the middle
stone certain miles for provision and furniture of his own household, which
plott in time obtained the name of one general part, and now makes up the
fifth, Media. Meth.
Meth it was called either for moytie of Cantredes, being but sixteen,
whereas the rest comprised thirty two apeece, or for the site thereof in the
navell of Ireland. This he assigned to the Monarch a surplus over and above
his Inheritance, which notvvithstanding grevv to a several Kingdom, and
allowed thereof certain parts by composition. Not long after dyed Slanius,
and was buried in a mountain of Meth that carries his name. Thirty years
the Monarchy was possessed in this order, but shortly the Princes ovving
fealty, began to stomach the Intrusion of Slanius, and when he was once
rid, they disdained his successor, whereupon ensued everlasting Battles. The
Monarchy was laid down, then fell they at debate for the land of Meth, which
strife could never be appeased. In the neck of those troubles came over a new
army of Scithians, who claymed also from Nemodus their fore-father, and they
took parts, and made parts, set all in uproare with sword, Ann. mundi 2800.
and havocke. To be short, they spent themselves one upon another so fiercely
and furiously, that now they reckoned not what nation or what soldier they
received in, to keep up or beat down a side. By which occasion the
Britains also put in a foot, who discovering the state of the land to their
Princes, Brennus.
opened a gappe for Brennus the brother of Belinus, to direct his course
thither with the same Navy which he had furnished to serve Signimius then
King of Lions amid the Galls in France. But Brennus took small effect. Before
him also diverse Kings of Britain had scope in Ireland. Insomuch that
Gurguntius the son of Beline, reputed the same by lineall descent among his
own Dominions. Notvvithstanding they never enjoyed it longer then they could
keep possession perforce, and often were they repelled and vvearyed with
seeking after it, as wherein they found small fruit, and blows enough.
Lastly came the Spaniards from Biscaye, conducted by four Captains, of whose
arryvall before I speak, I must repeat their original somevvhat farther, and
so give a light to the assoyling of a controversy, that is, whether the Irish
came from Egypt, or from Spain. It shall appear they came from both.

CAP. IX. The arrival of the Spaniards, then called Iberians, into Ireland.
IN the year of the World 2436. after the universal flood 780. while the
children of Israel served in Egypt, Gathelus the son of Neale, Hector.
Bo^th. l. 1. Hist. Scot.
a great Lord in Greece, was upon disfavour exiled the Country with a number of
his faction, adherents, and friends. The young Greek being very wise, valiant
and well spoken, Ioh. Major. de gestis Scot. lib. 1. cap. 9.
got honorable entertainment with Pharao surnamed Amaenophis king of Egypt,
and in short space reached to such a credit that he espoused the Kings base
Daughter Scota, whereof the Scotts are thought to be named. This match bred to
the King some tumult, Gathelus.
and to the young Gentleman much envy, Exodus 14.
wherefore as soon as the foresaid Amaenophis was drowned in the Red Sea, the
Princes of Egypt so vexed Gathelus and his wife, that they were feign to buske
them, withal their train into Europe, and came first to Lusitania, where
diverse of his people tired with travail, would needs abide, he builded there
the city of Brigantia, called afterward Novium, now Compostella. Hector.
Boeth. lib. 1.
The remnant passed with him into Ireland, where the Barbarians highly honored
him, for his cunning in all languages, who also greatly perfected and
beautified the Irish tongue, taught them letters, sought up their antiquities,
practiced their youth in martial feats, after his Greek and Egyptian
manner. Finally so well he pleased them that to gratify such a Benefactour,
they were content to name the Island after him Gathelia, and after his wife
Scotia. Truly that Scotia is the ancient appellation of Ireland, all
Chroniclers agree, as it shall be more plain, when we touch the Scottish
pedigree. A brute there is in Ireland but uncertainelie fathered, that in
remembrance of Pharao, their good lord, the Kerne pitching his Dart, cries of
courage faro, faro; but the learned think that to be taken from the Spaniard,
who in his Ioco dicano exclaymeth fabo, fabo.

The people left in the coast of Spain, founded the city of Bayon, now part of
Gascoigne, and replenished all the shore toward Africa, Ann. mundi 2642.
and the edges of Portugal, Castile, Galaecia, toward the sea Cantabricum,
well nigh 200. years, after which time some of them began to mind another
travail, because they were pestered with Inhabitants, and whether they ever
sped to Ireland, it is unknown, at the leastwise in the reign of Gurguntius
the Britain, then chief Lord of Bayon, four brethren Spaniards, whereof two
are noted, Hiberus and Hirimon, Hiberus and Hirimon.
not the sons of Gathelus (as writes Boethius) but his offspring,
understanding that diverse Western Islands were empty, desirous to live in ease
and elbovv-room, sailed Westvvard with a great retinue of men, The head
Captain was Bartholmew, as many Authors affirm.
women and babes, hovering long about the Islands Orchades in 60. great ships,
until by good hap they met with Gurguntius, then returning from the conquest
of Denmark, Fab. part. 2.
who had refused to pay him the tribute, which Belinus his father won, him
they besought (considering their want of victuals, Grafton. p. 60.
unable any longer to dvvell in their ships, accumbred with carriage of women
and children) to direct and further them to some place of habitation,
proffering to become his liege people to hold the same of him and his heirs
for ever. The King advising himself, remembered with what difficulty he kept
the Irish in subjection, and conceived hope that these strangers would
endeavor either to stub out that unruly generation, or to nurture them. Ann.
mundi 3^92.
and so taking their oaths and hostages, he manned their ships, stored the^
with victual and munition, and seated the^ in Ireland. Thus had the
Britains an elder right to the Realm of Ireland, then by the conquest of
Henry the 2. which title they never surceased to claim, and sometimes
prevailed, as in the days of King Arthur, to whom the Irish Princes agnized
their tribute and appearance, made at his Parliament in urbe Legionu^, which I
take to be Westchester, called of old Carleon, as diverse other cities were,
wherein the Romans placed the legions. Again the Kings of Britain were the^
Lords of the place whence this people came, so as their vvinnings must have
been the Kings Dominion.

To all this when their own free assent, the dedition of other Princes,
lawful conquest and prescription is adjoined, it forces an invincible title.
But to prosecute our purpose, Those Iberians being substantially aided of
Gurguntius, enjoyed the Lands, bestowed themselves four brethren into four
parts thereof, until their pride and ambition armed two against other two,
Hiberus and his brother against Hirimon and his. In this conflict Hirimon slew
Hiberus, and reigned quietly. At this time the country was first named
Ibernia, as I have declared in the third Chapter. The King to avoyde obloquie
and slander, purged himself to his subjects, that neither maliciously nor
contentiously, but for his necessary defense and safeguard he had borne arms
against his brother. And to witness how far he was from desire to rule
alone, he nominated special Captains to be Kings under him of their several
Countries, reserving to himself but one fourth part, and the portion of Meth
allotted to the Monarchy for the better maintenance of his part.

These afterward clambered into five Kingdoms incompatible, Leinster,
Connaght, Vlster, Several Kingdoms in Ireland.
Mounster in two portions, and sometimes to more by usurpations and
compositions. but ever one was elected the Monarch over all.

An hundred and thirty chief Kings are reckoned of this Nation from Hirimon
to Laigirus the son of Nealus magnus, in whose time the blessed Bishop
Patricius converted them to Christianity.

CAP. X. The coming of the Picts into Ireland. An. Dom* 120.

Bed. l. 1. c. 1.
NOW lived the Irish in tolerable order under their sundry Kings, and applied
themselves to peace and gathering of wealth, when suddenly Rodericke a
Red-shank of Scythia fled thither with a small company of Galleyes, and
winde-driven in compassing round about the British coast, Picts.
were happily blown ashore into Ireland. These are the Picts, a people from
their cradle dissentious, land-leapers, merciless, sour and hardy, being
presented to the King, they craved Interpreters, Ioh. Mayor* de gest. Scot* l.
1. c. 10.
which granted, Roderick their Chieftaine uttered for him and his, the request
in this manner.

The words of Roderick King of Picts.
Not as degenerate from the courage of our ancestors, but inclining our selves
to the bent and swaye of fortune, we are become suppliants to Ireland, that
never before have humbled our selves to any, Look Sir King, eye us well, It is
not light prowess that has caused these valiant bodies to stoop. Scithians we
are, and the Picts of Scithia, great substance of glory lodges in these two
names, what shall I tell of the civil Tumult that has made us leave our home?
or rippe up old Historyes to make strangers bemoane us? Let our vassailes and
children discourse it at large and leisure, if perhaps you vouchsafe us any
leisure in the Land: To which effect and purpose your infinite necessities pray
your favors. A King of a King, Men of Men, Princes can consider how near it
concerns their honor and surety to proppe up the state of a King defaced by
Treason, and men will remember nothing better beseems the nature of man, then
to feel by compassion the griefs of men. Admit we beseech you these scattered
relics of Scithia, If your Realms be narrow, we are not many* If the soil
be barren, we are born to hardness. If you live in peace, we are your
subjects. If you war, we are your Soldiers. We ask no kingdom, no wealth,
no triumph in Ireland. We have brought our selves, and left these casualtyes
with the enemy. Howsoever it like you to esteem of us, we shall easily learn
to like it, when we call to mind, not what we have been, but what we are.

Great consultations was had upon this request, The Answer.
and many things debated too and fro. In the end they were answered, that their
antiquities laid forcible arguments, wherefore it could not be expedient to
accept the Scithians into Ireland, that mingling of nations in a Realm
breeds quarrels remediless, that Ireland finding scarcity rather of room
then of people, that those few inferred amongst a many might quickly disturb
and put the whole out of joint. But quoth they, though we may not dwell
together yet shall you find us your very good neighbors and friends. Not
far hence lies the Island of Britain, in the north thereof: your manhood
and polycies shall win you scope enough, our Capitaines shall conduct you the
way, our strength shall help to settle you, address your ships and hye you
thither. With this persuasion they shaped course toward the north of
Britain, now called Scotland, John Stow.
where contrary to all expectation Marius the King awayted their coming, and
gave them there a sharp battle, wherein Rodericke was slain, with diverse of
his band. Them which remained and appealed to mercy, he licensed to inhabit
the uttermost borders of Scotland: Wives they wanted to increase their Issue,
and because the Britains scorned to match their daughters with such a froward
and beggarly people, the Picts continued their first acquaintance with the
Irish and by entreaty obtained wives from them, conditionally that if the
Crown should hap to fall in question they should then yield thus much
prerogative to the woman as of the female blood royal, rather then of the male
to choose their Prince, which Covenant, says S. Bid, the Picts are well
known to keep at this day. Bid lived an. Dom. 7^0.


But long before this time the Scottish Chronicles mention the arrival of
Almaine Picts into the marches now of England and Scotland, with whom
certain Irish called then also Scotts joined against the Britains, Anno
Mundi 57^7. ante Christum 330.
devising to erect a kingdom there, as well to fortify themselves as to
gratify the Irish, who detracting their obedience lately promised to
Gurguntius, practiced all they might to abridge the kingdom of the Britains.
First therefore came from Ireland, Fergusius the son of Ferchardus, a man
very famous for his skill in blasoning of arms. Himself bare the Red Lion
rampant in a golden field. Ioh. Major. lib. 2. cap. 1.
There was in Ireland a monument of Marble fashioned like a Throne, which Simon
Brecke a companion to Hiberus and his brethren found in the journey, and
because he deemed the finding thereof to be ominous to some Kingdom, he
brought it along with him, and laid it up in the country for a Jewel. This
marble Fergusius obtained toward the prospering of his voyage, and in Scotland
he left it, which they used many years after in Coronation of their King at
Scona. But Fergusius though he be scored in the row of Kings, for one, and the
first, yet he held himself there obscurely, sundry times beat back into
Ireland, where he was finally drowned by misfortune within the Creek of
Knockfergus. That Fergusius encountered with Coilus the Britain and slew him,
as writes the Scotts, it is impossible except they mistake the name of Coilus
for Calius, with whom indeed the age of Fergusius might well meet, and the
rather for that in the first year of his reign, the Picts entered, and then
Fergusius immediately after them, 330. years ere Christ was borne. Now Coilus
reigned in the year of our Lord, 124. about which time befell the second
arrival of the Picts in Britain, so it seems they mistake by a slight
error, Coilus for Calius, and the second arrival of the Picts, for the former.
This confusion of Histories is learnedly noted by Cooper in his general
collection of Chronicles.

CAP. XI. How the Irish settled themselves in Scotland.
Return we now to the course of our History, An. Dom. 160. Ioh Major. l. 1.
cap. 11. Bed. l 1. c. 1.
while the Picts were bestowed in the north of Britain and waxed populous,
the Irish made sundry arrands over to visit their Daughters, Nephews, and
kindred. In often coming and going, they noted waste places, and little Islands
not replenished, but rather neglected and suffered to grow wild. Hereof in
Ireland they advertised their Prince, namely Reuther or Rheuda, Rheuda.
who being the Issue of Fergusius, bethought himself of his interest to
certain pieces of land beside the nation of the Picts. He therefore well
appointed, partly by composition, and some deal perforce stepped into those
hamlets which no man occupied, and proceeded hansomely to rear his kingdom.
By little and little he edged forward, and got between the Picts and
Britains on this side the Scottish bank, which he possessed but a season.
The place was thereof named Rheudisdale, now Riddesdale, (as much to say, as the
part of Rheuda) for dahal in their language, signifies part. In those quarters
after sundry conflicts with the borderers, he was by them slain, but the
kingdom lasted in his successors still, and the two nations the Picts and
the Irish lovingly suffered each other to thrive. The Scotts caught up the
Islands and the Frontiers. The Picts dwelt in the middle: Soon after the peace
between them, went suspicions and the diversities of people, place, custom,
language, with the memory of old grudges stirred up such inward jealousies
and hate, that it seemed they were easy to kindle, and as in such factions,
there never wants drifte to drive a tumult, so it happened that certain of
the Nobility of the Scotts resciant next them had with some difficulty,
received out of Greece a Molossian Hound, Ioh. Mayor. de gest. Scot. l. 5* c.
15.
which breed both in swiftness of foot, and in sweetness of opening, was
reputed peerless.

This Hound, a wilful Gentleman, a Pict stole home, and therewith gratified
his Prince, glad of the novelty, and little thoughtfull of the displeasure.
Lucan. li. 5.
Contrariwise the Irish, wood for anger at this dishonor, and injury,
assembled in post haste under Eugenius their King, and after brawling, fell to
spoil, and so to blows; whereof parts and stomachs being even, An. Dom. 2^8.
the fortune was variable. In this division they scambled out a few years,
until the malice of Carassus a Britain forced a quietness between them to
abuse their help against The Empire. But he was shortly slain by Alectus the
Roman Captain, and hereupon the old sore waxed raw: To heap the mischief,
a British Lord named Maximus, aspiring to the kingdom, sent an ambassadge to
Ethodius king of Picts, pleading with him a league of friendship, utterly to
expulse the Irish Scot: conditioning withal their assistance to chase the
Romans out of Britain, which was concluded, and by this confederacy, after
many lamentable skirmishes, the Irish were betrayed, Eugenius the King, Ethai
his brother, and Ericus his nephew, and also the residue, such as could escape
the enemies sword, fled thence, some into Norway, some into Ireland their first
home.

An. Dom. 353.
Maximus watching his time, despairing of the British Kingdom, and espying
the Picts tired with continual vvarres, turned his power upon them, and
brought them to such an exigent, that they had no readier shift then to crave
help from Ireland, To. Mayor. li. 2. c. 1.
and so by degrees when some private persons, nourishers of the quarrel,
were out-vvorne, the matter of malice was qualified, and the remnant of the
Irish Scots, with their friends and offspring called home to their dwelling,
after their first banishment, 43. years expired.

From this time forvvard the amity waxed steady, and the Irish under Fergusius
the second their King won such credit, An. Dom. 398.
that finally the nation of Picts were afflicted by the Britains, then the
Scots incroched into the heart of the Realm, and became the mightier and more
populous, of whom the Country was ever since under one General name called
Scotland.

Thus you see the Scotts a lively, stirring, ancient, An. Dom. 423^
and victorious people, are mixed first of Britains, (though the Chronicles
dissemble it) whom Brutus planted there with Albanactus: Secondly, of Picts:
Thirdly and chiefly, of the Irish, which after this time left the name of
Scott, for those in Britain, and delighted rather to be called Irish. Then
came up the distinction of Scotia major for Ireland, and Scotia minor for the
Scotts in Britain.

But most effectually (as says Cambrensis) the Scotts prevayled under the
guiding of six valiant Gentlemen, Distinct. 3.
Sons to Muridus King of Vlster, who in the time that Neale the great enjoyed
the monarchy of Ireland, going to succor their countrymen there, at last also
took up for themselves no little portions of ground, which their posterity
kept in Cambrensis time, the year of Christ 1200. who treats their exploits
more largely in his Topography of Ireland. Ever since then, they were utterly
named and esteemed Scotts: Ioh Major. l. 1. cap. 10.
The nation of the Picts driven into corners, albeit the most parts and the out
Isles retain at this day a people mungrell betwixt both, called Redshanks. The
Scotts write that their King Gregorius, Pol. l. 1. Angl. hist.
in an. Dom. 875. invaded Ireland as his lawful inheritance, and the same
conquered, who lies buried in one of their out-Iles, called Iona, beautified
with the Sepultures of Scottish Kings, where the Irish tongue is their native
language, and therefore they call the submission of the Irish to Henry the 2. a
defection from Scotland, which nevertheless they recke, ne regard not, but
wilfully did forgo it, as reaping less then they expended, and unable to
defray the growing charge, which cost considered little better then nothing,
say they, the King of England wins by keeping of Ireland. Yet in the late
government of S. Henry Sidney, Vlster being conveyed by descent, and act of
Parliament to the Crown, which Earldom was in the time of Edward the third
reckoned at thirty one thousand marks yearly, the same being but one fifth
part of Ireland, It seems that if this right be well prosecuted that Ireland
might pay it self of necessaries, and yield sufficient benefit to the Princes
Coffers.

CAP. XII. The conversion of the Irish to Christianity.
An. Dom. 42^.
ABout this time, Holy Church being stayed in peace, enriched with possessions,
supported with authority, many noble Clearkes flourishing in diverse Realms,
the Holy Doctor Augustine yet in life: Nicephor. l. 14^ cap. 40^ Plat. in
Caelestin. 1.
Theodosius the second, suppressing Idols in all the Empire: Celestinus 1.
Bishop of Rome, conferred with his clergy touching the instruction specially
of the vvestern parts, wherein the faith of Christ was hitherto, either not
planted, or by persecution extinct, or by corruption of Heretics defaced: of
them all, no country was more lamented then Ireland, which partly for distance
from the heart of Christendom, partly for their infinite rudeness, had yet
received no fruit of true Religion. In that assembly was Palladius Archdeacon
of Rome, a good Priest and well learned, who proffered his charitable travail
toward the conversion of any those lands, whither he should be by them
directed and appointed. The Pope knowing the sufficiency of the man, did
consecrate Palladius a Bishop, Vita S. Patricij.
authorized his journey, furnished his wants, associated to him, diverse
religious persons, delivered him the Holy Bible, with great solemnities, and
certain monuments of Peter and Paul, whereat diverse miracles had been
showed. He arryved in the North of Ireland, whence he escaped hardly with his
life, into the Islands adjoining, there preaching and converting many, erecting
monasteries, and ensueing his vocation so painefully, that the only report of
his holiness and cunning, excited the Scotts (late christened, but abiding in
scisme, and committing the function of Bishops to single Priests,) to call
him thither, whereunto he assented, upon the Popes answer, and leaving his
Disciples in the Isle, became the special apostle of Scotland, where he spent
the residue of his time, with more fruit then among the Irish. Hereunto
Celestinus condiscended the easier, Ioh. Major. l. ^. cap, 2. Prosp. Aquit. in
Chroni.
for that in the very point of Palladius his departure, Patricius attended at
Rome to be sent with leave and benediction into Ireland. In which attempt he
found such joyful success, so far different from their accustomed
frowardness, that a man would ween the Realm had been reserved for him. And
because it pleased God to work to the Land such an universal benefit by the
means of this holy Patriarch, I take it convenient to set down briefly here
his course of life, after the most approoved Chronicles that I could find.

Patricius was borne in the marches of England and Scotland, in a sea town
called then Taburnia, The life of S. Patrick.
whose father Calphrune (as writes Ioseline) was a Deacon and a Priests son,
his mother Conches was sister to S. Martin, Ioselin. of Furness.
the famous Bishop of Toures in France. The child was from his cradle
brought up in the Faith, and much given to devotion.

Now were the Irish through the help of the Scots and Picts, arch-pirats of
the narrovv seas, and used to sack little vveake villages scattered along the
shore, and for want of other prey, to bring the Inhabitants home Captives,
with others also was taken this Patricius, Ex Epist. Patricij.
a ladde of sixteen years old, being then a student of secular learning, An.
Dom. 386.
and became the Villain of an Irish Lord called Mackbiam, from whom after
six years he redeemed himself with a piece of gold which he found in a
clod of earth, newly turned up by the svvyne he kept the time of his
Banishment (as affliction commonly makes men religious.) This with the regard
of his former education, printed in him such remorse and humility, that being
from thenceforth utterly vveaned from the world, he betook himself to
contemplation, ever lamenting the lack of grace and truth in that Land,
wherefore not despairing, but that in continuance, some good might be
wrought upon them, he learned their tongue perfectly, and alluring one
companion with him for his exercises, he departed thence into France, ever
casting back his eye to the conversion of Ireland, whose babes yet unborn,
seemed to him in his dream (from out their mothers vvombes) to call for
Christendom. In this purpose he sought out Martinus his Uncle, by whose
means the young man entered under the government of Germanus then Bishop of
Antisiodore, whose scholar and familiar he was forty years, bestovving all
that time in prayer and study of eloquence and holy Scriptures. Then at the age
of threescore and two years, being renowned through the Latin Church for his
wisdom, virtue, and skill, he came home to Rome, recommended with letters
from the French Bishops, An Dom^ 430.
to Pope Celestine, to whom he uttered his full mind, and the secret vow which
long since he had conceived touching Ireland. The Pope invested him Archbishop
and Primate of the whole Island, blessed him, commanded public prayer and
fasting, brought him and his disciples onward on the voyage. Therefore in the
twenty third year of Theodosius the younger, which was the year of our Lord
430. Patricke landed in Ireland: and because he spoke the tongue plentifully,
being a reverent personage, he took holy Bible, adding thereto diverse
miracles in the Name and virtue of JESUS whom he preached: many listened unto
him, namely such as in the late entertainment of Palladius and Albius the
Irish Bishops his Disciples, had some little feeling in the Gospel. In
continuance, he wanne the better part of that Kingdom, except Laigirus
himself son of Neale the great Monarch, who (notvvithstanding he relied
nothing to the Gospel yet) because he stopped not the course thereof, nor
forbid any that list to embrace it, the Bishop denounced to him a curse from
God, accordingly tempered with mercy and judgment, that during his life he
should be victorious, but after him, neither the Kingdom should stand, nor
his lineage inherit. Thence he journeyed with a great number of his Disciples
and friends to Conill Lord of Connaght, (who honorably reputed him, and with
all his people was converted) and then sent him to Logan his Brother, King of
Leinster, whom he likewise persuaded. In Mounster he was highly honored
of the Earl of Daris, who gave him a dwelling in the East angle of Ardmagh,
called Secta, where he erected many Celles and Monasteries, replenished with
votarious men and women. Thirty years continually he travailed in preaching
through the Land, ever leaving behind him Bishops and Priests, whose learning
and holiness by the special grace of God shortly repaired the faith so
begun, other thirty years he spent in his Province of Ardmagh among his
ghostly brethren, in visitation of those religious Houses, which by his means
were founded, so he lived in the whole one hundred twenty two years, An.
Dom. 492.
and lies buried in Down.

CAP. XIII. Of Saint Patrickes Purgatory.
EVery History of Ireland that I have seen, makes one several title De
mirabilibus Hiberniae, and therein with long process treats of several
Islands, some full of Angels, some full of devils, some for male only, some for
female, some where poor may live, some where none can dye: finally such
effects of waters, stones, trees, and trinkets, that a man would vveene them to
be but heedlesse and uncertain tales by their complexion.

Verily, being inquisitive of these matters, I could find no one of them
soothed by such persons upon whose relation I am disposed to venture. Only the
place behind Ardmagh called S. Patricks Purgatory, because it is known and
confessed, and because I would be discharged of my Readers expectation, who
perhaps with the name of S. Patricke looks to be informed thereof, I can
be content to put so much in vvriting, as Books and reports affirm with
most likelihood.

Two things I muse at, that neither the time nor the author of so strange
erection was preserved. Concerning the time one Record puts it in Anno
Domini 302. which is 128. years before S. Patricke converted Ireland, and
sixty six years before his birth. Again Cambrensis who makes curious
recital of wonders in the land, never utters word of this Purgatory; and
though a negative authority be not invincible, yet considering the property of
that man, and what a sort of trifles he takes pain to justify, it may serve
for a vehement suspicion, that the place was then either not found, or not
miraculous. Concerning the Author, very few there are that refer it to this
Patricke their Apostle, but rather to an Abbot of the same name, whom I
marvel I find not in the mighty big volume of their Saints:
Notwithstanding these Originalls might be either lost or altered, but the
thing it self being extant, must needs have had a beginning, whereof possibly
there are monuments in that Church, or in the Irish tongue to me unwitting.

Therefore I hold him unwise that will utterly mistrust the principal, because
the circumstances vary; or condemn the whole, because he could not reach to
the undoubted truth of some part. If any man be so delicate, that not a jote
thereof will sink into his head, who shall control him? neither he nor
we are bound to believe any story besides that which is delivered us from
the Scriptures, and the consent of Gods Church. Let the discreet Reader judge
of it.

This I learn, that the holy Abbot Patricius secundus, not the Bishop their
Apostle, labored the conversion of the people of Vlster, which being now
Christians, could yet at no hand be vvonne to renounce their old sensuality,
cruelty, Polichro l. 1. ca. 35. Trevis. ibid.
murders, extortion. And when he much enforced the life to come, they replied
unto him with contempt, that unless they savv proofs of these Joys and
pains he preached, they would never leese possession of the pleasures in
hand, for hope or dread of things to come they wist not when. At their
importunacie he besought God, were it his good pleasure to give out some
evident token of the matters they required: finally by the special direction of
God he found in the north edge of Vlster a desolate angle hemmed in round, and
in the mids thereof a pit, where he reared a Church, closed the same with a
wall, bestowed therein Canons regular, at the East end of this Church yard, a
door leads into a closet of stone, which they call the Purgatory, because
devout people have resorted thither for penance, and reported at their
return, strange visions of pain and bliss appearing to them. They used to
continue therein four and twenty hours, which doing one while with ghostly
meditations, and another while a dreadful conscience of their deserts, they
saw as they say, a plain resembling of their own faults and virtues, with the
horror and comfort thereto belonging, that one so terrible, the other so
joyous, that they verily deem themselves for the time to have sight of heaven
and hell. The revelations of men that went in (Saint Patricke yet living) are
kept written within the said Abbey. When any person is disposed to enter
(for the door is ever sparred) he repaireth first for advice to the
Archbishop, who casts all perils, and dissvvadeth him, because they say
diverse never came back again, but if the party be resolute, he recommendeth
him to the Pryor, who in like manner favorably exhorts him not to hazard
such a danger, if notvvithstanding he find the party fully bent, he conducteth
him to this Church, enjoyneth him to begin with prayer, fast and vigill o^ 15.
days, so long together as in discretion can be endured. This time expired, if
he yet persevere in his former purpose, the whole Convent accompanies him
with solemn procession and benediction to the mouth of the cave, where they
let him in, and so bar up the door till the morrow, and then with like
ceremonies they avvaite his return, and reduce him to the Church. If he be
seen no more, they fast and pray 15. days after. Touching the credit of those
matters, I see no cause but a Christian man assuring himself that there is both
hell and heaven, may without vanity upon sufficient information, be persuaded
that it might please God at sometime for considerations to his infinite vvisdome
known to reveal by miracles the vision of Joys and pains eternal, but that
altogether in such sort, and so ordinarily, and to such persons, and by such
means as the common fame and some records thereof do utter, I neither believe,
nor wish to be regarded. It appears by Trevisa in his additions to
Polichronicon, that a superstitious opinion of this Purgatory was then
conceived, which he disproveth. And a man of indifferent judgment may soon
suspect that in the drift and strength of Imagination, a contemplative person
would happily suppose the sight of many strange things which he never saw.
Since writing hereof I met with a Priest, who told me that he had gone the
same pilgrimage, and affirmed the order of the premises: But that he for his
own part saw no sight in the world, save only fearful dreams when he
chanced to nod, and those he says were exceeding horrible: further he added,
that the fast is rated more or less, according to the quality of the
penitent, and that the place seemed to him scarcely able to receive six
persons.

CAP. XIIII. The Irish Saints.
THough my search thereof in this my haste out of the land be very cumbersome,
yet being loath to neglect the memory of Gods friends, more glorious to a
Realm then all the victories and triumphs of the world, I think it good to
furnish out this chapter with some extracts touching the Saints of Ireland,
namely those that are most notable, mentioned by authors of good credit.
Distinct, 3.6. Brigid. Colum.
Cambrensis tells, that in S. Patricks time flourished S. Bride the virgin,
and S. Columbe in Down, where their bodies soon after the conquest, and also
S. Patrickes body were found, Sir John Courcye being then President of Vlster.
In vievving of the sepulture he testifies to have seen three principal
jevvells, which were then translated as honorable monuments vvorthie to be
preserved.

Of S. Columbe it is doubted, whether he lived in that age. Ex Vitis sanctorum
Hiberniae.
Brigide was base Daughter of Dubtachus a Captain in Leinster, who perceiving
the Mother with child, sold her secretly, fearing the jealousy of his wife, to
a Irish Poet, reserving to himself, the fruit of her womb, she was there
delivered of this Brigide, whom the Poet trained up in letters, and so conveyed
her home to her father. An. Dom. 439.
The Damsel was schooled in the faith by S. Patricke, preaching then in those
parts, she became so religious, and so ripe in judgment, An Dom. 4^8.
that not only the multitude, but a whole synod of Bishops assembled by
Dublin, used her advice in weighty causes, and highly esteemed her. One fact of
hers being yet a child, made her famous. The King of Leinster had given to
Dubtachus in token of singular affection, for his good service, a rich sword.
Now it befell, that the maiden visiting her sick neighbors, diversely
distressed for hunger, (her father being a stern man, his Lady a shrewe) she
saw none other help to relieve these wretched people, but to part the Jewels
of that idle sword among them. This matter was haynously taken, and came to the
Kings ears, who (coming shortly after to a Banquet in her fathers house)
demanded the Girl, not yet nine years old, how she durst presume to deface
the gift of a King, she answered, that it was bestowed upon a better King,
then he was, whom (quoth she) finding in such extremity, I would have given
all my father has, and all that thou have, yea your selves and all, were ye
in my power to give, rather then Christ should starve.

At convenient age she professed virginity, and allured other noble Virgins to
her fellowship, with whom she lived in her own Monastery, until the year of
our Lord 500. and was buried at Down, in the Tomb of S. Patricke, what
Cambrensis reports of his own knowledge and sight, I will be bold to add
hereunto.

Among her relics, was found a concordance of the 4. Evangelists, seeming to
be written with no mortal hand, beautified with mystical pictures in the
margent, whose colors and workmanship, at the first blush were dark and
unpleasant, but in the view wonderful lively and artificial. Senanus first a
Soldier, Senanus.
succeeded S. Patricke in the Sea of Ardmagh, An. Dom. 493.
when he had been certain years a minor and doctor to the Camp. Brendan.
Brendan Abbot at the age of ten years, was of such incomparable holiness,
and thereto so wise and lettered, that his parents thinking themselves to have
won the most notable fruit, that could ensue their marriage, by mutual
consent professed continency. He flourished in the time of S. Bride, lived
familiarly with Ercus the Bishop, and Finan the Abbot.

Madoc alias Edan of noble parentage, taken prisoner with the King of Temore,
An. Dom 456.
Edan, or Madoc.
and kept in his court with diverse yongmen his schoole-fellowes, openly
adjured the King to suffer him and them to depart and serve God, as they were
accustomed, which being now sundred and distrayned of liberty they had partly
discontinued, immediately they were dismissed: he died Bishop of Fernes, and
laid the foundation of that Burrogh. Molingus.
Molingus the successor of S. Madoc being Bishop took himself to voluntary
labor, and with his own hands, drived a running spring to his Monastery,
enduring that travail daily after prayer and study, Fintan.
eight years together. Fintan the Abbot was had in such veneration, that
whereas Colm King of Leinster, kept prisoner Cormak the Kings son of Kensill:
He went boldly with 12. of his Disciples through the press of the Soldiers,
and in sight of the King, rescued the young Prince, for the Irish in no ways
are outrageous against holy men. I remember, Cambrensis writes himself,
merrily to have objected to Morris then Archbishop of Cashell, that Ireland in
so many hundred years had not brought forth one Martyr. The Bishop answered
pleasantly, (but alluding to the late murder of Thomas of Canterbury,) Our
people (quoth he) notwithstanding their other enormities yet have ever more
spared the blood of Saints, marry now we are delivered to such a nation, that
is well acquainted with making Martyrs, henceforwards I trust this complaint
shall cease.

Malachias^
Malachias was borne in Ardmagh of noble parents, An. Dom. 1014
cherished in virtue by example of his Mother, and trained up in learning, even
yet a very babe, he was oft-times espied to steal from his companions to pray
in secret, so grave and modest, that of himself he choosed always the most
severe and rigorous Schoolemasters, and refused an excellent Clerk, only
because he saw him, somewhat lightly demeaned at game. In the beginning of his
youth he yielded himself the Disciple of Imarius, an old recluse, Bernard. in
vita Malach.
whose austerity of conversation, the whole town admired. There he became a
Deacon, and at twenty five years a Priest. The Archbishop for the fame and
opinion of his worthiness, made him his Coadjutor, in the which office he
reformed superstitions and revived the strength of religion, specially the
uniformitie of their Church service, wherein before time they jarred. Banchor.
The famous monastery of Banchor he reedified, of the patrimony and legacies by
his Uncle left him. The same Monastery was of old time, first governed by
Congellus, and then proceeded Columbanus, the father of many religious houses
in France. Banchor had been so stored with Moncks, that no hour of day nor
night they ceased, but some company or other was in continual succession at
divine service. Of which brethren there were in one day murthred 900. and the
place spoiled, whose possessions conveyed to Malachias by his Uncle, he
restored forthwith, and bettered the foundation. At the age of thirty years,
he was by Canonical election forced to accept the Bishopric of Conereth, a
people of all the Irish then most savage and bestiall, whom he with inestimable
toil reclaymed.

In the mean while died Celsus Archbishop of Ardmagh, to whom succeeded
Malachias, at the age of thirty eight years. But ere this wel-nigh the space of
200. years together, a pestilent custom had crept into the country, that the
Metropolitanes See, was inferred upon mere lay persons of the blood royal in
manner by inheritance, wherefore Nigellus the next of kindred animated by the
partiality of some Princes, and getting into his custody the Bible and Staff,
and other Ornaments of S. Patricke (whereunto the ears of the common people
tied the prelacy) came to the Palace, with a band of Soldiers to have
slain the Bishop. When all the people wept and howled, for his peril, he
alone stepped into the bosom of his enemies, demanding their purpose. The
very Tyrants letting fall their weapons in stead of the murder conspired, fell
to reverence him and departed friends. Three years he sat in the primacy,
rather to discontinue the horrible corruption before used, then with intent to
abide there: and their error having disanulled the abuse, he procured Gelasius
to be his Successor, and returned to his former Bishopric of Down. For to
Down was then annexed Coner. But Malachias understanding that in times past,
they were several, sundred them again, and preferred another to the Diocese
of Coner, desirous rather to discharge his cure, then to enlarge the fruits,
while he preached, a woman fell at his feet, and besought his prayer, for that
she had gone now with child fifteen months and twenty days, nor could by
any means be delivered, which done, the news of her delivery was reported
before the assembly brake up. He threatened vengance to a Captain, unless he
would turn away the Concubine he kept, the same being also his brothers
Concubine. The Captain took it disdainefully, and within one hour, was
slain by a conspiracy of women, whose Daughters and servants he had defiled.
There dwelt in Lismore a notable Clerk, of conversation upright, but corrupt
in judgment of religion, this fellow advancing his doctrine, offered
disputation to the Bishop, before the multitude, when he was forced to silence
with the weight of truth, yet he cavelled maliciously, that not the cause nor
learning, but the countenance and credit of Malachias had won the victory. To
whom the Bishop answered, our Lord compel thee, even maugre thine own
wilfulness to acknowledge thine errors. At these words the Clerk and
intending to fly the sight of men, was prevented with a mortal infirmity, and
beseeching the Bishop of his peace and communion, died immediately, reconciled
to God and holy Church. Being demanded of his Brethren, the Moncks of Banchor,
where and when he would wish to dye, and be buried, if it lay in his choice,
he answered: If in Ireland, beside the body of S. Patricke: If beyond the
seas, at Clarivall, where S. Bernard was then famous and in the feast of All
Souls. He cast in his mind, within a few days to sue to Eugenius the third,
for the increase of the number of Metropolitanes, which request, was shortly
after sped, and in this voyage he rested at Clarivall, and there diverse times,
openly foretold that his year of departing was come: accordingly when he had
taken leave of S. Bernard and the brethren, descended from his chamber to
Church, and received the rites of a christian man, he returned to his lodging,
and dyed on All Souls day, in the year of his age fifty four, 1148.
so mildely and peaceably that it seemed rather a sleep, then a death. There
his obsequies was solemnized and miracles wrought at his tomb, and from thence
his body was translated to Ardmagh, in the year 1192.

Malchus, though borne Irish, yet he spent most part of his time in the
monastery of Winchester, in England, from thence assumpted Bishop of Lismore,
him also remembers S. Bernard upon occasion. A lunaticke child he cured in
Bishopping him. This miracle was through the world seen and confessed of many
hundreds. There happened the same time, a discord between the King of
Mounster, and his Brother, King of Mounster.
wherein the King was overmatched and fled into England, visited Malchus in his
Abbey, and would at no hand be said nay, but so long as it should please God to
afflict him, he would live there under his government, and ensue his
conversation, he contented himself with a poor Cell, used daily a cold bathe
to repress the wantonness of his flesh, dieted himself with none other fare,
then bread, water and salt, passed days and nights in sobbing and remorse of
sin. At length the Kings and Nobles of Ireland began to stomach the usurper,
vanquished him, called home the good King to his right, who with many
persuasions of Malchus and Malachias could scarcely be gotten to forsake
ghostly company, and trade of life.

CAP. XV. The most noble events in Ireland, between the time of Saint
Patricke, and the conquest under Henry the 2.
586.
IN the year of Christ 586. the people of Norway were Lords and victours of
the Islands in the West Ocean called Orchades, and great scowrers of the seas:
A nation desperate in attempting the conquest of other Realms: as being sure
to find warmer dwelling any where, then at their own home. These fellows
lighted into Ireland by this means, Careticus K. of Britain.
Careticus King of Britain (odious to his subjects) fell with them at civil
war. Joyful was the news hereof to the Saxons, who then in the six several
kingdoms, possessed the Island sundry ways, so they laid together their
force, and associated to them Gurmondus, a Rover out of Norway, who having a
navy still in a readiness, and an army thereafter furnished, help the Saxons,
to hunt the Britains into the marches of Wales, builded the town of
Gormond-chester, and then having helped the Saxons, made a voyage into Ireland
where he sped but meanly, and therefore the Irish account not this for any of
their conquests, as some of their antiquities have informed me. The same
Gurmondus finding hard success, did but build a few slight castles and
trenches in the frontiers, and then leaving the land, got him home into France,
where he was finally slain, him our Chonicles name King of Ireland. But the
Irish affirm that before Turgesius no Easterlings obtained a Kingdom.
Turgesius.
Here Cambrensis to salve the contradiction, thinks Gurmundus to have
conquered the land by Turgesius his Deputy, sent thither at his provision,
which answer breeds a contrariety more incurable, for himself numbreth
between Laigirius King of Ireland, in an. 430. and ^edlemidius whom Turgesius
vanquished, Monarchs 33. and years 400. so that Turgesius lived in an. 830.
and could not possibly deal with Gurmondus, who joined with the Saxons against
Careticu in Anno 586. This knot might be untwyned with more facility. Gurmondus
made much of that little he caught, and wrote himself King, which Title our
Histories do allow him, because he opened a gappe, enjoyed it for a while, and
brake a way for his Countrymen. Turgesius brought this attempt to perfection,
and in these respects each of them may be called first King and Conqueror.

Secondly therefore Turgesius with his Normans, ^10*
assaulted Ireland, sustained loss and many overthrowes, but in the end
fastening his power to the sea coasts, and receiving in his friends at will, he
subdued the land through and through, ever as he went building up Castles and
fortresses, vvherevvith the Irish had not been yet acquainted, for hitherto
they knevv no fence, but vvoods or bogges, or strokes. Turgesius bridled the
Kings, and avved them so, that without interruption he reigned thirty years,
cried havocke and spoil where any wealth was heaped, spared neither Lay nor
Clergy, nor Church, nor Chapel, but very insolently abused his victory.
O-malaghlien king of Meth, was in some trust with the Tyrant, his only
Daughter Turgesius craved for his concubine. The father having a present wit,
and watching some subtle oportunities, Saving your fancy, my Lord, quoth he,
there are diverse Ladies of my blood sweeter bed-fellovves for a king, then
that brown girl; and then he began to count neeces and cousins a number
forsooth, endovved with angell-like beauties, painted so lively with his
Tale, that the Tyrant doted already upon them ere he savv them: But ever he
doubted, lest O-malaghlien extolled them to exempt his own, and the wise
father cloaked his drift with modesty in answers, and lingering his grant
to inflame the leachers folly, as he that would any thing to be suspected
rather then his thought indeed. And at the last when the other took his delay
somevvhat unkindely, and bade his Queen speak to him. If I said (quoth he)
that with my very goodvvill my sole daughter should be sent to you to be
deflovvred, your high wisdom would guess I did but feign and flatter, and
yet if ten daughters were deerer unto me then your good pleasure and
contentation, by whose bounty, both she and I, and we all are supported, I were
unworthie the secret friendship, wherein it lies in you to use me. As for the
wench, it will in part seem honorable to be asked to the bed of such a
Prince, seeing Queens have not sticked to come from far, and prostrate their
bodies to noble Conquerours, in hope of issue by them, and howsoever it be
taken, time will redeem it. But such a friend as you are to me and mine,
neither I nor mine shall live to see, and I purpose not to offend your amity
with saving a greater matter then twenty maiden-heads, seeing fathers have not
sticked to yield their own wives to quench the loves and lusts of their
sons.

Therefore I am thus agreed, name you the day and place, sever your self from
the open eye of your Court, confer with those that have a curious insight and
skill in beauties, I will send you my daughter, and with her the choice of
twelve or sixteen gentlewomen, the meanest whereof may be an Empress in
comparison, when all are before you, make your game at will, and then if my
child shall please your fancy, she is not too good to be at your
commandment: Only my request is, that if any other presume upon your
leavings, your Majesty will remember whose fathers child she is. This
liberal proffer was accepted of him, whose desire was insatiable, with many
fair promises and thanks. To be short, the same day O-malaghlien attired
Prince-like his own Daughter, and with her sixteen beautiful striplings,
which presented to the King in his privy Chamber, accompanied only with
certain wantons of the Nobility, drew forth from under their woman-like
garments, their skeanes, and valiantly bestirred themselves, Turgesius murdered.
stabbing first the Tyrant, next the youth present that prepared but small
resistance, surely sit mates to supply the office they took in hand, of
Paris, not of Hector.

Out flew the fame thereof into all quarters of Ireland, and the Princes
nothing dull to catch hold of such advantage, with one assent, rose ready to
pursue their liberty. All Meth and Leinster were soon gathered to
O-malaghlien, the father of this practice, who lightly leapt to horse, and
commanding their forvvardnesse in so natural a quarrel, said, Lordings and
friends, The words of O-malaghlien, King of Meth.
this case neither admits delay, nor asks policy, heart and haste is all
in all, while the feate is young and strong, that of our enemies some sleep,
some sorrovv, some curse, some consult, all dismayed, let us anticipate their
furye, dismember their force, cut off their flight, occupy their places of
refuge and succor. It is no mastery to pluck their feathers, but their
necks, nor to chase them in, but to rovvse them out, to vveede them, not to
rake them; nor to tread them down, but to dig them up. This lesson the
Tyrant himself has taught me, I once demanded him in a parable, by what
good husbandry the Land might be rid of certain Crovves that annoyed it,
he advised to watch where they bred, and to fire the nestes about their
ears. Go we then upon these Cormorants that shrovvde themselves in our
possessions, and let us destroy them so, that neither nest, nor root, nor
seed, nor stalk, nor stubbe may remain of this ungracious generation.

Scarce had he spoken the word, but with great shovvtes and clamours, they
extolled the King as patron of their lives and families, assured both courage
and expedition, joined their confederates, and with a running camp, svvept
every corner of the Land, razed the castles to the ground, and chased the
strangers before them, slew all that abode the battle, recovered each man
his own precinct and former state of government. The Irish delivered of
slavery, fell to their old vomit in persecuting one another, and having lately
defaced their fortified castles and towns, as coverts to the enemy; al sides
lay now more open in harms way. This considered, the Princes that in the
late rule of Turgesius espied some towardness to wealth and ease, began to
discourse the madness of their fathers, who could not see the use of that
which their enemies abused, they began to loathe their unquietness, to wish
either less discord, or more strength in every man's dominion to cast out the
danger of naked Territoryes, as ready to call in the enemy, as the contrary was
to shroud them, feign would they mend, and they wist not how. The former
subjection though it seemed intolerable, yet they felt therein a growing to
peace, fruits of merchandise, rest and surety; for it fared diversely tvvixt
those Easterlings, and these Irish: they knevv how to thrive, might they get
some commodious soil. These had all the commodities of the soil, and reckoned
them not. While the Princes and Potentates pavvsed in this good mood, certain
merchants out of Norvvay, called Ostomanni, Easterlings, because they lay East
in respect of us, though they are indeed properly Normans, and partly Saxons,
obtained license safely to land and utter their vvares. By exchanging of vvares
and money, finding the Normans civil and tractable, delighted also with gay
conceits, which they never esteemed needful until they savv them, they
entered into a desire of traffic with other nations, to allure merchants,
they licensed the strangers aforesaid to build, if they were disposed,
Haven-Tovvnes, which was done. Waterford. Limericke. Dublin.
Amellanus founded Waterford; Sitaricus, Limericke; Inorus, Dublin, more at
leisure by others. Then were repaired by help and counsel of these men,
castles, forts, steeples, and Churches everywhere. Thus are the Irish blended
also in the blood of the Normans, who from thenceforth continually flocked
hither, did the Inhabitants great pleasure, lived obediently, till wealth made
them wanton and rebellious. But they could not possibly have held out, had not
the conquest ensuing determined both their contentions. The mean while they
waxed Lords of Havens and Bur-Townes, housed their soldiers, and oftentimes
skirmished took their fortune, crept no higher, only a memory is left of
their field in Clantarfe, 1050. al. 1014.
where diverse noble Irish men were slain, that lie buried before the Cross
of Kilmaynam.

And it is to be noted, that these are the Danes, which people (then Pagans)
wasted England, and after that, France. From whence they came again into
England with William the Conqueror. So that Ostomani, Normans, Guil. de
Nangiac. Polid l. 8. Angl. hist.
Easterlings, Danes, and Norway-men are in effect the same, and as it appears
by conference of times and Chronicles, much about one time or season, vexed the
French men, subdued the English, and multiplied in Ireland. But in the year of
CHRIST 1095. perceiving great envy to lurk in the distinction of Easterlings
and Irishe utterly west, and because they were simply Northern, An. Dom. 900.
not Eastern, and because they magnified themselves in the late conquest of
their Countrymen, who from Normandy flourished now in the Realm of England,
they would in any wise be called and counted Normans. Flatsbury.


Long before this time, as ye have heard, Ireland was bestowed into two
principal Kingdoms, An. Dom. 94^.
and sometime into more, whereof one was ever elected Monarch, whom they term
in their Histories, maximum regem, or without addition, regem Hiberniae. The
rest were written Reguli or Reges by limitation, as the King of Leinster, of
Connaght, of Vlster, of Mounster, of Meth. To the Monarch besides his allowance
of ground, and titles of Honors, and other privileges in Jurisdiction, was
granted a negative in the nomination of Bishops at every vacation. The Clergy
and Laity of the Diocese, recommended him to their King, the King to their
Monarch, the Monarch to the Archbishop of Canterbury, for that as yet the
Metropolitanes of Ireland had not received their palles: In this sort was
nominated to the Bishopric of Divelin, then void Anno 1074. (at the petition
of Godericus King of Leinster, by sufferance of the clergy and people there,
with the consent of Terdilvachus the Monarch) a learned prelate called
Patricius: who^ the blessed archbishop Lanfrancus consecrated at S. Paul's
Church in London, and swore him to the obedience after the manner of his
antecessors. 11^2*
Christian Bishop of Lismore Legate to Eugenius 3. summoned a Provincial
Council in Ireland, wherein were authorized four Metropolitan See^, Ardmagh,
Dublin, Cashell, and Tuam: Bishops thereof being Gelasius, Gregorius, Donatus,
Edanus; for hitherto, though they yielded a primacy to the Bishop of Ardmagh,
in reverence of Saint Patricke, yet was it partly voluntary, and ratified
rather by custom, then by sufficient decree: neither did that Archbishop take
upon him to invest other Bishops, but sent them to Canterbury (as I said
before) which henceforth they did not. Namely the next Bishop S. Laurence,
sometimes Abbot of S. Kevynes in Glandilagh, 1162,
was ordered and installed at home by Gelasius Primate of Ardmagh.

THE SECOND BOOK OF CAMPION'S HISTORY OF IRELAND.
CAP. I. The conquest of Ireland by Henry the second, King of England, commonly
called Henry Fitz Empress.
DErmot Mac Murrough, 1167.
King of Leinster, halt and leacherous, This Chapter concludes the 1. and 2.
book Cambrens de conquest Hiberniae: delivered unto me by Francis Ag^rd.
vowed dishonestly to serve his lust on the beautiful Queen of Mead, and in
the absence of her husband, allured the woman so far, that she condiscended
to be stolen away. This dishonorable wrong to avenge, O-Rorick the King her
husband, besought assistance of Rodericke Oconor, King of Connaght, at that
season the general Monarch of all Ireland. The subjects of Leinster detesting
the quarrel, and long ere this time hating their Prince, left him desolate in
his greatest need, so as with much difficulty he caught his boat, and fled
over for succor to Henry the 2. King of England, then warring upon the
Frenchmen, within his Dukedom of Aquitaine. Somewhat before this season sat
in the Sea of Rome, Polichron. Plat. in Ad^. 4. Io. Stell. in Chr*
Adrianus 4. an English man borne, who having in his youth taken a painful
pilgrimage into Norway, and reduced the whole Island unto Christianity, learned
distinctly the state of Ireland, and how their countrymen which daily repaired
thither, John Stow.
being themselves the most part infidels, meeting with a people there, wild
and furious, were like very shortly (but if God found remedy) to deface
religion: for though Christ were believed and taught, yet the multitude eft
soon, grew to a shameless kind of liberty, making no more of necessary
points of Doctrine, then served their loose humor. Besides these occasions
Henry the 2. builded upon the Popes favor, his borne subject, had sent
Ambassadors to Rome, in the first year of his reign, asking leave to attempt
the conquest of Ireland. Adrian trusting and requiring a diligent reformation
of the premises, granted his Bull, which Alexander his Successor confirmed,
and ratified upon the same conditions. Now when Dermot was come in the very
neck of these consultations, and put up his complaint, wherein he preferred
the interest of his Crown, and craved a restitution of some piece of his
lands, the matter did seem not all untowardly broached, Henry having his hands
full with the French, because Mac Murrough urged all possible haste, could not
personaly intend that offer, but sent him honorably guarded into England, with
letters patents bearing this Tenor.

HENRY the second, King of England, Duke of Normandy and Aquitaine, The Kings
letter.
Earl of Angiow. To all our true subjects, English, Normans, Welchmen, Scotts,
and to all nations within our Dominions whatsoever. Greeting. Wit ye that the
Bearer hereof, Dermot Mac Murrough King of Leinster, we have received into the
sovereign protection of our Grace and bounty, wherefore who so of you all our
loving subjects will extend toward him, your aid for his restoring, as to our
trusty and welbeloved, know ye that he is thereto authorized by these
presents, and shall deserve at our hands high favor in so doing.

With these letters and many gay additions of his own, he arrived at Bristow,
where he fell at conference with Richard Strongbow, Lo. Strongbow al. Chepstowe.
Earl of Pembroke, with whom he covenanted, the delivery of his only daughter
and heir unto marriage, and so the remainder of his Kingdom: If the said
Earl would recover him his home. That day were planted in Wales two gentlemen,
Robert Fitz Stephens, and Maurice Fitz Gerald, brethren of a Mother, allied to
Rice ap Griffin, Fitz Stephens. Fitz Gerald.
then Prince of Wales, whose Grandfather was surnamed Rice the great. Fitz
Stephens had been high Constable there under the King, and for executing
rigor upon the Princes servants, was with him detained prisoner three years,
ne would in any wise pay ransom or accept the liberty promised him, but if the
conditions were loyal to the Crown, and to his person no dis-worship. Lastly
by the mediation of David Bishop of S. David's, the third brother; and of Fitz
Gerald, and at the instance of Mac Murrough whom the Prince entertained in that
distress, Fitz Stephens was conditionaly delivered, that he and his brother
Maurice, should the next spring, while Strongbow provided his army, assist the
Irish outcast, who in consideration thereof assured them an estate for ever in
the town of Weixford, and two Cantreds adjoining.

Thus much firmly concluded on all sides, the King stale secretly home, and
wintered closely among the Clergy of Fernes.

According to covenant came Fitz Stephens, with 30. Knights of his blood, 60.
Squiers, and 300. footmen Archers, to whom at his landing, Dermot sent in aid
his base son Duvelnaldus, and five hundred spears. The town and suburbs of
Weixford marched forth against him: But when they saw Soldiers in array,
diversely dighted and weaponed, furnished with artillery, barbed horses and
harness, they retired to their walls and strengthened them, burning the
villages thereabouts, and all the provision they could not carry. The assault
lasted 3. days, in the 4. certain Bishops resciant there, took up the
variance, pacified the Townsmen to their King, and procured the rendering of
the Town. Dermot having tried the valiantnes of the Welchmen, immeadiately
kept his touch, and gave possession of Weixford with the appurtenances
aforesaid, to Fitz Stephens and his brother. After success of these matters,
they leavyed to the number of 3000. Soldiers, and devised to vex the Lords
of Upper Ossory, who had been to the King of all other most cruel and
injurious. Them they compelled to deliver Trewage and swear fealty.

Rodericke the monarch appalled at these news, reared up all the Kings, in
defense of the land, verily supposing that all would to wrecke, were it not
prevented. And first they directed courteous messages and gifts to Fitz
Stephens, moving him to depart the land quietly, and not to molest them without
cause. To whom he answered, that much he wondered at the folly of those Princes,
who to satisfy their choler had opened such a gappe to their own prejudice,
as though the subjects whom they had schooled, to break alliance toward the
King of Leinster, would not be as ready by this example to learn to withstand
the King of Connaght, for his own part, though he might with better reason
invade strangers, then they could expel their neighbors and their peer, yet
would they suffer the King to reenter his right, they should not find him
stiff, nor untractable, otherwise they should well feel that the Bryttons
wanted neither ability, nor truth, to maintain their word.

Rodericke perceived it was no boot to spurn, and therefore bethought
himself of composition upon agreement, they resolved thus.

Conditions of peace.
Inprimis, that Mac Murrough swearing afresh his obedience to the Monarch,
should quietly, repossesse the parts of Leinster, which Rodericke withheld by
suspensation.

Secondly, that for ensurance thereof, he should pledge his dearest base son
Cnothurn, to whom Rodericke promised his daughter, if this peace were found
effectual.

Thirdly, that being rested in his kingdom, he should discharge the Welsh
army, nor should henceforwards call them over in defense.

About this time, Donatus the good King of Ergall, founded the Abbey of
Mellyfont, which is the eldest that I find recorded since the Danes arrival,
except S. Mary Abbey, besides Divelin, erected in an. 948.

The mean while was landed at Weixford, Maurice Fitz Gerald with his
provision, ten Knights, thirty Squiers, and an hundred Bowmen, hereupon Dermot
and the two Brethren, set their force against Divelin, which being the chief
City of his Realm, refused to yield, when Divelin and the country about it
was recovered, there befell hostility between Rodericke, and Duvenaldus Prince
of Limericke, whom Dermot his father help in field, foiled the enemy, and
then vvithdrevv his obedience from the Monarch. Shameful was Roderickes
flight, and Dermot insinuated into the favor of his people, began to recount
the confederates of his first misfortune, and consulted with the two Captains
for the invasion of Connaght, finding them pressed, he wrote over to the Earl
Strongbow, renewed their covenants, prayed his help. Richard Earl Strongbow
(whose ancestors came in with the Conquest, but commonly of the King and his
successors disfavoured) having read the letters, he passed to King Henry,
besought him either to answer him his rightful heritage, which other men
occupied, or to license him else where in uncouth lands, to seek his fortune.
The King half in derision bad him on in the name of God, even as far as his
feet could bear him. The Earl dissembling to perceive the hollovvnes of the
king, furnished his Cousin Reymond le Gross, Reymond le Gross.
Nephew to the brethren aforesaid, with ten Knights, and 70. Bovvmen,
himself ensued with about 200. Knights, and 1000. lusty Welchmen, tried
Soldiers, shortly they vvanne the City of Waterford, and then immediately
Mac Murrough accomplished his convention, gave to the Earl in marriage his
daughter Eve, with the succession of his Kingdom. When Waterford was gotten,
and Leinster pacified, and the Princes of Ossory tamed, and a chosen band ever
in garrison, Mac Murrough became so terrible, that none durst encounter him.
The Clergy assembled themselves at Ardmagh, and with one accord did protest
that for all their sins, and especially for the Turkish kind of Tyrany which
they used in buying and selling, and with vile slaveries oppressing the bodies
of the English, (whom their pirates took) their land was like to be translated
to that nation, whose captives they handled so cruelly. To appease in part, the
indignation of God, they decreed, that all English, wheresoever in hold within
the realm, should forthwith be loosed, Further, if it pleased God to scourge
them, it should be meekely suffered, as far beneath the debt of their
deserts. King Henry, though he was well apayed that the Earl should be from
him, yet he liked no deal, his growing in Ireland to such power, as percase in
time to come, with his faction in Wales, then living under a Prince of their
own, he might be able to face the Crown of England. An edict was therefore
drawn, whereby all subjects were charged upon their peril, to reverte into
England by a day, and a caveat annexed, that upon pain of death, none should
presume to pass over without a new warrant, nor ship over any wares, money,
munition, or victuals into Ireland.

11^0.
Thus had the Irish a breathing space, and would perhaps have picked greater
benefits thereby, Divelin assaulted (...) the Normans.
had not the Normans been in their top immediately after. Great force they
laid to Divelin, but were valiantly repelled, and their Captain Hasculphus
taken prisoner, Hasculphus the Norman.
who being calmely entreated, began to overview himself, and to imagine that
the Citizens durst not use him extremely, and once in open audience brake
forth his unseasonable courage, in these words. Take this (quoth he) but for
hansell, the game is to come: which heard they delayed him no longer, but pusht
him down on a block, and swapped off his head.

Strongbow perceiving the Kings jealously not yet allayed, having wel-nigh
spent his army in defense of diverse good towns, 1171.
impugned by Rodericke and the Irish, left sufficient ward till his return:
and met the King at Gloucester. To whom he writes, declaring the envy that
lurked in his preferment, yielded the tittle of all his winnings, craved good
countenance with his grace, contented himself with any portion whatsoever his
Majesty should relinquish: a final quietness was driven between them, Dublin
with th'appurtenances, and all port towns of Leinster, and all fortresses
reserved to the King. The Earl should enjoy with good leave whatsoever he had
gotten beside. This year dyed Mac Murrow, and the Abbey de Castro Dei was
founded.

Soon after the King with five hundred Knights with archers and horsemen many
more took shore at Waterford, 1172.
Regni sui 17. Aetatis 41.
and was such a terror to the Irish, that incontinently all Mounster submitted
themselves to his peace. There the men of Wexford to feed the surmises of
Henry conceived against the gentlemen, betrayed their Lord Fitz Stephens, and
him delivered to the King. The King to gratify them, for a while tremely
chained and hampered the prisoner, quarrelling with him, notwithstanding the
inhibition he had proceeded in atchieving the conquest of Ireland, but shortly
he enlarged him, and ratified the grants of Wexford abovementioned.

These Princes of the South swear fidelity and tribute to Henry. Dermot Car^ye
King of Cork, Donald Obrene king of Limericke, Donald and Omalaghlien,
puissant Lords of Ossory, and in brief, all the states of Mounster, from
thence he journeyed to Dublin, where in like manner all the Captains of
Leinster, and Ororicke king of Meth, and Rodericke Oconor, king of Connaght,
and of all Ireland for himself, and the whole Island, humbly recognized his
soveraignety: finally, no man there was of name in the land (except them of
Vlster) but they to him bowed and swear obeisance. All which he feasted royally
with a dinner of Cranes flesh, a foul till then utterly abhorred of the Irish.

Merlin had prophesied, that five should meet, and the sixth should scourge
them. Merlines Prophecy.
This sixth they now construed to be Henry, in whom the five petty Kingdoms
were united. Of the same conquest prophesied their four notable Saints,
Patricke, Brachon, Colme, Irish Prophets. Fab. part 7. c. 237.
and Moling.

The King not unmindfull of his charge, enjoined by the Popes Adrian and
Alexander, entered into a reformation of the Church: and moved the famous
Bishop of Lismore, Pol Virg lib. 13 Angl. Hist. Synod of Cashell-
Saint Christian, their Legate, to call a Synod at Cashell, wherein they
defined Eight Articles.

1. First, that their people should abandon unlawful contracts of their
cousins and allies, and observe the Canons of Matrimony.

2. That their Infants should be primestened of the Priests hand at the Church
door, and then baptized in the font of their mother Church.

3. That all faithful duly pay their Tithes.

4. That holy Church be for ever quit of those cursed exactions of diet and
harborow whereunto they had been accustomably strayned four seasons in the
year, and else against right.

5. That the fine levied for manslaughter, be not borne by the Clearkes, and
kinsmen to the malefactor, but if he were accessory or faulty to the deed
doing.

6. That the sick do his Testament to be made or read in the presence of
credible persons.

7. That the funerals of the dead be devoutly and solemnly kept.

8. That forasmuch as GOD has universally delivered them into the government
of the English, they should in all points, rights, and ceremonies, accord with
the Church of England.

To these things Gelasius Primate of Ardmagh, because he was old and impotent,
gave his consent at Divelin in the presence of the King, he died two years
after, so aged, that his sustenance was the milk of a white Cow, which he
carried with him wheresoever he traveled. This year the Abbey de font vivo
was founded.

While all went well in Ireland, news came that Henry the son (whom his
father had for good purpose crowned King of England) was misledde to intrude
upon the actual possession of the Crown in his fathers lifetime, which
stir to appease, the King left the custody of Ireland with Hugh de Lacy, to
whom he gave Meth in fee, with Fitz Stephens, Fitz Gerald, and Philip de
Bruise, and diverse others, King Henry returns into England.
and sailed into England.

In absence of King Henry, Ororick King of Meth, surnamed Monoculus, required
conference and parley with Hugh de Lacy, in which communication the King had
traitorously murdered Lacy, had not Fitz Gerald rescued him. Then stepped out an
ambushment of the Irish, but Griffin a Gentleman of the blood royal in Wales,
flighted the Kyrneghes, Ororick with one eye.
and slew Ororick.

The English perceived such practices daily sought and attempted, took from
the Irish as far as they durst, all trust of government, fenced themselves
with garrisons, made Captains, Keepers and Constables, wheresoever they
vvanne the better. But King Henry was so affrighted with his sons
rebellion, and grevv into such envye both at home and abroad for the death of
Thomas late Archbishop of Canterbury, that he had no will to mind his
proceedings in Ireland. Ever his jealousy increased toward the Earl
Strongbow, whom he supposed easy to be carried away with any light
occasion of tumult. Earl Strongbow.
The Earl was a man of great birth, but not of great port until this good
marriage befell him, and knovving himself neither to be brooked in sight, nor
trusted out of sight, kept still one certain rate in all his doings, bare but
low sail, fed no quarrels, shunned all suspicious conference.

While they stood thus in a mammaring, and Letters ctme daily over, how
faintly the States and Princes of Ireland performed obedience; for except in
Leinster, all other parts retained still their ancient kind of government,
and did only acknovvledge Tribute. It was thought expedient by Henryes
Counselors, to discharge his mind of that care, and seeing there was
trouble on all sides, and all could not be intended one way, they determined
to venture the custody of Ireland to Strongbow, being likely for his own
wealth and assurance, to procure all possible means of bridling and annoying
the Irish.

No sooner was the Earl landed with his Commission Lord Warden of Ireland,
Strongbow Lord Warden of Ireland.
but Donald King of Limericke met him at the vantage, and coursed him within
the walls of Waterford, whereof hearing the residue their mates were animated,
so that up they start in every corner, tagge and ragge to expel the English.

It went hardly, then the Earl remembered himself of his cousin Lord Reymond,
left behind him in Wales a suitor to Basil his sister, whose marriage nothing
stopped but the Earls consent. Now therefore he writes lovingly to the
Wooer, and upon condition that he came speedily to succor him, he yielded
the Lady and all else at pleasure. Reymond in his first entry brake into
Divelin, married his Wife in complete Armor, and the very next day sprang
forth, whipped the Rebels, quieted Leinster.

Pol. Virg. lib. 13 Angl. Hist.
Also the Clergy having lately perused the Popes Bull, wherein he entitleth
Henry Lord of Ireland, and under straight pains commands alleagiance unto
him, busily repressed the fury of their Countrymen. And for so much as
immediately after Christianity planted there, the whole Island had with one
consent given themselves not only into the spiritual, but also into the
temporal jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome, which temporal right the two
Bishops Adrian and Alexander had freely derived into King Henry, as by their
public instruments read in their counsel at Cashell appears, they
denounced curse and excommunication to any that would maliciously gainsay or
frustrate the same.

When these b^oyles were rocked asleep and hushed for a time, the familiars of
Strongbow greatly forethought them of the credit and rule committed to
Reymond, whom in conclusion they procured home again when he had served their
turn at need. The mean while dyed Strongbow, as some say, betrayed and
vvounded, he lies buried in the Body of Christ Church in Divelin, 1175.
Flatsbury.
leaving behind him one only daughter Isabel, married after 14. years to
William Earl marshall. Closely they concealed Strongbowes death, until they
had compassed from the King another Governor after their own tooth. For ever
they dreaded, that Reymond being in the Princes eye, and friended in the Court,
would catch his opportunity, and wind himself (might he get an inkling in time
of the Earls death) into the succession of his office, which even then waxed
sweet and savoury. Coodgellors of this drift, stopped messengers, intercepted
letters, hasted on their own course. Basil the wife of Reymond, Basil the wife
of Reymond le Gross.
more dutiful to her husband, then natural to her brother, continued still in
Ireland sick, but having privy knowledge of those news, ere the breath was
quite out of the Earls body, payned her self to disturb this whole array.
And whereas she knew well her letters should be searched, and her own
servants stayed, she let it be delivered at all a very venture to one of the
maryners, and therein draws a long process of her affairs and household, but
in the middle shuffles in a few lines of her meaning, under these terms: To
all my afflictions is added now lately the tooth-ake, so that except that one
master-tooth had fallen (which I send you for a token) I ween I were better
out of my life. Now was the tooth tipped with gold, and burnished feately like
a present, which Reymond wist well to be none of hers, and therefore quickly
smelled the construction, lingered not for Letters Pattents, but stepped over
presently, Reymond Lord Protector of Ireland.
and made his pack, and was elected by the Kings Agents there, Lord Protector
of Ireland, till the Kings pleasure were further known: During his authority
flourished the Geraldines, but shortly after they quayled again, under the
government of William Fitz Aldelin, with him was joined in commission the
valiant Knight John de Courcy, conqueror, and Earl of Vlster, Vlster
conquered.
which hitherto the King had not obtained.

That year was founded the Abbey of Crockesden, 1176.
by Bertramus de Verdon.

To establish the conquest of Vlster, and other victories of the parts of
Ireland before enjoyed, 1177.
Alexander the third sent his Cardinal Vivianus, who declares the Title that
Henry held of the Pope, the reservation of the Peter Pence, the indignation of
GOD and holy Church against the rebels, who being themselves contemners and
breakers of Canons Ecclesiastical, yet for maintenance of their unruly
stomachs, had found the means to make Churches their barnes, bestowing
therein both corn and pulse, that the victuallers and purveyors of the Princes
camp should not dare to require the sale thereof for peril of sacrilege.
Therefore he licenseth Officers in this behalf soberly and discreetely to
convent such persons, as made the Church a Sanctuary for their Corn, and in
need to take thereof at reasonable prices.

Little good did Fitz Aldelin, and less was like to do, because he
delighted to cross his Peers, and was of them stopped in his course of
government.

Hugh de Lacye was made Protector general over the Land. Hugh Lacye
Protector.
But Miles Cogan, Philip de Bruise, Fitz Stephens, Power, and diverse other
more preferred to several countries under him.

This Lacye builded a sort of castles and forts throughout all Leinster and
Meth, and the next six years continually devout gentlemen erected sundry
Abbeyes, as the Abbey of Roseglasse, Flat^bury.
1178.
of Donbrothy by Hervy a Welchman, one of the special conquerours of Ireland,
who himself after that, 1179.
entered into religion in Trinity Priory at Canterbury, 1180.
The Abbeyes of Geripont, and Choro Benedicti, the Abbey de lege Dei, with
repayring of many Chapels, Chauncells, 1182.
Bell-houses, High-vvayes, and Bridges. Then dyed Saint Laurence Archbishop of
Divelin, to whom succeeded John Common an Englishman, brought up in the Abbey
of Evesham, S. Patrickes Church in Divelin founded.
Founder of Saint Patrickes in Divelin, which was before that time a Parish
Church, and now by the said Archbishop endovved with Prebends, Viccars,
Clearkes, Chorists, and many notable possessions for their maintenance,
vvhereout from time to time have proceeded Clergymen of greatest learning and
reputation in the Diocese. Diverse contentions were raised betwixt Christ's
Church and it, for antiquity, wherein they of S. Patrickes, are (no doubt)
inferior, as shall appear. Infra cap. 4^
They are both written Cathedral Churches, and both are the Bishops Chapter,
in whose election they both ought to convent within the Church of the blessed
Trinity, called Christ's Church, which in all records has the preheminency of
place. The party that disturbeth this order of election, forfeiteth by deed to
th'Archbishop of Divelin, 200. pounds. S. Patrickes book of records.
This foundation was much enriched by King John.

The same year died the young King Henry, reconciled to his father, but
preparing war against his brother Richard Duke of Aquitain: soon after also
deceased Ieffry his other son, Duke of Britain. Thus were left Richard, his
inheritour, and John afterward Earl of Gloucester, heretofore surnamed without
land, to whom the father conveyed all his interest and Lordship of Ireland,
sent him thither honorably accompanied, being then but twelve years old, and
with him in special trust, Giraldus Cambrensis Clerk, Girald. Camb.
a diligent searcher of the antiquities of Ireland, surely well learned, and in
those days counted Eloquent.

About the young Earl were servants and counselors, Ioh. Lord of Ireland.
three sorts, first Normans, great quaffers, lourdens, proud, belly swains,
fed with extortion and bribery; to whom he most relied: secondly, the English
brought with him, meetly bold: Thirdly, the English found in the land, whom
being best worthy and most forward in all good services, he least regarded,
hereof sprang parties and disdain, and to the knights that hardiest were and
readiest of courage no small discomfort, to the enemies a spur.

With the brute of his arrival at Waterford, the Kings of Thomond, Desmond and
Connaght, put themselves in the bravest manner they could, to meet him and to
submit their countries to his Grace, before them came the Irish Franklyns with
rich presents, (and as they are very kind hearted where they list to show
obedience,) made unto the Child, their Lord, the most joy and gladness that
might be, and though rudely, yet lovingly, and after the custom of their
country, offered to kiss him, with such familiarity as they used toward their
Princes at home. Two of the Guard, Normans, pick-thankes, shook and tare the
Clownes by the glibs and beards unmannerly, and churlishly thrust them out of
the presence, whom they should have instructed courteously, and born with. The
Irish thus rejected, went against the forenamed Kings, opened the rebukes and
villanyes done to them, for their meekenes, that their Lord whom they thought
to honor, was but a Boy, peevish and insolent, governed by a sort of
flatterers, younglings and prowlers: That sithence to them that buxome were and
tractable, such despite and dishonor (that term they have borrowed of the
Spaniards) was proffered so soon, little good should the states of Ireland
look for in continuance, when the English had once yoked and penned them in
their clouches.

This report lightly alienated the minds of those Princes, not yet very
resolute, and turned them home with great oaths and leagues, entered among
themselves, caused also the mightiest Captains elsewhere to stick together,
while their lives lasted, and for no manner earthly thing to slack the defense
of their ancient liberties.

Immediately walked abroad mutinyes of broyle and commotion, so that the young
Earl and his army, were content to commit the trial thereof, to Lacy, Bruise,
Courcy, Fitz Gerald, and the rest, himself departing away the same year he
came, and leaving the Realm a great deal worse bestedde then he found it.

From the Conquest hitherto Giraldus Cambrensis, and from hence to the year
1370. I am specially helped by certain brief extracts, whose author is
namelesse, and therefore I quote him by the name of Philip Flatsbury who wrote
them, In these notes I used the conference of 3. coppies, much different, sent
me, the one by my Lord of Trimlestone, another from M Agard, the third from M.
Stanyhurst.
and enriched them with collections of his own, for Gerald the father of the
Earl of Kildare then being. An. 1517.

Lacy the rather for these whisperings, did erect and edify a number of
Castles, well and substantially, provided in convenient places, one at Derwath,
where diverse Irish prayed to be set on work, for hyre. Sundry times came
Lacy to quicken his laborers, full glad to see them fall in ure with any such
exercise, wherein, might they once be grounded and taste the svvetenesse of a
true man's life, he thought it no small token of reformation to be hoped, for
which cause he visited them often, and merrily would command his Gentlemen to
give the laborers example in taking pains, to take their instruments in hand,
and to work a season, the poor souls looking on and resting. But this game
ended Tragically, while each man was busy to try his cunning: some lading,
some plaistering, some heaving, some carving; the General also himself,
digging with a pykeaxe, a desperate villain of them, he whose tool the
General used, espying both his hands occupied and his body, with all force
inclining to the blow, watched his stoop, and clove his head with an axe, Lacy
murdered.
little esteeming the torments that ensued. 1189.
This Lacy was conqueror of Meth, his body the two Archbishops, John of
Divelin and Matthew of Cashell, Monast. de beatitudine.
buried in the monastery of of Becktye, his head in S. Thomas abbey at Divelin.
The next year, was builded the abbey of Ines in Vlster, 1187.
and soon after, the abbeyes of Iugo Dei, and of Comer, 1198. 1199. 1^^^*
and then the abbey of Knockmoy, or de Colle victoriae, by Cathel Cronderg King
of Connaght.

CAP. II. The Titles of the Crown of England to every part of Ireland, and to
the whole diverse ways.
I Will begin with the pedigree of William Earl marshall, for thereupon
depend many records in Ireland, and the Queens right to Leinster. Walter
Fitz Richard, who came from Normandy, with William Conqueror, died Lord
Strongbow of Strigule alias Chepstow without issue, to whom succeeded his
sisters son Gilbert, who was created the first Earl of Pembroke, and had
issue Richard the inheritour of Leinster, by a covenant and marriage of Eva the
sole daughter of Mac Murrough King of Leinster. This Richard conveyed to Henry
the second all his title, and held of him the Lordship of Leinster in four
counties, Weixford, Catherlagh, Ossory, and Kildare. Richard left issue, a
daughter Isabel, married to William Earl marshall of England, now Earl of
Pembroke, Lord Strongbow, and Lord of Leinster. William had issue five sons,
who died without issue, when every of them, except the youngest, had
successively possessed their fathers lands, and five daughters, Maude, ^oane,
Isabel, Sibil, and Eve, among whom the patrimony was parted in an. 31. H. 3. Of
these daughters bestowed in marriage, are descended many noble houses, as the
Mortimers, Bruises, Clares, etc. borne subjects to the Crown of England,
paying ever to the King his duties reserved.

Title to Meth.
Hugh de Lacy Conqueror of Meth, had issue Walter de Lacy, who held the same
of King John, paying a fine of four thousand marks sterling, and hence began
all the several claims there at this day, with allegiance sworn and done by
their ancestors.

Title to Mounster.
At the very first arrival of Henry the second, the Princes of Mounster came
universally, and did homage voluntarily, and acknowledged to him and his
heirs, duties and pays for ever.

Title to Vlster, and Connaght.
John de Courcy Conqueror and Earl of Vlster, dyed without issue, King John
Lord of Ireland, gave the Earldom to Hugh de Lacy, who had issue, Walter and
Hugh, dead without issue, Burke Earl of Vlster and Connaght.
and one daughter married to Reymond Burke Conqueror and Lord of Connaght.

Connaght descended to diverse heirs, owing service to the Prince, but Vlster
is returned by devolution to the special inheritance and revenues of the
Crown of England, in this manner The said De Burgo, had issue Richard, who had
issue John, who had issue William, who was slain without issue, and a
Daughter Elizabeth intytled to thirty thousand marks yearly, by the Earldom
of Vlster, whom Edward the 3. gave in marriage to Leonel his second son, Duke
of Clarence, who had issue a daughter Philippe, married to Edmund Mortymer, who
had issue Edmund, Anne, Elinor. Edmund and Elinor died without issue, Anne was
married to Richard, Earl of Cambridge, son to Edmund of Laugley Duke of
York, fifth son to Edward the third, which said Richard had issue Richard
Plantagenet, father to Edward the fourth, father to Elizabeth wife to Henry the
seventh, and mother to Henry the eight, father to Mary, Edward the sixth, and
Elizabeth.

Several claims to the Land of Ireland.
1. First that the Irish (for of the rest there is no question) were subjects
to the the Crown of Britain, before they set foot in Ireland. Thus it
appears. They dwelt on that side of Spain, whereof Bayon was then chief
imperial City, and the same then in possession and obedience to Gurguntius
376. years ere Christ was borne, as it was to his successors many a day
after, namely to Henry, the which as I find noted in certain precepts of
government, dedicated by James Young, to James Butler Earl of Ormond, then
Lieutenant of Ireland. an. 1416.

From this coast and City, now part of Gascoigne came the fleet of those
Iberians, who in 60. ships met Gurguntius on the sea, returning from the
conquest of Denmark, to whom they yielded oath and service, sued for dwelling,
were by him conducted and planted in Ireland, and became his liege people.

2. Mac Gil-murrow King of Ireland, with all his petty Princes, Lords, and
Captains, summoned to King Arthurs court held in Carlion, an. 519. did
accordingly their homage, and attended all the while his great feast and
assembly lasted. 3. The Monarch of Ireland and all other, both reges and reguli
for them and for theirs for ever, betook themselves to Henry the second in an.
Dom. 1172. namely those of the south, whiles he lay at Waterford, Dermot King
of Cork, which is the nation of Mac Cartyes, at Cashell, Donald King of
Limricke, which is the nation of the Obrenes, Donald King of Ossory, Mac
Shaghlen King of Ophaly, at Divelin did the like, Okeruell King of Vriell,
Ororicke king of Meth, Rodericke King of all Ireland, and of Connaght. This did
they with consents and shoutes of their people: and king Henry returned without
any Battle given. Only Vlster remained which John de Courcy soon after
conquered, and Oneale Captain of all the Irish there, came to Dublin to
Richard the 2. in an. 1399. And freely bound himself by oath and great sums
of money, to be true to the crown of England. 4. The same time Obrene of
Thomond, Oconor of Connaght, Arthur Mac Murrow of Leinster, and all the Irish
Lords which had been somewhat disordered, renewed their obedience. 5. When
Ireland first received Christendom they gave themselves into the jurisdiction
both spiritual and temporal, of the Sea of Rome. The temporal Lordship, Pope
Adrian conferred upon Henry the second, and he gave the same to John his
younger son, afterward King of England, and so it returned home to the
Crown. 6. Alexander the 3. confirmed the gift of Adrian as in both their
Charters is expressed at large. 7. Vivian the legate on the Popes behalf does
accurse and excommunicate all those that flitte from the obeisance of the Kings
of England. 8. The clergy twice assembled, once at Cashell, secondly at
Ardmagh, plainly determined the conquest to be lawful, and threatened all
people, under pain of Gods, and holy Churches indignation, to accept the
English kings for their Lords, from time to time. 9. It would ask a volume to
recite the names of such Irish Princes, who since the conquest have continually
upon occasions, revolts or petitions, sworn truth and faith to the kings of
England, from time to time, received honors, wages, fees, pardons, and
petitions. And thus I think no reasonable man will doubt of a right so old, so
continued, so ratified, so many ways confessed.
CAP. III. Richard the first, and King John.
BY occasion of Lacyes mishap, John Courcye, 11^9.
and Hugh de Lacye the younger, with all their assistants, did straight
execution upon the Rebels, and preventing every mischief ere it fell, stayed
the Realm from uproares. Thus they continued lovingly, and lived in wealth and
honor all the days of Richard the first, until the first year of King John's
reign.

Henry the second had issue male, William, Henry, Richard, 1199^
Ieffrey, and John. William, Henry, and Richard dyed without issue. Ieffrey
Earl of Britain dyed before his father, and left issue two daughters, and an
after-borne son called Arthur, S^ow* Gra^ton. Arth^rus. P^sthumas.
whose title to the Crown, as being the undoubted line of the elder brother,
Philip King of France, and certain Lords of England and Ireland stoutly
justified: Him had King John taken prisoner in Normandy, and dispatched, if the
same be true, with his own hands at Roane. Of this barbarous cruelty all men's
ears were full, and Courcye either of zeal or partiality, spoke bloody words
against it, which mean his undermyners caught, and did not only heave him out
of credit, but also got commission to attach his body, and to send him into
England.

The Earl mistrusted his part, and kept aloof, 120^.
till Hugh de Lacye Lord Justice, was feign to levye men in arms, and to
invade Vlster. Thence he was often put to flight, John Courcye.
vvhereupon he proclaimed Courcye Traitor, and hired sundry gentlemen with
rewards, to bring him in quick or dead, so long he vvooed the matter, that
Courcyes own Captains were inveygled to betray their Lord. Therefore upon
good Friday, when the Earl did off his armor, and in secret meditations
visited religious places barefooted, they laid for him, took him as a
rebel, 1^04.
and shipped him into England the next way, where he was adjudged to perpetual
prison: Sentleger adds in his collections that Lacy paid the Traitors their
money, and then immediately hanged them.

This Courcye translated the Church and Prebendaryes of the Trinity in Down,
to an Abbey of black Monks brought thither from Chester, and the same did
hallow to S. Patricke, for which alteration of the name of God to his servant,
he deemed himself justly punished.

Not long after (as say the Irish) certain French knights came to King John's
Court, and one of them asked the combat for trial of the Duchy of Normandy. It
was not thought expedient to jeopard the title upon one man's luck, yet the
challenge they determined to answer: some friend put them in mind of the
Earl imprisoned, a Warrior of noble courage, and in pitch of body like a
giant. King John demanded Courcye whether he would be content to fight in
his quarrel: Not for thee (said the Earl) whose person I esteem not worthy
the adventure of my blood, but for the Crown and dignity of the Realm,
wherein many a good man lives against thy will. The words were happily taken
without dudgen, as proceeding from stomach, and from one counted more plain
then wise.

Courcye therefore being cherished to the field, and refreshed with diet, fed
so wonderfully after his hard keeping, that the French Challenger took him for
a monster, and privily stale into Spain. Then was the Earl enlarged, and
crossed the seas toward Ireland, fifteen times, evermore beaten back to the
shore, went thence into France to change the coast, and there dyed: after
whose decease without heirs of his body, the Earldom of Vlster was
entirely bestovved upon Hugh de Lacye for his good service. Hugh de Lacy Earl
of Vlster.


In Ireland remained one of the Courcyes, Lord of Rathenny and Kilbarrock,
whom as a spy of all their practices, and an informer thereof to the King,
Walter and Hugh the sons of Hugh had slain, and great seditions raised,
bearing themselves after the decease of their father for Governors out of
check. King John enters Ireland the second time. Anno 1210. Stow.
To settle the Realm of Ireland, King John brought thither a maine Army,
banished the Lacyes, subdued the remanents, took pledges, punished
malefactors, established the execution of English Laws, coined money of like
value current sterling in both Realms. The two Lacyes repentant of their
follyes and tyrannies, fled into France, dispoyled of sumptuous apparel, and
unknown, meekely they served in Saint Taurines Abbey, as gardners, until the
Abbot by their countenance and behavior, began to smell their estates, and
pressed them so far, that they detected their offenses, and the due desert of
much harder chastisement, eftsoone beseeching the Abbot to keep their
counsels, who commending their humilities, yet advising them to lay hold
upon their Princes favor, if it might be had, labored the King his familiar
and godsip earnestly for their pardons and obtained it.

Each of them were fined, Walter at 4000. and Hugh at 2500. marks, and
restored him to the Lordship of Meth, this to the Earldom of Vlster: King
John made his Vicegerent, and returned home, subdued the Welchmen, met with
Pandulphus the Legate of Innocentius the third, who came to release him of the
sentence wherein he stood excommunicate for his spoil and extortion of Church
goods, to whom being the Popes Attorney, he made a personal surrender of both
his Realms in way of submission, and after his assoylement, received them
again: some add that he gave away his Kingdom to the Sea of Rome, for him
and his successors, recognizing, to hold the same of the Popes in fee, Polid.
lib. 15.
paying yearly therefore one thousand marks, and in them three hundred for
Ireland. Blundus says, Centum pro utroque auri marchas. Sir Thomas Moore, a
man in that calling and office likely to sound the matter to the depth, writes
precisely, that neither any such writing the Pope can show, nor were it
effectual if he could. How far forth, In the supplication of soul*
and with what limitation a Prince may or may not addict his Realm feodary to
another, John Mayor a Scottish Chronicler, and a Sorbonist, not unlearned,
partly scanneth, who thinks 300. marks for Ireland a very hard pennyworth.
The instrument which our English Chronicle rehearses, Fabian.
might happily be motioned and drawn, and then dye unratified, although the copy
of that record continue: But certain it is, that his successors never paid
it, and thereto assenteth John Bale in his Apology against vows.

To John Comin Founder of S. Patrickes Church, succeeded Henry Lounders in the
Archbishops See of Divelin, 1212.
who builded the kings Castle there, being Lord Chief Justice of Ireland, him
they nicknamed (as the Irish do commonly give additions to their Governors in
respect of some fact or quality) Scorch villain, Henry Scorchbill Lord
Justice.
and Burnebill, because he required to peruse the writings of his Tenants,
colourably pretending to learn the kind of each man's several tenure, and
burned the same before their faces, causing them either to renew their estates,
or to hold at will. In the fourth year of King John's reign, was founded the
Abbey of Dowske, in the sixth, the Abbey of Wethny in the County of Limericke,
by Theobald le Butler, Lord of the Carricke, and in the twelfth, Richard Tute
builded the Monastery of Granard.

CAP. IIII. Henry the third, and Edward the first.
^228.
AFter the death of Lownders, Henry the third (informed of the Truth and good
service done by the Geraldines ever since their first arryvall in the Country)
made Morris Fitz Gerald the son of Morris aforesaid Lord Justice. Morice
Fitz Gerald, Lord Justice.


To him sent Edward the Prince, surnamed Longshanke, for assistance and power
of men against the Welsh Rebels, who leaving Warders in the Castle of
Sligaghe, by him lately founded, together with Phelim Oconnor, and a lusty band
of soldiers met the king at Chepstovv, returned victoriously, and by this
means increased favor, and streightway they two joining with Cormack mac
Dermot, Mac Rory, made a noble hosting upon Odonill the Irish enemy that
invaded and grieved the Kings subjects of Vlster, when Lacy was once dead.

Odonill being vanquished, the Lord Justice forced pledges and Trowages of
Oneale, to keep the Kings peace, and diverse other exploytes did he during
his time of government, which in particular rehearses Flatsbury in his notes
collected for Gerald Fitz Gerald, Earl of Kildare, Anno 1517.

To him succeeded in office Sir John Fitz Geffrey knight, 124^. 1259^ 1260.
1261.
Geffrey Allan de la Zowche, whom Earl Warren slew, to Zowch, Stephen de
longa spata, who slew Oneale in the streets of Down, and there dyed. Him
followed William Den, in whose time Mac Cartye played the devil in Desmond,
and to Den, Richard Capell, who envyed the Geraldines, and was of them taken
prisoner, together with Theobald le Butler, and Miles Cogan. The king took up
the variance, and discharged Den, preferring David Barrye to his room, 1267^
126^. 1270.
who tamed the insolency of Morris Fitz Morris, cousin germane to Fitz
G^rald: upon Barrye came Vfford, upon Vfford, James Audeley, who dyed of a fall
from his horse in Thomond: and then for the time Fitz Morris governed, till
the king sent over Sir Ieffrey de Genevill, newly returned in pilgrimage from
the Holy Sepulture: Him called home again Edward the first, in the fourth
year of his reign, and sent in his stead Robert Vfford the second time, who
made his Vicegerent, Friar Fulborne, Bishop of Waterford, and resumed his
charge at his next arryvall into Ireland.

At this time the city of Divelin was miserably wasted with fire, 1280.
Divelin fired.
and the Bell-house of Christ's Church utterly defaced, which the citizens
before they repaired their private harms jointly came to succor, and
collections made to redress the ruins of that ancient building first begun by
the Danes, Records of Christ Church.
as I find in a monument of that foundation, continued by Sitricus; Prince of
Divelin, at the motion of Donate, then Bishop, and dedicated to the Blessed
Trinity, finished by Richard Earl Strangbow, Fitz Stephens, and S. Laurence
the Archbishop, It was first a Priory and Canons, now Deane and Chapter*
and his four successors, John of Evesham, Henry Scorchbill, Lord Justice, and
Lucas, and lastly by John de S. Paul, which work at the decay by fire, and
since, many devout citizens of Divelin have beautified.

The same Strongbowes Tomb spoiled by fall of the roof, Sir Henry Sidney Lord
Deputy, restores at this present, who has also given a sightly countenance to
the Quire, by doing cost upon the Earl of Kildares Chapel, Cap. Randolfe,
over against the which he has left a monument of Captain Randolfe, late
Colonel of Vlster, Valiantly dead in that service, John Samford Archbishop of
Divelin Lord Justice, William Vescy Lord Justice, who pursued Omalaghli^n king
of Meth, that soon after was slain.

^^87.
The Souldan of Babylon determined to vex the Christians cities of the East*
Tripolis, Tyrus, Berinthus, Sidon, Ptolemais, now parts of Turkey, whom to
redeem, and with their helps to get again the Holy Land, Edward the first
had four years past obtained by license of Mar^in the fourth, and by
confirmation o^ Honorius his successor, Blundus lib. ^.
the whole tenth of all ecclesiastical revenues in Ireland for 7. years,
vvhereafter follovved a fifteen of the Temporalty: And the same year John
Baliol Earl of Galvvay, founded Baliol College in Oxford, made his homage to
King Edward for his Kingdom of Scotland, and to the Lord Justice for his
Earldom of Ireland.

1281.
Vescey was a stern man, and full of courage, but rash and impudent of his
tongue: he convented before him, John Earl of Kildare, and charged him with
riots and vagaryes unseasonable, for that he ranged with his men abroad, and
preyed upon private enemies inordinatly, for malice and grudge, not for
advancement of the public weal: whom the Earl as impatient as the other,
1294.
ansvvered thus: By your honor and mine, my Lord, and by king Edwards hand,
you would if you durst, appeach me in plain terms of ^elony: for whereas I
have the title, and you the fleece of Kildare, I wot well how great an eye sore
I am in your sight, who if I could be hansomely trussed up for a fellon, then
might my young Master your son, become a Gentleman: Justice, Gentleman (quoth
he) thou proud Earl, the Vescyes were gentlemen, before Kildare was an
Earldom, and before the Welsh bankrupt thy Cousin feathered his Nest in
Leinster. But seeing thou dare me, I will surely break thy heart, and with
that word he called the Earl a notorious thief and murderer. Then followed
clattering of swords by Soldiers on both parties, until either side appeased
his own, and the Lord Justice leaving his Lieutenant William Hay, sped over
to the King, whom immediately followed the Earl, and as fast as Vescey charged
Kildare with felony, no less did Kildare appeach the Justice of high treason,
and in trial thereof he asked the Combat. But when the listes royal were
provided, Vescey was slipped away into France, and so disherited of all his lands
in the county of Kildare, which were bestowed upon the Earl of Kildare and his
heirs for ever.

The Earl waxed insolent upon this success, and squared with diverse Nobles
English and Irish of the Land, he took prisoner, Richard Earl of Vlster, and
him detained until the Parliament then assembled at Kilkenny, commanded his
delivery, and for that unrulinesse, disseised the Geraldines of the Castle of
Sligagh, and of all his lands in Connaght.

William Dodding^ale Lord Justice. 1294.
This year for the defense of Wales, and commodity of Passengers, to and from
Ireland, the King did coast upon the Isle of Anglisey, called the mother of
Wales, and builded there the castle de bello marisco, or Bewmarishe. Thomas
Fitz Morice Lord Justice.

John VVogan Lord Justice pacified the former strife, Bewmarishe.
12^6.
between Vlster and Kildare, and all the Geraldines, with their associats,
together with Theobald Lord Butler, gathered strength of men, and met the kings
army before Edinburgh, wan the City, slew 25. thousand Scots, hampred John
Baliol king of the Scots, in such sort, 1299*
that glad and feign was he to renew his homage.

CAP. V. Edward the second.
1307.
THomas Fitz Morice Lord Justice.

I will begin this Chapter with the modesty of a good Clerk, Richard Havering
who five years by dispensation had received the fruits and revenues of the
Bishopric of Divelin, and long might have done, had he been so disposed. But
now feeling in sleep a weight upon his stomach, heavyer to his weening then
any mass of metal, whereof to be released he vowed in his dream, all that
ever he could make in this world: Suddenly the next morn, resigned the
custodium of the Bishopric, and contented himself with other ecclesiastical
cures incident to his vocation. Templers. 1.
The same year was the bane of the Templers in Ireland, to whom succeeded the
Knights of the Rhodes. This profession began at Jerusalem, by certain
Gentlemen that kept their abode next to the Temple there, who till the Council
of Creetz increased not above the number of nine. Ty^. l. 12. c. 7.
But thenceforth in little more then fifty years, being enriched by
contribution of all Christian Realms, every where their houses were erected
and endowed bountifully: they grew to 300. Knights of the order and into
inferior brethren innumerable. But with ease and wealth they declined now to
such intolerable deformities of life and other superstitious errors, Ga^uin
hist. Gal. l. 7.
nothing less regarding then the purpose of this their foundation, that the
general Council assembled at Vienna, Tom. 3 Con^.
disanulled the same for ever. And thereupon as in other countries so in
Ireland, they confessed the public fame of their enormities, and themselves
culpable, their persons they yielded to perpetual penance, their lands were
given (though with some difficulty) to the Knights of S. John's hospital at
Jerusalem, who since then for recovering the Island of Rhodes from the Saracens,
Plat. in Clem. 5 charge them with treason against the Christians.
became famous, and multiplied much more honorably then did the Templers. Of
this latter foundation was the priory of S. John's at Kilmaynam besides Divelin.
1309.


John Decer Major of Divelin builded the high Pype there, John Decer.
and the Bridge over the Liffy, toward S. Wolstans, and a chapel of our Lady
at the Friar minors, where he lies buried, repaired the Church of the Friars
preachers, and every friday tabled the Friars at his own costs.

In absence of VVogan, Sr William Burcke was Lord Warden of Ireland, to whom
King Edward reco^mended Pierce of Gavestone the disquieter of all the nobility
in England, Pierce of Gavestone. S^ow.
a companion to the King in vice, bolstered up by the King so peremptorily
against the will of his Council, that whereas the said Pierce was by them
exiled, Edward sent him now into Ireland with much honor and many Jewels,
assigning him the commodities royal of that Realm, which bred some bickering
between the Earl of Vlster Sir Richard Burke, and Gavestone, who
notwithstanding bought the hearts of the Soldiers with his liberality,
subdued Obrene, edified sundry Castles, cawswayes, and bridges, but within
three years he retired from Flaunders, into England, where the nobles besieged
him at Scarborough and smit off his head.

John VVogan Lord Justice, summoned a Parliament at Kilkenny, where wholesome
laws were ordained, 1311.
but never executed: There fell the Bishops in argument about their
Jurisdictions and in especial the Archbishop of Divelin forbad the Primate of
Ardmagh to lift up his crosyer within the province of Leinster. In ratifying of
which privilege I have seen the copy of Pope Honorius Bull exemplified among
the records of S. Patricks Church, shortly after Rowland Joyce, then Primate,
stale by night in his pontificals from Howth to the priory of Gracedieu, where
the Archbishops servants met him, and violently chased him out of all the
diocese. This Archbishop was named John Aleeke, after whose death were elected
in scisme and division of sides, two successors, Thorneburgh Lord Chancellor,
and Bignore Treasurer of Ireland. The Chancellor to strengthen his election,
hastily went to sea, and perished by shipwreck, the other submitting his cause
to the process of law tarryed at home, and sped.

Theobald de Verdon Lord Justice. Six thousand Scots fighting men, under the
conduct of Edward Bruise brother to Robert King of Scotland, 1313. 1314.
also the Earl Murray, John Menteith, John Steward, and others landed in the
north of Ireland, joined with the Irish, and conquered Vlster, gave the
Englishmen three notable overthrowes, crowned the said Bruise King of Ireland,
burned Churches and Abbeyes, with all the people found therein, men, women, and
children. Then was Sir Edmund Butler chosen Lord Justice, 1315.
who combined the Earl of Vlster, and the Geraldines in friendship, himself
with Sir John Mandevill, and preserved the rest of the Realm.

In the neck of these troubles, arose four Princes of Connaght, to impair
and scatter the English force. But then the Burckes and the Berninghams
discomfited and slew the number of eleaven thousand besides Athenry. To Sir
Richard Berningham belonged a lusty young swayne, John Hussee.
John Hussee, whom his Lord commanded to take a view of the dead carcasses
about the walls, and bring him word whether Okelly his mortal foe were slain
among them. Hussee passed forth with one man to turn up and peruse the bodies.
All this marked Okelly, who lurking in a bush thereby, being of old time well
acquainted with the valiantnes and truth of Hussee, sore longed to train him
from his Captain, and presuming now upon this opportunity, The words of
Okelly.
disclosed himself and said* Hussee, thou see I am at all points armed, and
have my Esquire, a manly man, besides me, thou art thin and thy page a
youngling so that if I loved not thee for thine own sake, I might betray thee
for thy Masters. But come and serve me at my request, and I promise thee by S.
Patrickes staff, to make thee a Lord in Connaght, of more ground, then thy
Master has in Ireland. When these words waighed him nothing, his own man (a
stout lubber) began to reprove him, for not relenting to so rich a proffer,
assured him with an oath, whereupon he proffered to gage his soul for
performance. Now had Hussee three enemies, and first he turned to his own
knave, and him he slew, next he raught to Okellyes Squire a great rappe under
the pit of his ear, which overthrew him* Thirdly he bestirred himself so
nimbly that ere any help could be hoped for, he had also slain Okelly, and
perceiving breath in the Squire, he drawed him up again, and forced him, upon
a truncheon to bear his Lords head into the high town, which presented to
Bermingham, and the circumstances declared, he dubbed Hussee Knight and him
advaunced to many preferments, whose family became afterward Barons of
Galtrime. While the Scots were thus matched, Robert de Bruise King of Scots,
took shore at Cragsergus, to assist his brother, whose Soldiers committed
sacrilege and impiety, against Monasteries, Tombs, Altars, Virgins, robbed
Churches of all their plate and ornaments. They of Vlster, sent to the Lord
Justice pitiful supplication, for aid in this misery, who delivered them the
Kings power and standerd, wherewith under pretense to expel the Scots, they
raunged through the country with more grievance and vexation to the subjects,
then did the strangers. Le Bruise proceeded and spoiled Cashell, and
wheresoever he lighted upon the Butlers lands, those he burned and destroyed
unmercifully. By this time had the Lord Justice, 1317.
and Thomas Fitz John Earl of Kildare, Richard de Clare, and Arnold de Powere,
This is of some called the first Earl of Kildare^
Baron of Donoile, furnished and armed thirty thousand men ready to set
forward. Then came news that William de Burgo the Earls brother was taken by
the Scots, whereof the Irish of Vlster imboldened with the presence of the
Scottish Army, and with the late discomfiture which Earl Richard Burcke
sustained at Coins, denied their alleagiance openly, and conspired in the
behalf of Edward le Bruise, whom they proclaimed King. The Lord Justice had
assembled such force against them, under the leading of the Geraldines and
Poweres, that each of them was thought sufficient, by himself to win the
field. But suddenly the two Captains, and their adherents squared, so as no
good conclusion might be inferred: Roger Mortimer, trusting by their discention
to imbeazell a victory, Mortimer^
culled out fifteen thousand Soldiers, and met the Scots at Kenles, where he
was shamefully foiled, his men (as folk supposed) wilfully forsaking him, and
bearing false hearts. Up start the Irish of Mounster at these news, the
Ocooles, Obrines, and Omores, and wasted with fire and sword from Arkloe to
Leix; with them coped the Lord Justice and made a great slaughter, fourscore
of their heads were set upon Divelin Castle.

Edward Bruise reigns in Vlster.
The mean while Edward Bruise reigned in Vlster, held his courts, pronounced
his enemies traitors, abandoned the English blood, exhorted the Irish of
Leinster to do the like, whereupon Donald the son of Arthur Mac Morrow,
Donald son of Arthur Mac Murrowe.
a slip of the royal family, displayed his banner within two miles of Divelin,
but him Traherone took prisoner, sent him to the castle of Dublin, whence he
escaped, slyding down from the Turret, by a cord that one Adam Maugle brought
him. The said Maugle was drawn and hanged.

1317.
Roger Mortimer Lord Justice pacified the displeasure, between Richard Earl
of Vlster, and the Nobles that had put the said Earl under surety, misdeeming
him of certain riots committed against the kings subjects, whereby the Scots
caught strength and courage, whose ravening, caused such horrible scarcity in
Vlster, that the Soldiers which in the year before abused the Kings
authority, to purvey themselves of wanton fare, surfeited with flesh and
aquavitae all the Lent long, prolled and pilled insatiably without need, and
without regard of poor people, whose only provision they devoured: Famine
horrible.
Those (I say) now living in slavery under Le Bruise, starved for hunger, when
they had first experienced many lamentable shifts, as in scratching the dead
bodies out of their graves, in whose skulls they boiled the same flesh, and fed
thereof. Mortymer went over to the King indebted to the Citizens of Divelin for
his viands, a thousand pounds, whereof he paid not one smulkin, and many a
bitter curse carried with him to the sea.

1318.
William Archbishop of Cashell Lord Chancellor was left Lord Warden of
Ireland, in whose time Bermingham aforesaid being general of the field, and
under him Captains, Tute, Verdon, Tripton, Sutton, Cusacke and Manpas, led
forth the Kings power against Edward Bruise, pitching by Dundalke, the Primate
of Ardmagh personally accompanying our soldiers, blessing their enterprise,
and assoyling them all, ere ever they began to encounter. The Scots vanquished.
In this conflict the Scots were vanquished full and whole, 2000. slain, and
Manpas that pressed into the throng to meet with Bruise, was found in the
search, dead, covering the dead body of Bruise. Thus dissolved the Scottish
Kingdom in Ireland, and Bermingham sending his head to the King, received in
recompense the Earldom of Lowth, and to his heirs for ever the Barony of
Ardee, and Athenry.

Alexander Bigmore, Archbishop of Divelin, An. 1320.
sued to Pope John the 21. (so I reckon, omitting the scismaticke and dame
Ioane) for privilege of an University to be ordained in Divelin, which took
effect, University at Dublin.
and the first three Doctors of Divinity the said Bishop did create, William
Hardit a Friar preacher, Henry Coggy a Friar minor, Friar Edmund Kermerdin, and
one Doctor of the Canon law, William Rodiard Deane of S. Patricks, Chancellor
of the said University, who kept their terms and commencements solemnly,
neither was the same ever disfranchised, but only through variety of time
discontinued, and now since the subversion of monasteries, utterly extinct,
vvherin the Divines were cherished, and open exercise maintained. A motion
was made in this last Parliament to erect it again, contributions laid
together, Sir Henry Sidney then Lord Deputy, proffered 20. pound lands, and one
hundred pounds in money, others follovved after their abilities and devotions,
the name devised Master Acworth, Plantolinum of Plantagenet and Bullyne. But
while they disputed of a convenient place for it, and of other circumstances,
they let fall the principal.

Thomas Fitz John, Earl of Kildare, Lord Justice, to whom succeeded
Bermingham Earl of Lourh, 1321.
and to him Sir John Darcy. At this time lived in the Diocese of Ossorye, the
Lady Alice Kettle, whom the Bishop ascited to purge the fame of inchaunting
and Witchcraft objected to her, and to Petronilla, and Basil her accomplices.
Alice Kettle a Sorceresse.
They charged her mightily to have carnal conference with a spirit called
Robin Artison, to whom she sacrifized in the high way nine read Cocks, and
nine Peacockes eyes, she swept the streets of Kilkenny between compleere and
twilight, raking all the filth toward the doors of her son William
Outlawe, murmuring these words, To the house of William my son, hye all the
wealth of Kilkenny town. At the first conviction they abjured and accepted
penance, but were very shortly found in relapse, and then Petronilla was
burned at Kilkenny, the other twain could not be had: she at the hour of her
death, accused the said William as privy to their sorceryes, whom the Bishop
held in durance nine weeks, forbidding his keepers to eat or drink with him,
or to speak with him more then once in the day, by procurement of Arnold le
Power, then Senischall of Kilkenny he was delivered, and corrupted the
Senischall to vex the Bishop, which he did, thrusting him into prison for
three months. In ryfling the closet of Alice, they found a wafer of
Sacramental bread, having the devils name stamped thereon, in stead of JESUS,
and a pype of ointment, wherewith she greased a staff, whereon she ambled
through thick and thin, when and how she listed. This business troubled
all the Clergy of Ireland, the rather for that the Lady was supported by Noble
men: and lastly, conveyed into England, since which time no man wotteth what
became of her.

CAP. VI. Edward the third, and Richard the second.
13^7.
SCarcely was this business ended, but another devil possessed another
frantic gentleman of the nation of the O-tooles in Leinster, named Adam
Duffe, Adam Duffe^
who denied obstinately the Incarnation of Christ, the Trinity of persons in
unity of the Godhead, the resurrection of the flesh. He called the Holy
Scripture, a fable; the blessed Virgin, a whore; the Sea Apostolic,
erroneous; for which assertions he was burned in Hogging green besides
Divelin.

Roger Outlaw, Prior of S John's of Jerusalem at Kilmainam, 1^2^.
became Lord Justice. Great variance arising betvveene the Geraldines, Butlers,
and Berminghams on the one side, and the Powers and Burkes on the other side,
for tearming the Earl of Kildare a Rymer. The Lord Justice summoned a
Parliament to accord them, wherein he himself was feign to clear the slander
of heresy fathered upon him by Richard Ledred, Bishop of Ossory. The Bishop
had given a declaration against Arnold le Power, convented and convict in his
consistory of certain heretical opinions; but because the beginning of Powers
accusations concerned the Justices kinsman, and the Bishop was mistrusted to
prosecute his own wrong, and the person of the man, rather then the fault, a
day was limited for the justifying of the bill, the party being apprehended and
respited thereunto. This dealing, the Bishop (who durst not stir out of
Kilkenny, to prosecute his accusation) reputed partial; and when by means
thereof the matter hanged in suspense, he infamed the said Prior, as an
abbettour and favourer of Arnolds heresy. The Prior submitted himself to the
trial, and three several Proclamations were cried in Court, that any man
might lawfully come in and indict, The Lord Justice cleared of a slander^
accuse or say evidence against the Justice: none came: then passed the
Council a decree, commanding to appear at Divelin, all Bishops, Abbots,
Pryors, the Majors of Divelin, Cork, Limericke, Waterford, Droghedah, the
Sheriffs, Knights, and Senischalls of every shire. Out of them all they sorted
six Inquisitours, which in secrecy examined the Bishops and persons
aforesaid one by one, who with universal consent deposed for the Pryor, that
to their judgments he was a zealous and faithful child of the Catholic
Church. The mean while deceased le Power prisoner in the Castle, and because
he stood unpurged, long he lay unburyed.

Sir John Darcye Lord Justice.

The Irish of Leinster made insurrections, 1229.
so did Magoghigan in Meth, and Obrien in Mounster, whom William Earl of
Vlster, and James of Ormond vanquished. In which stir, William Bermingham, a
warrior incomparable, was found halting, and was condemned to dye by Roger
Outlawe, Pryor of Kilmainam, Bermingham hanged.
then Lieutenant to the Lord Justice, and so hanged was he, a Knight among
thousands odd and singular. So outrageous were the Leinster Irish that in one
Church they burned 80. innocent souls, asking no more but the life of their
Priest then at Mass, whom they notwithstanding sticked with their savelins,
spurned the blessed Sacrament, and wasted all with fire, neither forced they
the Popes interdiction, nor any censures ecclesiastical denounced against
them: But maliciously persevered in that fury, till the Citizens of Weixford
tamed them, slew four hundred in one skirmish, the rest flying, were all
drenched in the water of Slane.

1335^
Thomas Burgh Treasurer and Lieutenant of Ireland, while Darcy Lord Justice
pursued the murderers of William Bourk Earl of Vlster, a young gentleman of
twenty years old, whom the seditions of Maundevill murdered besides
Cragfergus. And when he had scourged those Traitors, he entered Scotland
with an army and might have possessed the Islands besides, had they been vvorth
the keeping, into which Islands besides him and Sussex the late Lieutenant of
Ireland no Governor ever yet adventured. Darcye and Sussex.


1337.
Sir John Carleton Lord Justice, with whom came his brother Thomas Bishop of
Hereford, Lord Chauncellor, and John Rice Treasurer, and two hundred Welchmen
soldiers. The Bishop became Lord Justice, 1338.
in whose time all the Irish of Ireland were at defiance with the English,
but were shortly calmed by the Earls of Kildare and Desmond.

Sir John Darcy by the Kings Letters Patents Lord Justice of Ireland during
life, in the fourteenth year of Edward the third, which king abused by some
corrupt informers, called in under his signet royal, 1340.
fraunchises, and liberties, and graunts whatsoever his predecessors had
ratified to the Realm of Ireland, and to every person thereof. This revocation
was taken very displeasantly.

The English of birth, The first notable dissension of the English in Ireland.
and the English of blood falling to words, and divided in factions about it.
The Irish lay waiting for the contention, so as the Realm was even upon point
to give over all and rebel. For remedy the Justice began a Parliament at
Divelin, whereto the nobles refused to make appearance, and assembled themselves
quietly without disturbance at Kilkenny, where they with the Commons agreed
upon certain questions to be demanded of the King by way of supplication, by
which questions they partly signified their griefs: Those in effect were,

1. How a Realm of war might be governed by one, both unskilful and unable
in all warlike service.

2. How an officer under the king that entered very poor, might in one year
grow to more excessive wealth, then men of great patrimony in many years.

3. How it happened seeing they all were called Lords of their own, that the
Lord of them all was not a penny the richer for them.

The Prince of this repining was Morice Earl of Desmond, whom Vfford the now
Lord Justice in pain of forfeiture of all his lands commanded to the
Parliament at Dublin, 1345.
and there put him under arrest, delivered him by main prise of the two Earls
Vlster and Ormond, and of 28. knights and squiers: All which, except the
Earls and two knights, lost their inheritance by rigor of the said Vfford,
because Desmond had escaped.

Therefore at the decease of the Lord Justice, which ensued the next year,
Bonfires and gavvdes were solemnized in all the Land: his Lady was a
miserable sott, and led him to extortion and bribery, much he clipped the
prerogatives of the Church, and was so hated, that even in the sight of the
country, he was robbed without rescue, by MacCarty, notvvithstanding he
gathered power, and dispersed the rebellions of Vlster.

Robert Darcy Lord Justice, chosen by the Council, 1346.
until the Kings charter came to Sir John Fitz Morris, who enlarged Fitz
Thomas Earl of Kildare, left in hold by Vfford, Fitz Morris was deposed,
and Sir Walter Bermingham elected, who procured safe conduct for Desmond to
plead his right before the King, where he was liberally entreated and allowed
toward his expenses there twenty shillings a day at the Princes charge, in
consideration of which courtesy to his kinsman, the Earl of Kildare,
accompanied with diverse Lords, Knights, and chosen horsemen, served the King
at Callice, a town thought impregnable, and returned after the winning thereof
in great pomp and jollity.

John Archer of Kilmainam, Lieutenant to the Lord Justice, to whom succeeded
Baron Carew, 1348.
Bar. Carew.
after Carew followed Sir Thomas Rokesby knight.

1350.
This year dyed Kemvricke Shereman, sometimes Major of Divelin, Sherman Major
of Divelin.
a Benefactour to every Church and religious house twenty miles round about the
city: his legacies to poor and others, besides the liberality showed in his
life time, amounted to 3000. marks: with such plenty were our fathers blessed,
that cheerfully gave of their true winnings to needful purposes, whereas our
time that gains excessively, and whineth at every farthing to be spent on the
poor, is yet oppressed with scarcity and beggary.

Sir Robert Savage.
The same time dvvelled in Vlster Sir Robert Savage, a vvealthie Knight, who
the rather to preserve his own, began to wall and fortify his Manor
houses, with castles and pyles against the Irish enemy, exhorting his heir
Sir Henry Savage, to intend that Work so beneficial for himself and his
posterity. Father (quoth he) I remember the Proverb, better a Castle of bones,
then of stones, where strength and courage of valiant men are to help us.
Never will I, by the grace of God, cumber my self with dead vvalls, my fort
shall be wheresoever young bloods be stirring, and where I find room to
fight. The father in a fume let lie the building, and forsvvore it. But yet the
want thereof, and such like, has been the decay asvvell of the Savages, as
of all the English Gentlemen in Vlster, as the lack of vvalled towns is also
the principal occasion of the rudeness and wildenesse in other parts of
Ireland. This Savage having prepared an army against the Irish, allowed to
every Soldier before he buckled with the enemy, a mighty draught of
Aquavitae, Wine, or old Ale, and killed in provision for their return,
beeffes, venison, and foul great plenty, which diverse of his Captains
misliked, and considering the success of war to be uncertain, esteemed it
better policy to poison the cates or to do them away, then to cherish a sort
of Catives with princely food: If ought should happen to themselves in this
adventure of so few, against so many. Hereat smyled the Gentleman and said:
Tush ye are too full of envy, this world is but an Inn whereunto you have no
special interest, but are only tennants at the will of the Lord. If it please
him to command us from it, as it were from our lodging, and to set other good
fellows in our rooms, what hurt shall it be for us to leave them some meat
for their suppers, let them hardly win it, and wear it, If they enter our
dwellings, good manners would no less but to welcome them, with such fare as
the country breeds, and with all my heart much good may it do them:
Notwithstanding I presume so far upon your noble courage, that verily my
mind gives me, that we shall return at night, and banquet our selves with
our own store, and so they did, having slain 3000. Irishmen.

Morris Fitz Thomas Earl of Desmond, 1356.
Lord Justice during life, whom followed Sir Thomas Rokesbye a knight, sincere
and upright of conscience, who being controlled for suffering himself to be
served in wooden Cups; Answered, these homely Cups and dishes pay truly
for that they contain, I had rather drink out of wood, and pay gold and
silver, then drink out of gold, and make wooden payment.

Almericus de Sancto Amando, James Butler Earl of Ormond, 1357.
and Morris Fitz Thomas Earl of Kildare, 1359.
Justices of Ireland by turns. To this last, the Kings letters appointed in
yearly fee, for his office 500. pounds, 1360.
with promise that the said governor should find twenty great horse to the
field, and should be the twentieth man in going out against the enemy, which
allowance and conditions at these days, I think were ordinary.

1361.
Leonell the third son of Edward the third Duke of Clarence, Leonell Duke of
Clarence.
and in the right of his wife, Earl of Vlster, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. He
published an inhibition, to all of Irish birth, that none of them should
approach his army, nor be employed in service of the wars. Obrene he
vanquished suddenly, but no man wist how, an hundred of his principal
Soldiers in garrison were missed, whose dispatch, that seditious decree was
thought to have procured, wherefore he advised himself and united the people,
showing alike fatherly care toward them all, and ever after prospered, Knights
he created these Gentlemen, the worthiest then in Chivalry, and at this day
continuing in great worship, Preston, now the house of Gormanstowne, Holywood,
Talbot, Cusacke, Delahide, Patricke, Robert and John de Fraxinis. The exchequer
he removed to Catherlagh, and bestowed in furnishing that town 500. pounds.

Gerald Fitz Morice Earl of Desmond, Lord Justice, until the coming of
William de Windsor, 1367. 1369. 1377.
Lieutenant to the King, then in the last year of Edward the third ruling the
realm, under the name of Lord Governor, and keeper of Ireland.

At the year 1370. all the Notes written by Flatsbury do end, and from hence
to this day, nothing is extant orderly gathered, the rest I have collected out
of sundry monuments, authorityes, and pamphlets.

During the reign of Richard the second, Lieutenants and Justices of Ireland,
Records of the exchequer fought up by M. John Thomas remembrancer. John Stow.
Records of excheq. an. 9. Rich. 2.
are specially recorded, the two Mortimers, Edmund and Roger Earls of March,
Phillip Courtney the kings cousin, James Earl of Ormond, and Robert Vere Earl
of Oxford, Marquess of Divelin, and Lord Chamberlain, who was created Duke of
Ireland by Parliament, and was credited with the whole Dominion of the Realm
by grant for term of life, 1385.
nothing paying therefore, passing all writs, all offices, as Chancellor,
Treasurer, Chief Justice, Admiral, his own Lieutenant, and other inferior
charges under his own Test.

1394.
The mean while King Richard afflicted impatiently with the decease of Queen
Anne his wife, nor able without many tears to behold his palaces, and
chambers of Estate, which represented unto him the solace past, and doubled his
sorrow, sought some occasion of business and visited Ireland, where diverse
Lords and Princes of Vlster renewed their homage, and he placing Roger Mortimer
his Lieutenant, returned quietly, but within four years after, informed of
the traiterous death of Mortimer, whom he loved entirely, and being wonderful
eager in hastening the revenge thereof upon the Irish, he journeyed thither the
second time, levied infinite subsidies of money, by penal exactions, and with
his absence as also with those injuries, 1399*
fed the hatred and opportunity of conspiratours at home, for Henry Duke of
Lancaster, intercepted the Kingdom, whose son with the Duke of Glocesters
son, King Richard shut up in the Castle of Trim, and then shipped course into
England, took land at Milford Haven, found his defense so weak and unsure,
that to avoid further inconvenience and peril of himself and his friends, he
condiscended to resign the Crown.

CAP. VII. The house of Lancaster, Henry the fourth, Henry the fifth, Henry the
sixth.
ALexander Bishop of Meth, Lieutenant of Ireland, under Thomas Lancaster the
Kings brother, 1329.
Records of Exch.
so was also the worshipful Knight Sir Stephen Scroope, whom for his violence
and extortion before used, in the same office under King Richard, the common
voice and outcry of poor people damned. James Young in precepts of
government to the Earl of Ormond cap. 5
This report hearing the Lady his wife, she would in no wise assent to live in
his company there, but if he swear a solemn oath on the Bible, that wittingly
he should wrong no Christian creature in the land, that duly and truly he
should see payment made for all expenses, and hereof, she said, she had made a
vow to Christ so deliberately, that unless it were on his part firmly
promised, she could not without peril of her soul go with him: her husband
assented, and accomplished her boon effectually, recovered a good opinion,
schooled his Caters, enriched the country, continued a plentiful house,
remissions of great fines, remedies for persons endamaged to the Prince,
pardons of lands and lives he granted so charitably and discreetely, that his
name was never uttered among them, without many blessings and prayers, and so
cheerfully they served him against the Irish, that in one day he spoiled
Arthur Mac Murrough, brent his country, restored O-Carrol to the town of
Callane, withheld by Walter Burke, slew a multitude of Kerneghes, and quieted
Leinster. Not long before, the Major of Divelin John Drake, 1402.
with his band out of the City, had slain of the same Irish Outlawes 400.

In this Kings reign the inhabitants of the county and town of Cork, Records
of Ch^ist-Church in Divelin.
being tired with perpetual oppressions of their Irish borderers, complained
themselves in a general writing, directed to the Lord of Rutheland and Cork,
the Kings Deputy, and to the Council of the Realm, then assembled at Divelin,
which Letter because it opens the decay of those parts, and the state of the
Realm in times past, I have thought good to enter here as it was delivered me,
by Francis Agard Esquire, one of her Majesty's privy Council in Ireland.

A letter from Cork coppied out of an old Record bearing no date.
It may please your wisdoms, to have pity of us the Kings poor subjects,
within the county of Cork, or else we be cast away for ever, for where there
was in this county these Lords by name, besides Knights, Esquiers, Gentlemen,
and Yeoman, to a great number, that might dispend yearly 800. pounds, 600.
pounds, 400. pounds, 200. pounds, 100. pounds, 100. marks, 20. pounds, 20.
marks, 10. pounds, some more, some less, to a great number, besides these
Lords following.

First the Lord Marquess Caro his yearly revenues was, besides Dorzey Haven
and other Creekes, 2200. pounds sterling.

The Lord Barnevale of Bearehaven, his yearly revenues was, beside Bearehaven
and other Creekes, 1600. pounds sterling.

The Lord Vggan of the great Castle, his yearly revenues was, besides havens
and creekes, 1300. pounds sterling.

The Lord Balram of Emforte, his yearly revenues was, besides havens and
creekes, 1300. pounds sterling.

The Lord Courcy of Kilbretton his yearly revenues, besides havens and
creekes, 1500. pounds sterling.

The Lord Mandevil of Barrenstelly his yearly revenues, besides havens and
creekes, 1200. pounds sterling.

The Lord Arundell of the strand his yearly revenues, besides havens and
creekes, 1500. pounds sterling.

The Lord Baron of the Guard his yearly revenues, besides havens and creekes,
1100. pounds sterling.

The Lord Sleynie of Baltimore his yearly revenue, besides havens and creekes,
800 pounds sterling.

The Lord Roche of Poole-castle his yearly revenue, besides havens and
creekes, 1000. pounds sterling.

The Kings Majesty has the Lands of the late young Barry by forfeiture, the
yearly revenue whereof, besides two rivers and creekes, and all other
casualties is, 1800. pounds sterling.

And at the end of this Parliament Your Lordship with the Kings most noble
Council may come to Cork, and call before you all these Lords and other Irish
men, and bind them in pain of loss of life, lands and goods, that never any
of them do make war upon another, without license or commandment of you my
Lord Deputy, and the Kings Council, for the utter destruction of these parts,
is that only cause, and once all the Irish men, and the Kings enemies were
driven into a great valley, called Glanehought, betwixt two great mountains,
called Maccorte or the leprous Island, and their they lived long and many
years, with their white meat till at the last these English Lords fell at
variance among themselves, and then the weakest part took certain Irish men
to take his part, and so vanquished his enemy, and thus fell the English Lords
at variance among themselves, till the Irish men were stronger then they, and
drove them away and now have the whole country under them, but that the Lord
Roche, the Lord Courcy, and the Lord Barry only remain, with the least part
of their ancestors possessions, and young Barry is there upon the Kings
portion, paying his Grace never a penny Rent. Wherefore we the Kings poor
subjects, of the City of Cork, Kinsale, and Yowghall, desire your Lordship to
send hither two good Justices, to see this matter ordered, and some English
Captains, with twenty English men that may be Captains over us all, and we
will rise with them to redress these enormities, all at our own costs. And if
you do not, we be all cast away, and then farewell Mounster for ever. And if
you will not come nor send, we will send over to our Liege Lord, the King, and
complain on you all. Thus far the letter.

And at this day the City of Cork is so encumbred with unquiet neighbors of
great power, that they are forced to watch their gates continually, to keep
them shut at service times, at meals, from sun set, to sun arising; nor
suffer any stranger to enter there with his weapon, but to leave the same at a
lodge appointed. They walk out for recreation at seasons, with strength of men
furnished, they match in wedlock among themselves, so that welnigh the whole
city is allied together. It is to be hoped that the late sent over Lord
President of Mounster, Sir John Parrot, who has chosen the same place to abide
in, as having greatest need of a Governor resident, would ease the
inhabitants of this fear, and scourge the Irish Outlawes that annoy the whole
region of Mounster.

An. 1408.
Henry the 4. in the 10. year of his reign, gave the Sword to the City of
Divelin, which City was first governed, as appears by their ancient seal,
Register of Majors.
called, Signum propositurae, by a Provost, and in the 14. year of H. the 3.
by a Major, and two Bayliffes, which Bayliffes were changed into Sheriffs, by
Charter of Edward the 6. an. 1547. This Majorality both for state and charge of
that office, and for the bountiful hospitality exceeds any City in England,
except London. While Henry the 5. reigned, Records of Exch.
I find lieutenants and deputyes of Ireland specially remembered, John Talbott
of Hollamshire Lord of Furnyvall. Thomas de Lancaster, Senischa of England, and
Stephen le Scroope his Deputy, John Duke of Bedford then also Lord Keeper of
England, and the noble Earl of Ormond.

Sir James Butler, 1421.
whose grandsire was James surnamed the chaste, The chaste Earl of Ormond.
for that of all vices he most abhorred the sin of the flesh, and in
subduing of the same gave notable example. In the red Moore of Athye (the sun
almost lodged in the West, and miraculously standing still in his epicycle the
space of three hours till the feat was accomplished, James Young.
and no pit in that bogge annoying either horse or man on his part) he
vanquished Omore and his terrible Army with a few of his own, and with the
like number Arthur Mac Murrough, at whose might and puissance, all Leinster
trembled. In the translation of Cambrensis. c. ^7.
To the imitation of this man's worthiness, the compiler of certain precepts
touching the rule of a Commonwealth, exciteth his Lord the said Earl in
diverse places of that Work incidently, eftsoons putting him in mind that
the Irish been false by kind, that it were expedient, and a work of Charity
to execute upon them (wilful and malicious transgressors) the Kings Laws
somewhat sharply, Prec of government. c 27.
That Odempsye being winked at a while, abused that small time of sufferance,
to the injury of the Earl of Kildare, intruding unjustly upon the Castle of
Ley, from whence the said Deputy had justly expelled him, and put the Earl in
possession thereof, ca. 2^.
that notvvithstanding their oaths and pledges, yet they are no longer true
then they feel themselves the weaker.

This Deputye tamed the Obriens, the Burckes, ca. 41.
Mac-banons, Ogaghnraghte, Manus Mac Mahowne, all the Captains of Thomond, and
all this in three months. The Cleargye of Divelin twice every week in
solemn procession praying for his good success against these disordered
persons, which now in every quarter of Ireland, had degenerated to their old
trade of life, and repyned at the English.

Lieutenants and their deputyes* Records of ex^h^quer.
Lieutenants to Henry the sixth over the Realm of Ireland were Edmund Earl of
March, and James Earl of Ormond his Deputy, An. 7. An. 1^.
John Sutton Knight, Lord Dudley, and Sir Thomas Strange, his Deputy Sir Thomas
Standley, and Sir Christopher Plonket his Deputy Lion Lord Wells, and the
Earl of Ormond his Deputy, James Earl of Ormond, the Kings Lieutenant by
himself, An. 20. An. 22. An. 26.
John Earl of Shrewesbury, and the Archbishop of Divelin, Lord Justice in his
absence.

Richard Plantaginet, Duke of York, father of Edward the fourth, An. 27*
and Earl of Vlster, had the office of Lieutenant by letters Patents, Richard
Duke of York.
during the space of ten years, who deputed under him at several times, the
Baron of Delvin, Roland Fitz Eustace knight, James Earl of Ormond, and Thomas
Fitz Morris Earl of Kildare. To this Richard then resciant in Divelin, was
borne within the castle there, his second son George, Duke of Clarence,
afterward drowned in a butt of Malmsey: Records of Christ-church.
his god fathers at the font were the Earls of Ormond and Desmond.

Whether the commotion of Jack Cade an Irishman borne, naming himself
Mortimer, and so clayming cousinage to diverse noble houses, 1450.
Io. Ma. l. 6* c. 16
proceeded from this crew, it is uncertain: surely the Duke was thereof
vehemently mistrusted, and immediately began his tumults, which because our
English histories discourse at large, I omit as impertinent.

Those broils being couched for a time, Richard held himself in Ireland,
being lately by Parliament ordained Protector of the Realm of England, leaving
his agent in the Court his brother the Earl of Salisbury Lord Chancellor, to
whom he declared by letters, the trouble then toward in Ireland, 1458.
which letter exemplified by Sir Henry Sidney, Lord Deputy, a great searcher
and preserver of Antiquities, as it came to my hands, I think it convenient
here to set down.

To the right worshipful and with all my heart entirely beloved brother, the
Earl of Shrewesbury.
RIght worshipful and with all my heart entirely beloved Brother, I commend
me unto you as heartily as I can. The Letter.
And like it you to wit, that since I wrote last unto the King our sovereign
Lord his Highness, the Irish enemy, that is to say, Magoghigan, and with him
three or four Irish Captains, associate with a great fellowship of English
rebels, notwithstanding, that they were within the King our Sovereign Lord
his power, of great malice, and against all truth, have maligned against their
legiance, and vengeably have brent a great town of mine inheritance, in Meth,
called Ramore, and other villages thereabouts, and murdered and brent both men,
women and children, without mercy. The which enemies be yet assembled in woods
and forts, waiting to do the hurt and grievance to the Kings subjects that
they can think or imagine, for which cause I write at this time unto the Kings
Highness, and beseech his good grace for to hasten my payment for this land,
according to his letters of vvarrant, now late directed unto the Treasurer of
England, to the intent I may wage men in sufficient number, for to resist the
malice of the same enemies, and punish them in such wise, that other which
would do the same, for lack of resistance in time, may take example; for
doubtless, but if my payment be had in all haste, for to have men of war
in defense and safeguard of this Land, my power cannot stretch to keep it in
the Kings obeisance. And very necessity will compel me to come into England
to live there, upon my poor livelode, for I had lever be dead, then any
inconvenience should fall thereunto in my default; for it shall never be
chronicled, nor remain in scripture, by the grace of God, that Ireland was
lost by my negligence. And therefore I beseech you right worshipful brother,
that you will hold to your hands instantly, that my payment may be had at this
time, in eschuing all inconveniences, for I have example in other places, more
pity it is for to dread shame, and for to acquit my truth unto the Kings
Highness, as my duty is. And this I pray and exhort you good brother, to show
unto his good grace, and that you will be so good, that this language may be
enacted at this present Parliament for my excuse in time to come, and that you
will be good to my servant Roger Roe the bearer hereof, and to mine other
servants in such things as they shall pursue unto the kings Highness: And to
give full faith and credence unto the report of the said Roger, touching the
said matters Right worshipful, and with all my heart entirely beloved brother,
our blessed Lord God preserve and keep you in all honor, prosperous estate
and felicity, and grant you right good life and long. Written at Divelin the
15. of June.

Your faithful true brother, Richard York.


Of such power was Magoghigan in those days, who as he wan and kept it by the
sword, so now he lives but a mean Captain, yielding his winnings to the
stronger. This is the misery of lawless people, resembling the wydenesse of
the rude world, wherein every man was richer or poorer then other, as he
was in might and violence more or less enabled.

Here began factions of the nobility in Ireland, favoring diverse sides
that strived for the Crown of England, for Richard in those ten years of
government, exceedingly tied unto him the hearts of the noblemen and gentlemen
in this land, whereof diverse were scattered and slain with him at
Waterford, as the contrary part was also the next year by Edward Earl of
March, 1459.
the Dukes brother, at Mortimers cross in Wales, in which mean time the
Irish waxed hardye, and usurped the English Countries insufficiently
defended, 1460.
as they had done by like opportunity in the latter end of Richard the second.
These two seasons did set them so a-floate, that henceforwards they could never
be cast out from their forcible possessions, holding by plain wrong all
Vlster, and by certain Irish Tenures, no little portions of Mounster and
Connaght, left in Meth and Leinster, where the civil subjects of English blood
did ever most prevail.

CAP. VIII. Edward the fourth, and Edward his son. Richard the third, and
Henry the seventh. Ann Reg 1.

THomas Fitz Morice Earl of Kildare, Ann. D. 1460.
Lord Justice until the third year of Edward the fourth, since which time the
Duke of Clarence aforesaid, Duke of Clarence Lieutenant, and his Deputies. 4^
brother to the King, had the office of Lieutenant, while he lived, and made
his Deputies in sundry courses, Thomas Earl of Desmond, John Tiptoft, An. Reg.
^. An. Reg. 7. An. 10. An. 18.
Earl of Worcester the Kings cozen, Thomas Earl of Kildare, Henry Lord Graye.
Great was the credit of the Geraldines, ever when the house of York prospered,
and likewise the Butlers thryved under the blood of Lancaster, for which cause
the Earl of Desmond remained many years Deputy to George Duke of Clarence his
god-brother, but when he had spoken certain disdainful words against the late
marryage of King Edward with the Lady Elizabeth Gray, the said Lady being now
Queen, caused his trade of life, (after the Irish manner, contrary to sundry
old statutes enacted in that behalf) to be sifted and examined by John Earl
of Worcester his successor. Of which treasons he was attaint and condemned,
and for the same beheaded at Droghedah. 1467.
James the father of this Thomas of Desmond, being suffered and not controuled,
Patrick Sein^leger in his collections.
during the government of Richard Duke of York his godsip: and of Thomas Earl
of Kildare his kinsman put upon the Kings subjects within the Countyes of
Waterford, Cork, Kerry, and Limericke the Irish impositions of Coin and
Lyverie, Cartings, carriages, loadings, cosherings, bonnaght, and such like,
which customs are the very nurse and teat of all Irish enormities, and extort
from the poor tennants everlasting Sesse, allowance of meat and money, their
bodies and goods in service, so that their horses and their Galloglashes lie
still upon the Farmers, eat them out, beggar the Country, foster a sort of
idle vagabonds, ready to rebel if their Lord command them, ever nusseled in
stealth and robberyes. These evil presidents given by the Father, the son
did exercise being Lord Deputy, to whom the reformation of that disorder
especially belonged, notwithstanding the same fault being winked at in others,
and with such rigor avenged in him, it was manifestly taken for a quarrel
sought and picked.

1469.
Two years after, the said Earl of Worcester lost his head, while Henry the 6.
taken out of the tower, was set up again, and King Edward proclaimed Usurper,
and then was Kildare enlarged, whom being likewise attainte, they thought also
to have rid, and shortly both the Earls of Kildare and Desmond were restored
to their blood by Parliament.

1470.
Sir Rowland Eustace, Knight, sometimes Treasurer, and Lord Chancellor,
Flatsbury.
and lastly, Lord Deputye of Ireland, founded Saint Frauncis Abbey besides
Kilkullen bridge.

1481.
Edward, a year before his death, honored his younger son Richard the infant,
Duke of York, with the title of Lieutenant over this Land. But his unnatural
Uncle Richard the Third, Edw. 5. Rich 3.
when he had murdered the child, and the elder brother called Edward the 5.
He then preferred to that Office his own son Edward, whose Deputy was
Gerald Earl of Kildare, and bare that office a while in Henry the 7. his
days. To whom came the vvylie Priest, Henr. 7.
Sir Richard Symonds, and presented a lad his scholar, named Lambert, whom he
fained to be the son of George Duke of Clarence, lately escaped the tower of
London. And the child could his pedigree so readily, and had learned of the
Priest such princely behavior, that he lightly moved the said Earl, and many
Nobles of Ireland tendering the Seed Royal of Richard Plantagenet, and George
his son, as also maligning the advancement of the house of Lancaster, in
Henry the seventh, either to think or make the world ween, they thought
verily this child to be Edward Earl of Warwick, the Duke of Clarences
lawful Son.

And although King Henry more then half marred their sport, in showing the
right Earl through all the streets of London, yet the Lady Margaret Duchess
of Burgoine, sister to Edward the fourth, John de la Poole her Nephew, the Lord
Lovel, Sir Thomas Broughton Knight, and diverse other Captains of this
conspiracy devised to abuse the color of this young Earls name, for
preferring their purpose, which if it came to good, they agreed to depose
Lambert, and to erect the very Earl indeed now prisoner in the tower, for
whose quarrel had they pretended to fight, they deemed it likely he should
have been made away: Wherefore it was blazed in Ireland, that the King to
mock his subjects, had schooled a Boy to take upon him the Earl of Warwickes
name, and had showed him about London to blind the eyes of simple folks, and
to defeat the lawful Inheritour of the good Duke of Clarence, their
countryman and Protector during his life, to whose lineage they also derived a
title of the Crown. In all haste they assembled at Divelin, and there in
Christ-Church they Crowned this Idol, honoring him with titles imperial,
feasting and triumphing, rearing mighty shoutes and cries, carrying him from
thence, to the Kings Castle upon tall men's shoulders, that he might be seen
and noted, as he was surely an honorable Boy to look upon. Thereupon ensued
the Battle of Stoke, wherein Lambert and his Master were taken, but never
executed, the Earl of Lincoln, the Lord Lovel, Martine Swarte, the Almaigne
Captain, and Morice Fitz Thomas Captain of the Irish, were slain, and all
their power discomfited.

Jasper Duke of Bedford and Earl of Penbroke, 1490.
Lieutenant, and Walter Archbishop of Divelin his Deputy. In this time befell
another like illusion of Ireland, procured from the Duchess aforesaid, and
certain Nobles of England, whereby was exalted as rightful King of England,
and undoubted Earl of Vlster, the counterfeit Richard Duke of York preserved
from King Richards cruelty, as his adherents faced the matter down, and with
this maygame lord, named indeed Peter (in scorn Perkin) VVarbecke, flattered
themselves many years.

Then was Sir Edward Poynings Knight, sent over Lord Deputy, 1494.
with commission to apprehend his principal partners in Ireland, amongst whom
was named Gerald Fitz Gerald Earl of Kildare, whose purgation the King
(notwithstanding diverse avouching the contrary) did accept. After much ado
Perkin taken, confessed under his own handwriting the course of all his
proceedings, whereof so much as concerns Ireland, an. Hen. 7.14.
I have here borrowed out of Halles Chronicles.

Perkins confession.
I being borne in Flaunders, in the town of Turney, put my self in service
with a Britton, called Pregent Meno, the which brought me with him into
Ireland, and when we were there arrived in the town of Cork, they of the
town (because I was arrayed with some clothes of silk of my said Masters)
threeped upon me, that I should be the Duke of Clarences son, that was before
time at Divelin, and forasmuch as I denied it, there was brought unto me the
Holy Evangelists and the Cross, by the Major of the town, called John
Lewellin, and there I took my oath that I was not the said Dukes son, nor
none of his blood. After this came to me an English man whose name was Stephen
Poytowe, with one John Walter, and swore to me, that they knevv well that I
was King Richards Bastard son, to whom I answered with like oaths that I
was not. And then they advised me not to be affraide, but that I should take
it upon me boldly: And if I would so do, they would assist me with all their
power, against the King of England, and not only they, but they were assured
that the Earls of Desmond and Kildare, should do the same, for they passed
not what part they took, so they might be avenged upon the King of England.
And so against my will they made me to learn English, and taught me what I
should do and say: and after this, they called me Richard Duke of York,
second son to Edward the fourth, because King Richards Bastard son was in
the hands of the King of England: And upon this, the said John Walter, and
Stephen Poytowe, John Tyler, Hubbert Burgh, with many others, as the foresaid
Earls, entered into this false quarrel, and within short time after the French
King sent ambassadors into Ireland, whose names were Lyot, Lucas, and Stephen
Frayn, and thence I went into France, and from thence into Flanders, and from
Flanders again into Ireland, and from Ireland into Scotland, and so into
England.

Thus was Perkins brag twighted, 1499.
from a milpost to a pudding prick, and hanged was he the next year after.

Then in the year 1501. King Henry made Lieutenant of Ireland, his second
son Henry as then Duke of York, 1501.
who afterward reigned. To him was appointed Deputy, Records of Christ-Church
the aforesaid Gerald Earl of Kildare, 1504.
who accompanied with John Black Major of Divelin, warred upon William de
Burgo, O-Brien, and Mac Nemarra, Occarrol, and the greatest power of Irish men,
that had been seen together since the conquest, under the hill of Knoctoe, in
English the hill of Axes, six miles from Galway, and two miles from
Ballinclare, de Burgoes manor town. Mac William and his Accomplices were there
taken, his Soldiers that escaped the sword were pursued, flying five miles,
great slaughter done, and many Captains gotten, not one English man killed.
The Earl at his return was created knight of the Noble Order, and flourished
all his life long, of whom I shall be occasioned to say somewhat in the next
Chapter.

CAP. IX. Henry the eight.
1513. From henceforward I have followed the relation of the wi^est and most
ind^fferent persons that I could acquaint my self withal in Ireland.
GErald Fitz Gerald Earl of Kildare a mighty made man, full of honor and
courage, who had been Lord Deputy and Lord Justice of Ireland thirty four
years, deceased the third of September, and lies buried in Christ's Church in
Divelin. Between him and James Butler Earl of Ormond, their own jealousies
fed with envy and ambition, kindled with certain lewd factions, abbettors of
either side: ever since the ninth year of Henry the seventh, when James of
Ormond with a great army of Irish men, camping in S. Thomas Court at Divelin,
seemed to face the countenance and power of the Deputy: Register of Majors.
these occasions I say fostered a malice betwixt them and their posterityes,
many years after incurable, causes of much ruffle and unquietnes in the
Realm, until the confusion of the one house, and nonage of the other,
discontinued their quarrels, which except their Inheritours have the grace to
put up, and to love unfainedly, as Gerald and Thomas do now, may hap to turn
their countries to little good, and themselves to less.

Ormond was nothing inferior to the other in stomach, and in reach of policy
far beyond him; Kildare was in government a mild man, to his enemies
intractable, to the Irish such a scourge, that rather for despite of him then
for favor of any part, they relied upon the Butlers, came in under his
protection, served at his call, performed by starts, as their manner is, the
duty of good subjects.

Ormond was secret and drifty, of much moderation in speech, dangerous of every
little wrinkle that touched his reputation. Kildare was open and passionable,
in his mood desperate, both of word and deed, of the English welbeloved, a
good lusticier, a warrior incomparable, toward the Nobles that he favored
not somewhat headlong and unrulie, being charged before Henry the seventh, for
burning the Church at Cashell, and many witnesses prepared to avouch against
him, the truth of that article, he suddenly confessed the fact, to the great
wondering and detestation of the Council, when it was looked how he would
justify the matter, By Jesus (quoth he) I would never have done it, had it not
been told me that the Archbishop was within. And because the Archbishop was
one of his busiest accusers there present, merrily laughed the King at the
plainness of the man, to see him allege that intent for excuse, which most
of all did aggravate his fault. The last article against him they conceived in
these terms, finally all Ireland cannot rule this Earl: No (quoth the King)
then in good faith shall this Earl rule all Ireland. Thus was the accusation
turned to a jest, the Earl returned Lord Deputy, shortly after created Knight
of the Garter and so died. Marvel not if this success were a corrosive to the
adverse party, which the longer it held aloof and bit the bridle, the more
eagerly it followed his course, having once the sway and room at will, as you
may perceive hereafter.

Gerald Fitz Gerald son of the aforesaid Earl of Kildare, 1516. Gerald Earl
of Kildare.
and Lord Deputy, who chased the nation of the Tools, battered Ocarrols
Castles, awed all the Irish of the land more and more. A Gentleman valiant and
well spoken, yet in his latter time overtaken with vehement suspicion of sundry
Treasons. He of good meaning to unite the families, matched his Sister Margaret
Fitz Gerald, with Pierce Butler Earl of Ossory, whom he also help to recover
the Earldom of Ormond, whereinto after the decease of James, a Bastard
brother had intruded.

Seven years together Kildare kept in credit and authority, notwithstanding
the pushes given against him by secret heavers, enviers of his fortune, and
nourishers of the old grudge, who fett him up to the Court of England by
commission, and caused him there to be opposed with diverse interrogatories,
touching the Earl of Desmond his Cousin, a notorious traitor, as they said. He
left in his room Morice Fitz Thomas Lord Justice. After whom came over Lord
Lieutenant, 1521.
Thomas Howard Earl of Surrey, Grandfather to this Duke of Norfolk,
accompanied with 200. of the Kings guarde. While he sat at Dinner in the
Castle of Divelin, he heard news that Oneale with a mighty army was even in
the mouth of the borders, ready to invade: Immediately men were levied by the
Major, and the next morrow joining them to his band, the Lieutenant marched as
far as the water of Slane, where having intelligence of Oneales recoyle, he
dismissed the footmen, and pursued Omore with his horsemen, which Omore was
said to lurk within certain miles. That espied a Gunner of Omore, and
watching by a wood side discharged his piece at the very face of the Deputy,
struck the visard of his helmet, and pierced no further (as God would.) This
did he in manner recklesse what became of himself, so he might amaze them for
a time, break the swiftness of their following, and advantage the flight of
his Captain, which thing he wanne with the price of his own blood, for the
Soldiers would no further, till they had searched all the corners of that
wood, verily suspecting some ambush thereabout, and in several knots ferretted
out this Gunner, whom Fitz Williams and Bedlowe of the Roche were feign to
mangle and hew in pieces; because the wretch would never yield.

1523.
In the mean while defiance proclaimed with France and Scotland both at once,
moved the King to return Surrey out of Ireland, that he might employ him in
those services, his prowess, integrity, good nature and course of government,
the country much commends, and honors the name and family to this day.

Pierce Butler Earl of Ossory Lord Deputy, Kildare attending the Kings
pleasure for his dispatch, recovered favor at the instance of the Duke of
Suffolk whose daughter, 15^4.
Dame Elizabeth Graye he espoused royally, and so departed home. Now there was
a great partaker of all the Deputies Council, one Robert Talbot of Belgard
whom the Geraldines hated deadly, him they surmized to keep a Calendar of all
their doings and to stir the coals that incensed brother against brother. In
which fury, James Fitz Gerald meeting the said Gentleman besides Ballimore,
slew him even there; Talbot of Belgard slain.
journeying to keep his Christmasse with the Deputy. With this despitefull
murder both sides brake out into open rage, and especially the Countess of
Ossory, Kildares sister, a rare woman, and able for wisdom to rule a Realm,
had not her stomach overruled her self. Here began intimation of new
Treasons passing to and fro, with complaints and replies. But Suffolk had
wrought the canvas so fast in his son in laws behalf, that he was suffered
to rest at home, and only Commissioners directed thither with Authority to
examine the root of their griefs, wherein if they found Kildare but even
tollerably purged, their instructions was to depose the plaintiff, and to
swear the other Lord Deputy. The Commissioners were, Sir Raphe Egerton, a
Cheshire Knight, Anthony Fitzherbert, second Justice of the Common Pleas, and
James Denton, Deane of Lichfield, who huddeled up those accusations as they
thought good, and suddenly took the sword from the Earl of Ossory, swear the
Geraldine Lord Deputy, before whom Con Oneale bare the sword that day.
Concerning the murderer whom they might have hanged, they brought him prisoner
into England, presented him to Cardinal Wolsey, who was said to hate
Kildares blood: And the Cardinal intending his execution with more dishonor
to the name, caused him to be led about London streets manacled and
haltered, which asked so long time, that the Deane of Lichfield stepped to the
King, and got the Gentleman his pardon.

This untimely shift inflamed the Cardinal, and ripened the malice hitherto
not so rank, and therefore hereafter Ossory brought evident proofs of the
Deputies disorder, that he vvilfully vvinked at the Earl of Desmond, whom
he should have attached by the Kings letters, that he curryed acquaintance and
friendship with mere Irish enemies, that he had armed them against him being
the Kings Deputy, that he hanged and hevved rashly good subjects, whom he
mistrusted to leave to the Butlers friendship. Yet again therefore was Kildare
commanded to appear, which he did, leaving in his room Fitz Gerald of
Leixlip, whom they shortly deprived, 1527
and chose the Baron of Delvin, whom O-Connor took prisoner, and there the
Earl of Ossory to show his ability of service, brought to Divelin an army of
Irish-men, having Captains over them Oconnor, Omore and O-Carroll, and at S.
Mary Abbey, was chosen Deputy by the Kings Council.

In which office (being himself, save only in feats of Arms, a simple
gentleman) he bare out his honor, and the charge of government, very
worthily, through the singular wisdom of his Countess, The Countess of
Ossory.
a Lady of such port, that all Estates of the Realm couched unto her, so
politic, that nothing was thought substantially debated without her advice,
manlike and tall of stature, very rich and bountiful, a bitter enemy, the
only mean at those days whereby her Husbands Country was reclaymed from the
sluttish and unclean Irish custom to the English habit, bedding,
housekeeping, and civility.

But to those virtues was yoked such a selfe-liking, and such a Majesty above
the tenure of a subject, that for ensurance thereof she sticked not to abuse
her husbands honor against her brothers follye. Notvvithstanding I learn not
that she practiced his undoing, (which ensued, and was to her undoubtedly,
great heaviness, as upon whom both the blemish thereof, and the sustenance of
that whole family depended after,) but that she by indirect means wrought
her Brother out of credit to advance her husband, the common voice, and the
thing it self speaks.

All this while abode the Earl of Kildare at the Court, and with much ado
found shift to be called before the Lords, to answer solemnly. They sat
upon him diversely affectioned, and especially the Cardinal, Lord
Chancellor, disliked his cause, comforted his accusers, and enforced the
Articles objected, and what else soever could be gathered thereof in these
words.

I wot well, my Lord, The Cardinals accusation against the Earl of Kildare.
that I am not the meetest man at this Board to charge you with these treasons,
because it has pleased some of your pew-fellowes to report, that I am a
professed enemy to all Nobility, and namely to the Geraldines, but seeing
every cursed boy can say as much when he is controlled, and seeing these points
are so weighty, that they should not be dissembled of us, and so apparent,
that they cannot be denied of you. I must have leave, notwithstanding your
stale slander, to be the mouth of these honorable persons at this time, and to
trumpe your Treasons in your way, howsoever you take me.

First, you remember how the lewd Earl your kinsman, Treasons laid to the
Earl.
who passes not whom he serve, might he change his Master, sent his
confederates with letters of credence to Frauncis the French King, and having
but cold comfort there, to Charles the Emperor, proffering the help of
Mounster and Connaght toward the conquest of Ireland, if either of them would
help to win it from our King. How many letters? what precepts? what
messages? what threats have been sent you to apprehend him? and yet not done:
why so? forsooth I could not catch him: Nay nay, Earl, forsooth you would
not nighly vvatch him. If he be justly suspected, why are you partial in so
great a charge? If not, why are you fearful to have him tried? Yea Sir, it
vvil be sworn and deposed to your face, that for fear of meeting him, you
have vvinked, vvilfully shunned his sight, altered your course, warned his
friends, stopped both eyes and ears against his detectors, and whensoever you
took upon you to hunt him out, then was he sure beforehand to be out of
your walk: surely this juggling and false-play, little became either an
honest man, called to such honor, or a Nobleman put in such trust. Had you
lost but a Covv, or a Garron of your own, two hundred Kyrneghes would have
come at your vvhistle, to rescue the prey from the uttermost edge of Vlster:
All the Irish in Ireland must have given you the way. But in pursuing so
weighty a matter as this, merciful God, how nice, how dangerous, how wayward
have you bin? One while he is from home, another while he keeps home,
sometimes fled, sometimes in the borders where you dare not venture: I wish, my
Lord, there be shrewde bugges in the borders for the Earl of Kildare to fear:
The Earl, nay, the King of Kildare, for when you are disposed, you reign more
like then rule in the Land: where you are malicious, the truest subjects stand
for Irish enemies; where you are pleased, the Irish enemy stands for a
dutiful subject: hearts and hands, lives and lands are all at your courtesy,
who fawneth not thereon, he cannot rest within your smell, and your smell is
so rank, that you tracke them out at pleasure.

Whilst the Cardinal was speaking, the Earl chafed and changed color, and
sundry proffers made to answer every sentence as it came, at last he broke out,
and interrupted him thus.

My Lord Chancellor, I beseech you pardon me, I am short witted, and you I
perceive intend a long tale. If you proceed in this order, half my purgation
will be lost for lack of carryage: I have no school tricks, nor art of memory,
except you hear me while I remember your words, your second process will
hammer out the former.

The Lords associate, who for the most part tenderly loved him, and knevv the
Cardinals manner of terms so loathsome, as vvhervvith they were tired many
years ago, humbly besought his grace to charge him directly with
particulars, and to dvvell in some one matter, till it were examined through.
That granted.

Kildares reply to the Cardinals oration.
It is good reason (quoth the Earl) that your Grace bear the mouth of this
chamber. But my Lord, those mouths that put this tale into your mouth, are
very vvide mouths, such indeed as have gaped long for my vvreck, and now at
length for want of better stuff, are fain to fill their mouths with smoke.
What my cousin Desmond has compassed, as I know not, so I beshrevv his naked
heart for holding out so long. If he can be taken by my agents that presently
wait for him, then have my adversaryes betrayed their malice, and this heap
of heinous words shall resemble a man of straw, that seems at a blush to
carry some proportion, but when it is felt and poysed, discovers a vanity,
serving only to fray crows, and I trust your Honors will see the proof
hereof and mine innocence testified in this behalf by the thing it self
within these few days. But go to, suppose he never be had, what is Kildare
to blame for it, more then my good brother of Ossory, who notwithstanding his
high promises, having also the Kings power, is glad to take eggs for his
money, and bring him in at leisure. Cannot the Earl of Desmond shift, but I
must be of counsel? cannot he be hid, except I wink? If he be close, am I
his mate? If he be friended, am I a Traitor? This is a doughty kind of
accusation, which they urge against me, wherein they are stabled and myred at
my first denial; You would not see him, say they, who made them so familiar
with mine eyesight? or when was the Earl within my Equinas? or who stood
by when I let him slip, or where are the tokens of my vvilfull hood-vvinking?
Oh, but you sent him word to bevvare of you; Who was the messenger? where
are the letters? convince my negative: See how loosely this idle reason
hangs, Desmond is not taken, well, we are in fault: why? because you are:
who proves it? no body. What conjectures? so it seems. To whom? to your
enemies who told it them? What other ground? none. Will they swear it? they
will swear it. My Lords, then belike they know it, if they know it, either
they have my hand to show, or can bring forth the messenger, or were present
at a conference, or privy to Desmond, or some body bevvrayed it to them, or
themselves were my carryers or vicegerents therein, which of these parts
will they choose, I know them too well to reckon my self convict by their
bare words or headless heare-sayes, or frantic oaths, my letter were
soon read, were any such writing extant, my servaunts and friends are ready
to be sifted. Of my cousin Desmond they may lie lewdly, since no man can here
well tell the contrary. Touching my self, I never noted in them either so much
wit, or so much faith, that I could have gaged upon their silence the life of a
good hound, much less mine own, I doubt not may it please your Honors to
oppose them, how they came to knowledge of these matters which they are so
ready to depose, but you shall find their tongues chayned to another man's
trencher, and as it were, Knights of the Post, suborned to say, swear and
stare the uttermost they can, as those that pass not what they say, nor with
what face they say it, so they say no truth. But of another thing it grieveth
me, that your good grace, whom I take to be wise and sharp, and who of your
own blessed disposition wish me well, should be so far gone in crediting
those corrupt informers, that abuse the ignorance of their state and country
to my peril. Little know you my Lord, how necessary it is not only for the
governor, but also for every Nobleman in Ireland, to hamper his vincible
neighbors at discretion, wherein if they vvayted for process of Law, and had
not these lives and lands you speak of within their reach, they might hap to
loose their own lives and lands without Law. You hear of a case as it
were in a dream, and feel not the smart that vexes us. In England there is
not a mean subject that dare extend his hand to fillip a Peer of the Realm.
In Ireland, except the Lord have cunning to his strength, and strength to save
his own, and sufficient authority to rack thieves and varletts when they
stir, he shall find them swarm so fast, that it will be too late to
call for Justice. If you will have our service take effect, you must not tie
us alvvayes to the Judicial proceedings, vvherevvith your Realm, thanked be
God, is inured.

As touching my Kingdom (my Lord) I would you and I had exchanged Kingdoms
but for one month, I would trust to gather up more crummes in that space,
then twice the revenues of my poor Earldom; but you are well and vvarme,
and so hold you, and upbraide not me with such an odious storm. I sleep on a
cabin, when you lie soft in your bed of down, I serve under the cope of
heaven, when you are served under a Canopy, I drink water out of a skull, when
you drink wine out of golden Cups* my courser is trained to the field, when
your Iennet is taught to amble, when you are begraced and belorded, and
crowched and kneeled unto, then I find small grace with our Irish borderers,
except I cut them off by the knees.

At these girds the Council would have smiled if they durst, but each man bitt
his lip, and held his countenance, for howsoever some of them inclined to the
Butler, they all hated the Cardinal: A man undoubtedly borne to honor,
Cardinal Woolsey.
I think some Princes Bastard, no Butchers son, exceeding wise, fair
spoken, high minded, full of revenge, vicious of his body, lofty to his
enemies, were they never so big, to those that accepted and sought his
friendship wonderful courteous, a ripe Schooleman, thrall to affections,
brought a bed with flattery, insatiable to get, and more princelike in
bestowing: as appears by his two Colleges at Ipswich, and at Oxenford,
the one suppressed with his fall, the other unfinished and yet as it lies an
house of Students (considering all appurtenances) incomparable, through
Christendom, whereof Henry the eight is now called Founder, because he let it
stand. He held and enjoyed at once the Bishoprics of York, Durham, and
Winchester, the dignities of Lord Cardinal, Legate, and Chancellor: The Abbey
of S. Albans, diverse Prioryes, sundry fat Benefices in Commendam: A great
preferrer of his servants, advauncer of learning, stout in every quarrel,
never happy till his overthrow. Therein he showed such moderation, and ended so
patiently, that the hour of his death did him more honor then all the pomp
of life passed.

The Cardinal perceived that Kildare was no Babe, and rose in a fume from the
Council table, committed the Earl, deferred the matter till more direct
probations came out of Ireland.

After many meetinges and objections wittily refelled, they pressed him sore
with a traiterous errant, sent by his daughter the Lady of Slane, to all his
brethren, to Oneale, Oconnor, and their adherents, wherein he exhorted them to
war upon the Earl of Ossory then Deputy, which they accomplished, making a
wretched conspiracy against the English of Ireland, and many a bloody skirmish.

Of this Treason he was found guilty, and reprived in the Tower a long time,
the Gentleman betook himself to God and the King, was heartily loved of the
Lieutenant, pitied in all the Court, and standing in so hard a case altered
l^^tle his accustomed hue, comforted other Noblemen, prisoners with him,
dissembling his own sorrow. One night when the Lieutenant and he, for disport
were playing at slide-groat, suddenly comes from the Cardinal a mandat to
execute Kildare on the morrow. The Earl marking the Lieutenants deep sigh, in
reading the bill; By Saint Bride, quoth he, there is some mad game in that
scrolle, but fall how it will, this throw is for a huddle; when the worst was
told him, now I pray thee, quoth he, do no more but learn assuredly from the
Kings own mouth, whether his Grace be witting thereto or not. Sore doubted the
Lieutenant to displease the Cardinal, yet of very pure devotion to his friend,
he posteth to the King at midnight, and said his errant, (for all hours of the
day or night, the Lieutenant has access to the Prince upon occasions.) King
Henry controwling the sawcynesse of the Priest, those were his terms, gave
him his Signet in token of countermand, which when the Cardinal had seen, he
begun to break into unseasonable words with the Lieutenant, which he was loath
to hear, and so he left him fretting: 1528. 15^0.
Thus broke up the storm for a time, and the next year Wolsey was cast out
of favor, and within few years Sir William Skevington sent over Deputy, who
brought with him the Earl pardoned, and rid from all his troubles. Who would
not think but these lessons should have schooled so wise a man, and warned
him rather by experience of adversities past, to cure old sores, then for joy
of this present fortune, to mind seditious drifts to come. The second year of
Skevingtons government, there chanced an uproare among the Merchants and
their Apprentices, in Divelin, which hard and scant the Deputy and Major both,
could appease. Then was also great stir about the Kings divorce, 1532.
who hearing the frowardnes of Ireland under Skevington, and thinking it
expedient in so fickle a world to have a sure post there, made Kildare his
Deputy, 1533
the Primate of Ardmagh Lord Chancellor, and Sir James Butler Lord Treasurer.
But Kildare reviving the old quarrels, fell to prosecute the Earl of Ossory,
excited Oneale to invade his country, his Bro^her John Fitz Gerald to spoil
the country of Vriell and Kilkenny, being himself at the doing of part, namely
in robbing the town, and killing the Kings subjects. 1534.
The next year going against O-Carrol he was pitiful hurt with a Gun in the
thigh, so that he never after enjoyed his limbs, nor delivered his words in
good plight, otherwise like enough to have been longer forborne, in
consideration of his many noble qualities, great good service, and the state of
those times. Straight ways complaints were addressed to the King of these
enormities, and that in the most heinous manner could be devised, whereupon he
was again commanded by sharp letters to repair into England, and to leave
such a substitute, 1535.
for whose government he would undertake at his peril to answer: He left his
heir the Lord Thomas Fitz Gerald, and ere he went, furnished his own pyles,
forts, and castles, with the Kings artillery and munition, taken forth of
Divelin. Being examined before the Council, he staggered in his answer,
either for conscience of the fact, or for the infirmity of his late ma^me:
Wherefore a false muttering flew abroad that his execution was intended. That
rumor helped forward Skevingtons friends and servants, who sticked not to
write into Ireland secret letters, that the Earl their Masters enemy (so they
took him, because he got the government over his head,) was cut shorter, and
now they trusted to see their Master again in his Lordship, whereafter they
sore longed as crows do for carryon. Such a letter came to the hands of a
simple Priest, no perfect English man, who for haste hurled it among other
papers in the Chimneyes end of his chamber, meaning to peruse it better at more
leisure: The same very night a Gentleman retaining to Lord Thomas (then Lord
Deputy under his father) took up his lodging, with the Priest, and raught in
the morning for some paper to draw on his strait hosen, and as the devil
would he hit upon the letter, bare it away in the heel of his his hose, no
earthly thing misdeeming, at night again he found the paper unfretted, and
musing thereof began to pore on the writing, which notified the Earls death.
To horsbacke got he in all haste, and spreading about the country these
unthrifty tidings, Lord Thomas the Deputy rash and youthful, immediately
confedered himself with Oneale, and O-Connor, with his Uncles and Fathers
friends, namely, John, Oliver, Edward Fitz Gerald, James and John Delahide,
Welsh parson of Loughseudy, Burnel of Balgriffen, Rorcks a pirat of the seas,
Bath of Dullardston, Field of Buske, with others, and their adherents guarded,
he rides on S. Barnabyes day to S. Mary Abbey where the Council sat, and
when they looked he should take his place, and rose to give it him, he charged
them to sit still, and stood before them and then spoke.

The words of Lord Thomas.
Howsoever injuriously we be handled and forced to defend our selves in arms,
when neither our service nor our good meaning toward our Princes crown
avails, yet say not hereafter but in this open hostility, which we profess
here and proclaim, we have showed our selves no villains nor churles, but
warriors and Gentlemen. This Sword of estate is yours and not mine, I received
it with an oath, and have used it to your benefit, I should offend mine honor,
if I turned the same to your annoyance, now have I need of mine own sword,
which I dare trust, as for this common sword, it flattereth me with a golden
scabberd, but has in it a pestilent edge, already bathed in the Geraldines
blood, and whetted it self in hope of a destruction: save your selves from us,
as from your open enemies. I am none of Henryes Deputy, I am his foe, I have
more mind to conquer, then to govern, to meet him in the field, then to
serve him in office, If all the hearts of England and Ireland that have cause
thereto, would join in this quarrel (as I trust they will) then should he be
a byword (as I trust he shall) for his heresy, lechery, and tyranny, wherein
the age to come may skore him among the ancient Princes, of most abominable
and hateful memory. With that he rendered up the sword, and flang away like a
Bedlam, adding to his shameful Oration many other slanderous and foul terms,
which for regard of the Kings posterity, I have no mind to utter.

They concluded, first to murder all of the English birth in Ireland, and sent
an ambassador to Paulus the 3, called Mac Granell, archdeacon of Kelles, and
rejected thence to Charles the fifth, whose Aunt Queen Katherine the King had
lately cast off, with much indignation of all the Spaniards, him he thought
eith to be kindled, and craved assistance to conquer the land, which he
promised to hold under him, and his heirs for ever. The mean while he forced
an oath upon Gentlemen of every shire to aid him, camped within the pale,
reared a great army of English, Irish, and Scots, invaded the Earl of Ossory,
and James his son Lord Butler, who having intelligence thereof, prevented his
fury and kept those parts in order.

When the Butlers had stopped his rage in Mounster, he fell to parlyes and
treatyes with them, sent them diverse messengers and letters, whereby he
covenanted to devide with them half the Kingdom, would they assist his
enterprise, James Lord Treasurer, in whom for their youth and acquaintance he
most affied, and often accumbred with such temptations, finally returned his
brokers with letters.

Taking pen in hand to write you my resolute answer, The letter of James Lord
Butler, and Lo. Treasurer: to Lord Thomas^
I muse in the very first line, by what name to call you, my Lord, or my
Cousin, seeing your notorious treason has distayned your honor, and your
desperate lewdnes shamed your kindred, your are so liberal in parting stakes
with me, that a man would ween you had no right to the game, so importunate
in craving my company, as if you would persuade me to hang with you for good
fellowship. And think you that James is so mad to gape for gudgens, or so
ungratious to sell his truth for a piece of Ireland, were it so, (as it cannot
be) that the Chickens you reckon were both hatched and feathered, yet be thou
sure I had rather in this quarrel die thine enemy, then live thy partner: for
the kindness you proffer me, and good love in the end of your letter, the best
way I can I purpose to requite, that is, in advising you though you have
fetched your feaze, yet to look well ere you leap over. Ignorance and error,
and a certain opinion of duty has carried you unawares to this folly, not yet
so rank, but it may be cured. The King is a vessel of bounty and mercy, your
words against his Majesty shall not be counted malicious, but rather balked
out for heat and impotency, except your self by heaping offenses, discover a
mischievous and wilful meaning. Farewell.

Nettled with this round answer, forth he passed to increase his power,
offered violence to very few, except that one despitous murder at Tartaine,
the twenty five of July, where in a morning early he caused to be brought
before him, the honorable Prelate Doctor Allen, Archbishop of Divelin, and
Lord Chancellor, who being a reverent personage, feeble for age and sickness,
kneeling at his feet in his shirte and mantle, bequeathing his soul to God,
his body to the Traitors mercy, the wretched young man commanded there to be
brained like an ox. Doctor Allen Archbishop of Divelin and L. Chancellor
murdered.
The place is ever since hedged in, overgrowne and unfrequented, in detestation
of the fact. The people have observed that all the accessaries thereof, being
after pardoned for rebellion, ended miserably. Allen had been in service with
Cardinal Wolsey, of deep judgment; in the Cannon law, the only match of
Stephen Gardener another of VVolseyes Chaplains, for avoiding of which
emulation he was preferred in Ireland, rough and rigorous in Justice, hated of
the Geraldines for his Masters sake, and his own, as he that crossed them
diverse times, and much troubled both the father and son in their
governements, nor unlike to have promoted their accusations.

All this while the Kings army was looked for, and no succor came to the
rebels, which greatly quayled them, being of themselves, though stored with
soldiers, yet unfurnished with any sufficient munition to stand in a maine
battle. Moreover the number of wise Gentlemen did not greatly incline to his
purpose. And therefore when he besieged the City of Divelin, the most part of
those arrows which were shot over the walls, were unheaded, and little or
nothing affrayed them. That espied the citizens, and gathering the faintnes of
his soldiers thereby, blazed abroad upon the walls triumphant news, that
the Kings Army was arryved, and as it had been so indeed, suddenly rushed out
of their gates upon the Rebels, who at the first sight of armed men, weening
no less but the truth was so, otherwise assured that the City would never
dare to encounter them, gave ground, forsook their Captains, dispersed and
scattered into diverse corners, and never after met together.

A little before this time dyed the Earl of Kildare in the tower of London for
thought and pain. John Stow.
Sir William Skevington (whom the Irish men call the gunner, because he was
preferred from that office of the Kings Master-gunner to govern them, and that
they can full evil brook to be ruled of any that is but meanly borne)
brought over an Army, and with him Leonard Gray, a younger son to the
Marquess Dorset, Lord Marshall. To whom Fitz Gerald yielded, and was sent
into England, where he with his Uncles, and other principalls of the
conspiracy, were afterward drawn, hanged and quartered at Tiburne. Soon
after was the house of the Geraldines attaynted by Parliament, and all of the
name busily trained out for fear of new commotions. But Thomas Leurus, Young
Fitz Gerald preserved.
late Bishop of Kildare, schoolmasters to a younger brother, Gerald Fitz
Gerald, the Earl that now lives, secretly stale away with the child,
first into Scotland, then into France, and misdoubting the French, into Italy,
where Cardinal Pole his near kinsman preserved him, till the reign of
Edward the sixth, with whom he entered into high favor, and obtained of him
his old Inheritance of Meinothe.

Lastly, by means of the said Cardinal, and Sir Anthony Brown, Lord
Mountague, whose sister he married (a woman worthy of such a brother) Queen
Mary (Founder and restorer of many Noble houses) repealed his attainder, and
set him in his fathers Earldom, wherein since that time he has showed
himself sundry ways officious and serviceable toward his Commonwealth, and
the Crown of England, beside other good qualities of honor and courtesy, they
repute him here for the best horseman in these parts of Christendom. With
this escape of young Fitz Gerald, the Lord Leonard Gray his Uncle on the mothers
side was held suspect, and the same was one special article urged against him
when he lost his head, 1542.
Anno 1542.

Hall. An. H 8. 32. and 34.
Sir William Skevington, a worthy Governor, and among all virtues very just
of his word, deceased Lord Deputy at Kilmaynam, 1537.
and the Lord Leonard Gray succeeded him. Oneale and Odonill colourably
required a parley with the Deputy, but in the way as they rode, they burned
the Navan, and the town of Ardee. Wherefore the Deputy with the help of the
Mayor of Divelin James Fitz Symonds, and the Mayor of Droghedagh, and the
English pale met them, flighted them, slew 400. of their train, and there the
Mayor of Divelin for notable service in that journey, Sir ^ames Fitz-Simons
Mayor of Divelin.
was knighted.

Sir Anthony Seintleger Knight of the Garter, Lord Deputy. He summoned a
Parliament, wherein the Geraldines were attainted, 1542.
Abbeyes suppressed, the King named supreme head and King of Ireland, because
he recognized no longer to hold it of the Pope. At this Parliament appeared
Irish Lords Mac Gilpatricke, Lord Barry, Mac Cartimore, O-Brene, and diverse
more, whom follovved Con Oneale, submitting himself to the Kings Deputy, and
after to the King himself, who returned him richly plated, Con Oneale Earl
of Tyrone.
created him Earl of Tyrone, his base son Matthew Oneale Baron of Donganon.
As for Shane Oneale the only son of his body mulier begotten, he was then
little esteemed and of no proof. The same time James Earl of Desmond came to
the King, and was of him both Princely entertained and revvarded.

CAP. X. Edward the 6. Mary, and Elizabeth.
BEfore the decease of Henry the 8. Seintleger was twice in England, leaving at
both times Sir William Brabason Lord Justice. In his second return An. 1546.
Sir Edward Bellingham, Captain general, landed at Waterford, and skowred the
coast, where Omore and Ocomore used to prey.

This year the city of Divelin obtained a Charter for two Sheriffs in stead
of Bayliffes. 154^.


The Geraldines Out-lawes were taken and executed, Bellingham appointed Lord
Deputye, erected a Mint within the Castle of Divelin, which quickly wearyed
them for want of fuel. Andrew Brereton with 300. horsemen, and 40. footmen,
inhabited the North as far as Lecale, where he with 35. horsemen gave the
charge upon 240. Scotts, that from the out Islandes came to succor the Irish,
and wasted the Country. In one year he cleared those quarters, that the
Kings subjects might pass in peace.

Sir Frauncis Bryan the Kings Mynion was left Lord Justice, while Bellingham
repaired into England, where he dyed a man made up by service in the vvarres,
by continual toil therein diseased and feebled, Sir Edward Bellingham.
but of courage a lion to his dying day, true as steel, as far from flattery
as from hearing flatterers, an exceeding fervent Protestant, very zealous and
careful in tendering the wealth of Ireland, wherein the country gives him
the praise over all his predecessors and successors within memory, he spent
his whole allowance in hospitality, calling the same, his dear Masters
meat, none of his own cost. Letters commendatory offered him by the
Council, when Brian had wrought his trouble before the nobility of England
he rejected as vain and superfluous, professing, that if of his own
innocence he could not uphold him, he would never seek other shift, then
Credo resurrectionem mortuorum, for (quoth he) well they may kill me, but they
shall never conquer me. Sour he was, and thundering in words, indeed very
temperate, applied himself altogether to severity, Lordlinesse, and terror,
Brian dyed within six weeks, and Brabason became Lord Justice, till
Saintleger the fourth time was sent over Deputye. To him crept Mac Cartye, that
had lately roved and denied his obedience, with an halter about his neck, and
got his pardon.

Upon Saintleger came Sir James Croftes, of whose bounty and honorable dealing
toward them, they yield at this day a general good report. Crofts tarryed in
office two years, and left Sir Thomas Cusack (who dyed five hours before the
writing hereof, and Gerald Ailmer, while they both were coursing Oneale from
Dundalke.

Queen Mary.
Queen Mary established in her Crown, committed her government once more to
Saintleger, whom sundry Noblemen pelted and lifted at, till they shouldered him
quite out of all credit. 1553.
He to be counted forward and pliable to the taste of King Edward the sixth his
reign, Sir Anthony Seintleger.
rymed against the Real Presence for his pastime, and let the papers fall
where Courtiers might light thereon, who greatly magnified the pith and
conveyance of that noble sonnet But the original of his own hand-vvriting, had
the same firmly (though contrary to his own Judgment) wandering in so many
hands, that his adversary caught it, and tripped it in his way: the spot
whereof he could never wipe out. Thus was he removed, a discreet Gentleman,
very studious of the State of Ireland, enriched, stout enough, without gall.

While the Deputy staggered uncertain of continuance, the Tools, and the
Cavenaghes waxed cockish in the County of Divelin, rangeing in flocks of
seven or eight score, on whom set forth the Marshall and the Sheriffs of
Divelin, Buckley and Gygen, with the cities help, and over-layde them in
sudden skirmishes, of which, threescore were executed for example.

Thomas Earl of Sussex, Lord Deputy, 1554.
with whom came his Brother in law Sir Henry Sidney, Treasurer. This Deputy,
Earl of Sussex.
to the inestimable benefit of the Realm, brought under obedience the
disordered countries of Leix, Slewmarge, Ofalie, Irrye, and Glinmalire, then
late possessed by the Oconnore, Omores, Odempsyes, and other Irish rebels. He
molested James Mac Conell the Scottish Islander, that in those days joined
with the Irish, and disquieted Vlster. In which voyage Divelin assisted the
Governor with a fair company, conducted by John Usher, Sheriff, and Patrick
Buckley. He held a Parliament, wherein it was made high Treason to retain
Scots for soldiers, and felony to contract with them matrimony. 1557.
At his return from England (in which time Sir Henry Sidney was Lord Justice)
he pursued the Scots to their Islands, and there entered, did them much skathe,
vvanne himself full great commendation of hardiness, sailed back with the
glory of that adventure, wherein (I trow) two more of his matches are not
remembered, nor read. With the nevves of Maryes death, he crossed the seas
again into England, leaving Sir Henry Sidney, Lord Justice, and yet again the
next year leaving Sir William Fitzwilliams Lord Justice, then returned he
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, Queen Elizabeth.
by Proclamation reformed and abated their base Coin, being as yet perfect in
all the proportions, measures, allayes and values thereof, as by mintanor,
took with him soldiers out of Divelin, victualled for six weeks at that
cities charge, 1560.
under the leading of Petaboghe Sheriff, and joining him to his power, went
upon Shane Oneale, the Irish enemy of greatest force then living. Thereupon
Shane hyed him into England, the Lieutenant after him, Fitz Williams Lord
Justice, till Sussex sped his business, and came back the next and last time
of his departure. Sir Nic. Arnold
Sir Nicholas Arnold directed thither with Commission, tarryed behind him
Lord Justice, and too short a while as the country speaks, who testifies
his upright and reasonable provision of household cates, the abuses whereof
with sesse and soldiers, do so impoverish and alienate the needy Farmors
from us, that they say they might as easily bear the Irish oppressions of
Conies and Cuddies, from which we pretend to deliver them.

Arnold for his better success in government, linked himself entirely with
Gerald Earl of Kildare, who likewise endeavored to support the same with all
diligence, being authorized to strain the rebels at his discretion, wherefore
he disposed himself to serve, and presented the Governor many times with a
number of principal Out-lawes heads.

The Earl of Sussex.
In the mean while Sussex became Lord President of the North of England, a
spare man of body, but sound and healthful, brought up with Stephen Gardener,
passing valiant, a deep reacher, very zealous in friendship, quick in
resolution of extremities in the field, wonderful patient, able to tire ten
soldiers, learned and languaged, ever doing with his pen, of utterance
sharp and sententious, wary, busy, painful, and speedy, meeter to rule,
then to be overruled.

Sir Henry Sidney, Knight of the Garter, Lord President of Wales, and Lord
Deputy of Ireland. He found the Realm distempered with Oneales rebellion,
and the same did extinguish, whereof before I speak, I must look back a
little into certain years past, and lay together the circumstance of this
lamentable tumult.

Of all the Irish Princes, though none was then comparable to Oneale for
antiquity and nobleness of blood, yet had the same endured sundry varieties
and vexations, until the divion began in England of the two royal families,
York and Lancaster, at which time the English Lords of Ireland, either for
zeal, or for kindred and affection transporting their force thither to uphold a
side, the mere Irish waxed insolent, and chiefly Oneale incroched upon the
full possession of Vlster, Oneales rebellion.
abiding so uncontrolled, till Shane Oneale fearing the puissance of Henry 8.
exhibited to him a voluntary submissio^, surrendered all titles of honor,
received at his hands the Earldom of Ter-owen, commonly called Tirone, to be
held of the King of English form and tenure: Arms he gave the bloody hand a
terrible cognizance. This Oneale had two sons, Matthew a bastard, and Shane
legitimate, but because Matthew was a lusty horseman, welbeloved, and a tried
Soldier, Shane but a Boy, and not of much hope, the father obtained the
Barony of Donganon, and the remainder of his Earldom to Matthew. When Shane
and his foster brethren grew to years, they considered of the injury and
tyranny, done by policy of the base Oneale, with rearing hue and cry at the
side of a Castle where he lay that night, when the Gentleman ran suddenly
forth to answer the cry, as the custom is, they betrayed and murdered him.
The father not utterly discontent with his dispatch, when he saw the proof of
his lawful son and heir, thenceforward fancied Shane Oneale, put him in
trust with all, himself being but a Cripple, notwithstanding that Matthew left
issue male which lives, to whom the inheritance appertained, yet after his
fathers decease, Shane was reputed for the rightful Oneale, took it, kept it,
challenged superiority over the Irish Lords of Vlster, warred also upon the
English part, subdued Oreyly, imprisoned Odonil, his wife, and his son,
enriched himself with all Odonils forts, castles, and plate, by way of
ransom, detained pledges of obedience, the wife (whom he carnally abused) and
the Child, fortified a strong Island in Tyrone, which he named spitefully,
Foogh-ni-Gall, that is, the hate of English men, whom he so detested, that he
hanged a Soldier for eating English biscuit, another by the feet mistrusted
for a spy, another Captain of the Galloglaghes he slew with torture. After
this usurpation and tyranny, he was yet persuaded by Melchior Husse sent unto
him from Gerald Earl of Kildare, to reconcile himself to good order, and to
remember the honorable estate wherein King Henry placed his father, which
monition he accepted, besought his protection, and made a voyage into England,
where the Courtiers noteing his haughtines and barbarity devised his style
thus. Oneale the great, Cousin to S. Patricke, friend to the Queen of England,
enemy to all the world besides. Thence he sped home again, graciously dealt
with, used Civility, expelled the Scots out of all Vlster, where they intended
a conquest, wounded and took prisoner, Captain James Mac Conill their
Chieftaine, whereof the said James deceased: ordered the North so properly,
that if any subject could approve the loss of money or goods within his
precinct, he would assuredly either force the robber to restitution, or of his
own cost redeem the harm to the loosers contentation. Sitting at meat,
before he put one morsel into his mouth, he used to slice a portion above the
daily alms, and send it namely to some beggar at his gate, saying, it was
meet to serve Christ first: But the Lords of Vlster, and elsewhere, whom he
yoked and spoiled at pleasure, abhorring his pride and extortion, craved
assistance of the Deputy, for redress thereof: Oneale advertised, increases
his rage, disturbeth and drives out Mac Gwire, the plantiffe, burns the
Metropolitan Church of Ardmagh, because no English army might lodge therein,
for which sacrilege the Primate accursed him, besieges Dundalke, practices
to call strangers into the land for aid, as appears by those letters which
Sir Henry Sidney Lord Deputy intercepted, occupies all the North of Ireland,
being 100. miles broad, 120. long. Then addressed he plausible letters to the
Potentates of Mounster, exhorting them to rebel, that the force of England at
once might be dismembered. This message the Deputy prevented, stayed the
country, abridged him of that hope, and then proclaimed him Traitor. An Irish
Iester standing by, and hearing Oneale denounced with addition of a new name,
traitor: Except (quoth he) traitor be a more honorable title then Oneale, he
shall never take it upon him, by my consent.

While the Deputy was absent in England, the town of Droghedagh was in hazard
to be taken by the Rebels, which to preserve, 1566.
at the motion of the Lady Sidney, then abiding in Droghedagh, came Master
Sarsfield then Major of Divelin, with a chosen band of goodly young men
Citizens, and brake the rage of the enemies. The Deputy returning made him
Knight, and finding it now high time utterly to weed and root out the
Traitor, he furnished a substantial army, and with the readiness thereof
hartened the Irish, whom Oneale had impoverished, cut off his adherents, and
all access of succor, chased him and his into corners, spent him, cast him
into such despair, that he consulted with his Secretary Neale Mac Connor,
Oneale vanquished.
to present himself unknown and disguised to the Deputy, with an halter about
his neck, begging his pardon. Ere you do so (quoth his Clarke) let us prove
an extreme shift, and there he persuaded him to join with the Scots, whom he
had lately banished: of whom, should he be refused or find inconvenience, at
any time, submission to the Deputy might then be used, when all fails. Shane
knew himself odious to the Scots, especially to them whom he thought to lincke
with the brother and kindred of James Mac Conill, Mac Conil the Islander.
yet in those hard odds he devised rather to assay their friendship, then to
grate upon mercy, which so often and so intollerably he had abused.

Mac Conill whom Shane overthrew left two brethren, and a Sister, whereof one
Suarly Torwy remained with Oneale, entertained after his brothers death. The
other was Alexander Oge, who with 600. Scots encamped now in Clanebov. The
woman was Agnes Ilye, whose husband Shane slew in the said discomfiture, Agnes
had a son Mac Gillye Aspucke, who betrayed Oneale to avenge his Fathers and
Uncles quarrel. At the first meeting, (for thither he came accompanied with
Torwy and his Secretary, and 50. horsemen) the Captains made him great cheer,
and fell to quaffing, but Aspucke minding to enter into his purpose, there
openly challenged his Secretary, as the Author of a dishonorable report, that
Mac Conils wife did offer to forsake her country and friends, and to marry with
Shane Oneale her husbands destruction; Mary (quoth the Secretary) if thine Aunt
were Queen of Scotland, it might beseem her full well, to seek such a
marriage. To this brawle Oneale gave ear, upheld his man, advaunced his own
degree: The comparison bred a fray between their Soldiers; Out sprang
Aspucke, and beat Oneales man, and then suddenly brought his band upon them
in the tent, where the Soldiers with their slaughter-knives, killed the
Secretary and Shane Oneale, Oneale murdered.
mangled him cruelly, lapped him in an old Irish shirte, and tumbled him into a
pit, within an old Chapel hard by whose head four days after, Captain
Pierce cut off and met therewith the Deputy, who sent it before him staked on a
pole, to the Castle of Divelin, where it now stands. It is thought that
Tirlagh who now usurpeth the name of Oneale, practiced this devise with Agnes,
Alexander, and Torwy, when he perceived Shane discouraged, and not able to hold
out.

Thus the wretched man ended, who might have lived like a Prince, had he not
quenched the sparks of grace that appeared in him, with arrogance and contempt
against his Prince.

The Butlers rebellion.
The next Tumult in Ireland proceeded of the folly, especially of Sir Edmund
Butler, Pierce and Edward his Brethren, who being unable in law, to maintain
his title to certain lands, whereof he held possession, whereunto Sir Peter
Carew laid very direct and manifest claim, (for Carew is an ancient Barons
house in Ireland) confedered with James Fitz Morice of the south, and others,
began commotion, more dangerous to the Realm then the late stir of Oneale,
such was their opportunity of place, the rebels so friended, their number so
furnished, that the Deputy passing forth against them in haste, requisite with
such shift as the sudden mischief asked, was thought to have put his person
in great adventure, but in conclusion he wanne by that journey, great martial
honor, started them from hole to hole, and ransackt every vein of the land,
so as the Butlers craving protection, shortly recoyled, and stand now at the
Queens mercy. To appease the country, and reform the lewdnes of his Brethren,
Thomas Earl of Ormond came from the Court of England home, and in quieting the
said broils, showed also for his part, a right good piece of service, worthy
to be remembered. After this ensued a Parliament, the particulars whereof, are
expressed in the acts lately drawn, to be published in Print, somewhat before
the last session, a seditious libell entitled, Tom Troth, (let fall in the
streets of Divelin) nipped by name diverse honorable and worshipful of the
Realm, and certain officers of the Deputyes household, for greeving the land
with impositions of Cesse, whereupon followed a proclamation, bearing date the
twenty eight of January, which if it may be executed in all points, would cut
off many such murmures, and leave a blessed memory of the Governor that
devised it. 12. Decembris 1570.
The day of prorogation when the Knights and Burgesses of the Cominalty
resorted to the Lords of the upper house, much good matter was there uttered
between the Deputy and the Speaker, whereof coming home to my lodging I took
notes, and here I will deliver them, as near as I can call them to mind, in
the same words and sentences, that I heard them. First the Speaker James
Stanihurst an Esquire of worship, Recorder of Divelin, and for the City
Burgess at that present, began thus.

Rather of custom and dutyfull humility, The oration of James Stanihurst
Speaker of the Parliament.
then for doubt of your honorable disposition, (so well known to us all, and
to every of us in private, that it little needs my praise) we are to request
your Lordship in the behalf of our selves, and our countries, whom we
represent in this Parliament, to accept our service and endeavor in driving
these conclusions, where by to the uttermost of our skill we have intended
without injury, the Crown to enrich, treasons to chastise, to better the
state, traffic to further, learning to cherish, and in brief, to maintain
with our best advice those benefits, which the Prince has inferred upon this
Realm by you, and you with your sword and wisdom have performed. An ordinary
suite it is, in the end of such assemblies to crave executions of law, for it
suffices not, to keep a statute tanquam inclusum in tabulis, as a thing shut
up in parchment rolls, but law must speak and walk abroad, to the comfort
and behoof of good subjects: Otherwise, we shall resemble the folly of him,
that once in every hour saluted his gold, never using it, but only bad it lie
still and couch. Of the necessity thereof, I cannot say so much as your
Lordship conceives, and I desire not to discourse a matter generally felt and
confessed. In particular the zeal which I have to the reformation of this
Realm, and to breed in the rudest of our people, resolute English hearts,
moves me to pray your Lordships helping hand for the practice, namely of one
statute which is for the erecting of Grammar Schools, within every diocese,
the stipends to be levied in such proportion, as in the late act has been
devised, whereunto the royal assent is already granted, and yet the point in
no forwardnes, nor in none is like to be, except by some good means, the onset
be given and freshly followed, surely might one generation sippe a little of
this liquor, and so be induced to long for more, both our country men that
live obeysant, would ensue with a courage the fruits of peace, whereby good
learning is supported, and our unquiet neighbors would find such sweetness
in the taste thereof, as it should be a ready way to reclaim them. In mine
experience, who have not yet seen much more then forty years, I am able to
say that our Realm is at this day an half deal more civil then it was,
since noble men and worshipful, with others of ability, have used to send
their sons into England to the Law, to Universities, or to Schools. Now when
the same Schools shall be brought home to their doors, that all that will
may repair unto them, I doubt not, considering the numbers brought up beyond
the Seas, and the good already done in those few places, where learning is
professed, but this addition discreetly made, will foster a young frye, likely
to prove good members of this common wealth, and desirous to train their
children the same way. Neither were it a small help to the assurance of the
Crown of England, when Babes from their Craddles should be inured under
learned Schoolmasters, with a pure English tongue, habit, fashion,
discipline; and in time utterly forget the affinity of their unbroken
borderers, who possibly might be won by this example, or at the least wise
loose the opportunity, which now they have, to infect others* And seeing our
hap is not yet, to plant an University here at home, which attempt can never
be remembered without many thanks to your good Lordship for your bountiful
offer, me seems it is the more expedient to enter so far forth as our
commission reaches, and to hope for the rest: I have said enough, especially
to a learned governor, to whom an inckling were sufficient in such a plausible
and needful motion. It rests that we pray your Lordship to fold up
whatsoever squarings or diversities of Judgments, wise men have here uttered
in our often meetings, and by the sequel of all our doings to measure the good
meaning of every several person.

When the Speaker had done, the Deputy having a rich and plentiful kind of
utterance, mere natural, but not without judgment, answered at length, as he
that knew no end of his good, the points whereof, as I can remember, were these.

In good faith, M. Speaker, I cannot less do, but record and testify the
readiness, travail and good service of you all, The Lord Deputies answer.
and namely of your self, who in the whole course of this Parliament, and now
lastly in this charitable request for trayning your youth, have confirmed the
opinion which my self and the general voice long since retained of your rare
virtues, devotion, wisdom, learning, and modesty, so as the case cannot be
misdoubted that is preferred by such a Proctor, the substance whereof touches
you my Lords spiritual and temporal, and you the knights and worshipful of
every Shire, to you belongs the quickening of this godly statute, which here
again I recommend unto you, and will not let to enquire after your diligence
therein from time to time, and the most effectual order that may be for this
purpose, shall assuredly be taken in place convenient. Show your selves
forvvard and frank in advancing the honor, wealth, ease and credit of your
countries, envy not to your posterity the same path that your selves have
trodden, and namely you that flourish at this day in the light and eye of your
commonwealth. Had your opinions matched with mine, concerning the University
which M. Speaker remembers, no doubt the name and reputation thereof would
have bin a spur to these erections, as nurses for babes to suck in, till they
might repair thither to be wained: But I trust your consents therein are only
suspended for a time, and that so much good labor shall not be utterly lost
and frustrate: What though certain imperfections cannot as yet be salved? What
though the sum arise not to make a muster of Colleges at the first day? What
though the place be not also commodious? What though other circumstances
infer a feeble and raw foundation? These are indeed objections of the
multitude, whose backewardnesse breeds an unnecessary stop in this our
purpose. But your wisdoms can easily consider that time must ripen a weak
beginning, that other Universities began with less, that all experience
tells us so, shall we be so curious or so testy that nothing will please us,
but all in all, all absolute, all excellent, all furnished, all beautified, all
fortified in the prime and infancy thereof. I remember a tale of Apuleius
ass, who being indifferently placed between two bottles of hay, because he
could not reach them both at once, forbear them both. Let us not so do, but
content our selves by little and little to be fed as the case requires. The
rest of your Bills debated and passed by your wisdoms in this Parliament, I
must confess, they are as you say, beneficial to the Queen my Mistress, and
to her Crown, but how? Verily as the Husbandman sows his seed, and reapeth
much more then he laid down, so whatsoever this benefit amounts unto, it
returns to your selves in a circle, here it grows, here it is eaten,
here it multiplyeth, here it is spent, they have their due, the Prince is
bettered, you are quieted, Justice executed, malefactors terrifyed. Were they
never so dear collopps of your own flesh and blood, I see not how you could
either have colored their offense, or qualifyed their punishment, the one so
notorious, that it cannot be dissembled, the other so ordinary, that course of
law prescribes it. Therefore as you have well done, so you have done but your
duties, allowed an inch to receive an ell, abridged your own foes, avenged
your own Injuryes, condemned your own oppressors. And yet this duty being on
your parts, so cheerfully and painfully, so lovingly and advisedly performed,
deserves great thanks, and shall find it too, If I be the man, either in
office able to consider you, or out of office in place to friend you. I am to
depart into England shortly, lay your heads together, and article the points,
whereby this Realm may be furthered, use me either as a mouth to speak for
you, or an eye to direct you, or as a hand to under-prop you, aut consilio, aut
auxilio. Besides, the general care which I ought to have for you all, as your
governor, and yoked together under one obedience, English bloods, and English
hearts, I am linked to you as to my continual acquaintance these many years,
hither I came in my spring, here I have spent my summer, I return in the fall
of the leaf, now is the time, intimate your defects in demands, or what else
soever may content you, and see whether I will tender your commonwealth. I
mean not the pretended commonwealth, seditiously promoted in Tom Loodles
ryme, but some good and substantial matter worth the hearing, which upright
and equal men will indeed esteem. As for his complaint of Cesse and
Imposition, it savoureth either hateful malice, or childish folly, malice if
he would decay the garrison that preserves the Realm, folly if he think the
Realm can be preserved without a garrison, vvherin I will show you my fancy
by the way, perhaps out of all order, but I pray bear with me, I take
matters as they come next to hand, I can not skill of written tales. Many a
good-fellovv talks of Robin Hoode, that never drevv in his Bovv, and many an
idle head is full of Proclamations, and conceives certain far fetches, able
in his vveening to vvield a Realm. But let me see which of them all can
justify, that Ireland may spare the Army they kick so much against. Are your
enemies more tractable then they have been? Are they fewer? Are you by your
selves of force to match them? If you be, then were England stark mad, to
disburse twenty or thirty thousand pounds a year, for none other purpose
but to vex and grieve you: that were like the husband who gelded himself to
anger his wife. You must not think we love you so evil, nay rather think
truly we tender your quietness and preservation, as a nation derived from
our ancestors, ingraffed and incorporate into one body with us, disturbed
with a sort of barbarous people, odious to God and man, that lap your blood
as greedily as ours. The abuse of soldiers, their horse, boys, and harlots,
the Legerdemaine of Captains, chequerelles, the purloyning of Cessors and
Constables, the number of freedoms holding only by concordatum, the annoyance
and hurt which the poor farmer endures, as I know them to be intolerable, so
I know them to be redressed with the first detection, whose complaint has not
been heard? whose enormity vvinked at? what can you ask more? would you have
soldiers nothing insolent, nothing sensual, nothing greedy, no quarrellers?
so wish I, but scarce hope for it, would you hazard a misery certain,
extreme, and incurable, to avoyde a trouble casual, transitory, and
remediless? so would not I, if you can prove a garrison needless, I
undertake to ease you thereof, If you need it, they must be fed, find
another way then this, to provide for them victual, that carries as much
readiness to service, and more contentation to your selves, and I assure you
mine assistance to set it forvvard. But the Brokers of this libell are wont to
reason, Why should not we live without an Army as well as in England? Why
cannot our Noblemen of might in every border, our tenants and servaunts
vvithstand the Irish next them, as well as the Northern Lords and
Inhabitants of Riddesdale and Tiddesdale, and those about the Scottish bank
resist the Scotts, facing and pilfering as fast as our enemies. Very good,
what say they then to France, which is no vvorser governed then England,
and has an Army. Italy notvvithstanding as well ordered as France without
an Army? Spain asvvell as either of them both, and continually keeps an
Army? I tell you, these are dangerous and hollovve kinds of Arguments, which
are deduced ab exemplo, by example of other Realms. Many subtle diversities,
many varieties of circumstance, many exceptions alter the case, and make it
utterly desperate. Touching Scotland it is well known, they were never the men
whom England need to fear: They are but a corner cut out, and easily tamed
when they wax outrageous. Your foes lie in the bosom of your Countries; more
in number, richer of ground, desperate thieves, ever at an inch, unpossible to
be severed from you without any fence, beside your own valiantnes, and the
help of our Soldiers. England is quiet within it self, thoroughly peopled
on that side of Scotland, which most requires it, guarded with an army,
otherwise the Lords and Gentlemen, and lusty Yeoman, that dwell on a row are
ready to master their private vagaries. From all foreign invasions walled
with the wide Ocean. Were there such a Sea betwixt you and the Irish, or were
they shut up in an odd end of the land, or had they no such opportunityes of
bogges and woods as they have, or were they Lords of the lesser part of
Ireland, or were they severed into handfuls, not able to annoy whole towneships
and Baronies as they do, the comparison were somewhat like, but alack it
fares not so with you, you are beset round, your towns be feeble, the land
empty, the commons bare, every county by it self cannot save it self. Take
away the terror and fear of our Band, which increases your strength, many
an Irish Lord would be set agog that now is full lowly, and holds in his
horns, and the open enemy would scovvre your quarters that now dares not
venture lest he pay for his passage. Consider me the effect of an Army wrought
in these fevv years, for doubt whereof you are nothing so often nor so
lamentably pelted at, as your ancestors were, which of them durst be stored
with coin, knovving the rebels teeth watered thereat, and himself not able
to hold him out? which of them had leisure to build, to lie soft and vvarme,
to take his ease in his own home? which of them were plated, or jevvelled,
or attyred themselves, their vivves and children sumptuously, after their
calling as you do now? If your bags be full where theirs were lancke, if
you dwell neatly where they dwelled homely, if you sleep on featherbeds where
they slept on couches, if you be sumptuous where they were skant, you have the
more cause to honor that Scepter, that so directs you, and to love the
warrant that procures you this quietness, the mother of all your wealth and
prosperity.

Therefore to conclude where I began, weigh well the sick and wounded parts of
your common wealth, cure the root, regard the foundation, the principal
pillars, the summer posts, the stone walls, as for the roof and the tyles, if
ye repair them only, and suffer the ground work to perish, a tempest of
weather, a flow will shake your building. Of some such good and substantial
reformation I would advise you friendly to consult, and you shall find me as
willing to prefer the general welfare of you all, as I have been desirous
to benefit every singular person of you, that has in any lawful suite
attempted me.

These last words gave Sidney to the Realm, as it were for a farewell, and
thenceforvvards looked for Sir William Fitz Williams his brother in law, a
politic and stout gentleman, now Lord Justice, and for Sir John Perrot Lord
president of Mounster, to be settled there, before his departure. He was
honored at the point of his going, with such recourse, pomp, music, shows
and enterludes, as no man reme^breth the like. He took ship toward England at
the key of Divelin, in Lent follovving, Sir Henry Sidney, Lord Deputy fails
into England. 25. Mar. 1571.
accompanied to sea with the Estates and Worshipful of Ireland, with
innumerable hearty prayers, and with that vvish of his return, whereof but
fevv Governors in these last 60. years, have held possession. The man was
surely much loved of them, from his first office of Treasurer in the 2. year
of Queen Mary, stately without disdain, familiar without contempt, very
continent and chaste of body, no more then enough liberal, learned in many
languages, and a great lover of learning perfect in blazoning of arms,
skillful of antiquities, of wit fresh and lively, in consultations very
Temperate, in utterance happy, which his experience and wisdom has made
artificial, a preferrer of many, a father to his servants, both in war and
peace of commendable courage.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
PAge 2. line 19. countie^ p. 6. l. 24. Inchequin. l. 26. de Burgo. l. 28.
Vlick. 29. Thomond. and 34. Clancar. p. 7. l. ^7. Killeene. l. 32. Donsany. and
35. Beare-haven. p. 8. l. 4. Brune. l. 19. Doceter or D'exeter. l. 22.
Inchequin. and l. 29. Thomastowne. p. 12. l. 12. Hiberus* p. 21. in the ^argons
for Dom* read, mundi. p. 22. l. 17. monarchy. p. 30. l. 25. after purpose,
read, our. p. 38. l. 36. for Mounster r. Vlster. p. 46. l. 33. after Clerk,
add, astonished. p. 61. l. 12. extremely. p. 65. l 7. coadiutors. l. 30.
Alde^m. p. 77. l. 13. after Knight, add, 10. p. 82. l. 15. Birminghame^. p.
84. l. 2. for Mounster r. Leinster. l. 3. O-Tooles, O-Birnes, l. 37. Maupas. p.
85. l. 11. Bignore. p. 87. in the margent, 1329. p. 90. l. 9. after Arch^r,
add, Prior. l. 12. Kenwrick. p. 93. in marg. l. 2. 1399. p. 96. l. 32.
prapofit^^a. p. 101. l. 5. least. p. 105. l. 21. cross out the first and. p.
118. l. 15. Rowks. p. 123. l. 8. O Connor, p. 136. l. 9. cheque* rolls. The
lesser faults are as easily amended as found out by the Reader.

THE CHRONICLE OF IRELAND: COLLECTED BY MEREDITH HANMER, Doctor of Divinity.
The second part.
THree hundred years after the flood, Bartholanus in Ireland.
one Bartholanus the son of Sera, with his three sons, Languinus, Salanus,
and Ruthurugus, and their wives of the posterity of Iaphet, are said to have
arrived in this Island. This opinion follows Giraldus Cambrensis, and him
follows Polychronicon; and my self, not meaning to swarve from the common
opinion, thought good to acquaint the posterity therewith. With this
Bartholanus, as their Captain, came many of that line, and multiplied
exceedingly for the space of 300 years, to the number of 9000 fighting men.
Little is remembered of Bartholanus, saving that with many hands he rid and made
plain a great part of the Country, making paces through woods and thickets; and
that his sons left doubtful remembrances of their names; the first to
Languinus Poole, the second to mount Salanga (since named Saint Dominicks hill)
and the third to Ruthurugus his Poole.

At the same time, according to the common saying, Where God has his Church,
the Devil has his Chapel, many of the cursed seed of Cham arrived also in
this Island, Oceanus invadeth Ireland.
with their Captain Oceanus, the son of Cham, called of some Mena, of Moses,
Mitzraim. First he was in the year of the world 1802, the second Commander of
Egypt, planted Colonies along the river Nilus, and after he had reigned there
7 years, he endeavored by navigation to subdue unto his Empire many parts of
the world. Thus waxing strong and mighty upon the seas, he prevailed much, and
traveled far; he came to these North parts of the world, landed many of his
followers, and in remembrance of his voyage, left his name upon the seas which
wash these lands, which of him is yet called the Ocean sea.

After his departure hence his cursed line multiplied not so much in number as
in all mischief and rebellion, they set up a King of their own, they opposed
themselves against the posterity of Iaphet; they were great in strength, and
huge of stature, and attempted great matters after the example of Cham or
Zoroastres the Magician, and Nimrod grandfather to Ninus: they repined at the
blessings bestowed upon Sem and Iaphet, thinking it necessary to withstand and
prevent all lawful rule and dominion, lest the curse of slavery prophesied by
Noah should light upon them, as at length it did. Many bickerings and
skirmishes were amongst them, the success was variable on both sides, between
the lawful governors and these usurpers, so much to the grief of them that
coveted to live in peace under their rightful Princes, that they determined
with the chance of one general battle either wholly to subdue those
rebellious miscreants and tyrannous Giants, or else to end their lives in
freedom, and so to be rid of farther misery. They assemble together, they
gather their forces out of all parts of the land, and coming to join battle
with the Giants, after they had fought fiercely together for the space of
certain hours, the victory inclined to the rightful part, so that the
lawful Kings prevailing against this cursed brood, great slaughter was made
upon the whole sort of that pestiferous generation, and the Kings meaning to
deliver themselves of all dangers in time to come, used their happy victory
with great cruelty, which turned to their own confusion. For they spared
neither man, woman, nor child that came in their way, for more despite and
fuller satisfaction of their determinate revenge, neither vouchsafed they to
bury the carcasses of their slain enemies, Victory with cruelty turns to the
hurt of the conquerors
but cast them out like a sort of dead dogs, whereof (through stink of the
same) such an infective pestilence insued in all places throughout the Island
by corruption of the air, that few escaped with life, A grievous infection.
except those that got them away by sea; yea the infection was so great of
those cursed carcasses of Cham his posterity, that the dogs and wolves died
thereof. And here ended the whole race of Bartholanus and his offspring, and
the Country (excepting a few silly souls scattered in remote places) was
unpeopled.

And here comes in a tale yet in great request among the Irish, how that one
Ruanus a Giant, fearing this mortality, fled into a cave, Of Ruanus:
and continued there till nature forced him to come forth for food and
nourishment, so hungry was he that every thing was meat that came to his
mouth: he covering his face with moss and grass, fled to the farthest parts
of the land into the wind to avoid the infection, and so for a long time
having taking the advantage of the air, escaped death. He is said to have
lived two thousand and one and forty years (which is more then twice the age
of Methushelah) unto the time (forsooth) of Saint Patrick, to whom he
discoursed at large (say they) of all the accidents of former times. In the end
he was of Saint Patrick baptized, and died after the birth of our Savior, in
the year 432, and lies buried at Loghry in Ormund, where there is a Church
dedicated to his name, and he is numbered among the Confessors of Ireland.

And to second this fable with two precedent lies, the which I should have
begun withal in the front of this History (as all Irish Antiquaries do) but
that I would not abuse the reader, being purposed beginning and ending to
deliver the truth, I read as follows:

Whereas in the year of the world 1525, Of Cesara and Fintan.
Noah began to admonish the people of vengeance to come by a general deluge
for the wickedness and detestable sin of man, and continued his admonition
120 years, building an Arc for the safeguard of himself and his family; one
Cesara (say they) according unto others Cesarea, a Niece of Noah, (when others
seemed to neglect this forewarning) rigging a navy, committed her self with
her adherents to the seas to seek adventures, and to avoid the plagues that
were to fall; there arrived in Ireland, with her three men, Bithi, Laigria, and
Fintan, and fifty women; within forty days after her arrival the universal
flood came upon them and those parts, as well as upon the rest of the world,
and drowned them all, in which perplexity of mind and imminent danger
beholding the waves overwhelming all things before their eyes, Fintan is said
to have been transformed into a Salmon, and to have swoome all the time of the
deluge about Vlster, and after the fall of the water recovering his former
shape, to have lived longer then Adam, and to have delivered strange things to
the posterity, so that of him the common speech rises; If I had lived Fintans
years I could say much.

But to let these fables pass: The next plantation after Bartholanus (as it is
recorded amongst the collections of Irish antiquities) is this in effect, that
Magog the son of Iaphet planted Colonies in Scythia near the river of
Tanais, from whence about the year of the world two thousand three hundred and
seventeene, Anno mundi 2317 Nemedus and his four sons arrive.
one Nemedus with his four sons Starius, Garbaneles, Anvinus, and Fergusius,
Captains over great companies of armed men, were sent into this Island now
called Ireland. And passing by Graecia took with them such voluntaries as were
willing to adventure with them, they landed, inhabited the Country, and
multiplied exceedingly, although not without continual wars which they held
with the Giants of Chams posterity for the space of two hundred years and
odd. In the end the Giants prevailing, chased them out of the land, so that
they retired into Scythia, and some to Greece. This was about the year after
the creation 2333, from which time the Giants kept possession of the land
without foreign invasion for many years, but yet in all that space their
minds not being set upon any goodness, but altogether upon mischief, they
made no good laws, framed no common wealth, they obeyed no Magistrate, but
fell at variance amongst themselves, measuring all things by might, and
seditiously vexed each other.

In the year of the world 2416, and after the universal flood 750 years (as
the Scottish History declares) one Gathelus the son of Nealus a Grecian,
Arrival of Gathelus the Greek.
upon displeasure for sundry rodes made into Macedonia and Achaia, being exiled
and banished his country, with a great number of his adherents and accomplices,
went into Egypt in the days of Moses, where he found favor in the sight of
King Pharaoh, insomuch that he married with Scota his daughter, continued there
about 93 years, and multiplied exceedingly. Johannes Major Scotus calls the
verity of this History in question, de hac prima profectione de Graecia and
Aegypto figmentum reor: I am of opinion (says he) that this first going out
of Greece and Egypt is but feigned: yet let us go forward. When Gathelus
understood that the land was shortly for the wickedness of the people to
suffer great plagues, he prepared a fleet, shipped Grecians and Egyptians,
hoised up sail, and came upon the coast of Numidia, now called Barbary, thence
they were put back, to sea they went, and came to the coast of Spain now
called Portingall (as they say) since that time of him called Port-gathell. The
inhabitants of the place resisted them, gave them a sore battle, and in the
end after parlie, Gathelus was entreated, and by them directed to take his
voyage into Galitia, which eftsoons he did. There in a short time they waxed
so populous, that the country could not sustain them: whereupon Gathelus
called a Council, and being resolved what to do, took a great number of them
with him to sea, and arrived in Ireland, and there grew into such estimation
with the barbarous people, that for knowledge especially in all languages
(having traveled many Countries, as is before mentioned) he was highly
honored. For he not only enriched and beautified the Irish tongue, but also,
as is said, taught them letters, sought up their antiquities, and trained their
youth in warlike exercises, after the manner of the Grecians and Egyptians
from whence he descended. Note here (gentle reader) before I wade further into
this History three contrary opinions of this Gathelus the son of Nealus: The
Scottish Historiographers say, it was 750 years after the flood. Thomas
Walsingham Monk of S. Albons, writes it was 1000 years and odd after the
delivery of the children of Israel out of Egypt (which must be anno mundi
3455, to wit, one 1000 years after the former computation) calling him a noble
man of Scythia whom the Egyptians banished out of Egypt. John Harding, a
great Antiquary (that knew best in his time the state of Scotland) delivers,
that Gathelus and Scota came to these parts after the birth of Christ, in anno
75. This I give as a caveat, referring unto the discreet reader the dissonance
that I find in the observation of times, to be considered of, promising to
lay down faithfully every thing as I find the same, as shall appear in that
which follows. And now to the history where we left. It is said that this
Gathelus of his wife Scota commanded that his followers Grecians and Egyptians
should be called Scoti, that is, Scottishmen. And Hector Boethius in the History
of Scotland sticks not to write, that upon his marriage with Scota, the
foresaid commandment was published, and that his followers in Egypt, Barbary,
Portingall, Galitia, and over Spain, were called Scoti. But how true that is,
it may appear by the Roman Histories (which have noted the accidents of those
times) in all which there is no mention of the Scots before the time of
Constantius the Emperor (which was about the year of Christ 310 who lies
buried at York, and was father to Constantine the great.

Paulus lovius writes, Scotland took that name upon the coming of a foreign
and no great ancient nation. No Latin writer before Marcellinus in Julian the
Emperors time (which was about the year 362) remembers the Scots: neither
does it well appear out of what Country the Scots first came into Albion, when
as by the Annals not only of English, but of Scottish Antiquities varying among
themselves, great obscurity is brought among doubtful things. Some bring their
original from Ireland, others from Dania, Cimbrica, Chersonesus, and the
Islands of Gothland and Norwey; neither wanted there some which were of opinion,
they came from Spain, deriving the name of Scottishmen from Moses himself,
and the Egyptians, as Hector Boethius the Scottish Chronicler; yet Hector
himself preventing as it were the like objection, confesses that in the third
year of Adrian the Emperor (which was after the birth of Christ about 122
years) the name of Scots was not known unto the Romans. Scot. Hist. lib. 4*


In short time after the retinue of Gathelus searched the North-east and
North-west Islands, and entered the Land which now is called Scotland, so also
called (as the Scottish will have it) of Scota. Hector Boet. in descript. regni
Scotia. Et lib. ^ histor. Scot.
But many grave writers have stumbled at the certainty of this story, yet I
find for certain, that Ireland was called Scotia mayor, and the other Scotia
minor, and oftentimes confusedly the one taken for the other, and the words to
be of no great antiquity. Capgrave in the life of Saint Columbanus says;
Johannes Capgrave in vita Sancti Colum. Idem in vita Sancti Fiacrij.
Ireland of old was called Scotland, from whence the Scottish nation inhabiting
Albania (next unto great Britain) now called Scotland took their original.
Fiacrius an Hermit being asked of a Bishop in France what he was, among other
things answered; Ireland the Island of Scots is the native soil of me and my
parents. It also appears by Orosius, Claudian, Isidore, Hubaldus, Beda, the
English Legend, the Martyrologe secundum usum Sarum, Marianus, Jonas in vita
Sancti Columbani, Aimoinus, Caesarius, etc. that Ireland and Scotland were
usually taken one for the other.

But before I go any further, I think it not amiss to say some what to this
word Scotus or Scottus, the which Hector Boethius carries away as derived of
Scota, and as thing granted. There came to this Country of Ireland at three
several times, before Gathelus, great Commanders of Scythia (as I have said
before) of the posterity of Iaphet, planted themselves, divided the land with
great troubles, and when they were at the worst, always they left a remnant of
their nation behind them. Beda every where calls them not Scotos, but
Scottos; so that I find in the word a double alteration, y turned into o, and
th into tt. Also in low Germany they call the Scythians and Scottish, Schotten.
Nennius the Britain writes, Scythae Hiberniam obtinuerunt, the Scythians gat
Ireland. King Alfredus translating the history of Orosius into the Saxon
tongue, terms the Scots, Scyttan: The borderers upon Scotland, call them to
this day, Skyttes and Skets. Walsingham writes, Of the country called Sicia
(alias Scythia) we have Scita, Sciticus, Scoticus, Scotus and Scotia.
Ranulphus Monk of Chester, writes, as Sir John Trevisa the Priest in old
English laid it down; Scotts been called as it were Scytes, for they came out
of Scytia. Matthew Monk of Westminster, says, Ex Pictis and Hibernensibus,
Scoti originem habuerunt, quasi ex diversis nationibus compacti; Scot enim
illud dicitur quod ex diversis rebus in unum acervum congregatur, deinde vero
terra illa quae prius Albania dicebatur a Scotis Scotia nuncupatur, (anno
gratiae 77.) Of Pictes and Irish the Scots had their original, as it were
compacted of diverse nations; for that is called Scot which of diverse things is
gathered into one heap, afterward that Land which was first called Albania of
the Scots is called Scotia.

Beda Ang. hist. lib. 1. cap. 1.
And Beda writes that the Country now called Scotland was inhabited by Pictes
that were Scythians; again, In process of time (says he) Britain besides
Britains and Pictes received a third nation that is of Scots upon the side of
the Pictes.

Volat geograph. lib. 3. Io. Mayor de gest. Scot. l. 1. c. 4. De rebus Hiber.
lib. 1.
Of the same opinion is Volateran and Johannes Major Scotus, although Hector
Boethius dissemble it. Richard Stanihurst the great Philosopher and Antiquary of
Ireland, writes, A quo primum initio Scotiae nomen fit tractum, nondum plane
perspectum video, etc. Of what first original the word Scotia is drawn, I
have not yet found out. And touching the truth of the History of Gathelus and
Scota, he says; To the end the worthiness of so great a marriage delivered
unto the posterity should flourish, all these Grecians call themselves Scots;
and Ireland where they first seated themselves, Scotiam. But all this as a
vain fable George Buchanan, and before him Humfrey Lloide have quite rejected,
and if Hector Boethius be not the chief forger of this history, or rather
vain fable, yet he has besprinckled (after his manner) the whole discourse
with lies. With great ambition has that silly writer labored to advance the
glory of his nation, in the which endeavor, he has little regarded the
honor of his Country and his own credit. For he has purchased this amongst
the learned, that where as he would seem to write all for the love of the
truth, they will believe in a manner nothing to be true which he wrote: For to
what purpose should he commend to the posterity the acts of his ancestors with
such majesty of words, that they have quailed the Spaniard; vanquished the
Irish with their only austere countenance, triumphed as often as pleased
themselves over the bordering Britains; where they pitched foot, subjected all
as furious victors; that thou may think the Scottish not so much to have
invaded foreign Countries, as to have removed to their proper possessions.
These fabulous dreams happily may move admiration to some old wives, applause
to some Abderas, and laughter to the discreet reader. The Scottish had as other
nations tofore (though now famous) base beginning, dusked and obscured with
some barbarous rudeness, and this had been more discretion to confess, then
to vaunt or crake among the ignorant, with boast of their fained doings. Thus
far Stanihurst:

And now (with Hector Boethius his leave) as the followers of Gathelus and his
wife Scota in Egypt, Greece, Barbary, Portugal, Galitia, and over all Spain,
were not called Scoti (as before is remembered) no more were they termed in
Ireland and Scotland, but corruptly of Scytae, Scoti, coming originlly out of
Scythia. And it were more honor in mine opinion for these nations, to derive
their original from Scythia then from Egypt, for two causes; first for that
the Scythians are more ancient then the Egyptians, as Trogus, Volateran, and
Marianus Scotus do write; secondly for that the Scythians come of Iaphet that
was blessed, and the Egyptians of Cham that was accursed, but in this case
leaving every man to his own choice; I will return the History.

In the antiquities of Ireland it is generally received that Gathelus (of whom
I spoke before) gave the Irishmen the language, which of him they call
Gaodhealgh in British Gwidhealaec, that is, a language compounded of many
tongues, and so it may well be; for by reason of his great travel he had skill
in many tongues. Although, as they say, he were a Grecian borne, yet I find no
Greek in the Irish tongue* yet for their coming from Spain, which they so
much urge, Johannes Major Scotus forsooth has found one Spanish word, Io.
Mayor. hist. Scot. lib. 1. c. 9.
bona dies, in Irish vennoka die; to which I answer, una hirundo non facit
ver; but indifferently to examine the matter, we find that diversity of
times, alteration of government, invasion of strangers, planting of new
Colonies, and conversing with foreign nations do alter languages. The
Hebrews by reason of their peregrination and captivities do smach of the
Chaldees, Syriack, and Arabic tongues. The Slavonian tongue, Laur. Surius ver.
in orb gest. ud annum. 1501
as Surius and others record, without exception, at this day is the most
dispersed language upon the earth; for the Muscovites, Ruthenes, Russians,
Dalmatians, Bosnenses, Croatians, Istrians, Carnians, Carniolanians,
Carinthians, Stirians, Maesians, Servians, Bulgarians, with other nations
reaching to Constantinople, as Bohemians, Lusatians, Silesians, Moravians,
Polonians, Circasians, Quinquemontanians, even unto Pontus, and the remnant of
Vandals, beyond the river Albis, through Germany, into the North, have the
language, and yet we have neither their characters, nor ancient Annals extant.
Saint Jerome borne in Strido in the confines of Dalmatia and Pannonia, is said
to have translated the Bible into the Slavon tongue, but whether it be in that
language extant, let him report that knows it. Gothi, Hypogothi, Gepidi,
Vandali, Hunni, Alani, though they vary in name, yet they use one language,
says Paulus Diaconus. The Italian, Spanish, and French tongues are compounded
of the Latin. The German (high and low country) Saxon, Scottish and English
have great affinity. Northwales, Southwales, Cornwall, and little Britain in
France, as Cambrensis and Sir Io. Price have learnedly discoursed; but the
Irish (excepting the Red shanks and the Scottish of the hay land) have
affinity with no tongue (as I can learn) more then with the British language.

Many reasons there are (gentle reader) to induce thee to be of that opinion;
first of all according unto the first command, the Celticke tongue was of force
in all these Northern parts. Bodinus writes, Bodinus. Pausanias:
that the British and Celtick language was all one. Pausanias the Grecian
makes mention how the Celts in their language called a horse Marc, and three
horses Trimarc, the which the Welshman uses to this day with a gutturall
alteration, Margh and Treemargh. Also Camden the learned Antiquary of this our
age, is of this opinion (remembering the story of Gurguntius, and the infinite
number of British words in ure among the Irish, the which he terms, infinitam
vim Britannicarum dictionum) that the Britains first peopled this land. And
although of a long time (by reason of troubles and alterations) the speech grew
wholly out of use; yet afterward in success of time it was revived. Secondly
the British and Irish often matched together, so that there grew among them great
alliance and affinity, to the furtherance of the language. Mare King of
Cornwall anno 459 married with Label Isode that built Isodes Chapel (or
Chappell-Isode) and Isodes Tower in Dublin, she was the King of Irelands
daughter. Edwal ap Meiric Prince of Wales in the time of Edelred, anno 992
married in Ireland. Iago ap Edwal Prince of Wales in the time of Cnute, anno
1031 married in Ireland. In the time of Edward the Confessor, Conan the son
of Iago Prince of Wales married with Ranulph daughter of Alfred King of Dublin,
anno 1041. In the time of William Rufus, Arnulph Earl of Pembroke married with
the daughter of Marogh King of Ireland anno 1101; at the same time Magnus the
son of Herald married with another daughter of the said King. In the time of
Henry the first and King Steven lived Griffith ap Conan Prince of Wales, that
was wont to brag of three things, that his mother was an Irishwoman, his
grandmother an Irishwoman, and that he himself was borne, and of a child
brought up in Ireland. In the time of Henry the second. Biryd the son of Owen
Gwyneth Prince of Wales, being Lord of Cloghran in Ireland, begat his son
Howel upon an Irish Gentlewoman. In the same Kings reign Richard Strangbow
Earl of Pembroke, married with Eva the daughter of Dermotte Mac Morrogh King
of Leinster. Thirdly, when there was any trouble in Ireland, they fled to
Wales; when they had any wars or rebellion there, they came for refuge and
aid into Ireland: hereof came the shaking of hands, Brother Brannagh, Brother
Erinagh. In the life of Henry the third, it is written, that when Othobon the
Popes Legate came to Oxford, and soiourned at Osney Abbey, among other
scholars, some for one cause, some for another, that were there, a poor Irish
scholar ( Matthew Paris calls him Capellanum Hibernensem) drew near unto
the kitchen dresser, and praid for some relief; the cook took a ladell full of
hot liquor and threw it in his face; a Welsh scholar standing by took his
bow, and shot the cook through with an arrow ( Stow writes that the cook was
the Legates brother) the hurly burly was great, the scholars came together in
arms (and as it is said, one Odo of Kilkenny was their ensign bearer) the
Cardinals men were well beaten, the Cardinal himself to save his life fled
secretly at a posterne gate to the King, made a grievous complaint, and craved
the aid of armed men to fetch off his men, and thereof arose great troubles;
but to proceed. Dermotte Mac Morogh King of Leinster, being banished out of his
country, had aid out of Wales. Conan the son of Iago, Griffith ap Conan,
Rees ap Tewder, Owen the son of Cadogan, Kadwalader the son of Griffith ap
Conan, Marlgon ap David, Princes of Wales; Algar Earl of Chester, Arnulph
Earl of Pembroke, Magnus the son of Herald, William de Bruise Lord of
Breknock, with his wife and children, in extremity, took Ireland for their
refuge, where they found favor and kindness to their own hearts desire, as in
the British Chronicles published by Caradoc of Sancarban, Cambrensis, Humfrey
Lloid, and Doctor Powel, does more plainly appear. These two nations conversed
much one with another; Sir Tristram one of the Knights of the round Table, came
to Ireland. Morogh brother to the King of Ireland (whom Caxton calls Morhaus)
was one of King Arthurs Knights. Merlin the Welsh Prophet came twice to
Ireland, and in Ofaby there is a Chapel bearing his name: the occasion of his
first coming was this. There was a noble man of Ireland which had a suit unto
the King of England, with whom Merlin was great, to whom he said, Merlin, if
thou will effect my suit, come to Ireland, and I will give thee as much land as
thou shall see round about thee: it was done; after his arrival, Merlin
demanded his promise, the noble man put him into a cellar, where was a grate,
and without a bawne, with an high wall, look out (says the Irish man) the
Welsh Prophet could not see a quoits cast from him, and thus was he deceived,
having left his spirit of prophecy at home. But to our purpose.

Fourthly, the first conquerors in Henry the seconds times, that brake the ice
into this land, were Welsh men, whose names and seats to this day are fresh in
memory. Rees ap Tewder Prince of Southwales had a daughter called Nesta, who by
King Henry the first had issue, Henry, and he had issue Meiler Fitz Henry and
Robart; she was afterward married to Stephan, and he had issue, Robart Fitz
Stephan, and his issue were Radulph and Mereduk; she had a third husband,
Giraldus Steward of Pembroke, whose mother was Gladys the daughter of Rywall ap
Conyn, this Girald had issue by her, Maurice Fitz Gerald, William Fitz Gerald,
and David Bishop of Menevia, now called Saint David's: Maurice Fitz Gerald had
issue, William, Girald, Alexander, and Nesta a daughter, wife to Harvey de
Monte Marisco; William Fitz Gerald had issue (by Ellen sister to Earl Richard
Strongbow) Reimund and Griffin, of these descend all the Geraldins in Ireland.
A niece (a sister say others) of Robart Fitz Stephans and Maurice Fitz Gerald
married with one Barry, and he by her had issue, Robart Barry, Philip Barry,
Walter Barry, and Girald Barry (otherwise called Giraldus Cambrensis the great
Antiquary) of these descend all the Barries in Ireland. There came with them
and after them out of Wales, the Prendergastes, Welches, Whites, Goughes, and
Williams, now called Mac William of the North.

The Irish Chroniclers, as David Curren, Nicolas Maguize (both sometimes Bishop
of Leighlin) and others, call them Brittones, Wallones, and Wallenses. It is a
name the Saxons gave them; though they were the true natives of Britain, yet
they called them Welshmen, that is, Camb. descrip. Brit. cap. 7.
strangers, as more at large is to be seen in Cambrensis. These gave Welsh
names to places, which continue to this day; in the Dioces of Leighlin there is
a town called villa Wallicoru^, the town of Welshmen. Carreg and Craig in the
British or Welsh tongue is a ston, or rock, and of the Britains, Carregfergus,
Carreggmont-Griffin, Carregg in Shurie, Carriggwaspani, and Craigwading have
their names. Likewise Llis in British is a Court or Palace, of that in Ireland
you have Lismore, Lisfenyn, Lislofty, Lismakery. Glan and Glyn are British
words, of them have you Glangibbon, Glandeboy, Glan Reynald, Glynburry,
Glyndelory, Glynmolowra, etc. Inis an Island, is British and Irish, of which
kind are Inissircan, Inisshoven, Inisdiok, Inissuag, Iniscorthie, and the like.
Rath a moat or round trench (whereof there are many in Ireland made by the
Danes) if Beda had not said that it was a Saxon word, I would have said it had
been British, and how many names of places are compounded with it in Ireland,
were too long to rehearse. I will here give Stanihurst leave to conclude, Omnes
insulae locos et lucos Wallici nominis gloria implevit; the renown of the
Welsh name (says he) has filled all the ways and woods of the Island.

The British words among them are infinite, the which, as I think, the Irish
have taken hold of, and have caused to vary little from their speech, for
example.

British, Bara Bread. Irish, Ran Br. Diod Drink. Ir. Diogh Br. Tan Fire. Ir.
Tine Br: Drus a Door. Ir. Dyrrus Br: Ithyn Firres. Ir. Ityn Br. Mawn Turfe.
Ir. Mon Br. Gaver a Goat. Ir. Gawr Br. Mawr Great. Ir. More Br. Mine a Kydde.
Ir. Mynan Br. Ty a House in both. Ir. Br. Scadan a Herring. Ir. Scadan Br.
Carregg in both a Rock. Ir. Br. Teer land or ground. Ir. Tyr Br. Sidan in both
Silk. Ir. Br. Kos in both a leg or foot. Ir. Br. Sane a pair of hose or
stockins. Ir. Fessane Br. Losky in both burning or burnt. Ir. Br. Berw and
Berwy in both sod. Ir. Br. Glan in both a like. Ir. Glyn Duffrey in both alike.
Duffrin Br. Mah a son. Ir. Mac Br. Cuanid wood. Ir. Cunnogh Br. Knaie nuts
Ir. Knoe Br. Kwyr wax Ir. Kwyragh Br. Cantref an hundred towns Ir. Cantrud
Eng. Cantred Br. Avon a river. Ir. Owen Moil in both bald. Mantagh in both
toothlesse.

And thus much of the Irish language occasioned by the history of Gathelus and
Scota; now to the history, from whence I fear me I have too long digressed.
The hard success of Nemedus before spoken of, and the departure of Gathelus
(as has been said) to the Northeast Islands, and North parts of Britain, now
called Scotland, moved five brethren, the sons of one Dela of the posterity
of Nemedus, being valiant men, and skillful in the Art of Navigation, to make
ready a great fleet, and to attempt the conquest of this Island. These were, as
I presently said, of the posterity of Nemedus, and were named, Gandius,
Gennadius, Sagandus, Rutheranius or Rutheragus, and Slanius, of whom Slane has
the denomination; when they had made preparation, Five sons of Dela arrive in
Ireland, anno mundi 2535.
assembled forces, and set all in a readiness, they hoised up sail, and in
short time arrived in Ireland, about the year of the world 2535.

After their arrival, and view had of the land, they found the puissance of
the Chamesite Giants sore weakened through their own civil dissension, so that
with more ease then they looked for, they achieved their purpose, wanne the
whole country, utterly destroyed and rooted out that wicked generation (enemies
to God and man) but spared as many as they found of Iaphets line, divided the
Island into five parts, and in each of them they severally reigned. First
division of Ireland.
This was the first division of Ireland, the discourse whereof I will refer
to another place. Furthermore for the satisfaction of all parties, and perfect
league to be had among these brethren, and their posterity, they concluded to
fix a meare stone in the middle point of Ireland, to the which each of their
kingdoms should reach, so as they might in equality partake of the commodities
found in that Island. Of these also it is said, that they invented the
distribution of Shires into Cantreds, every Cantred or Barony to contain one
hundred townships: but of this in another place. When they had for a certain
space seated themselves (say the Irish Antiquaries) and found warmth and wealth
about them, every one began to look big, and grow ambitious, so that in
process of time, desire of Soverainty set the five brethren at variance, which
in the end tended to their destruction. In this civil dissension it is
written, that Slanius the youngest through the aid of some old inhabitants, got
the upper hand, brought his four brethren to a low estate, attributed unto
himself the title of supreme honor over them, and encroched round about the
middle stone and fixed meare aforesaid, for the space of certain miles; which
plot in time, obtained the privilege and name of one entire plot, or part, and
makes up the number of five parts, into the which Ireland is commonly divided,
and is called Meth, in Latin Media, Meth why so called.
and of some Midia, taking that name (as some have guessed) for that in respect
of the other parts, it contained but the moity of Cantreds, that is, sixteen,
where each of the other contained thirty and two; or else for that it lies in
the midst of the land.

These encrochments Slanius annexed to his inheritance and Monarchy, which
Monarchy continued thus, the space of thirty years, and then Slanius departed
this life, and was buried in a mountain of Meth, that bears hitherto the
name after him. After his decease the Princes that before were subject unto
him, began to gather heart, stomached the matter, and denied their obedience to
his successor: whereupon ensued continual war amongst them, and especially
about the land of Meth, which strife of long time could not be appeased, yet
in the space of thirty years aforesaid, of these brethren and their successors
there were nine Kings. In the neck of all these mischiefs and hurly burlies
(say the Irish antiquities) there came a fleet of Scythians upon the coast,
landed their men in Ireland, made claim to the land, Invasion of Scythians.
by a title of right which they pretended from their forefather Nemedus (of
whom mention is made before) so that by partaking with the one side and the
other, all was in an uproare, havoc was made on each side with fire and sword
in most miserable manner. They spent themselves in pursuing one another with
such outrage, that they cared not what nation, or what soldier they received
to their aid, to hold up, or beat down a side. Both the one and the other sent
for aid into the Islands now called England and Scotland, Orchades, Hebrides,
etc. and acquainted forrainers with their state so far, that they could never
after be rid of them, to wit, the Britains, till in the end they yielded unto
them the upper hand, as by conquests, in process of the history, shall
appear. Note (gentle reader) how that hitherto, Anno mundi 2828
that is, the year of the world 2828, and before the birth of Christ 1142,
these North parts of the world, as England, Scotland, Ireland, with other Isles,
were possessed, commanded, and inhabited by the posterity of Iaphet and Cham,
the sons of Noah, without any special name given to the lands, or to the
Commanders of them, otherwise then Samothei, Celtae, Oceanes, Neptunists, and
Albions, although I have hitherto used the names now in ure (for the plainer
delivery of the history) as if they had been known before; neither were any
called Scots as Hector Boethius would have it.

After the times of the former troubles which happened in Ireland upon the
landing of the Scythians, I find nothing of Ireland till the days of
Gurguntius (the son of Belinus) who began his rain, according to the
ordinary account anno mundi 3580, Anno mundi 3580
and reigned 19 years over Britain. This King after his victory achieved in
Denmark (for his tribute which they there had refused to pay him) returning
back toward Britain, met by the Isles of Orkeney, with a navy of thirthy ships
( Stanyhurst says 60) with men and women, Gurguntius meets with Bartholin,
Hiber and Hermon.
whose General was called Bartholin or Partholin; in Ponticus Virunius
Partolom; in Flores Historiarum, Partholaim; in Gualter Oxoniensis, Bartholome;
in Fabian, Harding, Grafton, and Caxton, Irlamal; of whom they think the
country to be called Ireland. Gurguntius demanded of them what they were, and
the occasion of their travel, their answer was, they were Spaniards, and had
long been on the seas, seeking to find some favorable Prince, to assign
them a place of habitation, for that their country was so populous, that it
could not contain them, (others write that for some disordered parts they were
banished their country) and where they found favor, they would become
subjects, and hold of him as their sovereign Lord. In this fleet with the
Governor of Baion, their General (before named) there were four brethren of
noble birth, the sons of Milesius (others say, Miletus, and others Milo) the
two chief of which were called Hiberus and Hermon. And beside the former
differences in the parents name, Dowling writes in his Irish collections, that
they were the sons of Iubal; Hector Boethius avoucheth they were the sons of
Gathelus and Scota; Stanihurst affirms that Scota was great or old grand-dame
to Hiber and Hermon, others write they were of the posterity of Gathelus and
Scota, whereas Gathelus (if there were any such) was a Grecian, and Scota an
Egyptian, Hiber and Hermon, Spaniards: see (gentle Reader) how these reports
hang together.

Gurguntius being advised by his Council, Gurguntius gives Ireland to them.
pitying their necessity and wandering estate, granted them the Island now
called Ireland, to inhabit, and that they should become tributaries to him and
his successors, the Kings of Britain for ever. For he called to mind that
the inhabitants were an unruly people, and thought by this means to subdue
them, and quietly to enjoy his tribute; for it seems that the Britains made
claim to Ireland, to which effect I read in the Book of Houth, that
Gurguntius came into Ireland, and that the land many a year paid him truage,
Book of Houth.
and to other Kings of Britain after him; but as often as they put foot in the
land, they got more knocks then pence, says an Irish Chronicler. The King of
Britain hastening homeward, gave them Pilots, and safe conductors for their
arivall and possession of the land.

Hiberus and Hermon after their arivall, Hiber and Hermon divide Ireland into
two parts.
by the assent of all their associates, divided the land between them; the
North to Hiber, and the South to Hermon. But ambition, the mother of mischief,
would not long suffer them to enjoy peace, but rent their hearts with fiery
dissension, inflamed their minds to desire one Sovereign and absolute
commander over the whole land; they gather forces, they muster their men, they
put on Arms, and to battle they go, in which field Hiberus was slain,
(though Hector Boethius write, One brother kills another.

The second Monarch of Ireland.


that he went into Spain to succeed his father) and Hermon became Monarch of
all Ireland. Hermon being thus sole ruler and governor, to avoid the murmr
of his people, and the evil opinion (in a manner) of all men conceived against
him, and peaceably to govern the land, fell to purge himself, and caused the
occasion of the wars to be proclaimed, that he bore arms against his
natural brother, not of malice or desire of soveraigntie, but in defense of
his own person, and safety of his people; and for proof, that his heart was
far from desire to rule alone, he appointed certain Captains, as Kings, to
command under him certain Countries, reserving unto himself, one fourth part,
and the Country of Meth annexed to the Monarchy, for the better maintenance of
his princely estate.

By this means, this Realm of Ireland in process of time, Ireland divided
into five kingdoms*
grew to five kingdoms; the first Leinster, on the East side or quarter,
called in Latin Lagenia, and in Irish, Cuige-Laghen. The second, Conaght, on
the west side of the kingdom, called in Latin Connacia, and in Irish,
Cuige-Chonoght. The third, Vlster, which is the North part of Ireland, named in
Latin, Vltonia, and in Irish, Cuigh-Vlladh. The fourth, Mounster, South and
South-west, in Latin, Momonia, and in the country speech, Cuige Mughan. The
fifth and last, a plotte defalked from these parts, called Meth, comprising (as
they are now called) as well East-Meth as West-Meth, in Latin, Midia, or
Media, Diverse divisions in Ireland.
in Irish, Mhidhe. And here must not be forgotten, that there has been in
these kingdoms great change and alteration by usurping and compounding among
themselves, and by dividing of Countries, as we find Mounster was into two
parts, and since have been there great Earls, deriving their names of
Mounster, Ormond in Irish, Oirther Mughane, Desmond, in Irish, Deasmughain, and
Thomond in Irish, Tuathmughain, the which an Italian coming into Ireland,
meruailed at, when he inquired what great men dwelled in the land, for he
understood Ormond, to be orbis mundi, the round world; Desmond, december mundi,
ten worlds; Thomond, duo mundi, two worlds, profecto, said he, Valde gloriosi
tituli, assuredly these are very glorious titles. So were there also in
process of time, diverse other lesser kingdoms, as by the process of the
history will very well appear. And here for this time leaving to discourse
farther of the Irish kingdoms, I conclude with this one remembrance, that from
time to time there was one chosen to be chief sovereign Monarch over them
all; A Monarch always in Ireland.
and the number of Monarchs from Hermon to Laogirius, the son of Nealus
Magnus, that is, great Neale) in whose time S. Patricke converted them to
Christianity, amounts to an hundred thirty and one.

Ireland called Hibernia.
And now back again to the history where we left. It is said that of Hiber or
Hiberus, (who was slain, as has above been recorded) Ireland was called
Hibernia; certain it is with the concordance of most and the best antiquaries,
that the land was not called Hibernia, neither right Spaniard arived here
before the days of Gurguntius. Diverse writers have diversely delivered the
original name of the land, Diverse names of Ireland.
some corruptly, some poetically, some etymologically. Ierna, Iuvernia,
Ibernia, Overnia, Vernia, Iris; of the Britains, Ywerdhon, of the Irish
themselves Erin, and took that name of Fin Erin, (of whom at large in the
book of Houth) of the Saxons and English it is called Ireland, that is, the
land of Erin. All these names originally grew of Hiberus the Spaniard, or in
remembrance of Iberus the second King of Spain; who was the son of Tuball,
the fifth son of Iaphet. Annius Viterbiensis writes, that of this King, the
river is called Iberus amnis, Spain Iberia, and the inhabitants about the
river, Stainhurst de reh. Hib. pa. 17.
Iberi. This land of Ireland has also been called Scotia Major, (Scotland the
greater) after the birth of Christ, but that came of corrupting the word
Scytha, as I said before. Lastly, it has been called Banno of the Poets or
Bardes of the land: Stanihurst thinks it was so called of the Banne, a river
in the County of Weixford, the place is now called Bagganbun, where the
Britains upon the conquest arived, and thereof is the rhyme, At the creek of
Bagganbun,
Ireland was ylost and won.


But for this ancient name Banno, Camden in Hebernia.
and other the like which the Poets of Ireland have in use, I refer the
courteous reader to learned Camden, in his treatise of Ireland, about the
beginning.

Lanquet in his collections of antiquities, Lanquet ad Annum 3652.
notes that the Scottish historiographers about the year of the world, 3652.
begin their histories at Fergus, the son of Ferquhard, King of Ireland,
that he should come with great power out of Ireland, to their aid against the
Pictes, and that they favored him so much, that they chose him King, and that
he reigned over them in Scotland 25. years, Anno mundi, 36521
and how that in his reign he slew Coile, King of Britain, at what time by
general consent, there was no Scottish man then commanding in Albania, no Pict
at that time seen in Britain or Ireland, nor Coile King of Britain in many
years after. I am of Lanquets opinion, thus he writes, These histories of the
Scots, as they set them forth, be full of errors, and agree with none other
historians. Notwithstanding this Item may not stop the course of the
history, and therefore whether he came out of Ireland, (as we here take it) or
out of Denmark, (as some have thought) well he might be King of Albania, for
so was it then called, and not Scotland, and so from him I will term them
Kings of Albania, until I find the name Scoti known amongst foreign
writers.

This Fergus (says Buchanan) having orderly disposed of his affairs in
Albania, Fergusius. Buchanan.
went into Ireland to pacify and quiet troubles there risen, and hoising sail
for his return into Albania, he and all his company were cast away in a
tempest upon the rocks at a place of him now called in the British and Irish
tongues Karregfergus, or Craigfregus (corruptly in English, Knockfergus.) It is
written that he advanced in his banner, a red Lion Rampant, with his tail
folden toward his back, as it were moved with anger, Arms of Fergusius.
the which his successors since have used. After this his unfortunate decease,
there rose great strife about the succession, his two sons, Ferlegus and
Mainus were young, and many exceptions were made against them, in the end, the
two sons were put beside, and the eldest of the sept (after the Irish
Tanistrie) took place, which fell upon Feritharis an Irish man, brother to
Fergus. And this Tanistrie continued (says Buchanan) unto Kenathus 3. during
the reign of fourscore Kings. Tanistrie of Ireland used in Scotland.
But I must leave them, and follow only what concerns Irish business.

About the year of the world, says Lanquet, Anno mundi, 3750.
3750. and odd (not allowing as he protested before, but following the
Scottish histories, one Reuthar, commander of the invaders in Albania, Reuthar.
(now called Scotland) was vexed with civil wars, and by the Britains,
banished into Ireland, where he lived twelve years: See more of him in Hector
Boethius, and Buchanan. The 9. King Albaniensium Scotorum, (so Stanihurst
calls them) was Iosina Thereus, Iosina Thereus.
and is the next that seems to have any right or interest in the Irish
history. This man was bred and brought up in Ireland, and favored the nation
(says Bale) above all others; Io. Bale cent. 14.
he sought peace of all men, honored Chirurgions, Physicians and Druydes of
Ireland; reigned 24. years, and so ended his days.

The next that concerns our purpose, is Gillus the usurper, who through much
treason, Gillus.
and many murders, aspiring to the Crown of Albania, and deservedly falling
into the hatred and mislike of all his subjects, was at length forced by his
Nobles, (who rose in Arms against him) to take a fisher-boate and flee into
Ireland, where he was promised aid; but to prevent further mischief, one
Cadall is appointed general of an Army, to pursue the tyrant into Ireland,
and meeting him in the field, drove Gillus to flee. When the Irish men had
forsaken him, he hid himself in a den, environed with woods and bogs, where
shortly after, an Irish Kerne, for reward, found him out, cut off his head, and
brought it to Cadall, after he had tyrannized three years. He was the
thirteenth King of Albania.

In the time of Augustus Caesar, a little before the birth of our Savior,
Fridelenus the Dane takes Dublin.
Fridelenus King of Denmark, puffed up with pride, through some fortunate
successes, arrived in Ireland, laid siege to the City of Dublin, and finding
it not so easy a matter to atchieue, fell to policy; he caught certain
Swallows that bred in the City, tied fire to their wings, who flying to their
nests, fired the houses; while the Citizens endeavored to quence the fire, the
Danes entered the City, and w^nne it.

The King of Leinster after this, gathered forces, and gave the Danes battle,
in which, many fell on both sides; Fredelnus seeing the enemy increase, and his
army decrease, fled the land, and retired into his country. Frotho King of
Denmark. Alb. Krant. Dan. lib. 1. cap. 32. Saxo Gr. hist. Dan. lib. 5.
His son Frotho, the third of that name, King of Danes (so Albertus
Krantzius, and Saxo Grammaticus record) wantonly assailed the Britains, (
lustrans magis insulam quam subigens) rather taking a view of the Island, then
subduing it, afterward relinquishing that course, put foot in Ireland. The
historiographers of that side, report hardly of the land, and the inhabitants
thereof, and in fine they write, when Cepo the Irish King was overthrown and
put to flight, his brother Kervill (says Saxo, I take it to be O Carroll)
offered tribute, wherewith the Danes being pacified, returned to their Country.
This Frotho peopled the Orchades with Danes, and appointed Revillus their
commander.

Whilst this Frotho King of Danes was Monarch of Ireland, the light of the
world, JESUS CHRIST is borne. Claudius. Arviragus. Flor. histor.
the comfort of all Christians, JESUS CHRIST the son of GOD was borne in the
flesh.

About the 44. year after the incarnation of our Lord, ( Claudius the Emperor
having appeased the troubles of Britain by the aid of Arviragus, (as Matthew
Westmonasteriensis says) subdued Orchades, Hebrides, Thule, and all the Ocean
Islands, among the which, Ireland is reckoned, Beda eccles. hist. Angl. lib. 1.
c. 3. Eutropius rerum Romans lib. 8.
the which Beda and Eutropius have likewise remembered. But Fabian, Grafton,
Holinshed, and Ponticus Virunius say further, that he sent certain legions of
Knights into Ireland to subdue the same; what success they had, is not
recorded, a legion consisting of 6666. (as ancient Writers record) no doubt
they performed some great exploit. Camden pa. 557
Learned Camden writes of the Brigantes (the inhabitants of Yorkshire,
Lancashire, Brigantes.
the Bishopric of Durham, Westmerland and Cumberland were so called) how that
in the time of Claudius (as I take it) many of them went to end their days in
Ireland, and of old were called the Brigantes of Ireland. His words are these,
Quod vero Florianus Del Campo Hispanus, nostros Brigantes, etc. Whereas
Florianus Del-Campo the Spaniard, Florianus del Campo.
has somewhat arrogantly derived our Brigantes from Spain into Ireland, and
thence into Britain, being aided by no other conjecture, but that he found in
his Country of Spain, the City Brigantia; I fear me he has foully deceived
himself. For if the like cause have not given ours and the Brigantes of
Ireland the same name, I had rather be of opinion with my most learned friend
Thomas Savill, namely, that certain Brigantes and other nations of Britain
also, even from the coming of the Romans into Britain, departed into Ireland,
some for quietness sake, and to live at ease, some for that their eyes should
not be infected with the sight of the Roman dominion, and last of all others,
lest in their latter age they should willingly seem to lose the liberty which
from nature they had received in their youth. And that Claudius the Emperor,
first of any Roman took the Brigantes in hand, and subjected them to his
Empire and command: Seneca shows in these his verses.

........ Ille Britannos
Vltra noli littora ponti, and caeruleos Seneca.

Scuta Brigantes, dare Romulaeis colla catenis
Iussit,.........
The Britains far from known seas,
and Brigantes Bucklers blue,
The Roman Claude to Roman beck
did bring, and rebels slew.
Claudius having effected all his affairs, (as formerly has been delivered)
returned to Rome: then says Gualter Oxon. Omnia regna Arvirago tradidit, he
delivered all these kingdoms to Arviragus. He committed them al to his charge,
says Ponticus Virunius. Arviragus.
In Matthew Westmonsteriensis I read, regimen insulare Arvirago cessit, the
command of the Islands fell to Arviragus. Harding has delivered it in verse.

Orchades Isles in the mean time he conquered,
In which he infeoffed the King, and him preferred.
About this time, Frotho the fourth of that name, King of Danes, (some 30.
years after the former invasion, Saxo Gram. hist. Dan. lib. 6. Albertus
Krantz. Dan. lib. 1. Frotho 4.
says mine Author) sent great power of Giants out of Denmark, under the
leading of bloody Haco, and the great challenger and huge monster Starcuterus,
to invade Ireland. The occasion was as follows: Starcuterus (before
mentioned) being borne far in the East by reason of shipwreck, having lost
both his ship and fellows, was cast upon the coast of Denmark, and hearing of
the fame of Frotho, came to his Court. This Giant was greatly admired for
stature and strength of body. Frotho commanded a great navy to be in a
readiness, with all manner of necessary provision, made him an arch-pirate,
and turned him to the Sea to seek adventures. Haco and Starcuterus in Ireland.
They touched many lands, and fought with many Giants, at length (says mine
Author) that no Country, though never so remote, should be freed from the
smart of Danish forces, they arived in Ireland. Huglet, King of Ireland, gave
them battle, in the which, Huglet was slain, and all the Irish put to
flight. And yet mine Author, though a Dane, highly commends two Irish Lords,
Segathus and Suibdanus, the one wounded Haco, the other gave Starcuterus such a
blow, that he stood a great while amazed, and had been slain, Dufflania or
Dublin ransacked by them
had he not been rescued. The battle being ended, the Danes took
(Dufflinian) Dublin, ransacked it, and found great store of treasure, and some
of them remained in the land, the rest returned to Denmark, Starcuterus went
into foreign countries to combat with Giants.

Of the coming of the Pictes or Scythians into these parts.
In the time of Arviragus before mentioned, I find the greatest probability of
the first coming of the Pictes out of Scythia, first into Ireland, secondly,
into Albania, now called Scotland, and lastly, into the North of England. And
whereas before (page 3.) I made mention of the arivall of Scythians, Nemedus
and his four sons, and after them of five brethren of their posterity, and
the third time of another fleet of Scythians that arived in Ireland; and that
also by many antiquities it appears that the Scots be Scythians, and came out
of those parts whence these Pictes brake forth; I purpose now to make a more
full discourse of that business.

Camden modestly confesses he knows not when they came first into these
parts, neither do I mislike with his conjecture, that they should be old
Britains, who painted themselves, to show more terrible against the Romans:
yet we must confess, that there are many nations of several names in Scythia,
and Polychronicon, together with Rastall, says, that the Goths and Pictes be
one nation. The etymology I find in the story of the Goths: Scythia in the
Gothicke tongue, signifies a skillful archer. Io. Magnus Goth. Hist. lib. 1
cap. 27. Beda eccles. hist. gentis Aug. lib. 1 cap. 1.
And these Pictes brought with them the use of darts, which the Irish retain
to this day. But I come to Beda, who goes plain to work. When the Britains
(says he) had possessed the greatest part of the Isle, beginning at the
South, it happened that a nation of Pictes out of Scythia, with long ships,
(yet not many) entered the Ocean, the wind driving them about, beyond all the
coast of Britain, they came into Ireland, and arived in the North, and
finding there the nation of Scots, desired of them to grant them a dwelling
place amongst them, but they could not obtain it, etc. The Scots made answer
that the Island could not hold them both, but we can give you (said they) good
counsel what you may do. We know another Island not far from ours,
reaching to the East, the which we are wont often to discern in clear days; if
you will go thither, you may make it your dwelling place, or if any withstand
you, take us for your aid. And so the Pictes sailing into Britain, began to
inhabit the North parts of the Island, for the Britains held the South. Pictes
sail into Britain.
And when the Pictes had no wives, and sought them of the Scots, they were
granted them, only upon this condition, that when the title of Soveraigntie
became doubtful, they should choose them a King rather of the Feminine blood
royal, then of the Masculine, They obtain wives of the Scots.
the which unto this day is observed amongst the Pictes. And in process of
time, Britain after the Britains and Picts, received that third nation of the
Scots upon that part, where the Pictes had their habitation, Scots under Reuda
sail out of Ireland into Britain.
who issuing out of Ireland with their Captain Reuda, either by love or by the
sword, have won peculiarly unto themselves those seats which they hold unto
this day, and of this their captain they are called Dalreudin, for in their
language, (Dal) signifies apart.

And here I cannot but marvel at Hector Boethius and Buchanan, what confusion
they bring into the history, Hect. Boet. Scot. hist. lib. 4.
without regard of the truth, they name Beda, they call Reuda, Reuther, and say
that he was the sixth King of Albania, and that the Britains made him flee into
Ireland, and that in the end he was restored to his kingdom again; which can
no way agree with the words of reverend Beda, whose credit we may not impeach,
for he says, they were Scythians, and wanted a dwelling place, and began to
inhabit the North parts of the Island. If Reuda were King of Albania, no thank
to the Irish men to direct him thither. But let us go on with the Pictes.

I find in Lanquet that the Pictes were rebellious, Anno Dom. 53.
an. 9: of Arviragus, Anno. Domini 53. And Polycronicon affircteth, as Beda
wrote before, that they came to the North of Ireland in Vespasians time. Stow
says it was in Anno 73. Matthew the Monk of Westminster, in Anno 75. and 76.
Leslaeus and Bozius write that Reuda came about the year 360. which is very
doubtful, and that then the Pictes wanting wives, desired of the Britains
that they might march with their nation, their suit being denied, they went to
the Irish, who granted them wives upon the condition in Beda before rehearsed
And farther, Giraldus Cambrensis, Polycronicon and Grafton concurring, do say,
that Scotland was first called Albania of Albanactus, secondly, Pictlandia, of
the Pictes; thirdly, Hibernia, Ireland, because of the alliance or affinity in
marriage between the Pictes and Irish; last of all, Scotland or Scythians
land. And hereof it comes to pass, that Ireland is called Scotland, and
Scotland Ireland, the Irish Scots, Polychron lib 1. cap. 1. cap. 37.
and the Scots Irish, as one has largely collected; and the distinction of
Scotia Major, and Scotia Minor.

Io. Harding Chronig. Mewinus.
Harding has an history out of Mewinus a British Chronicler, ( Harding lived
in the time of Henry the fifth and sixth, and in the days of Edward the fourth,)
which if it be true, all that is formerly spoken of Gathelus and Scota his
wife, by the Scottish and Irish Chroniclers, is of small credit; namely, how
that Gathelus and Scota came into these North parts, together with the Pictes,
Anno Domini 75. his words are these, speaking of the King of Britain.

Then to the Peights left alive, he gave Catenesse
To dwell upon, and have in heritage;
Which wedded were with Irish as I guess,
Of which after Scots came on that lineage,
For Scots be to say their language
A collection of many into one,
Of which the Scots were called so anon:
But Mewinus the Bryton Chronicler
Flor. hist. Mewinus was also called Melkinus. Io. Bale cent. 1: cap. 57. wrote
his life. The stone Regal of Scotland.
Says in his Chronicle otherwise,
That Gadelus and Scota in the year
Of Christ, seventie and five by assise,
At Stone inhabit as might suffice:
And of her name, the country round about,
Scotland she called that time without doubt.
This Scota was, as Mewin says the sage,
Daughter and bastard of King Pharao that day,
Whom Gadele wedded, and in his old age
Unto a land he went, where he inhabited ay,
Which yet of his name is called Gadelway;
And with the Peights he came into Albanie
The year of Christ aforesaid openly, etc.
Pol. lib. 1. cap. 58
Polycronicon and Cambrensis accord with Harding in this point, that the King
gave the Pictes a place to dwell in, which is now called Galleway. Ponticus
Virunius.
And says Ponticus Virunius, it was desert and waste, where none dwelled in
many days before. The credit of Harding is great, and he that list to know
farther of him, let him read Bale, Bishop of Ossorie, who wrote his life. Io.
Bale. Script. Brytan. centur. 8


I will now neither confirm nor confute, but acquainte the reader with such
antiquities as I find, and in a word, to add something unto that which went
before, of the time of the Pictes coming into these North, and North-west
parts. Florilegus writes it was Anno Domini 77. Functius and Polydore, Anno
Dom. 87. To reconcile the dissonance, what every one says may stand for truth,
for they came in several companies, and at several times, some into Ireland,
some into Albania, and some into England. Scotland for Albania from hence
forward
I will from henceforward leave writing the kingdom of Albania, and write the
kingdom of Scotland.

Anno Dom. 73. began Marius the son of Arviragus to reign in Britain, Anno
Dom. 73.
( Humfrey Lloide calls him Meurig) who after his troublesome wars, for
nine years space against the Picts and Scots, ended with the help of Julius
Agricola, is said to have aspired toward Ireland, and to have placed garrisons
on the coast; and to the end he might perform some exploite there, entertained
an Irish Prince that was driven out of his country by civil dissension for his
conductor. I find no issue recorded of this business.

In the 15. years civil wars which ensued upon the death of Lucius, the
son of Coile, King of Britain, it is reported, Galf. Mon.
that Fulgenius called the Ilanders, Albanians, Pictes, and Irish men to his
aid, against whom, Severus the Emperor coming from Rome, gave them battle
near unto York, where Severus and a Prince of Ireland were slain, and
Fulgenius deadly wounded; the Emperor Severus and the Irish Prince, lie buried
at York.

In the antiquities of Ireland, I find that about the days of Constantine the
great, Book of Houth.

Anno Dom. 310 The history of Realmond, King of Vlster.


who began his reign anno Dom. 310.) one Realmond King of Vlster, fell in
love with a Lady of Leinster, who had been wife to the King of Connaught, a
woman (they say) of mean stature, but of singular beauty; when many Princes
and Lords of Ireland labored to win her favor, her answer was, that none
should enjoy her love, but a Champion that by Marshall prowess had prevailed
in foreign countries, quitted himself like a man, won the Garland, and
brought tribute with him to his native soil. Realmond being overcome with the
love of this Lady, hoised up sail and went for France, where he encounrted
with a Champion, and won a Garland called Civica. Afterward coming to great
Britain, he challenged the Duke of Cornwall, and got of him a tribute, Duke
of Cornwall. Castreus the Giant
thence he went into Scotland, and encountered with Giant Castreus, and
prevailed; (such was the manner of winning honor and dignity by marshall
feats in those days, says Saxo Grammaticus) last of all he came back to
Ireland, and acquainted his love, Sax. Gram. hist. Dan. lib. 7.
the Lady he formerly sought for, with his travail, his dangerous adventures,
and his good success, and now having prevailed abroad, he doubted not at home
in regard of his kingdom, his kindred and valor, but to obtain her favor.
She being made thoroughly acquainted with his affairs abroad and at home, gave
many a sigh in his absence, fearing some mischance might come to him, and
wishing she had not so peremptorily answered him; but he no sooner came in
place, but she relented from her former hardness, and with all speed the
solemnity of marriage was performed. But the match was disdained by others,
insomuch that he was hated of the Princes and Nobility of Ireland, who had
formerly affected the Lady, whereof grew mutinies, contentions, and at last
open war, and he finding himself weak, in comparison of his enemies, was
forced to flee into Denmark, where he found favor and great aid of worthy
Soldiers which came with him into Ireland, The Danes come to Ireland.
where he and his generation, together with the Danes and their posterity,
effected many notable acts, and continued many years.

The Danes of the line of Fin Eryn, that came out of Denmark, were these, The
genealogy of Fin Erin, or Fin Mac Coyll.
David the Kings son who had to his son borne in Ireland, Deure Dove, who
had four sons, Covrry, Boyskene, Fyagh, and Oghe; Boyskene had a son
called Garreneslo, and Con-Caghmore was his son; Con had a son named
Ferrelogh, and he had a son called Trenmore, this Trenmore had to his son,
Coylle Negoe, and he had a son called Fin-Fa, alias Fin Mac Coylle and he had
a son caled Oshen, and he had a son called Osker. This Oshen lived in Anno
Dom. 432. in the days of Saint Patricke, unto whom he made relation of many
things before going, and was by him baptized, being of the age of seven score
years. For proof of this history, I find in Saxo Grammaticus that wrote the
history of the Danes, that Fin and Finni were a great sept there, hardy,
stalworth men, given to preying, and burning of town and country, and happly
the Irish conversing with them, Eric or Erin what it signifies.
did learn those parts of them) and that the name of Eric was of the royal
blood among them; so Fin Erin turning c. into n. was a great commander there,
and conducted into Ireland many Danes. Erin or Ireland of whom so called.
And happly, Ireland of old, because of his great command, and his posterity,
might after him be called Erin: this is but my conceit, happly others can say
more thereof. These Danes increased and multiplied exceedingly, and became
great Commanders and Captains over the whole land, and took upon them the
defense thereof against all foreign invasion. In process of time fell out
the battle of Fentra in Mounster, valiantly fought by the Irish and Danes,
whereof the Irish Chroniclers make great account; it was fought chiefly in
Mounster, by the Princes and power of Ireland, with the aid of the Danes, and
generation of Fin Mac Coylle, and Fin Eryn, in which field, they say, all the
foreign enemies that came out of Scotland, Cornwall, Normandy, Germany,
Spain and Denmark it self, were overthrown. The occasion was as follows.

Many Giants and worthy Champions there were in those days in Ireland, of
Irish and Danish birth, hired by them for their defense; Occasions of the
battle of Fentra.
these traveling into foreign countries, fought many combats, and got yearly
tribute unto their country, as the manner then was among such challengers. For
this they were generally envied, and a day was appointed by the invaders to
arrive together in Ireland to overrun the country, and root out the whole
nation. The first company to the number of thirty thousand, landed at the
Derrie, Strangers intend the utter subversion of the Irish nation.
where Conkedagh one of the Princes of the North, being prepared for them, by a
slight, set their shipping on fire, and met with them in a place where they
were all overthrown, so that with their Arms, those among the Irish that
formerly wanted, were furnished and made fit for the wars. The second company
of this combination came to Lambay, landed their men at the Follesse of
Skerries, set their men in battle array, and marched to a place now called
Cnoc-nagean, that is the hill of dead men's heads, where Dermotte Lamhdhearg
King of Leinster met them, fought a cruel battle with equal fortune for the
space of four days; A strange battle if it be true.
the Irish by reason of the spoil and victory got at the former battle, were
mightily encouraged, and also the milk and fresh meat which the country
yielded them, and the strangers wanted, made them the more able to fight; to be
short, the strangers were overthrown, and thirty six thousand of them slain,
whose Arms furnished Ireland thoroughly to encounter with the rest of the
combination.

The third company came to Fentra in Mounster, where the forces of Ireland
being gathered together, kept them from landing the space of seven days, with
the slaughter of many on both sides, so that the seashore at sundry times was
died red with the blood of the slain karkasses, until that one Gillemore,
son to the King of Thomond, Gillemore of Thomond revolteth.
(being malcontent for that he was removed from the voward of the battle to
the rere) revolted, and by night stole to the enemy, and directed them where
they should safely land their men, which accordingly came to pass, so that the
Irish knew it not until the strangers had set their own ships on fire: he
withal brought the invaders to such advantage of ground, that they refreshed
themselves for ten days without any annoyance from the Irish, and afterward
when they came to skirmish, did himself diverse times fight valiantly, imbruing
his hands in the blood of his own natural countrymen. At last it fell out
after some bickering, that he called for water to wash his hands that were all
full of the blood of his countrymen, which was left stand after he had therein
washed, and soon after calling for a cup of wine, was answered that there
stood a bowl of wine upon the table; he forgetting that he had formerly washed
therein, drank it up, insomuch, that the standers by said; What fellow is
this, more like a brute beast then a man, that drinks his own blood, and
eats his own flesh? Gillemore hearing this, took it to heart,
notwithstanding dissembling his grief and anger, Gillemore returns.
the next night conveyed himself away, and submitting himself to his father,
delivered unto him the state of the strangers, which turned to their great
disadvantage and hinderance.

Shortly after, the day of battle was appointed, where the strangers were
overthrown, The battle of Fentra.
and (as they say) seven score thousand men slain. The Irish had supplies and
extraordinary means at home, the strangers could not come by it; the Irish
played with them at all advantages, the woods and the bogs defended them as
occasion served. This battle with the preambles and circumstances, continued
one whole year, the strangers had no shipping to flee unto for succor, the
ground was unknown unto them, their lodging and fare was cold, hard, and
scant, so as their hardiness could not hold out, their end was lamentable, and
the honor was bequeathed to the Irish nation. The Princes of Ireland having
thus with great success foiled their enemies, delivered their people from
utter overthrow, and quieted the land, rested themselves a while. Afterward,
partly for recompense of good service, and partly for safeguard of the land,
appointed the Danes (whom they had formerly hired, who also unto that time had
served them truly) over the whole land to prevent foreign invasion,
forewarned by the field of Fentra and the former attempts; these Commanders
with their particular places of command, I thought good to impart to the
courteous reader.

The several garrisons of the Danes.
Osker Mac Oshen Mac Fin with his Soldiers kept the haven of Dublin. Fian Mac
Fenrasse kept the Winde-gates. Wony Etagh Mac Cas Foul kept Wicklo. Creyon Mac
Wony kept Arcklow. Eye Onagh Mac Kellenkas kept Weixford. Dono Mac Kayder kept
Rosse. Fellum Mac Eye Keyge kept Dungarvan. Bresell Mac Eydow kept O Keylle.
Gaero Mac Doheyere kept Cork. Ollen Aye Nyarg Mac Bressell kept Kynsale. Collo
Mac Keilt kept Dingle Koysse. Con Keor Mac Bren Mac Foyll kept Fentra. Osker
Mac Cromkeyn kept Trallie. Don Dowe Mac Reymowre being a King over the sept of
Fin Mac Koyle kept Lymnagh, that is, Limericke. Eye Boge Mac Fin kept Inyskagh.
Coll Kroytt kept Cork Vaysken: Eye Mac Sroy kept Canborne. Eye clone Drylinge
kept Donrys Oveyragh. Bressell Mac Eye Beg kept Galloway* Deyre Dovenagh
Magher Morn, kept Inysbresyn. Eye O row Mac Fin kept Kleere. Collow Daver kept
small Island. Enos Dayrk kept Koymaghtbe. Enos Maygh Ercoipie kept Galley.
Feartagh Mac Ferolagh kept Moyc. Low Magh Mac Karbren kept Sligo. Smerger
Drought kept Bondroys: Keyll Croagh Kede Gonagh O Navnyd, Assero* Brasell Mac
Doyer kept Donagall. Mogh Small Mac Smoyll kept Fanyd. Eey Mac Kehow kept
Loughfoyle. Darawryd Rowrer kept Bonban. Sperenagh Claw kept Knockfergus. Magh
love kept Ardolloe. Donogh Mac Dermotte Evne, kept Ardglas. Art Oge Mac Morn
kept Dondorme. Eye Mac Carra Meyke Morn kept Carlingford. Flaas Fere Leyfroke
Greffey Fin Mac Koyll, kept Don dalke. Rey ne Roysklaygh Mac Fin Mac Koyll kept
Drogheda. Shealvagh Mac Dermotte Doyn kept Gormanston. Covuloe Mac Wowdyrge
kept Irelands eye. Derlleys Mac Dovgar kept Howth.
These were the chief Commanders by direction from Fin Mac Koyll, Beacons
appointed in Ireland by Fin Mac Koill.
who took farther order that Beacons should be set up in sundry places of the
land, where in time of danger they might have direction for relief, and draw
to a head for their defense; which order continued unto the field of Kaghcaro,
otherwise called Ardkagh or Ardkath, the occasion whereof was as follows.

In the time of Karbre Lifeacher, Monarch of Ireland, the Danish Captains with
their bands and garrisons, Karbre Lifeacher Monarch of Ireland.
waxed insolent and outrageous, they weighed not what Prince or people said,
they grew strong and rich, not caring what they did: they brought up fond
customs of their own devising, oppressing the people, and disdaining the
gentle admonitions of the Kings and Nobility of the land. Among themselves
they decreed, that no Maid should marry without their license, that none should
hunt the Hare, Otter, Fox, Wolf, Marterne or Dear, The insolent devices of
the Danes.
but should pay them what they pleased to rate it at, and that none should use
any other pastime without their privitie. The Kings and Nobility of the land
called a Parliament, endeavoring to reform these abuses, charging them to
surcease from their outrages, or to leave the land. The Danes answered, that
they came in with the sword, held by the sword, and with the sword they would
be driven away. The day of battle was appointed to be fought at Amaghery
Ongallin, now called Margallin in Westmeath, though the field be called
Ardkagh, which is by interpretation, a set field.

The Danes sent to Denmark, intimating their grief and lamentable estate,
craving aid of the King, and that he would be pleased to send his son to be
their General, who (according to their request) shortly after landed with
ten thousand stalworth soldiers (so the old phrase runs) and they coming
together, made up twenty and eight thousand, and seven hundred. The Kings of
Ireland with their forces were threescore and five thousand. Forces of the
Irish and Danes.
The Danes or Norwegians being valiant and venterous, hastened to the battle
at the day appointed. The Kings in like sort with their forces hearing that
their enemies approached, set themselves in battle array, and came to a place
where they all kissed the ground, ready to dye one with another, and gave
(after their manner) such a cry, as if heaven and earth met together, and
therewith somewhat amazed their enemies, Garrestowne. The marshalling of the
Danes at the battle of Ardkath.
so that the place to this day is called Balle-Nangartha, in English,
Garrestowne.

The strangers placed themselves on the South-west side of the hill, that the
forces of the Kings being on the other side, somewhat beneath them, might not
easily discrie their Army; they appointed their worst men for their Rereward,
that seeing the Voward valiantly encountering and prevailing, they might thereby
be the more encouraged. They placed their rascals on their jades, nagges and
laboring garrons, on the top of an hill, where at this day is a little Mote in
remembrance thereof, giving them in charge, that when the forces of the land
espied them, and drew near, they should retire to the maine battle for
refuge and succor; they hoped by these means, that the Kings when they saw so
great a company flee, would break their order and array to pursue them, and so
lay themselves open to utter overthrow; and then was their intent to have made
the King of Denmarkes son, King of the land, and to have enjoyed the Realm
to them and their posterity for ever.

The Kings of Ireland being seven in number, tracing a while on the top of an
hill (which therefore was called after that, Hol-trase. Order of the Kings of
Ireland at the* field of Ardkath.
the hill of Trase, now Hol-trase) divided themselves into two battles.
Gillemore, O Connor Dunnes, son of Connaght (one that had stood out in
rebellion against the Kings until that time) had in the Voward the leading of
the light footmen, whereof they made least account; he thereby to win their
favors, Dermot Lamhdhearg King of Leinster.
and they to hazard him first. Dermotte Lamhdhearg, King of Leinster had the
charge of the horsemen; their bonnys were double armed, well appointed, active
and venturous soldiers. Dermot being well mounted, got him to an advantage of
ground, and turned him to the army with this speech.

My friends and fellows in Arms, The King of Leinsters speech.
whose great valor has been often tried; understand (I beseech you) the cause
of this battle. Whereas heretofore we have sought out these, and hired them
in our wars for our defense and good of our country, against our foreign
enemies, to be at our service and command, they have committed all manner of
outrage against us, and extortion upon the people of this land; they abused our
wives, ravished our widows, defloured our daughters and maidens; their meat,
their drink, their bedding, will not content them, but they must have money
for eating, drinking and sleeping. Where they should have been our true and
dutiful seruitors, they disdained the Princes of the land, and made the people
their villains. By maintaining of them, we made our country men idle and
unapt for the wars, by enriching of them we have beggered our selves, and now
see the villainy of these verlates, our provision, our furniture, our Arms, and
forces of our native soil, they bend against us, and not only this, but they
have drawn to their present aid, afresh, both Danes and Norwegians. Wherefore
pluck up your hearts, quitte your selves like men, our cause is good, we
fight for our selves, our wives and children, and the liberty of our country;
if we lose, we are lost for ever, and our children become bondslaues, and our
country subject to these bloody rascal strangers.

He had no sooner ended his speech, but they all kissed the ground, and gave a
terrible shout, that the woods about them rang thereat. On the other side, one
Osker Mac Oshen, experienced in the wars, and bold of speech, craved of the
Danes and Norweyes liberty to speak, and began as follows.

My masters and fellows, Osker Mac Oshen his speech.
the cause of this our assembly is known unto you; it is to maintain that
which we honorably won in the field, and was granted our ancestors and their
posterity, the which we have in writing to show, under the hands and seals of
the ancestors of these faithless Kings and Princes that be in Arms against
us. There is no haven, creek or port in Ireland, but that our predecessors and
we took the charge of them, since our first arrival here out of Denmark, and
valiantly defended the^ maugre the beards of all foreign enemies. We fought
many a battle for them, we wanne them tributes, and procured them discharge
of tributes, the which foreign champions in combats had obtained of them, and
now for recompense, they endeavor either to banish us the land, or put us to
the sword. Will ye understand what they are, surely a people that keep no
promise with us, therefore we doubt not but the better to speed: and excepting
a few of their Princes and Gentlemen that are valiant men indeed, and daily
exercised in feats of Arms, the rest are but pesants, poor and needy slaves,
bare arst, bare legd, and bare footed, and of small strength. For Arms, they
wear a skull, a sword by their side hanging in a With that compasses their
middle, and a Target; other some have darts; the best thing in them is, they
are swift of foot, and I hope we shall speedily have the experience of that when
we see them run away. Their good meat and best drink we took, and made them
fast, their treasure we took to furnish us in apparel and Arms, and left
them unfurnished and bare, their bedding we had, and made them lie on the
ground, their wives, widows and maids were at our command to keep us warm
in the night, and we gave them leave to lie among their swine. The best soil
we took to our selves, Fabian part 6. cap. 198. writes that the Danes did the
like in England.
and gave them mountains and bogges: alas poor silly fellows, these be they
that now take Arms against us. Wherefore faint not, be of good courage, and we
shall prevail; let us win vantage of ground, and get the side of the hill,
and bogge against them, that their horses prevail not, and once master them,
we shall quickly over-runne the pesants; now last, kiss one another, in token
that you will live and die one with another.

The battle of Ardkath.
His words being ended, they marched forward with Pipes, Cornets, and Trumpets
sounding. Their chief arms were Skeynes, Spears, Darts, Slings, and
Sparthes, (which we call Galloglas Axes:) they sent their boys and varlets, as
they had formerly determined, to the top of the hill. The King of Leinster that
had the leading of the horsemen, no sooner espied them, but (contrary to the
plot laid down upon the hill of Trase) put spurs to his horse, and with a
loud voice said, follow me, they were straight upon their backs that fled, so
that the Danes had no leisure to receive them for their safeguard, but were
driven to kill their own before, as the Irish did behind. Immediately came
the light foot under the leading of Gillemore, and together with the horse,
charged the voward of the Danes, so that the rascals of the Danes, and the
light footmen of the Irish were slain, with the death and hurt of many a Dane.
Then came the great battle of the Kings of Ireland in rescue of the horse,
with a great and terrible noise, and gave a stout charge upon the enemy (that
kept the ground, I mean the side of the hill) and fiercely bare them down to
the bottom, where they fought a cruel battle with equal fortune, almost the
whole day, until the King of Denmarkes son was slain by the King of
Leinster, The King of Leinster slaieth the King of Denmark his son.

The Danes overcome.


whereupon the Danes fled, the Irish followed, and had the killing of them
without resistance, till horse and man were weary, and the Danes in a manner
all destroyed. Of the Irish were slain (as I find in the antiquities of the
land) four Kings, twenty five Kings sons, and of others, nineteen thousand,
seven hundred and threescore, though others extenuate the matter. They say the
horses went to their bellies in blood, also the air with the stink was
infected, and thereof shortly after rose a grievous plague, which cut off the
wives, children, and servants of the Danes, and of many of the Irish that were
slain.

There was at this field, one Ferreis a Dane, Ferreis a Dane fell mad.
a valiant soldier in the fight, but escaping with life, for very sorrow of
the overthrow, and loss of his friends, fell mad, and kept company with
wild beasts to his dying day. Fin Mac Coile, Fin Mac Coile.
one of the principal Captains of the Danish sept, was in Rome at the time of
this field; many things are reported of him worthy remembrance. His chief
house was called Baragh-llys in Vlster; he was a man in his prosperity of
great command in Ireland, so that the Danes and Norweyans had through him great
dealing and intercourse with Ireland, and Ireland with them. But yet (as it
sometime falls out among the dearest friends) many jarres and broiles and
factions fell between them, and especially between the sept of Klan ne Morn,
and Klan ne Boisken, The Danes disagree in Ireland.
both which sides still relieved themselves out of Denmark. The King of
Denmark at last hearing of the same of Fin Mac Coile, sent for him, and took
such a liking to him, that he concluded to marry him unto his daughter. Fin
went thither with three thousand soldiers: the King one day as they conversed
together, asked after the manner of the death of his three sons, Comen,
Law-ne-Meyd, and Feagh, who formerly went into Ireland to maintain one of the
factions; Dermot O Doyne, (one of Fins company) answered, trouble not thy
self, O King, this is the hand that killed thy son Comen; one Osker said,
this is the hand that killed thy son Law-ne-Meyd; Keyn Mac Fin also said,
this is the hand that killed thy son Feagh. Herewith the King was wroth and
said, Fin Mac Coile, thou and thy men are my prisoners; forthwith they drew
their Skeynes, the Kings guard for fear fled, they took him prisoner, carried
him aboard their ships, Fin Mac Coile takes the King of Denmark prisoner.
hoised up sail, and brought him to Ireland, so as the marriage was dashed, and
the King driven to pay a ransom for his liberty, before he could get from
them. This Fin Mac Coile also fought with a Giant that landed at Houth, and
came to challenge combats for tribute, Overcommeth a Giant.
and by policy, not by strength, overcame him: his policy was this; he caused
him in the night, (for the space of three nights) to be kept waking, and in the
day time to be fought withal, and thereby weakened his strength, and foiled
the Giant. Toward his end, Gorre burns Fin Mac Coiles house.
one Gorre an old man, after these former wars and troubles, came to his
house (before spoken of) and boasted unto the Gentlewomen then present, of his
feats in war, and the combats he had fought, whereat they laughed; he being
offended with them, swear in his anger that he would burn them all, got old
timber and straw, put it in the house, fired it, made fast the doors, and
compassed about the house with men that none might escape. They cried unto him
out of their windows to save their lives, but he was inexorable, and could not
be drawn to any compassion, and when the house was ready to fall, he fled
into Mounster, and there hid himself in a Cave. Fin Mac Coile came home from
hunting, and beheld this woeful desolation, how his Wife, his Maids, his old
Soldiers, his Horses, his Greyhounds, his Plate and household stuff, his
Shields, Iackes, and Shirts of maile, and his instruments of Music, were
consumed to ashes, made after Gorre into Mounster, where he found him, and
after some skirmish of both sides, took him, and brought him to the place
where he had committed this villainy. Gorre when he beheld the bones of them
that were burned, laughed, and being asked why, his answer was, that he
laughed at them that formerly laughed at him. This wil^e Gorre being kept that
night from execution, in the dead of the night stole away, and was found in a
Cave, where by commandment of Fin Mac Coill, Hugh Gorre his own son killed
his father, He is killed by his own son. The end of Fin Mac Coill.
and after became mad himself. And the end of Fin Mac Coill was, that he
dyed a beggar and in great misery. So far out of the book of Houth. Now to
continue the story.

It is written of Maximus, who began his reign in Britain, Anno Dom. 387,
that he took great displeasure against the Scots and Irish, for partaking with
Conan, and upholding the faction between him and Carodoch: W. Harrison in the
description of Brit. Georg. Buchan. veg. Scot. lib. 4.
thus it is written; Maximus drove the Scots out of Britain, and compelled
them to get habitation in Ireland, the out Isles, and the North part of the
maine, and finally divided their region between the Britains and the Pictes.
He denounced war also against the Irish men, for receiving them into their
land; but they craving peace, yielded to subscribe, that from thenceforth they
would not receive any Scot into their dominions.

H. Boet. Scot. hist. lib. 6.
Hector Boethius penneth this matter at large, that all the Scots were banished,
and despersed themselves into the Hebrydes, Orchades, Norwey, Denmark, and
some into France and Italy. And where Maximus somewhat tendered their utter
ruin and overthrow, and referred them to the Pictes for favor, the Pictes
most cruelly gave sentence, that the Scots which fled not, should eat the
Pictes sword, etc: And of Ireland he writes, Upon the first coming of this
news, all Ireland mourned and made great lamentation; and when they had
deliberately examined the exiles, and understood all the accidents that befell
them in Albion, they appointed certain days for a parley, summoned from East
to West, all the Princes of the land to meet their Monarch at the certain day
and place prefixed, Irish consult how to help the Scots against the Romans.
to consult how and by what means the Roman forces might be resisted, and the
kingdom of Albion restored to their allies and cousins the Scots. When they
could devise no remedy (for they feared the power of the Romans) they thought
good to put up all injuries, and to entreat for peace. To this purpose they
sent Ambassadors to Maximus the Roman Captain, who at the first sharply
rebuked them, for that they had sent aid into Albion against the Romans their
confederates and favorites, and in especial, seeing that unto that day,
Ireland of all the kingdoms of the world, felt little smart of the Roman
sword. In the end he received them into favor, and granted them peace upon
these conditions. Conditions of peace between the Romans and Irish.
That they should thenceforth receive no enemies of the Romans into the Realm
of Ireland, neither any that gave aid against the Romans, and that no rebel
of the Irish under pretense of merchandise, should thenceforth set foot in
Albion. These conditions of peace being concluded, the Irish were quiet, and
trod not upon Scottish soil. So far Boethius.

Not long after this (according to Ponticus Virunius) Guanius, Ponticus
Virunius lib. 4.
King of Hunnes, and Melga King of Pictes having long hulled here and there,
and roved upon the seas, were by Gratianus (after their invading of Britain
and Scotland, in the absence of Maximus) overthrown, and driven out of the
kingdom, and forced to flee for refuge into Ireland: soul weather followed
these two Kings, and Ireland gave them hard entertainment at the first.
Notwithstanding I find, that this Guanius and Melga, after the death of this
Gratianus, (who usurped the kingdom of Britain for the space of four years
upon the death of Maximus, who had slain Gratianus the Emperor) prepared
again for Britain, and brought with them the exiled Scots with Irish and
Ilanders for their aid. But to proceed.

Thomas Cooper, who afterward was Bishop of Winchester, speaking of the
return of the Scots from exile (in his continuing of the Chronicle of Lanquet)
makes the same to be Anno Dom. 423. and withal delivers his conceit, Tho.
Cooper.
that the Scots about this time came first out of Ireland into that country,
which of them was called Scotland. If he had referred it to a further year,
namely when the six sons of Muredus King of Vlster came to Scotland, happily
it would have carried some probability: but to say that it was the first
coming of the Scots into Scotland, I do no more like of it, Rerum Scot. lib.
5.
then George Buchanan does, neither does it concur with the antiquities
precedent or subsequent. Cambrensis and Stanihurst do direct me in this
course. Here I am to note, (says Cambrensis) that in the time of Neall,
Monarch of Ireland, the six sons of Muredus, King of Vlster, Cambrensis.
with no small navy, possessed the North parts of Britain, whence the nation
issuing out of them, and by special name called Scottish to this day, inhabit
that northern angle; but upon what occasion they came hither, how and by what
great treasons (rather then voyages) they banished the Pictes from those parts,
a stout nation, far passing them for arms and courage, I refer to our
Topographie of Britain. Stan. in appendice.
Stanihurst adds; this inrode into Albania was a little before the coming of
Patricke. So that these Noble men of Ireland came into Scotland in the time of
Neale, and Patricke came into Ireland in the time of Leigerius the son of
Neale, as hereafter more at large shall appear.

In the mean time we read, how that ( Anno 430. according to Functius)
Celestinus Bishop of Rome sent Palladius into Scotland, Anno Dom. 430. Prosper
in Chro. Palladius.
who was the first that gave them Bishops, for unto that time, the Churches
without Bishops, Geo. Buchanan. ^ey Scot. lib. 5.
were governed by Monks, with less pride and outward pomp, but with greater
sanctity and meekness of spirit, etc. I make mention of him, for that (as
our Irish Anonymus, and Iocelin do write) he landed in the North parts of
Ireland, where he hardly escaped with life, Iocelin in vita Sancti Patricij
cap. 24.
as it is reported, thence he went to the Islands, where he did much good,
lastly he came to Scotland, preached the Gospel, rooted out the Pelagian
heresy, and consecrated them Bishops, etc.

Christian faith in Ireland.
At this time (as it is written in the life of Declanus) Christian religion
first began, and took root in Ireland, not as some have dreamed, by Saint
James the Apostle, neither by Saint Patricke, whom they term the Apostle of
Ireland. The truth of the history is as follows. There was one Colmannus in
Mounster, a reverend Priest, Colmannus and Dymna.

The life of Saint Declanus.


(and the first Christian which I find upon record in Ireland) that baptized
one Declanus, and delivered him to be brought up unto one Dymna a Christian
schoolmaster, under whom he profited so much, that his fame was spread far
and nigh, so that upon good advice and counsel, he travailed to Rome, where
Celestinus the Pope consecrated him Bishop, where also he met with Albaeus a
Bishop of Irish birth. In his return from Rome, he met with Patricke in
Italy, conversed a while with him, and being enjoined by Celestinus, hastened
to Ireland, and left Patricke that was bound for Rome. Declanus after his
arrival in Ireland, came among his own sept (whom mine Author calls
Nandesi, and I take to be the ancient house of the Decies) not far from
Lismore, Family of the Decies.
and there preached the Gospel, and converted many to the Christian faith.
Thither came unto him, (says the Legend) seven holy men Mocellog, Beanus,
Colmanus, Lachuyn, Moby, Fyndlug and Caminanus* they builded them celles,
conversed together, and planted the Christian faith over all Mounster. Engus
King of Mounster.
He went to Engus the son Nafrygh, King of Mounster, whose Palace was in
Cassill, who gave him leave to preach, yet received not the faith; the reason
of this favor (as I find it) was for that Engus had married his mother, and
had issue by her, Colman and Eochard. Colman was by Saint Albaeus the Bishop
baptized, and then received the Ecclesiastical habit, Eochard reigned after
his father King of Mounster.

Saint Declanus took a second journey to Rome, and was reverently entertained
by David Bishop of Menevia; after the effecting of his business, he returned
into Ireland, and arrived in a place called Ard-naciored, in Latin Altitudo
ovium, now called Ardmore, the which soil the Lord of Nandesi gave him,
Ard-naciored, i. Altitudo ovium, now Ardmore.
where goodly buildings have been, and as the record runs, Civitas sancti
Declani quae in eo loco posita est, vocatur Ardmore, id est, Altitudo magna.
Farther in the same Legend I find, Quatuor sanctissimi Episcopi, cum suis
discipulis fuerunt in Hibernia, ante Patricium praedicantes in ea Christu^,
scilicet, Albaeus, Declanus, Ybarus and Kyaranus (alias Keran), Albaeus,
Declanus, Ybarus, Keran.
and hi plures ad Christum rete evangelico traxerunt, sed tamen sanctus
Patricius Majores Hiberniae, and potentiores ad fidem convertit. In their time
Patricke sent from Celestine Bishop of Rome came to Ireland whom these four
Bishops with their followers saluted, and seeing Patricke (after the humor of
humorous people) more graced then themselves, jarred with him, they would not
(forsooth) have any of foreign nation to patronize the land. In the original
it is recorded: Ybarus nulla ratione consentire Sancto Patricio, Emulation.
nunquam ei subditus esse voluit, nolebat enim Patronum Hiberniae de alia gente
habere, and conflictus magnos inter se ipsos Ybarus and Patricius fecerunt. But
afterward by much ado, they were reconciled. See gentle reader the infirmity
of men, and emulation following the same. At Cassill they were reconciled by
Engus King of Mounster, whom Patricke baptized, who after his baptism, founded
there the Cathedral Church, Cassill Church is built and made Mother Church of
Mounster.

A Parliament.


in the honor of Saint Patricke, made it the Metropolitan See of Mounster,
and assigned Albaeus the first Bishop there. This King held there a Parliament
of spiritual and temporal persons of his kingdom, ratifying the premises,
pacifying all quarrels, and yielding contentment to all sides, The Legend
reports, in quo decretum est ut Albaeus secundus Patricius, and Patronus
Mumeniae esset; and Declanus secundus Patricius, and Patronus esset Nandeisi,
and Nandeisi sua Diocesis usque ad finem seculi esset. Postea sancti Episcopi
salutantes and benedicentes regem Engusum, ad sua in osculo pacis, cum
spirituali gaudio, ad opus Domini seminandum regressi sunt. Wherein it was
decreed, that Albaeus should be a second Patricke and Patron of Mounster, and
that Declanus should be a second Patricke and Patron of Nandeisi, and that
Nandeisi should be his Diocese to the end of the world. After all, these holy
Bishops saluted and blessed King Engus, and in the kiss of peace, with
spiritual joy, returned every one to his charge, to sow the work of the Lord.
A great pestilence in Mounster.
Immediately there insued a grievous plague over all Mounster, and especially
at Cassill, which was the death of thousands; the manner of it was this, first
they had the yellow jaundies, then they fell down for dead. King Engus
lamented greatly the death of seven Nobles of Mounster, that were pledges with
him at Cassill, and miscarried in this mortality. Not long after, Declanus
ended the way of all flesh, and lies buried at Ardmore.

Albaeus, The life of Saint Albaeus.
(as his own Legend delivers) the second Patron of Mounster after Patricke
the general Patron of Ireland was borne in Elyach, now called Ely O Caroll.
His fathers name was Ol^nais, his mothers, Sandith, a maid servant in the house
of King Cronanus, King Cronanus of Eliach.
the Lord of Eliach was then called a King. Cronanus in his rage, bid his
servants hang the whore, and kill the child; the servants loath to dispatch
an innocent, took him out of his Palace, and laid him under the side of a
rock. One Lochanus the son of Lugyr passing by, pitied the child, took
him to his horse, and set him to nurse among certain Britains, in the East
part of Elyach. Palladius (says the story) passing from Rome toward Scotland,
and traveling through Ireland, baptized him. The Britains sent him into
France, where he was trained up in Christian schools, and brought up under
Bishop Hilarious, who sent him to Rome, where he was consecrated Bishop, and
remained one whole year and fifty days, preaching and expounding holy
Scripture, with great admiration. And says the Legend, there came unto him out
of Ireland, fifty grave and reverend men, of which number there were 12
Colmans, 12 Coenigeni, and 12 Fintans; the Bishop of Rome sent them back into
Ireland, they came to Dolomoir, where Sampson Bishop of that See gave them
entertainment. King Fintan baptized.
There he baptized (says the story) King Fintan. After he had baptized and
converted many unto the faith, and builded many Churches, and founded many
Hospitals for lazers, he came to Ymleach, Ymleach or Emley.
now called Emley, a Bishopric, and in the Legend, termed his own City,
fell sick, and there left his bones. He conversed with Biga, (whom learned
Camden calls Bega) and Bretach Nuns, and with Nessanus a great Antiquarie,
Biga and Bretach Nuns. Nessanus the Antiquarie. The life of Saint Kyaranus or
Keran.
says mine Author, whose antiquities I never saw.

Kyaranus or Keran, alias Piran, (another of the four Bishops that lived in
Ireland before Saint Patricke) comes next to be spoken of. Of him, Capgrave
and the Martyrologe thus write, that he was a Bishop and Confessor, and
termed Sanctorum Hiberniae primogenitus. And yet I find in Molanus, that one
Saint Mansuetus, (Bishop of Tullum now called Tullense oppidu^, a town in
Flanders) was of Irish birth, fellow Disciple with Saint Clement, under Saint
Peter the blessed Apostle, not trained up in Ireland in the Christian faith,
but in foreign countries, where he was both baptized, instructed, and made
Bishop, and where he now rests. But to return to Keran, he was borne in
Ossorie, having to his father Domnell, (says another, Lugnaeus, whereby I
gather, there were two of that name) to his mother Wingella, famous for life,
learning, and sanctity, in the days of Saint Patricke. He lived in the I Will of
Clear some 30 years, from thence he went to Rome, where he met Saint
Patricke, who came to Ireland 30. years after Pyranus was of note; in Rome he
continued 15. years, expounding holy Scripture with great admiration, (as
another says 20. years) there the Bishop of Rome consecrated him Bishop. He
came to Ireland, and was the first Bishop of Ossorie, having his See at Keran
in Elie O Carroll. He refreshed, (says mine Author) Saint Patricke, Keran the
first Bishop of Ossorie.
and ten Irish Kings for the space of three days, he confirmed Rhodanus in
the faith, visited the Virgin Cota (with her Priest Geranus) whose cell was a
rock of the ^eas, not far from the City of Cluan in Mounster. He was a man
of an austere life, never ware woollen garment, but the fell of Wolves and
wild beasts. As he came to his lodging, in time of Lent, and having inquired
what provision they had, answer being made, that they had but a pestle of
Porke, he commanded it to be laid on the table, one scornefully refused the
diet, he misliking with him, threatened him an ill end, which accordingly came
to pass. When by the course of nature he saw his end approach, he called his
friends unto him, and said: My welbeloved children and friends, God has
disposed that I should travail out of Ireland into Cornwall, and there expect
the end of my days; I cannot withstand the will of God; I do admonish you
brethren, to uphold the place, with good works and examples of life, for there
shall come children of perdition and death among you, ye shall have mortality
and wars, the Churches shall become waste and desolate, and the truth shall
be turned into iniquity, faith shall not shine with good works, the Pastors
will look to themselves more then to their flock, feeding themselves more
then their sheep: last of all, I beseech you brethren, pray for me that my
journey may be prosperous, and that after my decease, I find not my King and
my God angry, but gentle and appeased, when I shall appear before him. He
took leave, came to Cornwall, and rests some fifteen miles from
Petrok-stow, 25. miles from Mousehole, where he is remembered for their Patron.
Cambr^nsis writes, Itinerarium Cambriae.
that in Caerdise in Wales, there is a Chapel called Saint Perans Chapel,
where King Henry the second in his return from Ireland, repaired to hear
divine service, as he has remembered it in his Book entitled Itinerarium
Cambriae. And thus much of Saint Keran or Saint Peran.

Of Ybarus the fourth Bishop before Saint Patricke, The life of Saint Ybarus.
I find some discourse in the Legend of Abbanus the Abbot, how he baptized
him, and brought him up in learning, and how they went together to Rome, and
after their return, conversed in Ireland with Saint Patricke, as formerly in
part has been delivered in the life of Declanus.

This Abbanus is renowned in Ireland for building of Celles and religious
houses; besides three Monasteries in Connaght, The life of Abbanus the Abbot.
he built in Mounster, Ceall Achard Conchun, alias, Kill Achard, where Saint
Finan (whom he baptized) after his death was Abbot. Saint Finan.
In the borders of Muskerry he builded the Nunnery of Husneach, and left it to
Saint Gobnaid and her Virgins, another Monastery also by Kilcullen. In Nandesi
(as I take it now called the Decies,) by the town of Briogoban, he founded
Kill-na-Marban, and at the foot of the mountain Crotte in Muskerie, the famous
Monastery called Cluain-Airdmobecoc, where Saint Becanus was Abbot, Saint
Becanus.
the which afterward, because of Becanus his lamentation in devout sort (as it
is written) for his sins, was called Ceall Nander, Cella lachrymarum, the
cell of tears. He founded also Cluain Findglaise, and Cluain Conbrum, and went
into Ely, where he baptized and converted unto the faith, thousands, as the
Legend reports, in a place afterward called Rath-Becain, in Latin, Atrium
Becani, where Abbanus is recounted Patron. He builded a Monastery upon the
river Berba, called Ross-Mac-Treoin, Emenus the Abbot.
where the Abbot Saint Emenus rests; also in Mead, Ceall-Ailbe, and
committed the charge thereof to the holy Nun Segnith and her associates, and
in the North part of that country, a Nunnery, Ceall Abbain, where he made an
end of his course, and slept with his fathers. There was great strife for his
corpse, between the North and the South, the Lords of the country strove for it
in Arms. The North pleaded, here he first builded and made his abode, the
South answered, with us was he borne, with us he most conversed, and we will
have his corpse, or else we will leave our carcasses in this place. The body was
laid in a Cart, bruit beasts had the drawing of it, when both sides were in
Arms, the silly beasts were frighted, and ran away with the dead, and where
he was buried, I have not found as yet. His Monks howled, and kept a
lamentable stir; Civitas Magarnoid.
the record runs thus. Populus civitatis Magarnoid in Australibus
Laginensibus sic dicebat. Iste sanctus a Domino ad nos missus est, and per
multos annos apud nos vixit, and monasteria multa et cellas in nostra regione
edificavit, et ipse est noster Sanctus et venerabilis Pater, qui nostra^
civitatem similiter construxit, qui post multa miracula, apud nos, ad Dominum
migravit, et per eum semper a Domino adjuvari speramus, et scitote, quod nos
morti omnes prius trademus, antequam revertamini, eo a nobis absente. Ad hanc
vocemira principum et militum utrorumque arsit, surgentes in furorem magnum,
contendere et rixari conantes. Tunc vero monachi and clerici, quibus non
licebat bellare, seorsum exierunt, ululantes and flentes, and fusis lachrymis
dicentes; heu heu Domine Deus, cur concedis tam maximam caedem, tantoru^
nobilium virorum, circa corpus famulitui, qui in sua vita multa bella
prohibuit? He had familiarity with Saint Beartanus an Abbot, Brendanus,
Molyng, Flannanus, Munnu, Gobban, and with Columba the reverend Priest.

The life of Saint Patricke.
Saint Patricke was sent into Ireland by Celestinus Bishop of Rome before named,
five years after Palladius was sent into Scotland. So writes Johannes Major
Scotus, and Functius therein follows him; but I think they are too forward
in their computation, for he came into Ireland, Anno Christi, 422. Iocel. in
praef. ad vitam Patric.
Anno 432. and for this beside John Bale Bishop of Ossorie, I have warrant from
Iocelin the Monk of Furnese, who wrote his life at the request of Thomas,
Primate of Ardmagh, Malachias Bishop of Dune, and Sir John de Courcy Earl of
Vlster; and out of Sigebertus and John Clyn Guardian of the Friars Minors in
Kilkenny in his collections of Irish antiquities, Sigeb. ad an. 432. Johannes
Clyn Antiq. Hiber.
who also says, that he was 16. years old when the Pirates brought him out of
Britain into Ireland, that he was six years in servitude, that he was
eighteen years under Saint Germane a Bishop in France, that he spent thirty
and five years in converting Ireland and other Islands to the faith, that he
bestowed thirty three years in contemplation, and that he died anno aetatis,
one hundred twenty two.

Bale writes his life. Patricius surnamed Succetus Magonius, John Bale Scrip.
Britt. cent. 1. and 14.
of most writers called Magnus for his excellent virtues, had in Britain to
his father one Calphurnius a Priest (the son of Ponticus a Priest, says
Iocelin) and to his mother one Conche of Pannonia ( Concessa says Probus)
sister to Saint Martin (cousin says Iocelin:) he was brought up under godly
tutors, when Maximus reigned, first under his uncle Martin, afterward under
Germanus Bishop of Auxerre in Burgoyne, from thence he came to Italy, and so to
Rome, where for his grave carriage and singular learning, descending of noble
race, he got the name of a Senator, Patricius. His first name, says Florilegus
was Nannus, and in his consecration he was called Patricius; Sigebertus and
Stanihurst write, that in his baptism he was called Suchat or Suchar; of
Saint German, Magonius; and of Celestinus, Patricius; the like says Beda in
his Martyrologe.

Celestinus then Bishop of Rome sent him together with Segetius a Priest, anno
432 after Palladius the Grecian, Segetius sent with Saint Patrick.
unto the Scots and Irish, to defend them from the Pelagian heresy; he with a
wonderful fervency of spirit preached the Gospel unto the Irish nation,
travailing in the vineyard of the Lord the space of thirty nine years,
converted them unto the Lord with his great learning, and sanctity of life.
Whereupon among other miracles (the which he is said to have wrought) upon the
top of an hill, like a second Elias, he prayed and fasted forty days and
nights, in a vision he received of Christ the Gospel, and a staff, (an
Hermit gave him the staff says Iocelin.) He destroyed the profane temples
of false gods, he erected monuments of piety, builded Churches, ordained
Ministers, relieved the poor, redeemed captives, healed the sick, delivered
the possessed, raised sixty dead persons, baptized twelve thousand, if all be
true which Vincentius, Antonius, and Capgrave report of him. Saint Patricks
works.
Out of the treasure of his pure heart, many Authors affirm, that he wrote in
Latin these books.

De antiquitate Avalonica lib. 1 Itenerarium Confessionis lib. 1 Odoeporicon
Hiberniae lib. 1 Historia Hiberniae ex Ruano lib 1 De tribus habitaculis lib. 1
De futura electoru^ vita lib. 1 Abiectoria quaedam 366 lib. 1 Sermones quoque
lib. 1 Probus lib. 2. of his life mentions it.
Ad Cereticum tyrannum epist. 1 Ad Avaloniae incolas epist. 1 Ad Hibernenses
Ecclesias epist. plur. Ad suos Britannos epist. plur.
The manuscript Legend of Ireland reports, that Saint Patrick in his Epistles
wrote his own life. The Antiquaries report, that in his conflicts with the
sages of the Gentiles, this Apostle of the Irish wrought no less miracles then
of old Moses under Pharaoh, or Peter under Nero, and that he endured many
dipleasures. In the end after his death, he was buried near the City of Dune,
but the year among the Historiographers is not agreed upon; S. Patrick buried
in Down.
yet in remembrance of him this distichon was made.

Hi tres in Duno tumulo tumulantur in uno,
Brigida, Patricius, atque Columba pius.
Saint Patrick died first, Brigida six years after him, and Columba many
years after her, yet were all three buried in one grave. What Bale has
formerly written, I find he has gathered out of Vincentius, Antoninus, Authors
that wrote of Saint Pacrick.
Capgrave, Leland, Gildas, Giraldus Cambrensis, Bostonus Buriensis, and
Florilegus; and all that Iocelin has at large written, and what Legenda
Plumbea, and the book of Houth report, to avoid prolixity, and to shun
fabulous conceits, I omit. Now to the Irish Chroniclers.

They deliver, that in his captivity in Ireland being sold to Milcho King of
Vlster (says Iocelin) to Milach (says Stanihurst) to Cuulcu (says
Florilegus) to Macbuaine says the Irish Anonymus, Ioc. in vita Patricis cap.
12.
and to reconcile them all, I take it that Milcho was called Milcho Macbuaine:
he kept swine six years; no disgrace unto him, for Marcellus Bishop of Rome
(he that will not believe other writers, will credit the Martyrologe of Sarum)
by the commandment of Maximian the tyrant, kept swine many years. When
Patricks six years were expired, one of the swine turned up a clod, under the
which lay so much money as paid his ransom. When he came the second time, he
landed at Carlingford, and inquired after Milcho whose captive he had been,
who would not give ear to his doctrine, but immediately after his death,
Milcho his daughters are babtized. Laigerius Monarch of Ireland, withstandeth
S. Patr.
his two daughters of one name, Emeria were baptized. Laigerius* (in Iocelin,
Leogarius) Monarch of Ireland, the son of Neale harkning unto Magicians and
Soothsayers, gave commandment, (together with his brother Corbre) unto the
Country, for the banishing of Saint Patrick, but Dichu and Rius (two brethren
and great Commanders under him) received the faith, and Conil brother to
Laigerius, who also himself shortly after grew indifferent, winking at them
that did receive it, so that his Queen and his younger brother received the
faith, and his two daughters. And of Laigerius he thus prophesied: because thou
have always withstood my doctrine, and ceased not above measure to persecute
me, and have above all disdained to believe in him that made all things, thou
art the child of death. And whereas of right, thou with the rest, Saint Pat.
prophecy of the Monarch.
yea before all thy confederates, ought presently to enter into everlasting
torments; yet insomuch as thou meekely come unto me, craving pardon, and
like King Achab, humblest thy self before my God, the Lord will not forthwith
bring upon thee the evil which thou have deserved; notwithstanding there shall
none of thy seed after thee sit upon thy seat, but shall serve thy younger
brother that believes in my God, and his seed after him for ever.

As this holy man travailed in preaching the Gospel, Mocho Bishop of Dune.
he met with a young man whose name was Mochaa or Mocho, keeping swine, in
whose physiognomie he perceived towardness and sparkles of grace; he taught
him, baptized him, trained him up in holy Scripture, made him Deacon, Priest,
and Bishop of Dune where he lies buried. Clonsillan and Kellestowne, some five
miles west of Dublin, have him for their Patron, where under an high rock
runs a Spring called S. Mochon his Well. Next he baptized one Benignus,
called also Stephanus, so Probus writes, with his father, mother, Benignus or
Stephanus, successor to Saint Patricke. A Nun (says Iocelin) was in love
with him, sent for him to her bed, but the sign of the Cross made all well.
Erchus or Herkus a Bishop.
and family, who proved so good a member in the Church of God, that he
succeeded S. Patricke in Armagh; this Benignus, says Capgrave, lies buried in
Glastenburie. Saint Patricke also received into the faith, one Erchas, the
son of Dega, says Iocelin, whom he also made a Bishop. The Martyrologe of
Sarum calls him Herkus. At that time, one Pheg a Poet, and (says Probus)
Duptachus an Irish rymer or Poet in Lastgerius his Court, desired baptism, and
afterward all the days of his life, converted his vain rymes into Chrihian
Poems, and did much good thereby among the common people.

Saint Patricke had brought with him into Ireland out of Italy, one Mac
Cartyn, of Irish birth, so I read in the martyrologe of Sarum, Ioc. cap.
49.51.53.68.69. and seq.

Mac Carly. Saint Pa^. sisters.


and three sisters of his own, which proved very fruitful. Lupita (who lived
a Virgin, and lies buried at Armagh) Trigridia and Darercha. Tigridia had
seventeene sons, and five daughters; the men became Priests, Monks, and
Bishops; the daughters were made Nuns: the Bishops were called Brochadius,
Brochanus, Mogenochus, and Lumianus. Darerca the youngest sister had two Bishops
to her sons, Melrioch and Munis: the martyrologe of Sarum reckons her
children thus, Mele, Melk, Muncse, Bishops, Riok, Finian and Bolke Abbots.
Where I think there is some error, that Melrioch in Iocelin is Mele, and Ryok
in the maytyrologe.

Of Lumianus I read, that he baptized a Lord of the country, Lumianus Bishop
of Ahtrum.
called Fedlemus, and his son Forkernus, whose mother was a Britain, his
dwelling was at Ahtrum. There Lumianus by their means builded a Church some
twenty five years before the founding of Armagh, the which he took for his
Bishops See, and ordered Forkernus to succeed him there. The possessions (says
mine Author) which were first given to this Church, afterward by the donations
of other Princes, fell to belong to Armagh.

The holy man Patricke labored still in the vineyard of the Lord; Conallus
Lord of Connaght.
he baptized Conallus, alias Conill, Lord of Connaught, brother to Laigerius,
and his family, who gave Patricke a country called Dompnac. Patricke, and
builded for himself a dwelling place called Raith-Artair. After seven years,
this Conill sent him to his brother Logan (Cogan says the Book of Houth) King
of Leinster, whom he baptized, together with Amolgath (whom I take to be the
ancestour of the house of O Malaghlin) a great Lord of a country, and his seven
sons, ( Florilegus says they were seven Kings.) After this, this holy man
coming out of Meth, and having passed over the water at Finglas, went up to a
hill some mile from the village Athcled, now called Dublin. When he had viewed
the place and soil adjoining, he blessed the same, Saint Patricks prophecy of
Dublin.
and is said to have prophesied thus; This village is now but small, it will be
great, it will be enlarged with wealth and worship, neither will it leave
increasing until it be advanced to the seat of the Kingdom.

In a while after, he came to the village, where the inhabitants hearing of the
wonders which the Lord wrought by his hands, Dublin believes and is baptized.
went out to meet him with much joy, and believed by his preaching, and were
baptized. My Author adds that upon complaint made unto him, how that they
were annoyed with brackish waters, which of necessity they were driven to use,
he walked about the village, turned up cloddes, dug the earth and found a
Spring, which is now called Saint Patrickes Well.

Saint Patricks Well.

Morguus of Castleknoke.


From this village Athcled, he went to Castleknok, where one Murguus dwelled
and commanded those places, who hearing of Patricks coming, refused to give
him entertainment, but sent him word that he was asleep, in which sleep (as
the story says) he died, of which accident the common saying arises, Thou
sleep Murguus sleep, applied to those that sleep heavily, or are given to
overmuch sleep.

From Castleknok, he bent his course toward Mounster, and came to King Engus,
Engus and Daris receive Saint Pat.
alias Oengus Mac Nafroic, who received him joyfully, and brought him to his
Palace at Cassill, says Iocelin; where also one Daris a great Lord in that
country, showed him much kindness. When he had baptized the King, and many
thousands with him, he came to Vrmiunnan now called Ormond, Vrmiunnan or Ormond.
where in like sort they received the faith, and the inhabitants in remembrance
of him builded a Church, and dedicated the same to his name. From Mounster
(where he preached seven years) he took his journey back to Vlster, King
Eochu and his daughter baptized.
and came to King Eochu, whom he baptized, and his daughter Cumia, whom he made
a Nun, and committed her to the charge of the Nun Cecubris (in the Nunnery
of Drumdukain) whom Patricke first veiled of all the women in Ireland. Cecubris
the first Nun in Ireland.
Also he baptized Olcanus, who went into France to study, and upon his
return, ^rected schools in Ireland, and had many scholars, whereof a great
number were afterward Bishops, he himself toward his end, became a Bishop,
and ended his days in sanctity. When Saint Patricke had baptized a second
Conallus (a petite King) and his brother Fergus, he prophesied of Fedlemus the
son of Fergus, King Conallus and Fergus baptized.
and of Columba the son of Fedlemus, what a holy man he should prove, as
after he did, and was the founder of an hundred Monasteries.

Saint Patricke for all this travail sailed into Britain for coadiutors and
fellow laborers in this work, Saint Pat. in Britain.
where he opposed himself both in public and private against the Pelagians
and other heretics which disturbed the peace of the Church, Pelagians.
and brought with him thirty learned men, whom afterward he consecrated
Bishops. So that to this day in Britain, (as in Anglesey, Bristoll, Exeter,
and other places) there are Churches built in remembrance of him. He also
converted the Isle of Man to the faith, Isle of Man.
and there is a Church which also bears his name, and left them one Germanus
to be their Bishop, after whose death he ordained for that place, Conidrius,
Ronillus and Machaldus. Upon his return into Ireland, he met with six of his
Disciples, of Irish birth, that had been Students beyond Seas, whom in the end
he made Bishops; Lugacius, Columbanus, Meldanus, Lugadius, Cassanus, and
Cheranus. Then he made (says Iocelin) a second journey unto Athcled now called
Dublin; upon his coming, (which was about twenty years after their
conversion) and found them all given to idolatry, and withal, one Alpinus a
King with his Queen, and his retinue, Eocchiad and Dublinia raised from death.
lamenting the death of Eocchiad their son and heir, and the drowning of
their sole daughter Dublinia. Patricke preached, the people believed, the King
hearing of him hoped to reap some comfort; to be short, (says mine Author)
the dead are raised to life, and Athcled ever after in remembrance of the Kings
daughter Dublinia, was called Dublin. Dublin whence so called* Saint Pat.
manner of teaching


Saint Patrickes manner was, first to Catechize, secondly to Baptize, lastly to
minister the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. When with the aid of the country,
he builded Churches, he would not name them after any Saints name, but Domnach
the Church of the Lord. And when he had procured a Church to be builded in a
place called Achad Fobuit, and consecrated his Disciple Sennachus, alias
Seachuallus Bishop there, the humble suit of Senachus unto him was, that the
Church should not be called after him, as the manner was, (says mine Author)
in many places among the Irish people. Iocelin c. 1^2.
The only doctrine Patricke read and expounded unto the people, was the four
Evangelists, conferred with the old Testament. He is reported to have given
many blessings, and to have denounced many curses. He had many Disciples,
Kertennus, Winnocus, Winwallocus, likewise says Molanus, Elberus, Ibarus,
Connedus, Secundinus, Asicus, Fiechus, Sennachus, Olcanus, with many others
which he made Bishops. I find mention also of Riochus that kept his Books and
Papers, and of Rodanus that kept his Cattle, that he made them Bishops, and
the world made them Saints.

Ireland is greatly beholding unto him, for it is recorded that he went up to
the top of the Mount Hely (I take it to be a hill in Ely, O Carrols country)
where he made three petitions unto Almighty God for the people of Ireland that
had received the faith. Saint Patricks three petitions for Ireland. Flor.
histor. Anton Chron. part 2. tit. 11. cap. 18.
First, that every one might have grace to repent, though it were at the last
hour. Secondly, that they might not be utterly destroyed by Infidels. Lastly,
that no Irish man should live till the day of Judgment; Quia delebitur per
orationem sancti Patricij septem annis ante judicium; for it shall be destroyed
by means of Saint Patrickes prayers, seven years before the coming of
Christ to judgment. Probus makes mention of other Petitions, which for that I
hold them fabulous, I will not rehearse. He procured (as it is written of him)
seven hundred Churches to be builded in Ireland, Saint Patricks works and
labor in Ireland Iocelin cap. 187.
ordained five thousand Ministers, consecrated three hundred and fifty Bishops,
successively, understand, in his time.

Darius (the Book of Houth calls him Dares, in Probus Dair) a Noble man,
Ioc. cap. 164. and 198.
affecting Patricke, and seeing him bear low sail, and shrowding himself
with all humility in Vlster, drew him to dwell at Drumsailech, now called
Armagh, and having used means there for the building of a Church, Patricke
went to Rome, procured all confirmations necessary to his purpose, arrived
again in Ireland, and being of the age of 122. years, ended his life in the
time that Aurelius Ambrosius reigned in Britain, and Forthkerrus was Monarch
of Ireland, Brigida and Ethembria who then were accounted two holy women,
shrouded him to his grave, when Thassach a Bishop had ministered the Sacrament.
Probus writes that the Britains came with great forces, Strife for Saint
Patricks body.
attempting at several times to fetch away his corpse, and that the men of
Vlster did withstand them. As for the purgatory that is fathered upon him, I
must refer the reader to the year of grace, 850. where he shall find a
second Patricke founder thereof.

The life of Saint Brigide.
In our Patricks time flourished many good Christians, renowned at this day, and
as an Antiquarie and collector of antiquities, I desire the christian reader to
accept of them as I find them. And I will begin with Brigida that gave Saint
Patricke his winding sheet, she was borne (as John Clyn writes) anno 439. in
Fochart not far from Dondalke, Bernard in vita Malachiae.
as Bernard delivers, she was the base daughter of one Duptacus, happily
Laigerius his rymer before spoken of) a Noble man (says Bale of the North
parts, a Captain of Leinster, says the Book of Houth. Capgrave writes, that
her mother in wantonness having conceived, and her belly being espied to be
up, Duptacus his wife caused her to be turned out of doors; Duptacus to avoid
the i^alousie and disquietnesse of his wife, delivered her to a Poet or Bard,
(a Magician says Bale) who kept both Mother and Daughter, and trained her up
in such learning as he had skill in. She proved so singularly learned, and was
in such account among all men, that a Synod of Bishops assembled by Dublin,
used her advice in weighty causes, A Synod by Dublin.
as I read in the Book of Houth. She became a Nun, and wrought but one
miracle, (says Bale) that is, she used means to purge a Bishop, one Bronus
or Bruno from fornication, when the fact was manifestly proved against him. In
the authenticke manuscript Legend of Ireland, I find that she kept most in
Leinster, and builded a Cell for her abode under a goodly fair Oak, which
afterward grew to be a Monastery of Virgins, called Cyll-dara, in Latin,
Cella Quercus, the Cell of the Oak, now Kildare, and says mine Author, Kildare:
ibique maxima civitas postea in honor beatissimae Brigidaecrevit, quae est
hodie metropolis Laginensium. The first Bishop by her means was Conlianus,
alias Conlaidus. Stanihurst reckons the succession of the Sea in this sort.

Lony. Ivor. Conlie. Donatus. David. Magnus. Richard. John. Simon. Nicolas.
Walter. Richard. Thomas. Robart. Boniface. Madogg. William: Bishops of Kildare.
Galfride. Richard. James. Wale. Barret. Edmund Lane.
Who flourished in the year, 1518. So far Master Stanihurst:

Hector Boethius puts us in remembrance of the honor given her by Scots,
Pictes, Irish and English nations, Scot. hist. lib. 9*
and how that many Churches bear her name. The superstitious Irish in process
of time, found out a Bell called Clogg Brietta, Brigids Bell, whereunto, to
deceive the simple people, they attribute great virtue and holiness, the which
together with other toys they carried about, not only in Ireland, but also in
England, and were by Act of Parliament in England, banished the land in Henry
the fifts time. Cambrensis reports that the harmony of the four Evangelists
(the work of Saint Jerome) was caused by Brigid (most of it) to be written in
letters of gold, and was as curious a work (says he) as ever I saw, and
called Brigids Book, the which was kept as a monument (says Stanihurst) at
Kildare.

She deceased about the year 510. (another says, Brigides death.
anno 548.) and about the year 524. she was translated from the Hebrides into
Dune, and rests by Saint Patrickes side, as formerly has been declared in
his life. Ireland has given her this Epitaph.

Flos patriae, pietatis amans, virtutis alumna,
Sidus Hibernorum, Brigida virgo fuit.
In her Legend I find mention of Ercus, a Bishop, the disciple of Saint
Patricke, borne in Mounster, also of Saint Ruanus a Bishop, Saint Numidus,
Saint Praecipuus, Saint Daria a Virgin, Saint Darlugdach called a Virgin, and
yet had a daughter that was baptized in the presence of Brigide. Saint
Darludach.
This Darlugdach was the second Nun, and succeeded Brigide in Kildare, whose
remembrance is celebrated the same day with her. Illand King of Leinster.
Illand King of Leinster gave Brigide great honor, of him I read in her
Legend, that he was a most worthy Prince, and fortunate in all his affairs.
Illand Rex Lageniae qui triginta bella in Hibernia vicit, octo certamina in
Britannia, occidit Engusium regem Momoniae cum Ethna uxore, quos Patricius
baptizavit: Illand King of Leinster, who won thirty battles in Ireland, and
eight combats in Britain, slew Engusus King of Mounster, and Ethna his wife,
whom Patricke had baptized.

The life of Caelius Sedulius.
About this time lived Caelius Sedulius, whom Damianus a Goes, a Knight of
Portingall challenged for a Spaniard. Bale writes he was a Scot, and
Stanihurst that he was borne in Ireland. I will first lay down what Bale has,
next what Stanihurst reports. Caelius Sedulius (says Bale) by nation a Scot.
by calling a Priest, Johannes Bale Script. Brit. cent. 14.
a man trained up in learning from his youth, cleaved as a diligent scholar
unto Hildebert, the most learned Archbishop of Scots, as Tritemius delivers.
After the decease of his master, being desirous of farther knowledge, he took
a painful voyage in hand, travailed throughout Spain, France, Italy, Greece
and Asia; last of all, after he had read in Achaia most learned lectures, to
the great profit of many, he came back to Rome, where with great labor he
distributed most abundantly in like sort the treasure of singular learning. He
was a man exercised in holy Scripture, of a singular wit, excellently well
seen in all manner of secular literature, passing both for verse and prose, so
that Gelasius, Bishop of Rome, in the decrees, did. 15. calls him reverend
Sedulius, and gave his works no mean commendation. Pat^rius the disciple of
Gregorius Magnus, and Remigius Antisiodorensis, in his commentary upon him of
old have published his fame and renown. Sedulius both in verse and prose has
published many works, whereof in Boston of Bury, and Tritemius, I only found
these that follow. Unto Macedonius the Priest, a singular work, which he
entitled The works of Caelius Sedulius.
Carmen paschale -- lib. 4 Pascales quicunque dapes conviva requiris* Elegia
vel exhortatorium ad fideles lib. 1 Cantemus socij Dom. cantemus honorem. De
signis and virtutibus -- lib. 1 Domino meo charissimo. Gesta et miracula
Christi -- lib. 4 Expulerat quondam, etc: Superutroque testamento -- lib. 2 In
Psalmos Dividicos -- lib. 1 Collectanea in Paulum -- lib. 14 Antequam
Apostolica verba. In Paulum ad Romanos -- lib. 1 Sciendum est quod hoc. Ad
Corinthios -- lib. 2 Quod nomen suum proponit. Ad Galatas -- lib. 1 Hoc est non
ab humana* Ad Ephesios -- lib. 1 Refere scriptura testante. Ad Philippenses --
lib. 1 Metropoli Macedoniae cum. Ad Colossenses -- lib. 1 Hac vice Apostolatus
author. Ad Thessalonicenses -- lib. 2 Quod non dicit Apostolus. Ad Timotheum --
lib. 2 Non secundum praesumptionem. Ad Titum Discipulum -lib. 1 Hanc epistolam
scribit de Ad Philemonem -- lib. 1 In carcere vel in catenis. Ad Hebraeos --
lib. 1 Quoniam apud Haebraeorum. De factis Christi prosaice lib. 2 Ad Caesarem
Theodosiu^ lib. 1 Romulidum ductor Clariss. Epist. ad diversos -- lib. 1
Sedulius Scotigena dilect. In editionem Donati -- lib. 1 In Prisciani volumen
-- lib. 1 Carmina diversi generis lib. 1 He published also certain Hymns
which the Church uses. 1 A solis ortus cardine
Ad usque terrae limitem
Christum canamus principem, etc.
Hostis Herodes impie
Christum venisse quid times? etc.
2 A solis ortus cardine
Ad usque terrae limitem
Christum canamus principem, etc.
Hostis Herodes impie
Christum venisse quid times? etc.




He flourished in the year after the Incarnation, 450. under Theodosius Junior
the Emperor, what time Fergusius the second reigned in Scotland after his
miserable exile by the Romans. Of this Author, Sigebertus and Bostonus write
more. So far Bale.

Stanihurst pleads for Ireland, and writes: R. Stan. prefa^. ad lib. 1. de
r^b. Hib.
Sedulius was not only of Irish birth, but also the light of all Ireland,
neither will we suffer any longer so excellent a man out of his native soil
contrary to all right to exile or wander, but he is rather to be restored to
his former inheritance, as it were with a new solemnity of birth. Append. ad
cap. 17^
In another place he seems to qualify the matter (having already challenged
Damianus a Goes of injury) and to reconcile the dissonance of varying writers,
that the Scottish is taken for the Irish, and the Irish for the Scottish; and
to satisfy the reader, notes the confusion, how that all the commentaries of
Sedulius upon the Epistles of Paul begin, Sedulij Scoti Hibernensis, etc. the
Commentary of Sedulius the Scot of Ireland. And to shut up this challenge of
all sides, I find that there was a second Sedulius, a man of no less fame and
learning, and he is said to be a Scottish man, therefore let Ireland being
more ancient then Scotland, take the first, and Scotland the last.

The life of Fridelinus Viator Io. Bale script. Britanic cent. 14.
In the like sort (excepting the challenge) stands Fridelinus Viator, so
called by reason of his great travail; his style is, Scotorum Hibernicorum
regis olim filius, the son sometime of the King of the Scots in Ireland, whom
I couch among them of Irish birth, because of the ancient style and distinction
often used by Buchanan, Scoti Albanenses, and Scoti Hibernenses, the first he
challenges for Scotland, the second he refers to Ireland, and therefore I
accept of him as granted. He was a Kings son of Ireland, excellently studied
in Philosophy, earnestly addicted to the ecclesiastical course of life, and
to the end he might plant religion, and spread abroad christianity,
enterprised a voyage far from his native soil: This holy man first of all
taught here and there throughout France, he came to Poitiers, and became father
of the Monks of Saint Hilarie, and with the aid of King Clodovarus, erected a
stately Monastery, the like he did at Mosella in Flanders, upon the top of the
mount Vosagius, at Argentine, Curia Rhetiorum, and elsewhere throughout
Burgundy. Lastly, he came to Angia Seckingensis upon the Rhene, to the end he
might there also build a Cell; after many godly Sermons and learned
Interpretations, he is said to have written a Book of exhortations unto the
sacred Virgins. He flourished in the year 495. and rests in the Monastery
of Seckinge before spoken of.

Saint Fekin.
Ireland remembers the feast of Saint Fekin, that he was of the Kings blood,
and an Abbot, cured many of the flixe or flux, and dyed thereof himself.

The life of Saint Modwen
Many things are written of Saint Modwen, (whom the Britains call Mawdwen) the
daughter of Naughtheus the Irish King, who heard Saint Patricke preach, and of
her companions Orbila, Luge, Edith, Athea, Lazara, Since (whom the Irish call
Osith) Osmanna, and of Brigid spoken of before, whereof some began with
Patricke, and ended with him, some began with him, and lived many years after,
(as Capgrave writes in the life of Modwen) to the time of the Bishop
Collumkill, (otherwise called Colme and Columba) and the Eremite, Abbot, or
Bishop Kevin.

Saint Since the Virgin.
Saint Modwen was a Nun, lived 130. years. The Irish, Scots, and English (in
which countries she had travailed) strove for her corpse, at length Columkill
the Bishop gave sentence for England, where she rests at Andreisey* Bale
writes how that one Galfride, Abbot of Burton upon Trent, in the time of King
John, wrote the life and memorable acts of this Irish Virgin Modwen, unto the
posterity, with great applause.

Capgrave writes the life of Saint Since, (otherwise called Osith) that was
brought up under Modwen, that she was a Kings daughter, and borne in England:
Leppeloo the Carthusian, and other foreign Writers say little of her, saving
that the Danes (being Heathens) cut off her head, and that she took her head
in her arms, carried it uprightly three furlongs off, knocked at the Church
door, (being locked) with her bloody hands, and there fell down. The reader is
not bound to believe this.
The Martyrologe of Sarum confounds Dorothy, and Saint Since thus; the 15. of
January the feast of Saint Dorothie otherwise called Saint Since, is kept in
Ireland, who refused marriage, fled into a Monastery, where the devil
appeared unto her, and there mine Author left her.

Of Osmanna the Virgin I find little, Osmanna the Virgin.
saving what Capgrave reports, that she was of the blood royal in Ireland,
and having infidels to her parents, fled into France, dwelled upon the bank of
Loire, the river of Lions, and there in peace ended her days.

I read that about this time one Tathe, the son of an Irish King, Tathe the
Monke^
forsook his fathers possessions, went to the Diocese of Landaffe in Wales,
and became a Monk, builded a Monastery, and there left his bones.

Gualterus Calenius, Archdeacon of Oxford; Caxton and others do write, that
Aurelius Ambrosius, The stones of Salisbury sent for into Ireland.
after his valiant exploits and noble victories, went to a Monastery near
Cair-caredoch, now called Salisburie, where through the treason of Hengist,
(which the Britains call Toill y Killill Hirion, the treason of the long
knives) the Nobles and Princes of Britain were slain and buried, called his
Council, and demanded what monument were meet to be made there in remembrance
of so many Nobles of the land there resting in the dust of the earth.
Carpenters, Masons, Carvers, Ingravers, and Tombe-makers, being out of all
places sent for, came thither, delivered their opinions, but concluded nothing.
Then stepped forth a Bishop, which said; O King, if it may stand with your
pleasure, there is one Merlin of Worcester, a Prophet, a searcher of
Antiquities, a man of rare gifts, I wish his opinion in the matter. Merlin
came, and being advised, said as follows. Most Noble King, upon occasion
offered, I went lately into Ireland, and having ended my business, I was
inquisitive of antiquities, and sight of monuments, where among other things,
being brought to a mountain of Kildare, I saw so rare a sight, in so rude a
country, as might be seen; there was a round row of huge stones, the which
none of this age had so framed, neither could be, unless Art had mastered the
common skill of man; send for them, and set them up as they are there couched,
and they will be a monument whilst the world stands. Hereat the King smiled
and said; how shall we convey so great stones into Britain, from so far a
country, and to what end? as though Britain yielded not as good stones to all
purposes? Merlin replied, be not displeased O King, there is a hid mystery in
those stones, they are medicinable, and as I was given to understand in
Ireland, the Giants of old dwelling in that land, procured them from the
farthest part of Affricke, and pitched them there, in them they bathed
themselves, and were rid of their infirmities. The Britains hearing this, were
persuaded to send for them, the King appointed his brother Vter-Pendragon, with
Merlin, and fifteen thousand men to effect the business. In a short time,
they arrived in Ireland. Gillomer King of Leinster, Gillomer, King of Leinster.
raised an Army to resist them, and reviled the Britains, saying, what fools
and asses are you? are the Irish better then the British stones? and turning
himself to his Army, said, come on, quit your selves like men, keep your
monuments, and defend your country. Vter-Pendragon seeing this, animated his
company, they met, and manfully encountered in the end; Gillomer fled, and the
Irish were discomfited. Vter-Pendragon marched on, they came by Merlins
direction to the place, and beholding the hugeness of the stones, they
wondered, yet they joyed that they had found them. To work they went, some with
Ropes, some with Wythes, some with Ladders, and carried them away, brought them
to Britain, and pitched them in the Plain of Salisburie, which place is now
called Stonehenge. Stonehenge.


Beside this, there are diverse monuments of Giants in Ireland, as at Dundalke,
Louth, Ardee, and on the hills not far from the Naas: the like Saxo
Grammaticus reports of the Danes, In praefatione ad hist. Dan^.
a nation famous for Giants, and mighty men, and this, says he, the great and
huge stones laid of old upon Caves and Tombs of the dead, do declare.

Io. Harding.
About this time, Passent the son of Vortiger that fled into Germany for aid,
arrived in the North parts, Aurelius Ambrosius met him, and put him to flight;
Passent came into Ireland, delivered his grief unto Gillomer King of Leinster,
craved him to extend his Princely favor toward him; Gillomer on the other side
complained of the wrong done him by Vter-Pendragon and the Britains, namely,
how they had slain his subjects, wasted his country, and carried away his rare
monuments, concluding that he was willing of himself to be revenged of them,
much more finding this opportunity. Caxton says, he came with fifteen
thousand Irish to aid Passent against the Britains; the Army was great, for
with Passent came Germans, Irish and Saxons, and arrived at Menevia (now called
Saint David's) at which time Aurelius Ambrosius being sick of poison, (by the
procurement of Passent) of which he died, Vter-Pendragon was appointed General
of the field, met with the invaders, fought a bloody battle (where many fell
on both sides) and in the end, slew Passent and Gillomer, Gillomer, King of
Leinster, slain at Saint David's in Wales.
and overthrew the Germans, Irish, and Saxons, and was crowned King of England.

I do find in Antiquaries, together with Florilegus, Fabian, Caxton,
Holinshed, and Fleminge, (men of great judgment) that the Pictes and Scots in
the days of King Arthur (who succeeded his father Vter-Pendragon) joined with
the Saxons, and drew to their aid, Gillomer, second of that name, King of
Ireland, so that Arthur sent for Howell his sisters son, King of little
Britain in France, who came with fifteen thousand fighting men, and joining
forces with Arthur, foiled the Pictes, Scots, and Saxons, vanquished the Irish
King, and chaced him into Ireland, and the year following, viz. five hundred
twenty and five, in revenge of the former aid, he came into Ireland, offered
King Gillomer battle, Anno Dom. ^25.
he then being Monarch of Ireland (as Caxton and the book of Houth record)
assembled the Princes and Nobles of the land; and it is said that King Anguish
came to the field with five thousand horse, Homage for Ireland.
but Arthur constrained them to yield, and to acknowledge by doing their
fealty, to hold the Realm of Ireland of him. Whereof Harding says, The
somner next Arthur went to Ireland,
With battle sore forefoughten y conquered,
And of the King, had homage of that land
To hold of him, so was he of him feared;
And also gate (as Chronicles have us lered)
Denmark, Friseland, G^tland and Norwey,
Iseland, Groenland, the Isle of Man and Orkney.


The book of Houth records, that anno Dom. 519. Arthur summoned to a
special feast of solemnity of the round Table, Gillomer the Monarch of
Ireland, and King Anguish, with the Princes and Nobles of the land, where they
continued during the whole time of the solemnity. In which triumph it is
recorded that Garret, King of Orkeney, son to King Lotho, and nephew to
Arthur, being one of King Arthurs Knights, together with his two brethren,
performed most valiant exploits, encountered with Anguish, King of Ireland,
Goranus King of Scotland, Cador, Duke of Cornwall, and with other Princes, and
wanne great honor. This Anguish claimed tribute from Mark, King of Cornwall,
that formerly was won by combat, Marogh, one of K. Arthurs Knights*
and sent Morogh (whom Caxton calls Marhaus) the Queen of Leinsters brother,
who was also one of King Arthurs Knights, to demand it; he was a valiant
Gentleman, often tried, and ever quitted himself with honor. The Frenchmen
calls him Le Morhoult d'Ireland; Rich. Robinson in his books of Arms and
Archerie.
and a Citizen of London thus blazoneth his Arms.

In silver shield, on fesse of pieces five throughout the same,
He bare a Lion Rampant red and arm green, whose name
Might seem to signify in truth, each mighty enterprise,
A prey most fit for his courage, as is the Irish guise.
Mark, King of Cornwall denies the tribute, offers the combat, and Sir
Tristram undertaketh it for him. Morogh for himself pleaded that he was to
encounter with none, unless he were a King or Queen, a Prince or Princess
son; the circumstances being considered and agreed upon, the combatants
meet, and fiercly fight, the battle was a long time doubtful; in the end,
Sir Tristram gave Sir Morogh with his sword, a sore blow, that a piece of the
edge stuck in his scull, whereupon the combat ended, Morogh returned into
Ireland, and shortly after died of the wound. This does Caxton and the book of
Houth deliver at large. Caxton, and the book of Houth.
But I may not end thus with Sir Tristram, he also was sore wounded with a
Spear, whose head was venomed, and could not be cured until that by counsel
he repaired to the country where the venom had been confected. Whereupon he
came to Ireland, and to King Anguish his Court, and having great skill upon the
Harp, he recreated himself, delighted the house, and fell in love with La
Bell Isod the Kings daughter, Sir Tristram, and La Bell Isod.
and she with him. In process of time the Queen had learned that he had given
her brother Morogh his deaths wound, and comparing the piece of the swords edge
which was taken out of the skull, with his sword, found them to agree, and
banished him the land. Not long after upon conference had with Mark, King of
Cornwall, of marriage, and commending the beauty and virtues of La Bell Isod
spoken of before, he comes to Ireland to entreat of marriage between King
Mark and her. And having effected his purpose, takes her with him to
Cornwall, Mark, King of Cornwall married La Bell Isod. Jealousy.
where Mark espoused her with great joy and solemnity; but the old secret love
between Tristram and her, had taken such impression in both, and so inflamed
their hearts, that it could not easily be quenched, so that in process of
time, Mark espied it, and in his furious jealousy, slew him as he played upon
the Harp to recreate La Bell Isod; and thus as his love began with the Harp,
so it ended at the Harp; it is recorded that Isod came to his grave and
swouned. She was (says mine Author) so fair a woman, that hardly who so
beheld her, could not choose but be enamoured with her. In Dublin upon the wall
of the City, is a Castle called Isods tower, and not far from Dublin, a
Chapel with a Village named Chappell-Isod: the original cause of the name I
do not find, but it is coniectured, that her father King Anguish, that doted
on her, builded them in remembrance of her, the one for her recreation, and the
other for the good of her soul.

The life of Congellus a Britain.
About the time that King Arthur reigned, lived many famous men of Irish birth,
renowned for their great learning and sanctity, and commended by diverse
Antiquaries, both at home and abroad to the posterity. But before I come to
speak of them, I must first make mention of Congellus a Britain by birth, who
builded the Monastery of Bangor, not far from West-Chester, which was called
the College of Christian Philosophers, and became the first Abbot thereof
himself, in the days of King Arthur, anno Dom. 530. I make mention of him,
because Bernard in the life of Malachias, reports this College or Abbey
which he built, to have been the head or principal Abbey of all the
Monasteries in Europe, the seminary or bee-hive of many thousands of Monks,
after the Apostolic manner, getting their living with the sweat of their
brows, and the labor of their own hands. And the rather for that he had to
his Disciples of Irish birth, Columbanus that travailed France, Germany, and
Italy, Breudan that furnished Ireland and Scotland with holy men, with Luanus
and others, of whom I shall have occasion to speak in their places. This
Congellus also ( Bernard is mine Author) founded the Abbey of Benchor, alias
Bangor, here in Vlster, Bangor in Vlster*
where many singular learned men of Irish birth were trained up, yea Britains,
Saxons, and Scots also, and dispersed themselves far and nigh, (as hereafter
shall more plainly appear) into foreign countries, converted and confirmed
thousands in the true faith. The which Abbey of Benchor, was afterward
destroyed by Pirates, and nine hundred Monks slain in one day, and so
continued waste unto the time of Malachias Bishop of Armach, whereof I will
speak hereafter.

Yet in an ancient manuscript Legend of Ireland, I find that this Congellus
the Abbot was borne in Dail Naraid in Vlster, Congellus supposed to be Irish.
of honorable Parents, and upon some displeasure conceived, forsook his
native soil, came to Mounster to Saint Fintan Abbot of Cluoyn Ednech at the
foot of Mons Blandina, where he was joyfully received, who after long
instruction, through the counsel of Fintan, returned to his native soil, and
entered the Monastery of Saint Kiaran in Cluayn Mac Noise, where Bishop Lugidus
gave him orders; and that in a while after, he founded the famous Abbey of
Benchor in Vlster, in the country called Altitudo ultorum, Altitudo Vltorum,
now called the Arde^^
to the East sea (as I read in the life Mocoemog) containing three thousand
Monks, and that seven years after, he went into Britain, and founded there
a Monastery that swarmed with Monks, as formerly in part is delivered,
whither out of all places by sea and land, they flocked unto him, for the same
of learning which there was professed. He, when he had settled his affairs
there, returned into Ireland, and now rests at his monastery of Benchor. The
fame of both Monasteries or Colleges of Christian Philosophers and famous men
thither frequenting, and entercou^sing with domestical and foreign students,
me thinks, should reconcile Britain and Ireland now being in one, and breed
an agreement among Antiquaries.

Brendan, among others, was famous at this time, borne in Connaght, brought up
under Hercus a Bishop, Brendans life.
and directed by Barintus a Monk, he was excellently seen in the liberal
sciences, and travailed into Britain to the Abbey of Bangor, where he learned
the monastical rules of Congellus, from thence he went to Llancarvan and
builded a Monastery, became the father of three thousand Monks that got their
living with the labor of their hands, and sweat of their brows, left to
oversee them Machutus and Molochus, travailed over Ireland and Scotland with
other countries; after seven years peregrination, he returned to Ireland, and
became Bishop of Kerry, (of old called Kiaragi, but now Ardfertensis) where he
ended his days, and lies buried at Cluenarca, otherwise called Luarcha. Yet
in the life of Ruadanus, I find he was buried at Cluanferta. Other things
that Capgrave, the martyrologe, and Bale have, I omit.

When Saint Brendan was old, Saint Fynbarry was a child, he is now the
Patron of the Cathedral Church of Cork; Saint Fynbarry.
his Legend runs thus: There was a certain King in Ireland, called
Tegernatus, who had to his handmaid, a very beautiful Damsel; this King gave
charge throughout his dominion, that none should be so bold as to touch her,
for it was supposed he kept her for his own tooth. Yet (says the Legend) one
of his soldiers, whose name was Amorgen, (a black Smith) got her with child,
the which being brought to light, and the time of her travail nigh
approaching, Tegernatus commanded that Amorgen the father, the fair harlot the
mother, (with her great belly) should be cast into the fire, and burned to
ashes. But (says the Legend) they were all miraculously delivered, and the
child safely brought into the world. At his baptism he was named Loanus, but
in a while after, three religious men that had the charge of him (by reason of
the beauty of his white locks, and gracious aspect) called him in Irish,
Fuenbarrah, whom now we call Fynbarry. He was brought up under Bishop
Torpereus, the disciple of Gregory, Bishop of Rome, and was conversant with
Fa^turus, (another Legend calls him Fyachna) a King in Ireland, who did alot
him a certain portion of land in his country. Bishop Torpereus gave him
orders, after which he went (says the Legend) into Albania now called
Scotland, did much good there, and went from thence to Rome, and was
consecrated Bishop in the time of Gregory the first, then he returned to
Ireland, Lee ^lu.
landed on the South side of the river Lee, where one Edo a Noble man gave him
a parcel of ground, where (with the aid of many good men) he built the old
City of Cork, and the Cathedral Church, annexing thereto a fair Church
yard, wherein now stands a watch Tower, builded by the Danes. The Legend
speaks of a privilege granted to that Churchyard, which I take to have
been brought in through the covetousness of the Priests: That what faithful
soever being penitent, shall be buried there, shall not after this life, feel
the torments of hell; as if every faithful penitent Christian were not freed
from hell, wheresoever he be buried. But let us proceed: Torpereus Bishop of
Cloan his Schoolmaster, was the first man that was buried in that Churchyard.
After this, Finbarry went to Calangus a reverend man, then Abbot of Cloane, and
concluded between themselves, that in the fear of God, they would both be
buried in one place, and so indeed it fell out, for there Finbarry fell sick,
received the Sacrament at the hands of Calangus, ended his days, and was
brought to the Churchyard of old Cork, and there interred; shortly after,
followed Calangus, and there Bishop Torperus the first Bishop of Cloane,
Finbarry the first Bishop of Cork, and Calangus the first Abbot of Cloane,
keep together in the dust of the earth, waiting for the resurrection at the
last day. The fabulous circumstances of the Legend I leave to old Wives and
long winters nights; yet to satisfy the reader that I met with the Original,
I will lay down part of the Latin rithmes sung yearly on his day, being the
25. of September, not worthy of translation into English, and here they follow.

Infantis clari matremque patremque ligatum Ex officio Sancti Finbarri.

Ambo Rex quondam, flammis praeceperat uri;
Interea mirum bellum gessere elementa,
Ignis edax stupuit, non audens mandere ligna.
Hic nondum genitus jam matris ventre moratus,
O nova res! miris cepit clamare loquelis,
Obstupuit rex, etc.
Ad Christi verbum ducentes tres seniores
Infantem secum nitidum, vultuque decorum,
Dogmata ut sacra cunabulo disceret evo
Contigit ut nimio, solis fervore sitiret;
Tunc senibus quidam praeceperat ire ministrum
Vt potum puero cerva deduceret almo
Statim cerva petens vitulum lac fudit abunde
Et potum, etc.
Rex quondam retinens plenam turpedine prolem
Luminis expertem natum, mutamque puellam
Praeclarum Christi famulum iam rogitavit
Vt natos miseros ditaret munere caro
Illico respexit caecus, and muta locuta
Ad natum regis caecum, mutamque puellam
Fynbarry precibus salvavit conditor almus*
Sanctus Fynbarrus quondam cum rege sedebat,
Cumque salutabant laeti sese, vice versa,
Audierant fletum tristem, magnumque lamentum:
At rex confestim turbatus, heu mea, dixit,
Regalis conjux nunc mortem gustat amaram.
Tunc dixit Christi famulus, depone merorem,
Namque potest dominus vitam donare defunctis.
Fynbarry precibus tunc foemina viva resurgit.
Fynbarrus residens Rex atque sub arboris umbra:
Tunc placuit Regi miracula cernere quaedam
Auxiliante Deo Fynbarrus quae faciebat;
Interea corylus gignebat tempore veris
Maturos fructus, valde largeque cadebant.
Miratur corylum vernalem gignere fructum.
With many such strange things with which I will no longer trouble the reader,
nor keep him from that which follows.

Now comes in the confused name of Colme, Columba, Columbanus, Columkillus,
and Colmannus; who all lived at one time, about the days of King Arthure, and
were all of Irish birth, but are greatly mistaken by the Antiquaries.

Columbanus.
The first called Columbanus by Adamannus and Capgrave, in the life of Columba,
was, as they write, Episcopus Laginensis, a Bishop of Leinster, but the
Diocese of which he was Bishop, I find not named.

Columba.
The second by Beda (whom, for authority and antiquity, I reverence) is called
Columbanus presbiter and Abbas, Priest and Abbot, whom Capgraue calls
Columba, borne of Noble Parentage in Ireland. Adamannus who wrote his life,
says, his father hight Feidlimyd, the son of Fergus, his mother Ethnea, and
that the second year after the bloody battle of Cule-Dreibne, he came to
Britain in the time of Gildas sapiens, Battle of Cule-Dreibne.
and converted the Pictes. But before his departure out of Ireland, he founded
a Monastery (says Beda) a copia roborum, in the Scottish tongue called
Dearmagh. Capgrave terms it Roboretum, the grove of Oaks. In Britain (says
Beda) he builded a Monastery in the Island called Hu, ( Capgrave calls it
Iona) where he lies buried, ending his days at the age of 77. years, whose
death Aidanus King of Scots greatly lamented. Beda reports that some wrote of
him, which work came not to his hands, and that in the observation of Easter he
followed no other direction, then he found in holy Scripture. Here (gentle
reader) two scruples are to be removed from among our Irish Antiquaries; the
first Beda dissolveth, namely that of him the name of Columkilli came in; Beda
Ang* hist. lib. 5. cap. 10.
Columba, now a days (says he) of some men compounding Cella and Columba, is
called Columcelli, and in Capgrave we read Columkillius. The second scruple
is, where Beda writes that he was buried in the Isle Hu, the Antiquaries of
Ireland record his funeral to have been at Down, (as formerly I have
written) in one Tomb with Patricke and Brigide; I hold both may be true,
namely that he was buried in the Isle before spoken of, and being thence
translated into Down in Ireland, (as Brigide was before) now rests therein
one grave with Patricke and her.

The third Columbanus, otherwise called Columba, of Irish birth, 3 Columba.
was a most famous man of that time for learning and virtue, eternized in
writing by Jonas an Abbot his disciple, also by Capgrave, Bale, Surius,
Baronius, Lippeloo and Stanihurst. In his youth he was mightily tempted with
the feminine sex, nihil tam sanctum religione, (says mine Author) ^amque
custodia clausum, quod penetrare libido nequeat.

He forsook his native soil, went to Congellus, Abbot of Bangor, continued
there many years, and having formerly taken with him twelve of his country
men, called twelve followers, he went into France, and made them Cabanes,
after the Irish manner, in stead of Monasteries. Many fabulous things are
reported of Wolves, Bears, and Fowls of the air, that they had no power over
him. When he had continued together with his followers, twenty years in one
place, he was banished thence, and being desirous to return to Ireland,
Clotarius son to Chilpericke staid him, yet he took his course into Italy,
where Agilulphus King of Lombardie received him most honorably, and in Italy
he died, says Beda in his Martyrologe, though Capgrave write it was in
Almaine, Io. Capgrave.
whose report of him I may not omit. He builded (says he) certain famous
Monasteries in Almaine, into the which, (as it is said) they admit only Irish
men unto this day. He wrote (says Lippeloo) a book against the Arians. Bale
reckons his other works that he published.

In psalterium commentar* lib. 1. Collationes ad Monachos lib. 1: De moribus
monachorum metrice lib. 1. Haec praecepta legate. Epistolas ad Commilitones lib.
1. Monasteriorum methodos lib. 1. Adversus Theodoricum regem adulterum lib. 1
This Columbanus had many learned men of Irish birth, Columbanus his Irish
disciples* Deicolus. Gallus.
brought up under him. The Martyrologe of Sarum remembers one Deicolus an
Abbot. Capgrave and Walafridus Strabo commend one Gallus, whom Columbanus left
behind him in Almaine. And when Gunzo Duke of Suevia would have made him
Bishop of Constance, he preferred one John his Deacon and disciple, to the
roomth, and kept the desert himself. Surius writes, Italy glories of
Columbanus, Almaine of Gallus, and Flanders of Kilianus. He wrote, as Bale
remembers, In electione Iohannis Orat. 1. Sempiternus and inaestimabilis Deus.
Gubernandae ecclesiae formam lib. 1


Jonas likewise his disciple, Jonas a Monk
is by Tritemius commended and reckoned among the great learned men of Ireland,
who at the request of certain brethren, penned for the good of posterity.

Vitam Abbatis Columbani lib. 1 All are found among Beda his works. Vitam
Attalae Monachi lib. 1 All are found among Beda his works. Vitam Eustachij
Abbatis lib. 1 All are found among Beda his works. Vitam Bertolfi Abbatis. All
are found among Beda his works.
4 Columb.
There was a fourth Columbanus a Monk in Luxonium, countriman and kinsman to
Columbanus going before, who dyed in his presence; so much I find of him in
Capgrave, and no more of him either there or in any other.

Colmannus and Colme.
Colmannus I must refer to his place, and Colme I must leave to the vulgar
and corrupted speech; yet in one Author I find, that Colme is buried with
Patricke and Brigide, which must be understood to be Columbanus spoken of
before.

About the latter days of Saint Martin, Bishop of Toures in France, Ninianus a
Britain (whom Beda worthily commends) coming from Rome, was made Bishop of
Lyndsey, Lindesfernensis, whom Aidus (otherwise called Aidanus and Aedanus)
Finanus and Colmannus, all three of Irish birth, orderly succeeded in the days
of King Arthur.

About this time, Carthagus commonly called Mocudu, Mochudu and Mocodi was the
first Bishop of Lismore, Saint Mochudu
he descended of the sept of Fergusius, the most potent Prince of Vlster, whose
offspring were dispersed over Ireland, his father matched with the royal blood
of Mounster, he had to his Schoolmaster one Carthagus a Bishop. It is alleged
in his Legend, ( penes authorem sit fides) that it was prophesied, he should
become a great man, and build two cities; the first, Raithe (or Raichen) in
Feraceall; the second, Lismore. This diversity of names coming upon
accidents, is known unto them that have skill in the old Irish. It is remembered
in his life, that in his youth, 30. Virgins were in love with him, and that he
prayed unto God, to turn their carnal into spiritual love, which was
granted, yet (says mine Author) to requite their former love, he builded them
all Cells, and they dwelled in his parish, and conversed with him all the days
of their lives. He had disciples that proved rare men, Mochue, Mocoemoge,
Gobbanus, Sraphanus, Lazreaanus, Molva, Aidanus, Fiachus, Findeling, with
others. He was compelled to forsake Raithen, and travailed westward, until he
came to the river Nem, now called Band more, falling from the mountain Chua*
and running into the sea, whereupon Lismore is builded, and given to Saint
Mocodi. For the Lord of that country, Nandeisi Melochtrig, the son of Cokthacg,
before witness, granted him that seat, to build both Church and City, The
life of Saint Machutus or Maclovius.
where he rests, and whom one Molcolmog succeeded.

Machutus otherwise called Maclovius, though Bale and Capgrave call him a
Britain, yet I find that he was borne in Ireland, and that he was the son
of one Lovi, and therefore called Maclovy. Molanus writes, that he crossing
the seas, and having good success, led an Eremites life in Britain, and was
the disciple of Saint Brendan of Ireland. He accompanied with one Aaron, and
kept with him in an Island of his name, (says Molanus) called Aaron, but now I
find it in the North-west parts of Ireland, Isles of Aron.
belonging to the Earl of Ormond, called the Isles of Aran. Lastly, he was
made Bishop of Aletha, and is honored at Gemblacum in Flanders, where the
Church (say they) is patronized by Saint Machutus, alias Maclovius, he lived
(says Bale) about the year 540. what time Arthur commanded Britain. Io. Bale
cent. 1.


Kentegernus then also lived, Saint Kentegernus.
and now is remembered in Ireland and in Wales: the Martyrologe of Sarum
reports, that his Mother wist not how, when, nor by whom he was gotten, yet
was she an holy woman, (says mine Author) and much loved our Lady. She was
cast down headlong from a rock (says mine Author) into the sea, and took no
hurt, then put into a Boat alone without Sail or Oar, came into Ireland, and
presently travailed with child. He became an Abbot of 965. Monks, kept company
with Saint David, and in the end was a Bishop.

Ruadanus borne in Ireland, of Noble Parentage, Ruadanus his life.
his father hight Byrra, of the offspring of Dnach, but inhabited the West part
of Leinster, of old called Osraigie, but now Ossorie, whose sept is called
Dnachs, in those parts unto this day* He left Ossorie, and hearing of the fame
of Saint Fynnan, a wise and a learned man, dwelling in his own town, (so
says mine Author) commonly called Clonard, of Cluayn jarhaird in Mead, and
confines of Leinster, resorted to him, who for the space of certain years,
brought him up in sacred letters, gave him orders, and sent him to Muscraytrie
in Mounster, where he was borne, where also he builded a Monastery, which
stands to this day, and is maintained by the Lords of the soil. From thence
he went to a place called Lothra, where he builded another Monastery, and
lies there waiting the general resurrection. Saint Brendan at the same time
builded a Cell not far from that place, called Tulach Brenayd, that is,
(says mine Author) Collis Brendani, left Ruadan the charge thereof, took his
blessing, and begun his travail, as the Legends at large do write. Ruadanus
is said to have written these books in the Latin tongue.

De miraculosa arbore lib. 1 De mirabili fontium in Hibernia natura lib. 1
Contra Diarmoyd regem lib. 1
Saint Faghua lived in the time of Finbarry, Saint Faghua his life.
and founded a Monastery upon the sea in the south part of Ireland, where he
became Abbot, the which seat grew to be a City, wherein a Cathedral Church
was builded, and patronized by Faghua. This town of old called Rossai Lithry,
but now Roskarbry, has been walled about by a Lady of that country, but now
according to the fruits of war, among the Carties, O Driscales, and other
septs, scarce can the old foundation be seen. There has been there of old
(says mine Author) magnum studium scholarium, a great University, whereto
resorted all the South-west parts of Ireland for learnings sake. Saint Brendan
Bishop of Kery, read publicly the liberal sciences in that school. Farther
of Faghua or Faghuanus, mine Author records, that he being sapiens and
probus, a wise and a good man, by mishap fell blind, and with many prayers,
and salt tears, desired of God, restitution of his sight, for the good of his
Covent, and the Students brought up under him; a voice he heard, (says mine
Author) go get some of the breast milk of Broanus the artificers wife, wash
thine eyes therewith, and thou shall see. He went to a Prophetess called Yta
or Ytha, to learn how to come by this woman, and it fell out that this woman
was her sister, he found her out, washed his eyes, and recovered his sight;
whether it be true or no, I know not, I report it as I find it. Saint Yta the
Abbatesse.
This Saint Yta was an Abbatesse, whose original was of Meth, but she was
borne in Mounster.

Saint Mocoeinoge.
Upon the story of Faghua depends the Legend of Mocoeinoge, interpreted in
Latin, meus pulcher iuvenis, my beautiful young man, who proved learned, an
Abbot and a Bishop, being the child of those breasts that washed Faghua his
eyes; many admirable things are reported of him wherewith I will not trouble
the reader. He conversed with Coemanus or Chemanus, Cannicus, Finianus Abbas,
Colman a Bishop, Diverse learned men.
Daganus Abbot of Inbyr-dayle in Leinster, Mocobe his own disciple, Illepius
the disciple of Mocobe, Molna, Mofecta, Cunminus longus, the son of Fiachua,
and Cronanne, who lies buried at Rosscre, Luctichernus and Lazerianus, with
Yta, Patroness of Huae Conaill, and her Abbot of Cluayn Mac Noys, and Abbot
Engus, and Abbot Congallus, of Vlster, Mocoeinoge rests in the county of
Typperary, by a long foord in the way from Kilkenny to the Holy Cross (as they
call it) where sometime was a City and a Monastery called Liath, but now a
Village bearing his name, Liath Mocoeinoge. He had in his life time much ado
with Coemanus, Bledin, Ronanus, Foelanus, Diarmoda, Sugbue, Lords of Ely, (now
called Ely O Carroll) and with Falke Fland, King of Mounster, whose chief
Palace was in Cashell.

Saint Coeingenus.
Saint Coeingenus shall next be spoken of, in Latin as much to say, as
pulchrogenitus, he was ordered by Bishop Lugidus, and led an heremeticall life
in a Cell, in a place of old called Cluayn Duach, where he was borne and
brought up. Now the place is called Gleand-daloch (says mine Author) Vallis
duorum stagnorum, Gleand-daloch.
a valley of two pooles or standing waters, Dymnach.
where one Dymnach a Lord of the soil founded a Cathedral Church, in the
honor of Saint Coeingenus, joined thereunto a fair Churchyard, with other
edifices, and diverse buildings, the which in mine Author, legenda sancti
Coeingeni) is termed civitas de Glandelogh. In the life of Saint Patricke I
find, that he prophesied of two rare men, Albanus and Coeingenus, and that
this should be a Bishop, and that one Molingus should succeed him; I find this
true in the Sea of Glandelogh. Coeingenus was a great learned man, and wrote
these books.

De Britannorum origin lib. 1 Bryto sive Brutus. De Hibero and Hermone lib. 1
Hyber and Hermon.
Molva before mentioned in the life of Mocoeinoge, Saint Molva his life.
(of his mother called Lugidus, but of his master, Congallus) was a great
learned man, borne in Mounster, in Huafi, of the sept of Corcach. His father
hight Carthach, alias Coche, his mother Sochla, that is, Large; he was brought
up under Congallus in Vlster, in his Abbey of Benchor, where he received
orders, and was sent into his native soil of Mounster, for the good of his
country. He came to the school of Saint Finnian, in the confines of Leinster,
and profited there very much, Saint Finnian his school. Luacha mons. Synna flu.
from thence he went to mount Luacha in the South-west part of the river Synna,
together with his disciples, and craved of Foelanus, Lord of that soil,
license there to inhabit, who refused him, so that he went to his kindred in
Osraigi, (now called Ossorie) who received him joyfully. In a while after, he
went to mount Smoil, now called mo^s Blandina, where he cast his staff, Mount
Smoill
and builded a Monastery in a place called Rosse Bualead, by license of
Berachus Lord of that soil, (in Latin, Dux Laigy) where he decreed, says the
Legend, ut nulla mulier ibi semper intraret, that no woman should always enter
into it, which was, and may well be observed to this day, yea while the world
endures. In the same place was afterward a famous city builded, called
Cluayn ferta Molua, in Latin, latibulum mirabile sancti Molvae, the secret
habitation of Saint Molva. He conversed with Saint Flannanus, Molayssi, alias
Molassus, Diverse Bishops and learned men.
Sethua Bishop of Saigir or Sagri, where it lies, I find not, but by all
likelihood it should not be far from Cluayn Ferta, with Moedog Archbishop of
Leinster, Einenus Abbot of Rosse Mac Treoin in Kenselach, upon the river Berua,
founded by the old Saint Abbanus, with Daganus Abbot of Ardgabraine in
Nandesi, called Achad Dagani, Berua fl.
Saint Cronan in insula Cree, Stellanus his disciple, Manchenus and Munnu,
Abbot of Techmunnu in Kenselach in the South part of Leinster. He ended the
way of all flesh, and rests in the Monastery of Cluayn Ferta, where one
Lachtanus succeeded him. He is said to have wrought many wonders, and if the
reader laugh not, I will pen him one. Molva in an evening walking among the
cattle of his monastery, heard a company of Wolves howling for their prey;
he was moved with pity, called them to him, washed their feet, made them a
feast, and gave them lodging. The Legend faith further, that they thenceforth
familiarly conversed with the Heard keepers, and chased away other Wolves and
thieves. He wrote

Regulas Monachorum, confirmed by Greg. 1.

The life of Saint Munnu.
Munnu spoken of in the former Legend, came of good parentage, of the house of
Neill, his father was Tulchanus, his mother Fedelyr, he was brought up under
Silell a learned man in the North of Ireland. He proved a singular learned
man, and wrote a book de pascate, which was in his time in question, he
outlived Congallus and Columba, and conversed with Baithenus and Lazerianus,
Abbot of Leighlin, he dwelt a while in Ely, from thence he went to Athcayn in
Kinselach, and in Achad Lia^htrom he builded a monastery called Teach-Munnu,
alias Thech-Munnu, where he gave up the ghost, 12. of the Kalends of November,
and yet the Martyrologes place him the sixth Kalend of the same month. In his
story I find mention of a controversy between him and Lazerianus,
Lazerianus.
who builded a Monastery, In stagno Hiberniae Dai ynis, in Latin, bovis
insula, in the North part of Ireland, so it is written in the life of Aedanus;
afterward he came to the river Berba (now called the Barrow) and there became
Abbot of fifteen hundred Monks. In their time, the old controversy about the
observation of Easter, was vehemently urged of all sides; a great disputation
and parlie was appointed in Campo Albo (says mine Author) upon the Barrow.
Munnu held the old, the other the new observation. To be short, Munnu gave this
offer, brother Lazerianus (says he) let us not spend time, neither trouble
this people with this tedious question; choose for the trial of the truth, one
of these three things, take two books, one of the old, the other of the new
Easter, cast them into the fire, look which the fire saves, let the truth
rest there; or take two Monks, one of thy side, another of mine, If they were
as fa^ in those days, as most of them proved after, there would have been old
frying.
and cast them both into an house set on fire, he that comes forth safe, let
him carry the truth. Or let us go to the grave of some holy Monk, and raise
the dead, and stand to his sentence, when we shall keep Easter this year.
Lazerianus refused his offers, and said, I will no longer contend with thee
brother Munnu, for I know thy worthiness and sanctity is such, that if thou
command the mount Margee over against us to remove to this Campus albus, Mount
Margee
and this ground to remove thither, I am of opinion it will be so, thus they
broke up and did nothing.

Cannicus or Kennicus was borne in the North of Ireland (in Connaught as I
gather) his father was called Lugaid Lechteag a Poet, Saint Kenny his life.
his mother hight Maula or Mella, he was trained up in Britain in the
christian school of Docus, thence he went to Rome, and took orders in Italy,
returned into Ireland, preached the Gospel most zealously, and (says his
Legend) wrought many miracles. He conversed with great learned men, namely
Eugenius, Bishop of Ardratha, Learned men.
Baithenus and others. Adamannus in the life of Columba formerly spoken of, and
the second of the name, writes (whereby I gather the time of the learned men of
that age) how that at one time, Cannicus, Congallus, Brendanus, Cormacus, and
Fynbarry visited Columba, and were all present when he celebrated the divine
mystery. Colmanus the son of Feraid, Lord of Osraide or Ossragy, now called
Ossorie, was Kannicus his dear friend, who after he had received the faith,
gave him many villages, where he builded Cells and Monasteries, but chiefly at
Achadbo, where he rests. When the time of his departure out of this sinful
world drew nigh, he sent for Fintan the Abbot, and received at his hands the
blessed Sacrament, and so departed the fifth of the Ides of October.

In remembrance of this Cannicus, Kilkenny.
there is now a famous town in Leinster called Kilkenny, parted into the
English and Irish town, with a small fresh or brook that falls into the
Nure; the chief Lord under the King, is the Earl of Ormond and Ossorie; the
English town is governed by a Sovereign, Bayliffes and Burgesses, the Irish
town is governed by the Bishop of Ossorie and his officers, and the
Bishopric of Ossorie, whose principal see was first in Ely, and called Sire
Keran (as formerly I have written in the life of Keranus) afterward translated
to Achadbo, is now settled in Kilkenny. The first founder of Saint Kennies
Church there, was Hugh Mapilton, the fifth Bishop of that See, after the
conquest, about the year 1240. There was also about the same time, a Church
builded over against the town, upon the East side of the Nure, in the honor
of Saint Maula the mother of Saint Kenny, Saint Kennies Church.
whose memory is continued in that town, by her plague that fell among them,
and thus it was.

There was a great plague in that town, and such as died thereof being bound
with Wythes upon the Beer, were buried in Saint Maulas Churchyard; after that
the infection ceased, Saint Maula and her plague
women and maids went thither to dance, and in stead of handkerchiefes and
napkins to keep them together in their round, it is said they took those
Wythes to serve their purpose. It is generally received, (take it gentle reader
as cheap as you find it) that Maula was angry for profaning her Churchyard,
and with the Wythes infected the dancers so, that shortly after in Kilkenny,
there died of the sickness, man, woman and child.

Aedanus (diverse times before spoken of) was of honorable parentage, borne in
Connaght, his father hight Sothna, his mother, Aedanus his life
Ethne, of the sept of Amluygh, his companions were Molassus, alias Lazerianus,
and Airedus, also he conversed much with Saint David, Bishop of Menevia, (now
called Saint David's) and is there called Moedock; this David was his master.
The martyrologe of Sarum calls him Maeldock; my Author yields the reason,
writing how that his mother conceiving with child of him, his father dreamed
that he saw a star fall from heaven upon his wife, the mother of this
Aedanus, and therefore when he was borne, he was called in Latin, filius
stellae, in Irish, Moedog, that is, the son of the star. Master Fox
writes, that he builded the Monastery of Maibrose by the flood of Twide.
David the holy man advised him to repair to his native soil for the good of
his country, after that he had for a good space followed the Christian
Britains against the faithless Saxons. He came to Ireland to Anmyre, Anmyre,
King of Connaght.
King of Connaght, from thence to Leinster, and builded Monasteries in
Kinselach and Cluayn More, what time Edus or Edanus, Edus or Edanus King of
Connaght.
the son of Anmyre King of Connaght, levied war against Brandub King of
Leinster, in which battle, Edus and all his Nobility of Connaght were
slain, and Brandub became Monarch of Ireland. After this he went to the North
of England, Brandub, King of Leinster, Monarch of Ireland.
and was made Bishop of Lyndsey, Lyndesfernensis: Capgrave makes two of one
Aedanus, the one an Abbot, the other a Bishop, and to reconcile the dissonance,
he was first an Abbot, afterward a Bishop, so writes Bale. Beda delivers
singular commendations of him, the which to avoid prolixitie I omit. After all
this, he returned to Leinster, to Brandub the Monarch, who upon special
liking of his virtues, gave him a parcel of land, where he builded a
Monastery; the place is called Ferna, now Fernes, where both Church and
Monastery are patronized (as they write) by Saint Moedog, Fernes.
where afterward both Brandub and Moedog were buried, whereof the words in the
life of Aedanus, alias Moedog, are these. Magnas dedit rex oblationes Sancto
Moedog, and agrum in quo vir Dei construxit monasterium quod dicitur Ferna, in
quo Sanctus Moedog sepultus est, and rex Brandub, and genus ejus post eum ibi
semper sepelitur. Et magna civitas in honor sancti Moedog ibi crevit, quae
eodem nomine vocatur Ferna. Deinde facta Synodo magnatum in terra Laginensium,
decrevit Rex Brandub, and tam Laici quam Clerici, ut Archiepiscopatus omnium
Laginensium, semper esset in sede and cathedra sancti Moedog, and tunc sanctus
Moedog a multis catholicis consecratus est Archiepiscopus. The King gave many
gifts to Saint Moedog, and a parcel of ground, where the man of God builded a
Monastery, called Ferna, where Saint Moedog is buried, and King Brandub, and
his posterity after him, is there continually buried. And a great City in the
honor of Saint Moedog is there risen, the which by the same name is called
Ferna. Ferne^ the Metropolitan See of Leinster.
Afterward a Synod or Parliament of the Nobility of Leinster being called
together, King Brandub decreed together with the Laity and Clergy, that the
Archbishopricke of all Leinster should always be in the seat and chair of
Saint Moedog, and then Saint Moedog by many Catholics was consecrated
Archbishop. According to which indeed in the Legend of Saint Molva he is called
Archiepiscopus Laginensium.

David of Menevia being of great years, King Brandubs death.
desired to see him before his death; Moedog visited him, and returned into
Ireland in a troublesome time, namely when all Leinster was in Arms to revenge
upon Saran (a Nobleman of Leinster) the death of King Brandub, whom he had
traitorously murdered. This Brandub, the son of Eatach, of the progeny or
sept of Enna, of whom Censelach has original, had a most honorable funeral,
and was greatly lamented, and intombed in the Churchyard of Saint Moedog,
Fern, the burial place of the Kings of Leinster.
in his City Ferna, where his progeny, the royal blood of the Kings of
Leinster is interred; after his death, Earl Saran (so mine Author calls him)
being tormented in conscience, came to the Kings tomb, lamented the horrible
treason he had committed, and could find no rest to his dying day.

In the time of this Moedog, the three Kings of Tuomond, Wars against
Leinster.
Connaght, and Vlster, with an Army of four and twenty thousand men, came to
Leinster, to revenge the death of Edus before spoken of. The King of Leinster
called Moedog, and the Clergy, and commanded them all to pray while he fought,
and, says the story, God gave the Leinster men the victory, and their enemies
were overthrown.

It is remembered of this Aedanus, how that one coming unto him, and desiring
him to assign him a Confessor, his answer was; Thou needst no Confessor but
God, who knows the secrets of thy heart, but if thou will have a witness of
thy doings, go to one Molva a learned man, who shall direct thee in thy
course. And yet (gentle reader) I may not overslip one thing, the which
Capgrave reports in the life of Aedanus or Aidanus, (or Moedog) namely, An
Epistle from the Devil.
how that (for all the sanctity of the Prelates in those days) Satan, with
all the internal spirits, sent greeting, with great thanks, unto the
Ecclesiastical state upon earth, in dreadful characters. For that they
wanting no aid in their delights from hellish places, sent such a number of
damned souls into the sulphureall pits, through their remissness in life, and
slacknesse in preaching, as in former ages had not been seen. Whosoever
devised the course, it forces not greatly, the matter might seem odious if it
contained no truth.

Finnan in Wales, (as my Authors report) called Gwyn, Bishop Finan.
was born at Ardez, he traveled foreign countries, came to his native soil,
was Bishop of Farne, says Beda, baptized Penda King of Mercia, Capgrave.
Martyrologe.
consecrated Cedd, Bishop of East Saxons, and lies buried at Cuningham in
Scotland, called of the Britains, Kilgwinin. There was also one Finan an
Abbot, borne in Mounster, sent by Saint Brendan to Smoir, now called Mons
Blandina, to inhabit there, Abbot Finan.
who came afterward to Corcodizbue, where he was borne, builded Cells and
Monasteries for religious men, contended with Falbe Fland, King of Mounster.
Finan of Cluayn jarhaird.
A third Finan there was, who was master of Ruadanus a great learned man, and
dwelt at Cluayn jarhaird in Mead.

Colmannus.
Colmannus, whose life Bale writes at large, was a godly learned man, borne in
Ireland, the son of one Fiachra, of the blood Royal, and highly commended of
Beda, he was brought up after the Apostolic rules of Congellus, he succeeded
Finan in the Bishopric of Farne, alias, Linsey. In his time there was great
stir about the observation of Easter, when some alleged custom, and some
urged the authority of Rome; he pleaded the Gospel both against this stir,
and the like trouble that rose about the shaving of Priests crowns, the which
he rejected (says Beda) and seeing that he could not prevail, Beda.
forsook his Bishopric, and went with certain Scots and Saxons into the
Hebrydes, where he ended his days.

Beda writes, how that in the year 664. there fell strange accidents upon the
eclipse of the Sun, (which was the third of May) in England and Ireland, and
a great mortality in both lands, in the time of Finan and Colman the godly
Bishops. Gentle reader, thou shall hear himself speak. The plague pressed
sore that Island of Ireland, no less then England; there were then as that
time, many of noble parentage, and likewise of the mean sort of English birth,
in the days of Finan and Colman the Bishops, who leaving their native soil,
had repaired thither, either for divine literature, or for more continency of
life, whereof some immediately gave themselves to monastical conversation,
others frequenting the Cells, gave diligent ear to the lectures of the readers.
All which the Scots (he means the Irish men) with most willing mind daily
relieved, and that freely, yielding unto them books to read, and masterly
care without hire. Among these, there were two young men of great towardness,
of the Nobles of England, Edelthun and Egbert: the first was brother to
Edilhun, a man beloved of God, Edelthun and Egbert.
who formerly had visited Ireland for learnings sake, and being well
instructed, returned into his country, was made Bishop of Lindisfarne, and for
a long time governed the Church with great discretion. These men being of the
monastery of Rathmelfig, and all their fellows, by the mortality, either cut
off or dispersed abroad, were both visited with the sickness; and to make
short, that which mine Author lays down at large, Edelthun died thereof, and
Egbert lived until he was fourscore and ten years old. So far Beda.

There was another Colmannus, otherwise called Colmanellus, an Abbot,
Colmannus, or Colmanellus.
of the sept of the Neilles, borne in Hoichle in Meth, what time the King of
Leinster, with an huge army wasted the North, he became first Abbot of Conor
in Vlster, where the godly Bishop Mac Cnessey rests. From thence he came to
the place where he was born, and there (says his Legend) he met with Eadus the
son of Aimireach, Eadus the son of King Aimireach.
a King of Ireland, Edus Flan a Lord of that country, of the sept of the
Neills, his kinsman, Saint Columba Cylle, and Saint Cannicus the Abbot who
received him joyfully. Edus Flan gave him a parcel of land to build upon, and
to inhabit, called Fyd Elo, afterward called Colmans Elo, where he founded a
Monastery, and now rests himself.

Carantocus, in the martyrologe Cartak, Carantocus or Cervagh.
was the son of Keredicus, a King of Ireland, a good Preacher, the Irish
called him Ceruagh, his mother was a Britain, and was delivered of him in
Wales. He travailed over Ireland and Britain; King Arthur is said to have
honored him greatly, and gave him a parcel of land, where he builded a
Church. In his latter days he came to Ireland, and died in a town called
after his name, Chervac: So much Capgrave. There was another of that name, an
Abbot in France, of whom Jonas makes mention in the life of Columbanus, but
not of Irish birth.

Now to intermit a while from speaking of these learned men; I find that
Aurelius Conanus, (who slew Constantine that succeeded King Arthur, and reigned
in his stead thirty three years) valiantly by force of Arms brought under his
command, as Gualterus Oxoniensis writes, Norwey, Denmark, Ireland, Island,
Gothland, Ireland subject to the King of England.
the Orchades, and Ocean Islands. I find also that Malgo, the nephew of this
Conanus, who (as it is in the English history) succeeded Vortipore, vanquished
the Irish Pictes, or Scots, which the Britains called y Gwydhil Pictiard,
which had over-runne the Isle of Man, I Will of Man*
of them called, Tyr Mon, and slew Serigi their King with his own hand at
Llany Gwydhil, that is, the Irish Church at Holy-head; so write Sir John Price
Knight, and Humfry Lloyd in the description of Cambria. Florilegus says, that
he subdued six Islands of the Ocean adjoining unto him, which Harding thus
reckons.

And conquered wholly the Isle of Orkenay,
Ireland, Denmark, Iselond and eke Norway,
And Gotland also obeyed his royalty,
He was so wise, full of fortunitie.
When Careticus was King of Britain, who began his reign, Anno Dom. 586
Anno Dom. 586. the Saxons intending to make a full conquest of the land,
called to their aid, for a number of Pirates and sea rovers, that were mighty
and strong, and scoured the Seas and the Islands, whose Captain was Gurmundus,
one calls him an African. Fabian writes, that he had two names, and was
called Gurmundus, Gurmund^^
and Africanus; howsoever, I find, that he was the King of Norweys son, and
for his success in England, refer the reader to that history; and for his
behavior in Ireland, I will acquaint the courteous reader with what I find,
in which the Writers no^ not agree. Cambrensis and Polycronicon followed bad
presidents, and were deceived; Stanihurst stammereth, writing one thing in
English, another thing in Latin; Dowlinge and Grace.
the best record I find, is in Thadie Dowlinge, Chancellor of Leighlin, and
James Grace of Kilkenny. They write that Gurmund was in Ireland, but no King or
Conqueror, that with strong hand he entered Leinster like a raging Pyrate,
prevailed for the time, and that the Princes of the land, not being able then
to withstand his forces, yielded unto the iniquity of the time, and wincked at
his rash enterprises. And whereas he gave forth his style, King of England,
they laughed at it, and he perceiving the wiliness and ingeniositie of the
people, and having small stomach to continue among them, (by reason of many
mishaps which befell him) left the land, and went for France to seek
adventures, where he ended his days. Further they write, that he had a son
called Barchard, alias Burchared Mac Gurmond, whom his father made Duke of
Leinster, and Baron of Margee. Duke of Leinster and Baron of Margee.
He was commonly called, O Gormagheyn; He builded Gurmund grange in Monte
Margeo, with other memorable things for him and his posterity; he is said to
have been the founder of the mother Church or priorie of old Leighlin, but I
rather believe he was a Benefactor or endower thereof in the time of Saint
Eubanus the original Patron; and that one Lazerianus a Bishop and Confessor,
Anno 651. procured the perfection of the whole, as in the Leighlin records more
at large does appear. Again, it is recorded that Duke Burchard lies buried
on the North side of the Chancell of that Cathedral Church, over against the
Treasurers stall, under a marble stone, as it was found for certain, Anno
1589. by Thadie Dowlinge, Chancellor, and others, with this Epitaph.

Hic jacet humatus Dux fundator Leniae (i. Leighlenie)
En Gormondi Burchardus vir gratus Ecclesiae.
Here lies interred Duke Burchard, the son of Gurmond, founder of Leighlin,
and a grateful man to the Church.

There are, says mine Author, other remembrances of this in those parts, as
Gurmunds-grove, and Gurmunds-foord, the which I overpasse. Baron of Sliew
Marrig.
Mons Margeus, in Irish, Sliewe Marrig or Sliew Marighagha, (which is the
mountain reaching along by Leighlin to Butlers wood) wherein, as before I have
touched; Gurmunds-grange stands, was, as I have learned, of old, granted to
one called de Sancto Leodegario, by the name and honor of Baron de
Marrighagha, but time and place have brought the name to degenerate and turn
from English to Irish. Of late years a Gentleman of the name, dwelling at
Dunganstowne, near Catherlagh, (affirming himself to be lineally descended
from Baron Sentleger) made claim unto the same, but the success I hearken not
after, as impertinent to my purpose.

Anno 587.
Ireland helps the Britains.
About the year 587. Athelfrid the Saxon King of Northumbers, so tyrannized
over the Britains, that they were feign to take Ireland for their refuge, and
Atdan, King of Scots pitying their state, raised forces to defend them, but
could not prevail, so great was the misery of the Britains.

Anno Dom. 635. was Cadwallin crowned King of Britain; Caxton and Florilegus
write of cruel wars between Edwin, son unto Athelfrid, King of
Northumbers, and Cadwallin; Ireland helps Cadwallin.
how that Edwin made him flee into Ireland, destroyed his land, cast down his
Castles, burnt his Manors, and divided his land among his friends, and lastly,
how that in a good while after, Cadwallin came upon him with forces out of
Ireland, slew Edwin, and recovered all his possessions.

In the days of this Cadwallin, Kenevalcus, Agilbertus of Ireland, the first
Bishop of Winchester.
(otherwise called Cewalch) King of West Saxons, builded the Church of
Winchester, made it a Bishops See, and the first Bishop he placed there, was
one Agilbertus, who came out of Ireland, who in a short time after, was
deposed, say some; Grafton with other writers record not the cause, but Beda
writes that he was offended, for that Kenelwalkus divided the Province into
two, that he left the Sea, went into France, became Bishop of Paris, and there
ended his days; and how that Kenelwalkus sent for him again and again, but
his flat answer was, for that he had dealt with him so unkindely, he would
never return.

I must here insert that which Cambrensis writes of the antiquities of
Brechinia or Breknoke in this sort; Brachanus, son of Haulaph, King of
Ireland.
there was of old of that country, which now is called Brecheinoc, a governor
that was a man both mighty and Noble, whose name was Brachanus, of whom the
country of Brecheinoc, (Brecknokshire) is so called, of whom one thing came
unto me worthy the noting; the histories of Britain do testify that he had
four and twenty daughters, that were all from their childhood brought up in
the service of God, and happily ended their days in the holy purpose they
took upon them. Doctor Powell the great Antiquarie of Britain, in his learned
annotations upon him, explaineth the same thus. This Brachanus, (says he) was
the son of one Haulaph, King of Ireland, his mother was one Mercella, the
daughter of Theoderike, the son of Tethphalt a petite King of Garthmarthrin,
to wit, of the country which took the name of this Brachanus, and at this day
is called Brechonia, or Brechinia, in British, Brechinoc, in English, Breknok.
This Brachanus had to his daughter, one Tydvaell, the wife of Congenus, the
son of Cadell a petit King of Powis, and the mother of Brochmael, surnamed
Scithroc, who slew Athelfred, alias Ethelfred, King of Northumberland, at the
river of Deva (called of the Britains, Doverdwy) and foiled his army about
the year of our Lord, 603. Here Breknoktowne, and Breknokshire have cause to
glory of Ireland, that gave them the name and honor which they hold to this
day, and Ireland to glory of them that gave their Kings son Marcella their
Lady, and all that country in her right.

Beda eccles. hist. lib. 3. cap. 26.
Also I cannot omit another thing of that age, the which Grafton reports of
the Clergy; and I find in Beda more reverently delivered, for that I have
formerly spoken much of them, and shall have occasion to speak something
hereafter, especially seeing Bedaes words are general, to be understood as
well of the one land, as of the other, if not rather of Ireland, considering
what has been delivered heretofore. Grafton.
In those days (says Grafton) the Monks and Clergy set all their minds to
serve God, and not the world, and were wholly given to devotion, and not to
filling of the panch, and pampering of the body, wherefore they were then had
in great reverence and honor, so that they were then received with all
worship. And as they went by the streets and ways, Priests of former ages:
men that saw them, would run to them, and desire their blessings, and well
was him then that might give unto them possessions, and to build them houses
and Churches. But as they increased in riches of worldly treasure, so they
decreased in heavenly treasure; as in the days of Aluredus some deal began,
and sithen that time, has sprung not all to the pleasure of God* Then they
applied nothing that was worldly, but gave themselves to preaching and teaching
of the word of our Savior Jesus Christ, and followed in life, the doctrine
that they preached, giving good example to all men. And beside that, they were
utterly void of covetousness, and received no possessions gladly, but were
enforced thereunto. So far Grafton.

Anno Dom. 685. was Cadwallader crowned King of Britains, that Ireland was
subject unto him, Harding testifies, his words are, Cadwaladrus after him began
succeed,
Both young and fair in flourishing invent;
That Cadwallader was called as I read,
Who of Britain had all the Soveraigntie,
Of English and Saxons in each country,
Of Pightes, Irish, and Scots his under regence,
As Sovereign Lord, and most of excellence.


For other things that concern him, I refer the reader to the history of
England. He had two nephews (his daughters sons) named Iv^r and Heuyr, who
fled into Ireland says Powell, and when they saw their time, came with forces
against the Saxons, gave them three battles, with many skirmishes and
inrodes, yet in the end, were foiled, as in the proper history more at large
appears. And here ended the rule of the Britains which had long continued.

Saint Dympna the Virgin.
I must now acquaint the reader with such as for learning and sanctity were of
note during this age, beginning at the year 600. Zacharias Lippeloo, out of
Petrus Cameracensis, writes, that about this year 600. there was an
heathenish and idolatrous King in Ireland, who had one Dympna to his daughter,
who secretly was baptized by one Gerebernus a Priest that travailed the land
for such purposes. The daughter being sole heir, and her mother being now
dead, the father was very careful to see her well matched according to his
degree, and accordingly acquainted his dearest friends and counselors with his
intent and purpose, who likewise travailed carefully in the cause, but could
not speed to the fathers contentment. As she grew in years, so she excelled
in beauty, and the father being as wicked as she was good and fair, became
enamoured of his own daughter, and importunately offered her marriage. She at
the first being amazed at the motion, yet at length gathering spirit, desired
respite for forty days, and withal desired that it would please him to adorn
her with such attire, jewels and ornaments, as became a Kings daughter to
wear, all which being granted, she privately sent for Gerebernus the Priest,
and acquainted him with all the circumstances. The Priest advised her, that the
safest way for her to avoid the incestuous King, was to avoid the land; she
immediately with the Priest, together with her fathers Iester and his wife,
took shipping, and arrived at Antverp. When they had rested there a while, and
recreated themselves, they of devotion (says mine Author) sought out among
woods and deserts, a solitary place to remain; in this resolution they came
to a poor village called Ghele, (Gela says Molanus) and from thence they went
to a thicket called Zammale, where they rid some small quantity of ground, made
a Caban to hold them all four, where they continued well some three months,
praying and fasting. In the mean while the Irish King missing his daughter
Dympna, lamented greatly, made great inquiry, and offered great rewards to
know what became of her, and having gotten inkling of her course, hoised up
sail after her, and landed at Antverp, immediately he made search, and sent
messengers with large offers about, if happily they might hear of her. At the
length, by the coin which they offered for reward, she was found out, for they
said, there was a fair young woman, remaining in a solitary place, which had
sent for relief for her self, and three persons more with the like coin. The
messengers were brought to the place, who knowing her ran forthwith with
news to the King, and he with much joy made haste to the Caban, and when he
saw her, said; O my only daughter Dympna, my love, my delight, and the joy of
my heart; what constrained thee to despise a regal dignity, to forsake thy
native soil, to forget the natural affection of a Child toward her Parent,
to flee from thy father a King, and to follow, as a child, this old decrepit
bald Priest, and so willingly to condescend to his unsavorie injunctions?
hearken to mine advice, return with me into Ireland, yield to thy fathers
desire, and I will advance thee above all the Ladies in Ireland. Gerebernus the
Priest, preventing the young Gentlewoman, turned him to the Irish King, and
rebuked him sharply, denouncing him for a most wicked and abominable person;
then he turned him to the Gentlewoman, and charged her never to give ear to so
lewd a man. With this the King and his company being mightily moved, commanded
the Priest to be taken aside, and his head to be taken off his shoulders.
Afterward the father turned him to his daughter, O daughter, (says he) why
suffer thou me thy father to be thus vexed? why contemnest thou my love
toward thee? yield, and thou shall want nothing. She with a stern
countenance made answer, Thou unfortunate tyrant, why go thou about with
deceitful promises, to withdraw me from my settled purpose of shamefastness? I
defy thee, and all thine. Thou cruel tyrant, why have thou slain the Lords
Priest? shall thou escape (think thou) the judgment of the Almighty? what
torture thou will lay upon me, I weigh not: with this, the father being
furiously moved, commanded his soldiers to cut off her head, and they being
loath to do it, he took the sword that hung by his side, and with his own
hands struck off her head, and with expedition returned into Ireland. Thus the
Priest and Dympna died, of the Iester and his wife I read nothing, belike they
returned home again. Molanus writes, that many years after, the bodies of
Dympna and Gerebernus were sought ou^, taken up, and solemnly enterred. The
Irish in the County of Louth do honor her; belike her father dwelt there.

Saint Bertwin.
Saint Bertwin, an Irish man, was brought up in the Monastery of Othbell in
England, from thence he went to Rome, where he led a solitary life the space
of two years; in his return, he came to the Forest of Marlignia in Flanders,
where he builded a Chapel; lastly, he was made Bishop of Molania, where he
ended his days. Sigebert ad an. 651. writes, Many out of Eng* or Scot. (he
knew not well the countries) as strangers travailing in France, preached the
word of God, and did much good, Hub Tho Comment. de Tungris and Eburonibus.
to wit, Etto, Bertwinus, Eloquius. This Bertwin lies buried nigh Namurcum
(says Molanus) of old called Namur, novus murus, but now Namurra, so writes
Hubertus Thomas Leodius.

Livinus.
Livinus, borne in Ireland, and brought up in Scotland and England, under
Benignus the Priest, and Augustine the first Bishop of the Saxons, by whom he
was made Archbishop (says Molanus) of the Scots, (says Christianus Massaeus,
of Ireland, says Bale, Silvestris Scotiae, Molanus not. Sanctori Belgij. Chron
lib. 13.
of the Ilanders and Red-shanckes) the which charge, after certain years, he
committed to Sylvanus his Archdeacon, and gave himself to travail, and took
with him his three disciples, Saint Foillanus, Helias, and Kilian, and came to
Gandavum. Of him, Christianus Massaeus writes thus: In the year of our Lord,
631. Saint Livinus by nation a Scot, Archbishop of Ireland, came to Gandavum,
with three disciples, and remained there one month, from thence he went to
Esca, preached Christ, and converted many, there some hard-hearted people slew
him, when he was beheaded, he rose up, took with him his own head, (believe
it who list) and carried it to Houtthein, where the Angels had made a sepulcher
for him. He is said (says Bale) to have written a book of Homilies, and in
the year 1007. to have been translated to Saint Bavons Church in Gandavum.
There was another Livinus a French man, a Friar minorite, and slain, as they
say, about the year 1345. and of fame at this day in Flanders.

Arbogastus borne in Ireland, a godly Preacher, Arbogastus. Anno 646.
and a great Writer, was the second Bishop of Argentine, Anno 646. who also for
his great wisdom, was taken by Dagobert King of France, to be of his
Council. He left behind him for the good of the Church, a book of Homilies.
So much Bale out of Munster Molanus writes, that about the year 647. some of
the family of Pipinus, the first Duke of Brabant, father of Saint Gertrude,
sent for many Preachers out of Ireland and Scotland into Brabant, and the
bordering regions, to plant the Christian religion among them, Fortanus.
Vltanus. Egbertus. Wicbertus. Willibrodus.
Fortanus and Vltanus are there named. Lippeloo says, that about the year
696. Egbertus, Wicbertus and Willibrodus were famous learned men in Ireland,
continued there a long time, afterward dispersed themselves into far
countries, and with happiness ended their days.

Molanus hereof writes farther thus. Saint Switberd.
In the imperial town called Werda, the birth of Saint Switberd, (whom Beda
calls Suidbertus) the Bishop and Confessor is solemnized: who in the time of
Pipinus, (the first Duke of Brabant) together with Saint Willibrod, preached
souls health unto the nations thereabouts. This man, among other diseases, was
wont to cure the disease in the throat, called of the Physicians, the
squinancie. He is termed the second of those Apostolic men which came out of
England and Ireland to preach the Gospel unto the Frisians, Hollanders, and
the nations about them Among whom, being as yet but a Priest, he converted
many, chiefly the inhabitants of the great Village Duerstadt, the which now is
the town of W^ic. He converted also the City Hagenstein, which now is a
village adjoining unto Viana. And when as by the industry of him and
Willibrodus, the number of the faithful daily increased, at the entreaty of
the brethren in Trajectum and Friseland, both of them consented he should be
consecrated Bishop. Whereupon Saint Switbert (whom Beda says to have been
modest of life, and meek in heart) went into England, and was consecrated by
Saint Willfride Bishop of Mercia (Kent, says Beda, had then no Bishop) in the
year 695. But Saint Willibrode went unto Duke Pipinus, and having gotten leave
of him, departed to Rome, where the year following, Pope Sergius consecrated
him. And although Switbert, by reason of some small time, had the start of
Willibrode, yet Willibrode went before him in dignity, for he was the first
Archbishop of Trajectum, and especially by Pope Sergius, consecrated Archbishop
of Frisia, and directed to that people. And (says Beda) Sergius changed his
name, and called him Clement, because (says Molanus) he consecrated him on
Saint Clements Even. And he also writes, that he was Archbishop of the nations
now called Frisii, Transiselani, Trajectenses, Hollandi and Zelandi, whereas
Switbert is not called Bishop of Trajectum, but fellow Bishop with Saint
Willibrode. Yet he is by special name called the Apostle of Teisterbandia,
Westfalia, and of the Boructuarians: for Marcellinus writes, that he
converted the county of Teisterbandia, and together with it, in a manner, all
Batua, and the greater part of the lower Friseland unto the faith. He also
exceedingly increased the number of the believers in the Church, at Trajectum;
he founded many Churches, and dedicated the temples of Idols unto the honor of
God. In the history of Marcellinus, certain places by especial words are
named; as in Zandwic, in the I Will of Tila, which at this day cannot be found in
Arkell and Hoernaer villages of the Lordship of Gorcomia, in Schoenreford, (now
called Schoenrewoert) by Leerda, in Authensden, nigh Huesden in Wondrighen,
(now called Worckum) in Aelborch, Giesen and Riiswij^ke between Worckum and
Huesden, in Almkerk (which is the territory of Altenae) in Maelsem, Erkum and
Avesaede in the Lordship of Buria, with many other places. In these countries
he hallowed Churches, continually praying with great devotion for the people
which he had converted, and with wholesome admonitions drawing them to the
heavenly dwellings. He converted the Westfalians and Boructuarians, which at
this day are thought to be the people Markenses. Further, the renowned Duke
Pipinus gave him Werda upon the river of Rhene, Werda given to Saint Switbert.
for his good, and for the establishing of his principality: which place is
elsewhere called the Island of Saint Switbert, though now it be part of the
continent or maine land. Pipinus gave him also great store of treasure,
wherewith he builded there a Monastery, and replenished the same with a great
company of the servants of Christ. In the end, this Saint Switbert died in the
year 717. and lies buried in the Monastery of Werda-Caesaris which he had
founded.

Beda writes, that Willibrode lived in his time, and went on the thirtieth and
sixth year of his consecration, Archbishop of Friseland: Molanus delivers his
end, that namely he ended his days at Westervoert, and was buried at Elste in
Gelderland; but of Egbert and Wigbert the Martyr (before mentioned) he
reports out of Beda and Marcellinus, Beda lib. 5. cap. 10.
that Wigbert was one of the companions of Egbert, and for the space of many
years, had led an Anchors life in Ireland, that he sailed into Friseland, and
for the space of two whole years, preached unto that nation, and to their King
Radbodus, and seeing that he could do no good among them, returned again to
Ireland. And when as Egbertus the servant of God, had sent the second time unto
the Friselanders and Saxons, famous men for life and learning, Acca,
Willibaldus, Winiboldus, Lebuinus, Werenfridus, Marcellinus, Adalbertus,
Ewaldus senior and junior, together with Willibrode, he sent the said Wigbert,
who no sooner landed, but King Rad^od caused him cruelly to be tormented to
death in Fosetes-land^, an Island in the confines of Friseland and Denmark; for
that the Christians of that place by his preaching of the Gospel, had
destroyed there the Idol groves of Jupiter and Fosta.

There was a later Wigbertus, Patron of Hersweldia, remembered in the
Martyrologe, whom I would have the reader take notice of, to avoid the
confusion of times. And last of all, of Willibrode and Wilfram, there is a
story, how that Raboldus after long persuasion, seemed willing to be baptized,
and having one foot in the water, demanded where be the nobility of Frizeland,
my Father, Grandfather and kindred? Answer being made, that they were in hell,
he withdrew himself from baptism, saying, I will go after the greatest
company, take your heaven to your self.

Molanus when he had at large written the lives of the foresaid learned men
that came out of Ireland, he makes in his Chronicle a recapitulation of them,
the which will help the memory of the reader, therefore I thought good to lay
it down. Egbert the second time essaied to convert Friseland and Saxony,
gathered together twelve Apostolic men, Willibrode, Switbert, Acca, Wigbert,
Wilibald, Winibold, Lebuinus, Ewaldus, surnamed the black, (in Irish, Duffe)
Ewaldus the white, Werenfridus, Marcellinus and Adalbertus.

1 Saint Willibrod and Saint Switbert, Willibrode.
by common consent of the brethren, were elected and consecrated Bishops. Saint
Willibrode was made Archbishop of Friseland, he received by the donation of
Duke Pipinus, the City of Traiectum, with all thereunto appertaining. He
founded in the territory of Saint Thomas, a College of regular Canons. In the
town of Rhen he is said to have found the body of Cunera, one of the eleven
thousand Virgins. He travailed in preaching without Friseland; ^e had in
Latharingia, two women disciples, Herlind and Relind, Nuns of Maeseike, which
now is of Leodium or Leege in Flanders. He converted the Hulstenses, Axellanos,
Hasuenses, Birfletanos. At Trevires, in the Church of Saint Marie and Martyrs,
he founded a Monastery of Monks Benedictines* At Epternacum among the
Luxemburgs, he founded a famous Monastery, wherein he was buried, Anno 736.

2 Saint Switbert was consecrated in England, Switbert.
and converted many in Traiectum, Holland, Gelderland, chiefly Wiic,
Hagelsteyn, Alcmaria, Waterla^dia, Gerconium, Bomelia, Tiela, Huesda, Bura,
Ba^ua with other places. He is called the Apostle of Teisterbandia, Westfalia,
and of the Boructuarians. He builded a Monastery in Werda Caesaris, where he
ended his days, Anno 710.

3 Acca went into England to the consecration of Saint Switbert, and when
Switbert returned, he became Bishop of Lindisfarne.

Wigbert is said to be martyred in Fostilandia adjoining upon Friseland by
Radbodus King of Friseland, who also slew Saint Egelmund the Martyr.

5.6 Wilibaldus and Winiboldus being brethren, went to Aistadium in Germany.

7 Lebuinus converted the Transiselanians, and rests among them in Daventria.

8.9 The two Ewaldes went to Nabia, preached Christ, and were martyred by the
old Saxons.

10 Werenfridus converted many to the faith at Arnhemium in Westervaert, and at
Neomagum in Elst.

11 Marcellinus preached 65. years, chiefly in Trenta, Twenta, Oudenzeel and
Daventria.

12 Adelbertus was the first Archdeacon of Traiectum, preached in Kenemaria,
together with Engelmund an Englishman before spoken of, and lies buried at
Velsen in Egmondan monastery.

He writes farther of Wiron and Plechelinus, Bishops of Friseland, who came
thither together with Otgerus a Deacon, out of these parts, and were
entertained by Pipinus, Duke of Brabant.

Fursaeus, Foilanus, Vltanus.
Many things are written by Beda, Capgrave, Surius, Baronius, Molanus, Lippeloo
and others, of Fursaeus, Foilanus, (whom Beda calls Fullanus) and Vltanus.
They were three brethren, and the base sons of a King of Leinster, they
flourished about the year six hundred fifty and odd. Fursaeus is said to
have had many visions and dreadful conflicts with devils and infernal
spirits. He preached unto the Irish, Scots, Britains and Saxons; he went into
France, where he wrought many miracles, (says Molanus) and because of the fame
that went abroad of him, one Ercanaldus gave him at Latiniacum, a parcel of
land to build a Monastery, also he gave him another piece of ground at
Perona, sometime a town in Flanders, but now of France, and parcel of Gallia
Comata, where he builded another Monastery, and drew unto him, (says mine
Author) germanos fratres, Foilanus and Vltanus, and there ended the way of all
flesh. They of Cambray do honor him as a Bishop, not that he was a Bishop,
but an Apostle of certain places. The martyrologe of Sarum reports, how that
after his death, the angels and the devils strove for his soul, how that the
soul returned to the body again, and how that he lived afterward. Here the
Author is deceived, for it was a trance that he was in, out of which after
certain conflicts, he came to himself again, and finally in godly sort ended
his days. I find in the life of Mocoeinoge, that there was one Fursaeus a
Bishop, but more ancient then this.

Many other learned men of Irish birth, contemporane with Fursaeus.
With Fursaeus there were at one and the self same time, many famous men of
Irish birth, renowned for learning and sanctity, which gave themselves to
travail, and dispersed themselves to far countries, as Foilanus and Vltanus
(before mentioned) also Mombolus, Boethius, Eloquius, Adulgisius, Columbanus,
Hetto, Helanus, Tresanus, Germanus, Veranus, Gobanus, Corbrican, Dicull,
Fredegandus, Colmanellus, Madelgarius, Algisius and others. After they had
visited Rome, they came back (says Molanus) into France and Flanders,
Fursaeus and Adelgisius into Perona, Foilanus and Vltanus into Possa, Eloquius
and Algisius into Theoras, the reverend Priest Hetto, unto the lake adjoining
unto Corbriolum, where he builded a Monastery called domus Petri. Further,
says Molanus, in the confines of the Attrebates, there is a Village called
Buym, which has a Church called Saint Hetto, whereupon is written, In hoc loco
Hetto Hiberniensium Episcopus mansionem habuit, in another place of the Church,
Hic reposuit Hetto Hibernensis Episcopus reliquias de corpore sancti Clementis
Papae and Martyris. In another place he writes of Hetto, Goban, and Corbrican,
that they were three brethren, and in their return from Rome, died at
Walciodorum, and lie buried at Fesca. Beda left but a bare mention of Goban and
Dicull, only this, that they were companions of Foilanus.

Foilanus was slain in a place in Flanders, called Carboriar. Foilanus.
Saint Bernard writes, that in the place where he was slain, there is a
Monastery builded by the name of Saint Foilane ordinis praemonstratensis, in
the Diocese of Cambray.

Fredegand preached in Antverp, where now he rests, Fredegand.
and is greatly honored.

Mombolus became an Abbot in the Monastery of Fursaeus in France, a perceiving
a conspiracy of his covent against him, Mombolus.
forsook the place, and withdrew himself, together with a few of his company,
unto a place of old called Condrynus, upon the river Isara, where he led an
hermites life, and ended his days. There was another of that name, a Saint of
Burdeux, but not of Irish birth.

Eloquius preached most painefully throughout France and Saxony, Eloquius.
and being seated at Latiniecum in the Monastery which Fursaeus had founded,
perceived some treachery practiced against him, withdrew himself (as formerly
Mombolus had done) to a solitary place called Grimacum, upon the rivers of
Some and Isara, where he departed this life, afterward his body was translated
to Walciodorum in Flanders, and there he rests.

About this time, Saint Autbert, borne in Ireland, Saint Autbert.
was Bishop of Cambray; he converted Hannonia, and is called the Apostle of
Flanders; of him Molanus writes thus, Autbertus had been for certain years,
Hiberniae gubernator, governor of Ireland, (the which I take to be some
ecclesiastical charge) by which occasion, many singular good Preachers
heretofore mentioned, came the more willingly out of Ireland unto us.

Trithemius reports of this time in this sort, There were many Monasteries of
Irish men in Germany, Herbipolis and other places, but when their zeal waxed
cold, and that they fell to remiss and dissolute life, they were expulsed, and
their habitation became waste and desolate.

Saint Chilian.
Saint Chilian (otherwise written Kilian) whom Bale calls a Scot, Surius,
Baronius, and Lippeloo, write that he was an Irish man of Noble Parentage.
Molanus writes, in Hibernia regio sanguine procreatus, that he was begotten in
Ireland of royal blood; another says he was a Kings base son. This man
became a Monk, went to Rome, together with Colman a Priest, and Totnan a
Deacon of the same country birth, in the time of Conon, Bishop of Rome, about
the year 687. to sue unto the Bishop there, that Ireland might be released of
the curse that was denounced against the land, and the inhabitants thereof, for
the Pelagian heresy. Molanus writes, that he served in Saint Peter's Church in
Rome, eleven years, but he was directed another course, for he was consecrated
Bishop of Herbipolis in the East parts of France, and together with his
fellows sent away. There they converted Gosbert a French Duke, which had
married one Geila his brothers wife. It is John Baptists case, he rebuked him
for it, and she hearing thereof, sent certain lewd persons in the night,
which murdered them all three, and privily buried them, lest so horrible a
fact should come to light; but God that will have no such villainy concealed,
brought it out, the tormentors became mad, and confessed the whole. Beda in
his Martyrologe reports, how that at Wirciburge in Austria, the birth day of
Kilian the Martyr, and his two companions, is solemnly kept the eight of July.

Saint Fiacre.
Molanus says, that in his travail he met with Saint Fiacre, sometime his
fathers servant, but he following carefully his direction, staid not with him,
but passed on in his journey. This Saint Fiacre, (says the Martyrologe) was
base son of some King in Ireland, went into France, and became an heremite;
there are small remembrances of him in Surius and Lippeloo, saving that for a
woman's sake which called him a Witch, Sorcerer, and Inchanter, he commanded
that no woman should put foot into his Cloister, and if any should do so, he
prayed that God would lay some plague upon her; to try this, a woman sent her
maid to take the air of the Cloister, but she took no harm; upon a second
trial, a fairer then she presumed so far, that her shinne, her knee, and her
thigh, (says mine Author) and some parts above, took swelling, and that went
for a punishment. In an ancient manuscript Legend of the life of Congellus or
Congallus, I find that Saint Fiacre returned into Ireland, and became Abbot of
Airard in Leinster upon the river of Berba, now called the Barrow, in the
Barony of Odrone, and that he went to the Abbey of Beanchor in Vlster to visit
Congellus, at whose hands Congellus received the Sacrament, and gave up the
Ghost. There also it is further alleged, that this Fiacre builded a Monastery
in Leinster, in the honor of Saint Congellus.

The martyrologe aforesaid, remembers Saint Cataldus a Bishop, Saint Finan an
Abbot, Saint Sacodine a Virgin, Saint Cataldus. Saint Finan. Saint Sacodine.
who forsook her husband, and entered religion, to have lived then: and how
that Indrake, a King of Ireland, forsook his royalty, King Indrake, Dominica.
went to Rome with his sister Dominica, led a private life, and died beggars.
Capgrave calls him Indraktus, saying that he was a Kings son, and took
with him, beside his sister, nine persons more.

About this time, (says Capgrave) one Muriardachus, Monarch of Ireland,
together with his wife Sabina, Muriardachus Monarch of Ireland.
lived in the true faith and fear of God, who being mighty and wise, commanded
in good sort all the Princes of the land. In this his good success and
peaceable government, he was envied, so that a petite King his neighbor, came
upon him in the night, murdered him with his Queen, and all his family,
excepting one daughter, whose life he saved for her beauties sake. This cruel
tyrant after assaulted this fair Gentlewoman to his filthy lust, and when with
fair persuasions he could not prevail, at length by force he oppressed her,
so that she conceived and bare him a son, called at the time of his
baptism, Milluhoc, but afterward, Cuthbert.

This Cuthbert being borne (as my Author writes) at Kilmacrodrike, some three
miles from Dublin, Saint Cuthbert.
his mother took him to Scotland to her two brethren, Meldan and Eatan, that
were Bishops. Meldan and Eatan Bishops, sons to the Monarch of Ireland.
From thence he went into the North parts of England, and was brought up among
the holy Monks of those days, in the Monastery of Mailros, under the Abbot
Boisilius, whom he succeeded in the same Monastery. Anno 651. And Anno 676. he
went to the I Will Farne, which was uninhabited, and continued there nine years,
building, teaching and preaching, and (as Beda writing his life delivers)
working in harvest time with his own hands. The fame of his virtues and
holiness went far abroad, so that Egfride, King of the Northumbers, made him
Bishop of Lindesfarne, to which dignity he was consecrated at York by
Theodorus the Archbishop, Anno 685.

In his time, Anno 684.
the aforesaid Egfride sent Brith with a great host into Ireland to be revenged
of them, for that he was given to understand, Saxons in Ireland.
they had aided his enemies against him; these Saxons over-ranne the land,
killing, burning, and spoiling, they spared neither Church nor Monastery, so
writes Beda. Berthus vastavit misere gente^ innoxa^, and nationi Anglorum
semper amicissimam: Beda eccles. hist. lib. 4. cap 26.
Berthus pitifully spoiled this harmless people, who always most kindly
affected the English nation. Cuthbert reproved him for it, and the Ilanders
cried unto the heavens, and prayed God to avenge their cause. Beda reports
farther, how that he bent his forces afterward against the Pictes and Scots,
and would not be advised by Cuthbert and Egbert, and that his bloody course had
no good success, and that then Egfride, the glory of the Saxons began to
decay, the which Florilegus attributes to the cry of the Irish, and the
courage of the Pictes and Scots, and Britains. In his time, says Carodoc, it
rained blood in Britain and Ireland; the Milk likewise and the Butter, turned
to the color of blood, and the Moon appeared all bloody.

Cuthbert, when he had been Bishop two years, forsook his Bishopric, and
went to the I Will Farne, where he led an hermites life, and left the world, Anno
Dom. 687. It is written of him that he forbade his Monks and Priests, the
company of women, and that they should not come within any Cloister, for that
the devil appeared unto him in his Church in the shape of a woman most fair
and beautiful. Yet I find that he conversed much with Ebba and Verca, and
with Elfleda, King Egfrides sister, and repaired often to their Nunneries, did
eat and drink with them, and sent Elfleda a linen or thread Girdle for a
token, which took away a swelling and crampe that troubled her, and that he
was shrouded in the winding sheet, which the Nun Verca had sent him. Anno
875. Ardulphus, Bishop of Lindisfarne, fearing the incursion of the Danes, who
destroyed Churches, and defaced Tombs, took the corpse of Cuthbert, and
attempted the transporting of it into Ireland, but the wind was against them,
and compelled them to land in England, then they brought it to Cuncacester,
some six miles from Durham, where it rested some years. Anno 925. (though
Stow refer it to the year 995.) Aldunus (who was the first Bishop of Durham)
preventing (as formerly Ardulphus did) the invasion of barbarcus people,
removed it to a place full of bushes and thorns, now called Durham, and with
the aid of Earl Vthred, builded a Church over it, where (now at length) it
rests. Edmund the second Bishop of Durham, enlarged the Church, and
beautified the place of his burial, and long after, were brought thither, the
bodies of Balther and Bilfride, that had been Anchors, Acca and Alkmundus that
had been Bishops, Ebba the Nun, and familiar of Cuthbert, Boisilus the Abbot
his master, King Oswine, and the bones of Beda that rested at Girwin, so
writes Capgrave. He that will see farther of Cuthbert and his patrimony, (so
called in the Bishopric of Durham) of the endowments and grants given by
Christian Princes, and of the reverend opinion held of the place, because of
the sanctity of Irish Cuthbert, let him repair to learned Camdens Brigantes,
the which for that they concern the antiquities of England more then Ireland,
I omit.

Anno 701.
Now to come to the 700. year of Christ. I will begin with Adamannus, who
flourished Anno 701. as Florilegus writes, in the time of Alfred, King of
Northumbers, whom Beda highly commends, and as it may be gathered and
borrowed out of his works, many things to furnish his history of England. I
find of diverse reported, that he was in Ireland, and did much good. I take it
he was of Irish birth, for I cannot find the contrary. Bale summarily out of
Beda and others, writes in his life as follows. Adamannus Coludius, by
profession a Monk, not vowed, but of the Apostolic order, Adamannus his life.
and governor of that famous Monastery, which of old, Columbanus the disciple
of Congellus had founded in the I Will Hu, made himself a pattern of virtue to
be followed of many; he was a man studious and singularly well seen in holy
Scripture, as Tritemius witnesses, neither ignorant of profane literature,
wise and fair spoken; he was for his life and conversation, renowned, and for
opinion of sanctity, recounted the father of many Monks, so that he
travailed in a manner all the North regions of Britain; he was a notable
Preacher, instructing with heavenly admonitions, Irish, Scots, Pictes, and
Anglosaxons. He willingly gave ear to all such as made report of any
memorable acts of Palestina by their travail, and of other places of the holy
Land, with the site thereof, trusting thereby to attain unto a better sight in
the holy Scripture. Then it fell out (say the Chronographers) that one
Arnulphus, a Bishop of France, coming from Jerusalem, and being winde-driven
to that place, arrived there, and thoroughly informed Adamannus, the which he
shortly after committed to writing, and dedicated unto Alfred, King of
Northumbers, with these titles.

De locis terrae sanctae lib. 1. De situ Jerusalem lib. 1. De paschate legitimo
lib. 1.
With certain Epistles. So far Bale. I have seen beside these, a Manuscript
work of his, of the life of Saint Columba in three books.

About the year 740. says Lippeloo, Gualafer Bishop of Dublin, Gualafer,
Bishop.

Saint Rumold. Zachar. Lip. de vitis Sanct. tom. 3.


was famous, who by his prayers obtained that Cecilia, wife to David King of
Scots, and daughter to the King of Sicilia, being barren, did conceive and
bear a son called Rumoldus, who after the decease of Gualafer, was made
Bishop of that See, and consecrated by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and two
other Prelates. He went into England, afterward to France, and came to Rome,
Anno 752. in the time of Stephen 2. he resigned his Bishopric, from thence
he went into Brabant, and by his prayers (says mine Author) got one Eliza,
wife to Earl Ado, of the age of 66. years, to conceive. In the end he went to
repair an old Church, agreed with workmen, wrangled with them so, that they
for one quarrel and other, and especially for that they held him to be rich,
hoping to get some part of his wealth, knocked him in the head with a hatchet,
and there lay Saint Rumolde. Molanus in discreet sort examineth this history,
and delivers that this Rumoldus took with him beyond the seas, one Saint
Himelin, now Patron of Fenacum, the place in Dutch is Sijnte Himelijns
Vissenaken, some said he was of his blood, others some, that he was of his
blood and bone. Io. Molanus not. Scotorum Belgi^ ex Martyrologo Mechlin.
His words are these. Some suppose that Saint Rumold was the son of Erfinus
King of Scots, after whom succeeded in the kingdom, the third and fourth
son, Fergusius and Achaius, but the names of the first and second son are
not extant. They add happily unto the rest, that because he was the King of
Scots his son, it stood him upon to forsake the Bishopric of Dublin, when
Solvathius that reigned between Fergusius and Achaius, warred against the
Irish, and upon this occasion, he took his journey to Rome, and at his
return, preached the Gospel at Mechlin. All which, by conferring the times,
would have some great probability, unless the ancient Monuments and Records
of Mechlin, had avouched him to have been the son of one David a King, and
to have been brought forth into the world, by the intercession and devout
prayers of Gualafer, Bishop of Dublin, and of him baptized, whereby I gather,
that he was the son of some King of Ireland. Neither is it any mervaile,
though we read not of this David, when as Saint Bernard witnesses, that
Ireland was not governed by one King, but by many; the orderly succession of
which Kings, I suppose for the most part is now perished. If you urge that he
came of the Scottish blood royal; I admit it, for it is so sung every where
throughout the Diocese of Mechlin, but that of old the Irish men were
understood and comprehended under the name of Scots, by the life of Saint
Patricke and elsewhere, is very manifest. To this purpose is that which Beda
affirms, that Ireland is properly the country of the Scots, and Jonas also
writes in the entrance to Columbanus his life, how that the Scottish nation
inhabit the Island of the Irish. This Rumoldus died, Anno 775. and is honored
in Mechlin for their Patron.

Virgilius solivagus^
Virgilius Solivagus, borne in Ireland, and descended of noble Parentage, in
his years of discretion, forsook his native soil, and together with certain
companions of the same country birth, went into Germany, where Anno 754. he
was made Abbot of Salisburge, by Odilo, Duke of Bavaria, and shortly after,
Bishop of Iuvaviens; the name of which Bishopric, he procured to be
changed, and called it the Bishops See of Salisburgh, where he builded a
sumptuous Cathedral Church, and was the first founder thereof. In his time,
one Boniface an English man, and the Popes Legate in Germany, took upon him to
rebaptize, contrary to the Canons of the Church, such as had been (as he
thought) formerly not rightly baptized. Virgilius (having had conference with
Sydonius, Archbishop of Bavaria) opposed himself against him. The matter came
to hearing before Pope Zachary, who gave sentence, that Virgilius was in the
right, and Boniface his Legate (for all his great authority) in the wrong
opinion. He prudently governed his Church some thirty years, and gave place
to nature. So far Bale, out of Gaspar Bruschius.

Learned Camden alleges out of Rhegino, that in the time of Carolus magnus,
Invasions of Norwegian^ and Danes.
which must needs be about the year 767. certain Norwegians or Normans
entered Ireland, and were repulsed, and further of them I have not read: but in
the British Chronicle of Caradoc Llancarvan, I find that Anno 799. the Danes
came into England, and destroyed a great part of Lindsey and Northumberland,
Anno 799.
over-ranne the most part of Ireland, and destroyed Rechreyn.

The accidents of the eight hundredth year after Christ, now follow. And first
of all, Functius offers occasion to write, how that Anno 820. Regnerus, King
of Denmark, invaded Britain, and how that his prosperous successes in
Britain, Scotland, and the Orchades, puffed him up, and emboldned him so much,
that he passed into Ireland, slew the King of the land, took the City of
Dublin, where he remained an whole year, and then returned to Denmark.

Next comes Turgesius his time to be examined, who was of Norwey, and came
with great power of Esterlings into Ireland, vanquished King Edlumding, or
Edlimidus, or in Irish, Felim Mac Edmund, and reigned thirty years. Here
(gentle reader) observe certain errors or escapes (whether of ignorance,
wilfulness, or negligence, I know not) the which I find between Cambrensis,
Polychronicon, Fabian and others, touching Gurmund and Turgesius. First, that
Gurmund and Turgesius should be one man, the end of them both by a general
consent of Writers, reproves that; for Gurmund dyed in France, and Turgesius
was slain in Ireland. Secondly, (whereat Giraldus marvaileth) how that the
Antiquaries of England make mention of Gurmund, but nothing of Turgesius, and
that the Writers of Ireland speak of Turgesius, but little or nothing of
Gurmund; so that Turgesius by reason of his reign and continuance was known
unto them, and Gurmund, if he were here, made small abode, (as I have formerly
written) and therefore became a man unknown. Thirdly, that Turgesius should be
Gurmunds deputy in Ireland, or his brother (as I read in Fabian) cannot
possibly stand with the truth: for on all sides it is agreed, that Gurmund came
to Britain, and joined with the Saxons against Careticus, who began his reign
in Britain, anno 586. but, as says Cambrensis, Turgesius Captain of the
Norwegians, Danes or Esterlings, came to Ireland in the days of Fedlimidius,
which was 400. years from the coming of the first Patricke into the land, in
the which time there had reigned thirty three Kings or Monarchs; then this knot
with facility may be untied, Turgesius came to Ireland, Anno 832.
for Patricke came to Ireland (as I have formerly delivered) An. 432. add 400.
to it, then Turgesius came to Ireland, Anno 832. But forward with the history.

When these Norwegians or Esterlings had got footing in the land to their
content, and planted themselves the space of thirty years, they builded
Castles, Fortes and Wards, they cast up Trenches, Banks and Ditches for
safeguard and refuge. Toward the end of the term before mentioned, Turgesius
was enamoured on a fair Gentlewoman, the only daughter of Omalaghlin, King of
Meth, and desired her for his Concubine; he practiced with the father for
obtaining of his purpose, the father not willing to yield, nor daring to
displease, resolved him thus: Appoint the day, the hour, and the place, and
sequester your self from your Court and retinue, and I will send my daughter
unto you with twelve or sixteen Gentlewomen, of the choice and beautifullest
maidens of my country, and take your choice of them; if my daughter please you
best, she is at your command.

When the time appointed came, and the Lecher longed to satisfy his filthy
lust, Omalaghlin attired his daughter in princely sort, and sent her to King
Turgesius, with sixteen young men in women's attire, which had long Skeines
under their Mantles. These young springals were fair, beautiful, effeminate,
and amiable to look upon; they were brought to his chamber, and presented
before him, he takes the Gentlewoman by the middle, and kisseth her, the
Striplings out with their Skeines, Turgesius slain
and stabbed him, having the Lady in his arms, whereof he presently dyed,
whilst they fell upon a few loose and dissolute persons that were about him,
whom they killed every one.

Omalaghlin that lay in ambush all this while with certain horsemen,
(expecting the end of this exploit) rejoiced greatly when he saw his daughter
and her company make so speedy a return, and understanding that his practice
was effected as he desired, sent Scoutes and Cursitors, Messengers and horses
over the whole land, declaring what had happened. Immediately, Meth and all
Leinster are in Arms, the Princes and Lords from every place throughout
Ireland, repaired to Omalaghlin, and being glad of liberty, rejoiced with him
at the destruction of Turgesius and his Guard. To make the story short, (for
they made short work with it) they set upon the Norwegians and Danes, killed
them every mothers son that escaped not by flight, seized upon all their
possessions, so as together with their lives, they lost all their lands and
goods: and, says the Irish Chronicle, Jacob. Grace. Thad. Douling.
tunc cepit conquestus Hibernicorum, Then the Irish began to conquer.

This Omalaghlin King of Mead, being in great trust, credit and favor with
Turgesius (no man greater at that time) demanded of him (concealing the plot
that lay hidden in his heart against the Norwegians) by what means certain
ravenous and pestiferous foul (he meant the Norwegians) lately brought into
the land, which greatly annoyed the country, might be destroyed? Turgesius
answered, if they breed, destroy their eggs, birds, and nests; which answer,
the Irish made good upon the Norwegians.

Not long after (says Cambrensis and Polychronicon) after what? They mean,
after the murdering of Turgesius, and rooting out of all the Norwegians and
Esterlings, there came again out of Norway, and the Northern Islands, as
remnants of the former nation, and whether they knew of themselves, or by
relation of their Parents and Ancestors, the land to be fruitful, and
commodious; thither they came, not in warlike sort, but in peaceable manner, to
use the trade of merchandise; when they had entered certain Ports and Havens of
Ireland, with the license of the Princes of the land, they builded therein
diverse Cities. For the Irish nation, (they speak of that time) naturally given
to idleness, would not sulcate the seas, neither give themselves to
merchandise, so that by one consent of the whole land, it was thought good,
that some certain nation, by whose industry the commodities of other regions
wanting in Ireland, might be hither transported, should be suffered to dwell in
some parts of the land. Amelanus, Sitaracus and Ivorus.
Their Leaders and Captains were three brethren, Amelanus, Sitaracus and
Ivorus, when they had first builded three Cities, Dublin, Waterford, and
Limericke; the command of Dublin fell to Amelanus, Waterford to Sitaracus,
Lymericke to Ivorus, and from these by degrees, in process of time, they gave
themselves to build other Cities in Ireland. This nation (quae nunc Oas^mannica
gens vocatur) which now is called the Esterling nation, or East men, at their
first coming, demeaned themselves toward the Kings of the land, in a most
royal and peaceable mander, but when the number multiplied of their own
kin, and they had fortified their Cities with walls and trenches, they began
to revive the old hatred that was hid in their hearts, and obstinately to
rebel. They were called Oostmanni of their corrupt Saxon tongue, as men of the
East. Of these and the former Norwegians, the Irish took the use of the
Sparthes, now called Galloglas axes. So far Cambrensis verbatim, and
Polychron in substance.

Diverse have diversely delivered their opinion, and misreckoned themselves in
their computation of years, when these Cities before spoken of were builded.
Stanihurst in his description of Ireland, refers it to the year 155. and
that they were builded by Amelanus; in another place he alleges it was after
Gurmundus his days, done in like sort by Amelanus. It is such an error as I
cannot well impute it to the Printer. Cambrensis and Polychronicon do not lay
down the year, but the time about the year: what beside is added, is but
fancy and conjecture, for their testimony is the ground of all. For where they
write that these brethren came to Ireland after the death of Turgesius, then it
was after the year 862: wherein he died, but how soon or how long after,
there is no certainty. That they builded these Cities, I do not believe, I
had rather say with Stanihurst, that they reedified them, for those places were
after a sort builded, and inhabited many years before their arrival. I take
it that as Merchants, they builded themselves dwelling houses, walled the
towns, and made keys to moore their ships, neither do I hold it that every
one severally builded a City, but all three together with the aid of their
country Merchants upon their arrival in their safe Ports, builded and planted
their country people, and rested not long, for the Irish fell upon them, and
banished them out of the land, for their riches, pride, and rebellion.

Patricke, the Abbot.
In the year 850. lived Patricke the Abbot of Ireland, Abbot and Confessor. For
there were two Patrickes, the first a very learned and godly man, the second a
Abbot, and given to superstition, and founder of the fabulous Purgatory, which
goes in Ireland under the name of Saint Patrickes Purgatory; so write
Ranulphus, Monk of Chester, and Bale, Bishop of Ossory, though Stanihurst
allow not of it, but attribute it to the first Patricke, and that without
warrant.

In his time there rose a great rebellion in Ireland, so that he fled into
Britain, and lies buried in Glastenbury. The Martyrologe of Sarum reports,
that in Ireland they keep the feast of Patricke the Abbot, the 24. of August.
Stanihurst to further his credit, delivers that he wrote a book of
Homilies, and certain Epistles directed to the Irish. Saint Patricks Purgatory.
The sounder opinion is, (the which Stanihurst at unawares remembered out of
Claudianus) that the place there, was in like sort as it is now in the time of
Paganism, and was long before Saint Patrickes days, And it seems to be
after the manner of concavities in the bowels of the earth, where the air
entering naturally to avoid Vacuum, and the wind following, whisteleth and
cries like doleful ghosts; the silly ignorant and simple people being
deceived through persuasion of covetous Priests, that some souls and spirits
do penance there for their sins, call it a Purgatory. And further we see by
reason and daily experience in Miners, that if any be much under grownd, the
dampnesse of the earth takes away their lively color, and makes them look
ghastly, and if they continue any long while there (the vital spirits being
barred of their usual course) they are mightily tormented, cast into trances,
and distracted, and being once delivered from the place, report things at
randon of heaven and earth, believe them who list.

Albertus Krantz Dan. lib. 2.
Albertus Krantz, reckoning up reports given forth out of several countries
touching visions, apparitions, voices, illusions, inserteth among them,
Patrickes Purgatory in Ireland, and concludes, that they are to be accounted
among old Wives fables. Ant. chron. p 2. tit. 11. cap. 1^*
Antoninus alleges Vincentius for his Author, how that in those days, the
history de fossae sancti Patricij of Saint Patrickes pit or ditch, was not of
many allowed, the reason is alleged, for that it is there avouched, that the
souls in that Purgatory, go not straight to heaven, but into some
terrestrial Paradise, whereas the received opinion is, (says he) that there
is no middle place between Purgatory and the celestial Paradise.

In the time of Alphred, alias Alured, King of West Saxons, anno 872. as Fabian
and Cooper have noted, there was a grievous malady reigning among the people,
called the evil ficus, Evil Ficus.
which also took the King, so that (say mine Authors) an Irish maid came out
of Ireland, called Modwen, whose Monastery in time of rebellion, Modwen.
was destroyed, and cured the King. In recompense whereof, she had land given
her in the North, whereon two Monasteries were founded, and now she rests at
Aundersey by Burloa. Polychronicon and Holinshead report the history, as if
Alphred had gone into Ireland unto her. I allege this history to put the
reader in mind, how that formerly I have written of one Modwen, who lived
immediately after Saint Patricke, and was of Irish birth, about 400. years
ago* Were it not for the time, by many circumstances, they both should be one,
but to remove all doubts, and to uphold the credit of antiquaries, I will say
they were two, of one country birth, and now rest in one place*

There was great amity between Alphred or Alured before mentioned, and
Gregory, King of Scots, in whose time, Anno 877.
Anno 877. ( Grafton, Cooper, and Buchanan are mine Authors) great troubles and
misery fell upon Ireland; the circumstances in brief were these. The Citizens
of Dublin found themselves grieved, and mightily wronged by the Scots of
Galloway; that whereas certain tall ships of theirs were wind-driven thither,
the Scots fell upon them, rifled them, and thereof made a prey. In revenge
whereof, the people of Dublin gathered Irish forces, arrived there, and preyed
the country. Gregory the King having intelligence thereof, hastened with his
forces, to encounter with them; the Irish fearing the worse, got them with
their pillage aboard their ships, and hoised up sails for Ireland: Gregory
prepares his navy, and shortly after arriveth in Ireland.

The King at that time (says Buchanan) was but a child, whose name was
Duncanus, or Donatus, or rather Dunachus; Brian and Cornelius.
the Protectors or chief commanders of the land about the King, were Brian and
Cornelius, who had drawn the land into two factions. The Irish hering of the
coming of Gregory, fortified themselves upon the river of the Band, but there
the Scots overthrew them; Brian was slain, and Cornelius put to flight. The
Scots left them not so, Scots at the Band overthrow the Irish.
but pursued them, preyed the country without resistance, constrained the
towns before them to yield, and hearing by the way that Cornelius gathered all
the forces of Ireland against them, made ready to ioyn battle, in the which,
Cornelius and all his forces were foiled, so that for a safeguard of his life,
he fled to Dublin, and his army dispersed themselves abroad. Gregory followed
him, laid siege to Dublin, and by reason there were so many received within
that fled from the field, they could not long endure the strength of the
puissant King of Scots without, Dublin receive the Scots. Cormack, Bishop of
Dublin.
wherefore by general consent of the Citizens, Cormacke, Bishop of Dublin,
opened the gates, received the King of Scots, without loss of any man of
either side, or damage of goods. Immediately Gregory the King of Scots, went to
his cousin Duncan the young King, saluted him, and delivered unto him that he
came not for his kingdom, ne for gold nor silver, ne for commodities of his
country, but only to be revenged of them that had formerly injured his
subjects. And as for you, said he, cousin Duncan, I bear you no malice;
without blood I came into the City of Dublin, without blood I will depart;
recompense of the Citizens of Dublin I seek none, the inhabitants between
this and the Band have satisfied me and my people, let the Citizens pay it them
again, and make no more such rash attempts into Scotland. With this they
lovingly departed, and continued friends, to the great honor of the King of
Scots.

After this, Anno 897. poor Ireland had another scourge, for says Caradoc
Llancarvan in his British Chronicle, Anno 899.
Strange worms.
and likewise Polichronicon, this country was destroyed with strange worms,
having two teeth, so that there was neither corn nor grass, nor food for man
or beast, for all was consumed that was green in the land, at the season of
the year: The nine hundredth year follows.

Anno Dom. 900.
The Saxons that divided Britain (as formerly has been declared) into many
kingdoms, began now to grow weak in their estate; and the Danes that troubled
in a manner all Christendom, Danes in Ireland.
were falling to naught: yet Anno 905. says the British Chronicle, the Danes
entered Ireland, preyed, spoiled, and fired the country, slew in the field,
Garmot, (so he calls him) alias Cormac, Monarch of Ireland, and the son of
Cukeman, a man both godly and religious; and also Kyrvalt, son of Morgan,
King of Leinster. Then they roved round about England, hulling upon the seas,
and landing where they espied advantage, destroyed with fire and sword as much
as lay in them.

Anno 911. they came again into Ireland (says Cooper) holding on in their
former outrages.

Anglesey spoiled by them of Dublin.
Anno 913. (says Carodoc) the men of Dublin with great forces came to
Anglesey, preyed and destroyed the Island, and returned to Ireland: the cause I
find not, but that sea and land was bent to mischief, the fire upon the land,
and piracie upon the sea.

Anno 925. the second year of the reign of Adelstane, the base son of
Edward the first, (called Edward Senior) King of West Saxons, was a great army
gathered by the said Adelstane, against Hawlaffe, King of Ireland, the son of
Suthricus, and a Painym, says Polychronicon, Hawlaffe, King of Ireland.
Bromford says Grafton.
who came with the whole power of the Scots and Danes against him, and gave him
battle at Brimesturie, where Adelstane had the victory, and slew the said
King Hawlaffe, and the King of Scots, and five Kings of the Danes and Normans,
and twelve Earls, so that he brought all the land of England and Scotland into
subjection, which none of his Predecessors had ever attempted. So far out of
Caradoc in the British Chronicle.

Polychronicon writes of Hawlaffe, that he was the son of Sitricus, and had
married the daughter of Constantine, King of Scots, and by his aid entered the
mouth of the river of Humber, with a strong navy, and when both armies had
encamped themselves, Hawlaffe used this policy; He took a Harp, and in
Harpers attire, went to Adelstanes Tent, where he harped, and viewed their
di^t, disposition, and behavior, took money for his music, which in heart
he disdayned, he secretly, as he thought, hid the money in the ground, and went
away. A soldier that sometime served Hawlaffe, espied it, and told Adelstane
the whole; why, says Adelstane, did not thou acquaint me sooner? he
answered, O King, the faith I owe thee now, sometime I ought to Hawlaffe, if I
had been false to him, thou would have suspected me afterward; but now
remove thy Tent, for he will suddenly come upon thee. For all the haste that
Adelstane made, Hawlaffe came in the night, slew a certain Bishop and his
company that were fleeing, and many others: he hasted to Adelstanes Tent, but
he was provided, and in arms, and at the break of the day, set upon his
enemies, and foiled them, as formerly is delivered.

Anno 926. ( Saxo Grammaticus, Albertus Krantz, and others are mine Authors)
Knutus and Herald, sons to Gormo, King of Denmark, following the steps of
their fathers, gave themselves to Piracie; roved, crossed, and hulled upon the
seas, all was fish that came to their nets; they arrived in Ireland, and laid
siege to Dublin. The King of Leinster sent especially, and laid an ambush
within a mile of Dublin, and whilst the Danes scaled the walls without, the
Citizens manfully defended themselves within, and others were careless of
themselves abroad; one of the espials levelled an arrow at Knutus, and gave him
such a wound, that he shortly dyed thereof. The Danes prevailed, but their joy
upon his death was turned into sorrow; Gormo the father so entirely loved this
Knutus his son, that he vowed, whosoever brought him news of the death of
his son Knutus, for recompense, should die the death. Thira, daughter to
Edward the Martyr, (says Functius) the mother, being a Christian (though Gormo
were a bloody Infidel) having certain intelligence of the death of Knutus,
durst not reveal it, but used this policy: she caused instead of her
husbands princely robes, (wherewith he was on a morning to make himself ready)
mourning clothes to be laid before him, and such funeral exequies, as were
used to be prepared for the witnessing of the sorrow and grief conceived for
the departure of some dear friend; woe is me (says Gormo) now my son Knutus
is dead, this I gather by these circumstances. Then answered Thira the Queen,
you my Lord discover it, not I. Gormo dyed for sorrow, and Thira lamented in
one day the departure of her Lord and husband the King, the death of her son,
and her own doleful widdowhood.

Anno 939. (so writes Caradoc) Abloic a most worthy Prince, and Monarch of
Ireland deceased.

Anno 940. after the death of Athelstane, his brother Edmund reigned over
Britain. He subdued the Danes that remained in Northumberland, together with
others that came out of Ireland to invade the land with Anlaffe their Captain,
says Fabian; he slew some, and banished the rest, so writes Cooper.

Saint Mary's Abbey founded by Dublin
Anno 948. the Abbey of the blessed Virgin Mary, by Dublin, was founded by the
Danes.

Molanus writes of one Columbanus an Abbot of Irish birth that became a
recluse or an anachorist, Anno 957. in the Church yard of the Monastery of
Gandavum, where he kept the space of two years, and there ended his days.
This year, says Caradoc, Congelach, King of Ireland was slain, but he
shows not where nor how.

Anno 959. Edgar, the son of Edmund, began his reign over England, he
reduced all into one Monarchy. Camden found in a Charter, where Edgar
delivered of himself, that it pleased God of his mercy to grant unto him,
together with the command of England, to subdue all the Ilandish kingdoms of
the Ocean, together with their fierce and mighty Kings as far as Norwey, and
the greatest part of Ireland, with Dublin the most noble City thereof, unto
the kingdom of England.

Anno 966. Rodericke, the son of Edwall Voell, Prince of Wales, was slain by
Irish men that landed there for a prey, spoiled the country, and destroyed
Aberfraw. Caradoc so complains of them.

Molanus writes of one Forananus a Bishop, which flourished, Anno 980. he
terms him Bishop of Domenormor, Forananus his life.
and Metropolitan of Ireland and Scotland: where he mightily erred in the name
of the place, of the person, and his style. For he was Bishop of Dromore in
Ireland, and no Metropolitan at all, but to his purpose he finds him among
his Saints of Flanders, and says, that he was warned in a vision to travail;
so that he with a company of Irish Priests, arrived in France, and came to
Rome, in the time of Benedict 7. from thence he came back to the Monastery of
Walciodorum, where he and his Priests became professed Monks, of the order of
Saint Benedict, for the space of twelve years, and there ended their days.
The Monks there, says he, were wont among other Saints at Easter, yearly to
call upon him* Sancte Foranane ora pro nobis, until that the reformers of
Bursfeld wiped him out of the Catalogue of Saints, for that he was not
canonized by the Church of Rome.

Anno 988. (as I find in the British Chronicle) Elwmaen, the son of Abloic,
King of Ireland, was slain, and a great number of people dyed with famine;
that is always the end of civil wars and rebellion in Ireland.

Anno 1004. the Scots (I know not the cause) entered Ireland, and after their
manner, as also the Danes did then in England, preyed, Scots in Ireland.
burned, and destroyed: they took Gulfath and Vbiad, Irish Lords, and put out
their eyes, they ransacked also the City of Dublin.

Anno 1012. Grace and Dowlinge, the Irish Antiquaries do concur, Battle of
Clantarfe.
(the English Writers are silent) and deliver how that Bernaidus, commonly
called Brian Bowrow, Monarch of Ireland, Bri^n Boroave.
and his son Murcath, alias Murchardus Mac Brian, with other Kings of the
land subject unto him, gathered great power, and met at Clantarfe, nigh Dublin,
and gave a sore battle unto Sutraic, alias Sutric, the son of Abloic, King
of Dublin, and unto Moilmordha, King of Leinster. This Sutric, to withstand the
Monarch, had hired to his aid, all manner of strangers he could get by sea or
by land, as Danes, Norwegians, Scots, Britains, Pirates, and sea rovers. The
fight was desperate, the field all blood, a horse (they say) was sometime to
his belly in blood. There were slain that day of the one side, Brian the
Monarch, and his son Murchard; of the other side, Moilmordha King of
Leinster, Rodericke the Arch-Pirate, and Captain of the strangers, with others
of both sides innumerable. Sutrick was sore wounded, was brought to Dublin, and
shortly after died of his wound. I pray thee gentle Reader, who got by the
bargain? As far as ever I could learn, a woman set them together by the
ears.

The Book of Houth, after the Irish observation, delivers the story thus.
There was a Merchant in Dublin, The cause of the field of Clantarfe, out of the
book of Houth.
commonly called the white Merchant, a Dane, the fourth son of the King of
Denmark who had a fair wife of Irish birth, and he being full of jealousy,
and ready to travail for merchandise into far countries, desired of Brian
Borow, Monarch of Ireland, that his wife (until his return) might wait upon
his Lady, soiourne in his house for the safeguard of her person, credit, and
honesty, the which was granted, and the King undertook it. This Merchant made
as speedy a return as he could, and being landed early in a morning, with a
privy key, entered the chamber where his wife lay, and found Morogh Mac Brian
the Kings son in bed with his wife; he wheeled about, devising what was best
to be done, at length resolving himself to depart for that time, took Moroghs
sword, and put it into his own scabbard, and his into Moroghs scabbard. He
went to the King, and complained of the abuse here spoken of; the King
answered, He is my son, give thou judgment upon him; says the Merchant, let
him keep the whore still, I will be revenged upon him and his partakers in the
field, as soon as possibly may be, and I doubt not but all Ireland shall rue
the day of this villainy. Immediately he went to Denmark, brought over to his
aid, thirty thousand Danes and Norwegians, landed at Clantarfe, whereof the
field was called the field of Clantarfe; he summoned Morogh and his favorites
to fight, and thought at the first to have taken Dublin. Brian Borow fearing
this, made more haste then good speed, tarried not for the forces of the land,
that were coming with his son Donogh to his aid, but rashly with his son
Morogh, (the Author of all this mischief) gave them battle. The which
battle all the forenoone being cruelly fought, seemed all to lean on the
Irish side, but in the afternoon, the Danes that were in the rere, and yet
fresh for any fight they had, were directed to wheel about, and to take the
voward unknown unto the Irish, which fiercely fought and encountered with the
weary and wounded Irish, and won the field. Here was Brian Borow, and his
son Morogh, and eleven thousand of the Irish slain.

One thing further (gentle reader) note, there was a Priests son, accounted a
tall man of arms, who in the beginning of the battle, fled away, fearing the
hardiness of the Danes and Norwegians, and went to Donogh Mac Brian, the
brother of Morogh, who was coming with forces to the field, and persuaded him
to retraict; saying further, that there was no hope of good success to be
obtained in this field. This man being taken, confessed the whole treason, and
for punishment, was carried to the wind gates, twelve miles from Dublin, set
alive standing in the ground, with a great heap of stones about him, as it
pleased the Commanders to direct. In Stanihurst I find that the the chief
Potentates of the Irish, were Brian Borow, Miagh Mac Brian, (whom formerly I
termed Morogh) Tady O Kelly, Dolir Ahertegan, and Gille Barramed, and that they
were buried at Kilmaniham, over against the great Cross.

Anno 1031. as it is remembered by Caradoc in the British Chronicles, there was
great stir and bloodshed in South Wales, by the means of Howell and
Meredith, the sons of Edwyn ap Evean ap Owen ap Howell Dha, that made claim
unto that country against Rytherch ap Iestyn, Prince of South Wales. Howell and
Meridith hired unto them a King of Ireland, (whose name is not set down) which
brought with him a great army of Irish-Scots; the armies met, the fight was
cruel, much blood on both sides was shed, in the end, Rytherch the Prince was
discomfited and slain, by which means they attained unto the government of
South Wales, the which they jointly ruled, and bountifully rewarded the Irish
King.

There is at Sauntrie, some three miles from Dublin, yearly remembrance of
Saint Pappan that was borne there. Saint Pappan.
Molanus calls him Poppon. He travailed into France, builded there many
Monasteries, (says mine Author) and preferred to govern them many men, became
an Abbot himself, and departed this life, Anno 1048. and lies buried at
Stabuletum in France, where he governed. Lastly, mine Author notes, that he
was a Saint, but never canonized.

Conan, the son of Iago, Prince of North Wales, married Ranulph, the daughter
of Alfred, King of Dublin, who in the wars between Iago his father, and
Griffith the son of Lhewelyn ap Sitsylte, sometimes King of Wales, (says
Caradoc) was driven to flee into Ireland for safeguard of his life. This Conan,
Anno 1041. came with Alfred his father in law, with great power out of Ireland
to recover his country: they shortly landed in Wales, and by treason, secretly
took Griffith the King, and carried him toward their ships, but when it was
known, the country upon the sudden rose, armed themselves, followed the Irish
men, made great slaughter of them, rescued their Prince, and drove Alfred and
Conan, with the rest of their forces, to their ships, and so to Ireland.

Stow following Fabian, writes how that Anno 1049. certain forces out of
Ireland, (whom he calls Irish Pirates) with 36. ships, entered the mouth of
Severne, landed in a place called Westlapham, and with the help of Griffith
King of South Wales, spoiled along those coasts, and did great mischief.
Afterward Griffith, and those Irish Pirates, joining their powers together,
passed over the river Wie, and burnt Dumenham, and slew man, woman, and child,
leaving nothing behind them, but blood and ashes. Worcester, Gloucester, and
Herefordshire, rose in Arms against them, but many of them in cruel fight
being slain, the rest put to flight, the Irish returned home merrily, laden
with spoil.

Anno 1050. Conan gathered an army of his friends in Ireland, attempting the
second time the recoverie of his inheritance, he hoysed up sail toward Wales,
but on a sudden there arose such a tempest upon the seas, that scattered his
Navy, and drowned the most part of his ships, so that he gave over the voyage
for that time.

About this time (wherein the English and British historiographers do agree)
Robert, Archbishop of Canterbury, accused Earl Godwin and his five sons,
(especially Swain and Harold) of treason, and Queen Editha the daughter of
Godwin, of adultery, who being called before the King, refused to appear, and
therefore were banished the land, and the Queen was put away from the King.
Godwin and Swain fled to Flanders, Harold and Leofwin (Warwell says
Holinshead) to Ireland, and the Queen was sent with one Maid to the Monastery
of Wilton. Immediately the King disposed of all their possessions. It was not
long after ere Godwin and Swain got ships, men, munition, and all
necessaries in Flanders, the like did Harold and Leofwin in Ireland, they all
met upon the seas, to wit, the father, the mother, and the five sons; they
spoiled the I Will of Wight, Partland, Peveneseny, Romny-heath, Folkeston, Dover,
and Sandwich, and entering the Thames, destroyed Sheppey, and burned the Kings
houses at Mielton. Or Midleton.
Then they met with the kings Fleet upon the seas, and being ready to fight,
Bishop Stigand stepped between them, and reconciled both sides in such sort,
that the King restored them their lands and goods, took home the Queen, and
banished Robert the Archbishop, with all the French men which had put buzzes
and suspicions into the Kings head.

Anno 1054. as Powell in his annotations upon Caradoc, has learnedly
collected; King Edward by evil counsel (as it was thought) banished Algar,
Earl of Chester, which had treason laid to his charge, whereupon Algar gate
him into Ireland, and there providing him eighteen ships of war, well
appointed and manned with stalworth men, of Irish birth, returned and joined
himself with Griffith, King or Prince of Wales, who both together, invaded the
country of Mercia about Hereford, where Ranulph, Earl of that country (who was
son to King Edwards sister, named Goda, by her first husband Walter de Manut)
came against them with a great army, and met them about two miles from
Hereford, where after a sore fight, by the space of three hours, Ranulph and
his army were discomfited, and about 500. of them slain, and the rest put to
flight, whom Griffith and Algar pursued to Hereford, and entering the town, set
the Cathedral Church on fire, and slew the Bishop named Leogar, with seven of
the Canons, and most lamentably (as it falls out in wars) spoiled and
burned the town. King Edward being advertised hereof, gathered an army, and
sent Harold the son of Earl Godwin against them, who pursuing the enemies to
North Wales, passed through Stradlewyde to Snowdon: but Griffith and Algar
being loath to meet Harold, got them again into South Wales, whereof Harold
being advertised, left one part of his army in North Wales, to resist the
enemy there, and returning with the residue to Hereford, caused a great trench
to be cast round about the town, with a high rampire, strongly fortifying the
gates of the same. After this, by means of a parlee had with Griffith and
Algar, at a place called Biligellagh, a peace was concluded, whereupon Algar
being pardoned by the King, and restored again to his Earldom, returned home
to Chester.

About two years after, Algar was accused again of treason, and the second
time exiled the land, fled into Ireland, where he was most ioyously received of
his old followers, and offered more kindness, then he requested, for he had
most honorably dealt with the Merchants and owners of the former ships, and
most kindly entreated, and bounteously rewarded the Irish soldiers, the which
then in his second extremity, was not forgotten. With ships, men and munition
out of Ireland, he bent his course to Wales, repaired to his old friend
Griffith, Prince of Wales, where he was most welcome, and shortly restored
again to his Earldome by the means and entreaty of certain strangers, which
had lately there arrived out of Norway.

Camden writes how that Anno 1066. Godred, surnamed Cronan, the son of
Hiraldniger, of Island, invaded the I Will of Man, thence came into Ireland, did
the like unto Dublin, and a great part of Leynster, made great spoil, and went
back again.

The British Chronicle reports of Dermot, (a King in Ireland) that in Anno
1068. he was murdered, but the manner he shows not; the commendation he
gives of him is this: He was the worthiest and noblest Prince that ever ruled
in Ireland.

Polychronicon reports, how that Anno 1072. at Winsore before William the
Conqueror, and the Clergy, the controversy between the Archbishops of
Canterbury and York was heard at large, and decided, and that Bedaes history
was showed, where it appeared that from Austen the Monks time, till Bedaes
death, (about 140. years) the Archbishop of Canterbury had primacie over all
Great Britain and Ireland, that he had held Councels by York, summoned
Bishops of York, consecrated Bishops, and punished Bishops of York for their
offenses, and iudicially removed them.

Philip Flatesburie a great Antiquarie, whom Stanihurst follows, and James
Grace of Kilkenny, with Dowlinge his joint Collectour do write, how that Anno
1074. Patricke, Bishop of Dublin, was consecrated in Paul's Church in London, by
Lanfranke, Archbishop of Canterbury, upon commendatorie Letters of
Teridionatus, alias Terdilnacus, Monarch of Ireland, and Godericke, King of
Leinster, and with test of the Clergy and Laytie of that Diocese of his
lawful and orderly election. Further I find recorded, that it was the manner
to consecrate Bishops in this sort, and that the Monarch of Ireland in regard
of his royal principality and title of honor with other privileges
belonging to his Monarchy, had negative voice in the nomination of Bishops
throughout his Realm. Secondly, how the Archbishop of Canterbury took of him
that was so consecrated, a corporal oath of Canonical obedience (as his
predecessors formerly used) to him and his successors; and lastly, gave him
letters testimonial thereof to the Monarch and King of Leynster:

Cambrensis shows the reason of this consecration, namely, how that in
Ireland as then, there was no Archbishop, but one Bishop consecrated another,
until that Anno 1148. Johannes Papiron, a Priest Cardinal, sent from Eugenius
3. together with Christian, Bishop of Lismore, Legate of all Ireland, came to
the land, and brought with them foures Paales. But of this more in another
place.

The same Flattesburie writes further, how that the said Lanfranke in like
sort consecrated Donatus, Bishop of Dublin, Anno 1085.

About this time, Godwin and Edmund, sons to King Harold, (my Author is
Thomas Walsingham, Monk of Saint Albans) which formerly had fled into Ireland
for succor, unto Dermotte Mac O Nell, King of Ireland, returned with 66.
sail, landed in Sommersetshire, (says Stow) where Brian, the son of Eudo,
Duke of Brabant, met them and gave them battle, wherein (says Stow) the
brethren gate the victory, and the Irish men with many great preyes out of
Cornwall and Devonshire returned into Ireland. But Walsingham (which seems
more true) writes that it was a bloody battle, wherein 1070. of the English
and Normans, with certain of the Nobility of the land, were slain, and the
enemies with aid of their ships, fled, and brought heavy news home to their
dearest friends in Ireland.

It is very like that William the Conqueror immediately upon this, sent great
forces into Ireland, to be revenged of them for relieving or assisting his
enemies: for Stow writes out of William of Malmsbury, thus: Lanfranck,
Archbishop of Canterbury, being in such favor with King William, that the said
William thought not good to deny any thing that he requested, procured by his
industry, that the said King left his ill custom of selling his prisoners
which he took in Ireland, which was a thing hardly granted unto him, and to
Wolstan, Bishop of Worcester, the gain that the King had by the sale of those
Irish men was such.

The British Chronicle reports how that Anno 1087. and the last year of
William Conqueror, the sons of Blethlyn ap Convyn, sometime King of Wales,
gathered their strength together against Rees ap ^yder, who not being able to
meet with them, fled to Ireland, and there he purchased to himself great
friends, and got an army of Irish men and Scots, to whom he promised great
rewards when he should obtain his kingdom, and so landed in South Wales with
these strangers, and when his friends heard thereof, they drew unto him, and
the other came in all haste to vanquish him before he had made a head, and
gathered forces together; to be short, at Wechryd they gave battle, Or
Llechryd.
where they were discomfited, and two of the brethren slain, to wit, Madoc and
Kirid, and the other fled and forsook the country. As soon as Rees was in
quiet possession of his country, he sent away the Irish men with great rewards.

All the Lords of the Islands sent messengers unto Murchard, alias Moragh O
Brien, King of Ireland, that it would please him to send them some worthy man
of royal blood to be their King, during the nonage of Olanus, the son son
of Godred, King of Man. Whereupon he sent unto them one Dopnald Mac Tady, whom
he deeply charged to govern that kingdom, which of right appertained not to
him, with all kindness, love and modesty; but he was no sooner warm in the
kingdom, but he forgot his instructions, and the charge his Lord had given
him, he poled, he pilled, and practiced all kind of tyranny, for the space of
three years. Then all the Lords of the Islands rose in arms against him, and
banished him out of those parts, so he fled into Ireland, of whom they never
heard any further news.

Stanihurst finds that Anno 1095. there came certain Esterlings to the North
side of Dublin adjoining to the Liffie, and seated themselves there, so that of
them to this day, the place is called Ostomontowne, and corruptly, Oxmonton,
and the Parish, Saint Michans, Saint Michan lived, Anno 1095.
of one Michanus a Dane and a Bishop which founded the Church, unto whom
Murchard, or Moragh King of Leynster, gave that parcel of land to that use.
The fair green or Commune, now called Ostmontowne-greene, was all wood, and
he that diggeth at this day to any depth, shall find the ground full of great
roots. From thence, Anno 1098. King William Rufus, by license of Murchard, had
that frame which made up the roof of Westminster Hall, where no English Spider
webbeth or breeds to this day.

Cambrensis in his Itinerarie of Cambria, reports, how that King William
standing upon some high rock in the farthest part of Wales, beheld Ireland,
and said, I will have the ships of my kingdom brought hither, wherewith I
will make a bridge to invade this land: Murchard King of Leynster heard
thereof, and after he had paused a while, asked of the reporter; has the King
in that his great threatening, inserted these words, if it please God? No, then
(said he) seeing this King puts his trust only in man, and not in God, I
fear not his coming.

Anno 1095. Murchard, (so writes Holinshed) alias Morogh, Samuel, Bishop of
Dublin.
King of Leynster, with the Clergy, and people of the City of Dublin, elected
one Samuel a Monk of Saint Albans, an Irish man borne, to the government of
the Church, and Bishops See of Dublin, and according to the ancient custom,
presented him by sufficient letters of testimony unto Anselme Archbishop of
Canterbury, to be consecrated by him, who (according to their request) did so,
and took of him an oath of Canonical obedience after the usual manner.

Anno 1097. the Citizens of Waterford perceiving that by reason of the great
multitude of people in that city, Malchus, first Bishop of Waterford.
it was necessary for them to have a Bishop, obtained license of their King
and Rulers, to erect in their City, a Bishops See, and besought them to write
to Anselme, Archbishop of Canterbury, to have his consent therein, and
permitted them to nominate a man meet for the place. Hereupon Morogh King of
Leynster, wrote unto Anselme, informing him of the whole matter, wherein one
Malchus was commended and presented unto him to be admitted and consecrated if
he thought good; these letters were subscribed by Murchard, King of Leynster,
Dermotte his brother, Bishop Dufnald, Idiman, Bishop of Mead, Samuel, Bishop
of Dublin, and Ferdomnachus, a Bishop in Leynster. Anselme considering their
request to be honest and necessary, examined the man, gave him the oath of
Canonical obedience, and consecrated Malcus Bishop of Waterford.

About this time, to wit, Anno 1098. the Normans having slain Rees ap Twyde,
Prince of South Wales, they bent their forces against Griffith ap Conan, Prince
of North Wales, by the conduct of Hugh de Montgomerie, Earl of Saloppe and
Arundell, (called of the Welchmen, Hugh Gough,) and of Hugh Vras, Earl of
Chester. Griffith the Prince fled to the mountains, and sent for aid into
Ireland, (says Caradoc) where he received cold comfort, then to avoid farther
mischief and treason, which he suspected to have been wrought against him,
fled into Ireland. In the same season, Magnus King of Norway (so Stow calls
him) the son of Olavus, the son of Harold Harvager, came with great forces,
and subdued the Isles of Orknay, with the I Will of Man, entered into Anglesey,
incountred with Hugh, Earl of Salop, who withstood his landing, in the which
skirmish, Hugh the Earl had an arrow shot in his face, which pierced his
brain, of which he died; whereupon the Normans retraited. Magnus invadeth
Ireland (says Saxo Grammaticus) and Griffith the Prince of Wales returned to
his country, and made peace with the Normans, and governed the same fifty
years. Many things worthy of memory are recorded of this Griffith ap Conan.
Powell writes that he was an Irish man by his mother, daughter of the King of
Dublin, and also by his Grandmother, and that he was borne in Ireland, and
that he brought over with him out of that country into Wales, diverse cunning
Musicians, who devised in manner, all the isntrumental music upon the Harp
and Crowth that is there used, and made laws of minstrelsee to retain the
Musicians in due order.

I have not yet done with Magnus the Norwegian, of him Camden writes a worthy
story. Magnus (says he) caused a fleet to be in readiness of an 160.
sail, and sailed into the Orkeneys, the which he forthwith subdued, he passed
through all the Islands, made them subject unto him, and arrived in the I Will of
Man; when he beheld how pleasant the Island was, he made choice thereof for
habitation, fortified therein, which of him to this day bears his name. He so
hampered the inhabitants of Galloway in Scotland, that he made them bring him
timber to his Port for the frame of his fortifications. Afterward he sailed to
Anglesey in Wales, where he met with two Hughs, both Earls, the one he slew,
the other he put to flight, and made the Island subject unto him. The Welsh men
gave him many gifts and rewards, he bade them farewell, and so returned to Man.
He sent to Murchard, alias Morogh, King of Ireland, his shoes, commanding him
to hang them upon his shoulders upon Christmas day as he passed through his
Hall, in the sight of his Ambassadors, that thereby he might understand that he
was subject to Magnus the king. When the Irish men heard thereof, they took it
in ill part, and chafed exceedingly, but King Morogh, a wise and a sage Prince,
smiling at the conceit, with great modesty and discretion gave this answer. I
will not only bear his shoes, but I had rather eat them, then that King
Magnus should destroy any one Province in Ireland. Whereupon he fulfilled his
command, honored his Ambassadors, sent many Presents unto King Magnus, and
concluded a league. The Ambassadors upon their return, related all
circumstances gave great report and commendation of the land, delivered how
pleasant and fruitful the soil was, the temperature of the air, and how
healthful the dwelling was. Magnus hearing this, immediately it ran in his
head to conquer all Ireland; he commanded a great fleet to be in a readiness,
and he himself going before with sixteen sail privily to epsy and search
out the strength of the land, and unadvisedly ranging from his ships, was
upon a sudden compassed and hemmed in by the Irishmen, and slain, with all in
a manner that were with him. Thus Magnus is become Minimus, in fine, he was
buried in Saint Patrickes Church of Down. So far Camden in substance. The
British Chronicle writes, how that before this insolent attempt, he had
procured for his son, a daughter of King Morogh in marriage, and that he made
him King of Man, but I do not find that he enjoyed it.

Carodoc writes, how that Anno 1101. Robert de Mountgomerie, Earl of Salop,
and Arnulph his brother, Earl of Pembroke, rebelling against King Henry,
Robert sent for aid to Magnus, but could get none, Arnulph sent Gerald of
Windesore, his Steward to Murchard, alias Morogh, King of Ireland, to desire
his daughter in marriage, the which he obtained with promise of great
succors, which did encourage him the more against the King; whereupon Arnulph
went with all haste into Ireland for his wife and Irish forces. Earl Robert
seeing himself disappointed, sent to the King, desiring him that he might
forsake the Realm, which thing the King granted, and he sailed into Normandy.
Arnulph received message from the King, that either he should follow his
brother, and depart the land, or yield himself to his mercy, he chose to
forsake the land, and fled into Ireland. Not long after, Owen the son of
Cadogan, after he had done great mischief and spoil upon the English,
Normans, Flemings, and Welsh men, fled into Ireland to King Morogh, who
joyfully received him, for he had been there before, returned to Wales, and
fled thither the second time, and in like sort the third time.

Anno 1113. or thereabout, Griffith the son of Rees ap Twyder, Prince of
South Wales, who for fear of the King, had been of a child brought up in
Ireland, came to Gerald, Steward of Pembroke his brother in law, and others of
his friends, to recover his country, whom the King by secret policies and
practices pursued, so that he was forced to flee again.

In the time of King Henry the first, I find that there was great stir
between Murchard or Morogh, King of Leynster, and the Citizens of Dublin, for
it seems that he used grievous exactions and tyrannies over them, so that
the Dublinians in revenge of him, sent for Godred, King of Man, and the Islands,
so writes Camden, and made him their King. Morogh mustereth his country,
gathers forces, procures aid, marches against his enemies, pitcheth his
camp at the town of Coridelis, sent his brother (by the mother side) Osibell,
with three thousand horse well appointed to Dublin, where he was slain by
Godred, and by the men of Dublin, and the rest discomfited and put to flight.
Godred found himself well satisfied with spoils, and returned to Man; they of
Dublin likewise thought themselves in some sort reasonably well revenged of
their King, quitted themselves for a while, and by mediation and intercession
after many Presents and Gifts were reconciled. There was great banqueting and
feasting, and joy outward of all sides, but inward, lay venom and treason,
like sparkles of fire covered with ashes, which broke forth not long after, as
I am ready to deliver. Stanihurst, Grace and Dowlinge do write, that the
Council of the City determining to establish and decree many good laws and
orders, for the public weal of the town, and commons of the same, appointed
a solemn day of meeting, sent for Morogh their King, humbly craving with all
loyal circumstances, his presence, counsel, and assistance among them at the
day appointed, the which he granted; when the day came, and that they had
debated many matters, the King as he sat merrily in his chair, sporting
himself, and reporting some pleasant history, one suddenly stepped unto him,
and took away his weapon, the rest came upon him, and stabbed him to the
death; they were not content with this, but they cast him into a base grave,
and in further contempt and dispute of his person, they threw a dog upon him,
and earth upon them both, the which Dermotte his son revenged afterward, as
shall appear in process of the history.

About the year 1134. after Functius his computation, one Harold, borne in
Ireland, (so writes Saxo) gathered forces, and became the terror of Norway,
affirming withal, that he was the son of Magnus the Dane that invaded
Ireland, and for truth thereof, he would declare it by fire. When the time and
place was appointed, with his bare feet he trod upon a fiery plate, and felt
no hurt: the Norwegians admired, and would make him their King, which was the
root of many mischiefs in Norway. He was a man fair spoken, strong, hardy,
and swift of foot, and it seems, after the manner of Ireland, that he went
much bare, so that the soles of his feet were as hard as horn, and could not
easily take harm by fire, by which means he deceived the Norwegians.
Nicholaus, King of Denmark, corrupted Magnus of Norway by secret means to cut
him off. Magnus practiced with Ericus a Danish Captain, to dispatch him
immediately after his Coronation. To be short, Ericus came with great forces
to Scypetors, (a Village where Herald was) in the night time, laid siege to his
Palace, and by the break of day, pulled him and his sons forth by the head
and shoulders, and put them to death.

In the time of Henry 1. King of England, flourished Celsus, Celsus, Bishop of
Armagh.
Bishop of Armagh, and ended his days with the entrance of King Stephen to the
Crown. He descended of Noble Parentage in Ireland, whom Saint Bernard with
others, for diverse rare and singular gifts, highly commends; he had been
brought up in the University of Oxenford, where in the liberal sciences, and
profound literature, he excelled others of his time; when he perceived by the
infirmities of his body, that age hastened to an end, and that his natural
course was in short time to be finished, he desired of them that were present,
their favors, and prayed them to use means unto others that were absent, and
especially unto the two Kings of Mounster, (so Bernard writes) that Malachias
might succeed him in the Bishopric of Armagh. He was a married man, and died
of great age, and lies buried with his wife and children in the said Church.

Malachias in the time of King Stephen, succeeded Celsus in the Bishopric of
Armagh, whose life Saint Bernard, Malachias, Bishop of Armagh.
Abbot of Clarevallis, Capgrave, and Conganus, an Abbot of Ireland have written
at large. He was borne in Ireland amongst barbarous people (says Bernard) yet
in his birth and native soil, he sucked of them no more barbarousnesse, then
the Sea fish take of the salt water. His Parents for wealth and might, were in
great account in those days; he was brought up at Armagh, under Imarius the
Anachorite, where Celsus made him both Deacon and Priest at the age of 25.
years, from thence with license of Imarius and of Celsus, he went to Malchus,
Bishop of Lismore in Mounster, a man of Irish birth, that had been a Monk
sometimes in the Abbey of Winchester in England, and from thence advanced to
the Bishopric of Lismore. And to make the history plain, there was at that
time, great wars between Cormacke, King of Mounster, and his brother for the
Sovereignty; the brother prevails, Cormacke flees to the Bishop of Lismore,
and in his distressed estate, took a Monks Cell, and led a private life.
Malachias was appointed his Tutor, where Cormacke continued until that a King
there adjoining, pitying his misery, gathered forces, and restored him to his
kingdom.

Immediately after this, Letters came for Malachias in most earnest sort, that
he should come to Armagh, where not far off, an Uncle of his, a man of great
command, a Lord of a country, rich and potent (that held in his hands all the
wasted Monastery of Bench^r, alias Bengor) dwelled; of which Monastery I have
spoken before in the reign of King Arthure. Malachias upon his coming,
restored these possessions, and reedifieth the old Monastery, and appointed
one Malchus, brother to Christianus, Abbot of Mel^efont, governor of the
place; when Malachius was thirty years of age, he was made Bishop of Conor,
(Conorets says Bernard) where he met by his own report, (more then I am
willing to lay down in writing) so rude and barbarous a people, as worse could
not be found upon the face of the earth, yet the holy man ceased not to
travail among them by preaching and teaching, and by all means possible to
win them; not long after, a certain King of Vlster destroyed Conor, and put
the people to the sword, burned and spoiled, and made havocke of all, whereupon
Malachias with a hundred and twenty brethren, fled to Mounster, where King
Cormake gave him great entertainment, and aided him greatly in the building of
the Monastery of Ybrak. By this time, Celsus spoken of before, fell sick and
dyed. The rude people thrust in Mauritius that usurped the place some five
years, then Malchus, Bishop of Lismore, and Gislebertus the first Legate that
came to Ireland, from the Pope, called the Bishops and Princes of the land
together, appointed Malachias for the place. And when death had swiftly cut off
the intruder Mauritius, that damnable nation thrust in Nigellus, but he
prospered not long, so that Malachias enjoyed it quietly. Of the injury done to
that Church, and the abuse of that time, hear Bernard, (as he learned of
Conganus and others) report. The sea of Ardmach (says Bernard) for the
reverence and honor of Saint Patricke the Apostle of that nation, which
converted that whole land to the faith, in the which See living, he ruled, and
in which dying, he rested, is had of all men from the beginning, in so great
reverence, that not only the Bishops and Ministers of the Clergy, but the
Kings and Princes of that nation, carry themselves in all obedience unto their
Metropolitan, so that he being one, rules all: but there crept in a most
detestable custom, through the divellish ambition of certain mighty men, that
the holy See was obtained by inheritable succession, neither were any suffered
to enjoy the Bishopric, but such as were of their tribe and family, neither
did this execrable succession hold for a small time, but for the space of
fifteen generations, now in this diabolical malice elapsed. And so far this
wicked and adulterous generation had confirmed to it self this lewd interest,
yea rather an injury to be punished with all manner of death, that if at any
time there should want Clerks of that race, yet never wanted Bishops. To be
short, there were before Celsus, eight Bishops married men, besides himself,
without orders, yet learned men; from hence over all Ireland, issued that
dissolution of ecclesiastiall discipline, which Malachias found in Conor, the
rooting out of godly censure, and the abandoning of religion; from hence every
wherein stead of Christian meekness, was brought in cruel barbarousnesse,
yea, paganism and infidelity under a Christian name; for that which was not
heard of from the original of Christianity, without order, without reason,
the Metropolitans at their pleasure changed, and increased the number of
Bishops, so that one Bishopric contented not it self with one Bishop, and no
marvel, for how could it fare well with the members of so diseased a head?
they possessed the Sanctuary of God in this sort, the space well near of two
hundred years; he means unto the days of Celsus and Malachias. Cambrensis
in his itinerarie of Cambria, had relation no doubt unto this, where he with
Baldwin, Archbishop of Canterbury, in visitation about Wales, came to the
Church called lure padaen vacor, that is, the Church of great Paternus,
mis-stiled with the government thereof, for thus he writes: This Church, like
as many more throughout Ireland and Wales, has a Lay man to their Abbot, use
has prevailed, and a lewd custom has crept in, that great and mighty men in
Parishes, have been by the Clergy appointed Patrons and defendors; afterward
have usurped unto themselves the right thereof. Immediately he reports of a
travailer that came hither out of little Britain in France, that had for his
further knowledge seen many countries, and fashions of sundry nations, and
entering into the said Church on the Sabbath day, waited for divine Service,
they rung the Bell, they told, they waited long, at length came in the Abbot,
with some twenty after him in arms, and wild looks, every one having ( fon
villuge, so the Britains termed it) a forest Bill on his shoulder; the
travailer asked which is the Abbot, answer was made the foremost, with the
greatest forest Bill; the travailer asked, has he any other ornament, or does
he use any other weed? answer being made, no, then said he, I have travailed
far enough, I will see no more fashions whilst I live, after that I have
seen an Abbot carry a forest Bill upon his back. Now to return whence I
have made this digression, for the abuse of the Church causes me to abuse the
reader.

Malachias, when he had peaceably enjoyed Ardmagh some three years, with the
consent of the three Bishops and Princes, he resigned his place to Gelasius,
and returned to his former Bishopric, not of Conor, but of Dune, for he had
placed one in Conor before, to wit, Oedanus his disciple; here Bernard notes
that where Dune and Conor were before this time united through ambition and
covetousness, this man of devotion and conscience, separated them again,
dividing the Churches as they had been of old, for the good will he bare to
Armagh, he took his journey toward Rome, landed in Scotland, came to York,
sailed to France, and lodged at Clarevallis; he came to Rome in the time of
Innocentius 2. who made him his Legate of Ireland, in the roomth of Gislebert,
the old man spoken of before, which had made suit to be removed. Boniface
appointed Armagh to be a Metropolitan See, but did not effect it, and promised
the pall which he did not perform; Bernard makes mention of two Metropolitan
Sees, one procured by Celsus, the other by Malachias; but where and how I find
no ancient record. Bale is of opinion they were in vocibus, and not in rebus,
for lack of money to pay for them. Upon his return he came to Clarevallis,
thence to England, so to Scotland, (where King David most royally entertained
him) and lastly, to his Abbey of Benchor in Vlster. Of his conversation, hear
Bernard: from the day of his birth, to the day of his death, he lived sine
proprio, without claiming property in any thing; he had neither men servants,
nor maid servants, neither towns nor villages, neither any revenue
ecclesiastical or temporal in his Bishopric; for his provision, ( ad mensam
episcopalem) he had no certainty allotted him whereupon a Bishop might live,
he had no certain Monastery or dwelling place, for he daily went about all
the Parishes, preaching the Gospel, and living by the Gospel, as the Lord had
ordained, saying, the labourer is worthy of his reward; of his labors and such
as traveled with him, he carried about to relieve them all; to be short,
Malachias neither in diet or raiment was discerned from the rest of the
brethren; when he went a preaching with footmen, he went on foot, being a
Bishop and a Legate: and here Bernard exclaimeth, when he enters into the
consideration of the difference between him and his brethren, and the nephews
of the Apostles, so he calls them. Toward his latter days, he sorrowed
that Ireland had not the pall, and as often as he thought upon Innocentius 2. his
promise, he sighed, who (as formerly I have delivered) had promised, not
performed; when he heard that Eugenius his successor was come unto France, he
thought it a fit time to obtain his purpose, he took shipping for Scotland,
where King David received him as in times past, and thence unto England, where
the jarre between the King of England, and the Pope, hindered his passage, yet
he got into France, and straight to Clarevallis, where hearing that Pope
Eugenius was returned to Rome, he rested himself, fell sick of an ague, and
there dyed, being of the age of 54. years, Anno 1148. 4 Nonas Novembris, so
far Bernard in substance, yet Antonine says he dyed, Anno 1140.

In his time lived Conganus, Abbot of Benchor, who informed Bernard of the
whole life of Malachias, and wrote at large thereof himself, inserting many
fabulous things, and says Nicholas Magwire, he wrote not only the life of
Malachias, but also the life of Bernard. I find him to be the Patron of
Killaskin, otherwise called Killeshin, in Monte Margeo, and the Barony of
Marghagha in Leynster, spoken of before.

In this time lived Tundalus Magus, so surnamed, because suspected for a
Sorcerer, borne and brought up in Mounster (in Cashell, says Lepelo, in the
West of Ireland) of Noble birth, and by calling a Knight: Antonius out of
Vincentius reports, that he was fierce and cruel, and in the end became a
Carthusian Monk, for that order began as we may read in the life of Bruno,
the first founder thereof, upon some great extremity, (whereof the Proverb
rose, desperatio facit Monachum, desperation makes a Monk) it seems that he
had in his life time committed some heinous offenses, and was mightily
tormented in conscience, and fell into trances and ecstasies; upon his recovery
he delivered unto the world, strange and damnable untruths, (says Bale) of
Heaven, Hell, Purgatory, and I wot not what, for a man distracted, knows not
what he says. Bale writes, ( talia ad terrorem fingebant scelestissimi;
Nebolones somewhat excusing him, and extenuating his imbecillities and bids
him farewell: Clarint Stephano Rege in Anglia dominante; and satana apud
Hybernos suas vires exercente; he flourished when Stephen reigned over
England, and the devil domineered over Ireland. He wrote a book of
Revelations, the which Melchior Canus, Albertus Crantzius, and Gobelenus have
utterly condemned. He wrote also the life of Vrsula, and the 11000. Virgins,
printed at Cullen, the which Zazarias Lepelo counts for lies and fables.

Anno 1142. the Abbey of Molyfont was founded by Donatus, alias Donogh, King of
Louth, alias Vriell, some call him Donogh Ocarvell; the first Abbot was
Christianus, who afterward was Bishop of Lysmore, and Legate of all Ireland.

Anno 1144. William, Bishop of Winchester, by authority of Pope Celestine 2. in
a Council held at London, brought in the use of cursing with Bell, Book, and
Candle, which liked the Irish Priests well, to terrify the Laytie for their
Tithes. Fox.

Anno 1148. there fell great variance between Owen, surnamed Gwyneth, Prince
of North^Wales, and Cadwallader his brother, they were both the sons of
Griffith ap Conan, Prince of North Wales. This Cadwallader fled into Ireland,
and hired to his aid, Octer Mac Octer Curbell Mac Therulfe, with a great
number of Irish men, and red shankes, for 2000. marks, and landed at Abermeany
in Carnarvonshire, against whom, Prince Owen came with great power, but before
the Armies met, there was a peace concluded between the brethren, which when
the Irish men understood, they kept with them Cadwallader, as prisoner, for
their pay formerly promised, so that he was feign to deliver 2000. heads of
Cattle, besides many prisoners and spoils that were taken in the country; but
Prince Owen as soon as he knew his brother to be set at liberty, set upon the
Irish men (his stomach was full of revengement) slew a great number of them,
and recovered all the Cattle, with the prisoners, and other spoil, so that in
the end, as many as escaped with life, returned to Ireland with sorrow, shame,
and loss, and made no bost of their voyage; so writes Carodoc.

The same year, Anno 1148. John Papire a Priest Cardinal, together with
Christianus Bishop of Lismore, the Popes Legate over the whole Land, being sent
by Eugenius, came into Ireland. And in Anno 1151. says Matthew Paris, but by
the consent of most Writers, Anno 1152. summoned a Council, where in the
presence of the Bishops, Abbots, Kings, Dukes, and the Ancients of Ireland, by
the Apostolic authority, College of Cardinals, and consent of the Bishops,
Abbots, and others there present, they ordained four Archbishopricks in
Ireland, and gave them four pales, to wit, Ardmach, Dublin, Cashell, and Tuam.
In Ardmach, then sat Gelasius, in Dublin Gregory, in Cashell Donatus, in Tuam
Edanus; these were the first Archbishops of Ireland. The records from that time
to this day, of the four Provinces, the four Archbishoprickes with their
Bishops and Suffragans, in Latin, and vulgar speech, with their titles of
Saints and Patrons, together with the unions of them in process of time
following, I find thus,

Anno 1151. these Abbeys were founded, de Beatitudine, de duillio, de Magio, de
valle salutis, and happily the Monastery which Matthew Paris and Polychronicon
spoke of upon this occasion. There was a Knight (say they) called Owin, of
Irish birth, which had long served King Stephen in his wars, got license to
repair unto his native soil, and to visit his friends; when he came to
Ireland, hearing the fame of the Purgatory of the second Patricke the Abbot,
and not the Bishop, so I read in Polychronicon, it came in his mind to visit
the same, he being in the Cave, and concavities under ground, saw strange
sights, and making report thereof unto King Stephen, obtained license of him
thenceforth to lead a religious and solitary life: he obtained also of King
Stephen, (so Matthew Paris writes) a parcel of ground in Ireland to build a
Monastery called Luden, an Abbey of white Monks, where Gervasius became the
first Abbot, and where Gilbert a Monk trained up Owen in the order thereof.
This Gilbert (says mine Author) wrote as Owen told him all the reports that
are now extant of that Purgatory, so that it seems to be no ancient matter,
but a late device, first found by this Owen, in the late days of King Stephen.

Anno 1152. was the battle of Monad more fought in Ireland, between Leinster
and Mounster men, The battle of Monad more.
where (says Holinshed) the flower and chiefest personages of Leinster and
Mounster were slain, and says John Plunket, Mounster lost the field, Anno
1154. Terdielach, King of Connaght dyed, there succeeded him, Rorie Oconochor
Rowag, commonly called Roderic, who slew his own brother that aspired to the
kingdom of Connaght, and in this success, attempted further, and became
Monarch of Ireland.

Henry 2 was crowned King of England, 1154.
Henry 2 King of England, the son of Mathilda the Empress, subdued Scotland,
Ireland, Orchades, and the furthest Ocean Islands; he was Protector of France,
and was offered the kingdom of Jerusalem: this Noble Henry was crowned King of
England, Anno 1154. he married Elenor, daughter and heir of William, Duke of
Aquitaine, the which Elenor had been formerly married to Lewis, King of France,
and upon dislike, divorced, under pretense that they were within the fourth
degree of consanguinity: he was knighted by David, King of Scots, and after
many broils, and much bloodshed, adopted by King Stephen for his son, and
consequently proclaimed heir apparent to the Crown of England, and thereupon
after the discease of Stephen, crowned with great joy and applause of the
people.

Anno 1154. the same year that Henry the second was crowned, the Abbey of
Kyrie-eleeson was founded.

Anno 1155. says Matthew Paris and Fabian, and the first or second of Henry 2.
reign, (though Stow refer it to the 7. and Anno 1160* the King cast in his
mind to conquer Ireland, he saw that it was commodious for him, and
considered that they were but a rude and savage people, for so the
historiographers do write, whereupon in his ambitious mind, he sent unto
Adrian, Bishop of Rome, one John Salsbury, (who by the said Bishop afterward
was made Bishop of Carnolum in France) with others, delivering his suit to that
effect. Adrian being a man of English birth, heard his Ambassadors the more
willingly, considered the matter advisedly, together with his college of
Cardinals, and granted him his request, as follows: Adrian the Bishop, the
servant of the servants of God, to his most deer son in Christ, the Noble
King of England, sends greeting and Apostolic benediction: your magnificence
has been very careful and studious how you might enlarge the Church of God
here in earth, and increase the number of his Saints and elect in heaven, in
that as a good Catholic King, you have and do by all means labor and
travel to enlarge and increase Gods Church, by teaching the ignorant people
the true and Christian religion, and in abolishing and rooting up the weeds of
sin and wickedness. And wherein you have, and do crave for your better
furtherance, the help of the Apostolic See (wherein more speedily and
discreetly you proceed) the better success we hope, God will send, for all
they which of a fervent zeal and love in religion, do begin and enterprise
any such thing, shall no doubt in the end, have a good and prosperous success:
And as for Ireland, and all other Islands where Christ is known, and the
Christian religion received, it is out of all doubt, and your excellency well
knows, they do all appertain and belong to the right of Saint Peter, and of
the Church of Rome, and we are so much the more ready, desirous and willing to
sow the acceptable seed of Gods word, because we know the same in the latter
day will be most severely required at our hands: you have (our welbeloved son
in Christ) advertised and signified unto us, that you will enter into the Land
and Realm of Ireland, to the end to bring them to obedience unto Law, and
under your subjection, and to root out from among them, their foul sins and
wickedness, as also to yield and pay yearly out of every house, a yearly
pension of one penny to Saint Peter, and besides also will defend and keep the
rites of those Churches, whole and inviolate: We therefore well allowing and
favoring this your godly disposition, and commendable affection, do accept,
ratify, and assent unto this your petition; and do grant that you (for the
dilating of Gods Church, the punishment of sin, the reforming of manners,
planting of virtue, and the increasing of Christian religion) do enter to
possess that land, and thereto execute according to your wisdom, whatsoever
shall be for the honor of God, and the safety of the Realm: and further also
we do strictly charge and require, that all the people of that land, do with
all humbleness, dutifulness, and honor, receive and accept you as their
Liege Lord and Sovereign, reserving and accepting the right of holy Church to
be inviolably preserved: as also the yearly pension of Peter pence out of
every house, which we require to be truly answered to Saint Peter, and to the
Church of Rome. If therefore you do mind to bring your godly purpose to
effect, endeavor to travel to reform the people to some better order and
trade of life, and that also by your self, and by such others as you shall
think meet, true, and honest in their life, manners, and conversation, to the
end the Church of God may be beautified, the true Christian religion sowed and
planted, and all other things done, that by any means shall or may be to Gods
honor, and salvation of men's souls, whereby you may in the end receive of
Gods hands, the reward of everlasting life, and also in the mean time, and in
this life, carry a glorious same and an honorable report among all nations.
The King upon the receipt hereof, was very glad, and let it lie dorment by him,
until better opportunity was offered, as hereafter shall appear.

Anno 1166. Moragh Mac Cocholan, King of Ireland, called a great Council at
Dublin, gave battle to the King of Leinster, and killed him, and shortly
after was himself slain by Ororic, which succeeded in the sovereignty; the
same year says Guttyn Owen in his British Chronicle, Henry 2. being at
Chester, hired many ships out of Ireland for his aid, against North Wales,
but he discharged them immediately, for his purpose took no good effect, in
as much as the present troubles of Normandy called him away. In this pastime
(so the old English delivers) or rather the hurly-burly of the world, amids
the wars of France, Flanders, and England; Ireland was all in arms, the
occasion was as follows.

Dermot Mac Moragh, King of Leinster, was a long time enamoured with the wife
of Ororike, King of Meth, some call him Morice, some other Mordich, she was the
daughter of Omalarghlun, whom nature had made fair, the world a Queen, and
lust a Harlot: the book of Howth reports at large, how Ororic was old, his
Queen young and wanton, and that in derision, when he came from hunting, and
being an hungered, she gave Apples to eat, which had been in some undecent
place of her body to be spoken of, so that the scent of them was strong,
whereat she smiled; her Lord and husband having secretly learned her lewd
practice, took with him the day following, two of her foster brothers a
hunting, gelded them, baked their stones, brought the Pie hot to his Lady and
her Gentlewomen, when he had commended the rareness of the meat, the fond
wantons and giglets, fell to it, when they had satisfied themselves, says
Ororic, how like you this Pie, excellent good meat say they; it is (says he)
the meat which you love raw and roasted, what is that (say they) the stones of
your two foster brethren; with that she cast up a wild look, and never beheld
him cheerfully again. Ororic her Lord and husband being in pursuit of kerne
thieves and outlawes that had mightily annoyed his people in the furthest part
of his country, she with all celerity, supposing it a fit time, sent for her
lover Dermotte, the message was no sooner delivered, but he was a horse back,
posting to the Harlot; to be short, he took her away with him, at which time
(O false heart) she strugled, she cried, as though she were unwilling, and that
he forced her. Ororic immediately heard of it, gathered his forces together,
mustred his people, craved aid, and among others, wrote unto Roderick, Monarch
of Ireland as follows.

Though I am not ignorant, (most renowned Prince) that humane causes are to be
weighed in the balance of patience, and that a man endued with virtue, will not
effeminate himself by reason of the unconstant and mutable mind of a Harlot,
yet in so much this horrible crime, (whereof I am fully persuaded) came to your
ears before my messenger could deliver his letters, a thing heretofore not
heard of, as far as I remember, not practiced against any King of Ireland;
severity causes me to call for justice, when charity admonishes me not to
seek revengement. If thou behold the shame, I confess it redoundeth to me
alone; if you weigh the cause, it is common to us both; what confidence shall
we repose in our subjects that are bound unto us in regard of our Princely
command, if this effeminate adulterer, or rather queller of chastity, shall
escape unpunished for so abominable a fact? for the unchastised offenses of
Princes, notoriously committed in the sight of al men, breed a most pernicious
imitation, as precedents unto the people; in sum you have sufficient
experience of my good will and affection toward you, you see me wounded with
the cruel darts of fortune, vexed with infinite discommodities, and now
extremely driven to my utter shifts: It remains, (seeing I am wholly yours)
that not only with counsel, being requested, but with arms, being urged, you
revenge my quarrel: this when you will, and as you will, not only I ask, but
require at your hands. Farewell.

The Monarch for some former quarrel against Dermot was all on fire, and
joining forces with Ororic, entered Leinster with fire and sword, the people cry
woe and alack ( O bone in Irish) now are we punished for the lewdness of our
Prince. Dermot lulling himself in his lovers arms, hears the news,
starteth upon a sudden, beholds his Lady, has no power to speak, runs
forth, calls his men, cries for aid, throughout his country, none gave ^are
unto him; the country thought now (whereas they could not) that God will be
revenged on him for his exactions, cruelty, tyranny, and all other villainies
practiced upon his subjects, and especially for deflouring another man's wife:
when he saw himself quite forsaken, void and destitute of all aid, he betook
himself to the sea, and fled for England, but what became of the Harlot I
cannot learn; belike she hanged her self when she had set all the country in
uprore. Anno 1169. ( John Clin and John Stow are mine Authors) now that Dermot
is fled, I am to insert a story out of the British Chronicles of Conwey and
Strotflur Abbeyes, before I discourse of him which was in the same year, that
he took the sea, how that Owen Gwyneth, Prince of North Wales, had a son
called Ryryd, who in the right of his wife, as it seems, was Lord of Clochran
in Ireland, and another son begotten upon an Irish woman, called Howell, and
a third son called Madoc. This Madoc finding his country in great contention,
and his brethren at civil wars, prepared certain ships with men and
munition out of Wales and Ireland, and sought adventures by seas, he sailed
west from the coast of Ireland, so far north, that he came to a land
unknown, where he saw many strange things. This land in the opinion of
Humphrey Lloyde, the great Antiquary of Britain, must needs be some part of
that country, of which the Spaniards affirm themselves to be the first
discoverers since Hannos time. For by reason and order of cosmographie, this
land to the which Madoc came, must needs be son part of Nova-hispania, or
Florida; whereupon it is manifest that the same country was long before
discovered by Britains and Irish men, before either Columbus or Americus
Vespatius, led any Spaniards thither. Of the voyage and return of this Madoc,
there be many fables, the which I will not report. He prepared ships for a
second voyage, and took with him men and women to inhabit that land, therefore
it is to be presupposed that he and his people inhabited part of those
countries, for it appears by Francis Loves, that in Acusanus and other
places, the people honored the Cross, whereby it may be gathered, that
Christians had been there before the coming of the Spaniards: but because this
people were not many, they followed the manners of the land, and used their
language. I am of opinion with others, that the land whereunto Madoc came, was
some part of Mexico; first of all, for that the inhabitants of that land
report, their Rulers to have descended from a strange nation that came from a
far country, which thing is confessed by Mutesuma, King of that country, in his
orations made for quieting of his people at his submission to the King of
Castile, Hernando Curtecius being then present, which is laid down in the
Spanish Chronicles, of the conquest of the West Indies; secondly the british
words and names of places used in that country to this day, do argue the same,
as when they talk together, (they say) Gwrando, which is hearken or listen in
British. Also if you peruse Sir Humphrey Gilberts discovery, they have a Bird,
which they call Pengwin in British and Cornish, a white-head, but the Island of
Corroeso, the Cape of Britain, the river of Gwyndoor and the white rock of
Pengwyn, be British or Welsh words: whereby it appears, that it was that
country which Madoc and his people inhabited: now remembering my self that my
pen has not carried me so far unto foreign countries by sea, but that I
expect Dermots return by sea and by land into Ireland. Dermot Mac Morogh came
to Henry 2. in Normandy, made his moan (as formerly in substance is
delivered) craved aid for his restitution into his country, being a King
exiled, although distressed and void of comfort, unless he might obtain it
at his Majesty's hands; the Kings hands being full of wars, he granted him
his favorable letters as follows.

Henry, King of England, Duke of Normandy and Aquitaine, Earl of Anjow, etc.
unto all his subjects, English, Normans, Welsh, and Scots, and to all nations
and people being his subjects, greeting; whereas Dermot Prince of Leinster most
wrongfully (as he enformeth) banished out of his own country, has craved our
aid, therefore for so much as we have received him unto our protection, grace
and favor, whosoever within our Realms, subjects unto our command, will aid
and help him whom we have embraced as our trusty friend, for the recovery of
his land, let him be assured of our favor and license in that behalf.

Dermot returned joyfully with these letters, and came to Bristoll, where at
that time, Richard, surnamed Strangbow, Ear o^ Penbroke and Chepstow lay, he
showed his letters, caused them at several times, publicly to be read,
conferred with Earl Richard, and concluded to give the Earl his sole daughter
and heir in marriage, and his whole interest in the kingdom of Leinster after
his decease. Richard undertook of the other side to effect all his desire. As
Dermot waited for a wind, it came in his mind for the shorter cut into
Ireland, to go by land into Saint David's, where he was refreshed, and greatly
pitied by the Bishop there, and concluded in like sort (as with the Earl
before) with Robert fitz Stephens, and Moris Fitz Gerald, by the mediation of
the good Bishop there, to restore him unto his kingdom, upon condition that
he should give them and theirs for ever, the town of Wexford, and two
cantreds of land next adjoining; upon this he took shipping, secretly came to
Fernes, and lived privately among the Clergy all that winter, expecting
performance of promises out of England. Anno 1170. Abbatia de Castro Dei, was
founded in the same year, and the first day of May, (so writes Stow) Robert
Fitz Stephens, with David Barrie, and Hervie de Monte, Mariscospie of Strangbow
his nephew, according to his promise, with thirty Knights, threescore Esquires
well mounted, and three hundred foot, being Archers well appointed, of his own
kindred, and trayning up in feats of arms, and the choice soldiers of all
Wales, landed at the Bann, not far from Wexford; hereupon the rhyme runs.

At the Creek of Bagganbun,
Ireland was lost and won.
Here some allude unto the blind Prophecy of Merlin, that he should mean
this noble Warrior and worthy Knight, where he says; A Knight biparted shall
first enter with force of Arms, and break the bounds of Ireland: this they
would have understood of Robert Fitz Stephens, an English man, borne in
Normandy, and of Nesta his mother, daughter to R^es ap Tuyder Prince of South
Wales; so I find in Cambrensis; but if Merlin had foresight in this, I had
rather take his Prophecy verified in respect of his Arms and Ensigns, which
were biparted, being of two sundry changes, namely, party par pale gules and
ermine, a saltier counterchanged; for commonly all Prophecies have their
allusions unto Arms, and by them they are discovered, though at the first not
so apparent, before the event thereof take place.

The next day after, in the same place, landed Morice Prendergast, whom
Stanihurst calls Prendelgast de Rofensi Walliae Demetiae Provincia, as
Cambrensis writes; the which I take to be about Milford in South Wales,
accompanied with ten Knights, and a great number of Archers in most gallant
sort in two ships. Immediately, Robert Fitz Stephens directs his letters to
Dermot, who could scarce read them for joy of their arrival, and sent
forthwith his base son Donald with five hundred men to salute them, and
hasteneth after himself with all speed; off goes his poor mantle wherein he
obscurely shrouded himself, on goes his princely attire; the Irish men follow
him, the fame thereof is spread over the whole land: such as before in his
distressed state flatly forsook him, now run and flatter, and fawn upon
him; to be short, they meet, they confirm the former leagues with oaths, and
join forces together, and they march toward Wexford, to lay siege to the
town; the townsmen a fierce and wilful people (to the number of 2000.) sally
forth with full purpose to give them battle in the field, but when they heard
the Trumpets sound, the horses neyghing, and beheld their glittering Arms, the
rattling of their furniture, horse and men in complete Arms, and all most
comely in battle array, (the like of them not formerly seen, neither heard
of) they alter their minds, they retire into the town, they make fast their
gates, and fire the suburbs. Fitz Stephens came to the walls, filled the
trenches with armed men, and appointed his Archers to level at the walls and
turrets, if occasion were offered: the townsmen manfully defended themselves,
threw over the walls great stones and pieces of timber, hurt many, and made them
void the place, among whom, a courageous Knight, called David Barrye,
adventured to scale the walls, but with a great stone which fell upon his
headpiece, he was cast down to the ditch, and carried away by his fellows
with safeguard of his life, upon this they go to the sea strand, and fired all
the ships and vessels which they found there.

The next day after, upon better advice and deliberation, they approach unto
the walls, and gave a new assault, the townsmen within began to distrust
their state, being upon this sudden arrival of the strangers, not sufficiently
provided of men, munition, and victuals, to encounter with them, and remembering
again, how most unnaturally they had rebelled against their Prince and
Sovereign, they sent messengers to Dermot, to entreat for peace, (alas it was
far from the heart) the which was granted, and took of them pledges and
hostages for the performance thereof. Lastly, Mac Moragh, according to his
former promise gratified these first adventures, he gave unto Robert Fitz
Stephens, and Morris Fitz Gerrald, who was as yet in England, the town of
Wexford, and the territories thereunto adjoining, and unto Hervie de Monte
Morisco, two cantreds on the sea side, betwixt Wexford and Waterford.

Dermot Mac Moroch and his company now take heart, they increase their Army
with Wexford men, and become 3000. strong. The next journey they bend their
course toward Ossory, where one Donald, or Mac Donell was Prince, whom Dermot
hated deadly, and for this cause Donald suspected Dermots son and heir to
have much familiarity with his wife, and therefore in his jealous humor,
apprehended him, imprisoned him, and pulled out both his eyes, (but say they)
though sight failed him, his feeling did not, for she loved him the more, in so
much that she satisfied his lust, and ran away after him. When Robert Fitz
Stephens, and the Gallants of Britain entered the country, they found neither
dastards, nor cowards, but valiant men with horse and foot; they found the
country fast with woods, bogges, and paces trenched and plashed; yet the valor
of the adventurers was such, presuming upon former fortunes, to have the like
future successes, with loose wings drove them out of the woods and bogges, into
the plain and champion land, where the horsemen with their spears overthrew
them, and the foot finding them grovelling, run them through, and ended their
days; the Gallowglasses followed, and cut off their heads. And here Dermot Mac
Morogh is mightily condemned, he being originally for exaction, extortion,
cruelty, tyranny, and other damnable offenses, justly exiled, now shows no
Princely stomach, but a base Wolvish mind; for when 300. of the Ossory men's
heads were thrown at his feet, (alas they had not offended) he viewed them
all, and finding one whom he knew, and mortally hated, he held him by the head
and ears, and most brutishly with his teeth, bit the nose and lips of the
dead, whom without the aid of the Britains, he durst not behold in the face.
In this bloody course, Dermot directed these worthy warriors, they more
affecting the prey for their present maintenance, then the blood of any person,
to spoil, burn, waste the country, and murder the poor and seely people,
which God wot, meant no harm: whereupon Donald, Prince of Ossory, despising
Dermot Mac Morogh, by the advice of his Council and friends, sent to Robert
Fitz Stephens in writing as follows: Sir Knight of Noble race, renowned for
martial prowess, Donald Prince of Ossory sends greeting: Dermot that
damnable adulterer in his own person, with the King of Meths wife, and in his
sons person with my wife, have drawn thee and those Gallants, (most worthy
Knights) into this poor country and naked people: I will yield my self (it is
for the good of my poor followers) into thy hands, peace I crave, and peace
let me have. Robert Fitz Stephens acquainted Dermot Mac Morogh with the
premises of all sides, the Irish dissembled, (as hereafter shall further
appear) peace they granted, and they acknowledged Dermot for their Lord and
Sovereign. In all this service, I may not conceal what Cambrensis delivers.
David Barry and Meilerius, effected singular exployts, and deserved no less
commendations. As soon as the good success of Dermot and the strangers lately
arrived, was spread abroad, Rory Oconochor, alias Rodericke, King of Connaught,
Monarch of Ireland, called the Princes and Nobles of the land together, and
lays before them the dangerous estate and imminent peril of the whole land,
how Dermot guilefully had trained in strangers, how he and the strangers were
like to overrun all, unless with all expedition, this mischief were
prevented; in sum they concluded, that every man shall to his Arms, and make
ready horse and foot, and set upon these invaders.

Dermot Mac Morogh, having certain knowledge of this great separation and
mischief intended, and his false hearted subjects, that lately fawned upon him
were fled to the enemies, fearing the puisance of the Monarch, and the forces
of the whole land, called Robert Fits Stephens, and said unto him; Fortune is
fickle, our state is an ague that comes by fits, my friends fleet away, and
argue false hearts, no marvel though I be disquieted, if you stick not to
me I am undone: Robert Fitz Stephens replied, We have left behind us our
dear friends and our native soil, we have fired all our ships, not upon
intent to run away, we have already in arms engaged our lives, fall out as
fall out may, we will live and dye together, be you true to us, we will not
be false to you: Dermot hereupon gathering his spirits together, got him and
his followers to a certain fastenesse, not far from Fernes, where he
entrenched and plashed himself, being environed with woods, hills, rocks,
bogges and waters, a place to man's seeming inaccessible and invincible, to
endure for a while wandering clouds, and threatening storms of his adversaries,
to vanish and be carried away with waving winds of fortune and unfortunate
wars: Whose foresight and ready wit Robert Fitz Stephens highly commended,
Immediately there came a Messenger from Roderic the Monarch unto Robert Fitz
Stephens with this message: The Britans may not by the Laws of Arms, display
their Banners and Ensigns in foreign possessions, and dispose the lawful
heirs of their inheritance, but they are with license of the Irish to pack
home whence they came: It is a blemish for the British nation, injuriously to
give aid to a shameful fact, neither may the lechery of Dermot, be mantled
under British cloaks, wherefore depart and forsake him that is forsaken of God
and man. And here by my messenger receive to defray your charges, and transport
you to your native soil. Robert Fitz Stephens answers, your present I will
not accept, faith and troth I have pawned to my friend Dermot, I will not
break: he forsakes not me, I will not forsake him, neither leave him
distressed; you speak of lechery, what is that among martial men? I hear you
have Bastards your self, to what end is your embassy? If Roderick give
council, we need it not; if he Prophecy, we credit not his oracle; if he
command as a Prince, we obey not his authority; if he threaten as an enemy, a
fig for his Monarchy. The messenger returned with small welcome, going and
coming; Roderic bethought himself again, and sent letters to Dermot,
persuading him to be at peace with his country people, and to banish the
strangers out of the Land; he rejected his council and despises the
messenger: Roderic seeing that his private practices took small effect, put
himself in arms, assembleth his forces, and delivers unto them these
speeches: You right worthy and valiant defenders of your Country and liberty;
Consider with what people and for what cause we are now to fight and wage
battle, the enemy of his own Country, the tyrant over his own people, the
exile fugitive, behold he is returned backed with strangers, and purposes to
destroy us and the whole Nation; he being an enemy, has brought in those
enemies, which have been ever hateful unto us all, and are most greedy to
have the Sovereignty and Dominion over us all, protesting openly and firmly
avouching, that by fatal destiny they are to be Commanders over this land.
And so far has he poured out his venom, that there is no favor, nor mercy
to be looked for at his hands. O cruel beast, (yea more cruel then ever was
beast) who lately bit with his own teeth, the nose and lips of the dead: he to
satisfy his insatiable malice and bloody mind, spares neither man, woman,
nor child: he deserves well to be hated of all, that opposes himself an
enemy to all; wherefore my loving and dear country men, be well advised, look
about you, and consider advisedly, how by the like means, (I mean civil
wars) all Realms and nations for the most part have been overthrown and
brought to utter ruin. Julius Caesar attempted the invasion of Britain, was
twice foiled, and endured the repulse, but when Androgeus Duke of London fell
at variance with the King, to be revenged, sent for Julius, who thereupon
returning, subdued the land. The Britains being at discord, and hating their
vicious King Careticus, the Saxons finding opportunity to over-runne all, sent
for Gurmundus the arch-Pirate and terror of the Ocean seas, who joining forces
together, foiled the Britains, and banished their King: not long after,
Isembert aspiring to the Crown of France, procured the said Gurmund to his
aid: behold the end, Gurmund was slain, Isembert overthrown, and his whole
practice came to naught. Wherefore let us with one mind, like those valiant
Frenchmen in our rightful cause, in the defense of our country, and safeguard
of the lives of our wives and children, courageously give the onset upon our
enemies. And whiles these strangers are but few in number, let us stoutly issue
out upon them. The fire while it is but in embers and sparkles, may easily be
covered with ashes, but if it break into flames, it is hard to be quenched*
wherefore it is expedient we stop beginnings, and prevent sickness when it
creeps least; when it takes root, it will hardly be cured: wherefore cheer
my hearts, we fight for our country and liberty, let us leave unto our
posterity an immortal fame, let us march on, and lustily assault them, that
the overthrow of a few, may be a terror to many, and that it may be a
president unto all foreign Potentates, never to attempt the like again.

Dermot Mac Morogh and his men receive intelligence of this march, and the
approach of the enemy, and beholding his men, somewhat dismayed, turned him to
them with loving countenance: ye men of Leynster, my natural subjects, of my
flesh and blood, whom loyalty, truth and kindred has hitherto lincked
together; let us live together, and dye together, in the defense of our persons
and country; you see how that wicked and ambitious minded Rodericke, the Author
of many mischiefs, not contented with his own country and kingdom, seeks
now the sovereignty and dominion over the whole land, the which, I hope, God
will not permit. You see his glory, his pride, and audacious attempts, how he
lifts up his head, and looks aloft: he trusts to his multitude, doubt you
not but that God is on our side, and the rightful cause ours, though we of
country birth, to you Leinster men I speak, be not so many as they are,
neither so well appointed, it forces not, for victory is not measured by
multitude, but by valor and courage, and oftentimes, we know, that a few
stout and hardy men have foiled troops of sluggards, dastards and white liverd
Soldiers: If you mistrust any defect in your selves, behold a present supply
at your back and elbow.

Do not you see these Worthy Knights, these Valiant Warriers these Noble
gallants, the flower of Britain? their valor in part you have sufficiently
tried, their furniture excels, their order and array is most comely, they
have forsaken their native soil, their friends and kindred, and all for our
sakes; will they fly? no, they have burned their Ships, the Land will yield
them neither succor nor refuge, neither will the bloody tyrant Roderic show
any mercy; we are sworn the one to the other, while breath lasts and life
endures. If the enemy pretend with the sword to chastise us for our sins, as
it appears by their slanderous and shameless reports; alas, what have you
done? God knows, your consciences are clear, your cause honest, to take
Arms in defense of your Prince, and Country? Why do they not behold the
blemishes, nay the heinous enormities and villainies that reign among them?
Their carrows, their kerne, their thieves, their murders, their swearing, their
lying, their drunkenness, their whordome and bloody minds who reformeth? The
Tyrant Roderic has murdered his own natural brother, he has three wives
alive, he has eleven bastards by several women: O villain, to behold a mote
in our eye, and cannot see a beam in his own. If the tyrant make challenge
and pretend title to Leinster, because the same has sometimes been tributarie
to some one King of Connoght; by the same reason also may we demand and
challenge all Connoght; for our ancestors have been sole Governors of both,
and Monarchs of all Ireland. The Laws of all Nations do permit, and allow to
resist and withstand force and injury, with force and strength; Let us be of
good courage, we stand upon a good ground, our seat is naturally very strong
of it self, and now by our industry made more defensive; fear nothing, quit
your selves like men. When Dermot had made an end of his Irish Oration, Robert
Fitz Stephens in the British tongue turns him to the Britains. You my
companions in martial affairs, you lusty young gallants that have endured
with me many perils, yet still retain your noble and valiant courage; consider
whence we came, what we are, and the cause we have in hand; we are lineally
descended from Troy, whose fame has filled the whole earth, and now lately
some of us out of Normandy, have seated our selves in Britain, and have to
our wives, children, and kindred of the ancient and noble British race; of the
one we carry our valiant and noble mind, of the other we learned the experience
in feats of Arms; we are not come hither as pirates and thieves, to rob and
spoil (as it is well known unto you) we had our native soil to inhabit, we
had our kindred about us, and the countenance of great persons, we came after
the course of the World, as Marshall men (but in an honest cause) to take our
adventures. Here we are, our friends are with us, our foes are in arms
against us, we are well appointed, the enemy is but a wild, naked, ras^all
and savage people: fear nothing, our cause is good; Dermot sought us, we
sought not him, he loves our nation, and our friends in former times have
found friendship in his Country, he is a Prince lately exiled, whose fall is
more to be pitied then envied; we are to comfort him, to aid him, and to
restore him to his Kingdom. It is more honorable to make then to be a King,
and to restore then to exile: he is a Prince of a bountiful mind, he has
promised large for us and our heirs after us, he has in part already most
faithfully performed, his years are many, and his days are but few; after him
we shall enjoie his, and if we overcome the enemy, we shall possess all:
fear not death; it is but a short delay between transitory and eternal life,
it is but a short passage from vain and temporal delights, to certain and
perpetual joies, if we conquer here, we shall inherit here, and purchase unto
us immortal fame; if we miss here, we are sure of a Kingdom in another
world. Roderic considering with himself, the events of wars how doubtful
and uncertain they are, wrought all means to entreat for peace, being
timorous to adventure battle with strangers, whose force he mightily feared,
and whose puissance and valor being renowned, he was loath to encounter
withal; he sent messengers unto Dermot Mac Morogh, promising him that he and
his heirs should in peace and quietness enjoy all Leinster, and acknowledge
him for his chief King and Monarch, and to yield unto him the service and
homage that to that belonged; and that he should deliver him his son
Cunthurus (Cnothurinus says Stanyhurst) for pledge and hostage. And if the
peace were truly kept and performed, Roderic promised to give him his daughter
in marriage, and in the end when Leinster should be quitly settled and reduced
to the old Irish order, Dermot should drive away the Brittans and strangers,
and procure no more into the Land; all this was concluded upon, and solemnly
undertaken by oaths on both sides, yet all was but flat dissimulation. In the
nook of this, landeth at Wexford Maurice Fitz Girald, brother to Robert Fitz
Stephens by the mothers side, in two ships, having in his company, ten
Knights, thirty horsemen, archers and foot a hundred, whereof Dermot was very
glad and mightily encouraged on every side. And immediately took with him
Morice Fitz Girald, and bent his forces toward Dublin, to be revenged on them,
for many wrongs, and especially for the death of his father, whom they
murdered in their Council house, as formerly has been delivered, and after
for more despite buried him with a Dog: They left Robert Fitz Stephens behind
busily employed in building of a Fort or a strong hold some two miles from
Wexford, in British and Irish called the Carricke. As they drew near Dublin,
they preyed, they spoiled, they burned all before them. Dublin trembled for
fear, the townsmen entreated for peace, the which was granted upon the
delivery of certain pledges and hostages*

In the mean while, no small stir arose between Roderic the Monarch, and
Donald, Prince of Limerike for chiefery. Whereupon there arose deadly hatred
and martial wars: Roderic drew all his forces against him; Dermot Mac
Moroogh sent to Robert Fitz Stephens, that in all haste he should draw forces
to the aid of Donald Prince of Limirike his son in law, which was
accordingly affected, where Roderic was foiled, lost his chiefery, and with
shame enough returned to his own country. Now Dermot Mac Morogh is puffed up
with these prosperous successes, and whereas a while ago, he would have
contented himself with Leynster alone, now Connaght and all Ireland seem
little enough unto his aspiring mind. Secretly he acquainteth Robert Fitz
Stephens, and Maurice Fitz Gerald with his purpose, and offers any of them
his daughter and heir with his inheritance after, upon condition, that they
should send for supplies of their kindred and country men, to effect his
enterprises; they modestly thanked him for his offers, and refused his
daughter, for that they were both already married, and withal wished him to
write for Richard Strangbow, with whom he had formerly concluded to that
effect, unto whom he addresseth his messenger, and directs his letters in
this form:

Dermot Mac Morogh, Prince of Leinster, to Richard Earl of Chepstow, the son
of Earl Gilbert, sends greeting. If you do well consider the time of men
and matters, as we do which are distressed, then would you regard whether we
have cause to complain of men, or to malign and curse the unfortunate time.
Even as the seely Storkes and Swallows with their coming, prognostic^te the
summer season, and with westerly winds are blown away: we have observed times
and seasons fit for your arrival and transportation, if your affairs had
correspondently accorded unto our expectations. East and West no doubt would
have fitted our purpose, but hitherto being frustrated of your long desired
presence and promises, unless the most valiant Knights of your country birth,
(whose valor and prowess my pen is not able to paint unto the posterity)
had upheld our state and dignity. We beseech you again and again, in the
league and amity of Princes, not to use further delays; our success hitherto
has been to our hearts desire. Leynster is our own, your coming will
enlarge our bounds, the speedier it is, the more grateful; the hastier, the
more joyful; the sooner, the better welcome. Richard Strangbow was pleased
with these letters, glad of the success of Robert Fitz Stephens, and cast with
himself, how he might speedily pass for Ireland. He repaired to King Henry
2. humbly beseeching him, either to restore him to such possessions, as by
right of inheritance did belong unto him, or to give him Pass to seek
adventures in some foreign country, and among some strange nation. Stanihurst
excellently conceited, lays down the Kings answer: Henry smiling within
himself, says, Lo, whether and where thou will go and wander for me, it
shall be lawful for thee, take Dedalus wings and fly away. Strangbow between
^east and earnest, takes this for a sufficient license, and makes ready for
Ireland, and sends before him, Reimond le Gross, nephew to Robert Fitz
Stephens, and Morice Fitz Gerald, son to William Fitz Gerald, the elder
brother, which land at Dundorogh, commonly called Dundenold, West of Wexford,
with ten Knights, forty Esquires, and fourscore Archers and foot; whereupon
Omolaghlin Ophelin, Lord of the Decies, raised the country, consulted with the
townsmen of Waterford, and concluded that it stood them upon, with all
expedition, to set upon the strangers; they made ready 3000. men by land, they
run up and down the shore, they row; their song was kill, kill, kill,
Reimond straight upon his arrival, had fortified himself, the Waterfordians
march against him in battle array, the Britains being but sixscore and ten,
came forth to make good the field against 3000. Reymond perceiving in the
skirmish that the enemy over-laid them, retired to his Fort, the Irish
persuading themselves at that instant to give the Britains an utter overthrow,
thick and thin, with all haste pursued them, and the foremost entering at the
foot of the last Britain into the Fort, had his head cloven in two with
Reymonds sword, immediately says Reymond, strike the drum, follow me fellow
soldiers; the Irish being disordered, and out of battle array, and
discouraged with the death of one man, fly away; then they which in this
doubtful skirmish were like to be vanquished and quite overthrown, became
victors, conquerours, and wan the field; they chased the Waterfordians that
were out of order, and at their wits ends, and slew of them, says Cambrensis,
above 500. persons, and being weary of killing, they cast a great number of
those whom they had taken prisoners, headlong from the rocks, into the sea. In
this service, Sir William Ferand, a Knight, deserved singular commendations,
and was the only man of all the Britains, says Stanihurst that was slain:
Thus fell the pride and rash attempt of Waterford, thus decayed their strength
and force, and thus became the ruin and overthrow of that City, which, as it
bred a great hope and consolation to the Britains, so was it the cause of a
great desperation and terror to the enemy. They took 70. of the best men in
Waterford prisoners, they enter into consultation, and call a martial court,
what was to be done with them. Reymond full of pity and compassion,
delivers his opinion; you my noble and valiant companions, and fellow
soldiers, for the increase of whose honor, virtue and fortune, we presently
seem to contend, let us consider what is best to be done with these our
prisoners and captives: for my part I do not think it good, nor yet allow
that any favor or courtesy should be at al showed to the enemy, but understand
you, these are no enemies now, but men; no rebels, but such as be vanquished
and clean overthrown, and standing in defense of their country by evil
fortune and hard destiny, are subdued; their adventures were honest, and their
attempts commendable, and therefore they are not to be reputed for thieves,
factious persons, traitors, nor yet murderers; they are now brought to that
distress and case, that rather mercy for example sake is to be showed, then
cruelty to the increase of their misery to be ministered: surely our ancestors
in times past, (although indeed it be very hard to be done) were wont when
fortune favored, to temper their loose minds, and qualify their unruly
affections, with some one discommoditie or other: wherefore let mercy and
pity, which is in man most commendable, work so in us, that we that now have
overcome others, may subdue our own minds, and conquer our own affections.
For modesty, moderation, and discretion, are wont to stay hasty motions, and to
stop the course of rash devices. O how commendable and honorable is it to a
Noble man, that in his greatest triumph and glory, he counts it for a
sufficient revenge, that he can revenge, and be wreaked! Julius Caesar, whose
conquests were such, his victory so great, and his triumphs so many, that the
whole world was noysed therewith, he had not so many friends who rejoiced for
the same, but he had many more enemies that maligned and envied his successes,
not only in slanderous words, and evil reports, but many also secretly
conspired, devised and practiced his death and destruction; And yet he was so
full of pity, mercy, and compassion, that he never commanded nor willed any to
be put to death for the same, saving only one Domitius, whom he had of mere
clemency for his lewdness before pardoned, for his wickedness released, and
for his treachery acquitted. And thus as his pity did much increase his
honor, so did it nothing hinder his victories. Oh how beastly then and impious
is that cruelty, wherein victory is not joined with pity! for it is the part
of a right Noble and Valiant Conqueror, to count them enemies, that do wage
the battle, contend and fight for the victory, but such as be conquered,
taken prisoners, and kept in bonds and captivity, to take and repute them for
men; that hereby fortitude and force may diminish the battle, and end the
quarrel, as also humanity may increase love, and make peace. It is therefore
a great commendation, and more praise worthy to a noble man, in mercy to be
bounteous, then in victory to be cruel. For the one only lies in the course
of fortune, but the other in virtue. And as it had been a great increase of
our victory, and an augmentation of honor, if our enemies had been slain in
the field, and overthrown in the battle; so they being now taken and saved,
as it were men returned from rebels to the common society, and fellowship of
men. If we now should kill them, it will be to our great shame, dishonor and
reproach for ever. And for as much as by the killing and destroying of them,
we shall be never the nearer to have the command of the country, and never
sooner to be Lords of the Land) and yet the ransoming of them very good for the
maintenance of the Soldiers, the good fame of us, and the advancement of
honor) we must need think that it is better to ransom them, then cruely to
kill them; for as it is requisite, that a Soldier in the field fighting in
arms, should then thrist for the blood of his enemy, try the force of his
sword, and valiantly stand to his tackle for victory; so when the fight is
ended, the wars ceased, and the armor laid down, and all strongnesse of
hostility set apart, then in a Noble man must humanity take place, pity and
commiseration must be showed, and all kindness of courtesy must be extended.

With this they were all drawn to some mildness and remorse, and ready to
show favor in hope of friendship again. Henry de Monte Marisco, who came
thither to salute Reimond, stands up in opposition, bent to blood and villainy,
in whom there was neither manhood in battle abroad, nor mercy in consultation
at home, and spoke as follows: Reimond has very exquisitly discoursed of
pity and mercy in set speeches, uttering his eloquence has showed his mind,
and declared his opinion, persuading and inducing us to believe that a strange
land were to be conquered sooner by mercy and fond pity, then by fire and
sword; but I pray you, can there be a worse way then to hold that course. Did
Julius Caesar or Alexander of Macedonia, by such means or in such order
conquer the whole world; did the Nations from out of all places run to submit
themselves under their command, and imperie in respect of their pity and
mercy, and not rather compelled so to do for fear and perforce? For people
whilst they are yet proud and rebellious, all pity and mercy set apart, are by
all manner of means and ways to be subdued: but when they are once brought
under subjection and bondage, and ready to serve and obey, then they are with
all courtesy to be entreated and kindly dealt withal, so that the state of the
Government be in safety and void of danger, herein and in this point, must
pity be used; but in the other severity or rather cruelty is more necessary:
here clemency is to be showed, but in the other rigor without favor is to be
ministered. Reimond persuades that mercy is to be extended as upon people
already subdued and subjected, or as though the enemies were so few and of so
small a number, as against whom no valiant service nor chivalry can be
exploited; and yet they are ready to join with us, whereby our force may be
increased, and our power augmented: but alas, do not we see, how that the
whole notion and people of Ireland are fully bent and (not without cause)
altogether conspired against us? surely me thinks Reimond is contrary to
himself, for why? his coming hither was not to dispute of pity, nor to reason
of mercy, but to conquer the nation, to subdue the people: Oh what an example
of impious pity were it then, to neglect our own safety, and to have remorse
and compassion upon others distresses! moreover we have here in the field and
in armor, more enemies then friends, we are in the middle of perils and
dangers, our enemies being round about us in every corner: and shall we think
this to be nothing, but that we must be also in the like distress and danger
among our selves: Round about us our enemies are infinite, and within our
selves, some there be which practice and work our destruction: And if it should
happen that our Captives and Prisoners should escape, and break loose out of
their bonds, which are but very weak and slender, no doubt they would
forthwith take our own armor and weapons against us; well, well, the Mouse is
in the cubbord, the Fire is in the lap, and the Serpent is in the bosom, the
enemy is at hand ready to oppress his adversary, and the guest is in place
with small courtesy to requite his host. If our enemies, when they come in good
array, and well appointed to give the onset, and to wage battle against us; if
they should happen to have the victory, and the vpperhand over us, would they
deal in pity and mercy? would they grant us our lives? would they put us to
ransom? Tush, what needs many words, when the deeds are apparent; our victory
is to be used, that the destruction of these few may be a terror to many,
whereby all others, and this wild and rebellious nation may take example, and
bewar how they meddle and encounter with us; of two things we are to make
choice of one, for either we must valiantly and courageously stand to perform
what we have taken in hand, and all fond pity set aside, boldly and stoutly to
overthrowe and vanquish this rebellious and stubborn people, or (if we shall
after the mind and opinion of Reimond altogether be pitiful and full of mercy)
we must hoise up our sails, and return home, leaving both the Country, and
all that we have already gotten, to this miserable and wretched people. When
Herveie had made an end of his speech; they put it to voices, and the voices
went on Herveis side; whereupon the Captains (as men condemned) were brought
to the Rocks, and after their Limbs were broken, they were cast head long into
the Seas, and drowned every mothers son.

Upon the 23. of August, being Saint Bartholomewes Eeve, and year aforesaid,
to wit, Anno 1170. Richard, surnamed Strangbow Earl of Strigulia (whose
original and offspring in another place herafter (if God permit) shall be laid
down) landed in the Haven of Waterford, where Dermos Mac Morogh, Robert Fitz
Stephens, and Maurice Fitz Gerauld, and Reimond le Gross met him, and joined
their forces together? Reimond le Gross was made general of the field, they
took small rest after their arrival; for upon Bartholomew day being tuesday,
with Banners displayed, in good array they assaulted the City by water and by
land, the townsmen manfully defended themselves, and gave them two repulses:
Reimond having compassed the town, espied without adjoining unto the town
wall (where now stands a strong Bulwark) an old Cabban, propped with old
timber, and entered into the old wall, the which proppes they sawed asunder,
then down falls the cabban, and withal a great part of the wall: the breach
thus made, the Britains do enter, and in the streets kill man, woman and
child, and there left them in heaps: In Reignald tower, upon the wall of the
tower they found one Reignald (I take it the tower bears the name of him) and
Omalaghlin Ophelim, Lord of the Decies, whose lives Dermot Mac Morogh saved:
they found there other two, whom they put to the sword, they rifled the houses,
they ransacked the City, they made havoc of all, lastly they left there a
strong ward. Then according to precedent covenants, Dermot gave his daughter
Eva in marriage to Richard Strangbow, and after solemnity thereof, they all
marched with their forces toward Dublin: For Dermot bare them a deadly hatred,
and hitherto winked at them, until further opportunity served, for the villainy
and cruelty they showed to his father; the townsmen of Dublin foreseeing his
revenging mind, procured to their aid as many as they could throughout the
land, they trenched, they plashed in paces, streets and narrow places, all the
ways along to Waterford, to hinder their march. Dermot was not ignorant
thereof, whereupon he led the army from out the common and beaten way, through
the Mountains of Glandelogh, and came safe to the walls of Dublin. There the
Citizens sent messengers to entreat for peace, and amongst others, Laurence O
Tool Arcbishop of Dublin: while they parled without for peace, Sir Remond le
gross, and Sir Miles Cogan scaled the walls; for, says Cambrensis, they were
more desirous to fight under Mars in the field, then in the Senate to sit with
Jupiter in Council; they made a breach, they enter the City, they put all to
the sword: in the mean while, Hastulphus the Commander of the City, with a
great many of the better sort, with their Riches and Jewels, escaped and fled
by the Sea to the North Islands.

When the Earl had spent a few days in the town, he left Miles Cogan
Governor thereof, and by the persuasion of Dermot Mac Morogh, he drew his
forces into Meth to be avenged of Ororicke, whom some call Morice, some
Murdich, who was the cause of his exile, and whose wife Dermot had formerly
taken away. The Earl no sooner entered the Country, but the Army was given
wholly to the spoil; they robbed, they spoiled, they burned, and wasted all
before them: Roderic King of Conoght and Monarch of Ireland, seeing his
neighbors house set one fire, thought it high time to look to his own, and
wrotte to Dermot Mac Morogh, contrary to the order of Peace, formerly
concluded, thou have procured and allured a swarm and multitude of strangers,
to invade this land; all the while thou did contain thy self within
compass of thine own territories, we winked at thy proceedings, but forasmuch
as now thou not caring for thy oath, nor regarding the safety of thy hostages,
have so fondly and falsely passed thy bounds, I require thee that thou would
retire, and withdraw these excourses and inrodes of strangers, or else, to
begin, I will not fail to cut off thy sons head, and send it to thee with
speed.

Dermot despised the messenger, and would scarce vouchsafe to read his letter;
upon the messengers return, Roderic was mad, and in his rage, caused his
pledges head, the son of Dermot Mac Morogh to be cut off. In this troublesome
time, the Primate of Armagh called the Prelates and Clergy to a Synod; at
Armagh, assembled a Council; where, according to their wisdoms, they
endeavored to find out the cause of these miseries that fell upon the land,
they inquired not whether the Bishops had bought their Bishoprics for money,
whether their Parsons did pray, whether their Ministers were lettered; what
whoredom, symony, or lechery, with other enormities, reigned among the
Clergy, but simply, like themselves, posted over all to the Laytie, and
concluded ( insipienter) that the just plague fell upon the people, for
merchandising of the English nation; for then they bought and sold of the
English birth, such as they found, and made them bondslaves; so they served
Saint Patricke, called the Apostle of Ireland, who was a bondsman six years in
Ireland, but Patricke preached Christ, and the English nation reformed the
land. Here the sacred letters reconcile all, the stone which the builders
refused, is become the corner stone, and why so? the answer follows, it is
the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes. But I may not so leave my
Prelates, they synodically decreed as follows: that all the English men
within the land, whatsoever they were, should be manumised; a worshipful
piece of work, and no thank to them all, for the English sword was then ready
to cut off the Irish heads: this reformation was but a sweeping of a house with
a Foxes tail.

The prosperous successes of Earl Richard, surnamed Strangbow, were no sooner
effected, but fame flyed abroad, and flatterers carried it to Henry the seconds
ears, and made him jealous, as Kings commonly are, that a subject as Richard
was, should not only in the right of his wife, content himself with Leinster,
but most presumptuously without license, as the King alleged, attempt the
conquest of a kingdom, where he formerly by grant of Adrian, was interessed.
Whereupon the King in his jealous rage, endeavoring to stop the Springs and
Watercourse, proclaimed: We, Henry, etc. Forbid and inhibit, that from
henceforth no ship from any place of our dominion, shall traffic or pass
into Ireland; and likewise charge that all our subjects upon their duty of
allegiance, which are there commorant, shall return from thence into England
before Easter next following, upon pain of forfeiture of all their lands, and
the persons so disobeying, to be banished our land, and exiled for ever.

The Earl seeing himself in this distress, being in peril to lose his
friends, and to want his necessaries out of his native soil, by intercourse of
Merchants, calls a Council; where it was agreed and concluded, that Sir
Reimond Legrosse should be sent over to pacify the King (who then was in
Aquitaine) with these letters: Most puissant Prince, and my dread Sovereign, I
came into this land with your Majesty's leave and savor (as far as I
remember) to aid your servant Dermot Mac Morogh; what I have won, was with
the sword, what is given me, I give you, I am yours, life and living at your
command.

Upon the receipt of these letters, there fell of all sides, three disasters,
the King was mightily incensed against Earl Richard, and therefore delayed Sir
Reimond Legrosse, and gave him no answer; secondly, the death of Thomas,
Archbishop of Canterbury troubled him exceedingly, and to help the readers
memory with the time, it was as the rhyme delivers, Annus millenus, centenus
septuagenus
Primus erat, primas quo ruit ense Thomas.


The third was, that Dermot Mac Morogh a most bountiful Prince, died and was
buried at Fernes.

Anno 1171. Hastulpus, late Governor of Dublin (of whom I have formerly
spoken) returns, and enters the haven of Dublin, with threescore sail to
his aid, of Ilanders, Norwegians, and Esterlings, they forthwith landed, and
unshipped themselves, and had to their Captain, says Cambrensis, one John
Wood, some call him mad John, for the prankes he played, for wood and mad bear
one sense. Stanihurst calls him Pewood, Douling, Heywood. They were all
mighty men of war, and well appointed after the Danish manner, being
harnessed with good Brigandines, jackes and shirts of maile; their Shields,
Bucklers, and Targets, were round, and colored red, and bound about with iron,
and as they seemed in arms, so were they no less in minds; iron-strong and
mighty; they marched in battle array toward the East gate of the City.
Miles Cogan the Governor, with a fair company (yet but a handful to the
number of the enemy, sallied forth, and gave them battle, where both sides
lost many a tall man. Miles Cogan seeing himself overlaid with the furious
rage and multitude of his adversaries, gave back, and retired into the town;
by this time, Richard Cogan his brother had secretly issued out with a good
company, at the South posterne gate, compassed the Danes, and being at the foot
of the rereward, made mighty cry and shout, whereat the Danes were amazed, and
the two brethren had the killing of them before and behind. The Danes brake
their array, threw their Arms away, fled toward their ships, where many also
for haste were drowned. In this skirmish, John Wood was slain, and Hastulphus
taken prisoner, and put to his ransom. The prodigality of this Hastulphus was
such, that he contented not himself with life, but braved and bragged of his
exploits, in the hearing of Miles Cogan, and therewithal delivered, that that
attempt was nothing, but a taste or proof of the Irish valor, and shortly,
they should see another manner of forces assault them; What (says Miles Cogan)
is it not enough for him to have his life, but he must threaten us with further
rebellion; go, take him, and cut off his head. And thus the blabbe of his
tongue, turned to his confusion.

Shortly after, the Irish and country birth, lying aloof, waiting for all
opportunities, and understanding of some unkindness and displeasure conceived
by King Henry the second, against Earl Richard, and in that quarrel generally
against all the Britains and invaders of Ireland; they put their heads
together, they plot, they draw their draughts and devices, to lay siege to
recover the City of Dublin, and the chiefest instrument was Laurence O Tool,
Archbishop of Dublin, who wrote unto Roderic, King of Connaght, and unto
Gotred, alias Godfrey, King of Man, and to all the Princes of Ireland, that it
would please them (some in regard of neighborhood, othersome in regard of
natural affection unto their native soil and distressed country men of Irish
birth) put to their helping hand, join their forces together, lay siege to the
City of Dublin by sea and by land, relieve their brethren, rid them from the
Britains hands, and restore them to their former liberty. The Bishop for the
good opinion that was held of his learning, gravitie, and sanctity, prevailed,
insomuch, that Gotred, King of Man, came into the harbor of Dublin, with
thirty sail. Roderic the Monarch and forces of Ireland came by land, and
encamped within sight of the town. Within the town, were Earl Richard
Strangbow, Maurice Fitz Gerald, Reimond Legrosse, lately arrived from out of
England, Miles Cogan, Richard Cogan, with other worthy men and Citizens, to the
number of thirty thousand fighting men. As they were prepared for battle, (as
commonly one mischief falls in the neck of another) Donald, the base son
of Dermot Mac Morogh, came in post to the Earl, and delivered how that Robert
Fitz Stephens in his Fort of Carreck by Wexford, was besieged with three
thousand men of Wexford and Kinsele, by the conduct of Donald, Prince of
Limeric, son in law to Dermot Mac Morogh, who before time in his extremity,
and in the wars between him and Roderic the Monarch, for chiefery, (at the
request of Dermot Mac Morogh, was relieved by Robert Fitz Stephens, and so
aided, that he foiled his enemy; and thus good is recompensed with evil. In
this perplexity and doubtful danger, Maurice Fitz Gerald full of courage,
turns him to the Earl, and the martial men in these words: you most valiant
men, we came not into this land, neither were we procured hither to be idle,
or to live deliciously, but to try fortune, and to seek adventures; we stood
sometime upon the top of the wheel, and the game went of our side, now me
thinks fortune wheels about, let us not be dismayed, for that which is low
now, will be up again, and so we must tarry and take our time; such is the
mutability among the sons of men, the fickle and uncertain course of humane
causes, so that prosperity and adversity, enterchangeably do follow the one
after the other. After day, comes the night, and when the night is passed,
the day dawneth again; the sun rises, and spreads his beams over the face
of the earth, holds his course to his fall, passes the night season, and
rises again; we who before this time have made great triumphs, and had the
wings of fortune to fly withal, and are now clowded and enclosed by our
enemies on every side, our victuals are scant, the King our Sovereign Lord
frowneth upon us, we are barred of release by sea and by land, our friends
cannot help us, our enemies are ready to devour us: pluck up your hearts, if
God be with us, we care not who is against us; but alas my brother Fitz
Stephens, whose valiantness, and noble enterprise brake the ice, and made way
for us into this Island, is now shut up in a weak hold, and feeble place, with
wife and children, too weak and slender to keep out so great a force. O
traiterous Donald of Limiric, O treacherous and halfe-hearted people of Kensele
and Wexford! peace is war, trust is treachery, and truth is falsehood among them:
why then do we tarry, why do we linger? is there any hope of relief from our
native soil? no, no, the matter is now otherwise, and we our selves are
presently in a worse case, for as our nation at this present is odious and
hateful unto the Irish men, so are we also misled with some disgrace in our
country, wherefore in so much as fortune favors the forward and courageous,
and discourageth the dastard and faint-hearted, while our wits are fresh, while
our bodies are able, while we are all on heart, let us give the onset; though
we are not so many in number as they are, our courage and valor is known to
exceed theirs, they are but naked wretches, and unarmed people. Reimona
Legrosse immediately breaks out in these speeches. My Uncle Maurice has
gravely delivered his mind, he has pithily advised us, and prudently
councelled us: this is no time to sit in council, to spend time in speeches,
or to use delays, the danger is at hand, the enemy is at the door, we are
compassed by sea and by land, there is no flying, we must fight it out; our
provision is spent, England dares releeve us no more, Ireland defieth us, the
Kings Majesty (I know) dispraiseth not our activities, and yet graceth not our
successes; he discommendeth not our valor, yet envieth all our glory, though
in words he reports well of our service, yet in deeds secretly hinders the
course thereof; lastly, he fears that which we meant not, and doubts of
that which we think not of; wherefore all doubts and delays set apart, let
us, as becomes men of our sort, try the course of fortune, and prove the force
of the enemy; let that appear unto them which is known unto us; of what race
we came, and of what stock we are descended. Camber the first King of Cambria
our native Country, was our Ancestor, and the son of that Noble Brutus, the
first and sole Monarch of Britain, whose Ancestor was Troos, the founder of
that most ancient City of Troy, who descended from Dardanus the son of Jupiter,
from whom is derived unto us, not only the stem of ancient Nobility, but
also a certain natural inclination of valiant minds, and courageous stomachs
resolutely to follow all exploits of prowess and chivalry; and shall we now
like sluggarts, degenerate from so noble a race, and like a sort of Cowards, be
afraid of these naked and unarmed Raskals, in whom there is no valor, by
reason of knowledge or experience in Arms? Shall such a rabble of savages pin
us up within the walls of little Dublin? When in times past all the Princes in
Greece kept wars the space of ten years and odd months, against our
Ancecestors in the famous City of Troy; and could not prevail against them,
until they used treasons, and practiced treacheries which bred unto them a
more infamous victory, then a glorious Triumph? Let it never be said, that the
blood of the Trojans shall be stained in our pusillanimity, and receive
reproach by our peevish dastardy: Fortune, though she be pourtraied to be
blind, as ever void of right judgment, and to stand upon a rolling stone, as
being always flitting and unconstant; yet for the most part, she helps such
as be of courageous minds, and valiant stomachs; you will say, we are but a few,
and the enemy infinite in number; what then? Victory consists not in
multitudes, neither conquest in numbers: Did not Thomiris the Scythian Queen,
with hundreds, overthrow Cyrus with thousands, and took him and slew him? Did
not Laomedes the Spartane encounter (having but four thousand Soldiers) with
mighty Xerxes, who brought five hundred thousand to the field, and overthrew
him? Did not Alexander with a few Macedonians overthrew Darius, the great
Monarch of Persia? Did not he take him, his wife, and daughters prisoners, and
make a Conquest of Persia? Have not we in our persons (all praise be given to
God, the giver of Victory) even you, right honorable Earl at Waterford, my
uncle Fitz Stephens at Wexford, my self at Dondorogh with a few given many the
foil; what remains, since time shall sooner fail then matter want? let us like
men show resolute minds in this service. And to conclude, my mind then and
opinion is, that we do issue out upon them as secretly and as suddenly as we
may, and give the onset.

And for so much as Roderic of Conoght, is the general of the field, in whom
lies the chiefest force, and on whom all the rest do chiefly depend, it shall
be best to begin with him, and if we can give him the overthrow, all the rest
will fly, and we shall obtain a glorious victory; but if we shall fall into
their hands and be slain, yet shall we leave an honorable report and an
immortal fame to our posterity. He had no sooner ended his speech, but every
man armed himself to go forth, and give the onset: They divided the Army in
three battles; and although at the first, they contended for the Vanguard,
yet quickly they were accorded and marched forward. Reimond le Gross
resolutely given, with twenty Knights, and soldiers well appointed, took the
Vanguard. Miles Cogan with thirty Knights, and many a worthy warrior, kept the
maine battle. Earl Strangbow, and Maurice Fitz Gerald, with forty Knights,
Gentlemen and common soldiers, took the Rereward, in every ward were placed
some of the Citizens, and other some with martial men, left at home for the
guard and safety of the City: early in the morning when the enemy was unarmed
and out of order, little thinking that so few within durst attempt to give the
onset to so many without, they fell upon them, killed without mercy, and the
rere was so forward, that they came with the Vanguard by wheeling about to the
slaughter of the enemy. Roderic all this while trusting to his troops and
multitude of people, feared nothing, he took his ease and pleasure, and was
bathing himself; but when the larum was up, and that he saw his men on every
side fall to the ground, never tarried, called for man nor Page to array him,
but took his mantle and ran away all naked, and hardly escaped with life.
The Britains pursued after, and had the killing of them all that day, in the
evening they returned into the City, not only with the honor of the field,
but rich booties, and prays of victuals, armor and other pillage, as much as
man and beast could carry: Immediately, also the rumor hereof, the other Camps
were dispersed, namely, Laurence the Archbishop (whom it had beseemed better to
have been at home with his porthouse, then in Camp with rebels) Mathelan
Machalem, Gillemehelmocus, Otuetol, Ororic Prince of Mead, Ocarol, alias
Ocarvell Prince of Vriell, Machfalin, Ochadese, with many other great
Commanders, where every man shifted for himself; of Gotred, alias Godfray King
of Man that came by Sea, I find nothing, for upon this disaster he took him to
the seas the next day, without any further deliberation; Miles Cogan is left to
govern Dublin, and the Earl with his Army marched toward Wexford, to raise
the siege at the Carreke, to relieve Robert Fitz Stephens; as he passed by
Odrone, the forces of Leinster, by the conduct of Donole Obrene Prince of
Limerik, and Donald Prince Osery set upon him, and fought a cruel fight, but
he went on with the loss of one man. As he came to the borders of Wexford,
certain messengers met and informed him of the mischance that happened to
Robert Fitz Stephens, and the firing of the Town of Wexford; adding moreover,
that the Wexfordians were fully determined, if the Earl came any further
toward them, they would cut off all the heads of Fitz Stephens and all his
company, and send them unto him; whereupon with heavy cheer and sorrowful
heart he changed his mind and turned to Waterford. But before I proceed any
further, I am to deliver the manner of the treachery and villainy showed unto
Robert Fitz Stephens: Donold of Limric, son in Law to Dermot Mac Morogh,
while his father lived, he was one that favored the Britains, and not without
cause; but now forgetting humanity returns to his vomit, bends his course
toward Wexford, and while other states of Ireland by East and by North, with
might and maine practiced the rooting out of the Britains, he flies to the
South, and raises Wexford, and Kensile to lay siege to the Carreke, the fort
of Robert Fitz Stephens. First they begin with force, and seeing that failed
them, they fall to guiles and subtilities under color of peace, pretending
nothing but pure love, tender affection and safeguard of his person, and all
that were with him; they bring with them two Bishops, the one of Kildare, the
other of Fernes, in their formal moods, with other Religious persons (O damned
Prelates) and they had with them the Mass Book, the host, with certain
Relics; upon these they take corporal oaths, and swear with great
solemnity and protestations as follows: ( For the good will and affection we
bear unto you) whom we have always found a courteous and bountiful Prince, we
are to signify unto you this much; how that Dublin is taken, the Earl
Strangbow, Maurice Fitz Girald, Reimond le Gross, Miles Cogan, with all the
English are put to the sword, and now Roderic the Monarch, with all the power
of Conoght and Leinster posteth hither to raze even with the ground, all the
Forts, Holds, and Castles, which the Englishmen have, and especially to
apprehend you Robert Fitz Stephens, and Willam Not, that were the forerunners
into this Land of all this mischief; wherefore take this for truth and be well
advised what to do, if they take you there is no mercy; if you will put your
self with your company and goods into our hands, in the faith of Christianity
we swear we will safely transport you and yours unto Wales, so shall you not
lose so much as a hair of your head; wherefore the great Army being at hand,
yield, come forth and ship your self for Walls. Robert Fitz Stephens (who
would not in this case give credit) yielded himself into their hands,
immediately (more like Jews then Christians) they strippe them out of all that
ever they have, they hang one, they throw another over a rock, they break
another neck, one has his eyes pulled out, another has his tongue cut, some
they scourge with thongs, other some they take, and with sledges break their
Arms and thighs, the greatest kindness they show is iron and imprisonment,
the which Robert Fitz Stephens endured; now leaving these bloody Massacers and
themselves, I will turn to Waterford after Earl Strangbow. When Earl
Strangbow came to Waterford, he found there Hervie de Monte Marisco newly
arrived out of England, with letters from the King, requiring him forthwith to
repair unto his Majesty. Strangbow together with Hervy took the first wind
and went for England, and found the King at Newham not far from Gloucester,
where he was in readiness with a great Army to sail out into Ireland,
whereafter sundry altercations passed between them, at length (as they say) by
means of Hervy, the Kings displeasure was appeased, and it was agreed that the
Earl should swear allegiance to the King, and yield and surender unto him
the City of Dublin, with the Cantreds thereunto adjoining, as also such Towns
and Forts as were bordering upon the Sea side, and as for the residue he should
have and retain to him and his heirs, holding the same of the King and his
heirs.

Strangbow was no sooner known to be in England, and Reimond at Waterford, but
Ororic Monoculus, the one eyed Prince of Mead, mustred a great number of
Soldiers, and laid siege to the City of Dublin. Miles Cogan the Governor
withal his company (while the enemy was careless) upon a sudden issued out
and fell upon them unawares, and made a great slaughter of them, among whom
both Ororic and his son were slain.

In the British Chronicles copied by Owen Cretten out of the Abbeys of Conwey
in North Wales, and Stratflur in South Wales, I find recorded that when King
Henry the 2. made preparation for the conquest of Ireland, Richard Strangbow
Earl of Strigale, Marshall of England, being reconciled to the King, had all
his Lands in England and Normandy restored unto him again, and thereupon the
King made him Seneschall (Steward, says he, of Ireland) Then came Rees prince
of South Wales, and offered the King to further his Conquest, 300. Horses, 400.
Oxen, and for performance of all services gave him 14. pledges; when they were
presented the King made choice of 30. principal Horses, gave back all the
rest, confessing himself greatly pleasured at his hands.

Anno 1172. upon Saint Lukes day the 18. of October, Henry the 2. the 17. year
of his reign, the 41. of his age, entered the Haven of Waterford so writes
Cambrensis that lived then, and being landed to the hearty joy of the English,
and fained welcome of the Irishmen, had by them of Wexford formerly spoken of,
Robert Fitz Stephens in irons presented before him, whom the Wexfordians
(herein I commend Stanihursts indifferent dealing) rather of malice and cankard
spite, then for just cause, did charge with many heinous crimes. The King
advisedly to pacify the rage of furious people, for for the present time,
committed him to prison, whence shortly after, he was with honor and credit,
discharged, and advanced to his great preferment.

After that the King had a little rested himself, and the messengers scattered
themselves with news over the land, the Princes were amazed, they knew the
Kings greatness was such, if fair means would not, force should constrain
them, and therefore in policy resolved themselves to yield allegiance, homage
and fealty. Whereupon Dermot Mac Carty, Prince of Cork, began, became
tributarie, swear faith, truth, and loyalty to the King of England. And the
King thereupon gave the kingdom of Cork to Robert Fitz Stephens and Miles
Cogan as hereafter more at large shall appear.

From Waterford the King raised his army, and marched toward Lismore, where he
tarryed two days, and from thence he marched to Cashill, not far from the
Shure, and thither came to him, Donald O Bren, Prince of Limric, who submitted
himself, became tributarie, and swore fealty; whereupon the King as he had
formerly done with Cork, appointed a Governor for Limric: then also came in
Donall, Prince of Ossorie, and Omelaghlen Ophelin, Lord of the Decies, with all
the chieftaines of Mounster, submitting themselves, as others had formerly
done, surrendering unto the Kings hands, their territories, and holding them
again at his pleasure. Thence the King returned to Waterford, left there his
household, and Robert Fitz Barnard, governor of the town, and marched with his
army toward Dublin. In his journey there came unto him of the chiefest
commanders of the land, Omathelan, Machelan, Ophelan, O Mac Chelweie, Gille Mac
Holemoc, O tuell helly Ocathdhessy, O Caraell of Vriell, and Roric the son of
Monoculus of Meth. But Roderic the Monarch came no nearer then the Shanon,
where Hugh de lacy, and William Fitz Aldelme, by the Kings command met him, and
he desiring peace, submitted himself, swore allegiance, became tributarie,
and did put in (as all others had done) hostages and pledges for the
performance of the same. Thus was all Ireland, saving Vlster, brought in
subjection, and every Prince of the other parties, in his own person, saving
Roderic King of Connaght, submitted himself: but he subtly alleged, that he
submitted Connaght, but not the command of all Ireland, the which he reserved
for the Monarch and his successors: but of this hereafter if God permit.

Christmas drew on, which the King kept at Dublin, where he feasted all the
Princes of the land, and gave them rich and beautiful gifts, they repaired
thither out of all parts of the land, and wonderful it was to the rude people
to behold the Majesty of so puissant a Prince, the pastime, the sport, and the
mirth, and the continual music, the masking, mumming, and strange shows,
the gold, the silver, and plate, the precious ornaments, the dainty dishes,
furnished with all sorts of fish and flesh, the wines, the spices, the delicate
and sumptuous banquets, the orderly service, the comely march, and seemly array
of all officers: the Gentlemen, the Esquires, the Knights, and Lords in their
rich attire (such as rugged Mantles and Irish Troosses were never acquainted
withal) the running at Tilte in complete harness, with barb'd horses, where
the staves shivered and flew in splinters, safer to sit, then upon an Irish
Pillion that plays cross and pile with the rider, the plain honest people
admired, and no mervaile: but now to more serious matters. Henry 2. having thus
conquered Ireland (with the envy of the French and foreign Princes) without
one drop of sweat, without drawing of sword, or shedding of one drop of English
blood, (as it became his Princely calling) turned himself to reform the state
Ecclesiastical, and the misdemeanors of holy Church, whereof Cambrensis
writes: In the year of Christ's incarnation 1172. and in the first year, when
Henry the most Noble King conquered Ireland, Christianus, Bishop of Lismore,
and Legate of the Apostolic See; Donatus, Archbishop of Cashill; Laureance,
Archbishop of Dublin; and Catholi^us, Archbishop of Tuemond, with their
Suffragans, and fellow Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Deanes and Archdeacons, and
many other Prelates of the Church of Ireland, by the commandment of the King,
did assemble themselves, and kept a Synod at Cashill, and there debating many
things concerning the wealth, estate, and reformation of the Church of Ireland,
did provide remedies for the same. At this Council, in behalf of the King,
(whom he had sent thither) there were Raffe, Abbot of Buldeway, Raffe,
Archdeacon of Landaffe, Nicholas, the Kings Chaplain, with diverse other
Clerks; sundry good statutes and wholesome laws were there devised, which
were after subscribed and confirmed by the King himself, and under his
authority, which were these that follow.

First, it is decreed that all good and faithful Christian people throughout
Ireland, shall refrain and forbear to marry with their near kins folks and
cousins, and match with such as lawfully they might do.

Secondly, that children shall be catechized without the Church door, and
baptized in the Font appointed in the Church for the same purpose.

Thirdly, that every Christian do truly and faithfully pay yearly, the
tithes of his Cattle, Corn, and all other his increase and profits, to the
Church or Parish where he is a parishioner.

Fourthly, that all the Church lands and possessions throughout all Ireland,
shall be free from all secular exactions and impositions, and especially that
no Lords, Earls, or Noble men, nor their children nor family, shall extort or
take any cony and livery, cosheries or cuddies, or any other like custom from
thence, forth, in or upon any of the Church land and territories; and likewise
that neither they, nor any other person, do thenceforth exact out of the said
Church lands, old wicked and detestable customs of cony and livery, the which
they were wont to extort upon such towns and villages of the Churches, as were
near, and next bordering upon them.

Fifthly, when carik or composition is made among the lay people, for any
murder, that no person of the Clergy, (though he be a kin to any of the
parties) shall contribute any thing thereunto, but as they be guiltless of
the murder, so shall they be free from paying of money for any such release
for the same.

Sixthly, that all and every good Christian, being sick and weak, shall before
the Priest and his neighbors, make his last Will and Testament, and his debts
and servants wages being paid, all his movables to be divided, (if he have any
children) into three parts, whereof one part to be to the Children, another to
his Wife, and the third part to be for the performing of his Will; and if so be
that he have no children, then the goods to be divided into two parts, whereof
the one moytie to be to his Wife, and the other to the performance of his Will
and Testament. And if he have no Wife, but only Children, then likewise the
goods to be divided into two parts, whereof the one to himself, and the other
to his children:

Seventhly, that every Christian dying in the Catholic faith, shall be
reverently brought to the Church, and to be buried, as appertains.

Eighthly and lastly, that all the divine Service in the Church of Ireland,
shall be kept, used, and observed in the like order and manner as it is in the
Church of England; for it is meet and right, that as by Gods providence and
appointment, Ireland is become now subject, and under the King of England: so
the same should take from thence, the order, and rule, and manner how to
reform themselves, and to live in better sort.

Gelasius, Primate of Armagh, was not at this Synod, but at his coming to
Dublin, he concurred with his Colleagues, and confirmed the premises. He was a
man of great learning, godly life, and great age; when by reason of age, sight,
and strength, and stomach failed him, as he travailed, he had with him
always, a white Cow that gave him milk, and was his only sustentation.
Gilbert succeeded this Gelasius in that See. The Antiquaries of that time have
recorded, that the winter during the Kings abode in Ireland, there rose such
storms and tempest by sea and by land, that no news could be heard either out
of England or Normandy, neither Ship or Bark cross the seas, until
mid-Lent, at what time with an easterly wind, there came out of England, and
Aquitaine in France, news unto the King, how that there came into Normandy in
France, two Cardinals from Alexander the third, to wit, Albertus and Theodinus,
to enquire of the death of Thomas, Archbishop of Canterbury: Whereupon the King
sent in post before him, to signify that he was returning with all speed, and
that he would confer with them in Normandy. And leaving Ireland, he was
very sorry that time and leisure served not to lay things in better order for
the stay of the land. And also suspecting the greatness of Richard, Earl
Strangbow, whom at that time he took with him into England; he appointed to
govern Dublin, Hugh de Lacy, to whom he had given in Fee, the territory of
Meth, with twenty Gentlemen to his Guard. Robert Fitz Stephens, and Morice Fitz
Girald, with twenty others to attend their persons. Likewise he left Governors
over Waterford, Humfrey de Bohune, Robert Fitz Bernard, and Hugh de Grant
devil with forty persons to their guard. Lastly, he assigned over Wexford,
William Fitz Adelme, Philip de Bruesa, and Philip de Hastings, with twenty to
their guard, and took shipping at Wexford, Monday in Easter week, by six a
clock in the morning, with full sail, and landed the same day about noone, at
Saint David's in Wales; so writes Cambrensis in his vaticinall history, and in
his Itinerarie of Cambria. What time the King was in Ireland, there fell a
great plague in his army, which was some cause of his departure from Dublin to
Wexford. Cambrensis out of the mouth of the common people, attributes it unto
certain Archers, cessed at Finglas, that cut down the trees of the
Churchyard, and therefore were they justly punished, and left their bones
there every one; but the British Chronicle, and Holinshed also, more likely to
be true, affirms that there fell a plague among the Kings soldiers in
Ireland, by reason of the change of the air, and victuals, and concourse of
people, corrupting the same.

The names of the men of account orderly as they came to the conquest of
Ireland.

Dermot Mac Morogh, Prince of Leinster, after his return out of England,
wintred at Fernes, expecting the coming of these Conquerours. Robert Fitz
Stephens, the Kings Constable at Abertivy: Anno 1170.
David Barry. Hervie de Monte Marisco, married Nesta, daughter to Maurice Fitz
Girald. Willi^ Not. Maurice Prendregast. Meilerus. Maurice Fitz Girald.
Reimond le Gross, nephew to Robert Fitz Stephens, married with Basilia, the
sister of Earl Strangbow. William Ferrand. Richard Strangbow, Earl of
Penbroke. Miles Cogan. brethren and nephews to Robert Fitz Stephens, and
Maurice Fitz Girald. Richard Cogan. brethren and nephews to Robert Fitz
Stephens, and Maurice Fitz Girald. Henry 2. King of England, etc. Anno 1172.
Hugh de Lacy. William Fitz Adelme. Raffe Abbot of Bulldewa in Normandy.
Raffe, Archdeacon of Landaff. Nicholas, the Kings Chaplain. Humphrey de
Bohune. Robert Fitz Bernard. Hugh de Grandevilla. Philip de Brensa. Philip de
Hastings. Silvester, Giraldus, Barry, Cambrensis. John Ridensford. Girald. the
two sons of Maurice Fitz Girald. Alexander. the two sons of Maurice Fitz
Girald. William Makrell. Philip Mercr^s. William Morice, Fitz Girald his eldest
son, married with Elen, sister to Earl Strangbow. Griffin the son of
William Fitz Girald the elder brother. Philip Welsh. Adam Herford
brethren....... Herford brethren....... Purcell, Lieutenant of the Army,
slain by the Waterfordians. Nich. Wallingford a Prior, afterward Abbot of
Malmesburie. David Welsh, nephew to Reimund. Ieffrey Welsh. Reimund of Kantan.
Reimund Fitz Hugh. Milo of Saint David. Robert Poer. Osbert of Hertford. Willin
Bend^ger. Adam of Gernemie. Hugh Tirell. John de Courcey. Hugh Cantwell.
Redmond Cantimore.
Alliance of the chief Conquerours of Ireland.
Nesta the daughter of Rees ap Tuyder, Prince of South Wales,

Loved Henry the first, King of England, father to Henry father to Henry Fitz
Henry. Meiler Fitz Henry. Robert Fitz Henry.


was married twice, 1 Steven Custos castri Abertivi. Robert Fitz Steve^ Rafe,
Mered^cal^as Meredith Milo.

2 Gerald of Windsor. William Fitz Girald who had issue, Reimund le Gross, who
married Basilia, Strangbowes Sister. Griffeth.
Maurice Fitz Girald William married Ellen, Sister to Strangbow, Camb. or by
others, Alma, Daughter of Strangbow. Girald. Alexander. Nesta, married to
Hervie de monte Marisco. Milo or Miles. David, Bishop of Saint David's.



Not long after the Kings departure out of Ireland, Ororic of Meth craved a
parlee, with Hughe Delacy; pretending reformation of abuses, and establishing
of perfect love and amity; but meant nothing else, saving falsehood, treason and
villainy: the place being appointed ( Cambrensis calls it Ororics Hill, I take
it to be the Hill of Taragh) and oaths taken of each side, with conditions
that all arms should be laid aside, and few persons approach to the place,
Ororic contrary to the covenants, laid an ambush, that upon a sign or token
given by him, they should forth with issue out of the bushes, and ditches, and
effect his traitorous devices: The night before the parley, Griffith the nephew
of Robert and Morice, being the son of William the elder brother, dreamed in
his sleep, that he saw a great heard of wild hogs, rush upon Hugh Delacy,
and his uncle Maurice, and that one of them being more furious and raging then
the rest, had rent them with his tuskes, and tore them in pieces, if he had not
with his force rescued them, and killed the Bore: this dream troubled him
exceedingly, wherewith he acquainted his company; and made him and the rest be
the more upon their keeping, to prevent treachery: The hour of parlee came,
they met and confered together. Griffith not forgetting his dream, made choice
of seven tall men of his own kindred, in whom he reposed great trust and
confidence, well mounted, with swords, sparthes, and sheilds; raunged the
fields (as nigh the Hill as they might) and made sundry Carreers and brave
Tournaments, under pretense of recreation and pleasant pastime; yet always
casting an eye to the Hill, to see the end of this parlee.

Hughe Delacy and Ororic, being somewhat long together, Ororic to work his
treason, stepped aside, faining to make water, upon the sign he gave his men
brought him his horse, and sparth, the which he taking upon his shoulder, meant
therewith to have cloven Hughe Delacy his head, if the interpreter had not
stepped between, whose arm was clean cut off and himself wounded to the death.

Maurice Fitz Girald and Griffith his nephew rush in, the traitors of the one
side, the true men of the other are together by the ears; when Ororic the
traitor took horse to run away, Griffith with his lance run him through,
and killed him and his horse and three of his men, cut off his head and sent it
to the King of England: this was the end of Orirics treason, and the effect of
Griffiths dream.

Immediately upon this, Earl Richard (being formerly upon reconciliation made
with the King, appointed Seneschall of Ireland) is now sent out of Normandy, by
especially commission from the King, with Reimondle gross his brother in Law,
in joint commission to govern the whole land, and to be his Lieutenant in
Ireland; where he found the Irish says Cambrensis, constant in inconstancy,
firm in wavering, and faithful in untruthes: he found emulation between
Hervy and Reimond, and the Army in a mutiny, for lack of pay at Herveies
hands; whereupon he made Reimond Lieutenant of the forces. Reimond immediately
mustred his men, drew them forth to the Decies among the Rebels, where they
preyed and spoiled. Secondly, they marched to Lismore, where they did the like.
Lastly, along the Sea cost, they go with their booties, preyes and rich
pillage toward Waterford; and finding at Dunganan some thirteen botes out of
Waterford and other places, they lade them with their preys, intending by water
to sail for Waterford; while they waited for wind, Cork men envyed their
success; prepared 32. Barks, manned and furnished them out out of their Town,
to overthrow Reimond and the English men, and to recover the preyes; they met,
they fought cruelly; Cork men are overthrown, and their Captain Gilbert Mac
Turger was slain, by a valiant Knight Philip Welsh, and finally Adam Herford
with all his charge, safely arrived in Waterford. Reimond was not at this
skirmish, but by the way he met with Dermot Mac Corty Prince of Desmond, who
with great power was come to the aid of the men of Cork. They likewise
skrimished and fell to a cruel fight, where Dermot forsook the field with
small credit, and Reimond went to Waterford with four thousand head of cattle.

Immediately upon this, news came out of England unto Reimond, that William
Fitz Girald his father, was departed this life; whereupon he sailed to Wales,
and Hervey De monte Marisco was appointed by the Earl, Lieutenant of the
forces. This Hervey to advance his credit, purposed to work some exploits, and
drew out of Dublin the Earl to Cashil; there also after consultation by mandat
from the Earl, he appointed the Soldiers that were at Dublin to meet him:
When they came as far as Ossorie, Donald Prince of Limirik, having by his
espials before hand intelligence thereof, stole upon them in the morning; slew
of them four Knights, whereof O Grame an Irish man was one, and four hundred
soldiers; with this the Earl was discouraged, and went to Waterford; the
Irish gathered heart and determined to root out all the Englishmen. So that
Roderic Prince of Conoght took this opportunity, passed the Shannan, and
wasted all to the walls of Dublin. The Earl being in this perplexity wrote
unto Reimond, that was in Wales. As soon as you have read those our letters,
make all the haste you can to come away, and bring with you all the help and
force you can make, and then according to your own will and desire, you shall
assuredly enjoy that which you long looked for. Immediately he prepared
himself, together with his cousin Meilerius; shipped 30. young Gentlemen of
his own kindred. 100. horsemen, with 300. archers and foot, of the best and
chosen men of all Wales; and in 20. Barks arrived in Waterford: It was at such
time as the Waterford men had determined to kill every English man within the
walls; but when they saw the Barks come in with flags, and banners displaid,
they were astonished, and staid their course.

Reimond enters the town of Wexford, sets all in order, takes the Earl
with him, and all their forces, and went to Wexford; he had left behind him
one Purcell his Lieutenant to guard the town, whom the Waterfordians slew, and
put to the sword, of English birth, man, woman and child; but such as had fled
to Reynolds tower, plagued them sore afterward, drove them to entreat for
peace, the which they obtained with hard conditions: And, says the book of
Houth, the Waterfordians were ever after the less believed. For all the
troubles in England and Normandy, and these treasons and rebellions in
Ireland, the King was not unmindefull to quiet the people, and to establish
himself and his heirs in the kingdom; first, he sent Ambassadors to Rome to
clear himself of the death of Thomas of Canterbury: secondly, he sent
messengers thither concerning the state of Ireland, whereunto Alexander the
third, answered as follows, Alexander the Bishop, the servant of the servants
of God, to his dearly beloved son, the Noble King of England, greeting,
grace and Apostolic benediction. Forasmuch as things given and granted upon
good reason, by our predecessors, are to be well allowed of, ratified and
confirmed; we well considering and pondering the grant and privilege for and
concerning the dominion of the land of Ireland to us appertaining, and lately
given by Adrian our predecessor; we following his steps, do in like manner
confirm, ratify and allow the same, reserving and saving to Saint Peter, and
to the Church of Rome, the yearly pension of one penny out of every house, as
well in England, as in Ireland; provided also that the barbarous people of
Ireland by your means be reformed and recovered from that filthy life, and
abominable conversation; that as in name, so in life and manners they may be
Christians; and that as that rude and disordered Church, being by you reformed,
the whole nation may also, with the profession of the name, be in acts and
deeds, followers of the same. And says the book of Houth, Alexander the third
besought the devil to take them all that gainesayed this Kings title, Amen.
Henry 2. sent this privilege to Ireland by Nicholas Wallingford, a Prior,
afterward Abbot of Malmesbury, and William Fitz Adelme. And then being at
Waterford, they caused an assembly, and a Synod of the Bishops and Clergy
within the land to be gathered together, where, in open audience, this
privilege of Alexander, and the other of Adrian (formerly spoken of) were
read, and published, and ratified. Reimond having settled his affairs at
Wexford, marched toward Dublin, the noise of his coming drove Roderic the
rebel of Connaght away; he was no sooner come to Dublin, but the news of the
rebellion of Limric followed after, where Donald O bren having sworn faith and
fealty unto Henry 2. is now revolted and turned to his vomit. Reymond makes
preparation, mustereth his men, chose out 26. gallants, 300. horsemen, and 300.
Archers, and foot, and comes to Lymeric, where he found the Bridges drawn,
the river swift and impassable, the townsmen upon the walls, with all manner
of defense for their safeguard. David Welsh, a lusty Gentleman, makes no more
ado, but puts spurs to his horse, and with good guiding thereof, crosses
the river, and got to land; immediately he calls to his company, come, I have
found a Ford: yet for all that, none would follow, but Ieffery Welsh, and
Meilerius Fitz Henry. Then Reimond turns him to the army with these words:
You worthy men, who of nature are valiant, and whose Prowess we have well
tried, come away, the way heretofore not known, and the river hitherto thought
not passable, by our adventures, a foord is now found therein; let us therefore
follow him that is gone before, and help him being now in distress; let us
not suffer nor see so worthy a Gentleman thus for our common cause and honor,
oppressed, to perish, and to be cast away before our eyes, and in our sight,
for want of our help, and by means of our dastard cowardice. It is no time to
use many words, the shortness of the time, the present necessity of this
Noble Gentleman, and the state of our own honor, urges expedition, and
requires haste. And even with the words, he put spurs to his horse, and
adventureth the river, after whom, followed the whole company, every one
striving who might be foremost. And as God would, they passed all over safe,
saving two soldiers, and one Gwydo a Gentleman: when they had recovered land,
the enemy fled, whom they pursued, and in the chase slew a number of them, they
entered the town, got great spoils and riches, but greater honor and fame.
When all was quiet, Reimond left there a strong Garrison, and Miles of Saint
David's, Lieutenant over them, and returned to the borders of Leinster.

Envy hardly sleeps, but is still devising of mischief; Hervie de monte
Marisco, though now by marriage allied unto Reymond, yet by malice works his
overthrow, envying his honor and prosperous success, sends secret letters
to the King against him, which are not worthy to be recorded, being but the
sink of secret malice. The King, (as the nature of Princes is to be jealous
and suspicious of any greatness) is easily brought to credit Hervie, and
thereupon sends four of his servants to Ireland, Robert Poer, Osbert of
Herlotte, or Hereford, William Bendeger, and Adam of Gernemie; two of them to
stay with Earl Richard, and the other two to bring Reimond away with them; as
Reymond was ready to go for England, news came that Donald, Prince of Lymeric
had besieged the town, and that the garrison was greatly distressed, and in
want of victuals: the Earl, with Reimond and the four Gentlemen, fell to
consultation, what course to hold; they found in the army a secret mutiny,
where the soldiers said flatly, they would not serve that way, unless Reimond
were their Captain; to be short, it was concluded that Reimond should
undertake the service; when he had mustered and made choice of horse and foot,
he marched toward Lymeric: Donald, Prince of Ossory, who bore private grudge
to Donald of Lymeric, Morogh of Kencile, with other Irish men, then served and
attended upon Reimond. By the way a Post came, and certified Reimond, that
Donald of Lymeric had raised his siege, and was come to the pace of Cashill to
give him battle; this pace of it self was naturally very strong, but by
trenching, and hedging, and plashing of trees, it seemed invincible. When of
each side they were ready to join battle, Donald, Prince of Ossory being
desirous to see his enemy of Lymeric and Thomond overthrown, turns him to
the English men with these words: You worthy* Noble, and valiant Conquerours of
this land, you are this day valiantly to give the onset upon your enemies,
which if you do after your old and accustomed manner, no doubt the victory
will be yours; for we with our sparthes, and you with your swords, will
sharply pursue them, as they shall very hardly escape our hands, and avoid our
force, but if it so fall out (which God forbid) that you be overthrown, and
hove the worse side, be you assured that we will leave you, and turn to our
enemies, and take part with them. Wherefore be of good courage, and look well
to your selves, and consider that you are now far from any Fort or place of
refuge, and therefore if you should be driven to fly, the same will be long
and dangerous unto you. As for us, ye may not trust to us, for we determine to
stick to them who shall have the victory, and will pursue and be on the jackes
of them who shall fly and run away: and therefore be no longer assured of
us, then whilst ye be Conquerours: Meilerius, who had the foreward, being
somewhat moved and warmed with those words, suddenly, like a blast of wind,
entered the Pass, pulled away the bushes, brake down the hedges, the Pioners
filled the trenches, and speedily made plain the way, with no small slaughter
of the enemies, and so they marched without any great peril to Lymeric, where
they releeved the army, and set things in order, and rested a short time.
Roderic of Connaght, and Donald of Thomond finding themselves weak, craved a
parlee, it was granted them: Roderic would needs keep on the water, and Donald
kept the wood. Who would trust them that would trust no other? Reimond chose
the midst between them both; to be short, a peace was concluded, they both
submitted themselves, gave hostages, made fealty, and swore to be true
thenceforth for ever to the King of England, and to his successors after him.
This service was no sooner performed, but there came messengers to Reimond from
Dermot Mac Carty Prince of Desmond, humbly craving his aid, against his eldest
son Cormac O Lechan, who was in arms against his natural father: with the
advice of his Council; Reimond grants aid, he marches toward Cork and
subdueth the rebel, the son dissembleth with the father and clapped him in
prison: the father requiteth the son with like: he got him in under color of
peace, clapped him in prison and cut off his head.

And not long after, says Cambrensis, the men of Cork at a parlee not far
from the Town, slew their Prince Dermot Mac Carty, and most of his company.

Anno 1177. (so writes Holinshed) Henry the 2. held a Parliament at Windsore,
where Laurence Archbishop of Dublin was present; as what time Roderic King of
Conoght sent thither the Archbishop of Tuam, the Abbot of Saint Brandon, with
one Laurence his Chaplen; offering all submission and loyalty. The King
willingly heard them, and gladly concluded a Peace at the importunate suit of
his Messengers to avoid further trouble; injoyning Roderic to pay him in token
of subjection, a tribute of Cow hides, the Charter of agreement was drawn and
subscribed as follows.

A Charter of agreement between Henry 2. King of England, and Roderic King of
Connoght.
Hic est finis and concordia quae facta fuit apud Windesore, in Octabis Sancti
Michaelis, Anno gratiae 1175. Inter Dominum Regem Angliae Henricum secundum;
and Rodericum Regem Conaciae, per Catholicum Tuamensem Archepiscopum and
Abbatem C. Sancti Brandani, and Magistrum Laurentium Cancellarium Regis
Conaciae.

1. Scilicet quod Rex Angliae concedit predicto Roderico Ligio homini suo
Regnum Conaciae quamdiu ei fideliter serviet, vt sit Rex sub eo, paratus ad
servitiu^ suu^, sicut homo suus and ut teneat terra^ suam, ita been and in pace
sicut tenuit antequam Dominus Rex Angliae intraret Hiberniam; reddendo ei
tributum: and totam illam terram and habitatores terrae habeat sub se, and
justiciae ut tributum Regi Angliae integre persolvant, and per manum ejus sua
jura sibi conservent, and illi qui modo tenent, teneant in pace, quam diu
mansuerint in fidelitate Regis Angliae, and fideliter and integre persolverint
tributum and alia jura sua quae ei deben^, per manum Regis Conaciae, salvo in
omnibus jure and honor Domini Regis Angliae and suo.

2. Et si qui ex eis Regi Angliae, and ei rebels fuerint, and tributum and
alia jura Regis Angliae, per manum ejus solvere noluerint, and a fidelitate
Regis Angliae recesserint, ipse eos justitiet and amoveat, and si eos perse
justitiare non poterit; Constabularius Regis Angliae and familia sua de terra
illa juvabunt cum ad hoc faciendum, quum ab ipso fuerint requisiti, and ipsi
viderint quod necesse fuerit, and propter hunc finem reddet predictus Rex
Conaciae Domino Regi Angliae tributum singulis annis; scilicet, de singulis
december animalibus, unum co^ium placabile mercatoribus, tam de tota terra sua
quam de aliena.

3. Excepto quod de terris illis quas Dominus Rex Angliae retinuit in dominio
suo, and in dominio Baronum suorum nihil se intromittet: Scilicet Duvelina cum
pertinentijs suis, and Midia cum omnibus pertinentijs suis, sicut unqua^
Murchart Wamai Leth Lachlin, eam melius and before tenuet, aut aliqui qui eam
de eo tenuerint. Et excepta Wesefordia cum omnibus pertinentijs suis, scilicet
cum tota Lagenia, and excepta Waterf. cum tota terra illa quae est a Waterf.
usque ad Dungarvan; ita ut Dungarvan sit cum omnibus pertinentijs suis, infra
terram illam.

4. Et si Hibernenses illi qui aufugerint redire voluerint ad terram Baronum
Regis Angliae, redeant in pace reddendo tributum predictum quod alij reddunt,
vel faciendo antiqua servitia quae facere solebant pro terris suis, et hoc sit
in arbitrio Dominorum suorum, et si aliqui eorum redire noluerint, Domini eorum
et Rex Conaciae accipiat obsides, ad omnibus quos ei Co^misit Dominus Rex
Angliae ad voluntatem Domini Regis et suam, et ipse dabit obsides ad voluntatem
Domini Regis Angliae illos vel alios, et ipsi servient Domino de Canibus et
Avibus suis singulis annis de presentis suis, et nullum omnino de quacunque
terra Regis sit, retinebunt contra voluntatem Domini Regis. Hijs testibus
Richardo Episcopo Wintoniae, Gaufrido Episcopo Eliensi, Laurentio Duvelinensi
Archepiscopo, Gaufrido, Nicolao, et Rogero Capelanis Regis, Guilelmo Commit.
Essex, et aliis multis.

Moreover at that Parliament, the King gave an Irishman named Augustine, the
Bishopric of Waterford, which was then void, and sent him unto Ireland, with
Laurence the Archbishop of Dublin, to be consecrated of Donatus Archbishop of
Cashill.

Anno 1176. Bertran de Verdon founded the Monastery of Crokisdan. As Reimond
marches toward Leinster, news came unto him from the Lady Basilia his wife,
that Strangbow was dead, the which he concealed with good countenance; and
called a secret council of the wiser sort and trustiest friends, how to
dispose of the State of the Land, before the Irish were acquainted therewith: it
was agreed upon for that the enemy were many, the forces but few, they should
strengthen all their holds upon the Sea cost until the K. pleasure were
further known, and withdraw the midland garrisons to supply and complete the
same. And among others they thought good to take the garrison out of Lymerik
and deliver the Town to the charge of Donald Obrien of Thomond Prince of
Lymericke; he being sent for, came in poast, understanding Reimonds pleasure,
was the gladdest man that might be, and undertook the charge, Viz. to keep
the Town to the Kings use, and at his pleasure to re-deliver it, as also in
the mean time to keep the peace: this he undertook with Corporal oaths,
and solemn vows; and thereupon delivered hostages. But the Englishmen were no
sooner over the one end of the Bridge, but Donald broke the other end, and set
fire in the four quarters of the Town, saying there shall no English race
rest here any longer: This they beheld with their eyes, to their no small
grief of mind. Cambrensis inveyeth against this Donald Obrien calling him
traitor, wicked, impudent, perfidious, perjured and what not? This was in Anno
one thousand, one hundred, seventy seven.

Earl Strangbow left behind, one daughter of tender years, and lies buried
in the Church of the blessed Trinity in Dublin, over against the Pulpit, in the
body of the Church, whose exequies, Laurence O Tool, Archbishop of Dublin did
solemnize with great reverence; whereupon the King sent into Ireland, William
Fitz Adelme to be his Lieutenant, with the allowance of twenty Gentlemen of
his household, and joined with him in commission, John de Courcy, with the
allowance of ten men to attend his person. Robert Fitz Stephens, and Miles
Cogan, who had nobly served him in his wars two years, with the allowance of
twenty men to attend their persons; at which time, says Holinshed, the Irish
men paid the King a tribute of twelve pence yearly for every house, or else
for every yoke of Oxen, ( alias plow) which they had of their own.

Richard, surnamed Strangbow, had to his father, Gilbert, likewise surnamed
Strangbow, for his valor and strength; this Gilbert was E. of Ogye in
Normandy, and Lord of Totenha^, Alverdiston, and Wolaston in England, so
created by Henry 1. William the son of Osbert, a Norman, E. of Ogie in
Normandy, had issue, Richard, E. of Ogie, this Richard had issue Walter and
Gilbert, aforesaid father to Richard E. Strangbow; William Fitz Osbert came
into England in the aid of William the Conqueror. And as far as I can learn,
Walter was the first Earl of Penbroke (the Britains call it Penbraich More,
the head of an arm of the sea) whence both the County, and the most noble
Earldome have their denominations. Arnulph de monte Gomerik, the younger son
of Roger de montegomerik, that was by William the Conqueror created Earl of
Arundell and Shrewsbury, builded the Castle of Penbroke, where Henry the
seventh was borne; William the Conqueror gave him Divet and Cardigan, he was
Earl of Ogie, and the second Earl of Penbroke, and married the daughter (by
the mediation of Girald de Windsore, Constable of his Castle) of Morogh, King
of Leinster in Ireland. Gilbert, surnamed Strangbow, was created by King
Stephen, the third Earl of Penbroke, he was Earl of Ogie in Normandy, Lord
of Totenham, Alverdiston, Wolaston, and Cardigan, and in England succeeded
Arnulph. Henry the first made him Earl of Strigule, now called Chepstow, and
gave him Cardigan; this Gilbert builded Castrogie, alias Castrum Ogie, in
Gwent, and the Castle of Stratmirike.

Richard, surnamed Strangbow, succeeded his father Gilbert; his style as I take
it is thus. Richard, surnamed Strangbow, Lord of Totenham, Alverdiston,
Wolaston, and Cardigan; in England, Earl of Penbroke, Earl of Strigule, alias
Domonius de Chepstow in England, Earl of Ogie in Normandy, Earl of
Leicester, Earl Marshall of England, Vicegerent of Normandy, Lord Lieutenant
of Ireland, and Prince of Leinster in the right of Eva his wife, sole heir of
Dermot Mac Morogh, King of Leinster.

This Richard had issue by his first wife, a son, a fine youth, and a gallant
stripling, who following his father with some charge in battle array, as he
passed by Idrone in Leinster, to relieve Robert Fitz Stephens in Wexford, upon
the sight and cry of the Irish men, when his father was in cruel fight, gave
back with his company, to the great discouragement of the host, yet the Earl
got the victory, and commanded with the tears in his cheeks, that his son
should be cut in the middle with a sword for his cowardice in battle; he was
buried in the Church of the blessed Trinity in Dublin, where now his father
rests by his side, and caused the cause of his death for an Epitaph to be set
over him.

Nate ingrate mihi pugnanti terga dedisti,
Non mihi, sed genti and regno quoque terga dedisti.
My son unkind did fly the field, the father fighting hard,
Nor me, nor English birth did weigh, nor kingdom did regard.
How the son pleaded with his father for the place of service, and how the
father answered, Stanihurst has many circumstances hereof, and delivered, that
his own father in his fury, and in the face of the enemy, cut him off, and
marvaileth that Cambrensis would conceal it, and in the end takes it as a
matter of truth, both by the testimony of the Tomb in Christ Church, as also
by the industry of Sir Henry Sidney, Knight, a great favourer of Antiquities,
in preserving the same, to the knowledge of the posterity.

Richard Earl Strangbow by his second wife Eva, the daughter of Dermot Mac
Morogh, had issue, one daughter, Isabell, whom Richard the first gave in
marriage to William Maxfield, Lord Maxfield, Earl Marshall of England, of whom
(God willing) I shall have occasion to speak further, when I come to his time.

The same year that Strangbow dyed, viz. 1177. (so Holinshed writes) John de
Courcy entered Vlster, discomfited the Irish, and wanne the City of Dune, where
the body of Saint Patricke, Saint Colme, and Saint Brigide the Virgin rests,
whom Courcy calls tria jocalia Hiberniae, the three jewels of Ireland. At the
winning of Dune, Roderic King of Connaght, and Monarch of Ireland, (at several
times before sworn to the King) raised a mighty army against Courcy, where
Roderic was overthrown, and the Bishop of Dune taken prisoner among other
rebels; the which Bishop, at the request of Cardinal Vinian (then present) was
set at liberty. This Cardinal, says mine Author, entitled Sancti Stephani de
monte Celio, was sent from Alexander 3. and coming into England without
license, was pardoned by Henry 2. and permitted to go into Scotland, and the
north parts, where his commission directed him; when he had ended his business
in Scotland, he passed over into Man, where he held his Christmas with Gotred,
King of Man, and after the Epiphanie, sailed from thence into Ireland, and came
thither (says Newbrigiensis) the same time that the English men invaded the
country, and was entertained by Roderic, and the Bishop of Dune, and others,
with great reverence.

The Irish men ask council of Vivian the Legate, what in that case he thought
best to be done, whether they should fight, or yield unto the English nation;
he gave counsel, forgetting what Adrian 4. and Alexander 3. had formerly
granted and said, fight in defense of your country. This Legate (craftily
preventing all mishaps) took the Church of Dune for his sanctuary, and had in
readiness the Popes commission, and the King of Englands Pass unto the
Captains of Ireland for his safe conduct: From thence he went to Dublin,
called the Prelates, held a council, and filled his bags with the sins of
the people; the English Captains understanding of it, gave him in charge,
either to depart the land, or to go to the wars, and serve for pay with
them, and no longer to receive money for naught.

In the book of Howth it is further alleged, how that this Legate in his
Synod at Dublin (whether it were to curry favor with the English men, and to
color his other pranckes, it forces not greatly) showed and published openly
the King of Englands right to Ireland, with the Popes grant and confirmation,
and accursed all those that gainesaid the same.

Now to the true history of Sir John de Courcy, as worthy a Knight for martial
prowess, as ever trod upon Irish ground, whom Cambrensis lightly overskipped,
partly upon private grudge, for that Sir John de Courcy allowed him not for
Vicar general in Ireland, and Secretary to the State, partly in favor of Sir
Hugh Delacy, who maligned and envied the honor and renown, and prosperous
successes of Courcy; lastly for fear of King John, into whose displeasure
Courcy fell, through the false accusation of Lacy and his faction, yet the
certainty of his exploits has been preserved, and in Latin committed to
Paper by a Friar in the North, the which book Oneil brought to A^magh, and was
translated into English by..... Dowdall, Primate there, Anno 1551. He was by
father a Norman, by mother a Cambrian or Britain, and married the daughter of
Gotred, King of Man; he was a Gentleman descended, as it seems by his coat,
of an ancient house, of whom the Irish men hold that Merlin prophesied, where
he wrote: A white Knight sitting on a white horse, bearing birds in his shield,
shall be the first which with force of Arms, shall enter and subdue Vlster.

He served King Henry the second in all his wars, and in France he met with a
worthy Knight, Sir Amoricus Tristeram, who married Courcy his sister, and
whether it was derived of the Ladies name, or for that they were married on
Saint Laurence day, ever after he and his posterity after him, was called Sir
Amoricus de Sancto Laurentio, whence the Noble house of Howth is lineally
descended, whereof hereafter in another place more at large. These two Knights
became sworn brethren in the Church of our Lady at Roane; where solemnly they
vowed to serve together, to live and dye together and equally to devide
between them what they wanne by the sword, or should be given them in regard
of their service: Thus they continued in France, Anjou, Normandy, and England;
and when Sir John de Courcy was joined in commission with William Burgh Fitz
Adelme and others; Sir Amoricus de Sancte Laurentia, accompanied him into
Ireland, where Courcy received a grant of the King, by Patent for him and his
heirs or assigns after him, to enjoy in that Land all that he could Conquer
with the sword, reserving to the King homage and fealty; they landed at Houth
and there fought a cruel fight by the side of a Bridge, where Sir John de
Courcy being sickly, tarried abord the ship. Sir Amoricus being Chiftaine and
General of the field by land* behaved himself most worthily; many were slain
on both sides, but Sir Amoricus got the victory, with the lose of seven of his
own blood, sons, uncles and nephews, whereupon for his singular valor and
good service there performed, that Lordship was allotted unto him for his part
of the conquest, with other things which Sir John de Courcy gave him.
Immediately, Sir John de Courcy, Sir Amoricus de Saint Laurence, and Sir Roger
Hoer, so well appointed as then contented them, directed their course toward
the North; the principal cause that moved them (besides their valor) was the
hard government of William Fitz Adelme, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, whose
conditions Cambrensis who then lived and was conversant with him, delivers in
this sort. He was covetous, proud, malicious, envious, a favorite of wine and
women and good to none, but to his back and belly: and by his back he
understood his kindred, and by his belly he meant his children, for he opposed
himself, most enviously against the Garraldins, Fitz Stephens and Barries, the
first most valiant Conquerors of the Land, and against their posterity, etc.

While Courcy is on his way, give me leave, gentle Reader, to eternise the
Memorial of Maurice Fitz Gerald: As he was of birth and parentage nobly and
worshiply descended, so was he in condition and for martial prowess every way
renowned. Cambrensis his kinsman commends him greatly and no less then he
deserved. He left this world to the great grief of all the true hearts in
Ireland, and lies buried in the Monastery of gray Friars without the wales of
Wexford, his..... sons whom William Fitz Adelme maligned, builded the Castle
of Fernes. In his time, (says Cambrensis) at Wirlo, where Maurice Fitz Girald
dwelled, there was a Monster, begotten by a wicked man of that nation upon a
Cow, a vice (says he) at that time too common among that nation. It had the
body of a man, but all the hinder parts of an ox, from the anckles of the
legs, and the wrists of the arms, he had the hoofes of an ox; his head was
all bald saving a few small and thin hairs; his eyes, great, round, and
black like an Ox; nose he had none, but two holes; speak he could not, but
only bellow like a Cow: this Monster did daily resort to the house of Maurice
Fitz Girald about dinner time, and such meat as was given him, he took it in
his hoofes, and put it to his mouth, and so fed himself. Diviners in those
days construed this of the government of Fitz Adelme, the which in their
opinion was monstrous, but there I leave, and return to Courcy.

John de Courcy after four days, some miles come to Daud without resistance,
and unlooked for, contrary to all men's expectation, the which in a word has
been spoken of before: strange it is to see what a sudden fear will work.
Dunlenus, (whom I take to be O Donell) no base nor mean Commander of that
place, fled away, left arms, men and munition behind, happy was he (in his
own opinion) that he had escaped the hands, he wist not of what enemy; the
trumpets sounded, the armor ratled, the women clapped their hands, the children
cried, the townsmen to go, the leaders entered, the soldiers ryfled, the
town upon a sudden was ransacked, doors, windows, cupboards, chests flew
open, the army after long march, and sore travail, being in great want and
weakness, had their housing, firing, diet, and fare of the best, bedding,
clothing, gold, silver, plate, and rich booties, without check or
controulement of any, and respite for certain days to breath, rest, and
recreate themselves. In the neck of this out of Scotland, the wind blew one
Vinianus a Cardinal (spoken of before) which took upon him to entreat a
peace between the two nations, but could not prevail. After eight days,
Roderic the Monarch, and O Donnell, King of Duune, had mustred their men,
gathered forces, gotten great aid, and prepared an host of ten thousand
fighting men, and came to besiege the City. Sir John de Courcy, having but
seven hundred, thought best not to be cooped within, nor caged like a Bird,
prepared to give them battle abroad, marched forth, and ordered his army as
follows; he divided his men into three companies, the horsemen being seven
score, were set in a winge on the left hand, under the leading of Sir Amoricus
de Saint Laurantio, every horseman having a bowman behind him. On the right
hand, Sir Roger Poer, who had married Sir Amoricus Niece, led the foot company,
close by a bogge side, in the midst came Sir John de Courcy, with his company;
the way was narrow where they should encounter, and the English men had the
vantage of a great hedge and ditch of the one hand, and a bogge on the other to
gall the enemies horses, where no horse could enter within them. Odonell seeing
the Horsemen to be but a few, commanded his foot and maine battle to make a
stand until he sent them word to march on, meaning to make short work with
the Horsemen, and so to break the neck of the strength of the battle; the
Horsemen join battle, the Archers gall Odonels horses with arrows, whom the
English lance slew not, the horse unsadled, and when the English quiver was
empty, the archer with his sword haught the horses and dispatched the men that
were unhorsed and cast to the ground. Odonels horsemen being somewhat
discomfited retired, Sir Amoricus calls upon Courcy and Poer, to bring on the
foot, who metting with the foot and maine battle of the Irish (that
expected news from Odonell) fought most fiercely: No instrument of War could
be heard, the cry of both sides pierced the clouds, the gald horses grievously
complained, the maimed soldiers groueling on the ground and gasping for breath
gave pitiful groans; the Irish flang darts and stones, the English shoot
arrows, the Irish with sparthes and galloglasse axes, the English with spears
and swords encounter on both sides most valiantly; the splints of broken staves
fly about their ears, and eyes, sparkles of fire from their swords and
targets, and the blows upon their helmets yielded the sound of hammers working
upon anviles, both sides deserved honor and singular commendations; the
slaughter was great on both sides, and continued long; many of the English were
slain, and a number of the Irish were left alive, they determined to make an
end of the English that day; the rere of the Irish march courageously, the
English had the bog of the one side, and the ditch of the other, and the
entrance to them was full of heads, legs, and arms, dead corpse, armor and
horses dead, and lying a long striving with death, that they could not approach,
whereupon they broke their battle array, dispersed themselves, and from the
paces entered the plains. Sir Amoric watching his opportunity, called Ieffrey
Montgomery his sisters son and standard bearer, and said: Have not we quitted
our selves like men this day, and shall we dishonor the field so much as to
suffer yonder company to escape our hands; come, advance your Standard, let us
wheel about and give the onset: Montgomery replied, it seems strange unto
me, to see your stomach pass your strength, we have won honor advisedly,
and shall we now rashly lose it? of seven score, we have but forty horses left,
the rest are wounded, tired and not fit for service: then said Amorich give me
the Standard, I will bear it my self; if that be your pleasure (says
Mountgomery) you shall not heareafter charge me with cowardice, under this
Standard have I got honor, and under this Standard (if God so so please) I
will dye. With this they wheeled about and overtooke the foot of the Irish,
being laden with arms, and wearied with fight, with their lances they struck
them to the ground, they gave the onset a fresh upon the horsemen which were
about 200. and had Connor O Laghlin to their leader, who retreated in battle
array, ready to answer the fight. Sir Amoricus in that skirmish was twice
unhorsed, and by his men lift up again, afterward in a filthy foord he was
unhorsed again, and his horse slain under him: whereupon some of his troop
lighted, stood very stoutly by him, took weapons out of the dead men's hands
that lay along the way, and kept the Foord from horse and man, until Sir John
de Courcy came to the rescue, at which time many of the Irish were slain, and
the rest fled away: thus in the end God gave the victory unto the English men,
after the loss of many a brave man, and especially Lyonell Saint Laurence,
nephew to Amoricus, whose death was greatly lamented. When they had buried
their dead, and gathered their arms, they returned to Dune.

The Midsummer following, Courcy fought the second battle nigh the walls of
Dune (says Stanihurst) and overthrew fifteen thousand men in Vlster. And
says the book of Houth, after that field, Vlster men had small stomach to
give any onset upon the English men: yet I find the field to have been bloody
of both sides, and that Sir Amoricus was sore wounded, laid under a hedge,
eating honey suckles for his relief, where he left much blood, and was carried
away between four men; his wounds were so many, and so dangerous, that no
Physician or Surgeon could promise life the space of nine days, yet in the
end, recovered. Next unto him was his son Sir Nicholas Saint Laurence, a most
valiant Knight so sore wounded in nine several places, that he was once left
for dead, but at length recovered, to the great comfort of his friends.

The third battle that Sir John de Courcy fought, was in Ferng, against
eleaven thousand Irish men: the occasion was thus, Courcy had builded many
Castles throughout Vlster, and especially in Fern, where Mac Mahon dwelled;
this Mac Mahon with solemn protestations vowed to become a true and faithful
subject, gave Courcy many gifts, and made him his Goship, which is a league of
amity highly esteemed in Ireland. Whereupon Courcy gave him two Castles with
their demeanes to hold of him. Within one month after, this Mac Mahon
returning to his vomit, brake down the Castles, and made them even with the
ground. Sir John de Courcy sent unto him to know the cause that moved him to
fall to this villainy: his answer was, that he promised not to hold stones of
him, but the land, and that it was contrary to his nature, to couch himself
within cold stones, the woods being so nigh, where he might better warm
himself, with other slender and scornful answers. Courcy to be revenged of
him, saw no better course then to prey his country, mustred his men, entered the
land, and swept all the cattle before him. The prey was so great, that it
could not be driven, unless it were divided into three parts, and to that end,
this company in like sort was proportioned between the foremost of the voward,
and the last of the rereward, there was three miles distance; the paces were
narrow, the way miry and boggy, with thick bushes on either side, the Irish
being (as I said before) eleven thousand in number, stood upon all advantages,
had their espials upon them, divided themselves likewise, and stepped in between
every of the English companies, and upon a sudden, made such a cry, and gave
such a shout, that the woods rang thereof, and the Cowes ran like devils upon
the drivers, and overthrew horse and man, so that there were more slain and
trod under foot in the mire and dirt, of the English men, by the Cowes, then
by the sword of the rebels. Upon this cry, all the Cowes were lost, and the men
fell to blows, where the Irish being acquainted with every blind way, made
better shift then the English. Courcy and his brother Amoricus, with such as
were alive, hastened out of the woods, and came to a Plain, where they viewed
each other some quarter of a mile distant. Sir Amoric turned back, and cast up
his eyes, and saw Sir Roger Poer that had married his Niece, about a sevenight
before, pulled and halled by the Irish, and carried away prisoner; follow me,
says he unto his company, I will rescue him, or I will dye on the place; he
suddenly coming upon their heels, set upon them, and carried away Sir Roger
Poer; with that, the Irish gave such a shout, that all the rest of their
company that were dispersed and scattered among the bushes, gathered themselves
together to that place, to answer the cry, and stepped between Sir Amoric and
Sir John Courcy, so that with great peril of their lives, and loss of many
men, they came together to that place; when they met, they bewailed their
losses, and being environed with bogges and marshes, they forsook their
horses, and fell to kill them, and shifted for themselves; the Irish most
eagerly pursued them, and at length, one William Lawyard overtooke Courcy, he
with his company turned their faces, fought a cruel fight, wherein (says mine
Author) there were slain of the Irish men, six score. After this skirmish,
followed Art boy, with three hundred, and set upon Courcy, who slew of the
Irish, nine score: last of all, Mac Mohon, the ground of all this mischief,
came blowing, and set upon Courcy, with whom the base son of Sir Amoricus
encountered, slew him, and fourscore of his men, and drove the rest to fly,
the day being thus spent, the night made an end of that battle: as the night
fell, Sir John de Courcy by good hap, lighted upon an old Fort of his own,
moted or trenched about, where there was a good watch kept, he being glad of
them, and they of him, camped there with his forces that night, and the enemy
within half a mile of them, as it appeared by the great fires they made after
their travail. Sir Amoric Saint Laurance after a short nap or slumber, took a
few with him, went to epsy the enemies camp, and made a speedy return, he
pressed upon his brother Courcy and the camp, to wake them, and delivered unto
them these speeches: I have scouted abroad, and spared you in your heavy
sleep, I viewed the enemies camp, whom I take to be 5000. strong, and that by
the scope of their cabbins; we are but 500. fighting men, all wearied with
sore fight, long travail, and somewhat discouraged with hard fortune, not fit
to make any great enterprise, or to perform any worthy exploit; nay a worse
matter, there are among us such as have deadly wounds, but the dead sleep
suppresseth their complaints, and further, our men watch without sufficient
release, and the enemy has his fill every way; our case is desperate, if the
enemy set upon us to morrow, we are not able to withstand him, we shall be
slain every mothers son; wherefore I think best that we now set upon them
that are now feasting and sleeping, void of all fear of us, whom in their
opinion, they hold for men quite overthrown, and never able to make a head
again, and that we leave some of our sick men here to ward, and take some of
the fresh men with us. When he had ended his speech, there was silence for a
certain space, wherein one looked upon the other. Then Sir John Courcy spoke,
I looked all this while for some of these young gallants, and your fellow
soldiers to deliver their courage; but one thing further, Sir Amoric, where
are their horses bestowed? he answers, your white horse, and my black
gelding, I have cunningly conveyed away, and the rest I can point you to with
my finger. Then says Sir John Courcy, this is mine advice: Let two men ride
these two horses, and gather their horses together, and orderly in each side
drive them upon the enemy, all we in arms will come after, and suddrnly give
the shout upon them in their slay pes, and serve them with their horses, as
they served us with our kine: Every man liked well of this course, and when
they came to the place, they had the killing of them at their own desire.
There the English came, victualled, apparrelled, armed, and horsed themselves,
never better in their lives. Of 5000. Irish, there escaped not above 200. which
ran so fast, (says my Author) that a horse could not hold them. Of the
English, the day before, 400. men were missing, but in that mornings work,
only two. Lastly, Sir John Courcy, with some hearts ease, returned to his old
Fort, where he had camped that night, rested there a while, and sent to Dublin
and elsewhere among his friends, for supplies of men and other necessary
provisions. There are some out of the school of envy, with grace, to disgrace
Courcy, (whom I have in part touched before) that report the story otherwise,
which deliver not wherein he was to be honored, but wherein he was foiled,
fortuna de la guerra, that he was driven with eleven persons in arms, to
travail a foot some 30. miles, for the space of two days, the enemy still
pursuing, (the which they lay not down) all fasting without any relief,
until he came to an old Castle of his own, which savoureth not altogether of
truth, but forwards with the history.

The fourth battle that Sir John Courcy fought was in Vriell, for this cause:
Courcy had sent certain of his servants into England, for victuals, munition,
and diverse necessaries; the ship was by foul weather driven into a creick in
Vriell, called Torshead; O Hanlan with others being acquainted with all
circumstances, board the ship, put men and mariners to the sword, and make a
prize and havocke of all: Courcy hearing of this, gathered his forces together;
draws toward the Nury to come into Vriell to be revenged of them for this
injury; by the way he was given to understand, that all the Irish of those
parts were in arms prepared for him in their defense, to justify their
doings, and that they had camped by South of Dundalke, and by North of the
river Dondoygon. Courcy having marched to a place within a mile and a half of
the Irish camp, made a stand, called his brother Amoric, Sir Roger Poer, with
others, and consulted what course was best to be held. Sir Roger Poer being
full of courage, begins: I think best to hold still with us the favor of
Fortune; they are many, we are but few, the longer we behold them, the worse
we shall like them; the soldiers would be set a work, and the more we
linger, the more doubts and buzzes will enter his brain; for often we see,
that the sight makes, and the sight marreth.

Next, Sir Amoric delivers his opinion: we came not hither to make hasty
work, but advisedly to perform service; true it is, as you have delivered,
they are many we are but few in comparison of their number; before we give
battle, there are 3. things (as I take it) requisite to be considered, the
cause wherefore we fight, the number of both sides, that they be somewhat
equally matched, and the place where both join battle together. I would not
have any of my speeches drawn to discourage or dismay any valiant mind. To the
first, our parentage is known, we are no base people, our valor is tried, our
enemy has the proof thereof; we come not to steal, but to be revenged of the
thieves that murdered our men, and robbed us of our necessary provision.
Secondly, where we find our company small, and our side weak, and the ground
not fitting us for any advantage, where force cannot further, let policy take
place; my advice is that a beggar or a Friar shall go from us to the Irish
camp, and inform them, that Sir Hugh Delacy came yesternight with a great
force, to Drogheda, and that he saw two miles off a great army of horse and
foot, somewhat westerly of him, which he supposes to be the English Army,
that marched all night from Tradaf toward Dundalke; in the mean while, my
son Nico: with twenty choice horsemen, together with our lackies and
horseboies, for the greater show upon our hackneis and garrans, shall wheel
Westwards on the right hand, that it may concur with the Friars tale, and
give us a sign what we shall do, and we will march after to see the event;
when the enemy has discried us, we shall perceive by his stirring what he
means to do; if they turn face to us and offer fight, our foot shall recover
Dondalke before theirs, and with our horses we will so handle the matter, that
we shall sustain no great loss: if they fly and take the river, the sea comes
in, we shall overtake them before half pass over. All were well pleased with
his device, and followed the direction. Nico. Saint Laurence with his company,
wheels before, Sir John de Courcy a loofe follows after, Sir Roger Poer
takes the rereward; the enemy having discried them takes the river: Sir Nico.
gave the sign, whereupon the English Army give a great shout and follows
their heels; the Irish break their araie, they tumble one upon another in the
water: the carriage drowns some, the sea and the swiftness of the tide take
others away; such as would not venture the water, were slain by the English;
Othanlan and his company that had passed the water, seeing the slaughter of his
men, could not come to the rescues, by reason of the salt water: the Englishmen
having quitted that place, were directed by the Friar to a foord on the left
hand, where they passed over, and pursued the rest: The Horsemen overtooke the
Foot of the Irish, and skirmished with them, until Sir John de Courcy came by
that time; the sea likewise had stopped the Irish from flying, at a great
water, a mile from the Lurgan on the Southside of Dundalk. The Irish seeing
themselves in this strait, turn their faces, choose rather to dye with the
sword like men, then to be drowned in the seas like beasts. There were in that
place, some 6000. Irish, and about 1000. English, there was no advantage of
ground, it booted not to fly on any side; the coward must in that case try
himself a man, the fight was sore, no mercy but dead blows: The foot of the
English drew back, Sir John de Courcy their leader, was left in the midst of
his enemies with a twohanded sword, washing and lashing on both sides, like a
Lion among sheep (says my Author) Nicolas posteth to his father Amoric, that
was in chase of ths scattred horsemen of the Irish, and cried, alas father,
mine uncle Sir John is left alone in the midst of his enemies, and the foot
have forsaken him; with that Sir Amoric lighted, killed his horse and said,
here my son take charge of these horsemen, and I will lead on the foot
company, to the rescue of my brother Courcy; come on fellow soldiers says he,
let us live and dye together: He gave the onset upon the foot of the Irish,
rescued Sir John Courcy that was sore wounded, and with cruel fight in manner
out of breath; with the sight of him, the soldiers take heart and drive the
Irish to retreit; the slaughter on both sides was great, few of the Irish and
fewer of the English were left alive: The Irish got them to the Fewes, and the
English to Dundalke; but who got the best there is no boast made.

Not long after, Sir John de Courcy went into England, where the King in regard
of his good service, made him Lord of Conoght and Earl of Vlster; upon his
return (says Stanihurst) which was in the Canicular days, he fought at the
Bridge of Ivora a cruel battle, and prostrated his enemies, with great
honor; and for that I find little written thereof, I thought good thus lightly
to pass it over, as others before me have done: After this he builded many
Castles in Vlster, made bridges, mended high ways, repaired Churches, and
governed the Country in great peace, until the days of King John, where I
shall have further cause to discourse of him.

Amids these tumults in the North, Miles Cogan bestirred himself, in the West;
he passed the Shannon into Conoght with 540. men, where (says mine Author)
never Englishman entered before, whereupon the Conoght men, drove before them,
all their cattle into the fastnesses, carried with the^ as much as they could,
fired the rest, with their Towns, Villages, Houses and Cottages. Milo marched
as far as Tuam, where he rested 8. days, and finding man and beast fled, and
the Country barren of victuals, he returned toward the Shannon, and by the
way met with Roderic the Monarch, which lay in ambush with three Companies
waiting his coming: At their meeting, they skirmished a long while, and fought
a cruel fight, where the enemy lost many, and Milo but three men, then he
passed the river and came safely to Dublin.

Anno William Fitz Adelme, the Kings Lieutenant is called into England: He was
a man that did no honor to the King, neither good to the Country, whom every
good man in his life time detested, and all Irish Chronicles after his death
have defamed. In his room the King appointed Hugh Delacy Deputy of Ireland,
and joined in Commission with him Robert Poer Seneschal of Wexford and
Waterford.

Not long after, the King sent into Ireland Miles Cogan and Robert Fitz
Stephens with others, and gave them (in regard of their service) all South
Mounster, to with the Kingdom of Cork in Fee for ever, to be equally divided
between them, except the City of Cork, and one Cantred thereunto adjoining;
also he gave unto Philippe de Bruise all North Mounster, to wit the Kingdom of
Lymerick. After they had pacified Dermot Mac Carty, Prince of Desmond, quieted
the Country, and divided their territories, they conducted Philippe de Bruise to
Lymerick to take possession of the Kings grant given him in those parts.

As they came to the walls of Lymerick, the Citizens of spite in sight of
them all, to the end that no Englishman should roost there, set the Town on
fire. Philippe de Bruise was therewithal discouraged, and his Company, in so
much that when Robert Fitz Stephens and Miles Cogan, offered to adventure their
lives in the recovery of the Kingdom of Lymerik, with all their aid and
assistance; he refused it, and returned with them to Cork, esteeming it far
better to lose Lymric, and with safety to dwell among his lovers and friends,
then to lose life and kingdom by dwelling among such Jews, as will fire their
own houses, and cut all English throats.

In a while after, Miles Cogan, and Raffe the son of Robert Fitz Stephens,
who had lately married Miles daughter, went toward Lismore to parlee with
Waterford men, and determined that night to lodge with one Mac Tyrid, who had
solemnly invited them. As they waited in the field, expecting the coming of
the Waterfordians, this Mac Tyrid unawares stealing upon them, most
traitorously slew them, and five of their company, whereupon the whole country
was in uproare, insomuch that Dermot Mac Carty, and all the Irish in those
parts, together with Mac Tyrid, that most perfidious traitor, were in arms,
determining thenceforth to be no longer the Kings loyal subjects; when they
had gathered their forces together, they laid siege to Cork, meaning to cut
off Robert Fitz Stephens, and all the English men there. Robert Fitz Stephens
being distressed in Cork, fearing the open enemy without, and mistrusting the
secret enemy within, sent post to Wexford, to his nephew Reimond le Gross,
praying him to come to his aid. Reimund forthwith, with twenty knights, and
one hundred foot and bowmen, entered the Lee, landed at Cork, encountered with
the enemies, killed some, drove other to fly, and compelled the rest to submit
themselves, and sue for peace.

When the King understood of this, he sent Richard Cogan, brother unto Miles,
to supply his brothers room in the kingdom of Cork, a man no way inferior
to his brother for valor and martial prowess; in his company came Philip
Barry, and Girald Barry his brother, (otherwise called Silvester Giraldus
Cambrensis, the famous learned man) nephews of Robert Fitz Stephens, with a
jolly troop of horse and foot, chosen and picked men. Robert Fitz Stephens,
and Richard Cogan enjoyed this kingdom of Cork peaceably for certain years,
and in process of time, for want of heirs male of them, it came to two
daughters, the one of them was married to Robert de Carew, the other to
Patricke de Courcy, and they in right of their wives, enjoyed the same during
their lives, and after them, their heirs, until such time as by a division
grown (as I take it in England) between the two houses of York and
Lancaster, the Irish men expelled them, and recovered the country unto
themselves. Anno 1178. The Monastery, Beatae Mariae Roseae vallis, called
Rosgl^s, was founded. Yet others think it was in Anno 1189. I may not forget
Harvey de monte Marisco, (of whom often mention is made before) who after many
spiteful parts, treacheries and false accusations exhibited by him unto the
King against most noble servitors, became a Monk: the man was sore troubled in
conscience, and in his course he made the common saying true ( desperatio facit
Monachum.) He had founded (says Felcon) the Monastery of our blessed Lady, de
Portu Donbrodthi, he gave unto the Monastery Saint Trinitatis of Canterbury,
his territories and advousons along the sea coast, between Waterford and
Wexford, and there cloystred himself; I would (says Cambrensis) he had
changed his conditions with his habit.

The same year (says Holinshed) there came from Pope Alexander 3. into
England, two Cardinals, Alberto desuma, and Petro de sancta Agatha, whose
commission was to summon the Bishops of England, Ireland, Scotland, with the
Isles, and Normandy, to the general Council of Lateran in Rome: after they
had obtained license to pass through his dominions, the King swore them upon
the holy Evangelist, that in their Legateship they should not attempt any thing
that might be hurtful to the King or his dominions, and that upon their
return, they should visit him homewards: whereupon out of Ireland there went
thither, Laurence, Archbishop of Dublin, and Catholicus, Archbishop of Tuam,
with some other five or six Irish Bishops, whom the King likewise swore, that
they should not procure any damage to his Realms and dominions.

The Realm of Ireland at this time was singular well governed by Hugh de Lacy,
a good man, and a wise Magistrate, who for the good of the land and the people,
established many good orders: he made Bridges, and builded Towns, Castles, and
Forts, throughout Leinster, as Sir John de Courcy did in Vlster in his time;
the Priest kept his Church, the Soldier his Garrison, and the Plowman
followed his Plough, yet cankred envy quieted not her self, practiced
mischief against him, so that he was charged before the King, to attempt the
Crown of Ireland, and make himself absolute Lord of the land, and that he had
married the King of Connaghts daughter, (says Holinshed) contrary to the Kings
pleasure. The King immediately (as Princes are jealous of great men) called him
into England, appointed governors, John Constable, and Richard Peche. This
Lacy behaved himself so discreetly and dutifully in England, that he cleared
himself of all suspicion, that the King was resolved of his truth and
fidelity, and sent him back again into Ireland, with further credit then
formerly he had done, and that within three months, and gave him the absolute
command and Lievetenantship of the land, and joined as assistant unto him,
Robert Salisbury, calling home the former governors.

It was not long, but he was upon malicious occasion, the second time sent for
into England, and one Philip of Worcester, ( Cambrensis is mine Author) a
valiant soldier, a bountiful and a liberal man, with a most brave troop of
horse and foot, arrived in Ireland, with command to send over Hugh de Lacy, and
he to remain there as Governor of the land, until John his son came over.
Stanihurst is of opinion, that he went over into England, and clearing
himself, speedily returned again, which cannot well stand with the course of
the history; for when Philip of Worcester took upon him the government, Lacy
hastened the building and finishing of the Castle of Derwath (whereof my pen
immediately shall make report) and there ended his days. And now to Philip of
Worcester, and his companion Hugh Tirell, Cambrensis, and Stanihurst
especially, write most bitter of them: of Philip, how that first of all he
resumed and seized unto the Kings use, the lands of Ocathesie, and diverse other
parcels which Hugh de Lacy had sold away, and these he appointed to serve for
the Kings provision, and the Governors diet. And after the winter was past, he
assembled and mustred his men and company, and began to travail from place to
place. In March about the middle of Lent, he came to Armagh, where he extorted,
and perforce exacted from the Clergy there, a great mass of money and
treasure, and from thence he went to Dune, and from Dune to Dublin, laden with
gold, silver, money, and moneys worth, the which he extorted in every place
where he came, and other good did he none. Hugh Tirell his fellow scraper,
took from the poor Priests at Armagh, a great brass pan or brewing
furnace, which served the whole house: see the just judgment of God, (the which
then was so constraced, as Cambrensis has delivered in his Vaticinall history,
and likewise in his topagraphie) Philip at the towns end of Armagh, was taken
with a sudden pang, and the same so vehement, that it was supposed he should
never have recovered it. When he came to himself, a poor man standing by
said, Let him alone, he must have breath till he come to the devil, and then
the devil will have him, and all that he extorted from us. Hugh Tirell that
carried the pan as far as Dune, and the Priests curse withal, in night
time had his lodging set on fire, where house, and household stuff, and all
that he had there, was consumed to ashes, together with the horses that drew
the same (and so no thanks to him) he left it behind him for lack of
carriage. The Castles which Lacie builded for the good of the Land, were these.
First, Laghlen, of old called the Black Castle, upon the Barrow between
Ossory and Idrone, of which Castle by Henry 2. commandment, Robert Poer had the
charge, until in cowardice sort he gave over the same, and forsook it;
whereupon Cambrensis then living, makes this invective: O what worthy
Champions and fit men for martial feats, were this Poer and Fitz Adelme, to
inhabit and command such a nation as is destitute of noble and valiant minds?
but a man may epsy the variable sleight of fortune, disposed to smile at
foolery, how from the base dunghill, he advances to high dignities: for why?
they two had more pleasure in chambering, wantonness, playing with young
girls, and on the Harp, then in bearing of shield, or wearing of Armor: but
in sooth it is to be admired, that so Noble a Prince as Henry 2. is, would
send such cowards to command, or to direct in place of service. But to the
history. This black Castle now called New Leighlin, for difference of Old
Leighlin, which is the Bishops seat, stands in the Barony of Ydrone, which
was the ancient inheritance of the Carews: who being Barons of Carew in Wales,
so far as I can learn, one of them married the daughter and heir of the
Barron of Ydrone, and so the Carewes became, and were for the term of many
years, Barons of Ydrone, until the troublesome time of Richard 2. when the
Carewes with all the English of Ireland, in manner were driven to forsake the
land. Castles builded by Sir H de Lacy.
He builded in Leix for Meilerius Tachmeho, alias Cachmehe, and as for Kildare,
with the country adjoining, the which, as Cambrensis writes, was by Earl
Strangbow given him, the Governors in Hugh de Lacy his absence, subtly took
it away from him, under color of exchange, and gave him Leix, a wild savage
country, with woods, paces, bogges, and rebels far from succor or rescue. In
Meth, he builded Clanarec, Dunach killar, alias Killairie, the Castle of Adam
de Ieypon, alias sureport, and Gilbert de Nugents of Delvyn. In Fotheret of
Onolan, alias Fethred Onolan, in Latin, Rotheric, he builded a Castle for
Reimond, and another for Griffin his brother, the sons of William Fitz
Girald, for Walter of Ridensford, he builded in Omorchu, alias Moroghs country
Trisseldermot, otherwise called Trisdeldermot, about five miles from Caterlogh,
and likewise Kilka, in the country of Kildare. For John de Hereford, he builded
a Castle in Collach, otherwise called Tulacfelmeth: for John declawsa, alias
Clavill, he builded a Castle upon the Barrow, not far from Leighlin, now
supposed to be Carlogh, though some attribute it to Eva, Earl Strangbow his
wife; yet it is evident next after the Danes, that the English men builded all
the Castles of Ireland. He builded also near Aboy, a Castle that he gave to
Robert Bigaret, another not far from thence, which he gave to Thomas
Fleminge, another at the Narach on the Barrow, for Robert Fitz Richard; lastly,
he builded the Castle of Derwath, where he made a tragical end; for on a time
when each man was busily occupied, some lading, some heaving, some playstering,
some engraving, the General also himself digging with a Pick-axe, a desperate
villain among them, whose tool the Lord Lieutenant used, espying both his
hands occupied, and his body bent downwards, with an axe, cleft his head in
sunder; his body the two Archbishops, John of Dublin, and Matthew of Cashill,
buried in the Monastery of the Bectie, that is, in Monasterio Beatitudinis,
and his head in Saint Thomas Abbey at Dublin, whose death (I read in Holinshed)
the King was not sorry of, for he was always jealous of his greatness.

Upon the death of Lacy, Sir Roger le Poer a most worthy Knight, who served
valiantly in Vlster, in company with Sir John de Courcy, being made Governor
of the country about Leighlen in Ossorie, was in most lamentable sort
traitorously slain; and upon that occasion, there was (says Cambrensis) a
privy conspiracy over all Ireland against English men: But gentle Reader, I
must back a little, to bring on the years to concur with the history.

Anno 1180. The Monastery De Choro Benedicti, and of Ieripont was founded. The
same year dyed Laurence Archbishop of Dublin (whose life foraine Writers, as
Surius, Baronius, Molanus, and Leppelo with others have written) his father
hight Maurice, his mother Iniabre Principis filia, a great Commander in
Leinster; the Martyrologe of Sarum says he was bastard: This Maurice being at
continual wars with Dermot Mac Morogh King of Leinster, upon a league of
amity concluded between them, delivered unto him for pledge his youngest son
Laurence; Dermot sent him to a desert solitary place and barren soil to be
kept, where he was like to perish with famine: Maurice hearing thereof, took
12. of Dermots principal followers, clapped them in prison, and sent Dermot
word, that he would cut off their heads, unless he would release and send him
his son out of that slavish and miserable servitude: Dermot released the
youth, and delivered him not to his father, but to the Bishop of Glandelogh,
and the Bishop charged his Chaplen with his bringing up; the Chaplen trained
him up so virtuously, that in a short time after he was made Abbot of
Glandelogh, and shortly after that again, upon the death of Gregory Archbishop
of Dublin, he was chosen to suceed him. So holy a man was he, as some of mine
Authors do write, that he caused one of his men to whippe him twice a day,
belike he had deserved it in his youth. His Legend reports that in time of
famine and scarcity in Ireland, ^e releeved daily 500. persons at his door for
3. years space. Henry the 2. did not favor him, for he had both in public
and private at sundry times (as formerly in part has been touched) been an
instrument of rebellion and of many mischiefs against the English nation, and
at the Council of Lateran, contrary to his Oath, inveighed bitterly against
the King; Stainhursh excuses him, saying, that he pleaded for the immunities
of the Churches of Ireland, somewhat prejudicial to the Kings prerogative. He
came to the King at Canterbury, where the Monks received him with solemn
Procession, and he gave himself one whole night to prayers before Saint
Thomas his shrine, for good success in his affairs with the King: A fool
espied him in his Pontifical weed, wholly devoted to Saint Thomas Becket: And
said, I can do no better deed then to make him equal with Saint Thomas; with
that took a club, ran through the throng, and gave him such ablow upon the
pat, that the blood ran down his ears; the man was so sore wounded, that it
was thought he would streighway yield up the Ghost; the cry was up, the fool
run away, the Bishop taking breath called for water, and in a short time
after was healed: his suit unto the King was, (as foraigne Writers deliver) for
Deronog King of Ireland; but says Holinshed, which is likeliest to be true,
it was in the behalf of Roderic King of Conoght, which had often promised true
subjection and fidelity unto the King, but never performed; he had brought with
him Roderic his son as a pledge for performance of convenants, formerly
passed between them; as the payment of tribute and such like; but the King
neither liked the one or the other, but charged the Archbishop not to depart
without his license.

The King shortly after took shipping at Sandwich and sailed into Normandy.
The Archbishop followed him, and there dyed of an Ague; whereupon (as Holinshed
writes) the King sent Ieffray De Hail, one of his Chaplens and a Chaplen also
of Alexander the Popes Legate into Ireland, to seize the Archbi. see into his
hands, and further it is alleged, that being the Popes Legate of Ireland; he
abhorred incontinency so much, that for augmentation of penance, he would
absolve no dissolute Priest, but sent them to Rome for absolution; and proved
in regard of former favors, there, Amicus Curiae, so that he sent thither out
of Ireland at one time, 140. Priests, says the Legend, De peccato Luxuriae
convictos Romam misit absolvendos; convicted of Lechery: Behold gentle Reader,
the holy lives of the Priests of that age, and the Sanctity of the Roman Sea,
in pardoning of them all, propter quid, alias propter quas. Pope Honorius the
3. Anno Pontificatus 9. vel 10. Canonized this Laurence for a Saint, who is
Calendred the 14. of November, or as the Bull of his Canonization has, the 18.
of the Calends of December, which is all one; the which Bull follows in these
words.

Honorius Episcopus, servus servorum Dei, universis Christi fidelibus, in
Rothmugensi Provincia constitutis salutem, and Apostolicam benedictionem.
Ineffabilis providentia Dei congruentibus singulis quibusque temporibus
ordinary, dispensans in splendoribus Sanctorum Ecclesiam suam, quasi ex utero
genuit Deum, in exordio ipsius nascentis Ecclesiae crebro miraculorum fulgore
abstupefaciens gentes, ac prodestinatos in Fide generans Jesus Christi, Cujus
hoc fieri nomine and virtute videbant, ipsos filiorum adoptionis numero
aggregavit. Deinde crescrute numero and multitudine populi vocati de tenebris,
ambulantes juxta Isaiae Vaticinium in lumine Domini Dei sui, mirabilis
dispensator in pluviam fulgura sua fecit, dum signis suis and miraculis (quae
non erant jam fidelibus necessaria) intermissis, super novos populos pastores
qui eos pascerent scientia and doctrina...... sicut per os Ieremiae promiserat,
suscitavit Doctores Ecclesiae; qui terram cordis fidelium imbre doctrinae
complerent, and extirpatis sensibus vitiorum cum ad proferendum virtutum germen
and fructum boni operis foecundaret. Caeterum quia Charitate frigescente ab
exercitio boni operis, torpet Catholicus; errore devio abducente, delirat
haereticus; cecidit velamine adhuc super cor permanente, Iudaeus; and in
tenebris ambulat fide lucis nondum sibi orient, Paganus: Misericors Dominus
qui neminem vult perire signa interdum innovat, and miseratus immutat ex numero
illorum quos in Ecclesia triumphante glorificat aliquorum fidem et meritae in
militante miraculis declarando, ut per ea Catholici mentis...... discusso ad
boni operis excitentur instantiam, haeretici errore dimisso ab isto reducantur
ad viam veritatis et vitam.

Sanctae ergo memoriae Laurentio Dublinensi Archepiscopo, apud Ecclesiam
Sanctae Mariae de Ango Rathmagensis Diocesos, ubi corpus ejus feliciter
requiescit, divino munere coruscante miraculis; Venerabilis frater noster
Archepiscopus, et dilecti filij Capitulum Rathmagense, una cum Abbate et
Conventu Ecclesiae supradictae, multisque alijs Archiepiscopis et Episcopis,
Abbatibus et Religiosis viris, ejus venerabilis vitae, insignia coruscantia
miracula, suis nobis literis intimantes humiliter supplicarunt ut ipsum
Sanctorum Catalogo ascribere curaremus; quatenus autoritate (sicut convenit)
Apostolica, dignus honor illi exhiberetur in terris, qui (sicut claris signis
et evidentibus argumentis apparet) honoratur in coelis. Licet igitur quos
divina honorat dignatio, humana devotio prompto affectu debeat honorare,
volentes in hujusmodi negotio secundum consuetudinem Apostolicae sedis,
maturitate debita procedere; praefato Archiepiscopo and Decano and Thesaurario
Rathmagensi, dedimus in mandatis ut superdicti viri vita and miraculis
inquirerent diligentissime veritate^, and eam nobis fideliter intimarent, ut ea
plane comperta pro supplicantiu^ desiderio securius annisere valeremus. Ipsi
autem mandatum nostrum cum diligentia exequentes quod de prefati viri
conversatione ac vita istis certificare nequibant, eo quod per parts illas
transjectus faciens, in Ecclesia praedicta correptus infirmitatus decubuit and
infra octavum ab hac luce migravit diem, scripserunt venerabili fratri nostro
Archiepiscopo Dublinensi ut veritatem super hoc inquisitam iis per suas literas
intimaret, qui citra mare Hibernicum illustris Regis Anglorum negotiis
occupatus and volens id inquirere per se ipsum, venerabili fratri nostro
Darensi Episcopi suffragano suo, ac Priori Sanctae Trinitatis Dublinensis
commisit in hujusmodi negotio vices suas, ac demum literas eorum, sanctitatem
vitae and conversationis saepe dicti viri before continentes suo and ipsorum
sigillis munitas destinarunt eisdem, quas una cum depositionibus testium super
miraculis captorum nobis cum sigillis propriis transmiserunt. Colligimus vero
ex earum serie litterarum, quod saepe dictus vir Regis and Reginae Hiberniae
filius extitit, and ab infantia Sacris Litteris eruditus, senilem gessit in
juventute gravitatem and mundanarum illecebras vanitatum a se ultra quam aetas
illa solebat, abdicavit. Deinde in Archepiscopum Dublinensem assumptus, sic de
virtute in virtutem profecerit, ut in oratione assiduus, austerus in
maceratione proprii corporis, ac in Eleemosinarum largitione profusus, se
totaliter Domino dedicarit.

Per depositionem vero testium predictor. constitit evidenter sanctam vitam
ejusdem esse tot sequentibus miraculis comprobatam quae non parva^ texerent
historiam si quis vellet ea singula scribere seriatim: sed ut non praeter
mittamus claudi gressum, caeci visum, surdi auditum, muti loquelam, leprosi
mundationem and varijs afflicti languoribus sanitatem ad invocationem ejus
nominis, and ea sola quae inter caetera emicuerunt miracula breviter
perstringamus. Nam idem sanctus, (imo Deus ob ipsius merita gloriosa) septem
mortuos (quorum quatuor triduani erant) mirifice suscitavit. De ipsius
sanctitate tantis certificati miraculis, divinumque secuti judicium, quod eius
glorificatio nobis tam evidentibus innotuit argumentis, eundem sanctiss.
Catalogo sanctorum adscripsimus and annumerandum decrevimus, sanctorum Collegio
Confessorum ac inter eos Christi fidelibus venerandum statuentes, ut ejus
veneranda festivitas de cetero annis singulis decimo octavo Kalendas Decembris
solemniter celebretur. Monemus igitur universitatem vestram, and hortamur in
Domino quatenus Deum devotis mentibus collaudantes and students proficere
tantae virtutis exemplo, ejusdem gloriosissimi Confessoris apud Deum suffragia
humiliter imploret. Nos autem de Dei omnipotentis misericordia and beatorum
Petri and Pauli authoritate confisi, omnibus vere penitentibus and confessis
qui ad prefatam Ecclesiam, in die solemnitatis ejusdem gloriosissimi
confessoris vel infra Octabis cum devotione accesserint ejus orationum
suffragia petituri 20. dies de iniunctis sibi penitentijs miserecorditer
relaxamus. Dat. 3. Idus Decembris pontifitatus nostri anno decimo.

Molanus writes of this Laurence, that he favored Monks greatly, and hearing
of the fame of the 28. Monasteries of Aroatia, in the confines of Atrebatum in
the low Countries, made the secular Priests called Cannons in Dublin, become
regular cannons, according unto the order of Aroatia. After his discease, John
Comin, an English man, a Monk of Evesham (an Abbey in England) by the Kings
direction, was made Archbishop of Dublin, confirmed by Pope Lucius at
Viterbium, and also made a Cardinal (so writes Cambrensis) Anno 1148. the
Monastery legis dei, that is, of Leix, was founded, Anno 1185. John, the fifth
son of Henry 2. of the age of twelve years, landed at Waterford in the
Realm of Ireland, from the first arrival of his father, thirteen years,
from the first landing of Earl Strangbow, fourteen years, and from the first
entrance of Robert Fitz Stephens, fifteen years. In the Chronicles of England
I find, that Anno 1177. in a Parliament held at Oxford, Henry 2. created his
son John, King of Ireland. In Anno 1185. he dubbed his son John, Knight,
and set him in a readiness for Ireland, sending the new Bishop John of Dublin,
as his precurser thither for all things necessary. Item the same year he
obtained of Pope Urban 3. a license to crown which he would of his sons,
King of Ireland, and for reformation thereof, sent him a crown of Peacocks
tails, I would say feathers, after a feat manner woven in with gold; lastly,
how that Urban 3. sent two Legates, Octavianus, a subdeacon Cardinal, and Hugh
de Novant from the Court of Rome, to crown John, King of Ireland, but Henry 2.
delayed it so, that it was not effected; hereof (as I suppose) it rises that
oftentimes we find him called King John before he was crowned: but to the Irish
history. At the first landing and entering of the Kings son at Waterford, a
great many of the chiefest commanders in those parts, who since their first
submission unto King Henry, continued faithful and true, being advertised of
this his arrival, came and resorted unto him in peaceable manner after their
best manner, to salute him and congragulate his coming, one made courtesy,
another kneeled, some took him by the hand, other some offer to kiss him. The
new gallants and Normans, such as had not been before acquainted with the
country, neither the homeliness of the people, set them at naught, laughed at
their Mantles and Troosses, derided their glibbes and long beards, one takes a
stick, and pats the Irish man on the pate, another halls the mantle, and
pricks him behind with a pin, some have their glibbes and long beards
pulled, and departing, have flappes on the lips, thumpes in their necks, and
the doors clapped on their heels, with diverse other abuses, and undiscreet
entertainment. These men (not without cause) being mightily displeased,
shifted themselves out of the town, and in all haste got them home. And from
thence (says Cambrensis) with their wives, children, and household, departed,
and went some to the Prince of Lymeric, some to the Prince of Cork, some to
Roderic, Prince of Connaght, and so some to one Lord, and some to another; and
to these they declared orderly, how they had been at Waterford, and what they
had seen there, and how they were evil entreated, and that a young man was
come thither, guarded with beardlesse boys, and guided by the councels of
young men, in whom there was no stay, no sobriety, no steadfastness, no
assuredness, whereby they and their country might be secured of any safety.

These Princes, and namely they three of Connaght, Cork, and Lymeric, who were
the chiefest, and who were then preparing themselves in a readiness to have
come and salute the Kings Son, and to have yielded unto him their dutiful
obeisance, as faithful subjects; when they had heard these news, they began
forthwith to bethink themselves, that of such evil beginning, a worse ending
would ensue: wherefore with one consent, they concluded to stand and join
together against the English nation, and to their uttermost power, to adventure
their lives, and to stand to the defense of their country and liberties, and
for the performance thereof, they enter into a new league among themselves, and
swore each to other, and by that means, enemies before, are now become
friends, and reconciled, as of old, Ephraim against Manasses, and Manasses
against Ephraim, and both against the Tribe of Judah. Herod against Pilate, and
Pilate against Herod, both become friends to crucify Christ. To be short,
there followed a general revolt and rebellion over all Ireland. Cambrensis
alleges a second cause of this revolt. How that when Robert Fitz Setphens
first entered the land, there were certain Irish men which took part with him,
served faithfully, and were as reason required, rewarded for their service, and
had for recompense, certain lands given them, which they quietly held, and
peaceably enjoyed, until the coming of the Kings son, then new comers
wanting both living and government, had it given them to furnish them in their
foolish prodigality, so that these Irish men flying unto the enemies, became
not only enemies, but were espials upon the English, and conductors of the
enemy against them. A third reason of ill success, Cambrensis urges against
England; first, how that the Britains or Cambrians (so he terms them)
entering this land, and breaking the ice to the conquest of Ireland, were
afterward by William Fitz Adelme, and others, envied, and every way maligned:
secondly, how that the English commanding the land, were by the English
disgraced, and one often times articling, accusing, and disgracing one another:
thirdly, how that the Normans coming in place, overthrew all, for the King
being borne beyond the seas, affected them most, they were of his Council at
home in time of peace, and made Commanders abroad in time of wars; these
coming with the Kings son into Ireland, were fine in their apparel,
delicate mouthed, feeding upon dainties, they could not digest their meat
without Spice and Wine at every meal; they could not endure the service in the
Marches and borders, they would not remain in remote places, they brooked not
the Forts, Holds, and Garrison places; but liberty they liked of, so it were in
a walled town; a warm chamber, a Ladies lap, a soft bed, a furre gown, and
their Lords sides to guard and attend, pleased them well; they would talk and
brag of service, swear and stare at home, stand upon the pantofles of their
reputation, disdain others, and especially the Irish, and durst not show their
faces in the field. These were they that gave themselves to command the Irish,
that would not be commanded by them, they polled, pilled, extorted, and what
not.

In the space of eight months that Earl John stayed in Ireland, I find that
he built three Castles, Tibrach, Lismoore, and Archfinan, alias Ardsivin: at
Ardsivin upon Midsummer day, (so Cambrensis reports) the Prince of Lymeric
bent and animated to rebellion, slew four Knights, and the greater part of the
Garrison there: shortly after, the same rebels of Lymric, by a slight, drew out
the Garrison to seize upon a prey, and lying in ambush, killed many of them,
but these revolters escaped not scotfree in all the parts of the land: for at
this time when the Irish men of Kennally with great forces had entered Meth,
killing, burning, spoiling, and preying the Country. William le Petit,
Governor or Iusticer (says Cambrensis) drew a head against them, rescued the
prey, put them to flight, made a great slaughter of them, and sent a hundred
heads of the principal of them to Dublin.

The Kings son hearing of these troubles, hastened away unto England, left the
land tumultuous, troublesome and al upon an uprore; committed the charge
thereof (says Stanihurst) Bruseo, Courceo, Giraldidis, etc. in primis Hugonis
Lacaei virtuti, where in truth I find no such matter, for Cambrensis (whom
herein I must rely unto) being then in Ireland with the Kings son, reports
how that Henry the second, hearing of the course which these green heads held
in Ireland; thought good to call them all unto England, and send thither no
more such young commanders, and by the advice of his Council committed the
charge and absolute command thereof, unto Sir John de Courcy, whom he
appointed Lord Lieutenant of Ireland (the Book of Houth also testifies the
same.) Earl John immediately gathered forces, travailed over the whole land,
pacified for the time Cork, Tumound and Conoght, From the death of Hugh
Delacy, who was slain, Anno 1186. unto the time Hugh Delacy the younger came to
be Lord Justice, of whom hereafter more at large. Here gentle Reader,
Cambrensis leaves us, who most faithfully continued the affairs of Ireland,
some 30. years and odd: he was by father a Barry, by mother a Gerraldin,
nephew to Morice Fitz Gerald and Robert Fitz Stephens, that first entered to the
Conquest of Ireland; he was borne in Pembrok-shire, and was Archdecon of Saint
David's and Brechnoc, and diversely employed by Henry the second, in whose time,
among others, the first Conquerors and his kindred; he came into Ireland
again, and became Tutor unto John the Kings son, and accompanied him into
Ireland; he wrote many learned works, and among other, the Conquest of
Ireland, the Topography of Ireland, and Mirabilia Hiberniae. Whereof he
dedicated one unto Richard Earl Strangbow, and another unto Henry the second;
he was elected Archbishop of Saint David's, but at Rome he was out-bid, by him
that had more money, and missed the Cushin; he departed this life, when he
was about four score years old, and rests at Saint David's. Yet one thing
further of him which he reports of himself, how that he at the time of his
being in Ireland, had Conference with Matthew Archbishop of Cashill, and he
saying among other things: You have many Saints in Ireland, but I do not find
any martyr amonst you: the Bishop taking it in ill part, as spoken in derision
of the Nation, answered with great anger, Sir, it is so that our people is
rude, savage and barbarous, yet there is none so brutish and bloody, as to lay
violent hands upon a Priest; now it falls out that we are to be governed by
such a Nation as is not guiltless of Prelates deaths, and it is like, (if it
stands with Gods pleasure) that shortly we shall make up a number of Irish
martyrs this he spitefully spoke, meaning the death of Thomas of Canterbury.

In a while after that Sir John de Courcy had brought the whole land to a good
pass, Sir H de Lacy. the younger L. Justice of lie*
and pacified the Irish tumults (this I find in the Book of Houth) Sir Hugh
Delacy the younger is sent over into Ireland as Lord Justice, to take the
absolute Command of the Realm. He had no sooner landed but he sent very
imperious letters unto Sir John de Courcy, to discharge him, and all that were
authorized by him of their places, and command, and in like sort (like the
green heads spoken of a little before, which landed with Earl John) they
braved it out, disdained old experimented soldiers, and offered sundry
disgraces unto the rest of the English; so that thereof rose much heartburning,
division, quarrels and bloody brawles. The Irish seeing this sudden alteration,
this division among the English, this undiscreet government, thought now to
find fit opportunity publicly to release themselves of that, which they had
often secretly intended; by their runnagades they summoned at a day a place, all
the Chieftaines of Irish birth to a parlee; where after many doubts debated,
many griefs opened, they concluded with full resolution to invade all the
English, and root them wholly out of the land; and first they swoare to be
true one to another, throughout that whole rank of rebels, as far as life,
lands, and goods would reach to effect this enterprise: Secondly, they swoare
never to yield obedience to the English nation again.

Oconor King of Conaght becomes the mouth of the Irish, Oconnor K. of Conaght
with 20000. men.
persuades to his liking, disswades where fancy pleases not, and gathered
together in short time, an Army (as mine Author says) of 20000. fighting men;
his policy was first, to clear Conoght, and afterward all Vlster, and so by
degrees the whole land, the which he doubted not of, as he delivered to his
followers. Sir John de Courcy understanding this, and doubting what he should
find at Sir Hugh Delacies hands, sent letters in post to his brother Sir
Amorick Saint Laurence who shortly to his aid marched toward the North, with
30. Knights and 200. foot. Oconor hearing this, lies in ambush in most secret
wise, and sends scouts of horse and foot before him, to apprehend and cut off
all espials, which might bewray his ambush, and give intelligence to Sir
Amorick to prevent the danger; Sir Amorick boldly marches on, misdoubting
nothing, for that he understands by his espials nothing to the contrary, till
he came to the Devils mouth; where upon a sudden, beholding Oconor and his huge
Army peeping out of their ambush, was amazed, made a stand, and consulting with
his company, wist not what to do; there was no flying, there was no fighting,
one to a hundred was no equal match; a horseman whose name was Mountgomery, in
a few words said this. Let us fly and save our lives, as for the foot company
we can do them no good by figting; by flying and saving our own lives, we
may succor their wives, children and kindred. By that time Sir Amorick his
brother (leader of the foot company) came to the consultation, and said, I see
by all circumstances, that you mean to fly, and you Sir Amorick my noble
brother, what mean you to give ear to these cowardly horsemen, will you leave
us here as sheep in the mouths of this merciless people, and ravening wolfes,
ready to rent us in pieces? Have you forgotten the bloody battles we followed
you in? and do you not see that we have left our Country, our wives, our
children and dearest friends, and now stand at deaths door, to be forsaken of
you whom we never left so disolate and distressed: if you weigh not our
lamentable estate, regard your own honor, and the house you are descended of.
Will you lose in an hour, the honor you wanne in many years? Call to
remembrance, most worthy Knight, how that in Vriell in manner in the like
distress; you dismounted your self, slew your horse, led the foot, animated
the company, recovered your self, and ended with honor? We are your flesh
and your blood, we come hither to fight, to live and to dye together; I know
the worst; I am resolved, if we fight we dye, if we fly we are slain; is it
not better for us to dye in fight like men, and so win honor, then to be
slain in flight like beasts, and gain shame for ever? With this Sir Amorick
turned him to the foot company, and hardly gathering breath with the sorrow of
his heart, resolved himself thus: I have no power to fly and leave my frinds,
my flesh and blood, in this extreme distress. I will live with them, who for
my sake came hither, if it so please God, and I will dye with them, if it be
his pleasure, that ending here we shall meet again bodies and souls at the
last day, God and the World bear witness, that we do as Christian Knights
ought to do, I yield my soul into Gods hands, my body to return whence it
came, my service to my natural Prince, my heart to my wife and brother, Sir
John de Courcy, my might, my force and bloody sweat to the aid of you all that
are in the field: He lighted, kneeled upon his knees, kissed the cross of his
sword, ran his horse through, saying thou shall never serve against me, that
so worthily have served with me. The like did all the rest; then looking about
with a cheerful countenance, as if he had not been the man, that was
formerly dismayed, charged two young Gentlemen of the company to get them to the
top of an Hill, hard by adjoining, and beholding the battle, upon their
return homwards make true report to his brother Courcy and others of that
days service. Immediately they prepared to battle, the enemies marvailed,
seeing them approach, that they durst (being so few) abide the field; they made
likewise a stand, and cast doubts, whether the Englishmen in this attempt had
not some great supply; rescues are maine battle following after, they would
not give the onset, before they had certain knowledge thereof, by scoutes and
espials: to be short, they join the battle, where to deliver the whole in
few words; Sir Amorick was slain and all his company. It was a bloody day,
when all the one side, and a 1000. of the other side, fell to ground. Oconor
and his company seeing the end of this field, durst never again give battle
unto the English, but sued to Sir Hugh Delacy then Lord Justice for peace,
which he obtained, vowing, as he had many a time before, faith, truth and
perfect subjection: This Oconor after his reconciliation made report unto Sir
Hugh Delacy, of that days work, that he thought verily, there was never the
like seen upon the earth; how that the Englishmen not being able to stand in
fight, turned back to back, with sparthes and two handed swords, until the
last man was slain. The lamentation that Sir John de Courcy made, when this
was bruted abroad, I will not stand to rehearse.

I am now to end with King Henry the second, a most worthy Prince, whose
troubles every way troubled not him so much, as the unnatural rebellion of his
sons, and the Jealousy of his Queen; he reigned 34. years, 9. months and
two days: his Epitaph in Matthew Paris and in others I find thus.

Rex Henricus eram, mihi plurima regna subegi,
Multiplicique modo Duxque Comesque fui: etc*
Of late King Henry was my name,
Which Conquered many a Land;
And diverse Dukdomes did possess,
And Earldomes held in hand,
And yet while all the earth could scarce
My greedy mind suffice;
Eight foot within the ground now serves
Wherein my Carcas lies.
Now thou that read this, note well
My force, with force of Death;
And let that serve to show the state
Of all that yields breath:
Do good then here, fore slow no time,
Cast off all worldly cares;
For brittel world full soon does fail,
And death does strike unwares.
Richard the first, the third son of Henry 2. began his reign over England
the 6. of July, Anno 1189. For his valence, he was called Coeur de Lion, the
Lions heart; he was affianced, but never married, to Adela, or Alice, daughter
to the French King, and in his journey to the holy land, he took to wife in
the I Will of Cyprus, the Lady Berengaria, daughter to Garsias (some say Sanctius)
King of Navarre, and died without issue; when he had reigned nine years, nine
months, and two and twenty days. It is noted by the Antiquaries, that upon
the death of his father, he had three notable windfals, the first was the
Crown of England, the second was his fathers treasure, which he found at
Salisbury, amounting to nine hundred thousands pound in coin, besides Plate,
precious stones, Jewels and apparel; lastly, in the Coffers of Ieffrey Ridley,
Bishop of Elye, who dyed intestate, he found toward his coronation 3260. pound
in silver, five marks in gold, which was better; for his coronation was most
Royal. John Common Archbishop of Dublin was at it. Matthew Paris in Latin, and
Holinshed in English have penned it verbatim. Will. K. of Scots did him homage,
and when he was the second time crowned King, bare a sword before him. King
Richard the first year of his reign, gave the Lady Isabell, sole daughter and
heir of Richard, surnamed Strangbow, Earl of Penbroke, to William Maxfield,
Lord Maxfield, and Earl Marshall of England, Anno 1189:

This William, his surname was not Marshall, as Sir John Plunket his collection
has laid down, but Maxfield, his descent I find thus; with William the
Conqueror, there came into England to his aid, one Walter Maxfield a Norman,
that was his Marshall; this Walter had issue, William, William had issue,
Walter, Walter had issue, John, John had issue, this William Maxfield, that
married Isabell, the daughter of Strangbow, who was made Earl Marshall of
England, Earl of Penbroke in Wales, and Prince of Leinster in Ireland, in the
right of his wife. This William was in great favor with King Richard the
first, that gave him the Lady Isabell to wife, and honored him so at his
coronation, that he bare a regal Scepter before the King, in the top whereof
was set a Cross of gold, and when the King with full determination passed over
into Normandy, and from thence into the Holy Land, he assigned him the third
governor of the Realm, John Earl of Morton, Anno 1199. after the death of
his brother Richard, sent this William among others into England, to set all
things in a readiness for his coronation, the which being the 27. of May, and
year aforesaid, gave him his full creation to the Earldom of Penbroke, and
girded him with the sword; not long after, King John sent him with others, as
Ambassadors to the French King, with sundry other employments; he was also in
great favor with Henry 3. as shall be showed when I come to his reign. He had
five sons, and five daughters, his sons all succeeded him in the Earldome
of Penbroke, and office of Marshalsie, together with the Principality of
Leinster, and dyed all without issue. The daughters were all honorably matched
in the life time of their father and brethren, and had his territories and
possessions in Wales and Ireland, orderly divided among them, the which they
and their posterity peaceably enjoyed. This William Earl Marshall the elder,
came to Ireland, Anno 1207. he builded the Castle of Kilkenny, and gave the
town a Charter, with privileges which they enjoy to this day: he founded
there also the Monastery of the black Friars, and ended the way of all flesh
at London, Anno 1220. and lies buried in the temple of his Lady Isabell at
Tinterne in Wales.

William Marshall his eldest son succeeded him, both in the office of
Marshall, and Earldome of Penbroke and Ogie, and Principality of Leinster; he
granted a Charter to the town of Kilkenny, Anno 1223. sixth of April, with the
testate of Thomas Fitz Antony, Lord of Thomas stowne, Seneschall, of Leinster,
Fulkoe, Carnae; Walter Pursell, William Grace, Haman Grace, Amnar Grace, and
others, he ended his days at Kilkenny, Anno 1231. and rests in the Monastery
there, which his father had formerly founded.

Again, of this William I have seen another Charter, exemplified Anno 1329.
by King Edward the third, with an inspexim. Edwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae,
Dominus Hiberniae, Dux Aquitanie omnibus Ballivis and Ministris omnium villarum
and villatorum Lagenie and ceteris quibuscunque deijsdem partibus salutem.
Supplicavit nobis superior et communitas villae de Kilkenny quod cum Willielmus
nuper Comes Mariscallus et Pembrochie (tempore quo idem Comes extiterat Domini
totius terrae Lageniae) concesserit Burgensibus et Communitati ville predicte
qui pro tempore fuerint, diversas libertates, inter quas videlicet, quod ipsi
in perpetuum per totam Lageniam terram, and potestate^in suam tam villa qua^
alibi essent quieti de theulonio, lastagio, poritagio, and de omnibus aliijs
consuetudinibus quibuscunque, quam quidem cartam inspeximus, etc. Test Iohanne
Darcy Iusticiario nostro Hibernie apud Kilkenny, 8. die Iulij anno regninostri
3. per billam ipsius Iusticiarij. Yet Holinshed writes that this William
Marshall the younger, deceased at London, and lies buried by his father in the
new Temple.

Richard Marshall the second brother succeeded; he was Earl Marshall of
England, Earl of Penbroke in Wales, and Ogie in Normandy, and Prince of
Leinster in Ireland. In the year 1233. and the Month of April, in a battle
nigh Kildare, upon the great Heath called the Curragh, fighting against the
Oconors; he took his deaths wound, whereof shortly he dyed. He lies buried
by his brother William in the black Friars at Kilkennye, which was the
foundation of William, Earl Marshall, his father. Henry the third lamented his
death, and protested that he lost then the worthiest Captain of his time. His
tomb (with the tomb of eighteen Knights that came over at the Conquest, and
resting in that Abbey) at the suppression of the Monastery, was defaced, and
inhabitants there turned them to their private uses; and of some they made
swine-troughs, so as there remains no Monument in the said Abbey, save one
stone, whereupon the picture of a Knight is portraied, bearing a shield about
his neck, wherein the Cantwels arms are insculped; and yet the people there
call it Ryddir in Curry, that is, the Knight slain at the Curraghe. John Clyn,
guardian of the Friars there, in his Annals of Ireland writes thus.

Post incarnatum lapsis de virgin natum
Annis millenis tribus triginta ducent is
In primo mensis Aprilis, Kildariensis
Pugna die Sabbati fuit in tristitia facti
Acciderant stallo pugnae Comiti Mariscallo.
And upon his Tomb.

Hic Comes est positus, Richardus vulnere fossus
Cujus sub fossa Kilkennia continet ossa.
After the decease of Richard Gilbert, Marshall, the third brother was Earl
Marshall of England, Earl of Penbroke and Ogie, and Prince of Leinster, Anno
1239. King Henry the third held his Christmas at Winchester, where there rose a
grudge between the King and this Earl Gilbert, by reason that this same
Earl, with his servants, having tip-staves in their hands, coming to the
Court, were not suffered to enter within the gates, but were kept back by the
Porters and others: of which injury when he complained, the King made him an
overthwart answer. Whereupon the Earl not well pleased therewith, estranged
himself from the Court, and went into the North country, so that thenceforth,
he and his brother Walter gave small attendance upon the King; and to end with
this Earl Gilbert, it fell out on a time, in a Turnay which he had attempted
without the City of Hereford, contrary to the Kings pleasure, that his unruly
horse cast him, so that of the hurt which he took with the fall, he shortly
after departed this life, in the year 1241. and was buried in the new temple
Church at London: he had married the Lady Margaret, the sister of Alexander,
King of Scots, who by her had no issue; she also dyed Anno 1245.

Walter Marshall succeeded Gilbert in all the former honors and possessions,
both in England and Ireland, who because he had procured the turnament wherein
his brother was slain, hardly obtained of the king the same. He departed this
life at Godrike Castle by Monmouth and was buried at Tintern, Anno 1245.
leaving no issue behind him.

Anselme Marshall the fifth son of William Earl Marshall succeeded Walter, he
was the last of the Maxfields, and died without issue. He had married
Mathildis or Mawd daughter of the Earl of Hereford, anc because he had entered
without doing of homage unto the King, his wife after his decease could have no
dowry, whereof among the statutes of England I find the cause by especial words
thus overruled^

When any dies and his heir enters into the Land, that his Ancesters held of
the King, the day that he died before he has done homage to the King, and
received seisin of the King, he shall give no free hold thereby; and if he
dyed seized during that time, his wife shall not be endowed of the same land as
came late in urc; by Mawd the daughter of the Earl of Hereford, wife of
Anselme the Marshal. Who after the death of Walter Marshall of England his
brother, took his seisin of the Castle and manor of Strogill, and died in the
same Castle; before he had entered by the King, and before he had done homage
unto him, whereupon it was agreed, that his wife should not be endowed, because
that her husband had not entered by the King, but rather by trusion.

This Anselme died in England, and was buried at Tinterne. After the death of
these five brethren; Florilegus writes thus. All the sons of William the
great Marshall (it is not known what sin required the same) according to the
Prophecy of the Countess their mother, without issue left behind them, as
shadows departed out of this world; yet all successively became Earls, even
as their mother by a Prophetical spirit foreshewed, and so the Noble shield or
buckler of the Marshalls, dreadful to so many and so great enemies of England,
vanished away. Matthew Paris wrote the story at large. The aforesaid William, as
Warlike and stout, called Marshall, as if he had been Mars his Seneschall
while in Ireland he gave himself to slaughter, and burning, and got to
himself large possessions, he took away by strong hand and injuriously, from
an holy Bishop two manors or Lordships belonging to his Church, and
presumptuously usurped them, as though he might, by just title possess them,
as if he had won them with the sword. The Bishop after many admonitions, and
receiving many froward answers, thundered against him (and not without cause)
the sentence of Excommunication, the which the Earl despised, and pleaded for
excuse; the warlike season keeping injuries upon injuries: Whereupon not
without advisement one Master Gervasius de Melckeria, framed of him this
distinction and shrouded himself in his person.

Sum quem Saturnum sibi sensit Hibernia, Solemn
Anglia, Mercurium Normania, Gallia Martem.
Iam whom Ireland Saturn hight, and England Sol me calls,
Amids the Normans Mercury, and Mars among the Gauls.
The meaning in a word is, how that he in his time had tamed the wild Irish,
and had been the shining beam of honor unto the English, as an Ambassador
to pacify the Normans, and an invincible Knight among the French nation, but
forwards with Paris; the aforesaid Earl held those manors all his life time,
and annexed them unto his dominions: Within a few years after, the Earl ended
the way of all flesh, and was buried in the new Temple at London; the Bishop
hearing of this (for he was the Bishop of Fernes, a Cistertian Monk, by birth
Irish, and famous for Sanctity) not without great pain in travail, he went
unto the King, who then was in London, exhibited a grievous complaint of the
injury done unto him, and how that he had justly excommunicated the Earl, and
humbly besought the King, that by his sovereign authority and Princely mandat,
and also for the good of the said Earl Williams soul, he would see his
manors restored unto him, that in so doing (though he were dead) yet might
reap the benefit of absolution. The King with this was moved, and willed the
Bishop to repair to the Earls grave and absolve him, and he would diligently
labor for his satisfaction; the Bishop together with the King went to his
Tomb, and in the hearing of all that were present, as if they had been both
alive, said, O William, that here lie interred, and wrapped in the bonds of
Excommunication, if the thing which thou have injuriously taken away from my
Church, be restored by the king, or by thine heir, or by some one of thy
kindred or friends, with competent satisfaction, I absolve thee, o her wise I
do ratify the said sentence that thou being ever wrapped in thy sins,
may remain damned in hell. The King hearing this, was moved and sharply
rebuked the immoderat rigor of the Pontifical Prelate. To whom the Bishop
replied, my Lord ann dread sovereign, marvel not, though I be out of
patience, for he has spoiled my Church to his great commodity. The King then
secretly conferring with William the eldest son of this Earl, and heir to
the whole, and now invested in the inheritance and Earldom, and certain
others his brethren, besought them by the restoring the manors unjustly taken
away, mercifully to deliver their fathers soul; To whom William the heir made
answer, I do not believe, neither is to be credited, that my father took them
injuriously, for that which is gotten by the sword, may lawfully be enjoyed;
for if that old and doting Bishop has given a wrong sentence, let the curse
light upon his own pate. I will not weaken my estate, nor diminish the
inheritance wherein I am invested, my father dyed seized thereof, and I have
rightly entered. Unto these words all the brethren yielded their consents. The
King being then of tender years, and under Tutor, would not give cause of
heaviness unto so great and Noble a personage; when the Bishop understood
this, he was more waspish, and moved with the countenance of the sons, then
with the former injury of the father, and turning him to the King, spoke aloud;
what I have said, I have said; what I have written, I have written, never to be
blotted out.

To be short, the Bishop with great sorrow departed, and in bitterness,
prophesied of the ill success of the children, who dyed and lived in great
honor all the days of their lives: but these matters we are to refer to the
secret judgment of God.

After the decease of these five brethren, five Earls, and five Princes of
Leinster, leaving no issue behind them, the five daughters their sisters,
Ioane, Mathilda, Isabell, Sibilla, and Eva, being honorably matched, had their
fathers and brethrens possessions and territories in Ireland orderly divided
amongst them; Ioane, the eldest daughter of William Earl Marshall, and eldest
sister of the five brethren (before spoken of) was married to Warren de
Mountchensen, who in right of her, had allotted unto him, the County of
Wexford; they had issue, one daughter, Ioane that was married, Anno 1247. to
William de Valence, a Norman, the son of Hugh Brune, Earl of March, and
Turryn, Vicount of Curce, etc. he was half brother to King Henry the third,
by Queen Isabell, daughter and heir of Amerie, Earl of Angolesm, the widow
of King John. This William in the right of his wife, was Earl of Penbroke, and
Lord of Wexford, and died Anno 1296. he had issue, two sons and two
daughters, William de Valence, Owdomare alias Aimer de Valence, Isabell and
Ioane; William succeeded his father in the Earldome of Penbroke, and Lordship
of Wexford, and died without issue. Aymer his brother after him, was Earl of
Penbroke, and Lord of Wexford, and died without issue, whereupon the
inheritance fell to the two sisters, Isabell and Ioane. Isabell was married to
John Hastings, Lord Hastings of Abergevenny, who in the right of his wife had
one half of the county of Wexford allotted unto him, and had issue, Elizabeth,
which married Reynold, Lord Gray of Ruthin. Ioane the second sister was married
to John Lord Common, who in her right, had the other half of Wexford, and he
had issue, two daughters, Elizabeth and Ioane; Elizabeth married Richard Lord
Talbot, and Ioane was married to David, Earl of Atholl in Scotland, and thus
the County of Wexford was divided.

Mathilda, or Mawde, the second daughter of William, Earl Marshall of England,
had the county of Cattelough, alias Carlogh, assigned unto her: she was married
to Hugh Bigod, Earl of Norfolk, father of Ralph Bigod, whose daughter and
heir Isabell, was married to Sir Gilbert Lacy, who had issue, Margery and
Mawd, Margery was married to John Lord Verdon, of whom the Earl of
Shrewesbury, and the Earl of Essex are descended. Mawd married Ieffery
Genivill, father to Peter Genivill, whose daughter and heir was married to
Roger Mortimer, Lord of Wigmore, and the first Earl of March.

Isabell, the third daughter of William, Earl Marshall of England, had to her
portion, the county of Kilkenny. She was married to Sir Gilbert de Clare, Earl
of Gloucester and Herford, whose descent is before spoken of. He was slain by
the Scots in King Edward the seconds time, and died without issue. I have seen
a Charter granted by him to the town of Kilkenny. Gilbert Clare, Earl of
Gloucester and Herford, to our Seneshall of Kilkenny, and to our treasurer of
the same, greeting; know you that we for the common profit of the town of
Kilkenny, of our especial favor have granted to our loving Burgesses of the
same town, etc. the whole in substance is, that none shall sell victuals
there, but it shall be prized by the officers of our town. After the decease
of Sir Gilbert Clare, then the Earledomes of Gloucester and Herford, and the
County of Kilkenny, fell between his three sisters, begotten upon Isabell
aforesaid, to wit, Elenor, Margaret, and Elizabeth. Elenor was married to Hugh
Spencer the younger, Margaret was married to Peter Gaveston, and after his
death, to Hugh Lord Audely; Elizabeth was married first to William Lord Burgh,
Earl of Vlster; the second time to Ralph Roch, Baron of Farmoy; thirdly, to
Theobald, Lord Verdon; and lastly, to Roger Damary, and had issue by every one
of them.

Sibilla the fourth daughter of William Earl Marshall, had to her part the
County of Kildare, and was married to William Ferers, Earl of Ferers and
Darby, who had issue, Agnes, Isabell, Mathilda, Sibilla, Cecilia, and a second
Sibill; Agnes was married to William de Vescy, who had issue, John de Vescy,
who had issue, William de Vescy that died without issue in his fathers life
time. Lastly, this County of Kildare was given by the King unto John Fitz
Thomas, the first Earl of Kildare, as hereafter in more convenient place shall
appear.

Eva, the first daughter of William Earl Marshall, had to her portion, the
Manor of Dounmas in Leix, and was married to William Bruise, Lord Bruise of
Gower, who had issue, Mathilda, Elenor, and Eva. Mathilda was married to Roger
Mortimer, Elenor was married to Humphery de Bohun Earl of Herford and Eva, to
Cantilupe, alias William de Canlow: Of the line of these Maxfields, I mean of
William Earl Marshall of England, the pedigree and descent of this Noble
family, the properties and purports holds of the daughters. I have seen
sundry copies. Nicholas Magwir, Bishop of Leighlen perfected an abstract of the
division of the land in Ireland, among the daughters and the paritcularities
thereof, which is to be seen in the red towne-booke of Kilkenny: and now
forwards with the history, from whence I have somewhat digressed.

Anno 1190. (in which year the City of Dublin, by foul mishap, was fired to
ashes) King Richard set all in a readiness for his journey into the holy land,
gathered masses of money together, and among others it is remembered, what a
sum of money he received of Hugh Pudsey a Norman, and Bishop of Durham, that
gave an inestimable sum to be made an Earl, whom the Antiquaries do
condemn for his intolerable pride, and damnable covetousness, whom the King
also flowted after he had received the coin; saying, Lo, I have made a young
Earl of an old Bishop* In this voyage and preparation for the recovery of
Jerusalem, and the aid of the Christians in Asia, there went Frederick,
Emperor of Almaine, Richard, King of England, Philip of France, William of
Cicilia, Otho, Duke of Burgundy, the Venetians, Pisanes, Frisones, Danes and
Flemings. Now that the King is on his journey abroad, let us talk a little
(gentle Reader) of little John at home: Stanihurst leads me into the history,
and reports that Anno 1189. he came into Ireland, and sojourned at Dublin;
the story goes (and especially in Hector Boethius, and John Major, Antiquaries
of Scotland) how that in those days, there were many outlawes in the North
parts of England; of these outlawes, Robin Hood, and little John were
Chiefetaines: It was said of Robin Hood that he was an Earl, and after
outrages by him committed, he kept the woods; his company was of some hundred
persons, all chosen and picked Archers, of singular strength to handle their
weapons, and such as durst encounter with 400. others: they robbed none but the
rich, as Tanners, and Grasiers, and Usurers, and Bishops, Priests, and fat
Abbots; they shed no blood, they killed no man, releeved themselves and the
poor also with their spoils. Robin Hood after many theevish feats, fell
sick, went into a Nunnery in Scotland, to be let blood, where he was betrayed,
and bled to death: whereupon the company brake, and the crew dispersed
themselves, every man to shift for himself; little John came to Ireland, with
many of his confederates, and found in the woods, enough to fit his humor, and
fell so much to his old occupation, that he was feign to fly the land. In the
end, he went to Scotland, and there died. There are memorable acts reported of
him, which I hold not for truth, that he would shoot an arrow a mile off, and a
great deal more; but them I leave among the lies of the land.

Anno 1191. the Monastery de iugo Dei, was founded Anno 1193. King Richard
after many most valiant exploits in the Holy Land, (the which I hold not so
necessary for this place) after the drowning of Frederick the Emperor, and
after the sudden and envious departure of Philippe King of France; hearing the
conspiracy of the said Philippe, and the treason of his brother John aspiring
to the Crown of England; made peace with the Saladine for three years, and
with a small company returning homewards, was taken prisoner by Leopold, Duke
of Austria, who brought him to Henry the Emperor, and there kept him in prison
a year and 5. months, until he had paid his ransom, which was Anno 1194.

He was received into England with the joy and applause of all true hearts, and
having settled the affairs of the Realm in due sort, he went into France,
where he had much a do with the French King, the which for brevities sake, I
do omit, and yet one memorable act of his I may not omit, and thus it was;
There came unto him one Fulco a Priest, who with great courage and boldness
said: Thou have, O Mighty King three daughters very vicious and of evil
disposition, take good heed of them, and betimes provide them good husbands; to
whom the King in rage answered: thou errant liar, and shameless hypocrit, thou
know not where thou art, nor what thou say, I ween thou art not well in
thy wits, for I have never a daughter, as the world will bear me witness, get
thee out of our presence. To whom Fulco replied, If it like your Grace, I lie
not, but say truth, for you have three daughters which continually frequent
your Court, and (more is the pity) wholly possess your person; I mean,
Pride, Covetousness and Leachery. The King thereat smiled, and called his
Lords and Barons unto him, and related what Fulco had delivered unto him, and
thereupon gave his resolution: Here before you all I do presently bestow my
three daughters. First, I give my daughter swelling Pride, to the proud
Templars: my greedy daughter Avarice, to the covetous Order of the Cistercian
Monks: and my daughter Leachery, to the wanton Prelates of the Church. This
noble King went to besiege a Town called Chalus Cheverell in Poitou, in the
confines of Britain, where unlooked for, from the wall of the Town, he was
wounded with a venomed arrow out of a Crosbow; whereof shortly after he died:
before his death he sent for him, that was the cause of his death, forgave him,
yea and gave him money in his purse; but after his death he was apprehended and
cut off with cruel tortures. Lastly, King Richard took order for his burial,
thus he bequeathed his body to Fount Ebrad, there to lie at his fathers feet,
whom in his life time he had offended; his heart to Roan that had always been
true unto him; and his bowels to Chalus Cheverell where he took his death, for
that filth was fit for them, that had been unto him both false and rebellious,
Matthew Paris has is Epitaph thus.

The conceit is that Chalus was casus lucis.
Ad Chalus cecidit Rex, regni cardo Richardus,
His ferus, his humilis, his agnus, his Leopardus;
Casus erat lucis Chalus. Per secula nomen
Non intellectum fuerat, sed nominis omen
Non patuit, res clausa fuit; sed luce cadente
Prodiit in lucem pro casu lucis ademptae.
Again of his legacy.

Pictavus exta ducis sepelit, tellusque Chalutis
Corpus dat claudi sub marmore fontis Ebrandi:
Neustria tuque tegis cor inexpugnabile Regis:
Sic loca per trina se sparsit tanta ruina;
Nec fuit hoc funus, cui sufficeret locus unus.
John the fifth son of Henry the second, Earl Morton, alias Mortaigne and
Lord of Ireland, as formerly has been delivered, by the gift of his brother
King Richard the first, Earl of Cornwall, Dorset, Sommerset, Nottingham,
Darby, Lancaster, and in the right of his marriage, Earl of Gloucester, was
Crowned at Westminster, King of England, Anno 1199. He was first married to
Isabell (whom the Britains called Hawise, and the Cornish Avis) daughter to
Robert Earl of Gloucester, who for that they were found within the third
degree, were divorced, so that King John left both the Lady Isabell and the
Earldom of Gloucester, whereupon by the advice of Philip King of France, he
matched in holy wedlock with Isabell daughter to Amerie, Earl of Angolesme.
This Isabell (if not married) had been affianced to Hugh Brune, Earl of
March, a Noble man of Aquitaine, who gave battle in that quarrel to King
John, and was discomfitted, yet after the death of King John, he had her to
wife.

Immediately upon the Coronation of Henry the third (who succeeded him) broils
began in England, France and Ireland, which had every way a tragical end.
Bruise in England, Arthure in France, and Courcy in Ireland, are testimonies
thereof: But orderly of these as the Nature of the History requires; Arthure
the son of Ieffry Plantagenet nephew to King John, lived when his uncle John
aspired to the Crown, being 16 years of age, he was affianced to a daughter
of Philippe the French King, the said Philippe Knighted him in the field; he
was Duke of Britain, Earl of Anjou, Poitiers, Maine and Turrow of Normandy. He
did homage unto his uncle for some, and to Philippe for the rest; his uncle had
him in Jealousy, first lest that in process of time, he would make claim to
the Crown: secondly, for that he adhered too much to the French, and the young
Prince upon conference, with bold spirit told him, that he did him wrong, and
that he was bound in honor to deliver unto him the Crown of England, with
all that thereunto appertained. Shortly after, it fell out that King John took
this Arthure confederate against him, with William de Bruise, Hugh Brune and
others, imprisoned him in Falaise in Normandy; from thence he was brought to
Roane, and there clapped in the Tower, under the custody of Robert de Veipont,
where shortly after he finished his life, whether by leaping into the ditch,
thinking to make his escape, or by mean of some privy hand, which murder it
is not as yet agreed upon Vtinam (says Mat. Paris) non ut fama refert invida;
by occasion whereof, K. John was ever after had in great suspicion, whether
justly or unjustly the Lord knows King John fearing the secret practices of
his adversaries, and doubting the revolt of his Barons, sent for his further
security, unto those whom he most suspected for hostages and pledges of their
Ioialty, and among others, unto William de Bruise a Normand borne, but Lord of
Brechnok, says Guttin Owen, and a great commander in South Wales. The wife,
like a quick Dame, taking the answer out of her husbands mouth, gave this
round speech; that she would not give any of her sons to King John, who
already had slain and murdered his own nephew Arthur. These words being
lavishly delivered unto the King, set him in such a heat of displeasure against
her husband (though he had rebuked her sharply for the same) that the L. Bruise
with his wife and children fled the Realm, and got them unto Ireland for
safeguard of their lives; and when King John came unto Ireland, they fled to
the I Will of Man, where they were apprehended and sent to the Castle of Windsore
in England, and there (as the common fame went) famished to death. But William
de Bruise himself escaped the hands of the King in Ireland, and fled into
France, died at Corbell, and was buried in Paris. The next that comes upon the
stage is Sir John de Courcy Earl of Vlster, Lord of Conaght, that had lastly
been L. Liev. of Ireland, who governing the land with great circumspection,
together with Sir Hugh de Lacy the younger, who maligned him secretly, and
envied his prosperity, in so much that he accused him to King John, saying,
that he laid to the Kings charge the murdering of his nephew Arthure;
whereupon King John sent for him into England; and gave commission unto Sir
Hugh de Lacy, and his brother Walter Delacy, to attach his person. Sir John de
Courcy having secret intelligence of their drift, kept himself a loofe: Sir
Hugh Delacy finding that levied an army, and invaded Vlster; the Country rose
against him and drove him to fly. Then Lacy praclaimed him traitor, and
marched toward him with all the forces he could make. Courcy in like sort
prepared for his coming.

At Dune they met and fought a cruel battle, where the field was all blood,
and many slain on both sides, but in the end the victory fell to Courcy, and
Lacy went back with shame enough. Then Lacy practiced how he might betray him.

It is said among the Irish, that Courcy offered the combat, and that Lacy
refused it, aleadging that it was not for him, that represented the Kings
person, to hazard his life with an inferior, being a subject and a traitor.
Lacy makes proclamation, promising a large reward to him that should bring him
in Courcy either alive or dead, but it would not be; then privily he dealt with
some of his servants, that if they would undertake the apprehension of him,
they should have great rewards; it was concluded, and this advice the betraiers
gave: Sir John de Courcy is a mighty man in arms, and of such strength, that
no one man dares be so hardy as lay hand upon him, and again he is always
both in public and private well provided: Yet we can direct you a course to
bring your purpose to effect: upon good Friday yearly he wears no arms, but
is wholly given to divine contemplation, and commonly walks all solitary
round about the Churchyard of Dune: if you provide a troop of horsemen in a
readiness, and send your espiall before, there you shall have him, apprehend
him and work your will, and hither they came, and laid hands upon him. Courcy
now unarmed and altogether distressed; ran to a wooden cross that stood in
the Church yard, took the pole thereof and laid about him lustily; Courcy at
that time had but a few attending on him, and they armelesse; of which number,
were two young Gentlemen, the sons of Sir Amorick Saint Laurence which were
slain; to be short, the Author of the Book of Houth reports, that Courcy
in that Skirmish slew 13. of Lacy his men, that died not upon the Cross, but
under the Cross, but in the end he was carried away, conveied beyond the seas,
clapped in the Tower of London, and condemned to perpetual imprisonment:
Whereupon Lacy for that service, had the Earldom of Vlster given him, and the
Iudases that betrayed their Master had their hire. Then they craved of Sir Hugh
de Lacy a pasport into England, with the relation of the good service they had
done in Ireland, which was granted upon condition, that upon the pain of
death, they should never return into Ireland again, neither to open the same
before it were demanded of them: It was as follows.

I Hugh de Lacy Lord Justice of Ireland, servant to my dread Sovereign Lord
King John: To all them that shall read these few lines, greeting; know you that
th^se men, whose names are under written, served sometimes Sir John de Courcy
late Earl of Vlster, but now in durance in the Tower of London, and for a
sum of money, betrayed their own Master into my hand. I deem them no better
then Judas the traitor: how hardly soever I have conceived of Courcy, I hold
them a thousand times more damnable traitors. Wherefore let no subject within
any of the Kings dominions, give them any entertainment, but spit in their
faces, and suffer them to rogue about and wander as Jews. He provided them a
bark, with sail and victual, but gave them no Pilots nor seafaring men, for
want of skill they could not take the seas, but were tossed with wind and
weather, along the Coast, at length the Tide brought them into the river of
Cork: they were no sooner landed, but they were apprehended, examined, and
brought to Sir Hugh de Lacy, and forthwith all four hanged cheek by jole.

Not long after, there fell some difference between John, King of England, and
Philip, King of France, for the right of some Fort in Normandy, who to avoyde
the shedding of Christian blood, agreed of each side to put it to a combat; of
King Philips part there was a French man in readiness; King John upon the
sudden wist not what to do for a Champion to encounter with him; at length,
one attending upon his person, informed him that there was one Courcy in the
Tower of London, the only man in his dominions (if he would undertake it) to
answer the challenge. King John joyful of this, sent the first, yea second,
and third time, promising large rewards, and rich gifts, and that it stood him
upon as far as the honor of his Crown and kingdom did reach, to make good
the combat. Courcy answered very frowardly, (the which was taken in good part
in regard of the urgent necessity) that he would never fight for him, neither
for any such as he was, that he was not worthy to have one drop of blood spilt
for him; that he was not able to requite him the wrongs he had done him,
neither to restore him the hearts ease he had bereaved him of: yet
notwithstanding all the premises, he was willing, and would with all
expedition, be ready to venture his life in defense of the Crown and his
country. Whereupon it was agreed, that he should be dyeted, apparrelled, and
armed to his content, and that his own sword should be brought him out of
Ireland. The day came, the place appointed, the List provided, the scaffolds
set up, the Princes with their nobility of each side, with thousands in
expectation. Forth comes the French Champion, gave a turn, and rests him in
his tent: They sent for Courcy, who all this while was trussing of himself
about with strong points, and answered the messengers, if any of their company
were to go to such a banquet, I think he would make no great haste. Forth he
comes, gave a turn, and went into his Tent. When the Trumpets sounded to
battle, forth come the combatants, and viewed each other. Courcy beheld him
with a wonderful stern countenance, and passed by. The French man not liking
his grimme look, the strong proportion and feature of his person, stalked
still along, and when the Trumpets sounded the last charge, Courcy drew out his
sword, and the French man ran away, and conveyed him to Spain. Whereupon
they sounded victory, the people clapped their hands, and cast up their cappes;
King Philip desired King John that Courcy might be called before them, to show
some part of his strength and manhood, by a blow upon on a Helmet; it was
agreed, a stake was set in the ground, and a shirt of maile, and a Helmet
thereon; Courcy drew his sword, looked wonderful sternely upon the Princes,
cleft the helmet, the shirt of maile, and the stake so far in, that none
could pull it out but himself. Then the Princes demanded of him, what he
meant to look so sowrely upon them; his answer was, if he had missed his blow
upon the block, he would have cut off both the Kings heads. All that he said
was taken in good part: King John discharged him out of all his troubles, gave
him great gifts, and restored him to his former possessions in Ireland. It is
written further, that hereupon he sailed into England, came to Westchester,
offered himself to the sea, and was put back again fifteen times by
contrary winds which rose upon a sudden, to the English shore. And in the
book of Houth it is delivered, that upon every repulse, the night following,
he was admonished in a vision, not to attempt the seas, for to sail into
Ireland, and that he should never set foot upon any land there; and withal,
that the reason was yielded thus. Courcy, thou have done very ill, for thou
have pulled down the master, and set up the servant; for he had translated the
Cathedral Church, and the Prebendaries of the blessed Trinity in Dune, into
an Abbey of black Monks, brought thither from Chester, and consecrated the
same to the honor of Saint Patricke. Whereupon remembering himself that he had
done very ill in taking the name from God to a creature, gave sentence upon
himself, that he was worthily punished. Immediately he altered his course,
went into France, and there died: now forwards with the history, according to
the due course of time in the reign of King John, so the book of Houth
reports.

Anno 1202. Meler Fitz Henry, whose father was the base son of King Henry the
first, founded the Abbey of Cownall; he came into Ireland with the first
Conquerours, being a young stripling, and is highly commended by Cambrensis for
his great valor, and worthiness in martial prowess: he left this world,
Anno 1220. his Epitaph I find in John Clynne.

Conduntur tumulo Meyleri nobilis ossa,
Indomitus domitor totius gentis Hibernae.
Intombed are the bones of him they Noble Meler call,
Who was the tamelesse tamer of the Irish nation all.
Anno 1205. in the seventeenth year of the reign of King John, Theobald Fitz
Walter, Fitz Gilbert, Becket the first Lord Butler of Ireland, founded the
Monastery of Wethencia, alias Wethran, alias Wethenoya, alias Voghney, in the
county of Limeric; this difference I find in Dowling, Grace, and others.

Anno 1206. Saint Monon an Irish man, and a Martyr, ( Molanus lays him down
among the Saints in Flanders) flourished; he is reputed the Patron of Nassonia,
under the command of the Abbot of Saint Hubert, in the Lordship of Audiamum; he
was the Disciple of Saint Remulch, and Saint John Agnus, Bishop of Trajectum,
and of Irish birth; this Monon was murdered at Ardevenna, (says Molanus) by
some bloody massacres, and lies buried at Nassonia, in the Church which he
there had founded.

A rebellion in Thurles.
Anno 1208. (I find it in Dowlinge and Grace) Sir Hugh de Lacy the younger,
being Lord Justice, entered into Thurles, where the country being in rebellion,
offered him battle, he laid siege to Castle Meiler, wanne it, brake it down,
and made it even with the ground; but he lost there more men, (say the Irish)
then he took away with him; the chief Rebel was Ieffery Mac Moris, alias
Morich.

Black Monday.
Anno 1209. the occasion of black Monday, and the original remembrance
thereof rose at Dublin. The City of Dublin by reason of some great mortality,
being wasted and desolate, the inhabitants of Bristoll flocked thither to
inhabit, who after their country manner, upon Holy days, some for love of the
fresh air, some to avoid idleness, some other for pastime, pleasure, and
gamings sake, flocked out of the town toward Cullen wood upon Monday in
Easter week. The Birnues and Tools, (the mountain enemies) like Wolves lay
in ambush for them, and upon espiall finding them unarmed, fell upon the^, and
slew some 300. persons, besides women and children, which they led in their
hands, although shortly after, the town was upon the report thereof, eftsoons
peopled again by Bristolians; yet that dismal day is yearly remembered, and
solemnly observed by the Mayor, Sheriffs, and Citizens, with feast and
banquet, and pitching up of tents in that place in most brave sort, daring the
enemy upon his peril, not to be so hardy, as once to approach near their
feasting camp; and whereas the Irish heretofore accounted Tuesday their fatal
and unfortunate day, (for Lymric was twice won, Wexford yielded up, Waterford
was besieged, and Dublin was sacked upon a Tuesday) now they have Monday in
memory, making difference of days, not fitting the mind of the Apostle, which
forbade the superstitions or vain observations of days, etc. Gal. 4.

Anno 1211, (or somewhat before) the Monastery of Grenard was founded by
Richard Tute, who shortly after miscarried at Athlone, by the fall of a Turret,
and was buried in the same Monastery. About the same time, in the year 1209.
the Monastery of Forte was founded by Walter Lacy, Lord of Meth.

King John in Ireland.
Anno 1210. and the twelfth year of his reign, King John came into Ireland,
and landed at Waterford with an huge army, mavelous well appointed to pacify
that rebellious people, that were universally revolted, burning, spoiling,
preying, and massacring the English. Fabian and Graffton allege the cause that
moved the Irishmen to this rebellion, to have been for that the King endevord
to lay grievous taxes upon them toward his aid in the wars against the
French King, which they could not brook, and therefore rose in arms against
their Sovereign. When he came to Dublin the whole Country fearing his
puissance, craved peace and flocked unto him along the sea cost, the Champian
Countries and remote places receiving an oath to be true and faithful unto
him. There were 20. ( Reguli) of the chiefest rulers within Ireland, which came
to the King to Dublin, and there did him homage and fealty, as appertained.
Harding names them Lord O Neale, and many more. Walsingham remembers Catelus
King of Conaght, it forces it not though they miss the right names of place
and person; it is a fault in manner common to all foraigne writers.

After this he marched forwards into the land, and took into his hands,
diverse Fortresses, and strong Holds of his enemies, that fled before him, for
fear to be apprehended; as William le Bruise, Mathilda his wife, William their
son with their train, of whom I spoke before; also Walter de Lacy Lord of
Mead, and Hugh de Lacy Earl of Vlster, and Lord Justice of Ireland, fearing
his presence, fled into France; their exaction, oppression and tyranny was
intolerable. Likewise they doubted how to answer the death of Sir John de
Courcy Lord of Ratheny and Kilbarrock within 5. miles of Dublin, whom they had
murdered, of especial malice and deadly hatred.

First, for that he was of the house of Sir John de Courcy, Earl of Vlster,
(whom the Lacies always maligned.)

Secondly, for that he had made grievous complaints of them in England to King
John, the trial whereof they could not abide. Upon the sight of the Lacies,
John Graye B. of Norwich L. Deputy.
King John made John Gray Bishop of Norwich his deputy. Of these Lacies it is
further remembered in the Book of Houth, and other antiquities; how that in
France they obscured themselves, in the Abbey of S. Taurin, and gave themselves
to manual labor, as digging, delving, gardening, planting, and greffing for
daily wages, the space of 2. or 3. years; the Abbot was well pleased with
their service, and upon a day (whether it were by reason of some inkling or
secret intelligence given him, or otherwise) demanded of them of what birth
and parentage they were, and what Country they came from; when they had
acquainted him with the whole, he bemoned their case, and undertook to become
a suitor unto the King for them; in a word he obtained the Kings favor for
them thus far, that they were put to their fine, and restored to their fromer
possessions; so that Walter de Lacy paid for the Lordship of Mead 2500.
Marks, and Hugh his brother, for Vlster and Conaght a greater sum.

Hugh de Lacy, in remembrance of this kindness which the Abbot showed them,
took his nephew, his brothers son with them into Ireland, one Alured, whom
he Knighted and made Lord of the Dengle. The Monks also, which out of that
Monastery he had brought with him into Ireland, he honored greatly, and gave
them entertainment in Four, the which Walter De Lacy had formerly builded.

King John having pacified the land, ordained that the English Laws should be
used in Ireland, appointed 12. English shires with Sheriffs and other
Officers, to rule the same, according unto the English Ordinances; he reformed
the Coin and made it uniforme, (some say it was Gray his Deputy) of like
weight and finenes, and made it current as well in England as in Ireland.

When he had disposed of his affairs, and ordered all things at his pleasure,
he took the sea again, with much triumph, and landed in England the 30. day
of August.

Anno 1213. When the French King by instigation of Innocentius 3. Bishop of
Rome, prepared to invade England: King John eftsoone understanding thereof,
made provision accordingly to answer his enterprise, and among others (the
cause why the story is here inserted) Holinshed writes how that to his aid the
Bishop of Norwich, the Kings Deputy of Ireland, levied an Army of 300. foot
well appointed, beside horsemen which arrived in England to the encouragement
of the whole Camp. And as the French was frustrate of his purpose, so they
shortly returned with great joy to their native Country.

Castle of Dublin builds.
In the same year, Viz. 1213. John Comin Archbishop of Dublin departed this
life, and was buried in the Quire of Christ-Church, whom Henry Loudres
succeeded in the days of this King John. This Henry builded the Castle of
Dublin, and was made Lord Justice of Ireland. Schorchbill.
His tenants nic-named him Schorchbill or Schorcvillen upon this occasion;

He being peaceably stalled in his Bishopprike, summoned all his tennants and
farmers at a certain day appointed, to make their personal appearance before
him, and to bring with them such evidences and writings as they enjoyed their
holds by; the tenants of the day appointed, appeared, showed their evidences to
their Landlord, mistrusting nothing; he had no sooner received them, but before
their faces, upon a sudden cast them all into a fire, secretly provided for
the purpose; this fact amazed some that they became silent, moved others to a
stirring choler and furious rage, that they regarded neither place nor person,
but brake into irreverent speeches: Thou an Archbishop, nay, thou art a
Schorcvillen, an other drew his weapon and said, as good for me kill as be
killed; for when my evidences are burned, and my living taken away from me, I
am killed. The Bishop being thus tumult, and the imminent danger, whipped out at
a back door: His Chaplains, Registers, and Summoners, were well knocked, and
some of them left for dead. They threatened to fire the house over the Bishops
head; some mean was made for the present time to pacify their outrage, with
fair promises, that all hereafter should be to their own content: upon this
they departed, the intent of the promises I cannot learn, othersome inveigh
against it; but in fine, complaint thereof being made to Henry 3. the King
thought so hardly of the course, that he removed him from his Iusticeship, and
placed in his room, Maurice Fitz Girald, of whom hereafter. Maurice Fitz
Girald Lord Justice.
This Loudreds was buried in Christ Church.

In the same year also King John being mightily distressed through the
practices of her Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Monks, Priests of his
dominions, and the Barons of his Kingdom revolting, and the inward hatred of
the French King, with foreign powers intending an open invasion, was driven,
to prevent further mischief, as I find in Polychronicon, to surrender his
Crown from his head, and to subject his Kingdoms of England and Ireland,
tributarie to the Sea of Rome, and as his client, vassal and feodarie to that
See, to hold them of Innocentius the Bishop: again, England being interdicted,
and Ireland likewise, were after released upon agreement, composition, and
Charter, and homage, as in the Chronicle of England more at large appears.

The death of King John, and the manner of it, I refer to the English
Chronicles. After his decease, Henry the third, his eldest son, aged about
nine years, began his reign, Anno 1216.

Anno 1220. and the fourth year of Henry the third, so writes Clyn, Dowling,
and Grace; together with the English Antiquities, in their Irish collections;
all Meth was wonderfully afflicted and wasted by reason of the private quarrels
and civil wars between William Earl Marshall, Earl of Penbroke, etc. and
Sir Hugh de Lacy, Earl of Vlster, and Lord of Connaght. Trim was besieged,
and brought to a lamentable plight, and when the rage and fury of those
garboiles was somewhat mitigated and appeased, after the shedding of much
blood, the same year to prevent afterclaps, and subsequent calamities, the
Castle of Trim was builded.

About this time, certain worthy persons of great fame and renown, to wit,
Henry Loudreds, Roger Peppard, and William Peppard, Lords successively, de
saltu Salmonis, and Meiler Fitz Henry, one of the first Conquerours, paid
nature her due, sin her debt, and ended their days.

It appears in Stanihurst, that the same year that Henry Loudreds died, viz.
1220. the Castle of Dublin was builded: I mean the walls four square, or
quadrangle wise, but the four Turrets and the other afterward. Sir Henry
Sidney is said to have builded the inner lodgings, in whose eternal
commendation, I find in the said Stanihurst, these verses.

Gesta libri referunt multorum clara virorum,
Laudis and in chartis stigmata fixa manent:
Verum Sidnaei lauds haec saxa loquuntur,
Nec jacet in solis gloria tanta libris.
Si libripereant, homines remanere valebunt,
Si pereant homines ligna manner queant;
Lignaque si pereant, non ergo saxa peribunt,
Saxaque si pereant tempore, tempus erit,
Si pereat tempus, minime consumitur aevum,
Quod cum principio, sed sine fine manet.
Dum libri florent, homines dum vivere possunt,
Dum quoque cum lignis saxa manner valent,
Dum remanet tempus; dum denique remanet aevum,
Laus tua Sydnaei, digna perire nequit.
Anno 1224: Abbatia de Albo tractu was founded. By general consent of
Antiquaries, after the death of Henry Loudres, spoken of before. Maurice Fitz
Gerald was by Henry the third, made Lord Justice of Ireland, and afterward
fell in the Kings displeasure, and was removed, but the years they agree not
upon, wherein I find great discord.

The English Chronicle of Ireland delivers that he was made Lord Justice
Anno 1228. Florilegus and Holinshed write, that he was removed from his
Iusticeship, Anno 1245. and John Fitz Ieffery substituted in his room. Matthew
Paris writes that he was removed, Anno 1248 but howsoever they have mistaken
the years, or whether the fault of the Printer crept in, it forces not; I am
to deliver to the reader, the truth of the history, and the most worthy service
of this Noble man, with the years and the time as near as I can.

Anno 1229. in the reign of Henry the third, Maurice Fitz Girald being Lord
Justice, ( Matthew Paris and Holinshed write the story) one Stephen Chapplen,
and Nuntio to Pope Gregory, came to King Henry with the Popes Apostolic
Mandates and procuration letters, requiring of spiritual and temporal
throughout England, Ireland, and Wales, the tenth of all their movables, to
the maintenance of his wars against Frederick the Emperor. At the day and
place appointed when the King and his Lords spiritual and temporal met
together, and the Nuntio had read his letters, the King was silent, and reputed
(says mine Author) as consenting thereto; the Earls and Barons (says Paris)
and all the Laytie said flatly, that they would give the Pope no tenths,
neither subject their Baronies and local possessions to the Church of Rome;
the Clergy after three or four days deliberation, fearing the thunderbolts
of excommunication, with grudging and murmurs, and many a bitter curse,
yielded; yet Ranulphus, Earl of Chester, alone, stood stoutly in the cause,
and would not permit the Clergy of his country to become in bondage, neither
to contribute the said tenths, though England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland
were compelled to pay. Ireland sent likewise after their money, Irish curses,
for they were driven at the worst hand to sell unto the merciless Merchants,
their Cowes, Hackneyes, Caddoes, and Aqua vitae, to make present payment, and
were driven in that extremity, to pawn and sell their Cups, Chalices, Copes,
Altar-clothes and vestments.

Anno 1230* (as I find recorded in the book of Houth) Hubertus de Burgo was
Lord Justice of Ireland, as I gather, in the absence of Maurice Fitz Girald, to
whom the King gave the land..... and Connaught, and made him Earl of
Connaught, and shortly after, ob probitatem and fidelititem ex imiam, so I
read in Ypodigma Neustria, being called into England for his uprightness and
singular fidelity, was made governor of the King, Lord Justice of England, and
Earl of Kent, by the consent of all the Peers of the Realm; afterward as
the course of this world wheels about, he fell into the Kings displeasure, so
that he called him old traitor, (and in his rage would have run him through
with his sword, had not the Earl of Chester and others run between) for
that (says Stow) he had taken five thousand marks of the Queen of France,
to hinder his purpose; to avoid the Kings displeasure, this Hubert fled to the
Chapel of Brandwood in Essex, where he was taken, and by commandment of the
King, sent to the Tower of London; all his friends forsook him, none answered
for him but the Archbishop of Dublin; wherein we may behold as in a Glass, the
disposition of feyned friends in former ages, who in the Spring of a man's
felicity, like Swallows, will fly about him, but when the winter of
adversity nippeth, like Snailes they keep within their shells: at length this
Hubert was somewhat reconciled to the Kings favor, that he was enlarged, yet
banished the Court: lastly, he ended his miseries at his Manor house of
Bansted in Surry, and was buried at the Church of the Friars Preachers at
London, which was then in Holborne; unto the which Church he gave his noble
Palace at Westminster, the which afterward Walter Gray the Archbishop of York
bought of them, and made it his Inn, since commonly called York House, but
now White Hall. So far Stow, Holinshed, and others.

The year aforesaid, I find one Ieffery March, alias Maurish, (so Holinshed
calls him) in Matthew Paris, Galfridus de Marisco, to have been Lord Justice
of Ireland: so it may be in the absence of Maurice Fitz Girald, who made three
journeys to King Henry the third; one with great power out of Ireland to aid
him beyond the seas; secondly, to clear himself of the death of Richard
Marshall Earl of Pembrook: lastly, with Irish forces against the Welshmen.
Mat. Paris and Holinshed, make report of his good service; How that when an
Irish petit King in Conaght, understanding that both the King of England, and
the Earl Marshall and Maurice Fitz Gerald were gone over into France, and so
Ireland left without any great aid of men of war, on the English part,
raised a mighty Army, and with the same entered into the Marches and borders of
the English dominion, spoiling and burning the Country before him. And how that
Ieffray de Maurisco then Lord Justice, being thereof advertized; called to him
Walter de Lacy, Lord of Meth, and Richard de Burgh, assembling therewithal an
hugh Army, the which he divided into three parts, appointing the said Walter de
Lacy and Richard de Burgh with the two first parts, to lie in ambush within
certain Woods, through the which he purposed to draw the enemies. And marching
forth with the third, which he reserved to his own government, he proffered
battle to the Irishmen, the which when they saw but one battle of the
Englishmen, boldly assaid the same.

The Englishmen according to the order appointed, faining as though they had
fled and so retired still back, till they had trained the Irish within danger
of their other two battles which coming forth upon them, did set on them
eagerly; whilst the other which seemed before to fly, returned back again,
and set upon them in like manner; by means whereof, the Irish men being in the
midst were beaten down: if they stood to it, they were before and behind
slain; if any offered to fly he was overtaken, thus in all parts they were
utterly vanquished, with the loss of 20000. Irish, and the King of Conaght
taken and committed to prison. This Noble Ieffray de Marisco (of whom Holinshed
writes) a man some time in great honor and possessions in Ireland, fell into
the displeasure of the King, was banished; who after he had remained long in
exile, suffered great misery, ended the same by natural death: Thus the
unstable Wheel goes round about: and yet I may not so leave it he had a
son called William de Maurisco, who together with the father (the Justice of
God requiring the same) came to most shameful ends: Matthew the Munke of
Westminster and Matthew Paris the Munke of Saint Albones, do write the Story:
While the King was beyond seas, a certain noble man of Irish birth to wit
Willielmus de Maurisco, an exiled and banished man, the son of Ieffray de
Maurisco, for some heinous offense laid to his charge, kept himself in the
Isle of Lundy, not far from Bristall, preying, robbing and stealing, as a
notorious Pirate; at length being apprehended, together with 17. of his
confederacy, and by the Kings commandment adjudged to cruel death; he was
drawn at London with his confederats, at horse tails to the Gibbet, and there
hanged and quartered: His father one of the mightiest men of Ireland, by name
Galfridus de Maurisco, hearing thereof, fled into Scotland, and scarce there
could he lie safe; who pinnig away with grief and sorrow, soon after ended a
miserable life, with wished death; again after in another place he writes,
Galfridus de Maurisco reckened amongst the most Noble of Ireland, an exile and
a banished man, died pitifully, yet not to be pitied; whom being banished
Ireland, expulsed out of Scotland and fled out of England, France received for
a beggar, where he ended an unfortunate life, after the most shameful death
of his son Willielmus de Maurisco.

These things therefore I deliver more at large unto the hearers, that every
man may wey with himself, what end is alloted unto treason, and especially
being committed against the sacred person of a Prince: His father against
Richard Earl and Marshall in Ireland, and his son William against the King,
unadvisedly and unfortunatly adventured to practice mischief.

Paris adds the name of this William was very odious unto the King, for so
much it was reported, that through the council of Ieffray his father, he had
conspired the death of the King, and that he had traitorously sent that varlet,
which came in the night season, to Woodstock to slay the King, and last of all,
that he had killed at London in presence of the King; one Clemens, a Clerk,
messenger of some Noble man of Ireland, that came to inform the King against
him.

About this same time, flourished a Learned man of Irish birth, one Cornelius
Historicus, so called, because he was an exquisit antiquary Bale: and
Stanihurst have briefly written his life and his commandations out of Hector
Boethius, who was greatly furthered by this Cornelius, to the perfecting of the
Scottish History, he wrote as they say: Multarum rerum Cronicon. lib. 1.

About this time, Viz. Anno 1230. there rose a doubt in Ireland, so that they
sent to England to be therein resolved: the King, by his learned Council
answered as follows.

Henry by the grace of God, etc. King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of
Normandy and Guian, etc. Trusty and welbeloved Gerald Fitz Maurice Iusticer of
Ireland, greeting; Whereas certien Knights of the parties of Ireland lately
informed us; that when any land does descend unto sisters, within our dominion
of Ireland, the Justices errant in those parties are in doubt, whether the
younger sister ought to hold of the eldest sister, and do homage unto her or
not. And forasmuch as the said Knights have made instance, to be certified how
it had been used before within our Realm of England in like case; at their
instance we do you wit, that such a Law and Custom is in England in this
case, that if any holding of us in chief, happen to die, having daughters to
his heirs our ancestors, and we after the death of the father, have always had
and received homage of all the daughters, and every of them in this case did
hold of us in chief. And if they happned to be within age, we have always had
the ward and marriage of them, and if he be tennant to another Lord, the
sisters being within age, the Lord shall have the ward and manage of them all,
and the eldest only shall do homage for herself, and all her sisters, and
when the other sisters come to full age, they shall do their service to the
Lord of the fee, by the hands of the eldest sister; yet shall not the eldest by
this occasion, exact of her younger sisters homage, ward, or any other
subjection; for when they be all sisters, and in manner, as one heir to one
inheritance: if the eldest should have homage of the other sister, or demand
ward, then the inheritance should seem to be divided so, that the eldest
sister should seem to be segnioresse and tennant of inheritance, simul and
semel, that is to say, heir of her own part, and segnioresse to her sisters,
which could not stand well together in this case, for the eldest can demand no
more then her sisters; but the chief mease by reason of her auncienty.
Moreover, if the eldest sister should take homage of the younger, she should be
as a segnioresse to them all, and should have the ward of them and their
heirs, which should be none other, but but to cast the Lamb to the Wolf to
be devoured.

And therefore we command you that you cause the aforesaid customs that be
used within our Realm of England, in this case to be proclaimed throughout
our dominions of Ireland, and to be straightly kept and observed, in testimony
whereof, etc. I witness my self at Westminster, the ninth of February, the
thirteeneth year of our Reign.

Anno 1233. or as some will have it, 1234. the 7. of April, there appeared as
it were four Suns, besides the natural Sun, of a red color, and a great
Circle of Crystal color; from the sides whereof went out half Circles; in
the divisions whereof, the four Suns went forth. There followed that year
great war and cruel bloodshed, and general great disturbance throughout
England, Wales, and Ireland, so write Matthew Paris and Stow.

This troublesome year died Gualter Lacy Lord of Mead, leaving behind him two
daughters, coheires to inherit his possession (to wit) Margret that was married
to the Lord Theobald Verdon and Mathilda married to Ieffray Genevile.

Amids these troubles in the flourishing days of Maurice Fitz Gerald, Hubert
de Burgo, Ieffray de Morisco, and Gualter de Lacy, whose ends followed
according: The Noble Earl Richard Maxfield Lord Maxfield, Earl Marshall of
England, spoken of before, and being by them maligned, was traitorously cut off
by sundry devilish draughts. Matthew Paris wrote the Story at large, laid down
their practice on both the sides of the seas, their forged letters; and
secretly as it were by stealth, fixing thereto the Kings seal: He calls
them traitors, Iudasses; and Ieffery de Morisco he terms Achitophell that
gave wicked counsel. Hubert had a lamentable end, Ieffery dyed in misery, Lacy
was shortly cut off, and Maurice Fitz Girald was with dishonor removed from
his Iusticeship. This Maurice of the King desired to be reconciled to Gilbert
Marshall his brother, whom he greatly feared, and offered in satisfaction to
build with all speed, a noble Monastery, and to endow the same with large
possessions, and to furnish it with a reverent covent, to pray for the soul of
Richard Marshall: at length with much ado, and importunate entreaty of the
King and Nobility of England, Gilbert Marshall granted him peace; but of Earl
Richards end I have spoken somewhat before.

About the year 1233. or 34. Hugh Mapleton, Bishop of Ossorie, whose
Episcopal see was then at Achboo, in upper Ossorie, began the foundation of
the Cathedral Church, now standing in the Irish town of Kilkenny, in the
honor of God and Saint Canicus, (of whom the town of Kilkenny has the name)
and is reckoned the first founder. He ordained three Canons for the service,
he gave them diverse Churches and tithes for their maintenance, as in the
foundation of those Chanons more at large does appear. He builded the Bishops
Court of Aghor, adding thereto fish ponds, fishings, and other necessaries.
Such good men lived in those days.

At the same time came the King of Connaught, exhibiting a grievous complaint
unto Henry the third (says Matthew Paris) against John de Burgo, the son, as
I suppose, of Hubert de Burgo before spoken of; that he had entered his country
with forces, and wasted the same with fire and sword, that it would please his
Majesty to do him justice, and command such rash attempts to be bridled,
alleging that he was his loyal subject, and paid for his kingdom, an annual
pension, mounting to the sum of 5000* marks, ever since King John had subdued
his kingdom, and that he would rid him of that base upstart, or new commer
which sought unjustly to disherit him. The King tendered his reasonable
requests, and commanded Maurice Fitz Girald then present, to pluck up by the
root, the fruitless Plant, the which Hubert Earl of Kent had sometime
planted in those parts, while he was in Ruff, that it might budde no more. He
wrote also unto the Nobility of Ireland, that they should banish the said John
de Burgo, and peaceably establish the King in his kingdom, who with these
princely favors, joyfully returned into his country.

Anno 1235. (says Cooper) the Irish men rebelled; so he left it, and so I
leave it too.

Anno 1236. Matthew Paris does write that in the North parts not far from the
Abbey of Rochor Rupie, and also in Ireland, and the parts there abouts more
apparently, strange and wonderful sights were seen, which amazed the
beholders: to wit, there appeared coming forth of the earth, companies of
armed men on horseback, with Spear, Shield, Sword, and banners displaid in
sundry forms and shapes, riding in battle array, and encountering together;
and this sight appeared sundry days each after other; sometimes they seemed to
join as it had been in battle, and fought sore; and sometimes they seemed
to just and break staves, as if it had been at some triumphant justs of
torny. The people of the country beheld them a far off with great wonder, for
the skirmish showed it self so lively, that now and then they might see them
come with their empty horses, sore wounded and hurt, and likewise men mangled
and bleeding; A pitiful fight to behold, and that which seemed more strange,
and most to be mervailed at, after they vanished away, the prints of their feet
appeared in the ground, and the grass trodden in those places where they had
been seen.

Anno 1240. Petrus de Supino came from Pope Gregory into Ireland, with an
authenticke papal mandate, Petrus de Supino and Petrus Rubeus, Pope Gregory's
agents in Ireland and Scotland, were rifled of all they had by the Emperor.
requiring under pain of Excommunication, and other censures ecclesiastical
the twentieth part part of the whole land, besides donatives and private
gratuities to the maintenance of his wars against Frederick the Emperor,
where he extorted, says Matthew Paris, a thousand and five hundred marks, and
above, says Florilegus; at which time also one Petrus Pubeus, entitled the
Popes Familiar, and kinsman, and both bastards, says Bale, filled in like sort
his fardles in Scotland. These Nuntioes were so crafty, that they needed no
Brokers, they secretly understood by Posts and Cursitors, the state of the
Court of Rome, which quailed them full sore, that the Pope was either gone, or
panted for life; secretly by the conduct of the Monks of Canterbury, they were
conveyed to Dover, where they took shipping, and crossed the seas. The
Emperor Frederick, against whom this provision was made, having intelligence
thereof, and secretly acquainted with the Popes state, wrote to the King of
England to apprehend such prollers, wherein he also reproved his cowardice. The
Emperor when he understood that the birds were flowne away, made search for
the neast, yet overtooke them in Italy; where, to be short, he imprisoned
them, their kindred and favorers rifled them of their money, and sent them to
Rome to sing for more money: he that will read the story more at large, let
him repair to Matthew Paris.

The same year, says Matthew Paris, Andelmus borne in Cullen, a man highly
commended for life and learning, Andelmus, Primate of Armagh.
was by the Bishop of Worcester, solemnly consecrated at Westminster,
Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of Ireland, in the presence of the King, the
Legate, The Castle of Sligoe builded Girald Fitz Maurice Ricardus de Burgo in
Gascoigne.
and many reverend Prelates.

Anno 1242. Maurice Fitz Girald, Lord Justice of Ireland, builded the Castle of
Sligoe.

Anno 1243. Clun and Dowlinge write, that Giraldus Fitz Maurice, Richardus de
Burgo, and Hugh de Lacy, Earl of Vlster in Ireland, ended the way of all
flesh, and was buried at Carechfergus. Matthew Paris gives Lacy great
commendations, that he was a most renowned warrior, and a valiant Conqueror
of a great part of Ireland. This Lacy left behind him one daughter and heir,
whom Walter de Burgo married, and in her right, became Earl of Vlster: of
Richardus de Burgo, Matthew Paris writes he had great possessions and lands in
Ireland, by the conquest of his most Noble father.

Anno 1245. Florilegus, Powell (out of Gittin Owen) and Holinshed, do write
how that the Welsh men rebelled against the King, and his forces being foiled
by David ap Llewelin Prince of Wales, he sent into Ireland to Maurice for
aid, and was in winter time mightily distressed, the which I find by Powell
recorded and written by a Noble man out of the camp unto his friends.

The King with his army lies at Gannocke, fortifying of that strong Castle,
and we live in our Tents, thereby watching, fasting, praying, and freezing with
cold; we watch for fear of the Welsh men, who are wont to invade and come
upon us in the night time; we fast for want of meat, for the half penny loaf
is worth five pence; we pray to God to send us home speedily; we starve for
cold, wanting our winter garments, and having no more but a thin linen
cloth between us and the wind; there is an arm of the seas under the Castle
where we lie, whereto the tide comes, and many ships come up to the haven,
which bring victuals to the Camp, from Ireland and Chester. The King all this
while expected the arrival of Maurice Fitz Girald, with his Irish forces,
mused with himself, fretted with himself, the wind serving, and yet said
nothing; at length the Irish sails are discryd, a shore they came, and Maurice
Fitz Girald, (together with Phelina, Oconor) Oconoghor, says another in
battle array, present themselves before the King at Chepstow, say the Irish
Chroniclers, but the British Chroniclers coppied out of the Abbeys of Conwey
and Stratflur, by Owen Gittine, deliver they landed at the I Will of Man or
Anglesey, the which in mine opinion seems to be most likely to be true. For
David ap Llewelin was Prince of North Wales, and there kept his forces, and
Chepstow is in South Wales; and besides, it is agreed upon of all sides, that
the Irish landing, spoiled the I Will of Anglesey, laded themselves with spoils,
and going to their ships, were driven to run and leave all behind; but to be
short, when all the forces joined together, the Welsh men were overthrown; the
King manned and victualled his Castles, returned into England, gave the Irish
men leave to return, winking a while in policy at the tarriance and slow
coming of Maurice Fitz Girald: when Maurice Fitz Girald, Lord Justice arrived
in Ireland, he found O Donell the Irish enemy, upon the death of Hugh Lacy, in
Arms, invading and sore annoying the Kings subjects in Vlster, and called unto
him Cormake Mac Dermot Mac Dory, with great forces, and entered Tireconell,
preyed, burned, and spoiled, and vanquished the enemy; there he slew
Moyleslaghlon O Donell, called King of Keyvayle, together with Gille
Canvinelagh, Obugill, and Mac Surley, called King of Oyrisgall, with diverse
others, gentlemen of those parts: in like sort many English men were cast away
in the river, whose passage O Donell stopped, and slew there William Butt, high
Sheriff of Connaught, together with a valiant young Gentleman his brother.
When the Lord Justice had thus achieved his purpose, he manned and victualled
the Castle of Sligo, took pledges of O Neale to keep the Kings peace, and
left them in the said Castle, gave Cormake Dermot Mac Dory that came to his
aid, the moytie of Connaught, and returned with a great prey.

When this noble service was performed, the King disgorged himself, and what
inwardly he had conceived, and for a while conceived against the Lord Justice,
John Fitz Ieffery Lord Justice, Anno 1245.
he then in writing delivered, and removed Maurice Fitz Girald out of his
Iusticeship, and placed in his room, John Fitz Ieffery de Morisco, the which
the Irish Chroniclers have suppressed, yet Florilegus and Holinshed do write,
Mauritium Hiberniae Iustitiariu^ eo quod ficte and tarde auxilium ab hibernia
domino Regi duxerat periclitanti a Iustitiaria Deposuit.

This Maurice departed out of this world, Anno Dom. 1256. was buried says Clyn
in the habit of the Friars Minors at Yough-halle, the which Morice had founded,
of whom Matthew Paris says thus; he was a valiant Knight, a very pleasant man,
inferior to none in Ireland, who sometime swayed the land when he had the
sword of Iusticeship; this man lived with commendations all the days of his
life, but peradventure falsely reported of, and stained in the end with the
death of Richard, Earl Marshall.

Anno 1247. after that Henry the third, and the Clergy of England and Ireland
found themselves mightily grieved at the Popes exactions and intolerable
extortions in England, Wales, and Ireland, and had signified the same in
writing to the Court of Rome; whereupon says Florilegus, the Court of Rome
fretted and sorrowed, that their avarice was as well reproved, as restrained.
Innocentius 4. devised in his conceit, a milder course to be held, that in
stead of a greater sum, they should give him at that time out of those
dominions, to supply his wants, but eleven thousand marks. Then says
Florilegus, Master Johannes Rusus was sent into Ireland, furnished with
authority, diligently to collect the Popes money, as a Legate, yet not clad in
scarlet, lest the Pope should offend the King of England, who has this
privilege, that no Legate set foot on his land, unless he be sent for, or
licenced; but the said John being a sophistical Legate, vigilantly plying the
papal mandate, and his own private gain, extorted out of Ireland, about six
thousand marks; the which by the conduite of the Clergy, was transported and
conveied to London, about the Feast of Saint Michaell the Archangell.

The same year, says Florilegus, there was a marveilouse and strange
Earthquake over England; but says Felcon, over Ireland: A great Earthquake.
And all the West of the world, and there followed immediately a continual
untemperature of the air, with a filthy skurfe; the Winter stormy cold and
wet, which continued until the 11. of July, and put the Gardeners, Fruterers,
and Husbandmen void of all hope, in so much they complained that Winter was
turned to Summer, and Summer to Winter, and that they were like to lose all,
and be undone.

Anno 1252. says Dowling and Grace, and the English Anonimus, but Clyn and
Florilegus write, that it was 1254. King Henry gave to Prince Edward his son,
Gascoigne, Ireland, Wales, Bristow, Stanford and Grantham, and sent him to
Alphonsus King of Spain, to take Ellionor his sister to wife, where he was by
the said King Knighted, and returned together with his wife into England, with
great riches.

Anno 1255. Alanus de la Zouch, was made Lord Justice; so I find in the Book
of Houth, after his departure out of Ireland, he being a Lord Baron, and
chief Justice in England; Florilegus, Humfrey Loid and Stow, do write the
Story how he came to his end; great strife rose in England, between certain
of the Nobility, about territories lands and titles, whereto each side made
claim; the matters in controversy, by direction from the King were decided in
Westminster Hall; the first Controversy was between John Earl of Surrey and
Warren, and Hugh de Lacy Earl of Lincoln, which went upon Lacy his side. The
second was, between this Earl Warren and Allan de la Zouch, this Zouch being
Chief Justice asked Earl Warren, how he held his land, Earl Warran drew
forth his sword and said, by this mine Ancestors held the same, and by this I
presently hold it, and with that ran the Chief Justice through in
Westminster Hall, and in his flight wounded also his son; thence he fled to
his Castle at Risgate, whom Prince Edward the Kings eldest son pursued with
an Army; to whom the Earl submitted himself, and afterward with friends, and
what with money pacified all.

Anno 1256. in the wars of Lewelin Prince of Wales, so I find in the records
of Conway and Stratflur Copied by Gettine Owen. The Irish coming to aid Ed.
Earl of Chester, were slain and their ships suncke.
Edward Earl of Chester, fell to outrage one while against the King, another
while against the Welshmen; his Army was 1500. foot and 500. horse. Henry the
third together with Richard Earl of Cornwall, and King of Almane wrote unto
him gently, wishing him to return to his Country and keep the peace, and not
to provoke the Welshmen to Arms; the which he refused to do, but sent to the
Irishmen for succor and supplies. Prince Edward the Kings eldest son,
understanding thereof, rigged a Navy, met with the Irish fleet, killed their
men and sunck their ships, few only remaining to return, and to make report
of this hard success in Ireland; In a while after, the King raised wars
against Lewellin Prince of Wales, and the Welshmen (says Paris, Causa autem
eorum etiam hostibus eorum justa videbatur,) and was brought to a narrow
straight, so that he sent to Ireland, and to Gascoigne for succor; the
Irishmen not forgetting their late overthrow, were loath to come (being of all
sides driven to serve) in the end came, and joined with their Kings forces,
where no memorable act was performed, for God, says Paris, defended the poor
people that put their whole confidence in him.

About this time, to wit, Anno 1256. Flourished Johannes De Sacro Bosco; The
life of Ioannes de Sacro Bosco.
Bale out of Leland, will have him to be a Yorkshire man, and term him John
Holyfaxe, Stanihurst writes he was borne in Ireland at Holy Wood, in Fingall,
some 12. miles from Dublin, and therefore called Johannes De Sacro Bosco, which
carried great likly-hood with it, until they are reconciled (which side
prevails, I weigh not greatly) I thought good to insert him, for so much as
his great learning graced him unto the posterity: In his springing years he
sucked the sweet milk of good learning, in the famous University of Oxford;
afterward he went to Paris, where he professed the learned Sciences, with
singular commendations, and there slumbreth in the dust of the earth, whose
exequies and funerals were there with great lamentations solemnized: first, he
followed Aristotle, afterward gave himself to the Mathematikes, and addicted
himself so much thereto, that none of the posterity (as is thought) could
follow him; he wrote.

De Spaera Mundi lib. 1. Tractatum de spaera, quatuor. De Algorismo lib. 1.
Omnia quae a primeva rerum orig. De Anni Ratione lib. 1. Cmoputus scientiam
considerans. Breviarium Iuris lib. 1. Verborum superficie penitus.
Upon his Tomb together with the Mathematical Astrolabe, was insculped as
follows.

The Epitaph of Johannes de Sacro Bosco.
M. Christi bis. C. quarto deno quater anno,
De Sacro Bosco discrevit tempora ramus,
Gratia cui nomen dederat divina Johannes.
Stepham Espee Lord Justice of Ireland. The battle of Down.
Anno 1258. Stepham Espee, alias De longa spatha, that is Stepham with the long
skeine or two handed sword, Earl of Salibury, as I suppose, was made Lord
Justice of Ireland; this Stepham gave battle unto Oneile, and the rebels of
Vlster and Conaght, and slew of them together with Oneile (says Clinne) in one
day, three hundred fifty and two, and departed this life, says Florilegus,
1260.

Anno 1260. William Den was made Lord Justice, in whose time Green Castle,
Arx Viridis was destroyed, S. Willi. Den Lord Justice, Anno 1260.
and the Carties played the Devils in Desmond, where they burned, spoiled,
preyed, and slew many an innocent; they became so strong, and prevailed so
mightily that for the space (so it is reported) of twelve years the Desmonds
durst not put plow in ground in his own Country; at length through the
operation of Satan, a bane of discord was thrown between the Carties and the
Odriscoles: Odonovaies Mac Donoch, Mac Mahonna, Mac Swines, and the
inhabittants of Muscrie, in so much that by their cruel dissension, they
weakened themselves of all sides, that the Desmond in the end overcame and
overtopped them all; but in the beginning of these garboils, I find that the
Carties slew of the Desmonds, John Fitz Thomas founder of the Monastery and
Covent of Trally, together with Maurice his son; eight Barons 15. Knights,
beside infinite others, at a place called Callan, where they were buried. Mine
Authors are John Clinne only, and the Book, of Houth. In the end of these
tumults, dyed Sir William Denny Lord Justice, Anno 1261. Richardus de Capella,
Richardus de Chappella Lord Justice of Ireland, Anno 1261.
otherwise called Rochell (Clinne calls him La Rochell de Capella) became
Lord Justice of Ireland.

Anno 1262. There rose in Dublin a great stir between the Prior and Covent
of the blessed Trinity now called Christ-Church, and the Communalty of the
City, about the tithe fish of the Liffy.

Anno 1264. Walter Bourke, commonly called Walterus de Burgo (spoken of before)
was made Earl of Vlster, he had married the daughter and heir of Sir Hugh
Delacy the younger, and in her right enjoyed the Earldom.

The Book of Houth lays down the descent, that this Walter by the said
heir of Vlster had issue Walter, and he had issue five daughters; 1. Ellen
that married Robert le Bruise King of Scotland; 2. Elizabeth, that married the
Earl of Gloucester; 3. Johan, that married Thomas Earl of Kildare; 4. Katherine,
that married the Earl of Louth; 5. Margaret, that married the Earl of
Desmond; the 6. Ellinor, that married with the Lord Multon, notwithstanding
these honorable matches and amity concluded in the outward sight of the world
there rose deadly wars between the Giraldins and Burks, which wrought blood
sheds, troubles by partaking throughout the Realm of Ireland; at the same time
the fury of the Giraldins was so outrageous, in so much that Morice Fitz
Maurice the second, Earl of Desmond, opposed himself against the sword, and
took at Trisledermote now called Castle Dermocke; Richard de Capella the Lord
Justice, Theoball le Butler and John or Millis de Cogan, and committed them to
the prisons in Leix and Donamus; but the year following, Henry the third not
pleased with these commotions and hurly burlies, by mature advice taken of his
Council, pacified the variance between them; discharged Denny of his
Iusticeship, and appointed David Barry Lord Justice in his place.

David Barry Lord Justice, Anno 1207.
Anno 1267. David Barry took, by the appointment of the King, the sword of
Iusticeship and the command of Ireland, and quelled or tamed (says the English
Anonymos) the insolent dealing of Morice Fitz Maurice, Cousin german to Girald.

The same year, says ( John Clinne) the Friars Preachers, first of all
settled themselves at Rosse in Wexford, The Friars Preachers and Minors came to
Ireland.
and the Minors at Kilkennie, and two years after at Clonemell.

Anno 1268. Conochur Obrian was slain by Dermot Mac Monard; Maurice Fitz
Girald Earl of Desmond drowned.
and the same year (says Felcon and Clinne) Maurice Fitz Gerald Earl of
Desmond, was drowned crossing the seas between England and Ireland, leaving
behind him a son and heir, of the age of 3. years and a half.

Robert Vfford Lord Justice, Anno 1268. The Castle of Roscommon. Ric. de
Exester Lord Justice, Anno 1269. Othobone the Popes Legate.
The same year, Robert Vfford became Lord Justice of Ireland, and began to
build the Castle of Roscommon.

Anno 1269. Richard de Excester was made Lord Justice, who dyed the same year,
together with his wife Margery de Say; the same year (says Florilegus)
Othobone the Popes Legate, held a Council at Paul's in London, where he called
before him the Clergy of England, Wales, Ireland and Scotland, and left among
them certain constitutions, which were afterward, commended by Linwood, and
are at this day in request, the which constitutions of Otho and Othobon, were
afterward confirmed by the Archbishop of Canterbury in Ed. 1. reign.
Holinshead.

James L. Audley Lord Justice, Anno 1270. The Irish rebels.
Anno 1270. The Lord James Audley was made Lord Justice of Ireland, and dyed
with the fall of a horse; in his time Florilegus and Holinshead note, there was
great commotion in Ireland, the Irish took Arms against the English, burned,
spoiled, destroyed and slew as well the Magistrates as others. Clinne goes
more particularly to work, and delivers how that the King of Conaght by
force of Arms, in the plain field overthrew Walter Burke Earl of Vlster, who
hardly escaped with life, yet dyed the year following, and slew a great number
of Nobles, and Knights, that held with the Burk, and among others, by especial
name the Lord Richard Verdon, and the Lord John Verdon, and that there ensued
over all Ireland great famine and pestilence, as the sequel of wars.

About this time, say our Antiquaries, the Bishop of Rome sent to Ireland,
requiring the tithes of all spiritual promotions for 3. years to come to
maintain his wars against the King of Aragon, the which was greatly murmured
at, and gainesaid, yet the Nuntio went not empty away.

Anno 1272. the most renowned King Henry the third, having lived 65. years,
and reigned 56. and 28: days, ended his days, and was buried at Westminster.
Edward, the first of that name, son of King Henry the third, surnamed
Long-shankes, of the age of 35. years, began his reign, Anno 1272.

Anno 1272. and the first of Edward the first his reign, Maurice Fitz Maurice,
Lord Justice, Anno 1272. called Rochfallath.
Maurice Fitz Maurice was made Lord Justice, in whose time the Irish brake out
into cruel rebellion, rased and destroyed the Castles of Aldleeke, Roscommon,
Scheligath and Randon; this Maurice, (says Clyn) not long after was betrayed
by his own followers in Ophali, taken and imprisoned.

Anno 1273. the Lord Walter Genvill (who lately returned home from the Holy
Land) was sent into Ireland, Walter Lord Genevill, Lord Justice Anno 1273.
and appointed Lord Justice: in his time (so write Dowlinge and Grace) the
Scots and Red-shankes out of the high land crossed the seas, burned towns and
villages, most cruelly killed man, woman and child, took a great prey, and
returned home before the country could make preparation to pursue them: but in a
while after, to be revenged of them, Vlster and Connaught mustred a great
Army under the leading of Richardus de Burgo, and Sir Eustacele Poer knight,
made after them, entered the Islands, and high land of Scotland, slew as many as
they could find, burned their Cabbans and Cottages, and such as dwelt in caves
and rocks under ground (as the manner is to den out Foxes) they fired and
smothered to death, covering their entrances into the ground with great and
huge stones, and so returned into Ireland.

Anno 1276. what time Thomas Clare came into Ireland, and married the daughter
of Maurice Fitz Maurice. The Castle of Roscommon was taken by the Irish, and a
great overthrow given unto the English men at Glynburry (Glandelory, says
Clyn) where William Fitz Roger, Prior of the Kings hospitallers, and many
others, were taken prisoners, and a great number of others were slain; at what
time also Ralph Pepard, and Otholand gave O Neale a sore battle.

Anno 1277. Walter Lord Genuill was sent for into England, Robert Vfford Lord
Justice, Anno 1277.
and Robert Vfford the second time took the office of Iusticeship; at this
time Muridath or Murtagh, a notable rebel, was taken at the Noraght, by
Gualter de Fant, and executed: Thomas Clare likewise in this rebellion, slew
Obryan Roe, King of Thomond, and yet after this, the Irish drew such a draught,
that they closed him up in Slew Banny, together with Maurice Fitz Maurice his
father in law, and all their forces, until they gave hostages to escape with
their lives, upon condition to make satisfaction for the death of O brian and
his followers, and in the mean while to yield them up the Castle of Roscommon,
although the conditions seemed hard and prejudicial to the Kings Majesty, yet
were they driven for safeguard of their lives to condescend thereunto. In this
rebellious season, to clear himself, that in his own person he came not to
daunt the enemy, Robert Vfford the Lord Justice was sent for into England, who
substituted in his room, one Friar Robert Fulborne, Bishop of Waterford, who
when he had cleared himself, came and resigned his place of Iusticeship.

Robert Vfford going into England, substituted Fulborne Bishop of Waterford.
Anno 1278. there rose civil wars, no better then rebellion, between Mac
Dermot de Moylargo, and Cathgur O Conoghor, King of Connaught, where there was
great slaughter and bloodshed on both sides, and the King of Connaught slain.
Raphaell Holinshed in his Irish collection thinks that there were slain at
that time, above two thousand persons. The King of England hearing thereof, was
mightily displeased with the Lord Justice, and sent for him into England, to
yield reason why he would permit such shameful enormities under his
government. Robert Vfford substituted Robert Fulborne, (as before) satisfied
the King that all was not true that he was charged withal, and for further
contentment, yielded this reason, that in policy he thought it expedient to
wink at one knave cutting off another, and that would save the Kings Coffers,
and purchase peace to the land; whereat the King smiled, and bid him return to
Ireland.

The groats, pence, half pence, and farthings were made.
Anno 1279. ( Stow is mine Author) King Edward commanded groats of four pence
a piece, pence, half pence, and farthings, to be coined, and to be current
through England and Ireland, not decrying the old; whereupon says he, these
verses were made:

Edward did smite round penny, half penny, farthing,
The cross passes the bond, of all throughout the ring:
The Kings side was his head, and his name written,
The cross side, what City it was made in, coined and smitten.
The poor man ne to Priest, the penny frayses nothing,
Men give God aye the least, they feast him with a farthing:
A thousand two hundred, fourscore years and more,
On this money men wondered, when it first began to go.
Anno 1280. the City of Waterford says Clyn, Waterford burned.
through some foul mischance was all set on fire; others report that some
Merchant stranger being wronged, as they thought, by the Citizens, brought
bags of powder out of their ships, and threw them in the night season, in at
their sellers windows, and coals of fire after them, and spoiled the City in
that sort, that it was long after ere they could recover themselves.

Anno 1281. Robert Fulborne Bishop of Waterford, Robert Fulborne Lord Justice
of Ireland.
was by direction from the King, ordained Lord Justice of Ireland. This year
there was a great rebellion in Connaught, and in upper Ossory, Anno 1281.
and in Archloe, which cost many men's lives, but the ringleaders were cut off.
Adam Cusack slew William Barret and his brethren, which contended about lands.
In Connaught, Hogken Mac Gill Patricke was cut off; in Vppsory, Murtough Mac
Muroch, with Art: his brother, lost their heads at Wickloe, another says at
Artchloe, so Clyn and Dowlinge do report.

Anno 1283. (it is remembered by Clyn and others) that a great part of Dublin
was burned. Campanile and Capitulum sanctae Trinitatis, Dublin burned
says mine Author, the belfrie or steeple and Chapter house of the blessed
Trinity, with the Dormiture and Cloister. Others write that certain Scots to
be revenged upon some Citizens for wronging of them, set Skinner-Row a fire,
and by that means the fire ran into Christ Church, but the citizens of
Dublin (therein greatly to be commended) before they went about to repair
their own private houses, agreed together to make a collection for repayring
the ruin of that ancient Church.

Anno 1284. flourished Ieffery, Galfridus de sancto Leodegario.
or (as Clyn writes) Galfridus de sancto Leodegario, Bishop of Ossorie, the
second founder of the Cathedral Church of Setus Canicus, and the first founder
of the College of the Vicars of the same Church, who gave unto the College
and vickars of the same Church, for the maintenance of divine Service, his
Manse and lodging, with the edifices thereunto adjoining, the rectory of
Kilkesh, and revenue de manubrinnio, one mark sterling, of the Abbot of
Duiske, for the land of Scomberlowaie with other revenues. The said Ieffery by
combat (the combatants I find not recorded) anno 1284. recovered the Manor
of Sirekeran in Elly, now Ocarolls country. He builded part of the Manors of
Aghboo and Dorogh, he builded a great part of the Church of Saint Canicus,
formerly begun by Hugh Mapilton his Predecessor, he exchanged the town
Scomkarthie, for the town of Killamerry, with William Marshall the Earl of
Penbroke, in his kind of devotion he enjoined the collegiat Vicars of Kilkenny
to celebrate the universary and aniversary of the reverend fathers his
predecessors, Walter Barkeley, Galfrid Turvill, Hugh Mapilton, and others, and
his successors and Canons in the said Church of Ossory. He established other
things for the good of the Burgesses of Cross..... in the Irish town of
Kilkenny, as in the foundation of the Burgesses there more at large does
appear: he dyed Anno 1286. and lies buried before the Chapel of our Lady,
in the Cathedral Church.

Thus far the Collections of Doctor Hanmer: the Continuation following is
taken out of the Chronicles of Henry Marleburrough.

HENRY MARLEBVRROVGH'S CHRONICLE OF IRELAND.
ANno 1285. the Lord Theobald Butler fled from Dublin, and died shortly after;
and the Lord Theobald Verdon lost his men and horses, going toward Ophali, and
the next morning, Girald Fitz Maurice was taken prisoner, and John Samforde was
consecrated Archbishop of Dublin, and the Lord Ieffery Genuill fled, and Sir
Gerard Doget, and Ralph Petit were slain.

Anno 1287. deceased Richard Decetir, Girald Fitz Maurice, Thomas de Clare,
Richard Taff, and Nicholas Telinge Knights.

Anno 1288. In England a bushel of Wheat was at four pence. And Friar
Stephen Fulburne Lord Justice of Ireland dyed. And John Samford Archbishop of
Dublin was made Lord Justice. And the Lord Richard Burgh, Earl of Vlster,
besieged Theobald Verdon in the Castle of Aloan, and came to Trymm with a great
power by the working of Walter Lacy.

Anno 1290. Was the chase or discomfiture of Ophaly, and diverse Englishmen were
slain. And Mac Coghlan slew O^olaghlin. And William Bourgh was discomfited at
Delvin by Mac Coghlan. And Gilbert Earl of Gloucester, married the daughter of
King John le Bayloll, King of Scotland. And Sir William Vescy was made Lord
Justice of Ireland:

Anno 1294. Deceased John de Samford, Archbishop of Dublin, and John Fitz
Thomas, and John de la Mare took prisoners, Richard Bourgh Earl of Vlster,
and William Bourgh in Mead. And the Castle of Kildare was taken, and by the
English and Irish, the whole country was wasted. And Calwagh burnt all the
rolls and tallyes of that county. And Richard was delivered out of the Castle
of Leye for his two sons. And John Fitz Thomas with a great army, came into
Mead.

Anno 1295. William Dodinsell Lord Justice of Ireland dyed, and the Lord Thomas
Fitz Maurice was made Lord Justice.

Anno 1296. Friar William de Hothum was consecrated Archbishop of Dublin.

Anno 1298. The Lord Thomas Fitz Maurice dyed, and an agreement was made
betwixt the Earl of Vlster, and the Lord John Fitz Thomas: and Sir John Wogan
was made Lord Justice of Ireland.

Anno 1299. William, Archbishop of Dublin dyed: and Richard de Feringes was
consecrated Archbishop of Dublin.

Anno 1302. The King of England ( Edward the first) went into Scotland, and
there Sir John Wogan Lord Justice of Ireland, and the Lord John Fitz Thomas
with many others met with him.

Anno 1305. King Edward made the inquisitions of Treylbaston. The same year
Jordan Comin slew Conthir de Ophaly: and Calwagh his brother was slain in the
Court of Peirs de Birmingham at Carricke: and Balimor was burnt:

Anno 1306. Edward the second succeeded his father being dead, in the kingdom.
In the beginning of his reign, he called back from beyond the seas, Peirs de
Gaveston, whose company in the presence of his father he abjured: and being
wholly taken up with him, he neglected Isabell his Queen, and his Nobles; for
which cause the Nobles being offended, they banished the said Peirs into
Ireland, where also the Kings treasure that was sent over thither, was wantonly
consumed. Then Peirs was called back again, but in regard the Kings treasure
was spent as aforesaid, the Nobles make an insurrection, and put away Peirs
from the King.

Anno 1308. And in the second of King Edward the second, Peirs de Gaveston, by
the Lords of England, but contrary to the Kings mind, was banished into
Ireland, about the nativitie of our Lady: but the next year he was called
back again, and the King met him at Chester.

Anno 1309. The Lord Ieffery Genvill became a Friar at Trym, of the order of
the Preachers: and the Lord Peirs de Birmingham dyed.

Anno 1311. Was the consecration of John Leeke, Archbishop of Dublin: and
Richard Bourgh Earl of Vlster, with a great army went to Bourath in Thomound,
and there he was taken prisoner by Sir Robert de Clare, and John Fitz Walter,
Lacy, and many others were slain: and there dyed Sir Walter la ^aint, and Sir
Eustace Power. And the next year, Maurice Fitz Thomas, and Thomas Fitz John,
married two daughters of the Earl of Vlster. And Saint Fingay was translated;
and William de Lowndres the first, and John the son of Sir Richard Bourgh
Knight deceased, and the Lord Edmund Butler made 30. Knights.

Anno 1313. Died John Leek, Archbishop of Dublin, and Theobald Verdon came over
Lord Justice of Ireland, and William de Montency and Richard Loundries died.

Anno 1315. The Lord Edward Bruise brother of the King of Scots, entered the
North part of Vlster with a great Army, upon Saint Augustines day, in the month
of May; and afterward he burned Dundalke, and a great part of Vrgile: and the
Church of Athirde was burned by the Irish: And in the war of Comeram in
Vlster, Richard Earl of Vlster was put to flight: and Sir William Bourgh, and
Sir John Mandevill, and Sir Alan Fitz Warren were taken prisoners, and the
Castle of Norburgh was taken. Moreover at Kenlis in Mead, the Lord Roger
Mortimer in the war together with the said Edward were put to flight, and
many of the men men of the said Roger were slain and taken prisoners, and he
burnt the Town: and after this he went as far as Finnagh and the Skerries in
Leinster; and there incountred him Edmund Butler Lord Justice of Ireland, the
Lord John Fitz Thomas, afterward Earl of Kildare, and the Lord Arnold Power;
and every one of them had a great army to war against him: and upon the sudden
there arose a dissension amongst them, and so they left the field; and this
dissension happened upon the 26. day of January: after this he burnt the Castle
of Leye, and afterward he returned into Vlster, and besieged the Castle of
Knockfergus, and slew Thomas Mandevill and John his brother at Down, coming
out of England; and then returned into Scotland.

Anno 1316. Edward Bruise before Easter, came into Ireland with the Earl of
Murry and other armies, and besieged the Castle of Knockfergus; afterward they
went to Castle Knock, and there took the Baron prisoner, and Edward Bruise lay
there: and Richard Earl of Vlster lay in Saint Mary's Abbey near Dublin. Then
the Major and Commonalty of the City of Dublin, took the Earl of Vlster
prisoner, and put him in the Castle of Dublin and slew his men and spoiled the
Abbey. Then the said Bruise went as far as Lymmerick after the Feast of Saint
Matthew the Apostle, and stayed there until after Easter; and in the mean
time Roger Mortimer the Kings Lieutenant, landed at Waterford with a great
Army, and for fear of him, Edward Bruise made haste to go into the parts of
Vlster, and John Fitz Thomas was created Earl of Kildare: also Oconthir of
Conaght and many other of the Irish of Conaght and Mead were slain, near
Athenry by the English there: also there was a great slaughter made by Edmond
Butler, near Testilldermot upon the Irish: and another slaughter by the same
Edmund upon Omorthe at Balitcham.

Anno 1317. The said Lieutenant delivered the Earl of Vlster out of the Castle
of Dublin, and after Whitsuntide, he banished out of Mead Sir Walter and Sir
Hugh de Lacy, and gave their lands unto his soldiers, and they together with
Edward Bruise went back into Scotland: and Alexander Bignor was consecrated
Archbishop of Dublin.

Anno 1318. The Lord Roger Mortimer went again into England, and Alexander
Bignor was made Lord Justice, and Edward Bruise and the said Walter and Hugh de
Lacy with a great Army, landed at Dundalke upon Saint Calixtus the Popes day;
and there the Lord John Brimingham, Richard Tute and Miles Verdon, with one
thousand three hundred twenty four men incountred them, and slew the said
Edward Bruise, with eight thousand two hundred seventie four of his men; and
the said John Birmingham did carry the head of the said Edward into England, and
gave it to King Edward, and the King gave unto the said John and his heirs
males, the Earldom of Lowth, and the Barony of Athirdee to him and his
heirs; also Sir Richard de Clare, with four Knights and many others, were
slain in Thomond.

Anno 1319. The Lord Roger Mortimer came over again Lord of Justice of
Ireland. And the Town of Athessell and Plebs, were burned by the Lord John
Fitz Thomas, brother to the Lord Maurice Fitz Thomas. And the Bridge of
Kilcolin was built by Maurice I^kis.

Anno 1320. The Lord John Fitz John, Earl of Kildare, was made Lord Justice.
And the bridge of Leiglin was built by Maurice Iakis.

Anno 1321. There was a very great slaughter made of the Oconhurs at Balibagan,
by the English of Leinster and Mead. And the said Earl of Lowth was made Lord
Justice.

Anno 1322. Died the Lord Richard Birmingham, Lord of Athenry, the Lord Edmund
Butler, and the Lord Thomas Persivall. Moreover the Lord Andrew Birmingham, and
Sir Richard de la Land, were slain by Onolan.

Anno 1323. John Darcy came over Lord Justice of Ireland.

Anno 1325. Deceased Nicolas Fitz Simon Gonvill.

Anno 1326. The Lord Richard Burgh Earl of Vlster died: Edward the third,
son to Edward the second, after the Conquest, at the age of fifteen years,
in his fathers life time; upon Candlemas day was crowned King at Westminster.
In the beginning of whose reign there was great likelihood of good success to
follow: For then also the Earth received fruitfulness, the Air temperature
and, Sea calmness.

Anno 1327. Donald son to Art, Mac Morch, and Sir Henry Traharne were taken
prisoners.

Anno 1328. Deceased the Lord Thomas Fitz John Earl of Kildare, and the Lord
Arnold Power, and William Earl of Vlster came into Ireland.

Anno 1329. John Brimingham Earl of Lowth, and Peter his brother with many
other, were slain on Whitsun, even at Balibragan by the men of the Country:
Also the Lord Thomas Butler, and diverse other Noble men were slain by
Macgohegan and other Irishmen, near to Molingar.

Anno 1330. There died Sir Richard Deicetir: Also the Earl of Vlster went with
a great Army into Mounster upon Obren: Also the Prior of the Hospital, then
Lord Justice, put the Lord Maurice Fitz Thomas Earl of Desmond, into the
custody of the Marshall, out of the which he freely escaped. And Sir Hugh de
Lacy returned into Ireland, and obtained peace of the King.

Anno 1331. The Earl of Vlster went into England, and great slaugher was made
upon the Irish in O kenslie; also the Castle of Arclow was taken by the Irish,
and great slaughter made of the English ni the Cowlagh by Otothell, where Sir
Philip Bryt and many others were slain; and the Lord Anthony Lacy came over
Lord Justice of Ireland, and great slaugter was made of the Irish at Thurles,
by the men of the Country, and at Finnath in Mead; there were many of them
slain by the English: also the Castle of Fernis was taken and burned by the
Irish: also Maurice Fitz Thomas Earl of Desmond was apprehended at Limerick by
the Lord Justice, upon the day of the Assumption, and sent unto the Castle of
Dublin. Moreover, the Lord Justice took Sir William Birmingham and Walter his
son at Clomell by a wile, whilst he was sick in his bed, and sent them
likewise unto the Castle of Dublin on the 19. day of April.

Anno 1332. Sir William Birmingham was hanged at Dublin, but Walter his son
was delivered, by reason he was within orders. Also the Castle of Clonmore was
taken by the English, and the Castle of Bonrath was destroyed by the Irish of
Thomond: also Henry Mandevill was sent prisoner to Dublin; likewise Walter
Burgh with two of his brethren were taken in Conaght, by the Earl of Vlster,
and sent to the Castle of Norburgh: also the said Lord Justice was deposed by
the King, and went into England with his wife and children; and John Darcy was
made Lord Justice, and great slaughter was made upon Bren Obren and Mac Carthy
in Munster, by the English of that Country.

Anno 1333. The Earl of Desmond by the Parliament held at Dublin, was sent
over into England unto the King; and William Earl of Vlster, in going toward
Knock fergus, upon the seventh day of June was treacherously slain, near to
the foords in Vlster by his own people: but his wife with his daughter and
heir, escaped into England; which daughter was married unto the Lord Lionell,
the Kings son, and afterward died at Dublin; and had a daughter and heir,
which was afterward married unto Roger Mortimer, Earl of March, and Lord of
Trim: And to revenge the death of the said Earl, the Lord Justice of Ireland
with a great Army, went into Vlster. But before that he came thither, the men
of that Country had done the revenge: and the Lord Justice with his Army, went
into Scotland to the King of England; because at that time he was there in
war; and he left the Lord Thomas Burgh his Lieutenant in Ireland: also on
Saint Margarets Eve, great slaughter was made in Scotland by the Irish; and so
what by the King in one part, and the Lord Justice in another, Scotland was
Conquered, and Edward Balioll was established King of Scotland; and John Darcy
came back Lord Justice of Ireland, and delivered Walter Birmingham out of the
Castle of Dublin.

Anno 1336. On Saint Laurence day, the Irish of Conaght were discomfited and
put to flight by the English of the Country there, and there were slain ten
thousand and one Englishman.

Anno 1342. And in the sixteenth of King Edward the 3. Pope Benedict deceased;
Clement the sixth succeeded, a man truly of great learning, but exceeding
prodigal, so that he would bestow upon his Cardinals Church livings in
England when they were vacant, and would go about to impose new titles for
them. For which cause the King of England about the year 1344. disannulled the
provisions so made by the Pope, interdicting upon pain of imprisonment, and
death, that none should bring any of them.

Anno 1348. There was great mortality in all places, especially in and about
the Court of Rome, Avinion, and about the sea coasts of England and Ireland.

Anno 1349. Deceased Alexander Bignor, upon the foureteenth day of July, and
the same year was John de Saint Paul consecrated Archbishop of Dublin.

Anno 1355. Died Maurice Fitz Thomas, Earl of Desmond, L. Justice of Ireland.

Anno 1356. Deceased the Lord Thomas de Rokesbie, L. Justice of Ireland.

Anno 1357. Began great variance betwixt Master Richard Fitz Ralphe Primat of
Ardmagh, and the four Orders of begging Friars.

Anno 1360. Deceaded Richard Archbishop of Ardmagh, upon the seventeenth day of
the Kalends of December in the Popes Court, and Richard Kilminton dyed in
England, therefore the controversy ceased betwixt the Clergy and the orders
of begging Friars.

Anno 1361: and in the thirty fourth year of K. Edward the third, about
Easter, began a great mortality of men, consuming many men, but few women, in
England and Ireland. Also the same year, the Lord Lionell, Son to King
Edward the third, Duke of Clarence, came over the Kings lieutenant into
Ireland.

Anno 1362. deceased John de Saint Paul, Archbishop of Dublin, on the fifth day
before the Ides of September.

Anno 1363. Thomas Minot was consecrated Archbishop of Dublin.

Anno 1369. the Lord William Windsor came over, the Kings Lieutenant in
Ireland.

Anno 1370. there was a third great Pestilence in Ireland. And the Lord Gerald
Fitz Maurice, Earl of Desmond, and the Lord John Fitz Richard, and the Lord
John Fitz John, and many other Noble men, were taken prisoners, and many others
were slain by Obren and Maccoinnard of Thomond, in the month of July.

Anno 1372 Sir Robert Asheton came over Lord Justice of Ireland.

Anno 1373. there was great war betwixt the English of Meth, and Offerolle;
in which war, many upon both sides were slain,

Anno 1375. Thomas, Archbishop of Dublin departed this life, and the same year
was Richard de Wikeford consecrated Archbishop there.

Anno 1381, Edmund Mortimer the Kings Lieutenant in Ireland, Earl of March
and Vlster, diet at Co^ke.

Anno 1383. the fourth great Pestilence was in Ireland.

Anno 1385. Dublin Bridge fell.

Anno 1387. about Martilmas, the Peers of England rose against those that were
of the side of King Richard the second: but Robert Veer, Duke of Ireland, came
over to Chester, and got together many men, and put them in array to march
back toward the King: whom the said Peers met at Rotcotebridge, and slew
Thomas Molleners, and spoiled the rest: nevertheless, the Duke of Ireland
escaped. But in the same year on the morrow after Candlemas day, a Parliament
began at London: in which were adjudged the Archbishop of York, the Duke of
Ireland, the Earl of Suffolk, etc.

Anno 1388. four Lord Justices of England were banished into Ireland, by a
decree of the Parliament: and it was not lawful for them either to make laws,
or to give counsel, upon pain of the sentence of death.

Anno 1390. Robert de Wikeford Archbishop of Dublin, departed this life, and
the same year was Robert Waldebie translated unto the Archbishopricke of
Dublin, being an Augustine Friar.

Anno 1394. and in the seaventeenth year of King Richard the second, died
Anne, Queen of England: and the same year about Michaelmas, the King crossed
the seas over into Ireland, and landed at Waterford the second day of the
month of October, and went back about Shrovetide.

Anno 1397. Friar Richard de Northalis, of the order of the Carmelites, was
translated to the Archbishopricke of Dublin, and died the same year. Also the
same year, Thomas de Craulie, was consecrated Archbishop of Dublin. And Sir
Thomas Burgh, and Sir Walter Birningham slew six hundred Irish men with their
Captain Macdowne. Moreover, Edmund Earl of March, Lord lieutenant of
Ireland, with the aid of the Earl of Ormond, wasted Obren's country, and at
the winning of his chief house, he made seven Knights, to wit, Sir
Christopher Preston, Sir John Bedlow, Sir Edmund Loundres, Sir John Loundres,
Sir William Nugent, Walter de la Hide, and Robert Cadell.

Anno 1398. and in the two and twentieth of King Richard the second, on
Ascension day, the Tothillis slew forty English men. Among whom these were
accounted as principal, John Fitz Williams, Thomas Talbot, and Thomas Common.
The same year upon Saint Margarets day, Edmund, Earl of March, the Kings
lieutenant, was slain, with diverse other by Obren, and other Irishmen of
Leinster, at Kenlis in Leinster. Then was Roger Greye elected Lord Justice of
Ireland. The same year on the feast day of Saint Mark, the Pope and Confessor
came to Dublin, the Noble Duke of Surrey, the Kings lieutenant in Ireland, and
with him came Thomas Crauly, Archbishop of Dublin.

Anno 1399. and of King Richard the three and twentieth, on Sunday being the
morrow after Saint Petronilla the Virgins day, the illustrious King Richard
landed at Waterford with two hundred ships: and the Friday after, at Ford in
Kenlis, in the County of Kildare, there were slain, two hundred Irish men by
Ienicho and other English men, and the morrow after, the Citizens of Dublin
brake into Obrens country, slew three and thirty of the Irish, and took
fourscore men, women, and children. The same year King Richard came to Dublin
upon the fourth Kalends of July, where he was advertized of the coming of
Henry, Duke of Lancaster into England; whereupon he also speedily went over
into England: and a little while after, the same King was taken prisoner by the
said Henry, and brought to London, and there a Parliament was holden the morrow
after Michaelmas day, in which King Richard was deposed from his kingdom, and
the said Henry, Duke of Lancaster, was crowned King of England, on the feast
day of Saint Edward the Confessor.

Anno 1400. and in the first year of the reign of King Henry the fourth, at
Whitsontide, the Constable of Dublin Castle, and diverse others at Stranford in
Vlster, fought at Sea with the Scots, where many Englishmen were slain and
drowned. The same year on the feast of the Assumption of the blessed Virgin
Mary, King Henry, with a great army, entered Scotland, and there he was
advertized that Owen Glendor, with the Welsh men, had taken arms against him:
for which cause he hastened his journey into Wales.

Anno 1401. in the second year of King Henry the fourth, Sir John Stanley the
kings Lieutenant, in the month of May, went over into England, leaving in his
room Sir William Stanley. The same year on Bartholomew Eeven, arrived in
Ireland, Stephen Scroope, Lieutenant unto the Lord Thomas of Lancaster, the
kings Lieutenant of Ireland. The same year on Saint Brices day, the Lord
Thomas of Lancaster, the kings Son, and Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, arrived
at Dublin.

Anno 1402. on the fifth Ides of July, was the dedication of the Church of the
Friars Preachers in Dublin, by the Archbishop of Dublin. And the same day the
Mayor of Dublin, namely, John Drake, with the citizens and townsmen, near to
Bre, slew of the Irish, four hundred ninety three, being all men of war. The
same year in September a Parliament was held at Dublin; during the which, in
Vrgile, Sir Bartholomew Verdon, knight, James White, Stephen Gernond, and their
complies, slew John Dowdall Sheriff of Lowth.

Anno 1403. in the fourth year of king Henry, in the month of May, Sir Walter
Betterley, Steward of Vlster, a right valiant knight, was slain, and to the
number of thirty other with him. The same year on Saint Ma^dlins Eeven, near
unto Shrewesbury, a battle was fought between king Henry, and Henry Percy,
and Thomas Percy then Earl of Worcester; which Percyes were slain, and on
both sides there were six thousand and more slain in the battle. The same
year about Martlemas, the Lord Thomas of Lancaster, the kings Son, went over
into England, leaving Stephen Scroope his Deputy there: who also in the
beginning of Lent, sailed over into England, and then the Lords of the land
chose the Earl of Ormond to be Lord Justice of Ireland.

Anno 1404. in the fifth year of king Henry, John Colton, Archbishop of Armagh,
departed this life upon the fifth of May, unto whom Nicholas Flemming succeeded.
The same year on the day of Saint Vital the Martyr, the Parliament began at
Dublin, before the Earl of Ormond, then Lord Justice of Ireland, where the
Statutes of Kilkenny and Dublin were confirmed, and likewise the Charter of
Ireland. The same year Patricke Savage was treacherously slain in Vlster, by
Mac Kilmori, and his brother Richard was given for a pledge, who was murdered
in the prison, after he had paid two thousand marks. The same year upon
Martilmas day, deceased Nicholas Houth, Lord of Houth, a man of singular
honesty.

Anno 1405. in the sixth year of King Henry, in the month of May, three
Scottish Barks were taken, two at Greenecastle, and one at Dalkay, with
Captain Thomas Macgolagh. The same year the Merchants of Droghedah entered
Scotland, and took pledges and preyes. The same year on the Eeven of the
feast day of the seven brethren, Oghgard was burnt by the Irish. The same
year in the month of June, Stephen Scroope crossed the seas over into
England, leaving the Earl of Ormond, Lord Justice of Ireland. The same year
in the month of June, they of Dublin entered Scotland at Saint Ninian, and
valiantly behaved themselves: and afterward they entered Wales, and there did
much hurt to the Welsh men, and brought away the shrine of Saint Cubius, and
placed it in the Church of the holy Trinity in Dublin. The same year on the
Eeven of the feast of the blessed Virgin, James Butler, Earl of Ormond, dyed
at Raligauran, (whose death was much lamented) whilst he was Lord Justice of
Ireland, unto whom succeeded Girald, Earl of Kildare.

Anno 1406. in the seventh year of King Henry, on Corpus Christi day, the
citizens of Dublin, with the country people about them, manfully vanquished the
Irish enemies, and slew diverse of them, and took two Ensigns, bringing with
them to Dublin, the heads of those whom they had slain. The same year the
Prior of Conall, in the Plain of Kildare, fought valiantly, and vanquished two
hundred of the Irish that were well armed, slaying some of them, and chasing
others; and the Pryor had not with him, but twenty English men: and thus God
assisteth those that put their trust in him. The same year after Michaelmas,
came into Ireland, Scroope, Deputy Justice to the Lord Thomas of Lancaster,
the Kings Son, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. The same year dyed Innocent the
seventh, to whom succeeded Gregory in the Popedom. The same year a
Parliament was holden at Dublin, on the feast of Saint Hillary, which in Lent
after was ended at Trym, and Meiler Birmingham slew Cathole O Conghir, in the
end of Frebruary; and there dyed Sir Ieffery Vaulx, a Noble Knight in the
County of Carlogh.

Anno 1407. a certain most false fellow, an Irish man, named Mac Adam Mac
Gilmori, that had caused forty Churches to be destroyed, who was never
baptized, and therefore he was called Corbi; took prisoner Patricke Savage,
and received for his ransom, two thousand marks, and afterward slew him,
together with his Brother Richard.

The same year, in the feast of the exaltation of the holy Cross, Stephen
Scroope, Deputy to the Lord Thomas of Lancaster, the Kings son, Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, with the Earls of Ormond and Desmond, and the Prior of
Kilmainan and diverse other Captains, and men of war of Mead, set from
Dublin, and invaded the land of Mac Murch, where the Irish had the better part
of the field for the former part of the day, but afterward they were valiantly
rescued by the said Captains, so that Onolad with his son and diverse others,
were taken prisoners. But then and there being advertised that the Burkens and
Okeroll, in the County of Kilkenny, had for the space of two days together
done much mischief, they rode with all speed unto the Town of Callan, and
there encountering with the adversasaries, manfully put them to flight, slew
Okeroll and eight hundred others; and it was averred by many, that the Sun
stoodstill for a space that day, till the Englishmen had ridden 6. miles, which
was much to be wondered at.

The same year, Stephen Scrope went over into England, and James Butler Earl
of Ormond, was elected by the Country L. I. of Ireland.

The same year, in England near unto York, was slain Henry Percy Earl of
Northumberland, and the Lord Bardolf, and the Bishop of Bangor, were taken
prisoners.

Anno 1408. The said Lord Justice held a Parliament at Dublin, in which the
Statutes of Kilkenny and Dublin were established, and the Charter granted under
the grear Seal of England against Purveiors.

The same year, the morrow after Lammas day, the Lord Thomas of Lancaster the
Kings son, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, landed at Carlingford, and in the
week following, he came unto Dublin and arrested the Earl of Kildare, coming
to him with three of his family; he lost all his goods, being spoiled and
rifled by the Lord Lieutenant his servants, and himself kept still in the
Castle of Dublin, till he had paid three hundred marks fine.

The same year on the day of Saint Marcell the Martyr, the L. Stephen Scrope
died at Tristledermot.

The same year, the said L. Thomas of Lancaster, at Kilmainan was wounded, and
hardly escaped death; and after caused summons to be given by Proclamation,
that all such as ought by their tenures to serve the King, should assemble at
Rosse: and after the Feast of Saint Hillary, he held a Parliament at Kilkenny,
for a tallage to be granted; and after the 13. of March he went over into
England, leaving the Prior of Kilmainan his Deputy in Ireland.

This year, Hugh Mac Gilmore was slain in Cragfergus within the Church of the
Friars Minors, which Church he had before destroyed, and broken down the
Glasse-windowes, to have the Iron bars, through which his enemies the Savages
entered upon him.

Anno 1409. Of King Henry the fourth in June, Ianico de Artois, with the
Englishmen slew fourscore of the Irish in Vlster.

The same year, on the day of Saint John and Paul, Alexander the fifth of the
Order of Friars Minors was consecrated Pope, and Pope Gregory and Antipope
Clemens were condemned for heretics: and by these means unity was made in
the Church.

The same year a heretic or Lollard of London was burned, because he did not
believe in the sacrament of the altar.

Anno 1410. Pope Alexander died on the day of the Apostles Philippe and Jacob,
at Bononia; to whom succeeded John the XXIII.

Anno 1411. On Thursday before Septuagesima, marriage was celebrated betwixt
William Preston and the daughter of Edward Paris; and on Saint Valentines even
and day, marriages were celebrated between John Wogan and the daughter of
Christopher Preston and Walter de la Hide, and the second daughter of the same
Christopher, with a great deal of charges.

Anno 1412. About the feast of Tiburtius and Valerianus, Oconthird did much
mischief in Mead, and took a hundred and three score Englishmen.

The same year Odoles a Knight and Thomas Fitz Maurice Sheriff of Limerick
slew each other.

The same year, on the nineth Kalends of June, there died Robert Mountain
Bishop of Mead, to whom succeeded Edward Dandisey sometimes Archdeacon of
Cornward.

The same year in Harvest, the Lord Thomas of Lancester Duke of Clarence, went
over into France, and with him went the Duke of York, the Earl of Ormond and
Green-Cornwall with many others.

The same year, on Saint Cutberts day, King Henry the fourth departed this
life. To whom succeeded Henry the fifth his eldest son.

Anno 1413. On the fifth Ides of April, namely, the first Sunday of the
Passion of our Lord, A. being the Dominicall letter, Henry the fifth, was
crowned King of England at Westminster.

The same year, on the first of October, there landed in Ireland at Clontarf,
John Stanley the Kings Lieutenant in Ireland; he departed this life the 18. of
January.

The same year, after the death of John Stanly Lieutenant, Thomas Crawly
Archbishop of Dublin, was chosen Lord Justice of Ireland, on the 11. Kalends of
February; the morrow after Saint Mathias day, a Parliament began at Dublin, and
continued for the space of 15. days. In which time the Irish burned all that
stood in their way, as their usual custom was in times of other Parliaments:
whereupon a tallage was demanded but not granted.

Anno 1414. The English slew of the Irish of the Omordris and Odemsis, near to
Kilka, Thomas Crawly Archbishop of Dublin, then Lord Justice of Ireland, in
Tristledermot, praying in Procession with his Clergy, and his men, with the
help of those of the Country, slew one hundred of the Irish enemies. In the
feast of Saint Gordian and Epimachus, the English of Mead were discomfited,
and there Thomas Manrevard Baron of Skrine was slain, and Christopher Flemnig
and John Dardis taken prisoners, and many others were slain by Oconthir and
the Irish. On Saint Martins Eve, Sir John Talbot, Lord Furnivall, the Kings
Lieutenant in Ireland landed at Dalkey.

Anno 1415: In the month of November a right noble man that walled the suburbs
of Kilkenny departed this life; and after Hallonide Friar Patricke Baret Bishop
of Fernes a Canon of Kenlis dyed, and was buried there.

Anno 1416. On the feast day of Saint Gervasius and Prothasius the Lord
Furnivall Lord Justice of Ireland, had a son borne at Finglasse; about this
time Stephen Flemming Archbishop of Armagh, a venerable man died, after whom
succeeded John Suaing: And the same time dyed the Lord and Friar Adam Leins, of
the Order of the Preaching Friars, Bishop of Ardmagh. On the day of Saint
Laurence the Martyr, the Lord Furnivals son Thomas Talbot, that was borne at
Finglasse departed this life, and was buried in the Quire of the Friars
Preachers Church in Dublin. About the same time the Irish fell upon the
Englishmen and slew many of them, among whom Thomas Balimore of Baliquelan was
one. The Parliament which the last year had been called and holden at Dublin;
was this year removed to Trim, and there began the 11. of May, where it
continued for the space of 11. days, in the which was granted unto the L.L. a
subsidy of four hundred marks.

Anno 1417. Upon May Eve, Thomas Granly Archbishop of Dublin, went over into
England, and deceased at Faringdon, but his body was buried in the New College
at Oxford. This man is greatly praised for his liberality, he was a good
almes-man, a great Clerk, a Doctor of Divinity, an excellent Preacher, a great
builder, beautiful, courteous, of a sanguine complexion, and of a tall
stature, in so much as in his time it might be said unto him; Thou art fairer
then the sons of men, grace and eloquence proceeded from thy lips: He was 80.
years of age when he died, and had governed the Church of Dublin almost 20.
years in great quiet.

Anno 1418. The Annunciation of our Lady was in Easter week, and shortly
after, the Lord Deputy spoiled the tenants of Henry Crus and Henry Bethat; also
at Slane upon the feast day of S. John and S. Paul, the Earl of Kildare, Sir
Christopher Preston, and Sir John Bedlow were arrested and committed to ward,
within the Castle of Trim, because they sought to commune with the Prior of
Kilmaynan. Upon the 29. of June, Matthew Husseil Baron of Galtrim deceased, and
was buried in the Covent of the Friars Preachers of Trim.

Anno 1419. upon the eleventh of May, dayed Edmund Brel sometime Major of
Dublin, and was buried at the Friars Preachers of the same City. A Royal
Council was holden at the Naas, where were granted unto the Lord Lieutenant
300. marks. At the same time died Sir John Loundres Knight.

The same year upon Cene thursday, Othoill took four hundred Cowes belonging
unto Balimore, breaking the peace, contrary to his oath: The fourth Ides of
May, Mac Morthe, chief Captain of his Nation, and of all the Irish in
Leinster, was taken prisoner. And the same day, was Sir Hugh Cokesey made
Knight. The last of May, the Lord Lieutenant and the Archbishop of Dublin, with
the Major, rased the Castle of Kenini. The morrow after the feast of Processus
and Martinianus, the Lord William de Burgh and other Englishmen, slew five
hundred of the Irish, and took Okelly: On the feast day of Mary Magdalen, the
Lord Lieutenant John Talbot went over into England; leaving his Deputy there
the Archbishop of Dublin, carrying along with him the curses of many, because
he being run much in debt for victual and diverse other things, would pay
little or nothing at all. About Saint Laurence day, diverse dyed in Normandy, as
Friar Thomas Butler, that was Prior of Kilmainan, and many others. Whom Friar
John Fitz Henry succeeded in the Priory. The Archbishop of Dublin, being Lord
Deputy, made an assault upon Scohies, and slew thirty of the Irish, near unto
Rodiston. Also the thirteenth of February, John Fitz Henry, Prior of Kilmainan
departed this life; and William Fitz Thomas was chosen to succeed in his place,
and was confirmed the morrow after Saint Velentines day. Also the morrow after
the Lord John Talbot Lord Furnivall delivered up his place into the hands of
the Lord Richard Talbot Archbishop of Dublin, who was afterward chosen to be
Lord Justice of Ireland.

Anno 1420. about the fourth des of April, James Butler, Earl of Ormond, Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, landed at Waterford, and shortly after he caused a
combat to be fought betwixt two of his cousins: of whom one was slain in the
place, and the other was carried away sore wounded unto Kilkenny.

On Saint Georges day, the same Lord Lieutenant held a Council at Dublin, and
there summoned a Parliament, and after the midst thereof, he made great preyes
upon O Rely Mac Mahon, Mac Gynoys. And the seventh of June, the Parliament
began at Dublin, and there were granted to the Lord Lieutenant, seven hundred
marks. And that Parliament continued for sixteen days, and was adjourned
again to Dublin until Monday after Saint Andrews day. And in the said
Parliament were reckoned up the debts of the Lord John Talbot, late Lord
Lieutenant, which amounted to a great sum. Also on the morrow after
Michaelmas day, Michael Bodley departed this life. Upon Saint Francis Eeve,
dyed Friar Nicholas Talbot, Abbot of the Monastery of Saint Thomas the Martyr
at Dublin, whom Friar John Whiting succeeded. The morrow after the feast day of
the Apostles Simon and Jude, the Castle of Colmolin was taken by Thomas Fitz
Girald. And on Saint Katherines Eeven, Buttler, Son and heir unto the Earl
of Ormond, was borne: and the Monday after Saint Andrews day, the Parliament
was begun at Dublin, and continued for thirteen days; and there were granted
unto the Lord Lieutenant, three hundred marks, and then again the Parliament
was adjourned until Monday after Saint Ambrose day. Then rumors were spread
abroad, that the Lord Thomas Fitz John, Earl of Desmond, was departed this
life at Paris, upon Saint Laurence day, and that he was buried in the Covent of
the Friars Preachers there, the King of England being there present. After whom
succeeded his Uncle James Fitz Girald, whom he had three several times
renounced, alleging that he was an unthrift, and had wasted his Patrimony both
in Ireland and England, and that he gave or would give lands unto the
Monastery of Saint James of Keynisham.

Anno 1421. Our Lady day fell out to be upon Monday in Easter week. Also the
Parliament began the third time at Dublin, the Monday after Saint Ambroses day;
and there it was ordained that agents should be sent over unto the King for
reformation of matters touching the state of the land; namely, the Archbishop
of Armagh, and Sir Christopher Preston, Knight. At the same time Richard
Ottdian, Bishop of Casshell, was accused of John Gese, Bishop of Lismore and
Waterford, upon thirty articles: among other, one was, that he made very much
of the Irish, and that he loved none of the English nation, and that he
bestowed no Benefice upon any English man, and that he counseled other Bishops
not to give the least Benefice to any of them: that he counterfeited the Kings
Seal and letters Patents: that he went about to make himself King of Munster:
and that he had taken a Ring from the image of Saint Patricke, (which the
Earl of Desmond had offered) and bestowed it upon his Concubine And he
exhibited many other enormious matters against him in writing, by whom the
Lords and Commons were troubled. Also in the same Parliament, there arose a
contention betwixt Adam Pain, Bishop of Clone, because the said Adam would have
united unto his See, the Church of another Prelate, and the other would not
give way unto it; and so they were dismissed unto the Court of Rome, and the
Parliament continued eighteen days. Then news were stirring, that the Lord
Thomas of Lancaster, Duke of Clarence, was slain in France, and many other
with him. Upon the seventh of May there was slaughter made upon the Earl of
Ormonds, the Lord Lievetenants men, by Omordris, near unto the Monastery of
Leys, and there were seven and twenty English men slain: the chief whereof
were Purcell and Grant, ten Noble men were taken prisoners, and two hundred
fled unto the said Abbey, and so saved themselves. About the Ides of May, dyed
Sir John Bedloe, knight, and Ieffery Galon, sometime Mayor of Dublin, who was
buried in the house of the Friars Preachers of the same City. About the same
time, Mac Mahon an Irish Lord, did much hurt in Vrgile, by wasting and burning
all before him. Upon the seventh of June, the Lord Lieutenant entered into the
Country, about Leys, upon Omordris, leading a very great army, and for the
space of four days together, slaying the people, till the Irish were glad to
sue for peace. On the feast of Saint Michael the Arch-angell, Thomas Stanley,
with all the Knights and Esquires of Mead and Irel, took Neyle O Donnell
prisoner, and slew the rest, in the fourteenth year of the reign of King
Henry the sixth.

Here ends the Chronicle of Henry Marleburrough.
FINIS.
A VIEW OF THE STATE OF IRELAND, Written dialogue-wise between Eudoxus and
Irenaeus, By EDMUND SPENSER Esquire. in the year 1596.

Whereunto is added the History of IRELAND, By EDMUND CAMPION, sometime fellow
of St John's College in Oxford.

Published by Sir JAMES WARE Knight.

DUBLIN, Printed by the Society of Stationers. M.DC.XXXIII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS LO. VISCOUNT WENTWORTH, LO. DEPVTY GENERAL OF
IRELAND, LO. PRESIDENT OF HIS MAJESTY'S COUNCIL ESTABLISHED IN THE NORTH PARTS
OF ENGLAND, AND ONE OF HIS MAJESTY'S MOST HONORABLE PRIVY COUNCIL.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
THE sense of that happy peace, which by the divine providence this Kingdom
has enjoyed, since the beginning of the reign of his late Majesty of ever
sacred memory, does then take the deeper impression, when these our halcyon
days are compared with the former turbulent and tempestuous times, and with
the miseries (of several kinds) incident unto them. Those calamities are
fully set out, and to the life by Mr Spenser, with a discovery of their causes,
and remedies, being for the most part excellent grounds of reformation. And so
much may be justly expected from him in regard of his long abode and experience
of this Kingdom. In these respects, and for other good uses, which the
collections (now communicated) do afford for matter of history and policy, I
am encouraged to dedicate them to your Lordship, and humbly to desire your
favorable acceptance of them, and of

Your Lordships ever humbly devoted JAMES WARE.

THE PREFACE.
HOw far these collections may conduce to the knowledge of the antiquities and
state of this Land, let the fit reader judge: yet something I may not pass by
touching Mr Edmund Spenser and the work it self, lest I should seem to offer
injury to his worth, by others so much celebrated. He was borne in London of
an ancient and noble family, and brought up in the University of Cambridge,
where (as the fruits of his after labors do manifest) he misspent not his
time. After this he became Secretary to Arthur Lord Gray of Wilton, Lord Deputy
of Ireland, a valiant and worthy Governor, and shortly after for his services
to the Crown, he had bestowed upon him by Queen Elizabeth, 3000. acres of
land in the County of Cork. There he finished the later part of that
excellent poem of his Faery Queen, which was soon after unfortunately lost by
the disorder and abuse of his servant, whom he had sent before him into
England, being then a rebellibus (as Annal. r^r. Anglic. and Hibern. page 729,
edit. 1625.
Camdens words are) e laribus ejectus and bonis spoliatus. He deceased at
Westminster in the year 1599. (others have it wrongly 1598.) soon after his
return into England, and was buried according to his own desire, in the
collegiat Church there, near unto Chaucer, whom he worthily imitated, (at the
costs of Robert Earl of Essex,) whereupon this Epitaph was framed, Hic prope
Chaucerum situs est Spenserius, illi
proximus ingenio, proximus ut tumulo.
Hic prope Chaucerum Spensere poeta poetam
conderis, and versu quam tumulo propior.
Anglica te vivo vixit plausitque poesis,
nunc moritura timet te moriente mori.
As for his work now Ex Bibliotheca Remi in Christo patris D. Iacobi Vsserij
Archiep. Armachani.
published, although it sufficiently testifies his learning and deep
judgment, yet we may wish that in some passages it had bin tempered with more
moderation. The troubles and miseries of the time when he wrote it, do partly
excuse him, And surely we may conceive, that if he had lived to see these
times, and the good effects which the last 30. years peace have produced in
this land, both for obedience to the laws, as also in traffic, husbandry,
civility, and learning, he would have omitted those passages which may seem to
lay either any particular aspersion upon some families, or general upon the
Nation. For now we may truly say, jam cuncti gens una sumus, and that upon just
cause those ancient statutes, wherein the natives of Irish descent were held to
be, and named Irish enemies, and wherein those of English blood were forbidden
to marry and commerce with them, were repealed by Vid. lib. Status. Hiborn.
edit. Dubl. an. 1621. page 427.
act of Parliament, in the reign of our late Sovereign King JAMES of ever
blessed memory.

His proofs (although most of them conjecturall) concerning the original of
the language, customs of the Nation, and the first peopling of the several
parts of the Island, are full of good reading, and do show a sound judgment.
They may be further confirmed by comparing them with Richard Creagh's Book de
lingua Hibernica, which is yet extant in the original manuscript, and although
mixed with matter of story, leaning too much to some fabulous traditions, yet
in other respects is worthy of light.

Touching the general scope intended by the author for the reformation of
abuses and ill customs, This we may say, that although very many have taken
pains in the same subject, during the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and some
before, as the Floruit subinitium reg. Edw. 4
author of the book entitled Salus populi, and after him Floruit sub Hen. 8.
Patrick Finglas, chief Baron of the Exchequer here, and afterward chief
Justice of the common pleas, yet none came so near to the best grounds for
reformation, a few passages excepted, as Spenser has done in this. Some
marginall notes I have added, although not intending any, until the fourth
part of the Book was printed.

A VIEW OF THE STATE OF IRELAND, Written Dialogue-wise between Eudoxus and
Irenaeus, By Edmund Spenser Esquire. in the year 1596.
Eudox. BUT if that Country of Ireland, whence you lately came, be of so
goodly and commodious a soil as you report, I wonder that no course is taken
for the turning thereof to good uses, and reducing that nation to better
government and civility.


Iren. Marry so there have bin diverse good plottes devised, and wise Councels
cast already about reformation of that Realm, but they say, it is the fatal
destiny of that Land, that no purposes whatsoever which are meant for her good,
will prosper or take good effect, which whether it proceed from the very Genius
of the soil, or influence of the stars, or that almighty God has not yet
appointed the time of her reformation, or that he reserveth her in this
unquiet state still, for some secret scourge, which shall by her come unto
England, it is hard to be known, but yet much to be feared.


Eudox. Surely I suppose this but a vain conceit of simple men, which judge
things by their effects, and not by their causes; for I would rather think the
cause of this evil, which hangs upon that Country, to proceed rather of the
unsoundnes of the Councels, and plots which you say have bin oftentimes laid
for the reformation, or of faintnes in following and effecting the same, then
of any such fatal course appointed of God, as you misdeeme, but it is the
manner of men, that when they are fallen into any absurdity, or their actions
succeed not as they would, they are always ready to impute the blame thereof
unto the Heavens, so to excuse their own follies and imperfections. So have I
heard it often wished also, (even of some whose great wisdoms in opinion
should seem to judge more soundly of so weighty a consideration) that all that
land were a Sea poole: which kind of speech, is the manner rather of desperate
men far driven, to wish the utter ruin of that which they cannot redress,
then of grave Counselors, which ought to think nothing so hard but that
thorough wisdom, it may be mastered and subdued, since the Poet says, that
the wiseman shall rule even over the Stars, much more over the Earth, for
were it not the part of a desperate Physician to wish his diseased Patient
dead, rather then to apply the best endeavor of his skill, for his recovery.
But since we are so far entered, let us, I pray you, a little devise of those
evils, by which that country is held in this wretched case, that it cannot (as
you say) be recured. And if it be not painful to you, tell us what things
during your late continuance there, you observed to be most offensive, and
greatest impeachment to the good rule and government thereof.


Iren. Surely Eudox. the evils which you desire to be recounted are very many,
and almost countable with those which were hidden in the basket of Pandora. But
since you please I will out of that infinite number, reckon but some that are
most capital, and commonly occurrant both in the life and conditions of
private men, as also in the managing of public affairs and policy, the
which you shall understand to be of diverse natures, as I observed them: For
some of them are of very great antiquity and continuance; others more late and
of less indurance; others daily growing and increasing continually by their
evil occasions, which are every day offered.


Eudox. Tell them then, I pray you, in the same order that you have now
rehearsed the^, for there can be no better method then this which the very
matter it self offers. And when you have reckoned all the evils, let us
hear your opinion for the redressing of the^: After which there will perhaps
of it self appear some reasonable way to settle a sound and perfect rule of
government, by shunning the former evils, and following the offered good. The
which method we may learn of the wise Physicians, which first require that the
malady be known thoroughly, and discovered: Afterward to teach how to cure and
redress it: And lastly do prescribe a diet with straight rule and orders to
be daily observed, for fear of relapse into the former disease, or falling
into some other more dangerous then it.


Iren: I will then according to your advisement begin to declare the evils,
which seem to me, most hurtful to the commonweal of that land; And first
those (I say) which were most ancient and long grown. And they also are of
three sorts: The first in the Laws, the second in Customs, and the last in
Religion.


Eudox. Why Irenaus can there be any evil in the laws, can things which are
ordained for the good and safety of all, turn to the evil and hurt of them?
This well I wore both in that State, and in all other, that were they not
contained in duty with fear of law, which restrains offenses, and inflicteth
sharp punishment to misdoers, no man should enjoy any thing; every man's hand
would be against an other. Therefore in finding fault with the Laws, I doubt
me, you shall much over-shoote your self, and make me the more dislike your
other dislikes of that government.


Iren. The Laws Eudox. I do not blame for themselves, knowing right well that
all Laws are ordained for the good of the commonweal, and for repressing of
licentiousness and vice, but it falls out in Laws, no otherwise then it
does in Physic, which was at first devised, and is yet daily meant, and
ministered for the health of the Patient. But nevertheless we often see, that
either thorough ignorance of the disease, or thorough unseasonablenesse of the
time, or other accidents coming between, in stead of good, it works hurt,
and out of one evil, throws the Patient into many miseries. So the Laws
were at first intended for the reformation of abuses, and peaceable continuance
of the Subject; but are sithence either disanulled, or quite prevaricated
thorough change and alteration of times, yet are they good still in themselves,
but in that commo^-wealth which is ruled by them, they work not that good
which they should, and sometimes also that evil which they would not.


Eudox. Whether do you mean this by the Common-Lawes of that Realm, or by
the Statute Laws, and Acts of Parliaments.


Iren. Surely by them both: for even the Common law being that which William of
Normandy brought in with his conquest, and laid upon the neck of England,
though perhaps it fitted well with the state of England then being, and was
readily obeyed thorough the power of the Commander, which had before subdued
the people unto him, and made easy way to the settling of his will, yet with
the state of Ireland peradventure it does not so well agree, being a people
very stubborn and untamed, or if it were ever tamed, yet now lately having
quite shooken off their yoke, and broken the bonds of their obedience. For
England (before the entrance of the Conqueror) was a peaceable Kingdom, and
but lately inured to the mild and goodly government of Edward surnamed the
Confessor, besides now lately grown into a loathing and detestation of the
unjust and tyrannous rule of Harold an usurper, which made them the more
willing to accept of any reasonable conditions, and order of the new victor,
thinking surely that it could be no worse then the latter, and hoping well it
would be as good as the former, yet what the proof of first bringing in and
establishing of those laws was, was to many full bitterly made known. But
with Ireland it is far otherwise, for it is a Nation ever acquainted with
wars, though but amongst themselves, and in their own kind of military
discipline, trained up ever from their youths, which they have never yet been
taught to lay aside, nor made to learn obedience unto Laws, scarcely to know
the name of Law, but in stead thereof have always preserved and kept their
own Law, which is the Brehon Law.


Eudox. What is that which you call the Brehon law, it is a word unto us
altogether unknown?


Iren. It is a rule of right unwritten, but delivered by tradition from one to
another, in which oftentimes there appears great show of equity, in
determining the right between party and party, but in many things repugning
quite both to Gods Law, and man's: As for example in the case of murder, the
Brehon, that is their judge, will compound between the murderer, and the
friends of the party murdered which prosecute the action, that the malefactor
shall give unto them, or to the child, or wife of him that is slain, a
recompense, which they call an Eriach: By which vilde law of theirs, many
murders amongst them are made up, and smothered. And this Judge being as he is
called the Lords Brehon, adjudgeth for the most part, a better share unto his
Lord, that is the Lord of the soil, or the head of that Sept, and also unto
himself for his judgment a greater portion, then unto the Plantiffes or
parties greived.


Eudox. This is a most wicked law indeed: But I trust it is not now used in
Ireland, since the Kings of England have had the absolute dominion thereof, and
established their own Laws there.


Iren. Yes truly, for there be many wide countries in Ireland which the laws
of England were never established in, nor any acknowledgment of subjection
made, and also even in those which are subdued; and seem to acknowledge
subjection, yet the same Brehon law is practiced among themselves, by reason,
that dwelling as they do, whole nations and septs of the Irish together,
without any Englishman amongst them, they may do what they list, and compound
or altogether conceal amongst themselves their own crimes, of which no notice
can be had, by them which would and might amend the same, by the rule of the
Laws of England.


Eudox. What is this which you say? And is there any part of that Realm or any
Nation therein, which have not yet been subdued to the Crown of England? Did
not the whole Realm universally accept and acknowledge our late Prince of
famous memory Henry the Viiith for their only King and Liege Lord?


Iren. Yes verily: in a Parliament holden in the time of Sir Anthony
Saint-Leger then Lord Deputy, all the Irish Lords and principal men came in,
and being by fair means wrought thereunto, acknowledged King Henry for their
Sovereign Lord, reserving yet (as some say) unto themselves all their own
former privileges and Seignories inviolate.


Eudox. Then by that acceptance of his Sovereignty they also accepted of his
laws. Why then should any other laws be now used amongst them?


Iren. True it is that thereby they bound themselves to his laws and
obedience, and in case it had been followed upon them, as it should have
been, and a government thereupon settled among them agreeable thereunto, they
should have been reduced to perpetual civilitie, and contained in continual
duty. But what boots it to break a Colte, and to let him straight run
loose at random. So were these people at first well handled, and wisely
brought to acknowledge allegiance to the Kings of England: but being straight
left unto themselves and their own inordinate life and manners, they eftsoons
forgot what before they were taught, and so soon as they were out of sight, by
themselves shook off their bridles, and began to colte anew, more
licentiously then before.


Eudox. It is a great pity, that so good an opportunity was omitted, and so
happy an occasion fore-slacked, that might have been the eternal good of the
Land. But do they not still acknowledge that submission?


Iren. No, they do not: for now the heirs and posterity of them which yielded
the same, are (as they say) either ignorant thereof, or do wilfully deny, or
steadfastly disavow it.


Eudox. How can they so do justly? Does not the act of the Parent in any
lawful grant or conveyance, bind their heirs for ever thereunto? Since then
the Ancestors of those that now live, yielded themselves then subjects and
Liegemen, shall it not tie their Children to the same subjection?


Iren. They say no: for their Ancestors had no estate in any their Lands,
Seigniories, or Hereditaments, longer then during their own life's, as they
allege, for all the Irish do hold their Land by Tanistrie; which is (say
they) no more but a personal estate for his life time, that is, Tanist, by
reason that he is admitted thereunto by election of the Country.


Eudox. What is this which you call Tanist and Tanistry? They be names and
terms never heard of nor known to us.


Iren. It is a custom amongst all the Irish, that presently after the death of
any of their chief Lords or Captains, they do presently assemble themselves
to a place generally appointed and known unto them to choose another in his
steed, where they do nominate and elect for the most part, not the eldest
son, nor any of the children of the Lord deceased, but the next to him of
blood, that is the eldest and worthiest, as commonly the next brother unto him
if he have any, or the next cousin, or so forth, as any is elder in that kindred
or sept, and then next to him do they choose the next of the blood to be
Tanist, who shall next succeed him in the said Captainry, if he live thereunto.


Eudox. Do they not use any ceremony in this election? for all barbarous
nations are commonly great observers of ceremonies and superstitious rites.


Iren. They use to place him that shall be their Captain, upon a stone always
reserved for that purpose, and placed commonly upon a hill. In some of which I
have seen formed and engraven a foot, which they say was the measure of their
first Captains foot, whereon he standing, receive an oath to preserve all the
ancient former customs of the Country inviolable, and to deliver up the
succession peaceably to his Tanist, and then has a wand delivered unto him by
some whose proper office that is: after which, descending from the stone, he
turns himself round, thrice forward, and thrice backward.


Eudox. But how is the Tanist chosen?


Iren. They say he sets but one foot upon the stone, and receives the like
oath that the Captain did.


Eudox. Have you ever heard what was the occasion and first beginning of this
custom? for it is good to know the same, and may perhaps discover some secret
meaning and intent therein, very material to the state of that government.


Iren. I have heard that the beginning and cause of this ordinance amongst the
Irish, was specially for the defense and maintenance of their Lands in their
posterity, and for excluding all innovation or alienation thereof unto
strangers, and specially to the English. For when their Captain dies, if the
Signiorie should descend to his child, and he perhaps an Infant, another
peradventure step in between, or thrust him out by strong hand, being then
unable to defend his right, or to withstand the force of a forreiner, and
therefore they do appoint the eldest of the kin to have the Signiorie, for
that he commonly is a man of stronger years, and better experience to maintain
the inheritance, and to defend the Country, either against the next bordering
Lords, which use commonly to incroach one upon another, as each one is
stronger, or against the English, which they think lie still in wait to wype
them out of their Lands and Territoryes. And to this end the Tanist is always
ready known, if it should happen the Captain suddenly to dye, or to be slain
in battle, or to be out of the Country, to defend and keep it from all such
doubts and dangers. For which cause the Tanist has also a share of the Country
allotted unto him, and certain cuttings and spendings upon all the inhabitants
under the Lord.


Eudox. When I heard this word Tanist, it brings to my remembrance what I
have read of Tania, that it should signify a Province or Seigniorie, as
Aquitania, Lusitania, and Britania, the which some think to be derived of
Dania, that is, from the Danes, but, I think, amiss. But sure it seems,
that it came anciently from those barbarous nations that over-ranne the world,
which possessed those Dominions, whereof they are now so called. And so it may
well be that from thence the first original of this word Tanist and Tanistry
came, and the custom thereof has sithence, as many others else, been
continued, But to that general subjection of the Land, whereof we formerly
spoke, me seems that this custom or tenure can be no bar nor impeachment,
seeing that in open Parliament by their said acknowledgment they waved the
benefit thereof, and submitted themselves to the benefit of their new
Sovereign.


Iren. Yea but they say as I erst told you, that they reserved their titles,
tenures and Seigniories whole and sound to themselves, and for proof allege,
that they have ever sithence remained to them untouched, so as now to alter
them, should (say they) be a great wrong.


Eudox. What remedy is there then, or means to avoid this inconvenience? for
without first cutting of this dangerous custom, it seems hard to plant any
sound ordenance, or reduce them to a civil government, since all their ill
customs are permitted unto them.


Iren. Surely nothing hard: for by this Act of Parliament whereof we speak,
nothing was given to K. Henry which he had not before from his Ancestors, but
only the bare name of a King, for all other absolute power of principality he
had in himself before derived from many former Kings, his famous Progenitors
and worthy Conquerors of that Land. The which sithence they first conquered and
by force subdued unto them, what needed afterward to enter into any such idle
terms with them to be called their King, when it is in the power of the
Conqueror to take upon himself what title he will, over his Dominions
conquered. For all is the Conquerours, as Tully to Brutus faith. Therefore (me
seems) instead of so great and meritorious a service as they boast they
performed to the King, in bringing all the Irish to acknowledge him for their
Liege, they did great hurt unto his Title, and have left a perpetual gall in
the mind of the people, who before being absolutely bound to his obedience,
are now tied but with terms, whereas else both their lives, their lands, and
their liberties were in his free power to appoint what tenures, what laws,
what conditions he would over them, which were all his: against which there
could be no rightful resistance, or if there were, he might when he would
establish them with a stronger hand.


Eudox. Yea but perhaps it seemed better unto that noble King to bring them by
their own accord to his obedience, and to plant a peaceable government amongst
them, then by such violent means to pluck them under. Neither yet has he
thereby lost any thing that he formerly had, for having all before absolutely in
his own power, it remains so still unto him, he having thereby neither
forgiven, nor forgone any thing thereby unto them, but having received something
from them, that is a more voluntary and loyal subjection. So as her Majesty
may yet when it shall please her, alter any thing of those former ordinances,
or appoint other laws, that may be more both for her own behoof, and for the
good of that people.


Iren. Not so: for it is not so easy, now that things are grown unto an
habit, and have their certain course to change the channel, and turn their
streams another way; for they may have now a colorable pretense to withstand
such innovations, having accepted of other laws and rules already.


Eudox. But you say they do not accept of them, but delight rather to lean to
their old customs and Brehon laws, though they be more unjust and also more
inconvenient for the common people, as by your late relation of them I have
gathered. As for the laws of England they are surely most just and most
agreeable, both with the government and with the nature of the people. How
falls it then that you seem to dislike of them, as not so meet for that
Realm of Ireland, and not only the Common Law, but also the Statutes and
Acts of Parliament, which were specially provided and intended for the only
benefit thereof?


Iren. I was about to have told you my reason therein, but that your self
drew me away with other questions, for I was showing you by what means, and
by what sort, the Positive Laws, were first brought in and established by the
Norman Conqueror: which were not by him devised nor applied unto the state of
the Realm then being, nor as yet might best be (as should by Lawgivers
principally be regarded) but were indeed the very Laws of his own Country of
Normandy. The condition whereof, how far it differs from this of England,
is apparent to every least judgment. But to transfer the same laws for the
governing of the Realm of Ireland, was much more inconvenient and unmeete, for
he found a better advantage of the time, then was in the planting of them in
Ireland, and followed the execution of them with more severity, and was also
present in person to overlooke the Magistrates, and to over awe these subjects
with the terror of his Sword, and countenance of his Majesty. But not so in
Ireland, for they were otherwise affected, and yet do so remain, so as the
same Laws (me seems) can ill fit with their disposition, or work that
reformation that is wished. For Laws ought to be fashioned unto the manners
and conditions of the people, to whom they are meant, and not to be imposed
upon them according to the simple rule of right, for then (as I said) in stead
of good they may work ill, and pervert Justice to extreme injustice. For he
that transferres the Laws of the Lacedaemonians to the people of Athens, should
find a great absurdity and inconvenience. For those Laws of Lacedemon were
devised by Licurgus as most proper and best agreeing with that people, whom he
knew to be inclined altogether to wars, and therefore wholly trained them up
even from their Cradles in arms and military exercises, clean contrary to the
institution of Solon, who in his Laws to the Athenians labored by all means
to temper their warlike courages with sweet delights of learning and sciences,
so that as much as the one excelled in arms, the other exceeded in knowledge.
The like regard and moderation ought to be had in tempering and managing of
this stubborn nation of the Irish to bring them from their delight of
licentious barbarism unto the love of goodness and civilitie.


Eudox. I cannot see how that may better be then by the Discipline of the
Laws of England: for the English were at first, as stout and warlike a people
as ever the Irish, and yet you see are now brought unto that civillity, that no
nation in the world excels them in all goodly conversation, and all the
studies of knowledge and humanity.


Iren. What they now be, both you and I see very well, but by how many thornie
and hard ways they are come thereunto, by how many civil broiles, by how many
tumultuous rebellions, that even hazzarded oftentimes the whole safety of the
kingdom, may easily be considered: all which they nevertheless fairly
overcame, by reason of the continual presence of their King, whose only
person is oftentimes in stead of an Army, to contain the unrulie people from a
thousand evil occasions, which this wretched kingdom for want thereof is
daily carried into. The which whenever they make head, no laws, no
penalties, can restrain, but that they do in the violence of that fury,
tread down and trample under foot all both divine and humane things, and the
laws themselves they do specially rage at, and rend in pieces, as most
repugnant to their liberty and natural freedom, which in their madness they
affect.


Eudox. It is then a very unseasonable time to plead law, when Swords are in
the hands of the vulgar, or to think to retain them with fear of
punishments, when they look after liberty, and shake off all government.


Iren. Then so it is with Ireland continually, Eudoxus; for the sword was never
yet out of their hand, but when they are weary of wars and brought down to
extreme wretchedness, then they creep a little perhaps and sue for grace,
till they have gotten new breath and recovered their strength again. So as it
is in vain to speak of planting laws, and plotting policy, till they be
altogether subdued.


Eudox. Were they not so at the first conquering of them by Strongbowe in the
time of King Henry the second? was there not a thorough way then made by the
sword, for the imposing of the laws upon them? and were they not then executed
with such a mighty hand as you said was used by the Norman Conqueror? What
odds is there then in this case? why should not the same laws take as good
effect in that people as they did here, being in like sort prepared by the
sword, and brought under by extremity? and why should they not continue in as
good force and vigor for the containing of the people?


Iren. The case yet is not like, but there appears great odds between them:
for by the conquest of Henry the second, true it is that the Irish were utterly
vanquished and subdued, so as no enemy was able to hold up head against his
power, in which their weakness he brought in his laws, and settled them as
now they there remain; Like as William the Conqueror did, so as in thus much
they agree; but in the rest that is the chiefest, they vary: for to whom did
King Henry the second impose those laws, not to the Irish, for the most part
of them fled from his power, into deserts and mountains, leaving the wide
country to the Conqueror: who in their stead eftsoons placed English men,
who possessed all their lands and did quite shut out the Irish, or the most
part of them. And to those new inhabitants and Colonies, he gave his laws, to
wit the same laws, under which they were borne and bred, the which it was no
difficulty to place amongst them, being formerly well inured thereunto, unto
whom afterward they repaired diverse of the poor distressed people of the
Irish, for succor and relief of whom, such as they thought fit for labor and
industriously disposed, as the most part of their baser sort are, they received
unto them as their vassalls, but scarcely vouchsafed to impart unto them the
benefit of those laws under which themselves lived, but every one made his
will and commandment a law unto his own vassal: Thus was not the Law of
England ever properly applied unto the Irish Nation, as by a purposed plot of
government, but as they could insinuate and steal themselves under the same,
by their humble carriage and submission.


Eudox. How comes it then to pass, that having been once so low brought, and
thoroughly subjected, they afterward lifted up themselves so strongly again,
and sithence do stand so stiffely against all rule and government?


Iren. They say that they continued in that lowliness, until the time that
the division between the two houses of Lancaster and York arose for the Crown
of England: at which time all the great English Lords and Gentlemen which had
great possessions in Ireland, repaired over hither into England, some to
succor their Friends here, and to strengthen their party for to obtain the
Crown, others to defend their lands and possessions here against such as
hovered after the same upon hope of the alteration of the kingdom and success
of that side which they favored and affected. Then the Irish whom before they
had banished into the mountains, where they lived only upon whitt meats, as
it is recorded, seeing now their lands so dispeopled, and weakened, came down
into all the plains adjoining, and thence expelling those few English that
remained, repossessed them again, since which they have remained in them, and
growing greater, have brought under them many of the English, which were before
their Lords. This was one of the occasions by which all those Countries, which
lying near unto any Mountains, or Irish deserts, had been planted with
English, were shortly displanted and lost. As namely in Mounster all the lands
adjoining unto Slewlogher, Arlo, and the bog of Allon. In Connaght all the
Countries bordering upon the Curlues, Mointerolis, and Orourkes Country. In
Leinster all the lands bordering unto the Mountains of Glanmalour, unto
Shillelah, unto the Brackenah, and Polmonte. In Vlster all the Countries near
unto Tirconnel, Tyrone, and the Scotts.


Eudox. Surely this was a great violence: but yet by your speech it seems
that only the Countries and valleys near adjoining unto those mountains
and deserts, were thus recovered by the Irish: but how comes it now that we see
almost all that Realm repossessed of them? was there any more such evil
occasions growing by the troubles of England. Or did the Irish out of those
places so by them gotten break further and stretch themselves out thorough the
whole land: for now, for ought that I can understand, there is no part but the
bare English Pale, in which the Irish have not the greatest footing.


Iren. But out of these small beginings by them gotten near to the mountains,
did they spread themselves into the Inland, and also to their further
advantage, there did other like unhappy accidents happen out of England; which
gave heart and good opportunity to them to regaine their old possessions: For
in the reign of King Edward the fourth, things remained yet in the same state
that they were after the late breaking out of the Irish, which I spoke of; and
that noble Prince began to cast an Eye unto Ireland, and to mind the
reformation of things there run amiss: for he sent over his brother the
worthy Duke of Clarence, who having married the heir of the Earl of Vlster,
and by her having all the Earldom of Vlster, and much in Mead and in
Mounster, very carefully went about the redressing of all those late evils,
and though he could not beat out the Irish again, by reason of his short
continuance, yet he did shut them up within those narrow corners and glynnes
under the mountains foot, in which they lurked, and so kept them from
breaking any further, by building strong holds upon every border, and
fortifying all passages. Amongst the which he repaired the Castle of Clare in
Thomond, of which Country he had the inheritance, and of Mortimers lands
adjoining, which is now (by the Irish) called Killaloe. But the times of that
good King growing also troublesome, did let the thorough reformation of all
things. And thereunto soon after was added another fatal mischeife, which
wrought a greater calamity then all the former. For the said Duke of Clarence
then Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, was by practice of evil persons, about the
King his brother, called thence away: and soon after by sinister means was
clean made away. Presently after whose death, all the North revolting, did set
up Oneale for their Captain, being before that of small power and regard: and
there arose in that part of Thomond, one of the O-Briens, called Murrogh
en-Ranagh, that is, Morris of the Fern or wast wild places, who gathering
unto him all the relics of the discontented Irish, eftsoons surprised the
said Castle of Clare, burnt, and spoiled all the English there dwelling, and in
short space possessed all that country beyond the River of Shanan and near
adjoining: Whence shortly breaking forth like a sudden tempest he overran
all Mounster and Connaght; breaking down all the holds and fortresses of the
English, defacing and utterly subverting all corporate Towns, that were not
strongly walled: for those, he had no means nor Engines to overthrow, neither
indeed would he stay at all about them, but speedily ran forward, counting his
suddenness his most advantage, that he might overtake the English before they
could fortify or gather themselves together. So in short space he clean
wyped out many great Towns, as first Inchequin, then Killalow, before called
Clariford, also Thurles, Mourn, Buttevant, and many others, whose names I
cannot remember, and of some of which there is now no memory nor sign
remaining. Upon report whereof there flocked unto him all the scumme of the
Irish out of all places, that ere long he had a mighty Army, and thence marched
forth into Leinster, where he wrought great outrages, wasting all the
Country where he went; for it was his policy to leave no hold behind him,
but to make all plain and waste. In the which he soon after created himself
King, and was called King of all Ireland, which before him I do not read that
any did so generally, but only Edward le Bruce.


Eudox. What? was there ever any general King of all Ireland? I never heard it
before, but that it was always (whilst it was under the Irish) divided into
four, and sometimes into five kingdoms or dominions. But this Edward le Bruce
what was he, that could make himself King of all Ireland?


Iren. I would tell you in case you would not challenge me anon for forgetting
the matter which I had in hand, that is, the inconvenience and unfitness which
I supposed to be in the laws of the Land.


Eudox. No surely, I have no cause, for neither is this impertinent thereunto;
for sithence you did set your course (as I remember in your first part) to
treat of the evils which hindered the peace and good ordering of that Land,
amongst which, that of the inconvenience in the laws, was the first which you
had in hand, this discourse of the overrunning and wasting of the Realm, is
very material thereunto, for that it was the beginning of all the other evils,
which sithence have afflicted that land, and opened a way unto the Irish to
recover their possession, and to beat out the English which had formerly won
the same. And besides, it will give a great light both unto the second and
third part, which is the redressing of those evils, and planting of some good
form or policy therein, by renewing the remembrance of these occasions and
accidents, by which those ruins happened, and laying before us the ensamples of
those times, to be compared to ours, and to be warned by those which shall have
to do in the like. Therefore I pray you tell them unto us, and as for the
point where you left, I will not forget afterward to call you back again
thereunto.


Iren. This Edw. le Bruce was brother of Robert le Bruce, who was King of
Scotland, at such time as K. Edward the second reigned here in England, and
bare a most malicious and spightfull mind against K. Edward, doing him all the
scathe that he could, and annoying his Territoryes of England, whilst he was
troubled with civil wars of his Barons at home. He also to work him the
more mischief, sent over his said brother Edward with a power of Scotts and
Red-shankes into Ireland, where by the means of the Lacies, and of the Irish,
with whom they combined, they gave footing, and gathering unto him all the
scatterlings and out-lawes out of all the woods and mountains, in which they
long had lurked, marched forth into the English pale, which then was chiefly
in the North from the point of Donluce and beyond unto Dublin: Having in the
midst of her Knockfergus, Belfast, Armagh, and Carlingford, which are now the
most out-bounds and abandoned places in the English Pale, and indeed not
counted of the English Pale at all: for it stretches now no further then
Dundalke toward the North. There the said Edward le Bruce spoiled and burnt
all the old English Pale Inhabitants, and sacked and rased all Cities and
Corporate Towns, no less then Murrough en Ranagh, of whom I erst told you:
For he wasted Belfast, Greene-Castle, Kelles, Bellturbut, Castletowne, Newton,
and many other very good Towns and strong holds, he rooted out the noble
Families of the Audlies, Talbotts, Tuchets, Chamberlaines, Maundevills, and the
Savages out of Ardes, though of the Lo: Savage there remains yet an heir,
that is now a poor Gentleman of very mean condition, yet dwelling in the
Ardes. And coming lastly to Dundalke, he there made himself King, and
reigned the space of one whole year, until that Edward King of England having
set some quiet in his affairs at home, sent over the Lord John Birmingham to
be General of the Wars against him, who incountering him near to Dundalke,
over-threw his Army, and slew him. Also he presently followed the victory so
hotly upon the Scotts, that he suffered them not to breathe, or gather
themselves together again, until they came to the Seacoast. Notwithstanding
all the way that they fled, for very rancor and despite, in their return
they utterly consumed and wasted whatsoever they had before left unspoyled, so
as of all Towns, Castles, Forts, Bridges, and Habitations, they left not any
stick standing, nor any people remaining, for those few which yet survived,
fled from their fury further into the English Pale that now is. Thus was all
that goodly country utterly wasted. And sure it is yet a most beautiful and
sweet Country as any is under Heaven, being stored throughout with many goodly
Rivers, replenished with all sorts of Fish most abundantly, sprinkled with many
very sweet Islands and goodly Lakes, like little inland Seas, that will carry
even ships upon their waters, adorned with goodly woods even fit for building
of houses and ships, so commodiously, as that if some Princes in the world had
them, they would soon hope to be Lords of all the Seas, and ere long of all
the world: also full of very good Ports and Havens opening upon England, as
inviting us to come unto them, to see what excellent commodities that Country
can afford, besides the soil it self most fertile, fit to yield all kind of
fruit that shall be committed thereunto. And lastly, the Heavens most mild and
temperate, though somewhat more moist then the parts toward the West.


Eudox. Truly Iren. what with your praises of the country, and what with your
discourse of the lamentable desolation thereof, made by those Scotts, you have
filled me with a great compassion of their calamities, that I do much pity
that sweet Land, to be subject to so many evils as I see more and more to be
laid upon her, and do half begin to think, that it is (as you said at the
beginning) her fatal misfortune above all other Countries that I know, to be
thus miserably tossed and turmoyled with these variable storms of affliction.
But since we are thus far entered into the consideration of her mishaps, tell
me, have there been any more such tempests as you term them, wherein she
has thus wretchedly been wracked?


Iren. Many more God wot, have there been, in which principal parts have
been rent and torn asunder, but none (as I can remember) so universal as
this. And yet the rebellion of Thomas fitz Garret did well-nye stretch it self
into all parts of Ireland. But that which was in the time of the government of
the Lord Gray, was surely no less general then all those, for there was no
part free from the contagion, but all conspired in one, to cast off their
subjection to the Crown of England. Nevertheless thorough the most wise and
valiant handling of that right noble Lord, it got not the head which the former
evils found; for in them the Realm was left like a ship in a storm, amidst
all the raging surges, unruled, and undirected of any: for they to whom she was
committed, either fainted in their labor, or forsook their charge. But he
(like a most wise Pilote,) kept her course carefully, and held her most
strongly even against those roaring billows, that he safely brought her out of
all; so as long after, even by the space of 12. or 13. whole years, she road
at peace, thorough his only pains and excellent indurance, how ever envy list
to blatter against him. But of this we shall have more occasion to speak in
another place. Now (if you please) let us return again unto our first course.


Eudox. Truly I am very glad to hear your judgment of the government of that
honorable man so soundly, for I have heard it oftentimes maligned, and his
doings depraved of some, who (I perceive) did rather of malicious mind, or
private grievance, seek to detract from the honor of his deeds and Counsels,
then of any just cause, but he was nevertheless in the judgments of all good
and wise men, defended and maintained. And now that he is dead, his immortal
fame surviveth, and flourishes in the mouths of all people, that even those
which did backbite him, are checked with their own venom, and break their
galls to hear his so honorable report. But let him rest in peace, and turn we
to our more troublesome matters of discourse, of which I am right sorry that
you make so short an end, and covet to pass over to your former purposes, for
there be many other parts of Ireland, which I have heard have bin no less
vexed with the like storms, then these which you have treated of, as the
Countries of the Birnes and Tools near Dublin, with the insolent outrages
and spoils of Feagh mac Hugh, the Countries of Catherlagh, Wexford, and
Waterford, by the Cavenaghes. The Countries of Leix, Kilkenny, and Kildare by
the O Moors. The Countries of Ofaly and Longford by the Connors. The
Countries of Westmeath, Cavan, and Lowth, by the O Relyes, the Kellyes, and
many others, so as the discoursing of them, besides the pleasure which would
redound out of their History, be also very profitable for matters of policy.


Iren. All this which you have named, and many more besides, often times have I
right well known, and yet often do kindle great fires of tumultuous broils
in the Countries bordering upon them. All which to rehearse, should rather be
to Chronicle times, then to search into reformation of abuses in that Realm,
and yet very needful it will be to consider them, and the evils which they
have often stirred up, that some redress thereof, and prevention of the evils
to come, may thereby rather be devised. But I suppose we shall have a fitter
opportunity for the same, when we shall speak of the particular abuses, and
enormities of the government, which will be next after these general defects
and inconveniences which I said were in the Laws, Customs, and Religion.


Eudox. Go to them a Gods name, and follow the course which you have promised
to your self, for it fitteth best, I must confess with the purpose of our
discourse. Declare your opinion as you began about the Laws of the Realm,
what incommoditie you have conceived to be in them, chiefly in the common Law,
which I would have thought most free from all such dislike.


Iren. The Common Law is (as I said before) of it self most rightful and
very convenient (I suppose) for the Kingdom, for which it was first devised:
for this (I think) as it seeemes reasonable, that out of your manners of your
people, and abuses of your Country, for which they were invented, they take
their first beginning, or else they should be most unjust; for no Laws of man
(according to the straight rule of right) are just, but as in regard of the
evils which they prevent, and the safety of the Commonweal which they
provide for. As for example, in your true ballancing of Justice, it is a flat
wrong to punish the thought or purpose of any before it be enacted, for true
Justice punishes nothing but the evil act or wicked word, that by the Laws
of all Kingdoms it is a capital crime to devise or purpose the death of your
King: The reason is, for that when such a purpose is effected, it should then
be too late to devise thereof, and should turn the Commonwealth to more
loss by the death of their Prince, then such punishment of the malefactors.
And therefore the Law in that case punishes the thought, for better is a
mischief, then an inconvenience. So that Ius politicum, though it be not of
it self just, yet by application, or rather necessity it is made just, and
this only respect makes all Laws just. Now then, if these Laws of Ireland
be not likewise applied and fitted for that Realm, they are sure very
inconvenient.


Eudox. You reason strongly: but what unfitness do you find in them for that
Realm, show us some particulars.


Iren. The Common Law appoints, that all trials, as well of Crimes, as
Titles and Rights, shall be made by verdict of a Jury, chosen out of the
honest and most substantial Freeholders* Now, most of the Freeholders of
that Realm, are Irish, which when the cause shall fall betwixt an Englishman
and an Irish, or between the Queen, and any Free-houlder of that Country,
they make no more scruple to pass against an Englishman, and the Queen,
though it be to strain their oaths, then to drink milk unstrayned. So that
before the Jury go together, it is all to nothing what the verdict shall be.
The trial have I so often seen, that I dare confidently avouch the abuse
thereof. Yet is the Law of it self, (as I said) good, and the first
institution thereof being given to all Englishmen very rightfully, but now that
the Irish have stepped into the very rooms of your English, we are now to
become heedfull and provident in Iuryes.


Eudox. In sooth Iren. you have discoversed a point worthy the consideration;
for hereby not only the English subject finds no indifferency in deciding
of his cause, be it never so just; but the Queen as well in all pleas of the
Crown, as also in inquiries for Escheates, Lands attainted, Wardshipps,
Concealements, and all such like, is abused and exceedingly dammaged.


Iren. You say very true; for I dare undertake, that at this day there are more
attainted Lands, concealed from her Majesty, then she has now possessions in
all Ireland, and it is no small inconvenience: for besides that, she loses
so much Land as should turn to her great profit, she besides loses so many
good subjects, which might be assured unto her, as those Lands would yield
Inhabitants and living unto.


Eudox. But does many of that people (say you) make no more conscience to
perjure themselves in their verdicts, and damn their souls?


Iren. Not only so in their verdicts, but also in all other their dealings:
especially with the English they are most wilfully bent: for though they will
not seem manifestly to do it, yet will some one or other subtle-headed fellow
amongst them, put some quirke, or devise some evasion, whereof the rest will
likely take hold, and suffer themselves easily to be led by him to that
themselves desired. For in the most apparent matter that may be, the least
question or doubt that may be moved, will make a stop unto them, and put
them quite out of the way. Besides, that of themselves (for the most part) they
are so cautelous and wylie-headed, especially being men of so small experience,
and practice in law matters, that you would wonder whence they borrow such
subtiltyes and slye shifts.


Eudox. But me thinks this inconvenience might be much helped in the Judges
and chief Magistrates which have the choosing and nominating of those Jurors,
if they would have dared to appoint either most Englishmen, and such Irishmen
as were of the soundest judgment and disposition; for no doubt but some there
be incorruptible.


Iren. Some there be indeed as you say, but then would the Irish party cry
out of partiality, and complain he has no Justice, he is not used as a
subject, he is not suffered to have the free benefit of the Law, and these
outcries the Magistrates there do much shun, as they have cause, since they
are readily hearkened unto here, neither can it be indeed, although the
Irish party would be so contented to be so compassed, that such English
free-houlders which are but few, and such faithful Irish-men, which are
indeed as few, shall always be chosen for trials, for being so few, they
should be made weary of their free-houldes. And therefore a good care is to
be had by all good occasions, to increase their number, and to plant more by
them. But were it so, that the Jurors could be picked out of such choice men
as you desire, this would nevertheless be as bad a corruption in the trial,
for the evidence being brought in by the baser Irish people, will be as
deceiptfull as the verdict, for they care much less then the others, what they
swear, and sure their Lords may compel them to say any thing, for I my self
have heard, when one of the baser sort (which they call Churles) being
challenged and reprooved for his false oath, has answered confidently, that
his Lord commanded him, and it was the least thing that he could do for his
Lord, to swear for him; so inconscionable are these common people, and so
little feeling have they of God, or their own souls good.


Eudox. It is a most miserable case, but what help can there then be in this?
for though the manner of the trials should be altered, yet the proof of
every thing must needs be by the testimony of such persons as the parties
shall produce, which if they shall be corrupt, how can there ever any light of
the truth appear, what remedy is there for this evil, but to make heavy Laws
and Penalties against Jurors.


Iren. I think sure that will do small good, for when a people be inclined to
any vice, or have no touch of Conscience, nor sense of their evil doings; it
is bootelesse to think to restrain them by any penalties or fear of
punishment, but either the occasion is to be taken away, or a more
understanding of the right, and shame of the fault to be imprinted. For if that
Licurgus should have made it death for the Lacedaemonians to steal, they being
a people which naturally delighted in stealth, or if it should be made a
capital crime, for the Flemmings to be taken in drunkenness, there should
have been few Lacedaemonians then left, and few Flemmings now. So unpossible it
is, to remove any fault so general in a people, with terror of laws or most
sharp restraints.


Eudox. What means may there be then to avoyde this inconvenience, for the
case seems very hard?


Iren. We are not yet come to the point to devise remedies for the evils, but
only have now to recount them, of the which, this which I have told you is one
defect in the Common Law.


Eudox. Tell us then (I pray you) further, have you any more of this sort in
the Common Law?


Iren. By rehearsal of this, I remember also of an other like, which I have
often observed in trialls, to have wrought great hurt and hinderance, and that
is the exceptions which the common law allows a Fellon in his trial, for he
may have (as you know) 56. exceptions pere^ptory against the Jurors, of which
he shall show no cause. By which shift there being (as I have showed you) so small
store of honest Iurymen, he will either put off his trial, or drive it to such
men as (perhaps) are not of the soundest sort, by whose means, if he can
acquit himself of the crime, as he is likely, then will he plague such as
were brought first to be of his Jury, and all such as made any party against
him. And when he comes forth, he will make their Cowes and Garrons to walk, if
he do no other harm to their persons.


Eudox. This is a slye devise, but I think might soon be remedied, but we
must leave it a while to the rest. In the meane-while do you go forwards with
others.


Iren. There is an other no less inconvenience then this, which is, the trial
of accessaries to felony, for by the common Law, the accessaries cannot be
proceeded against, till the principal have received his trial. Now to the
case, how it often falls out in Ireland, that a stealth being made by a
rebel, or an outlawe, the stolen goods are conveyed to some husbandman or
Gentleman, which has well to take to, and yet lives most by the receipt of
such stealthes, where they are found by the owner, and handled: whereupon the
party is perhaps apprehended and committed to Goal, or put upon sureties,
till the Sessions, at which time the owner preferring a bill of Indictment,
proves sufficiently the stealth to have been committed upon him, by such an
Outlaw, and to have been found in the possession of the prisoner, against
whom, nevertheless, no course of law can proceed, nor trial can be had, for
that the principal Theife is not to be gotten, notwithstanding that he
likewise, standing perhaps indicted at once, with the Receiver, being in
rebellion, or in the woods: where peradventure he is slain before he can be
gotten, and so the Receiver clean acquitted and discharged of the crime. By
which means the Thieves are greatly encouraged to steal, and their
maintainers imboldened to receive their stealthes, knowing how hardly they can
be brought to any trial of Law.


Eudox. Truly this is a great inconvenience, and a great cause (as you say) of
the maintenance of Thieves, knowing their Receivers always ready, for were
there no receivers, there would be no thieves: but this (me seems) might
easily be provided for, by some act of Parliament, that the receiver being
convicted by good proofs might receive his trial without the principal.


Iren. You say very true Eudox. but that is almost impossible to be compassed:
And herein also you discover another imperfection, in the course of the Common
Law, and first ordinance of the Realm: for you know that the said Parliament
must consist of the Peers, Gentlemen, Freeholders, and Burgesses of that
Realm it self. Now these being perhaps themselves, or the most part of them
(as may seem by their stiff with-standing of this Act) culpable of this
crime, or favorers of their friends, which are such, by whom their Kitchins
are sometimes amended, will not suffer any such Statute to pass. Yet has it
oftentimes been attempted, and in the time of Sir John Parrot very earnestly
(I remember) labored, but could by no means be effected. And not only this,
but many other like, which are as needful for the reformation of that Realm.


Eudox. This also is surely a great defect, but we may not talk (you say) of
the redressing of this, until our second part come, which is purposely
appointed thereunto. Therefore proceed to the recounting of more such evils, if
at least, you have any more.


Iren. There is also a great inconvenience, which has wrought great damage,
both to her Majesty, and to that common wealth, thorough close and colorable
conveyances of the lands and goods of Traitors, Fellons and Fugitives. As when
one of them minds to go into rebellion, he will convey away all his lands
and Lordships, to Feoffees in trust, whereby he reserveth to himself, but a
state for term of life, which being determined either by the sword or by the
halter, their lands straight comes to their heir, and the Queen is defrauded
of the intent of the Law, which laid that grievous punishment upon Traitors,
to forfeite all their lands to the Prince, to the end that men might the rather
be terrified from committing treasons, for many which would little esteem of
their own lives, yet for remorse of their wives and children would be
withheld from that heinous crime. This appeared plainly in the late Earl of
Desmond. For before his breaking forth into open Rebellion, he had conveyed
secretly all his lands to Feoffees of trust, in hope to have cut off her
Majesty from the escheate of his Lands.


Eudox. Yea, but that was well enough avoided, for the Act of Parliament which
gave all his lands to the Queen, did (as I have heard) cut off and frustrate
all such conveyances, as had at any time by the space of twelve years before
his rebellion, been made, within the compass whereof, the fraudulent
Feoffement, and many the like of others his accomplices and fellow-traytors
were contained.


Iren. Very true, but how hardly that Act of Parliament was wrought out of
them, I can witness; and were it to be passed again, I dare undertake it
would never be compassed. But were it also that such Acts might be easily
brought to pass against Traitors and Fellons, yet were it not an endless
trouble, that no Traitor or Fellon should be attainted, but a Parliament must
be called for bringing of his Lands to the Queen, which the Common Law gives
her.


Eudox. Then this is no fault of the Common Law, but of the persons which work
this fraud to her Majesty.


Iren. Yes marry; for the Common Law has left them this benefit, whereof they
make advantage, and wrest it to their bad purposes. So as thereby they are the
bolder to enter into evil actions, knowing that if the worst befall them, they
shall lose nothing but themselves, whereof they seem surely very careless.


Eudox. But what meant you of Fugitives herein? Or how does this concern them?


Iren: Yes, very greatly, for you shall understand that there be many ill
disposed and undutifull persons of that Realm, like as in this point there are
also in this Realm of England too many, which being men of good inheritance,
are for dislike of Religion, or danger of the law, into which they are run, or
discontent of the present government, fled beyond the seas, where they live
under Princes, which are her Mties professed enemies, and converse, and are
confederat with other traitors and fugitives, which are there abiding. The
which nevertheless have the benefits and profits of their lands here, by
pretense of such colorable conveyances thereof, formerly made by them unto
their privy Friends here in trust, who privily do send over unto them the
said Revenues wherewith they are there maintained and enabled against her
Majesty.


Eudox. I do not think that there be any such fugitives, which are relieved
by the profit of their Lands in England, for there is a straighter order
taken. And if there be any such in Ireland, it were good it were likewise
looked unto, for this evil may easily be remedied. But proceed.


Iren. It is also inconvenient in the Realm of Ireland, that the Wards and
Marriages of Gentlemen's children should be in the disposition of any of those
Irish Lords, as now they are, by reason that their Lands be held by Knights
service of those Lords. By which means it comes to pass that those Gentlemen
being thus in the ward of those Lords, are not only thereby brought up lewdly,
and Irish-like, but also for ever after so bound to their services, they will
run with them into any disloyal action.


Eudox. This greivance Iren. is also complained of in England, but how can it
be remedied? since the service must follow the tenure of the lands, and the
lands were given away by the Kings of England to those Lords, when they first
conquered that Realm, and to say troth, this also would be some prejudice to
the Prince in her wardshipps.


Iren. I do not mean this by the Princes wards, but by such as fall into the
hands of Irish Lords, for I could wish, and this I could enforce that all those
wardships were in the Princes disposition, for then it might be hoped, that she
for the universal reformation of that Realm, would take better order for
bringing up those wards in good nurture, and not suffer them to come into so
bad hands. And although these things be already passed away, by her
Progenitors former grants unto those said Lords; yet I could find a way to
remedy a great part thereof, as hereafter, when fit time serves shall appear.
And since we are entered into speech of such graunts of former Princes, to
sundry persons of this Realm of Ireland, I will mention unto you some other,
of like nature to this, and of like inconvenience, by which the former Kings of
England, passed unto them a great part of their prerogatives, which though then
it was well intended, and perhaps well deserved of them which received the
same, yet now such a gapp of mischeife lies open thereby, that I could wish it
were well stopped. Of this sort are the graunts of Counties palatines in
Ireland, which though at first were granted upon good consideration when they
were first conquered, for that those lands lay then as a very border to the
wild Irish, subject to continual invasion, so as it was needful to give them
great privileges for the defense of the Inhabitants thereof: yet now that it
is no more a border, nor frontired with enemies, why should such privileges
be any more continued?


Eudox. I would gladly know what you call a County palatine, and whence it so
called.


Iren. It was (I suppose) first named palatine of a pale, as it were a pale and
defense to their inward lands, so as it is called the English Pale, and
therefore is a Palsgrave, named an Earl Palatine. Others think of the Latin,
palare, that is to forage or outrun, because those marchers and borderers use
commonly so to do. So as to have a county palatine is, in effect, to have a
privilege to spoil the enemies borders adjoining. And surely so it is used at
this day, as a privileged place of spoils and stealthes, for the county of
Tipperary, which is now the only county palatine in Ireland, is by abuse of
some bad ones, made a receptacle to rob the rest of the Counties about it, by
means of whose privileges none will follow their stealthes, so as it being
situate in the very lap of all the land, is made now a border, which how
inconvenient it is, let every man judge. And though that right noble man, that
is the Lord of the liberty, do pain himself, all he may, to yield equal
Justice unto all, yet can there not but great abuses lurk in so inward and
absolute a privilege, the consideration whereof is to be respected carefully,
for the next succession. And much like unto this grant, there are other
privileges granted unto most of the corporations there: that they shall not be
bound to any other government then their own, that they shall not be charged
with garrisons, that they shall not be travailed forth of their own
franchises, that they may buy and sell with thieves and rebels, that all
amercements and fines that shall be imposed upon them, shall come unto
themselves. All which, though at the time of their first grant they were
tolerable, and perhaps reasonable, yet now, are most unreasonable and
inconvenient, but all these will easily be cut off with the superior power of
her Majesty's prerogative, against which her own grants are not to be pleaded
or enforced.


Iren. Now truly Irenaeus you have (me seems) very well handled this point,
touching inconveniences in the Common Law there, by you observed; and it
seems that you have had a mindful regard unto the things that may concern
the good of that Realm. And if you can as well go thorough with the Statute
laws of that land. I will think you have not lost all your time there.
Therefore I pray you, now take them in hand, and tell us, what you think to
be amiss in them.


Iren. The Statutes of that Realm are not many, and therefore we shall the
sooner run thorough them. And yet of those few there are impertinent and
unnecessary: the which though perhaps a^ the time of the making of them, were
very needful, yet now thorough change of time are clean antiquated, and
altogether idle: As that which forbids any to wear their beards all on the
upper lip, and none under the Chinne. And that which puts away saffron
shirts and smockes. And that which restrains the use of guilt bridles and
petronels. And that which is appointed for the Recorders and Clerks of Dublin
and Tredagh, to take but ij. d. for the copy of a plainte. And that which
commands Bows and Arrows. And that which makes, that all Irishmen which
shall converse among the English, shall be taken for spies, and so punished.
And that which forbids persons amesnable to Law, to enter and distraine in the
lands in which they have title, and many other the like, I could rehearse.


Eudox. These truly, which ye have repeated, seem very frivolous and
fruitelesse, for by the breach of them, little damage or inconvenience, can
come to the Commonwealth: Neither indeed, if any transgress them, shall he
seem worthy of punishment, scarce of blame, saving but for that they abide by
that name of Laws. But Laws ought to be such, as that the keeping of them,
should be greatly for the behoof of the Commonweal, and the violating of
them should be very heinous, and sharply punishable. But tell us of some more
weighty dislikes in the Statutes then these, and that may more behoofefully
import the reformation of them.


Iren. There is one or two Statutes which make the wrongful distrayning of any
man's goods against the form of Common Law, to be felony. The which Statutes
seem surely to have been at first meant for the good of that Realm, and for
restrayning of a foul abuse, which then reigned commonly amongst that people,
and yet is not altogether laid aside: That when any one was indebted to
another, he would first demand his debt, and if he were not paid, he would
straight go and take a distress of his goods or cattle, where he could find
them, to the value; which he would keep till he were satisfied, and this the
simple Churl (as they call him) does commonly use to do, yet thorough
ignorance of his misdoing, or evil use, that has long settled amongst them.
But this, though it be sure most unlawful, yet surely (me seems) too hard to
make it death, since there is no purpose in the party to steal the others
goods, or to conceal the distress, but does it openly, for the most part,
before witnesses. And again, the same Statutes are so slackely penned (besides
the later of them is so unsensibly contryved, that it scarce carries any
reason in it) that they are often and very easily wrested to the fraud of the
Subject, as if one going to distrayne upon his own land or Tenement, where
lawfully he may, yet if in doing thereof he transgress the least point of the
Common Law, he straight commits felony. Or if one by any other occasion
take any thing from another, as Boys use sometimes to cap one another, the
same is straight felony. This is a very hard Law.


Eudox. Nevertheles that evil use of distrayning of another man's goods ye
will not deny, but it is to be abolished and taken away.


Iren. It is so, but not by taking away the subject withal, for that is too
violent a medecin, specially this use being permitted, and made lawful to
some, and to other some death. As to most of the corporate Towns there, it is
granted by their Charter, that they may, every man by himself, without an
Officer (for that were more tolerable) for any debt, to distraine the goods of
any Irish, being found within their liberty, or but passing thorough their
towns. And the first permission of this, was for that in those times when that
grant was made, the Irish were not amesnable to Law, so as it was not safety
for the Townes-man to go to him forth to demand his debt, nor possible to
draw him into Law, so that he had leave to be his own Bayliffe, to arrest his
said debtors goods, within his own franchese. The which the Irish seeing,
thought it as lawful for them to distrayne the Townes-mans goods in the
Country, where they found it. And so by ensample of that grant to Townes-men,
they thought it lawful, and made it a use to distrayne on another goods for
small debts. And to say truth, me thinks it hard for every trifling debt, of
2. or 3. shil: to be driven to Law, which is so far from them sometimes to be
sought, for which me thinks it too heavy an ordinance to give death,
especially to a rude man that is ignorant of law, and thinks that a common
use or grant to other men, is a law for himself.


Eudox. Yea, but the Judge when it comes before him to trial, may easily
decide this doubt, and lay open the intent of the Law, by his better discretion.


Iren. Yea, but it is dangerous to leave the sense of the Law unto the reason
or will of the Judge, who are men and may be miscarried by affections, and many
other means. But the Laws ought to be like stony Tables, plain, steadfast,
and unmovable. There is also such another Statute or two, which make Coigny
and Livery to be treason, no less inconvenient then the former, being as it
is penned, how ever the first purpose thereof were expedient, for thereby now
no man can go into another man's house for lodging, nor to his own Tennants
house to take victual by the way, notwithstanding that there is no other
means for him to have lodging, nor horse meat, nor man's meat, there being no
Innes, nor none otherwise to be bought for money, but that he is endangered by
that Statute for treason, whenever he shall happen to fall out with his
Tennant, or that his said host list to complain of greivance, as oftentimes I
have seen them very maliciously do, thorough the least provocation.


Eudox. I do not well know, but by guess, what you do mean by these terms
of Coigny and Livery, therefore I pray you explain them.


Iren. I know not whether the words be English or Irish, but I suppose them to
be rather ancient English, for the Irish men can make no derivation of them.
What Livery is, we by common use in England know well enough, namely, that it
is allowance of horse-meate, as they commonly use the word in stabling, as to
keep horses at Livery, the which word, I guess, is derived of livering or
delivering forth their nightly food: So in great houses, the livery is said to
be served up for all night, that is their evenings allowance for drink. And
livery is also called, the upper weed which a serving man wears, so called
(as I suppose) for that it was delivered and taken from him at pleasure: So it
is apparent, that by the word Livery, is there meant horse meat, like as by
the word Coigny, is understood man's meat. But whence the word is derived is
hard to tell: Some say of Coin, for that they used commonly in their Coignies,
not only to take meat, but coin also: and that taking of money was
specially meant to be prohibited by that Statute: but I think rather this
word Coigny is derived of the Irish. The which is a common use amongst Land
lords of the Irish, to have a common spending upon their Tennants: for all
their Tennants, being commonly but Tennants at will, they use to take of them
what victuals they list: For of victuals they were wont to make small
reckoning: neither in this was the Tennant wronged, for it was an ordinary and
known custom, and his Lord commonly used so to covenant with him, which if at
any time the tenant disliked, he might freely depart at his pleasure. But now
by this Statute, the said Irish Lord is wronged, for that he is cut off from
his customary services, of the which this was one, besides many other of the
like, as Cuddy, Coshery, Bonnaght, Shrah, Sorehin, and such others: the which
(I think) were customs at first brought in by the English upon the Irish, for
they were never wont, and yet are loath to yield any certain Rent, but only
such spendings: for their common saying is, Spend me and defend me.


Eudox. Surely I take it as you say, that therein the Irish Lord has wrong,
since it was an ancient custom, and nothing contrary to Law, for to the
willing there is no wrong done. And this right well I wot, that even here in
England, there are in many places as large customs, as that of Coignie and
Livery. But I suppose by your speech, that it was the first meaning of the
statute, to forbid the violent taking of victuals upon other men's Tenants
against their wills, which surely is a great outrage, and yet not so great
(me seems) as that it should be made treason: for considering that the nature
of treason is concerning the Royal estate or Person of the Prince, or
practizing with his enemies, to the derogation and danger of his Crown and
dignity, it is hardly wrested to make this treason. But (as you erst said)
Better a mischief then an inconvenience.


Iren. Another Statute I remember, which having been an ancient Irish
Custom, is now upon advisement made a Law, and that is called the Custom of
Kin-cogish, which is, that every head of every Sept, and every chief of every
kindred or family, should be answerable and bound to bring forth every one of
that sept and kindred under it, at all times to be justified, when he should be
required or charged with any treason, felony, or other heinous crime.


Eudox. Why? surely this seems a very necessary Law. For considering that many
of them be such Losells and scatterlings, as that they cannot easily by any
Sheriff, Constable, Bayliffe, or other ordinary Officer be gotten, when they
are challenged for any such fact, this is a very good means to get them to be
brought in by him, that is the head of that sept, or chief of that house,
wherefore I wonder what just exception you can make against the same.


Iren. Truly Eudoxus, in the pretense of the good of this Stature, you have
nothing erred, for it seems very expedient and necessary, but the hurt which
comes thereby is greater then the good. For whilst every chief of a sept
stands so bound to the Law, for every man of his blood or sept that is under
him, and he made great, by the commanding of them all. For if he may not
command them, then that Law does wrong, that binds him to bring them forth
to be justified. And if he may command them, then he may command them
as well to ill as to good. Hereby the Lords and Captains of Countries, the
principal and heads of septs are made stronger, whom it should be a most
special care in policy to weaken, and to set up and strengthen diverse of his
underlings against him, which whenever he shall offer to swarve from duty,
may be able to beard him; for it is very dangerous to leave the command of so
many as some septs are, being five or six thousand persons, to the will of one
man, who may lead them to what he will, as he himself shall be inclined.


Eudox. In very deed Iren. it is very dangerous, seeing the disposition of
those people is not always inclineable to the best. And therefore I hold it
no wisdom to leave unto them too much command over their kindred, but rather
to with-drawe their followers from them as much as may be, and to gather them
under the command of Law, by some better mean then this custom of
Kin-cogish. The which word I would be glad to know what it namely signifies,
for the meaning thereof I seem to understand reasonably well.


Iren. It is a word mingled of English and Irish together, so as I am partly
led to think, that the custom thereof was first English, and afterward
made Irish: for such an other Law they had here in England, as I remember,
made by King Alured, that every Gentleman should bring forth his kindred and
followers to the Law. So Kin is English, and Congish Affinity in Irish.


Eudox. Since then we that have thus reasonably handled the inconveniences in
the Laws, let us now pass unto the second part, which was, I remember, of the
abuses of customs; in which me seems, you have a fair champian laid open
unto you, in which you may at large stretch out your discourse into many sweet
remembrances of antiquities, from whence it seems that the customs of that
nation proceeded.


Iren. Indeed Eudox. you say very true; for all the customs of the Irish
which I have often noted and compared with that I have read, would minister
occasion of a most ample discourse of the original of them, and the antiquity
of that people, which in truth I think to be more ancient then most that I
know in this end of the world, so as if it were in the handling of some man of
sound judgment and plentiful reading, it would be most pleasant and
profitable. But it may be we may at some other time of meeting, take occasion
to treat thereof more at large. Here only it shall suffice to touch such
customs of the Irish as seem offensive and repugnant to the good government
of that Realm.


Eudox. Follow then your own course, for I shall the better content my self
to forbear my desire now, in hope that you will, as you say, some other time
more abundantly satisfy it.


Iren. Before we enter into the treaty of their customs, it is first needful
to consider from whence they first sprung* for from the sundry manners of the
nations, from whence that people which now is called Irish, were derived, some
of the customs which now remain amongst them, have been first fetched, and
sithence there continued amongst them; for not of one nation was it peopled, as
it is, but of sundry people of different conditions and manners. But the
chiefest which have first possessed and inhabited it, I suppose to be
Scythians.


Eudox. How comes it then to pass, that the Irish do derive themselves from
Gathelus the Spaniard?


Iren. They do indeed, but (I conceive) without any good ground. For if there
were any such notable transmission of a Colony hither out of Spain, or any
such famous conquest of this Kingdom by Gathelus a Spaniard, as they would
feign believe, it is not unlikely, but that the very Chronicles of Spain, (had
Spain then been in so high regard, as they now have it) would not have
omitted so memorable a thing, as the subduing of so noble a Realm to the
Spaniard, no more then they do now neglect to memorize their conquest of the
Indians, specially in those times, in which the same was supposed, being nearer
unto the flourishing age of learning and Writers under the Romans. But the
Irish do herein no otherwise, then our vain Englishmen do in the Tale of
Brutus, whom they devise to have first conquered and inhabited this Land, it
being as impossible to prove, that there was ever any such Brutus of England,
as it is, that there was any such Gathelus of Spain. But surely the Scythians
(of whom I erst spoke) at such time as the Northern nations over-flowed all
Christendom, came down to the seacoast, where inquiring for other Countries
abroad, and getting intelligence of this country of Ireland, finding shipping
convenient, passed thither, and arrived in the North part thereof, which is now
called Vlster, which first inhabiting, and afterward stretching themselves
forth into the Land, as their numbers increased, named it all of themselves
Scuttenland, which more briefly is called Scutland, or Scotland.


Eudox. I wonder (Irenaeus) whether you run so far astray, for whilst we
talk of Ireland, me thinks you rippe up the original of Scotland, but what
is that to this?


Iren. Surely very much, for Scotland and Ireland are all one and the same.


Eudox. That seems more strange; for we all know right well that they are
distinguished with a great Sea running between them, or else there are two
Scotlands.


Iren. Never the more are there two Scotlands, but two kinds of Scots were
indeed (as you may gather out of Buchanan) the one Irin, or Irish Scots, the
other Albin-Scots; for those Scots are Scythians, arrived (as I said) in the
North parts of Ireland, where some of them after passed into the next coast of
Albine, now called Scotland, which (after much trouble) they possessed, and of
themselves named Scotland; but in process of time (as it is commonly seen)
the dominion of the part prevails in the whole, for the Irish Scots putting
away the name of Scots, were called only Irish, and the Albine Scots, leaving
the name of Albine, were called only Scots. Therefore it comes thence that of
some writers, Ireland is called Scotia mayor, and that which now is called
Scotland, Scotia minor.


Eudox. I do now well understand your distinguishing of the two sorts of
Scots, and two Scotlands, how that this which now is called Ireland, was
anciently called Erin, and afterward of some written Scotland, and that which
now is called Scotland, was formerly called Albin, before the coming of the
Scythes thither; but what other nation inhabited the other parts of Ireland?


Iren. After this people thus planted in the North (or before) for the
certainty of times in things so far from all knowledge cannot be justly
avouched) another nation coming out of Spain, arrived in the West part of
Ireland, and finding it waste, or weakly inhabited, possessed it, who whether
they were native Spaniards, or Gauls, or Africans, or Goths, or some other of
those Northern nations which did overspread all Christendom, it is
impossible to affirm, only some naked conjectures may be gathered, but that
out of Spain certainly they came, that do all the Irish Chronicles agree.


Eudox. You do very boldly Iren. adventure upon the Histories of ancient
times, and lean too confidently on those Irish Chronicles which are most
fabulous and forged, in that out of them you dare take in hand to lay open the
original of such a nation so antique, as that no monument remains of her
beginning and first inhabiting, especially having bin in those times without
letters, but only bare traditions of times and remembrances of Bardes, which
use to forge and falsify every thing as they list, to please or displease any
man.


Iren. Truly I must confess I do so, but yet not so absolutely as you
suppose. I do herein rely upon those Bard^s or Irish Chroniclers, though the
Irish themselves through their ignorance in matters of learning and deep
judgment, do most constantly believe and avouch them, but unto them besides I
add mine own reading, and out of the^ both together, with comparison of
times, likewise of manners and customs, affinity of words and names,
properties of natures, and uses, resemblances of rites and ceremonies,
monuments of Churches and Tombs, and many other like circumstances, I do
gather a likelihood of truth, not certainly affirming any thing, but by
conferring of times, language, monuments, and such like, I do hunt out a
probability of things, which I leave to your judgment to believe or refuse.
Nevertheless there be some very ancient Authors that make mention of these
things, and some modern, which by comparing them with present times,
experience, and their own reason, do open a window of great light unto the
rest that is yet unseene; as namely of the elder times, Caesar, Strabo,
Tacitus, Ptolomie, Pliny, Pomponius Mela, and Berosus: of the later,
Vincentius, Aeneas Sylvius, Luidus, Buchanan, for that he himself being an
Irish Scot or Pict by nation, and being very excellently learned and
industrious to seek out the truth of all things concerning the original of
his own people, has both set down the testimony of the ancients truly, and
his own opinion together withal very reasonably, though in some things he
does somewhat flatter. Besides the Bardes and Irish Chroniclers themselves,
though through desire of pleasing perhaps too much, and ignorances of Arts,
and purer learning they have clauded the truth of those lines, yet there
appears among them some relics of the true antiquity, though disguised,
which a well eyed man may happily discover and find out.


Eudox. How can there be any truth in them at all, since the ancient nations
which first inhabited Ireland, were altogether destitute of letters, much more
of learning, by which they might leave the verity of things written. And those
Bardes coming also so many hundred years after, could not know what was done
in former ages, nor deliver certainty of any thing, but what they feigned out of
their unlearned heads.


Iren. Those Bardes indeed, Caesar writes, delivered no certain truth of any
thing, neither is there any certain hold to be taken of any antiquity which is
received by tradition, since all men be liars, and many lie when they will, yet
for the antiquities of the written Chronicles of Ireland, give me leave to say
something, not to justify them, but to show that some of them might say truth.
For where you say the Irish have always bin without letters, you are therein
much deceived; for it is certain, that Ireland has had the use of letters
very anciently, and long before England.


Eudox. Is it possible? how comes it then that they are so unlearned still,
being so old scholars? For learning (as the Poet says) Emollit mores, nec
sinit esse feros: whence then (I pray you) could they have those letters?


Iren. It is hard to say, for whether they at their first coming into the
Land, or afterward by trading with other nations which had letters, learned
them of them, or devised them amongst themselves, is very doubtful, but that
they had letters aunciently, is nothing doubtful, for the Saxons of England
are said to have their letters, and learning, and learned men from the Irish,
and that also appears by the likeness of the Character, for the Saxons
Character is the same with the Irish. Now the Scythians, never, as I can read,
of old had letters amongst them, therefore it seems that they had them from
the nation which came out of Spain, for in Spain there was (as Strabo
writes) letters anciently used, whether brought unto them by the Phenicians,
or the Persians, which (as it appears by him) had some footing there, or from
Marsellis, which is said to have bin inhabited by the Greeks, and from them to
have had the Greek Character, of which Marsilians it is said, that the Gauls
learned them first, and used them only for the furtherance of their trades and
private business, for the Gauls (as is strongly to be proved by many ancient and
authentical writers) did first inhabit all the sea coast of Spain, even unto
Cales, and the mouth of the straights, and peopled also a great part of Italy,
which appears by sundry havens and cities in Spain called from them, as
Portugallia, Gallecia, Galdunum, and also by sundry nations therein dwelling,
which yet have received their own names of the Gauls, as the Rhegni,
Presamarei, Tamari, Cineri, and diverse others. All which Pomponius Mela being
himself a Spaniard, yet says to have descended from the Celts of France,
whereby it is to be gathered, that that Nation which came out of Spain into
Ireland, were anciently Gauls, and that they brought with them those letters
which they had anciently learned in Spain, first into Ireland, which some also
say, do much resemble the old Phenician Character, being likewise
distinguished with prick and accent, as theirs aunciently, but the further
inquiry hereof needs a place of longer discourse then this our short
conference.


Eudox. Surely you have showed a great probability of that which I had thought
impossible to have bin proved, but that which you now say, that Ireland should
have bin peopled with the Gauls, seems much more strange, for all the
Chronicles do say, that the West and South was possessed and inhabited of
Spaniards: and Cornelius Tacitus does also strongly affirm the same, all which
you must overthrow and falsify, or else renounce your opinion.


Iren. Neither so, nor so; for the Irish Chronicles (as I showed you) being
made by unlearned men, and writing things according to the appearance of the
truth, which they conceived do err in the circumstances, not in the matter.
For all that came out of Spain (they being no diligent searchers into the
differences of the nations) supposed to be Spaniards, and so called them; but
the groundwork thereof is nevertheless true and certain, however they through
ignorance disguise the same, or through vanity, whilst they would not seem to
be ignorant, do thereupon build and enlarge many forged Histories of their
own antiquity, which they deliver to fools, and make them believe for true*
as for example, That first of one Gathelus the son of Cecrops or Argos, who
having married the King of Egypt his daughter, thence sailed with her into
Spain, and there inhabited: Then that of Nemedus and his sons, who coming
out of Scythia, peopled Ireland, and inhabited it with his sons 250. years,
until he was overcome of the Giants dwelling then in Ireland, and at the last
quite banished and rooted out, after whom 200. years, the sons of one Dela,
being Scythians arrived there again, and possessed the whole land, of which
the youngest called Slanius, in the end made himself Monarch. Lastly of the 4.
sons of Milesius King of Spain, which conquered the land from the Scythians,
and inhabited it with Spaniards, and called it of the name of the youngest
Hiberus, Hibernia: All which are in truth fables, and very Milesian lies, as
the later proverb is: for never was there such a King of Spain, called
Milesius, nor any such Colonie seated with his sons as they feign, that can
ever be proved, but yet under these tales you may in a manner see the truth
lurk. For Scythians here inhabiting, they name and put Spaniards, whereby
appears that both these nations here inhabited, but whether very Spaniards,
as the Irish greatly affect, is no ways to be proved.


Eudox. Whence comes it then that the Irish do so greatly covet to fetch
themselves from the Spaniards, since the old Gauls are a more ancient and
much more honorable nation.


Iren. Even of a very desire of new fanglenes and vanity, for they derive
themselves from the Spaniards, as seeing them to be a very honorable people,
and near bordering unto them: but all that is most vain, for from the
Spaniards that now are, or that people that now inhabit Spain, they no ways
can prove themselves to descend; neither should it be greatly glorious unto
them, for the Spaniard that now is, is come from as rude and savage nations as
they, there being, as there may be gathered by course of ages, and view of
their own History (though they therein labor much to enoble themselves)
scarce any drop of the old Spanish blood left in them, for all Spain was first
conquered by the Romans, and filled with colonies from them, which were still
increased, and the native Spaniard still cut off. Afterward the Carthaginians
in all the long Punick wars (having spoiled all Spain, and in the end
subdued it wholly unto themselves) did as it is likely, root out all that were
affected to the Romans. And lastly the Romans having again recovered that
country, and beat out Hannibal, did doubtless cut off all that favored the
Carthaginians, so that betwixt them both, to and fro, there was scarce a native
Spaniard left, but all inhabited of Romans. All which tempests of troubles
being over-blowne, there long after arose a new storm, more dreadful then all
the former, which overran all Spain, and made an infinite confusion of all
things; that was, the coming down of the Goths, the Hunnes, and the Vandals:
And lastly all the nations of Scythia, which like a mountain flood, did
overflow all Spain, and quite drowned and washed away whatsoever relics
there was left of the land-bred people, yea, and of all the Romans too. The
which Northern nations finding the nature of the soil, and the vehement heat
thereof far differing from their constitutions, took no felicity in that
Country, but from thence passed over, and did spread themselves into all
Countries of Christendom, of all which there is none but has some mixture or
sprinckling, if not thoroughly peopleing of them. And yet after all these the
Moors and the Barbarians breaking over out of Africa, did finally possess
all Spain, or the most part thereof, and did tread under their heathenish
feet, what ever little they found yet there standing. The which though after
they were beaten out by Ferdinando of Arragon and Elizabeth his wife, yet they
were not so cleansed, but that through the marriages which they had made, and
mixture with the people of the land, during their long continuance there, they
had left no pure drop of Spanish blood, no more then of Roman or of Scythian.
So that of all nations under heaven (I suppose) the Spaniard is the most
mingled, and most uncertain, wherefore most foolishly do the Irish think to
enoble themselves by wresting their Auncientry from the Spaniard, who is unable
to derive himself from any in certain.


Eudox. You speak very sharply Iren. in dispraise of the Spaniard, whom some
others boast to be the only brave nation under the Sky.


Iren. So surely he is a very brave man, neither is that any thing which I
speak to his derogation, for in that I said he is a mingled people, it is no
dispraise, for I think there is no nation now in Christendom, nor much
further, but is mingled, and compounded with others: for it was a singular
providence of God, and a most admiral purpose of his wisdom, to draw those
northern heathen nations down into those Christian parts, where they might
receive Christianity, and to mingle nations so remote miraculously, to make as
it were one blood and kindred of all people, and each to have knowledge of him.


Eudox. Neither have you sure any more dishonored the Irish, for you have
brought them from very great and ancient nations, as any were in the world, how
ever fondly they affect the Spanish. For both Scythians and Gauls were two as
mighty nations as ever the world brought forth. But is there any token,
denomination or monument of the Gauls yet remaining in Ireland, as there is of
the Scythians?


Iren. Yea surely very many words of the Gauls remaining, and yet daily used
in Common speech.


Eudox. What was the Gaulish speech, is there any part of it still used among
any nation?


Iren. The Gaulish speech, is the very British, the which was very generally
used here in all Britain, before the coming of the Saxons: and yet is
retained of the Welshmen, Cornishmen, and the Britains of France, though time
working the alterarion of all things, and the trading and interdeale with other
nations round about, have changed and greatly altered the dialect thereof, but
yet the original words appear to be the same, as who has list to read in
Camden and Buchanan, may see at large. Besides there be many places, as havens,
hills, towns and Castles, which yet bear the names from the Gauls, of the
which, Buchanan rehearses above 500. in Scotland, and I can (I think) recount
near as many in Ireland which retain the old denomination of the Gauls, as
the Menapij, Cauci, Venti, and others; by all which and many other reasonable
probabilities (which this short course will not suffer to be laid forth) it
appears that the chief Inhabitants in Ireland were Gauls, coming thither
first out of Spain, and after from besides Tanais, where the G^thes, the
Hunnes, and the Getes sat down, they also being (as it is said of some)
ancient Gauls, and lastly passing out of Gallia it self, from all the
Seacoast of Belgia and Celtica, into all the southern coasts of Ireland, which
they possessed and inhabited, whereupon it is at this day, amongst the Irish a
common use, to call any stranger Inhabitant there amongst them, Gald, that is
descended from the Gauls.


Eudox. This is very likely, for even so did those Gauls anciently possess
all the southern coasts of our Britain, which yet retain their old names,
as the Belga, in Sommerset-shire, Wilshire, and part of Hamshire, Attrebatij in
Barkeshire, Regni in Sussex and Surry, and many others. Now thus far then, I
understand your opinion, that the Scythians planted in the north part of
Ireland: the Spaniards (for so we call them, what ever they were that came from
Spain) in the west, the Gauls in the south: so that there now remains the
east parts toward England, which I would be glad to understand from whence you
do think them to be peopled.


Iren. Mary I think of the Britains themselves, of which though there be
little footing now remaining, by reason that the Saxons afterward, and lastly
the English, driving out the Inhabitants thereof, did possess and people it
themselves. Yet amongst the Tools, the Birns, or Brins, the Cavenaghes* and
other nations in Leinster, there is some memory of the Britans remaining. As
the Tools are called of the old British word Tol, that is, a hill Country,
the Brins of the British word Brin, that is, woods, and the Cavenaghes of the
word Caune, that is, strong, so that in these three people the very
denomination of the old Britons do still remain. Besides when any flies
under the succor and protection of any against an enemy, he cries unto him,
Comericke, that is in the British, help, for the Britain is called in their
own language, Comeroy. Furthermore to prove the same, Ireland is by Diodorus
Siculus, and by Strabo, called Britannia, and a part of great Britain.
Finally it appears by good record yet extant, that King Arthur, and after him
Gurgunt, had all that Island under their alleagiance and subjection, hereunto I
could add many probabilities of the names of places, persons, and speeches, as
I did in the former, but they should be too long for this, and I reserve them
for another. And thus you have had my opinion, how all that Realm of Ireland
was first peopled, and by what nations. After all which the Saxons succeeding,
subdued it wholly to themselves. For first Egfrid King of Northumberland, did
utterly waste and subdue it, as appears out of Beda's complaint against him,
and after him, King Edgar brought it under his obedience, as appears by an
ancient Record, in which it is found written, that he subdued all the Islands
of the North, even unto Norway, and brought them into his subjection.


Eudox. This ripping of Ancestors, is very pleasing unto me, and indeed
savoureth of good conceit, and some reading withal. I see hereby how
profitable travail, and experience of foreign nations, is to him that will
apply them to good purpose. Neither indeed would I have thought, that any such
antiquities could have been avouched for the Irish, that makes me the more to
long to see some other of your observations, which you have gathered out of
that country, and have erst half promised to put forth: And sure in this
mingling of Nations appears (as you erst well noted) a wonderful providence
and purpose of Almighty God, that stirred up the people in the furthest parts
of the world, to seek out their regions so remote from them, and by that
means, both to restore their decayed habitations, and to make himself known
to the heathen. But was there I pray you no more general employing of that
Island, then first by the Scythians, which you say were the Scotts, and
afterward by the Spaniards, besides the Gauls, Britains and Saxons?


Iren. Yes, there was another, and that last and greatest, which was by the
English, when the Earl Strangbowe having conquered that land, delivered up the
same into the hands of Henry the second then King, who sent over thither, great
store of Gentlemen, and other warlike people, amongst whom, he distributed the
Land, and settled such a strong Colonie therein, as never since could with all
the subtle practices of the Irish be rooted out, but abide still a mighty
people, of so many as remain English of them.


Eudox. What is this that you say, of so many as remain English of them? Why?
are not they that were once English, English still?


Iren. No, for some of them are degenerated and grown almost mere Irish, yea
and more malicious to the English then the Irish themselves.


Eudox. What hear I? And is it possible that an Englishman brought up in such
sweet civility as England affords, should find such liking in that barbarous
rudenes, that he should forget his own nature, and forgo his own nation, how
may this be, or what (I pray you) may be the cause thereof?


Iren. Surely, nothing but the first evil ordinance and institution of that
Commonwealth. But thereof here is no fit place to speak, least by the
occasion thereof, offering matter of a long discourse, we might be drawn from
this, that we have in hand, namely the handleing of abuses in the Customs of
Ireland.


Eudox. In truth Iren. you do well remember the plot of your first purpose;
but yet from that (me seems) ye have much swarved in all this long discourse,
of the first inhabiting of Ireland, for what is that to your purpose?


Iren. Truly very material, for if you marked the course of all that speech
well, it was to show, by what means the customs, that now are in Ireland,
being some of them indeed very strange and almost heathenish, were first
brought in: and that was, as I said, by those Nations from whom that Country
was first peopled; for the difference in manners and customs, does follow the
difference of nations and people. The which I have declared to you, to have
been three especially which seated themselves here: to wit first the Scythian,
then the Gauls, and lastly the English. Notwithstanding that I am not
ignorant, that there were sundry Nations which go^ footing in that land, of the
which there yet remain diverse great families and septs, of whom I will also in
their proper places make mention.


Eudox. You bring your self Iren. very well into the way again,
notwithstanding that it seems that you were never out of the way, but now
that you have passed thorough those antiquities, which I could have wished not
so soon ended, begin when you please, to declare what customs and manners
have been derived from those nations to the Irish, and which of them, you
find fault withal.


Iren. I will begin then to count their customs in the same order that I
counted their Nations, and first with the Scythian or Scottish manners. Of the
which there is one use, amongst them to keep their cattle, and to live
themselves the most part of the year in Boolies, pasturing upon the mountain,
and waste wild places; and removing still to fresh land, as they have
depastured the former. The which appears plain to be the manner of the
Scythians, as you may read in Olaus Magnus, and Io: Bohemus, and yet is used,
amongst all the Tartarians and the people about the Caspian Sea, which are
naturally Scythians, to live in herds as they call them, being the very same,
that the Irish Boolies are, driving their cattle continually with them, and
feeding only on their milk and white meats.


Eudox. What fault can you find with this custom? for though it be an old
Scythian use, yet is it very behoofefull in this Country of Ireland, where
there are great mountains, and waste deserts full of grass, that the same
should be eaten down, and nourish many thousands of cattle, for the good of
the whole Realm, which cannot (me thinks) well be any other way, then by
keeping those Boolies there, as ye have showed.


Iren: But by this custom of Boolying, there grow in the mean time many great
enormityes unto that Commonwealth. For first if there be any out-lawes, or
loose people, (as they are never without some) which live upon stealthes and
spoils, they are evermore succored and find releife only in these Boolies,
being upon the waste places, whereas else they should be driven shortly to
starve, or to come down to the towns to seek releife, where by one means or
other, they would soon be caught. Besides such stealthes of cattle as they
make, they bring commonly to those Boolies, being upon those waste places,
where they are readily received, and the theife harbored from danger of law,
or such Officers as might light upon him. Moreover the people that thus live in
those Boolies, grow thereby the more barbarous, and live more licentiously then
they could in Towns, using what manners they list, and practizing what
mischeifes and villainies they will, either against the government there, by
their combynations, or against private men, whom they malign, by stealing
their goods, or murdering themselves. For there they think themselves half
exempted from law and obedience, and having once tasted freedom, do like a
steer, that has been long out of his yoke, grudge and repyne ever after, to
come under Rule again.


Eudox. By your speech Iren. I perceive more evil come by this use of Boolies,
then good by their grasing: and therefore it may well be reformed: but that
must be in his due course, do you proceed to the next.


Iren. They have another custom from the Scythians, that is the wearing of
Mantles, and long Glibbes, which is a thick curled bush of hair, hanging
down over their eyes, and monstrously disguising them, which are both very bad
and hurtful.


Eudox. Do you think that the Mantle comes from the Scythians? I would
surely think otherwise, for by that which I have read, it appears that most
Nations of the world aunciently used the Mantle. For the Jews used it, as you
may read of Elyas Mantle, etc. The Chaldees also used it, as ye may read in
Diodorus. The Egyptians likewise used it, as ye may read in Herodotus, and may
be gathered by the description of Berenice, in the Greek Commentary upon
Callimachus. The Greeks also used it aunciently, as appears by Venus Mantle
lyned with stars, though afterward they changed the form thereof into their
cloakes, called Pallia, as some of the Irish also use. And the ancient Latins
and Romans used it, as you may read in Virgil, who was a very great Antiquary.
That Euander, when Aenaeas came to him at his Feast, did entertain and feast
him, sitting on the ground, and lying on Mantles. Insomuch as he uses the very
word Mantile for a Mantle. -- Humi mantilia sternunt. So that it seems that
the Mantle was a general habit to most Nations, and not proper to the
Scythians only, as you suppose.


Iren. I cannot deny but that aunciently it was common to most, and yet
sithence disused and laid away. But in this later age of the world, since the
decay of the Roman Empire, it was renewed and brought in again by those
Northern nations, when breaking out of their cold caves and frozen
habitations, into the sweet soil of Europe, they brought with them their
usual weeds, fit to shield the cold, and that continual frost, to which they
had at home been inured: the which yet they left not off, by reason that they
were in perpetual wars, with the Nations whom they had invaded, but still
removing from place to place, carried always with them that weed, as their
house, their bed, and their garment, and coming lastly into Ireland, they
found there more special use thereof, by reason of the raw cold climate, from
whom it is now grown into that general use, in which that people now have it.
After whom the Gauls succeeding, yet finding the like necessity of that
garment, continued the like use thereof.


Eudox. Since then the necessity thereof is so commodious, as you allege, that
it is instead of housing, bedding, and clothing, what reason have you then to
wish so necessary a thing cast off?


Iren. Because the commodity does not countervaile the disco^moditie: for the
inconveniences which thereby do arise, are much more many. For it is a fit
house for an Outlaw, a meet bed for a Rebel, and an apt cloak for a thief.
First the Outlaw being for his many crimes and villanyes, banished from the
Towns and houses of honest men, and wandering in waste places, far from danger
of law, makes his Mantle his house, and under it covers himself from the
wrath of Heaven, from the offense of the Earth, and from the sight of men. When
it raineth it is his pent-house; when it blows it is tent, when it freezeth
it is his Tabernacle. In summer he can wear it loose, in winter he can wrap it
close, at all times he can use it; never heavy, never cumbersome. Likewise for
a Rebel it is as serviceable. For in his war that he makes (if at least it
deserve the name of war) when he still flies from his foe, and lurketh in
the thick woods and strait passages, waiting for advantages, it is his bed,
yea and almost as his household stuff. For the wood is his house against all
weathers, and his Mantle is his couch to sleep in. Therein he wrappeth himself
round, and coucheth himself strongly against the gnats, which in that country
do more annoy the naked Rebels, whilst they keep the woods, and do more
sharply wound them then all their enemies swords, or spears, which can seldom
come nigh them: yea and oftentimes their Mantle serves them, when they are
near driven, being wrapped about their left arm in steed of a Target, for it
is hard to cut thorough with a sword, besides it is light to bear, light to
throw away, and being (as they commonly are) naked, it is to them all in all.
Lastly for a Theife it is so handsome, as it may seem it was first invented
for him, for under it he may cleanly convey any fit pillage that comes
handsomely in his way, and when he goes abroad in the night in free-booting, it
is his best and surest friend; for lying as they often do 2. or 3. nights
together abroad to watch for their booty, with that they can prettily shroud
themselves under a bush or a bank side, till they may conveniently do their
errand: and when all is over, he can in his mantle pass thorough any town or
company, being close hooded over his head, as he uses, from knowledge of any
to whom he is endangered. Besides this, he or any man else that is disposed to
mischief or villainy, may under his mantle go privily armed without suspicion
of any, carry his head-peece, his skean, or pistol if he please, to be always
in readiness. Thus necessary and fitting is a mantle for a bad man, and surely
for a bad huswife it is no less convenient, for some of them that be wandering
women, called of them Mona-Shul, it is half a wardrobe: for in summer you
shall find her arrayed commonly, but in her smock and mantle to be more ready
for her light services: in winter, and in her travail, it is her cloak and
safeguard, and also a coverlet for her lewd exercise. And when she has filled
her vessel, under it she can hide both her burden, and her blame; yea, and
when her Bastard is borne, it serves instead of swaddling clouts. And as for all
other good women which love to do but little work, how handsome it is to lie
in and sleep, or to louse themselves in the Sunshine, they that have been
but a while in Ireland can well witness. Sure I am that you will think it very
unfit for a good huswife to stir in, or to busy her self about her huswifry
in such sort as she should. These be some of the abuses for which I would
think it meet to forbid all Mantles.


Eudox. O evil minded man, that having reckoned up so many uses of a Mantle,
will yet wish it to be abandoned! Sure I think Diogenes dish did never serve
his Master for more turns, notwithstanding that he made it his Dish, his Cup,
his Cap, his Measure, his Water-pot, then a Mantle does an Irish man. But I see
they be most to bad intents, and therefore I will join with you in abolishing
it. But what blame lay you to the glibbe? take heed (I pray you) that you be
not too busy therewith for fear of your own blame, seeing our Englishmen
take it up in such a general fashion to wear their hair so immeasurably
long, that some of them exceed the longest Irish glibs.


Iren. I fear not the blame of any undeserved dislikes: but for the Irish
glibbes, they are as fit maskes as a mantle is for a thief. For whenever he
has run himself into that peril of Law, that he will not be known, he
either cutteth off his glibbe quite, by which he becomes nothing like
himself, or pulls it so low down over his eyes, that it is very hard to
discern his theevish countenance. And therefore fit to be trussed up with the
Mantle.


Eudox. Truly these three Scythian abuses, I hold most fit to be taken away
with sharp penalties, and sure I wonder how they have been kept thus long,
notwithstanding so many good provisions and orders, as have been devised for
that people.


Iren. The cause thereof shall appear to you hereafter: but let us now go
forward with our Scythian customs. Of which the next that I have to treat of,
is the manner of raising the cry in their conflicts, and at other troublesome
times of uproare: the which is very natural Scythian, as you may read in
Diodorus Siculus, and in Herodotus, describing the manner of the Scythians and
Parthians coming to give the charge at battles: at which it is said that they
came running with a terrible yell as if heaven and earth would have gone
together, which is the very Image of the Irish Hubub, which their Kerne use at
their first encounter. Besides, the same Herodotus writes, that they used in
their battles to call upon the names of their Captains or Generals, and
sometimes upon their greatest Kings deceased, as in that battle of Thomyris
against Cyrus: which custom to this day manifestly appears amongst the
Irish. For at their joining of Battle, they likewise call upon their Captains
name, or the word of his Ancestors. As they under Oneale cry Laundarg-abo,
that is, the bloody hand, which is Oneales badge. They under O Brien call
Laun-laider, that is, the strong hand. And to their ensample, the old English
also which there remains, have gotten up their cries Scythian-like, as
Crom-abo, and Butler-abo. And here also lies open an other manifest proof,
that the Irish be Scythes or Scots, for in all their incounters they use one
very common word, crying Ferragh, Ferragh, which is a Scottish word, to wit,
the name of one of the first Kings of Scotland, called Feragus, or Fergus,
which fought against the Pictes, as you may read in Buchanan, de rebus
Scoticis; but as others write, it was long before that, the name of their
chief Captain, under whom they fought against the Africans, the which was
then so fortunate unto them, that ever sithence they have used to call upon his
name in their battles.


Eudox. Believe me, this observation of yours Irenaeus, is very good and
delightful; far beyond the blind conceit of some, who (I remember) have upon
the same word Ferragh, made a very blunt conjecture, as namely M. Stanihurst,
who though he be the same countreyman borne, that should search more nearly
into the secret of these things, yet has strayed from the truth all the
heavens wide, (as they say) for he thereupon groundeth a very gross
imagination, that the Irish should descend from the Egyptians which came into
that Island, first under the leading of one Scota the daughter of Pharaoh,
whereupon they use (says he) in all their battles, to call upon the name of
Pharaoh, crying Ferragh, Ferragh. Surely he shootes wide on the Bow hand, and
very far from the mark. For I would first know of him what ancient ground of
authority he has for such a senseless fable, and if he have any of the rude
Irish books, as it may be he has, yet (me seems) that a man of his learning
should not so lightly have bin carried away with old wives tales, from
approvance of his own reason, for whether it be a smack of any learned
judgment, to say, that Scota is like an Egyptian word, let the learned judge.
But his Scota rather comes of the Greek sktos, that is, darkness, which has
not let him see the light of the truth.


Iren. You know not Eudoxus, how well M. Stan. could see in the dark, perhaps
he has Owls or Cats eyes: but well I wot he sees not well the very light in
matters of more weight. But as for Ferragh I have told my conjecture only, and
yet thus much I have more to prove a likelihood, that there be yet at this day
in Ireland, many Irish men (chiefly in the Northern parts) called by the name
of Ferragh. But let that now be: this only for this place suffiseth, that it is
a word used in their common hububs, the which (with all the rest) is to be
abolished, for that it discovers an affectatio^ to Irish captainry, which in
this platform I endeavor specially to beat down. There be other sorts of cries
also used among the Irish, which savor greatly of the Scythian barbarism, as
their lamentations at their buryals, with dispairfull outcries, and immoderate
waylings, the which Master Stanihurst might also have used for an Argument to
prove them Egyptians. For so in Scripture it is mentioned, that the Egyptians
lamented for the death of Joseph. Others think this custom to come from the
Spaniards, for that they do immeasurably likewise bewail their dead. But the
same is not proper Spanish, but altogether Heathenish, brought in thither first
either by the Scythians, or the Moors that were Africans, and long possessed
that Country. For it is the manner of all Pagans and Infidels to be
intemperate in their waylings of their dead, for that they had no faith nor
hope of salvation. And this ill custom also is specially noted by Diodorus
Siculus, to have been in the Scythians, and is yet amongst the Northern Scots
at this day, as you may read in their Chronicles.


Eudox. This is sure an ill custom also, but yet does not so much concern
civil reformation, as abuse in Religion.


Iren. I did not rehearse it as one of the abuses which I thought most worthy
of reformation; but having made mention of Irish cries I thought this manner of
lewd crying and howling, not impertinent to be noted as uncivil and
Scythian-like: for by these old customs, and other like coniecturall
circumstances, the descents of nations can only be proved, where other
monuments of writings are not remaining.


Eudox. Then (I pray you) whenever in your discourse you meet with them by
the way, do not shun, but boldly touch them: for besides their great pleasure
and delight for their antiquity, they bring also great profit and help unto
civility.


Iren. Then since you will have it so, I will here take occasion, since I
lately spoke of their manner of cries in joining of battle, to speak also
somewhat of the manner of their Arms, and array in Battle, with other
customs perhaps worthy the noting. And first of their Arms and Weapons,
amongst which their broad Swords are proper Scythian, for such the Scythes
used commonly, as you may read in Olaus Magnus. And the same also the old Scots
used, as you may read in Buchanan, and in Solinus, where the pictures of them
are in the same form expressed. Also their short Bows, and little Quivers
with short bearded Arrows, are very The original of the very name of
Scythians seems to come from shooting. vide Seldom. annot. in Poly. olb. (ex
Gorop. Becan. ^eccesel. et Aluvedi l^g.) page 122.
Scythian, as you may read in the same Olaus. And the same sort both of Bows,
Quivers, and Arrows, are at this day to be seen commonly amongst the
Northern Irish-Scots, whose Scottish Bows are not past three quarters of a
yard long, with a string of wreathed hemp slackely bent, and whose Arrows are
not much above half an ell long, tipped with steel heads, made like common
broad Arrow heads, but much more sharp and slender, that they enter into a
man or horse most cruelly, notwithstanding that they are shot forth weakly.
Moreover their long broad Shields, made but with wicker rods, which are
commonly used amongst the said Northern Irish, but especially of the Scots,
are brought from the Scythians, as you may read in Olaus Magnus, Solinus, and
others: likewise their going to battle without armor on their bodies or heads,
but trusting to the thicknes of their glibbs, the which (they say) will
sometimes bear off a good stroke, is mere Scythian, as you may see in the
said Images of the old Scythes or Scots, set forth by Herodianus and others.
Besides, their confused kind of march in heaps, without any order or array,
their clashing of swords together, their fierce running upon their enemies, and
their manner of fight, resembles altogether that which is read in histories to
have been used of the Scythians. By which it may almost infallibly be gathered
together, with other circumstances, that the Irish are very Scots or Scythes
originally, though sithence intermingled with many other Nations repairing and
joining unto them. And to these I may also add another strong conjecture which
comes to my mind, that I have often observed there amongst them, that is,
certain religious ceremonies, which are very superstitiously yet used amongst
them, the which are also written by sundry authors, to have bin observed
amongst the Scythians, by which it may very vehemently be presumed that the
nations were anciently all one. For Not he, but Herodotus in the life of Homer.
Plutarch (as I remember) in his treatise of Homer, endeavoring to search out
the truth, what countryman Homer was, prooveth it most strongly (as he
thinks) that he was an Aeolian borne, for that in describing a sacrifice of
the Greeks, he omitted the loyne, the which all the other Grecians (saving the
Aeolians) use to burn in their sacrifices: also for that he makes the intralls
to be roasted on five spits, which was the proper manner of the Aeolians, who
only of all the nations of Grecia, used to sacrifize in that sort. By which he
infers necessarily, that Homer was an Aeolian. And by the same reason may I
as reasonably conclude, that the Irish are descended from the Scythians, for
that they use (even to this day) some of the same ceremonies which the
Scythians anciently used. As for example, you may read in Lucian in that sweet
Dialogue, which is entitled Toxaris, or of friendship, that the common oath of
the Scythians was by the sword, and by the fire, for that they accounted those
two special divine powers, which should work vengeance on the perjurers. So
do the Irish at this day when they go to battle, say certain prayers or
charms to their swords, making a cross therewith upon the earth, and
thrusting the points of their blades into the ground, thinking thereby to have
the better success in fight. Also they use commonly to swear by their swords.
Also the Scythians used when they would bind any solemn vow or combination
amongst the^, to drink a Bowl of blood together, vowing thereby to spend their
last blood in that quarrel: and even so do the wild Scots, as you may read in
Buchanan: and some of the Northern Irish. Likewise at the kindling of the
Fire, and lighting of Candles, they say certain prayers, and use some other
superstitious rites, which show that they honor the Fire and the light: for
all those Northern Nations having been used to be annoyed with much cold and
darkness, are wont therefore to have the Fire and the Sun in great
veneration; like as contrariwise the Moors and Egyptians which are much
offended and grieved with extreme heat of the Sun, do every morning when
the Sun arises, fall to cursing and banning of him as their plague. You may
also read in the same book, in the tale of Arsacomas, that it was the manner
of the Scythians, when any one of them was heavily wronged, and would assemble
unto him any forces of people to join with him in his revenge, to sit in some
public place for certain days upon an Ox hide, to which there would resort
all such persons as being disposed to take Arms, would enter into his pay, or
join with him in his quarrel. And the same you may likewise read to have
been the ancient manner of the wild Scotts, which are indeed the very
natural Irish. Moreover the Scythians used to swear by their Kings hand, as
Olaus shows. And so do the Irish use now to swear by their Lords hand, and
to forswear it, hold it more criminal then to swear by God. Also the
Scythians said, that they were once a year turned into Wolves, and so is it
written of the Irish: Though Master Camden in a better sense does suppose it
was a disease, called Lycanthropia, so named of the Wolf. And yet some of the
Irish do use to make the Wolf their Gossip. The Scythians used also to see
the the flesh in the hide: and so do the Northern Irish. The Scythians used
to draw the blood of the beast living, and to make meat thereof: and so do the
Irish in the North still. Many such customs I could recount unto you, as of
their old manner of marrying, of burying, of dancing, of singing, of feasting,
of cursing, though Christians have wyped out the most part of them, by
resemblance, whereof it might plainly appear to you, that the Nations are the
same, but that by the reckoning of these few, which I have told unto you, I
find my speech drawn out to a greater length then I purposed. Thus much only
for this time I hope shall suffice you, to think that the Irish are anciently
deduced from the Scythians.


Eudox. Surely Iren. I have heard in these few words, that from you which I
would have thought had bin impossible to have bin spoken of times so remote,
and customs so ancient: with delight whereof I was all that while (as it were
intranced, and carried so far from my self, as that I am now right sorry
that you ended so soon. But I marvel much how it comes to pass, that in
so long continuance of time, and so many ages come between, yet any jot of
those old rites and superstitious customs should remain amongst them.


Iren. It is no cause of wonder at all, for it is the manner of many Nations to
be very superstitious, and diligent observers of old customs and antiquities,
which they receive by continual tradition from their Parents, by recording of
their Bards and Chronicles, in their songs, and by daily use and ensample of
their elders.


Eudox. But have you (I pray you) observed any such customs amongst them,
brought likewise from the Spaniards or Gauls, as these from the Scythians?
that may sure be very material to your first purpose.


Ien. Some perhaps I have, and who that will by this occasion more diligently
mark and compare their customs, shall find many more. But there are fewer
remaining of the Gauls or Spaniards, then of the Scythians, by reason that the
parts, which they then possessed, lying upon the coast of the Western and
Southern Sea, were sithence visited with strangers and foreign people,
repayring thither for traffic, and for fishing, which is very plentiful upon
those coasts: for the trade and interdeale of Seacoast Nations one with
another, works more civilitie and good fashions, (all Sea men being naturally
desirous of new fashions,) then amongst the Inland folk, which are seldom
seen of forrainers; yet some of such as I have noted, I will recount unto you.
And first I will for the better credit of the rest, show you one out of their
Statutes, among which it is enacted, that no man shall wear his beard only on
the upper lip, shaving all his Chinne. And this was the ancient manner of the
Spaniards, as yet it is of all the Mahometans to cut off all their beards
close, save only their Muschachios, which they wear long. And the cause of
this use, was for that they being bred in a hot country, found much hair on
their faces and other parts to be noyous unto them: for which cause they did
cut it most away, like as contrarily all other nations brought up in cold
countries, do use to nourish their hair, to keep them the warmer, which was
the cause that the Scythians and Scotts wore Glibbes (as I showed you) to
keep their heads warm, and long beards to defend their face, from cold. From
them also (I think) came saffron shirts and smocks, which was devised by them
in those hot Countries, where saffron is very common and rife, for avoiding
that evil which comes by much sweating, and long wearing of Linen: Also the
Women amongst the old Spaniards had the charge of all household affairs, both
at home and abroad, (as Boemus writes) though now the Spaniards use it quite
otherwise. And so have the Irish weomen the trust and care of all things, both
at home, and in the field. Likewise round leather Targets is the Spanish
fashion, who used it (for the most part) painted, which in Ireland they use
also in many places, colored after their rude fashion. Moreover the manner of
their Woemens riding on the wrong side of the horse, I mean with their faces
toward the right side, as the Irish use, is (as they say) old Spanish, and
some say African, for amongst them the women (they say) use so to ride. Also
the deep smock sleive, which the Irish women use, they say was old Spanish,
and is used yet in Barbary: and yet that should seem rather to be an old
English fashion, for in Armory the fashion of the Manche, which is given in
Arms, by many being indeed nothing else but a sleive, is fashioned much like
to that sleive. And that Knights in ancient times used to wear their
Mistresses or Loves sleive, upon their Arms, as appears by that which is
written of Sir Lancelot, that he wore the sleive of the fair maid of
Asteloth in a Tourney, whereat Queen Gueneuer was much displeased.


Eudox. Your conceit is good, and well fitting for things so far grown from
certainty of knowledge and learning, only upon likely-hoods and conjectures.
But have you any customs remaining from the Gauls or Britains?


Iren. I have observed a few of either; and who will better search into them,
may find more. And first the profession of their Bardes was (as Caesar
writes) usual amongst the Gauls, and the same was also common amongst the
Brittans, and is not yet altogether left off, with the Welsh which are their
posterity. For all the fashions of the Gauls and Britains, as he testifies,
were much like. The long darts came also from the Gauls, as you may read in
the same Caesar, and in Io: Boemus. Likewise the said Io: Boemus writes, that
the Gauls used Swords a handful broad, and so do the Irish now. Also they
used long Wicker sheilds in Battle that should cover their whole bodies, and
so do the Northern Irish. But I have not seen such fashioned Targets used in
the Southern parts, but only amongst the Northern people, and Irish-Scottes,
I do think that they were brought in rather by the Scythians, then by the
Gauls. Also the Gauls used to drink their enemies blood, and painte
themselves therewith. So also they write, that the old Irish were wont, and so
have I seen some of the Irish do, but not their enemies, but friends blood.
As namely at the execution of a notable Traitor at Limericke, called Murrogh
O-Brien, I saw an old woman, which was his foster mother, take up his head*
whilst he was quartered, and sucked up all the blood that run thereout,
saying, that the Earth was not worthy to drink it, and therewith also steeped
her face and breast, and tore her hair, crying out and shreeking most terribly.


Eudox. You have very well run thorough such customs as the Irish have
derived from the first old Nations which inhabited the land: namely the
Scythians, the Spaniards, the Gauls, and the Britains. It now remains that
you take in hand, the customs of the old English which are amongst the Irish:
Of which I do not think that you shall have much cause to find fault with,
considering that by the English, most of the old bad Irish customs were
abolished, and more civil fashions brought in their stead.


Iren. You think otherwise Eudox. then I do, for the chiefest abuses which
are now in that Realm, are grown from the English, and some of them are now
much more lawless and licentious then the very wild Irish: so that as much
care, as was then by them had to reform the Irish, so and much more, must now
be used to reform them, so much time does alter the manners of men.


Eudox. That seems very strange, which you say, that men should so much
degenerate from their first natures, as to grow wild.


Iren. So much can liberty and ill examples do.


Eudox. What liberty had the English there, more then they had here at home?
were not the laws planted amongst them at the first and had they not
Governors to curb and keep them still in awe and obedience?


Iren. They had, but it was for the most part, such as did more hurt then good,
for they had governors for the most part of themselves, and commonly out of
the two families of the Geraldines and Butlers, both adversaries and corrivales
one against the other. Who though for the most part they were but Deputies
under some of the Kings of Englands Sons, Brethren, or other near kinsmen,
who were the Kings Lieutenants, yet they swayed so much, as they had all the
Rule, and the others, but the title. Of which Butlers and Geraldynes, albeit (I
must confess) there were very brave and worthy men, as also of other the
Peers of that Realm, made Lo: Deputies, and Lo: Justices at sundry times, yet
thorough greatness of their late conquests and seignories they grew insolent,
and bent both that regal authority, and also their private powers, one against
another, to the utter subversion of themselves, and strengthening of the Irish
again. This you may read plainly discovered by a Letter written from the
Citizens of Cork out of Ireland, to the Earl of Shrewsbury then in England,
and remaining yet upon record, both in the Tower of London, and also among the
Chronicles of Ireland. Wherein it is by them complained, that the English Lords
and Gentlemen, who then had great possessions in Ireland, began thorough pride
and insolency, to make private wars one against another, and when either part
was weak, they would wage and draw in the Irish to take their part, by which
means they both greatly encouraged, and enabled the Irish, which till that
time, had been shut up within the mountains of Slewlogher, and weakened and
disabled themselves, insomuch that their revenues were wonderfully impaired,
and some of them which are there reckoned to have been able, to have spent 12.
or 1300. pounds per annu^, of old rent (that I may say no more) besides their
Commodities of Creekes and havens, were now scarce able to dispend the third
part. From which disorder, and through other huge calamities, which have come
upon them thereby, they are almost now grown like the Irish, I mean of such
English, as were planted above toward the West, for the English pale has
preserved it self, thorogh nearenes of the state in reasonable civilitie, but
the rest which dwelt in Connaght and in Mounster, which is the sweerest soil
of Ireland, and some in Leinster and Vlster, are degenerate, yea, and some of
them have quite shaken off their English names, and put on Irish that they
might be altogether Irish.


Eudox. Is it possible that any should so far grow out of frame that they
should in so short space, quite forget their Country and their own names:
that is a most dangerous Lethargy, much worse then that of Messala Coruinus,
who being a most learned man, thorough sickness forgot his own name. But can
you count us any of this kind?


Iren: I cannot but by report of the Irish themselves, who report, that the
These families of Mac-mahones and Mac-swines are by others held to be of the
ancient Irish.
Mac-mahons in the north, were aunciently English, to wit, descended from the
Fitz Vrsula's, which was a noble family in England, and that the same appears
by the signification of their Irish names: Likewise that the vide anno^. page
praeced.
Mac-swynes, now in Vlster, were aunciently of the Veres in England, but that
they themselves, for hatred of English, so disguised their names.


Eudox. Could they ever conceive any such dislike of their own natural
Countries, as that they would be ashamed of their name, and byte at the dugge
from which they sucked life?


Iren. I wot well there should be none, but proud hearts do oftentimes (like
wanton Colts) kick at their Mothers, as we read Alcibiades and Themistocles
did, who being banished out of Athens, fled unto the Kings of Asia, and there
stirred them up to war against their Country, in which wars they themselves
were Cheifetaines. So they say did these Mac-swines and Mac-mahons, or rather
Veres and Fitz Vrsulaes, for private despite, turn themselves against
England. For at such time as Robert Vere Earl of Oxford, was in the Barons
Wars against King Richard the second, through the malice of the Peers,
banished the Realm and proscribed, he with his kinsman Fitz Vrsula fled into
Ireland, where being prosecuted, and afterward in England put to death, his
kinsman there remaining behind in Ireland rebelled, and conspiring with the
Irish, did quite cast off both their English name and alleagiance, since which
time they have so remained still, and have since been counted mere Irish. The
very like is also reported of the Mac-swines, Mac-mahones, and Mac-Shehies of
Mounster, how they likewise were aunciently English, and old followers to the
Earl of Desmond, until the reign of King Edward the fourth. At which time
the Earl of Desmond that then was, called Thomas, being through false
subornation (as they say) of the Queen for some offense by her against him
conceived, brought to his death at Others hold that he was beheaded at Tredagh
15. Febr. 146^. by (the command of) John Tip^of^ Earl of Worcester, then Lo:
Deputy of Ireland, for exacting of Coin and Livery. vid. Ca^den. Britan. page
738 edit. (...). an* 1607
Tredagh most unjustly, notwithstanding that he was a very good and sound
subject to the King: Thereupon all his Kinsemen of the Geraldines, which then
was a mighty family in Mounster, in revenge of that huge wrong, rose into Arms
against the King, and utterly renounced and forsook all obedience to the
Crown of England, to whom the said Mac^swines, Mac-shehies, and Mac-mahones,
being then servants and followers, did the like, and have ever sithence so
continued. And with them (they say) all the people of Mounster went out, and
many other of them which were mere English, thenceforth joined with the Irish
against the King, and termed themselves very Irish, taking on them Irish habits
and customs, which could never since be clean wyped away, but the contagion
has remained still amongst their posterityes. Of which sort (they say) be most
of the surnames which end in an, as Hernan, Shinan, Mungan, etc. the which now
account themselves natural Irish. Other great houses there be of the English
in Ireland, which thorough licentious conversing with the Irish, or marrying,
or fostering with them, or lack of meet nurture, or other such unhappy
occasions, have degenerated from their ancient dignities, and are now grown
as Irish, as O. Hanlons breech, as the proverb there is.


Eudox. In truth this which you tell is a most shameful hearing, and to be
reformed with most sharp censures: in so great personages to the terror of
the meaner: for if the Lords and chief men degenerate, what shall be hoped of
the peasants, and baser people. And hereby sure you have made a fair way unto
your self, to lay open the abuses of their evil customs, which you have now
next to declare* the which no doubt, but are very bad being borrowed, from the
Irish, as their apparel, their language, their riding, and many other the like.


Iren. You cannot but hold them sure to be very uncivil, for were they at the
best that they were of old, when they were brought in, they should in so long
an alteration of time seem very uncouth and strange. For it is to be thought,
that the use of all England, (was in the reign of Henry the second, when
Ireland was planted with English) very rude and barbarous, so as if the same
should be now used in England by any, it would seem worthy of sharp
correction, and of new laws for reformation, for it is but even the other day,
since England grew civil: Therefore in counting the evil customs of the
English there, I will not have regard, whether the beginning thereof were
English or Irish, but will have respect only to the inconvenience thereof. And
first I have to find fault with the abuse of language, that is, for the
speaking of Irish among the English, which as it is unnatural that any people
should love another language more then their own, so it is very inconvenient,
and the cause of many other evils.


Eudox. It seems strange to me that the English should take more delight to
speak that language, then their own, whereas they should (me thinks) rather
take scorn to acquaint their tongues thereto. For it has ever been the use
of the Conqueror, to despise the language of the conquered, and to force him
by all means to learn his. So did the Romans always use, insomuch that
there is almost no Nation in the world, but is sprinkled with their language.
It were good therefore (me seems) to search out the original cause of this
evil, for the same being discovered, a redress thereof will the more easily
be provided: for (I think) it very strange, that the English being so many,
and the Irish so few, as they then were left, the ^ewer should draw the more
unto their use.


Iren. I suppose that the chief cause of bringing in the Irish language,
amongst them, was specially their fostering* and marrying with the Irish, the
which are two most dangerous infections, for first the child that sucketh the
milk of the nurse, must of necessity learn his first speech of her, the which
being the first inured to his tongue, is ever after most pleasing unto him,
insomuch as though he afterward be taught English, yet the smacke of the
first will always abide with him, and not only of the speech, but also of
the manners and conditions. For besides that, young Children be like Apes, which
will affect and imitate what they see done before them, especially by their
nurses whom they love so well, they moreover draw into themselves, together
with their suck, even the nature and disposition of their nurses: for the
mind follows much the temperature of the body: and also the words are the
image of the mind, so as they proceeding from the mind, the mind must needs
be affected with the words. So that the speech being Irish, the heart must
needs be Irish* for out of the abundance of the heart, the tongue speaks.
The next is the marrying with the Irish, which how dangerous a thing it is in
all commonwealths, appears to every simplest sense, and though some great
ones have perhaps used such matches with their Vassals, and have of them
nevertheless raised worthy issue, as Telamon did with Termessa, Alexander the
Great with Roxane, and Julius Caesar with Cleopatra, yet the example is so
perilous, as it is not to be adventured: for in stead of those few good, I
could count unto them infinite many evil. And indeed how can such matching
succeed well, seeing that commonly the child takes most of his nature of the
Mother, besides speech, manners, and inclynation, which are (for the most part)
agreeable to the conditions of their mothers: for by them they are first framed
and fashioned, so as what they receive once from them, they will hardly ever
after forgo. Therefore are these evil customs of fostering and marrying with
the Irish, most carefully to be restrained: for of them two, the third evil
that is the custom of language, (which I spoke of,) chiefly proceeds.


Eudox. But are there not laws already provided, for avoiding of this evil*


Iren. Yes I think there be, but as good never a whit as never the better, for
what do Statutes avail without penalties, or laws without charge of
execution? for so there is another like law enacted against wearing of the
Irish apparel, but neverthemore is it observed by any, or executed by them
that have the charge: for they in their private discretions think it not fit
to be forced upon the poor wretches of that Country, which are not worth the
price of English apparel, nor expedient to be practiced against the abler
sort, by reason that the country (say they) does yield no better, and were
there better to be had, yet these were fitter to be used, as namely the mantle
in travailing, because there be no Innes where meet bedding may be had, so
that his mantle serves him then for a bed. The leather quilted Jack in
journeying and in camping, for that it is fittest to be under his shirt of
Male, and for any occasion of sudden service, as there happen many, to cover
his trouse on horseback. The great linen Roll, which the Women wear, to
keep their heads warm, after cutting their hair, which they use in any
sickness. Besides their thick folded linen shirts, their long sleived
smocks, their half sleived coats, their silken fillets, and all the rest:
they will devise some color for, either of necessity, or of antiquity, or of
comeliness.


Eudox. But what color soever they allege, me thinks it not expedient, that
the execution of a Law once ordained, should be left to the discretion of the
Judge, or Officer, but that without partiality, or regard, it should be
fulfilled as well on English, as Irish.


Iren. But they think this precisenes in reformation of apparel, not to be so
material, or greatly pertinent.


Eudox. Yes surely but it is: for men's apparel is commonly made according to
their conditions, and their conditions are oftentimes governed by their
garments: for the person that is gowned, is by his gown put in mind of
gravitie, and also restrained from lightness, by the very unaptnesse of his
weed. Therefore it is written by Aristotle, That when Cyrus had overcome the
Lydians that were a warlike nation, and devised to bring them to a more
peaceable life, he changed their apparel and music, and in stead of their
short warlike coat, clothed them in long garments like women, and in stead of
their warlike music, appointed to them certain lascivious lays, and loose
Iiggs, by which in short space their minds were so mollified and abated, that
they forgot their former fierceness, and became most tender and effeminate,
whereby it appears, that there is not a little in the garment to the
fashioning of the mind and conditions. But be these which you have described,
the fashions of the Irish weeds?


Iren. No: all these which I have rehearsed to you, be not Irish garments, but
English; for the quilted leather Jack is old English: for it was the proper
weed of the horseman, as you may read in Chaucer, when he describes Sir Thopas
apparel and Armor, as he went to fight against the Giant, in his robe of
Shecklaton, which is that kind of gilded leather with which they use to
imbroyder their Irish Iackets. And there likewise by all that description, you
may see the very fashion and manner of the Irish horseman most truly set forth
in his long hose, his ryding shoes of costly Cordwaine, his hacqueton, and his
haberion, with all the rest thereunto belonging.


Eudox. I surely thought that the manner had been Irish, for it is far
differing from that we have now, as also all the furniture of his horse, his
strong brass bit, his slyding reins, his shanke pillion without stirruppes,
his manner of mounting, his fashion of ryding, his charging of his spear aloft
above head, the form of his spear.


Iren. No sure; they be native English, and brought in by the Englishmen first
into Ireland: neither is the same accounted an uncomely manner of ryding: for I
have heard some great warriors say, that in all the services which they had
seen abroad in foreign Countries, they never saw a more comely man then the
Irish man, nor that comes on more bravely in his charge, neither is his
manner of mounting unseemely, though he lack stirruppes, but more ready then
with stirruppes; for in his getting up, his horse is still going, whereby he
gayneth way. And therefore the stirrup was called so in scorn, as it were a
stay to get up, being derived of the old English word Sty, which is, to get
up, or mount.


Eudox. It seems then that you find no fault with this manner of ryding, why
then would you have the quilted Jack laid away?


Iren. I do not wish it to be laid away; but the abuse thereof to be put
away; for being used to the end that it was framed, that is, to be worn in
war under a shirt of Mayle, it is allowable, as also the shirt of Mayle, and
all his other furniture: but to be worn daily at home, and in towns and
civil places, it is a rude habit and most uncomely, seeming like a players
painted coat.


Eudox. But it is worn (they say) likewise of Irish Footmen, how do you allow
of that? for I should think it very unseemely.


Iren. No, not as it is used in war, for it is worn then likewise of footmen
under their shirts of mayle, the which footmen they call Galloglasses, the
which name does discover them also to be ancient English: for Gall-ogla
signifies an English servitour or yeoman. And he being so armed in a long shirt
of Mayle down to the calfe of his leg, with a long broad Axe in his hand, was
then Pedes gravis armaturae, (and was instead of the armed footeman that now
wears a Corslet,) before the Corslet was used, or almost invented.


Eudox. Then him belike you likewise allow in your strait reformation of old
customs.


Iren. Both him and the Kerne also, (whom only I take to be the proper Irish
Soldier) can I allow, so that they use that habit and custom of theirs in
the wars only, when they are led forth to the service of their Prince, and
not usually at home, and in civil places, and besides do lay aside the evil
and wild uses which the Galloglasse and Kerne do use in their common trade of
life.


Eudox. What be those?


Iren. Marry those be the most barbarous and loathly conditions of any people
(I think) under heaven: for from the time that they enter into that course,
they do use all the beastly behavior that may be, they oppress all men,
they spoil as well the subject, as the enemy; they steal, they are cruel and
bloody, full of revenge, and delighting in deadly execution, licentious,
swearers, and blasphemers, common ravishers of women, and murderers of
children.


Eudox. These be most villainous conditions, I marvel then that they be ever
used or employed, or almost suffered to live; what good can there then be in
them?


Iren. Yet sure they are very valiant, and hardy, for the most part great
indurers of cold, labor, hunger, and all hardness, very active and strong of
hand, very swift of foot, very vigilant and circumspect in their enterprises,
very present in perils, very great scorners of death.


Eudox. Truly by this that you say, it seems that the Irishman is a very
brave Soldier.


Iren. Yea surely, in that rude kind of service, he bears himself very
courageously. But when he comes to experience of service abroad, or is put
to a piece, or a pike, he makes as worthy a Soldier as any Nation he
meets with. But let us (I pray you) turn again to our discourse of evil
customs amongst the Irish.


Eudox. Me thinks, all this which you speak of, concerns the customs of
the Irish very materially, for their uses in war are of no small importance
to be considered, as well to reform those which are evil, as to confirm and
continue those which are good. But follow you your own course, and show what
other their customs you have to dislike of.


Iren. There is amongst the Irish a certain kind of people, called Bardes,
which are to them in steed of Poets, whose profession is to set forth the
praises or dispraises of men in their Poems or Rymes, the which are had in so
high regard and estimation amongst them, that none dare displease them for
fear to run into reproach thorough their offense, and to be made infamous
in the mouths of all men. For their verses are taken up with a general
applause, and usually sung at all Feasts and meetings, by certain other
persons, whose proper function that is, who also receive for the same, great
rewards and reputation amongst them.


Eudox. Do you blame this in them which I would otherwise have thought to have
been worthy of good account, and rather to have been maintained and augmented
amongst them, then to have been disliked, for I have read that in all ages,
Poets have been had in special reputation, and that (me thinks) not without
great cause; for besides their sweet inventions, and most witty lays, they
have always used to set forth the praises of the good and virtuous, and to
beat down and disgrace the bad and vicious. So that many brave young minds,
have oftentimes thorough hearing the praises and famous Eulogies of worthy men
sung and reported unto them, been stirred up to affect the like commendations,
and so to strive to the like deserts. So they say that the Lacedaemonians were
more excited to desire of honor, with the excellent verses of the Poet
Tirtaeus, then with all the exhortations of their Captains, or authority of
their Rulers and Magistrates.


Iren. It is most true, that such Poets as in their writings do labor to
better the manners of men, and thorough the sweet bait of their numbers, to
steal into the young Spirits a desire of honor and virtue, are worthy to be
had in great respect. But these Irish Bardes are for the most part of another
mind, and so far from instructing young men in moral discipline, that they
themselves do more deserve to be sharply disciplined, for they seldom use
to choose unto themselves the doings of good men for the Arguments of their
Poems, but whomsoever they find to be most licentious of life, most bold and
lawless in his doings, most dangerous and desperate in all parts of
disobedience and rebellious disposition, him they set up and glorify in their
Rithmes, him they praise to the people, and to young men make an example to
follow


Eudox. I marvel what kind of speeches they can find, or what face they can
put on, to praise such bad persons as live so lawleslie and licentiously upon
stealthes and spoils, as most of them do, or how can they think that any
good mind will applaude or approve the same.


Iren. There is none so bad Eudoxus, but shall find some to favor his doings,
but such licentious parts as these, tending for the most part to the hurt of
the English, or maintenance of their own lewd liberty, they themselves being
most desirous thereof, do most allow. Besides this, evil things being decked
and attired with the gay attire of goodly words, may easily deceive, and carry
away the affection of a young mind, that is not well stayed, but desirous by
some bold adventures, to make proof of himself, for being (as they all be
brought up) idly, without awe of Parents, without precepts of masters, and
without fear of offense, not being directed, nor employed in any course of
life, which may carry them to virtue, will easily be drawn to follow such as
any shall set before them, for a young mind cannot rest, if he be not still
busied in some goodness, he will find himself such business, as shall soon
busy all about him. In which, if he shall find any to praise him, and to give
him encouragement, as those Bardes and Rythmers do for little reward, or a
share of a stolen Cow, then waxes he most insolent and half mad with the
love of himself, and his own lewd deeds. And as for words to set forth such
lewdnes, it is not hard for them to give a goodly and painted show thereunto,
borrowed even from the praises which are proper to virtue it self. As of a
most notorious thief and wicked outlaw, which had lived all his lifetime of
spoils and robberies, one of their Bardes in his praise will say, that he was
none of the idle milke-sops that was brought up by the fire side, but that most
of his days he spent in arms and valiant enterprises, that he did never eat
his meat, before he had won it with his sword, that he lay not all night
slugging in a cabin under his mantle, but used commonly to keep others waking
to defend their lives, and did light his candle at the flames of their houses,
to lead him in the darkness: That the Day was his Night, and the Night his
Day, that he loved not to be long woing of wenches to yield to him, but where
he came, he took by force the spoil of other men's love, and left but
lamentation to their lovers; that his music was not the harp, nor lays of
love, but the cries of people, and clashing of Armor: and finally, that he died
not bewailed of many, but made many wail when he died, that dearly bought his
death. Do you not think ( Eudoxus) that many of these praises might be
applied to men of best deserts, yet are they all yielded to a most notable
Traitor, and amongst some of the Irish not smally accounted of. For the song,
when it was first made and sung to a person of high degree there, was bought
(as their manner is) for forty crowns.


Eudox. And well worthy sure. But tell me (I pray you) have they any Art in
their compositions? or be they any thing witty or well favored as Poemes
should be?


Iren. Yea truly, I have caused diverse of them to be translated unto me, that
I might understand them, and surely they savoured of sweet wit and good
invention, but skilled not of the goodly ornaments of Poetry: yet were they
sprinkled with some pretty flowers of their natural device, which gave good
grace and comeliness unto them, the which it is great pity to see so abused;
to the gracing of wickedness and vice, which with good usage would serve to
adorn and beautify virtue. This evil custom therefore needs reformation.
And now next after the Irish Kerne, me thinks the Irish hors-boyes would come
well in order, the use of which, though necessity (as times now be) do enforce;
yet in the thorough reformation of that Realm they should be cut off. For the
cause why they are now to be permitted, is want of convenient Innes for lodging
of travailers on horsback, and of hostlers to tend their horses by the way. But
when things shall be reduced to a better pass, this needs specially to be
reformed. For out of the fry of these rake-hell horse-boyes, growing up in
knavery and villainy, are their Kerne continually supplied and maintained. For
having been once brought up an idle horse-boy, he will never after fall to
labor, but is only made fit for the halter. And these also (the which is one
foul oversight) are for the most part bred up amongst the Englishmen, of whom
learning to shoot in a piece, and being made acquainted with all the trades of
the English, they are afterward when they become Kerne, made more fit to cut
their throats. Next to this, there is another much like; but much more lewd
and dishonest, and that is, of their Carrows, which is a kind of people that
wander up and down to Gentle-mens houses, living only upon Cards and Dice,
the which, though they have little or nothing of their own, yet will they play
for much money, which if they win, they waste most lightly, and if they lose,
they pay as slenderly, but make recompense with one stealth or another, whose
only hurt is not that they themselves are idle Lossells, but that thorough
gaming, they draw others to like lewdness and idleness. And to these may be
added another sort of like loose fellows, which do pass up and down amongst
Gentlemen, by the name of Iesters, but are (indeed) notable rogues, and
partakers not only of many stealthes, by setting forth other men's goods to be
stolen, but also privy to many traitrous practices, and common carryers of
news, with desire whereof you would wonder how much the Irish are fed, for
they use commonly to send up and down to know news, and if any meet with
another, his second word is, what news? Insomuch that hereof is told a
pretty jest of a Frenchman, who having been sometimes in Ireland, where he
marked their great inquiry for news, and meeting afterward in France an
Irishman, whom he knew in Ireland, first saluted him, and afterward said thus
merrily: O Sir, I pray you tell me of courtesy, have you heard any thing of the
news, that you so much inquired for in your Country?


Eudox. This argues sure in them a great desire of innovation, and therefore
these occasions which nourish the same, must be taken away, as namely those
Iesters, Carrowes, Mona-shutes, and all such straglers, for whom (me thinks)
the short riddance of a Marshall, were meeter then an ordinance or prohibitio^
to restrain the^. Therefore (I pray you) leave all this rabblement of
Runnagates, and pass to other customs.


Iren. There is a great use amongst the Irish, to make great assemblies
together upon a rath or hill, there to parlie (as they say) about matters and
wrongs between Township and Township, or one private person and another. But
well I wot, and true it has been oftentimes proved, that in their meetings
many mischiefs have been both practiced and wrought; for to them do commonly
resort all the scumme of the people, where they may meet and confer of what
they list, which else they could not do without suspicion, or knowledge of
others. Besides at these meetings I have known diverse times, that many
Englishmen, and good Irish subjects, have bin villainously murdered by moving
one quarrel or another against them. For the Irish never come to those Raths,
but armed, whether on horse or on foot, which the English nothing suspecting,
are then commonly taken at advantage like sheep in the pin-folde.


Eudox. It may be ( Irenaeus) that abuse may be in those meetings. But these
round hills and square Bawnes which you see so strongly trenched and thrown
up, were (they say) at first ordained for the same purpose, that people might
assemble themselves therein, and therefore aunciently they were called
Talk-motes, that is, a place of people, to meet or talk of any thing that
concerned any difference between parties and Towneships, which seems yet to
me very requisite.


Iren. You say very true Eudoxus, the first making of these high hills, were at
first indeed to very good purpose for people to meet, but howsoever the times
when they were first made, might well serve to good occasions, as perhaps they
did then in England, yet things being since altered, and now Ireland much
differing from the state of England, the good use that then was of them, is now
turned to abuse; for those hills whereof you speak, were (as you may gather by
reading) appointed for 2 special uses, and built by 2 several nations. The one
is that which you call Talk-motes, which were built by the Saxons, as the word
bewraieth, for it signifies in Saxon, a meeting of folk, and these are for the
most part in form four square, well entrenched, the others that were round,
were cast up by the Danes, as the name of them does betoken, for they are
called Danes-Rathes, that is, hills of the Danes, the which were by them
devised, not for treaties and parlies, but appointed as fortes for them to
gather unto, in troublesome time, when any trouble arose, for the Danes being
but a few in comparison of the The like reason may be given for the making of
such Rathes in Ireland, by the Danes or Norwegians. vid. Gir. Cambr. top^g.
H^b. distinct. 3. cap. 37.
Saxons (in England) used this for their safety, they made those small round
hills, so strongly fenced, in every quarter of the hundred, to the end that if
in the night, or any other time, any troublous cry or uproare should happen,
they might repair with all speed unto their own fort, which was appointed for
their quarter, and there remain safe, till they could assemble themselves in
greater strength, for they were made so strong with one small entrance, that
whosoever came thither first, were he one or two, or like few, he or they might
there rest safe, and defend themselves against many, till more succor came
unto them: and when they were gathered to a sufficient number, they marched to
the next fort, and so forward till they met with the peril, or knew the
occasions thereof. But besides these two sorts of hills, there were anciently
diverse others, for some were raised, where there had been a great battle
fought, as a memory or Trophie thereof, others, as monuments of burialls, of
the carcasses of all those that were slain in any field, upon whom they did
throw such round mounts, as memorialls of them, and sometimes did cast up
great heaps of stones, (as you may read the like in many places of the
Scripture) and other whiles, they did throw up many round heaps of earth in a
circle, like a garland, or pitch many long stones on end in compass, every of
which (they say) betokened some person of Note, there slain and buried, for
this was their ancient custom, before Christianity came in amongst them, that
Churchyards were enclosed.


Eudox. You have very well declared the original of their mounts and great
stones encompassed, which some vainly term, the old Giants Trevetts, and
think that those huge stones, would not else be brought into order or reared
up, without the strength of Giants. And others as vainly think that they were
never placed there by man's hand, or Art, but only remained there so since the
beginning, and were afterward discovered by the deluge, and laid open as then
by the washing of the waters, or other like casualty. But let them dream their
own Imaginations to please themselves, you have satisfied me much better, both
for that I see some confirmation thereof in the holy writ, and also remember
that I have read in many Historyes and Chronicles, the like mounts and stones,
oftentimes mentioned.


Iren. There be many great authorities (I assure you) to prove the same, but as
for these meetings on hills, whereof we were speaking, it is very inconvenient
that any such should be permitted.


Eudox. But yet it is very needful (me thinks) for many other purposes, as
for the countries to gather together, when there is any imposition to be laid
upon them, to the which they then may all agree at such meetings, to devide
upon themselves, according to their holdings and abilities. So as if at these
assemblies, there be any Officers, as Constables, Bayliffes, or such like
amongst them, there can be no peril, or doubt of such bad practices.


Iren: Nevertheless, dangerous are such assemblies, whether for Cesse or ought
else, the Constables and Officers, being also of the Irish, and if any of the
English happen to be there, even to them they may prove perilous. Therefore
for avoiding of all such evil occasions, they were best to be abolished.


Eudox. But what is that which you call Cesse, it is a word sure unused amongst
us here, therefore (I pray you) expound the same?


Iren. Cesse is none other then that which your self called imposition, but it
is in a kind unacquainted perhaps unto you. For there are Cesses of sundry
sorts, one is the cessing of Soldiers upon the Country: For Ireland being a
Country of war (as it is handled) and always full of Soldiers, they
which have the government, whether they find it the most ease to the Queens
purse, or the most ready means at hand, for victualing of the Soldier, or
that necessity inforceth them thereunto, do scatter the Army abroad in the
Country, and place them in Villages to take their victuals of them, at such
vacant times as they lie not in Camp, nor are otherwise employed in service.
Another kind of Cesse, is the imposing of provision; for the Governors
housekeeping, which though it be most necessary, and be also (for avoiding of
all the evils formerly therein used) lately brought to a composition, yet it
is not without great inconveniences, no less then here in England, or rather
much more. The like Cesse is also charged upon the Country sometimes for
victualling of the Soldiers, when they lie in Garrison, at such times as
there is none remaining in the Queens store, or that the same cannot be
conveniently conveyed to their place of Garrison: But these two are not easily
to be redressed when necessity thereto compels, but as for the former, as it
is not necessary, so is it most hurtful and offensive to the poor country,
and nothing convenient for the Soldiers themselves, who during their lying at
Cesse, use all kind of outrageous disorder and villainy, both toward the poor
men, which victual and lodge them, as also to all the Country round about
them, whom they abuse, oppress, spoil, and afflict by all the means they can
invent, for they will not only, not content themselves with such victuals as
their hosts, nor yet as the place, perhaps affords, but they will have other
meat provided for them, and Aqua vitae sent for, yea and money besides laid
at their trenchers, which if they want, then about the house they walk with
the wretched poor man and his silly wife, who are glad to purchase their peace
with any thing. By which vile manner of abuse, the country people, yea and the
very English which dwell abroad and see, and sometimes feel this outrage,
grow into great detestation of the Soldiers, and thereby into hatred of the
very government, which draws upon them such evils: And therefore this you
may also join unto the former evil customs, which we have to reprove in
Ireland.


Eudox. Truly this is one not the least, and though the persons by whom it is
used, be of better note then the former roguish sort, which you reckoned, yet
the fault (me thinks) is no less worthy of a marshall.


Iren. That were a harder course Eudoxus, to redress every abuse by a
marshall, it would seem to you very evil surgery to cut off every unsound or
sick part of the body, which being by other due means recovered, might
afterward do very good service to the body again, and happily help to save
the whole: Therefore I think better that some good salve for the redress of
the evil be sought forth, then the least part suffered to perish: but hereof
we have to speak in another place. Now we will proceed to other like
defects, amongst which there is one general inconvenience, which reigns
almost throughout all Ireland: that is, the Lords of land and freeholders, do
not there use to set out their land in farm, or for term of years, to their
Tennants, but only from year to year, and some during pleasure, neither
indeed will the Irish Tennant or husbandman otherwise take his land, then so
long as he list himself. The reason hereof in the Tennant is, for that the
Landlords there, use most shamefully to rack their Tennants, laying upon them
Coigny and Livery at pleasure, and exacting of them (besides his Covenants)
what he pleases. So that the poor husbandman either dare not bind himself
to him, for longer term, or thinks by his continual liberty of change, to
keep his Landlord the rather in awe from wronging of him. And the reason why
the Landlord will no longer covenant with him, is, for that he daily looks
after change and alteration, and hovereth in expectation of new worlds.


Eudox. But what evil comes hereby to the Commonwealth or what reason is it
that any Landlord should not set, nor any Tennant take his land, as himself
list?


Iren. Marry the evils which comes hereby is great, for by this means, both
the Landlord thinks that he has his Tennant more at command, to follow him
into what action soever he shall enter, and also the Tennant being left at his
liberty is fit for every occasion of change that shall be offered by time: and
so much also the more ready and willing is he to run into the same, for that
he has no such state in any his houlding, no such building upon any farm, no
such cost employed in fensing or husbanding the same, as might withold him
from any such wilful course, as his Lords cause, or his own lewd
disposition may carry him unto. All which he has forborne, and spared so much
expense, for that he had no firm estate in his Tenement, but was only a
Tennant at will or little more, and so at will may leave it. And this
inconvenience may be reason enough to ground any ordinance for the good of the
Commonwealth, against the private behoof or will of any Landlord that shall
refuse to grant any such term or estate unto his Tennant, as may tend to the
good of the whole Realm.


Eudox. Indeed (me thinks) it is a great willfullnes in any such Landlord to
refuse to make any longer farms unto their Tennants, as may, besides the
general good of the Realm, be also greatly for their own profit and avail:
For what reasonable man will not think that the Tenement shall be made much
better for the Lords behoof, if the Tennant may by such good means be drawn
to build himself some handsome habitation thereon, to ditch and enclose his
ground, to manure and husband it as good Farmours use. For when his Tennants
term shall be expired: it will yield him in the renewing his lease, both a good
fine, and also a better rent. And also it shall be for the good of the Tennant
likewise, who by such buildings and enclosures shall receive many benefits:
first by the handsomeness of his house, he shall take more comfort of his
life, more safe dwelling, and a delight to keep his said house neat and
cleanely, which now being as they commonly are, rather swyne-styes, then
houses; is the chiefest cause of his so beastly manner of life, and savage
condition, lying and living together with his beast in one house, in one room,
in one bed, that is, clean straw, or rather a foul dunghill. And to all
these other commodities, he shall in sort time find a greater added, that is
his own wealth and riches increased, and wonderfully enlarged, by keeping his
Cattle in enclosures, where they shall always have fresh pasture, that now is
all trampled and over-runne, warm covert, that now lies open to all weather,
safe being, that now are continually filched and stolen.


Iren. You have Eudoxus well accounted the commodities of this one good
ordinance, amongst which, this that you named last is not the least, for all
the other being most beneficial to the Landlord and Tennant. This chiefly
redoundeth to the good of the Commonwealth, to have the land thus enclosed,
and well fenced. For it is both a principal bar and impeachment unto thieves
from stealing of cattle in the night, and also a gaul against all Rebels, and
Outlawes, that shall rise up in any numbers against the government, for the
theife thereby shall have much ado, first to bring forth, and afterward to
drive away his stolen prey, but thorough the common high ways, where he shall
soon be descryed and met withal: And the Rebel or open enemy, if any such
shall happen, either at home, or from abroad, shall easily be found when he
comes forth, and also be well incountred withal by a few, in so straight
passages and strong enclosures. This therefore when we come to the reforming
of all those evil customs before mentioned, is needful to be remembered but
now by this time (me thinks) that I have well run thorough the evil uses
which I have observed in Ireland. Nevertheless I well note that there be many
more, and infinitely many more in the private abuses of men. But these that are
most general, and tending to the hurt of the Commonweal, (as they have come
to my remembrance) I have as briefly as I could rehearsed unto you. And
therefore now I think best that we pass unto our third part, in which we
noted inconveniences that are in Religion.


Eudox. Surely you have very well handled these two former, and if ye shall as
well go thorough the third likewise, you shall merit a very good meed.


Iren. Little have I to say of Religion, both because the parts thereof be not
many, (it self being but one) and my self have not much been conversant in
that calling: but as lightly passing by I have seen or heard: Therefore the
fault which I find in Religion is but one, but the same is universal,
thoroughout all that country, that is, that they be all Papists by their
profession, but in the same so blindly and brutishly informed, (for the most
part) that not one amongst a hundred knows any ground of Religion, or any
Article of his faith, but can perhaps say his Pater noster or his Ave Maria,
without any knowledge or understanding what one word thereof means.


Eudox. Is it not then a little blot to them that now hold the place of
government, that they which now are in the light themselves, suffer a people
under their charge, to wallow in such deadly darkness.


Iren. That which you blame Eudox. is not (I suppose) any fault of will in
those godly fathers which have charge thereof, but the inconvenience of the
time and troublous occasions, wherewith that wretched Realm has continually
been turmoyled; For instruction in Religion needs quiet times, and ere we
seek to settle a sound discipline in the Clergy, we must purchase peace unto
the Laity, for it is ill time to preach among swords, and most hard or rather
impossible it is to settle a good opinion in the minds of men, for matters of
Religion doubtful, which have doubtless an evil opinion of us. For ere a new
be brought in, the old must be removed.


Eudox. Then belike it is meet that some fitter time be attended, that God
send peace and quietness there in civil matters, before it be attempted in
Ecclesiastical. I would rather have thought that (as it is said) correction
must first begin at the house of God, and that the care of the Soul, should
have been preferred before the care of the Body.


Iren. Most true Eudoxus, the care of the soul, and soul matters is to be
preferred, before the care of the body, in consideration of the worthynesse
thereof, but not till the time of reformation, for if you should know a wicked
person dangerously sick, having now both soul and body greatly diseased, yet
both recoverable, would you not think it evil advertizement to bring the
Preacher before the Physician, for if his body were neglected, it is like that
his languishing soul being disquieted by his diseasefull body, would utterly
refuse and loath all spiritual comfort, but if his body were first recured,
and brought to good frame, should there not then be found best time, to recover
the soul also. So it is in the state of a Realm: Therefore (as I said) it is
expedient, first to settle such a course of government there, as thereby both
civil disorders, and ecclesiastical abuses may be reformed and amended,
whereto needs not any such great distance of times, as (you suppose) I
require, but one joint resolution for both, that each might second and confirm
the other.


Eudox. That we shall see when we come thereunto, in the mean time, I conceive
thus much, as you have delivered, touching the general fault, which you
suppose in Religion, to wit, that it is Popish, but do you find no particular
abuses therein, nor in the ministers thereof?


Iren: Yes verily, for what ever disorders you see in the Church of England,
ye may find there, and many more: Namely, gross Symony, greedy
covetousness, fleshly incontinency, careless sloth, and generally all
disordered life in the common Clergy men: And besides all these, they have
their particular enormityes; For all Irish Priests, which now enjoy the Church
livings, they are in a manner mere lay men, saving that they have taken holy
orders, but otherwise they do go, and live like lay men, follow all kind of
husbandry, and other worldly affairs, as other Irish men do. They neither
read Scriptures, nor preach to the people, nor administer the Communion, but
Baptism they do: for they Christen yet after the Popish fashion, only they
take the tithes and offerings, and gather what fruit else they may of their
livings, the which they convert as badly and some of them (they say) pay as due
tributes and shares of their livings to their Bishops, (I speak of those which
are Irish) as they receive them duly.


Eudox. But is that suffered amongst them? It is wonder but that the Governors
do redress such shameful abuses.


Iren. How can they, since they know them not? for the Irish Bishops have their
Clergy in such awe and subjection under them, that they dare not complain of
them, so as they may do to them what they please, for they knowing their own
unworthiness and incapacity, and that they are therefore still removeable at
their Bishops will, yield what pleases him, and he takes what he lists:
yea, and some of them whose Diocesses are in remote parts, somewhat out of the
worlds eye, do not at all bestow the Benefices, which are in their own
donation, upon any, but keep them in their own hands, and set their own
servants and horse-boyes to take up the Tithes and fruits of them, with the
which some of them purchase great Lands, and build fair Castles upon the same.
Of which abuse if any question be moved they have a very seemly color and
excuse, that they have no worthy Ministers to bestow them upon, but keep them
so bestowed for any such sufficient person, as any shall bring unto them.


Eudox. But is there no law nor ordinance to meet with this mischief? nor has
it never before been looked into?


Iren. Yes, it seems it has, for there is a Statute there enacted in Ireland,
which seems to have been grounded upon a good meaning, That whatsoever
Englishman of good conversation and sufficiency, shall be brought unto any of
the Bishops, and nominated unto any living, within their Diocese that is
presently void, that he shall (without contradiction) be admitted thereunto
before any Irish.


Eudox. This is surely a very good Law, and well provided for this evil,
whereof you speak, but why is not the same observed?


Iren. I think it is well observed, and that none of the Bishops transgress
the same, but yet it works no reformation thereof, for many defects. First
there are no such sufficient English Ministers sent over as might be presented
to an^ Bishop for any living, but the most part of such English as come over
thither of themselves, are either unlearned, or men of some bad note, for which
they have forsaken England. So as the Bishop to whom they shall be presented, may
justly reject them as incapable and insufficient. Secondly, the Bishop himself
is perhaps an Irish man, who being made Judge by that Law, of the
sufficiency of the Ministers, may at his own will, dislike of the Englishman,
as unworthy in his opinion, and admit of any Irish, whom he shall think more
for his turn. And if he shall at the instance of any Englishman of
countenance there, whom he will not displease, accept of any such English
Minister as shall be ^endered unto him, yet he will under hand, carry such a
hard hand over him, or by his Officers wring him so sore, that he will soon
make him weary of his poor living. Lastly, the Benefices themselves are so
mean, and of so small profit in those Irish Countries, thorough the ill
husbandry of the Irish people which do inhabit them, that they will not
yield any competent maintenance for any honest Minister to live upon,
scarcely to buy him a gown. And were all this redressed (as happily it might
be) yet what good should any English Minister do amongst them, by teaching or
preaching to them, which either cannot understand him, or will not hear him?
Or what comfort of life shall he have, where his Parishioners are so
insatiable, so intractable, so ill affected to him, as they usual be to all
the English; or finally, how dare almost any honest Minister, that are
peaceable civil men, commit his safety to the hands of such Neighbors, as
the boldest Captains dare scarcely dwell by?


Eudox. Little good then (I see) was by that Statute wrought, how ever well
intended, but the reformation thereof must grow higher, and be brought from a
stronger ordinance, then the commandment, or penalty of a Law, which none
dare inform or complain of when it is broken; but have you any more of those
abuses in the Clergy?


Iren. I would perhaps reckon more, but I perceive my speech to grow too
long, and these may suffice to judge of the general disorders which reign
amongst them; as for the particulars, they are too many to be reckoned. For the
Clergy there (excepting the grave Fathers which are in high place about the
State, and some few others which are lately planted in their Trinity College
by Dublin, which was founded by Queen Eliz 3 Martij 159^. The 13. of the same
month, its first stone was laid by Thomas Smyth then Mayor of Dublin, and the
9. of Ian 1593. it first admitted Students.
new College) are generally bad, licentious, and most disordered.


Eudox. You have then (as I suppose) gone thorough those three first parts
which you proposed unto your self, to wit, The Inconveniences which you
observed in the laws, in the customs, and in the Religion of that land. The
which (me thinks) you have so thoroughly touched, as that nothing more
remains to ^e spoken thereof.


Iren. Not so thoroughly as you suppose, that nothing can remain, but so
generally as I purposed, that is, to lay open the general evils of that
Realm, which do hinder the good reformation thereof, for to count the
particular faults of private men, should be a work too infinite, yet some
there be of that nature, that though they be in private men, yet their evil
reaches to a general hurt, as the extortion of Sheriffs, and their
Sub-sheriffs and Bayliffes, the corruption of Victuallers, Cessors, and
Purveyors, the disorders of Seneschalls, Captains, and their Soldiers, and
many such like: All which I will only name here, that their reformation may
be mended in place where it most concerns. But there is one very foul
abuse, which by the way I may not omit, and that is in Captains, who
notwithstanding that they are specially employed to make peace thorough strong
execution of war, yet they do so dandle their doings, and dally in the
service to them committed, as if they would not have the enemy subdued, or
utterly beaten down, for fear lest afterward they should need employment,
and so be discharged of pay: For which cause some of them that are laid in
garrison, do so handle the matter, that they will do no great hurt to the
enemies, yet for color sake, some men they will kill, even half with the
consent of the enemy, being persons either of base regard, or enemies to the
enemy, whose heads eftsoons they send to the Governor for a commendation of
their great endeavor, telling how weighty a service they performed, by cutting
off such and such dangerous Rebels.


Eudox. Truly this is a pretty mockery, and not to be permitted by the
Governors.


Iren. But how can the Govrrnour know readily what persons those were, and what
the purpose of their killing was, yea and what will you say if the Captains
do justify this their course by ensample of some of their Governors, which
(under Benedicite, I do tell it to you) do practice the like slight in their
governments?


Eudox. Is it possible? take heed what you say Irenaeus.


Iren. To you only Eudoxus, I do tell it, and that even with great hearts
grief, and inward trouble of mind to see her Majesty so much abused by some
who are put in special trust of those great affairs: Of which, some being
martial men, will not do always what they may for quieting of things, but
will rather wink at some faults, and suffer them unpunished, lest they (having
put all things in that assurance of peace that they might) they should seem
afterward not to be needed, nor continued in their governments with so great a
charge to her Majesty. And therefore they do cunningly carry their course of
government, and from one hand to another do bandie the service like a
Tennis-Ball, which they will never strike quite away, for fear lest afterward
they should want.


Eudox. Do you speak of under Magistrates Irenaeus, or principal Governors?


Iren. I do speak of no particulars, but the truth may be found out by trial
and reasonable insight into some of their doings. And if I should say, there is
some blame thereof in the principal Governors, I think I might also show
some reasonable proof of my speech. As for example, some of them seeing the
end of their government to draw nigh, and some mischiefs and troublous
practice growing up, which afterward may work trouble to the next succeeding
Governor, will not attempt the redress or cutting off thereof, either for
fear they should leave the Realm unquiet at the end of their government, or
that the next that comes, should receive the same too quiet, and so happily
win more praise thereof, then they before. And therefore they will not (as I
said) seek at all to repress that evil, but will either by granting
protection for a time, or holding some emparlance with the Rebel, or by
treaty of Commissioners, or by other like devices, only smother and keep
down the flame of the mischief, so as it may not break out in their time of
government, what comes afterward they care not, or rather wish the worst. This
course has been noted in some Governors.


Eudox. Surely ( Irenaeus) This if it were true, should be worthy of an heavy
judgment: But it is hardly to be thought, that any Governor should so much
either envy the good of that Realm which is put into his hand, or defraude
her Majesty who trusts him so much, or malign his successor which shall
possess his place, as to suffer an evil to grow up, which he might timely
have kept under, or perhaps to nourish it with colored countenance, or such
sinister means.


Iren. I do not certainly avouch so much ( Eudoxus) but the sequel of things
does in a manner prove, and plainly speak so much, that the Governors
usually are envious one of another greater glory, which if they would seek to
excel by better governing, it should be a most laudable emulation. But they
do quite otherwise. For this (as you may mark) is the common order of them,
that who comes next in place, will not follow that course of government, how
ever good, which his predecessors held, either for disdain of himself, or
doubt to have his doings drowned in an other man's praise, but will straight
take a way quite contrary to the former: As if the former thought (by keeping
under the Irish) to reform them: the next by discountenancing the English,
will curry favor with the Irish, and so make his government seem plausible,
as having all the Irish at his command: But he that comes after, will
perhaps follow neither the one nor the other, but will dandle the the one and
the other in such sort, as he will suck sweet out of them both, and leave
bitterness to the poor Country, which if he that comes after shall seek to
redress, he shall perhaps find such crosses, as he shall hardly be able
to bear, or do any good that might work the disgrace of his predecessors.
Examples you may see hereof in the governors of late times sufficiently, and
in others of former times more manifestly, when the government of that Realm,
was committed sometimes to the Geraldines, as when the house of York had the
Crown of England, sometimes to the Butlers, as when the house of Laencaster
got the same. And other whiles, when an English Governor was appointed, he
perhaps found enemies of both.


Eudox. I am sorry to hear so much as you report, and now I begin to conceive
somewhat more of the cause of her continual wretchedness then heretofore I
found, and wish that this inconvenience were well looked into, for sure (me
thinks) it is more weighty then all the former, and more hardly to be
redressed in the governor, then in the governed, as a malady in a vital part
is more incurable then in an external.


Iren. You say very true; but now that we have thus ended all the abuses and
inconveniences of that government which was our first part. It follows now
that we pass unto the second part, which was of the means to cure and
redress the same, which we must labor to reduce to the first beginning
thereof.


Eudox. Right so Irenaeus: for by that which I have noted in all this your
discourse, you suppose, that the whole ordinance and institution of that
Realms government, was both at first when it was placed, evil plotted, and
also sithence thorough other over-sights, came more out of square to that
disorder which it is now come unto, like as two indirect lines, the further
that they are drawn out, the further they go asunder.


Iren. I do see Eudoxus; and as you say, so think, that the longer that
government thus continues, in the worse course will the Realm be, for it is
all in vain that they now strive and endeavor by fair means and peaceable
plotts to redress the same, without first remmooving all those inconveniences,
and new framing (as it were) in the forge, all that is worn out of fashion:
For all other means will be but as lost labor, by patching up one hole to
make many, for the Irish do strongly hate and abhor all reformation and
subjection to the English, by reason that having been once subdued by them,
they were thrust out of all their possessions. So as now they fear, that if
they were again brought under, they should be likewise expelled out of all,
which is the cause that they hate the English government, according to the
saying, Quem metuunt oderunt: Therefore the reformation must now be the
strength of a greater power.


Eudox. But me thinks that might be by making of good laws, and establishing
of new Statutes, with sharp penalties and punishments, for amending of all
that is presently amiss, and not (as you suppose) to begin all as it were
anew, and to alter the whole form of the government, which how dangerous a
thing it is to attempt, you your self must needs confess, and they which
have the managing of the Realms whole policy, cannot without great cause,
fear and refrain, for all innovation is perilous, insomuch as though it be
meant for the better, yet so many accidents and fearful events may come
between, as that it may hazard the loss of the whole.


Iren. Very true Eudoxus, all change is to be shunned, where the affairs stand
in such sort, as that they may continue in quietness, or be assured at all to
abide as they are. But that in the Realm of Ireland we see much otherwise, for
every day we perceive the troubles growing more upon us, and one evil growing
upon another, insomuch as there is no part now sound or ascertained. but all
have their cares upright, waiting when the watchword shall come, that they
should all arise generally into rebellion, and cast away the English
subjection. To which there now little wants, for I think the word be already
given, and there wants nothing but opportunity, which truly is the death of
one noble person, who being himself most steadfast to his sovereign Queen,
and his Country, coasting upon the South Sea, stops the ingate of all that
evil which is looked for, and holds in all those which are at his beck,
with the terror of his greatness, and the assurance of his most immovable
loyalty: And therefore where you think, that good and sound laws might
amend, and reform things there amiss; you think surely amiss. For it is
vain to prescribe Laws, where no man cares for keeping of them, nor fears
the danger for breaking of them. But all the Realm is first to be reformed,
and laws are afterward to be made for keeping and continuing it in that
reformed estate.


Eudox. How then do you think is the reformation thereof to be begun, if not
by laws and ordinances?


Iren. Even by the sword, for all these evils must first be cut away by a
strong hand, before any good can be planted, like as the corrupt branches,
and unwholesome boughs are first to be pruned, and the foul moss cleansed
and scraped away, before the tree can bring forth any good fruit.


Eudox. Did you blame me even now, for wishing of Kerne, Horse-boyes, and
Carrowes, to be clean cut off, as too violent a means, and do you your self
now prescribe the same medicine? Is not the Sword the most violent redress
that may be used for any evil?


Iren. It is so, but where no other remedy may be devised, nor hope of
recovery had, there must needs this violent means be used. As for the loose
kind of people which you would have cut off, I blamed it, for that they might
otherwise perhaps be brought to good, as namely by this way which I set before
you.


Eudox. Is not your way all one with the former in effect, which you found
fault with, save only this odds, that I said by the halter, and you say by
the sword, what difference is there?


Iren. There is surely great, when you shall understand it, for by the sword
which I named, I did not mean the cutting off all that nation with the sword,
which far be it from me, that I should ever think so desperately, or wish
so uncharitably, but by the Sword I mean the royal power of the Prince, which
ought to stretch it self forth in the chiefest strength to the redressing and
cutting off those evils, which I before blamed, and not of the people which
are evil. For evil people, by good ordinances and government, may be made
good; but the evil that is of it self evil, will never become good.


Eudox. I pray you then declare your mind at large, how you would wish that
sword which you mean to be used to the reformation of all those evils.


Iren. The first thing must be to send over into that Realm, such a strong
power of men, as should perforce bring in all that rebellious route and loose
people, which either do now stand out in open Arms, or in wandering companies
do keep the woods, spoiling the good subjects.


Eudox. You speak now Irenaeus of an infinite charge to her Majesty, to send
over such an Army, as should tread down all that stands before them on foot,
and lay on the ground all the stiff-necked people of that land, for there is
now but one Outlaw of any great reckoning, to wit, the Earl of Tyrone abroad
in arms, against whom you see what huge charges she has been at this last
year, in sending of men, providing of victuals, and making head against him,
yet there is little or nothing at all done, but the Queens treasure spent, her
people wasted, the poor Country troubled, and the enemy nevertheless brought
into no more subjection then he was, or list outwardly to show, which in effect
is none, but rather a scorn of her power, and emboldening of a proud rebel,
and an encouragement to all like lewdlie disposed Traitors, that shall dare to
lift up their heel, against their sovereign Lady: Therefore it were hard
counsel to draw such an exceeding great charge upon her, whose event should
be so uncertain.


Iren. True indeed, if the event should be uncertain, but the certainty of
the effect hereof shall be so infallible, as that no reason can gainesay it,
neither shall the charge of all this Army (the which I demand) be much
greater, then so much as in these last two years wars, has vainly been
expended. For I dare undertake, that it has cost the Queen above 200000.
pounds already, and for the present charge, that she is now at there, amounts
to very near 12000. pounds a month, whereof cast you the account: yet nothing
is done. The which sum had it been employed as it should be, would have
effected all this which now I go about.


Eudox. How mean you to have it employed? but to be spent in the pay of
Soldiers, and provision of victuals.


Iren. Right so, but it is now not disbursed at once, as it might be, but
drawn out into a long length, by sending over now 20000 pounds, and next half
year 10000. pounds, so as the Soldier in the mean time for want of due
provision of victual, and good payment of his due, is starved and consumed,
that of a 1000. which came over lusty able men, in half a year there are not
left 500. And yet is the Queens charge never a whit the less, but what is not
paid in present money, is accounted in debt, which will not be long unpayd, for
the Captain, half of whose Soldiers are dead, and the other quarter never
mustered, nor seen, comes shortly to demand payment of his whole account,
where by good means of some great ones, and privy shareings with the Officers
and servants of other some, he receives his debt, much less perhaps then was
due, yet much more indeed then he justly deserved.


Eudox. I take this sure to be no good husbandry, for what must needs be
spent, as good spend it at once, where is enough, as to have it drawn out into
long delays, seeing that thereby both the service is much hindered, and yet
nothing saved but it may be Irenaeus that the Queens treasure in so great
occasions of disbursements (as it is well known she has been at lately,) is
not always so ready, nor so plentiful, as it can spare so great a sum
together, but being paid as it is, now some, and then some, it is no great
burden unto her, nor any great impoverishment to her Coffers, seeing by such
delay of time, it daily comes in, as fast as she parts it out.


Iren. It may be as you say, but for the going thorough of so honorable a
course (I doubt not) but if the Queens Coffers be not so well stored (which we
are not to look into) but that the whole Realm which now as things are used,
do feel a continual burden of that wretched Realm, hanging upon their
backs, would for a small riddance of all that trouble, be once troubled for
all: and put to all their shoulders, and helping hands, and hearts also, to the
defraying of that charge, most gladfully and willingly, and surely the charge
in effect, is nothing to the infinite great good, which should come thereby,
both to the Queen, and all this Realm generally, as when time serves shall
be showed.


Eudox. How many men would you require to the furnishing of this which ye take
in hand? and how long space would you have them entertained?


Iren. Verily not above 10000. footmen, and a 1000. horse, and all these not
above the space of a year and a half, for I would still as the heat of the
service abateth, abate the number in pay, and make other provision for them, as
I will show.


Eudox. Surely it seems not much which you require, nor no long time, but how
would you have them used? would you lead forth your Army against the Enemy,
and seek him where he is, to fight?


Iren. No Eudoxus; That would not be, for it is well known that he is a flying
enemy, hiding himself in woods and bogges, from whence he will not draw
forth, but into some straight passage or perilous foord, where he knows the
Army must needs pass: There will he lie in wait, and if he find advantage
fit, will dangerously hazard the troubled Soldier. Therefore to seek him out
that still flitteth, and follow him that can hardly be found, were vain and
bootelesse, but I would devide my men in garrison upon his Country, in such
places as I should think might most annoy him.


Eudox. But how can that be Irenaeus with so few men? for the enemy as you now
see, is not all in one Country, but some in Vlster, some in Connaght, and
others in Leinster. So as to plant strong garrisons in all those places should
need many more men then you speak of, or to plant all in one, and to leave
the rest naked, should be but to leave them to the spoil.


Iren. I would wish the chief power of the Army to be garrisond in one
Country that is strongest, and the other upon the rest that is weakest* As for
example, the Earl of Tyrone is now accounted the strongest, upon him would I
lay 8000. men in garrison, 1000. upon Pheagh Mac Hugh and the Cavanaghes, and
1000. upon some parts of Connaght, to be at the direction of the Governor.


Eudox. I see now all your men bestowed, but what places would you set their
garrison that they might rise out most conveniently to service? and though
perhaps I am ignorant of the places, yet I will take the Map of Ireland, and
lay it before me, and make mine eyes (in the mean time) my Schoolmasters, to
guide my understanding to judge of your plot.


Iren. Those eight thousand in Vlster, I would devide likewise into four
parts, so as there should be 2000. Footmen in every garrison: The which I
would thus place. Upon the Black water, in some convenient place, as high upon
the River as might be, I would lay one garrison. Another would I put at
Castle-liffer, or there-abouts, so as they should have all the passages upon
the River to Logh-foyle. The third I would place about Fermanagh or Bundroise,
so as they might lie between Connaght and Vlster, to serve upon both sides, as
occasion shall be offered, and this therefore would I have stronger then any of
the rest, because it should be most enforced, and most employed, and that they
might put wards at Balli-shanon, and Belick, and all those passages. The last
would I set about Monoghan or Balturbut, so as it should front both upon the
Enemy that way, and also keep the Countyes of Cavan and Mead in awe, from
passage of straglers from those parts, whence they use to come forth, and
oftentimes use to work much mischeife* And to every of these garrisons of
2000. Footmen, I would have 200. horsemen added, for the one without the
other, can do but little service. The 4. Garrisons thus being placed, I would
have to be victualled before hand for half a year, which you will say to be
hard, considering the corruption and usual waste of victuals. But why should
not they be as well victualled for so long time, as the ships are usually for a
year, and sometimes two, seeing it is easier to keep victual on land then
water. Their bread I would have in flower, so as it might be baked still to
serve their necessary want. Their Beer there also brewed within them, from
time to time, and their Beef before hand barelled, the which may be used, but
as it is needed: For I make no doubt but fresh victuals, they will sometimes
purvay for themselves, amongst their Enemies. Hereunto likewise would I have
them, have a store of hose and shoes, with such other necessaries as may be
needful for Soldiers, so as they should have no occasion to look for
releife from abroad, or occasion of such trouble, for their continual supply,
as I see and have often proved in Ireland to be more cumberous to the Deputy,
and dangerous to them that relieve them, then half the leading of an Army; for
the Enemy knowing the ordinary ways thorough the which their releife must be
brought them, uses commonly to draw himself into the straight passages
thither-ward, and oftentimes does dangerously distress them, besides the pay
of such force as should be sent for their convoy, the charge of the carriages,
the exactions of the Country shall be spared. But only every half year the
supply brought by the Deputy himself, and his power* who shall then visit and
overlooke all those Garrisons, to see what is needful to change, what is
expedient, and to direct what he shall best advise. And those 4. Garrisons
issuing forth, at such convenient times as they shall have intelligence or
espiall upon the enemy, will so drive him from one side to another, and Tennis
him amongst them, that he shall find no where safe to keep his Creete in, nor
hide himself, but flying from the fire shall fall into the water, and out of
one danger into another, that in short space his Creete, which is his chief
sustenance, shall be wasted with preying, or killed with driving, or starved
for want of pasture in the woods, and he himself brought so low, that he
shall have no heart nor ability, to endure his wretchedness, the which will
surely come to pass in very short time, for one Winter well followed upon him
will so pluck him on his knees, that he will never be able to stand up again.


Eudox. Do you then think the Winter time fittest for the services of
Ireland, how falls it then that our most employments be in Summer, and the
Armies then led commonly forth?


Iren. It is surely misconceived, for it is not with Ireland as it is with
other Countries, where the wars flame most in Summer, and the Helmets glister
brightest in the fairest Sunshine: But in Ireland, the Winter yields best
services, for then the trees are bare and naked, which use both to cloth and
house the Kerne, the ground is cold and wet, which uses to be his bedding, the
air is sharp and bitter, to blow thorough his naked sides and legs, the
kyne are barren and without milk, which uses to be his only food, neither
if he kill them, will they yield him flesh, nor if he keep them, will they
give him food, besides being all with Calfe (for the most part) they will
thorough much chasing and driving, cast all their Calves, and loose their
milk, which should relieve him the next Summer.


Eudox. I do well understand your reason, but by your leave, I have heard it
otherwise said, of some that were Outlawes: That in Summer they kept themselves
quiet, but in Winter they would play their parts, and when the nights were
longest, then burn and spoil most, so that they might safely return before
day.


Iren. I have likewise heard, and also seen proof thereof true: But that was
of such Outlawes as were either abiding in well inhabited Countries, as in
Mounster, or bordering on the English pale, as Feagh Mac Hugh, the Cavanaghes,
the Moors, the Dempsies, or such like: For, for them the winter indeed is the
fittest time for spoiling and robbing, because the nights are then (as you
said) longest and darkest, and also the Countries round about are then most
full of Corn, and good provision to be gotten every where by them, but it is
far otherwise with a strong peopled enemy, that possess a whole country,
for the other being but a few, and indeed privily lodged, and kept in out
villages, and corners nigh to the woods and mountains, by some of their privy
friends, to whom they bring their spoils and stealthes, and of whom they
continually receive secret releife: But the open enemy having all his Country
wasted, what by himself, and what by the Soldiers, finds then succor in
no place: Towns there are none, of which he may get spoil, they are all
burnt: bread he has none, he ploweth not in Summer: Flesh he has, but if he
kill it in Winter, he shall want milk in Summer, and shortly want life.
Therefore if they be well followed, but one Winter, you shall have little
work with them the next Summer.


Eudox. I do now well perceive the difference, and do verily think that the
Winter time is there fittest for service, withal I conceive the manner of your
handling of the service, by drawing sudden draughts upon the Enemy, when he
looks not for you, and to watch advantages upon him, as he does upon you. By
which straight keeping of them in, and not suffering them at any time long to
rest, I must needs think that they will soon be brought low, and driven to
great extreamities. All which when you have performed and brought them to the
very last cast, suppose that they will offer, either to come to you and submit
themselves, or that some of them will seek to withdraw themselves, what is
your advice to do, will you have them received?


Iren. No, but at the beginning of those wars, and when the Garrisons are
well planted, and fortified, I would wish a Proclamation were made generally,
to come to their knowledge: That what persons soever, would within twenty days
absolutely submit themselves, (excepting only the very Principalls and
Ringleaders) should find grace: I doubt not, but upon the settling of these
Garrisons, such a terror and near consideration of their perilous state,
would be stricken into most of them, that they will covet to draw away from
their Leaders. And again I well know that the Rebels themselves (as I saw by
proof in Desmonds wars,) will turn away all their rascal people, whom they
think unserviceable, as old men, women, children, and hyndes (which they call
Churles,) which would only waste their victuals, and yield them no aid, but
their Cattle they will surely keep away: These therefore though policy would
turn them back again, that they might the rather consume and afflict the
other Rebels, yet in a pittyfull commiseration I would wish them to be
received; The rather for that this sort of base people, does not for the most
part rebel of themselves, having no heart thereunto, but are by force drawn
by the grand Rebels into their action, and carried away with the violence of
the stream, else they should be sure to loose all that they have, and perhaps
their lives too: The which they now carry unto them, in hope to enjoy them
there, but they are there by the strong Rebels themselves, soon turned out of
all, so that the constrainte hereof, may in them deserve pardon. Likewise if
any of their able men or Gentlemen shall then offer to come away, and to bring
their Cattle with them, as some no doubt may steal them away privily, I wish
them also to be received, for the disabling of the enemy, but withal, that
good assurance may be taken for their true behavior and absolute submission,
and that then they be not suffered to remain any longer in those parts, no nor
about the Garrisons, but sent away into the inner parts of the Realm, and
dispersed in such sort as they may not come together, nor easily return if
they would: For if they might be suffered to remain about the Garrisons, and
there inhabit, as they will offer to tille the ground, and yield a great part
of the profit thereof, and of their Cattle, to the Coronell, wherewith they
have heretofore tempted many, they would (as I have by experience known) be
ever after such a gaul, and inconvenience to them, as that their profit shall
not recompense their hurt, for they will privily relieve their friends that are
forth, they will send the Enemy secret advertizements of all their purposes and
journeyes, which they mean to make upon them, they will not also stick to
draw the enemy privily upon them, yea and to betray the fort it self, by
discovery of all her defects and disadvantages (if any be) to the cutting of
all their throats. For avoiding whereof and many other inconveniences, I wish
that they should be carried far from thence into some other parts, so that
(as I say) they come in and submit themselves, upon the first summons: But
afterward I would have none received but left to their fortune and miserable
end: my reason is, for that those which will afterward remain without, are
stout and obstinate Rebels, such as will never be made dutiful and obedient,
nor brought to labor or civil conversation, having once tasted that
licentious life, and being acquainted with spoil and outrages, will ever
after be ready for the like occasions, so as there is no hope of their
amendment or recovery, and therefore needful to be cut off.


Eudox. Surely of such desperate persons, as will follow the course of their
own folly, there is no compassion to be had, and for others you have proposed
a merciful means, much more then they have deserved, but what then shall be
the conclusion of this war; For you have prefixed a short time of its
continuance?


Iren. The end will (I assure me) be very short and much sooner then can be in
so great a trouble, as it seems hoped for, although there should none of them
fall by the sword, nor be slain by the Soldier, yet thus being kept from
manurance, and their Cattle from running abroad, by this hard restraint they
would quickly consume themselves, and devour one another. The proof whereof,
I saw sufficiently exampled in these late wars of Mounster, for
notwithstanding that the same was a most rich and plentiful country, full of
corn and cattle, that you would have thought they should have been able to
stand long, yet ere one year and a half they were brought to such
wretchedness, as that any stony heart would have rued the same. Out of every
corner of the woods and glynnes they came creeping forth upon their hands, for
their legs could not bear them, they looked like anatomies of death, they
spoke like Ghosts crying out of their graves, they did eat the dead Carrions,
happy were they could find them, yea, and one another soon after, insomuch as
the very carcasses they spared not to scrape out of their graves, and if they
found a plot of watercresses or Shamrocks; there they flocked as to a feast
for the time, yet not able long to continue therewithal, that in short space
there were none almost left, and a most populous and plentiful country
suddenly left void of man and beast, yet sure in all that war, there
perished not many by the Sword, but all by the extremity of famine, which they
themselves had wrought.


Eudox. It is a wonder that you tell, and more to be wondered how it should so
shortly come to pass.


Iren. It is most true, and the reason also very ready, for you must conceive
that the strength of all that Nation, is the Kerne, Galloglasse, Stocah,
Horseman and Horseboy, the which having been never used to have any thing of
their own, and now being upon spoil of others, make no spare of any thing,
but havocke and confusion of all they meet with, whether it be their own
Friends goods, or their Foes. And if they happen to get never so great spoil
at any time, the same they waste and consume in a tryce, as naturally
delighting in spoil, though it do themselves no good. On the other side,
whatsoever they leave unspent, the Soldier when he comes there, spoyleth
and havocketh likewise, so that between both, nothing is very shortly left.
And yet this is very necessary to be done for the soon finishing of the
war, and not only this in this wise, but also those subjects* which do
border upon those parts, are either to be removed and drawn away, or likewise
to be spoiled, that the Enemy may find no succor thereby. For what the
Soldier spares, the Rebel will surely spoil.


Eudox. I do now well understand you. But now when all things are brought to
this pass, and all filled with these ruefull spectacles of so many wretched
Carcases starving, goodly Countries wasted, so huge desolation and confusion,
that even I that do but hear it from you, and do picture it in my mind, do
greatly pity and commiserate it. If it shall happen that the state of this
misery and lamentable image of things shall be told, and feelingly presented
to her sacred Majesty, being by nature full of mercy and clemency, who is most
inclinable to such pitiful complaints, and will not endure to hear such
Tragedies made of her poor people and subjects, as some about her may
insinuate. Then she perhaps for very compassion of such calamities, will not
only stop the stream of such violence, and return to her wonted
mildness, but also conne them little thanks which have been the authors
and Councillors of such bloody platformes* So I remember that in the late
government of that good Lord Gray, when after long travel, and many perilous
assayes, he had brought things almost to this pass, that you speak of, that
it was even made ready for reformation, and might have been brought to what
her Majesty would, like complaint was made against him, that he was a bloody
man, and regarded not the life of her subjects no more then dogs, but had
wasted and consumed all, so as now she had nothing almost left, but to reign
in their Ashes, ear was soon lent thereunto, and all suddenly turned
topside-turvy the Noble Lord eft-soones was blamed, the wretched people pitied
and new counsels plotted, in which it was concluded that a general pardon
should be sent over to all that would accept of it, upon which all former
purposes were blancked, the Governor at a bay, and not only all that great and
long charge which she had before been at quite lost and cancelled, but also
all that hope of good which was even at the door put back, and clean
frustrated. All which, whether it be true or no, your self can well tell.


Iren. Too true Eudoxus, the more the pity, for I may not forget so memorable
a thing: Neither can I be ignorant of that perilous device, and of the whole
means by which it was compassed, and very cunningly contrived by sowing first
dissension between him, and an other noble personage; where in they both at
length found how notably they had been abused, and how thereby under hand,
this universal alteration of things was brought about, but then too late to
stay the same, for in the mean time all that was formerly done with long
labor, and great toil, was (as you say) in a moment undone, and that good Lord
blotted with the name of a bloody man, whom, who that well knew, knew to be
most gentle, affable, loving and temperate. But that the necessity of that
present state of things, enforced him to that violence, and almost changed his
natural disposition. But otherwise he was so far from delighting in blood,
that oftentimes he suffered not just vengeance to fall where it was deserved:
and even some of them which were afterward his accusers, had tasted too much
of his mercy, and were from the gallows brought to be his accusers. But his
course indeed was this, that he spared not the heads and principalls of any
mischievous practices or rebellion, but showed sharp judgment on them,
chiefly for ensamples sake, that all the meaner sort, which also were generally
then infected with that evil, might by terror thereof be reclaymed, and
saved, if it were possible. For in the last conspiracy of Consulat (s^ place^)
Camden. annal. rerum Anglic. and Hiber. ad an. 1520.
some of the English Pale, think you not that there were many more guilty
then they that felt the punishment? yet he touched only a few of special
note, and in the trial of them also even to prevent the blame of cruelty and
partial proceeding, and seeking their Blood, which he, as in his great
wisdom (as it seems) did foresee would be objected against him; he for
avoiding thereof, did use a singular discretion and regard. For the Jury that
went upon their trial, he made to be chosen out of their nearest kinsmen,
and their Judges he made of some of their own Fathers, of othets their Uncles
and dearest friends, who when they could not but justly condemn them, yet he
uttered their judgment in abundance of tears, and yet he even herein was
called bloody and cruel.


Eudox. Indeed so have I heard it here often spoken, but I perceive (as I
always verily thought) that it was most unjustly, for he was always known
to be a most just, sincere, godly, and right noble man, far from such
sternenesse, far from such unrighteousness. But in that sharp execution of
the Spaniards, at the fort of Sinerwick, I heard it specially noted, and if it
were true as some reported, surely it was a great touch to him in honor, for
some say that he promised them life: others at least he did put them in hope
thereof.


Iren. Both the one and the other is most untrue; for this I can assure you, my
self being as near them as any, that he was so far either from promising,
or putting them in hope, that when first their Secretary (called as I
remember) Signior Ieffrey an Italian, being sent to treat with the Lord
Deputy for grace, was flatly refused: And afterward their Coronell named Don
Sebastian, came forth to entreat that they might part with their Arms like
Soldiers, at the least with their lives according to the custom of War, and
Law of Nations, it was strongly denied him, and told him by the Lord Deputy
himself, that they could not justly plead either custom of War, or Law of
Nations, for that they were not any lawful Enemies, and if they were, he
willed them to show by what commission they came thither into another Princes
Dominions to war, whether from the Pope or the King of Spain, or any other,
the which when they said they had not, but were only adventurers that came to
seek fortune abroad, and to serve in wars amongst the Irish, who desired to
entertain them. It was then told them, that the Irish themselves, as the
Earl and John of Desmond, with the rest, were no lawful Enemies; but Rebels
and Traitors, and therefore they that came to succor them, no better then
Rogues and Runnagates, specially coming with no license, nor commission from
their own King. So as it should be dishonorable for him in the name of his
Queen, to condition or make any terms with such Rascals, but left them to
their choice, to yield and submit themselves, or no: whereupon the said
Coronell did absolutely yield himself and the Fort, with all therein, and
craved only mercy, which it being not thought good to show them, for danger
of them, if being saved, they should afterward join with the Irish, and also
for terror to the Irish, who are much imboldened by those foreign succors,
and also put in hope of more ere long, there was no other way but to make that
short end of them as was made. Therefore most untruely and maliciously do
these evil tongues backbite and slander the sacred ashes of that most just and
honorable personage, whose least virtue of many most excellent that abounded
in his Heroicke spirit, they were never able to aspire unto.


Eudox. Truly Irenaeus, I am right glad to be thus satisfied by you, in that I
have often heard questioned, and yet was never able till now, to choke the
mouth of such detractours, with the certain knowledge of their slanderous
untruthes, neither is the knowledge hereof impertinent to that which we
formerly had in hand, I mean for the thorough prosecuting of that sharp
course which you have set down for the bringing under of those Rebels of
Vlster and Connaght, and preparing a way for their perpetual reformation,
least happily by any such sinister suggestions of cruelty and too much
bloodshed, all the plot might be over-throwne, and all the cost and labor
therein employed, be utterly lost and cast away.


Iren. You say most true, for after that Lords calling away from thence, the
two Lords Justices continued but a while: of which the one was of mind (as it
seemed) to have continued in the footing of his predecessors, but that he was
curbed and restrained. But the other was more mildly disposed, as was meet for
his profession, and willing to have all the wounds of that Commonwealth healed
and recured, but not with that heed as they should be. After when Sir John
Perrot succeeding (as it were) into another man's harvest, found an open way to
what course he list, the which he bent not to that point which the former
Governors intended, but rather quite contrary, as it were in scorn of the
former, and in vain vaunt of his own Counsels, with the which he was too
wilfully carried; for he did tread down and disgrace all the English, and
set up and countenance the Irish all that he could, whether thinking thereby
to make them more tractable and buxome to his government, (wherein he thought
much amiss) or privily plotting some other purposes of his own, as it partly
afterward appeared, but surely his manner of government, could not be sound
nor wholesome for that Realm, it being so contrary to the former. For it was
even as two Physicians should take one sick body in hand, at two sundry times:
Of which the former would minister all things meet to purge and keep under
the Body: the other to pamper and strengthen it suddenly again, whereof what
is to be looked for, but a most dangerous relapse? That which we now see
thorough his rule, and the next after him, happened thereunto, being now more
daungerously sick then ever before. Therefore by all means it must be
foreseen and assured, that after once entering into this course of
reformation, there be afterward no remorse nor drawing back for the sight
of any such ruefull objects, as must thereupon follow, nor for compassion of
their calamities, seeing that by no other means it is possible to cure them,
and that these are not of will, but of very urgent necessity.


Eudox. Thus far then you have now proceeded to plant your garrisons, and to
direct their services, of the which nevertheless I must needs conceive that
there cannot be any certain direction set down, so that they must follow the
occasions which shall be daily offered, and diligently awayted. But by your
leave ( Irenaeus) notwithstanding all this your careful foresight and
provision (me thinks) I see an evil lurk unespyed, and that may chance to
hazard all the hope of this great service, if it be not very well looked into,
and that is, the corruption of their Captains; for though they be placed never
so carefully, and their Companies filled never so sufficiently, yet may they,
if they list, discarde whom they please, and send away such as will perhaps
willingly be rid of that dangerous and hard service, the which (well I wot)
is their common custom to do, when they are laid in garrison, for then they
may better hide their defaults, then when they are in Camp, where they are
continually eyed and noted of all men. Besides, when their pay comes, they
will (as they say) detain the greatest portions thereof at their pleasure, by
a hundred shifts that need not here be named, through which they oftentimes
deceive the Soldier, and abuse the Queen, and greatly hinder the service. So
that let the Queen pay never so fully, let the Muster-Master view then never
so diligently, let the Deputy or General look to them never so exactly, yet
they can cozen them all. Therefore me thinks it were good, if it be possible,
to make provision for this inconvenience.


Iren. It will surely be very hard; but the chiefest help for prevention
hereof must be the care of the Coronell that has the government of all his
garrison, to have an eye to their alterations, to know the numbers and names of
the sick Soldiers, and the slain, to mark and observe their ranks in their
daily rising forth to service, by which he cannot easily be abused, so that
he himself be a man of special assurance and integrity. And therefore
great regard is to be had in the choosing and appointing of them. Besides, I
would not by any means, that the Captains should have the paying of their
Soldiers, but that there should be a Play Master appointed, of special trust,
which should pay every man according to his Captains Ticket, and the account
of the Clerk of his Band, for by this means the Captain will never seek to
falsify his alterations, nor to diminish his Company, nor to deceive his
Soldiers, when nothing thereof shall be sure to come unto himself, but what is
his own bare pay. And this is the manner of the Spaniards Captain, who never
has to meddle with his Soldiers pay, and indeed scorneth the name as base to
be counted his Soldiers Pagadore, whereas the contrary amongst us has brought
things to so bad a pass, that there is no Captain but thinks his Band very
sufficient, if he can muster 60: and sticks not to say openly, that he is
unworthy to have a Captainship, that cannot make it worth 500l. by the year,
the which they right well verify by the proof.


Eudox. Truly I think this a very good means to avoid that inconvenience of
Captains abuses. But what say you to the Coronell? what authority think you
meet to be given him? whether will you allow him to protect or safe conduct,
and to have martial laws as they are accustomed?


Iren. Yea verily, but all these to be limited with very strait instructions.
As first for protections, that he shall have authority after the first
Proclamation, for the space of twenty days, to protect all that shall come
in, and them to send to the Lord Deputy, with their safe conduct or pass, to
be at his disposition, but so as none of them return back again, being once
come in, but be presently sent away out of the Country, to the next Sheriff,
and so conveyed in safety. And likewise for martial Law, that to the
Soldier it be not extended, but by trial formerly of his crime, by a Jury of
his fellow Soldiers as it ought to be, and not rashly at the will or
displeasure of the Coronell, as I have sometimes seen too lightly. And as for
other of the Rebels that shall light into their hands, that they be well
aware of what condition they be, and what holding they have. For in the last
general wars there, I knew many good Freeholders executed by martial law,
whose lands were thereby saved to their Heirs, which should have otherwise
escheated to her Majesty. In all which the great discretion and uprigntnesse
of the Coronell himself is to be the chiefest stay both for all those doubts,
and for many other difficulties that may in the service happen.


Eudox. Your caution is very good; but now touching the Arch-Rebell himself, I
mean the Earl of Tyrone, if he in all the time of these wars, should offer
to come in and submit himself to her Majesty, would you not have him
received, giving good hostages, and sufficient assurance of himself?


Iren. No marry, for there is no doubt, but he will offer to come in, as he
has done diverse times already, but it is without any intent of true
submission, as the effect has well showed, neither indeed can he now if he
would, come in at all, nor give that assurance of himself that should be
meet: for being as he is very subtle headed, seeing himself now so far
engaged in this bad action, can you think that by his submission, he can
purchase to himself any safety, but that hereafter, when things shall be
quieted, these his villainies will be ever remembered, and whenever he shall
tread awry (as needs the most righteous must sometimes) advantage will be
taken thereof, as a breach of his pardon, and he brought to a reckoning for
all former matters; besides, how hard it is now for him to frame himself to
subjection, that having once set before his Eyes the hope of a Kingdom, has
thereunto not only found encouragement from the greatest King in Christendom,
but also found great faintnes in her Majesty's withstanding him, whereby he is
animated to think that his power is able to defend him, and offend further then
he has done, whenever he please, let every reasonable man judge. But if he
himself should come and leave all other, his accomplices without, as O Donel,
Mac Mahone, Maguire, and the rest, he must needs think that then even they,
will ere long cut his throat, which having drawn them all into this occasion,
now in the midst of their trouble gives them the slip, whereby he must needs
perceive how impossible it is for him to submit himself. But yet if he would
so do, can he give any good assurance of his obedience? For how weak hold is
there by hostages, has too often been proved, and that which is spoken of
taking Shane O-Neales sons from him, and setting them up against him is a
very perilous counsel, and not by any means to be put in proof, for were
they let forth and could overthrowe him, who should afterward overthrow them,
or what assurance can be had of them? It will be like the tale in Aesop, of the
wild horse, who having enmity with the Stagg, came to a man to desire his aid
against his foe, who yielding thereunto mounted upon his back, and so
following the stagge, ere long slew him, but then when the horse would have him
alight he refused, but ever after kept him in his subjection and service. Such
I doubt would be the proof of Shane O-Neales sons. Therefore it is most
dangerous to attempt any such plot, for even that very manner of plot, was the
means by which this traiterous Earl is now made great: For when the last
O-Neale, called Terlagh Leinagh, began to stand upon some tickle terms, this
fellow then, called Baron of Dunganon, was set up as it were to beard him, and
countenanced and strengthened by the Queen so far, as that he is now able to
keep her self play: much like unto a Gamester that having lost all, borrows
of his next fellow-Gamester somewhat to maintain play, which he setting unto
him again, shortly thereby wins all from the winner.


Eudox. Was this Rebel then set up at first by the Queen (as you say) and now
become so undutifull?


Iren. He was (I assure you) the most outcast of all the O-Neales then, and
lifted up by her Majesty out of the dust, to that he has now wrought himself
unto, and now he plays like the frozen snake, who being for compassion
releived by the husbandman, soon after he was warm began to hiss, and
threaten danger even to him and his.


Eudox. He surely then deserves the punishment of that snake, and should
worthily be hewed to pieces. But if you like not the letting forth of Shane
O-Neales sons against him, what say you then of that advice which (I heard)
was given by some, to draw in Scotts to serve against him? how like you that
advice?


Iren. Much worse then the former, for who that is experienced in those parts
knows not that the O-Neales are nearly allied unto the Mac-Neiles of
Scotland, and to the Earl of Argyle, from whence they use to have all their
succors of those Scotts and Redshanckes: Besides all these Scotts are
through long continuance intermingled and allied to all the inhabitants of the
north: The causes of these fears have been amputated, since the happy union of
England and Scotland, established by his late Majesty.
So as there is no hope that they will ever be wrought to serve faithfully
against their old friends and kinsmen: And though they would, how when they
have overthrown him, and the wars are finished, shall they themselves be put
out? do we not all know, that the Scotts were the first inhabitants of all
the north, and that those which now are called the north Irish, are indeed very
vide ^ed. Eccles. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Scotts, which challenge the ancient inheritance and dominion of that
Country, to be their own aunciently: This then were but to leap out of the
pan into the fire: For the chiefest caveat and provision in reformation of the
north, must be to keep out those Scotts.


Eudox. Indeed I remember, that in your discourse of the first peopling of
Ireland, you showed that the Scythians or Scotts were the first that sat
down in the north whereby it seems that they may challenge some right
therein. How comes it then that O-Neales claims the dominion thereof, and this
Earl of Tyrone says that the right is in him? I pray you resolve me herein?
for it is very needful to be known, and makes unto the right of the war
against him, whose success uses commonly to be according to the justnes of
the cause, for which it is made: For if Tyrone have any right in that Seigniory
(me thinks) it should be wrong to thrust him out: Or if (as I remember) you
said in the beginning that O-Neale when he acknowledged the King of England for
his Liege Lord and Sovereign, did (as he alleges) reserve in the same
submission, his Seigniories and rights unto himself, what should it be
accounted to thrust him out of the same?


Iren. For the right of O-Neale in the seigniory of the north, it is surely
none at all: For besides that the Kings of England conquered all the Realm,
and thereby assumed and invested all the right of that land to themselves and
their heirs and successors for ever: So as nothing was left in O-Neale but
what he received back from them, O-Neale himself never had any ancient
Seigniory over that country, but what by usurpation and incroachment after the
death of the Duke of Clarence, he got upon the English, whose lands and
possessions being formerly wasted by the Scotts, under the leading of Edward
le Bruce, (as I formerly declared unto you) he eft-soones entered into, and
sithence has wrongfully detained, through the other occupations and great
affairs which the Kings of England (soon after) fell into here at home, so as
they could not intend to the recovery of that Country of the north, nor
restrain the insolency of O-Neale, who finding none now to withstand him,
reigned in that desolation, and made himself Lord of those few people that
remained there, upon whom ever sithence he has continued his first usurped
power, and now exacteth and extorteth upon all men what he list; So that now to
subdue or expel an usurper, should be no unjust enterprise or wrongful
war, but a restitution of ancient right unto the Crown of England, from
whence they were most unjustly expelled and long kept out.


Eudox. I am very glad herein to be thus satisfied by you, that I may the
better satisfy them, whom I have often heard to object these doubts, and
slanderously to bark at the courses which are held against that traiterous
Earl and his adherents. But now that you have thus settled your service for
Vlster and Connaght: I would be glad to hear your opinion for the prosecuting
of Feagh Mac Hugh, who being but a base villain, and of himself of no power,
yet so continually troubles the State, notwithstanding that he lies under
their nose, that I disdain his bold arrogance, and think it to be the
greatest indignity to the Queen that may be, to suffer such a caytiffe to play
such Rex, and by his ensample not only to give heart and encouragement to all
such bad Rebels, but also to yield them succor and refuge against her
Majesty, whenever they fly unto his Comericke, whereof I would first wish
before you enter into your plot of service against him, that you should lay
open by what means, he being so base, first lifted himself up to this
dangerous greatness, and how he maintains his part against the Queen and her
power, notwithstanding all that has been done and attempted against him. And
whether also he have any pretense of right in the lands which he houldeth, or
in the wars that he makes for the same?


Iren. I will so, at your pleasure, and will further declare, not only the
first beginning of his private house* but also the original of the sept of the
Birnes and Tools, so far as I have learned the same from some of themselves,
and gathered the rest by reading: The people of the Birnes and Tools (as
before I showed unto you my conjecture) descended from the ancient Britains,
which first inhabited all those eastern parts of Ireland, as their names do
betoken, for In Richard Creagh's book de lingua Hibernica, there is a very
plentiful collection of Irish words, derived from the British or Welsh
tongue, which does much strengthen the Authors opinion, in houlding that the
B^rnes, Tools, and Cavenaghs, with other the ancient inhabitants of the
eastern parts, were originally British Colonyes. vid* page 32 and 33.
Brin in the British language signifies woody, and Tool hilly, which names
it seems they took of the Countries which they inhabited, which is all very
mountainous and woody. In the which it seems that ever since the coming in
of the English with Dermot Mac Murrogh King of Leinster, who was surnamed also
ni-Gall, as being a friend to the English, and a chief instrument in inciting
them to the conquest of Ireland.
Dermot ni-Gall, they have continued: Whether that their country being so rude
and mountainous was of them despised, and thought unworthy the inhabiting, or
that, that they were received to grace by them, and suffered to enjoy their
lands, as unfit for any other, yet it seems that in some places of the same
they have put foot, and fortified with sundry Castles, of which the ruins
only do there now remain, since which time they are grown to that strength,
that they are able to lift up hand against all that state; and now lately
through the boldness and late good success of of this Feagh Mac Hugh, they are
so far imboldened, that they threaten peril even to Dublin, over whose neck
they continually hang. But touching your demand of this Feaghes right unto that
Country which he claims, or the seigniory therein, it is most vain and
arrogant. For this you cannot be ignorant, that it was part of that which was
given in inheritance by Dermot Mac Morrough King of Leinster, unto Strongbowe
with his daughter, and which Strongbowe gave over unto the King and his heirs,
so as the right is absolutely now in her Majesty, and if it were not, yet could
it not be in this Feagh, but in o^ O-Birn^.
O Brin, which is the ancient Lord of all that Country, for he and his
ancestors were but followers unto O-Brin, and his grandfather Shane Mac
Terlagh, was a man of meanest regard amongst them neither having wealth nor
power. But his Son Hugh Mac Shane, the father of this Feagh, first began to
lift up his head, and through the strength and great fastnes of Glan-Malor,
which adjoyneth unto his house of Ballinecor, drew unto him many thieves and
out-lawes, which fled unto the succor of that glynne, as to a sanctuary and
brought unto him part of the spoil of all the Country, through which he grew
strong, and in short space got unto himself a great name thereby amongst the
Irish, in whose footing this his son continuing, has through many unhappy
occasions, increased his said name, and the opinion of his greatness, insomuch
that now he is become a dangerous Enemy to deal withal.


Eudox. Surely I can commend him, that being of himself of so mean condition,
has through his own hardiness lifted himself up to the height, that he dare
now front Princes, and make terms with great potentates; the which as it is
to him honorable, so it is to them most disgraceful, to be bearded of such a
base varlet, that being but of late grown out of the dunghill, begins now
to overcrow so high mountains, and make himself great protector of all
Outlawes and Rebels that will repair unto him. But do you think he is now
so dangerous an enemy as he is counted, or that it is so hard to take him down
as some suppose?


Iren. No verily, there is no great reckoning to be made of him, for had he
ever been taken in hand, when the rest of the Realm (or at least the parts
adjoining) had been quiet, as the honorable Gent. that now governs there, (I
mean Sir William Russell) gave a notable vide Camdeni annals, sub senem anni
1594.
attempt thereunto, and had worthily performed it, if his course had not been
crossed unhappily, he could not have stood 3. months, nor ever have looked up
against a very mean power: but now all the parts about him being up in a
madding mood, as the Moors in Leix, the Cavenaghes in the county of Wexford,
and some of the Butlers in the county of Kilkenny, they all flock unto him,
and draw into his country, as to a strong hold where they think to be safe,
from all that prosecute them: And from thence they do at their pleasures
break out into all the borders adjoining, which are well peopled countries, as
the counties of Dublin, of Kildare, of Catherlagh, of Kilkenny, of Wexford,
with the spoils whereof they victual and strengthen themselves, which
otherwise should in short time be starved, and sore pyned, so that what he is
of himself, you may hereby perceive.


Eudox. Then by so much as I gather out of your speech, the next way to end the
wars with him, and to root him out quite, should be to keep him from
invading of those countries adjoining, which (as I suppose) is to be done,
either by drawing all the inhabitants of those next borders away, and leaving
them utterly waste, or by planting garrisons upon all those frontiers about
him, that when he shall break forth, may set upon him and shorten his return.


Iren. You conceive very rightly Eudoxus, but for that the dispeopling and
driving away all the inhabitants from the country about him, which you speak
of should be a great confusion and trouble, as well for the unwillingnesse of
them, to leave their possessions, as also for placing and providing for them in
other Countries, (me thinks) the better course should be by planting of
Garrisons about him, which whenever he shall look forth, or be drawn out
with the desire of the spoil of those borders, or for necessity of victual,
shall be always ready to intercept his going or coming.


Eudox. Where then do you wish those Garrisons to be planted that they may
serve best against him, and how many in every Garrison?


Iren. I my self by reason that (as I told you) I am no martial man, will not
take upon me to direct so dangerous affairs, but only as I understood by the
purposes and plots, which the Lord Gray who was well experienced in that
service, against him did lay down: To the performance whereof he only
required 1000. men to be laid in 6. garrisons, that is, at Ballinecor 200.
footmen and 50. horsemen, which should shut him out of his great glynne,
whereto he so much trusts; at Knockelough 200. footmen and 50. horsemen, to
answer the county of Catherlagh; at Arclo or Wicklow 200. footmen and 50.
horsemen to defend all that side toward the Sea. In Shillelagh 100. footmen
which should cut him from the Cavanaghes, and the county of Wexford; and about
the three Castles 50. horsemen, which should defend all the county of Dublin;
and 100. footmen at Talbots town, which should keep him from breaking out
into the County of Kildare, and be always on his neck on that side: The which
Garrisons so laid, will so busy him, that he shall never rest at home, nor
stir forth abroad but he shall be had; as for his Creete they cannot be above
ground, but they must needs fall into their hands or starve, for he has no
fastnes nor refuge for them. And as for his partakers of the Moors, Butlers,
and Cavanaghes, they will soon leave him, when they see his fastnes and strong
places thus taken from him.


Eudox. Surely this seems a plot of great reason, and small difficulty, which
promises hope of a short end. But what special directions will you set down
for the services and risings out of these Garrisons.


Iren. None other then the present occasions shall minister unto them, and as
by good espialls, whereof there they cannot want store, they shall be drawn
continually upon him, so as one of them shall be still upon him, and sometimes
all at one instant, bayting him. And this (I assure my self) will demand no
long time, but will be all finished in the space of one year, which how small
a thing it is, unto the eternal quietness which shall thereby be purchased to
that Realm, and the great good which should grow to her Majesty, should (me
thinks) readily draw on her Highness to the undertaking of the enterprise.


Eudox. You have very well (me thinks) Irenaeus plotted a course for the
atcheiving of those wars now in Ireland, which seems to ask no long time,
nor great charge, so as the effecting thereof be committed to men of sure
trust, and sound experience, as well in that Country, as in the manner of those
services, for if it be left in the hands of such raw Captains, as are
usually sent out of England, being thereunto only preferred by friendship, and
not chosen by sufficiency, it will soon fall to the ground.


Iren. Therefore it were meet (me thinks) that such Captains only were
thereunto employed, as have formerly served in that Country, and been at least
Leivtenants unto other Captains there. For otherwise being brought and
transferred from other services abroad, as in France, in Spain, and in the
Low-Countryes, though they be of good experience in those, and have never so
well deserved, yet in these they will be new to seek, and before they have
gathered experience, they shall buy it with great loss to her Majesty, either
by hazarding of their companies, through ignorance of the places, and manner of
the Irish services, or by loosing a great part of the time which is required
hereunto, being but short, in which it might be finished, almost before they
have taken out a new lesson, or can tell what is to be done.


Eudox. You are no good friend to new Captains; It seems Iren. that you bar
them from the credit of this service: but (to say truth) me thinks it were
meet, that any one before he came to be a Captain, should have been a
Soldier, for parere qui nescit, nescit imperare. And besides there is great
wrong done to the old Soldier, from whom all means of advancement which is
due unto him, is cut off by shuffling in these new cutting Captains, into the
place for which he has long served, and perhaps better deserved. But now that
you have thus (as I suppose) finished all the war, and brought all things to
that low ebb which you speak of, what course will you take for the bringing
in of that reformation which you intend, and recovering all things from this
desolate estate? in which (me thinks) I behold them now left, unto that
perfect establishment and new commonwealth which you have conceived of, by
which so great good may redound unto her Majesty, and an assured peace be
confirmed, for that is it whereunto we are now to look, and do greatly long
for, being long sithence made weary with the huge charge which you have laid
upon us, and with the strong indurance of so many complaints, so many delays,
so many doubts and dangers, as will hereof (I know well) arise, unto the which
before we come, it were meet (me thinks) that you should take some order for
the Soldier, which is now first to be discharged and disposed of, some way:
the which if you do not well foresee, may grow to as great inconvenience as
all this that I suppose you have quit us from, by the loose leaving of so many
thousand Soldiers, which from thence forth will be unfit for any labor or
other trade, but must either seek service and employment abroad, which may be
dangerous, or else perhaps employ themselves here at home, as may be
discommodious.


Iren. You say very true, and it is a thing much mislyked in this our
Commonwealth, that no better course is taken for such as have been employed
in service, but that returning whether maimed and so unable to labor, or
otherwise whole and sound, yet afterward unwilling to work, or rather willing
to set the hangman on work. But that needs another consideration; but to
this which we have now in hand, it is far from my meaning to leave the
Soldier so at random, or to leave that waste Realm so weak and destitute of
strength, which may both defend it against others that might seek then to set
upon it, and also to keep it from that relapse which I before did forecast.
For it is one special good of this plot, which I would devise, that 6000.
Soldiers of these whom I have now employed in this service, and made
thoroughly acquainted both with the state of the Country, and manners of the
people, should henceforth be still continued, and for ever maintained of the
Country, without any charge to her Majesty, and the rest that either are
old, and unable to serve any longer, or willing to fall to thrift, as I have
seen many Soldiers after the service, to prove very good husbands, should be
placed in part of the lands by them won, at such rate, or rather better then
others, to whom the same shall be set out.


Eudox. Is it possible Irenaeus? can there be any such means devised, that so
many men should be kept still in her Majesty's service, without any charge to
her at all. Surely this were an exceeding great good both to her Highness to
have so many old Soldiers always ready at call, to what purpose soever she
list to employ them, and also to have that land thereby so strengthened, that
it shall neither fear any foreign Invasion, nor practice, which the Irish
shall ever attempt, but shall keep them under in continual awe and firm
obedience.


Iren. It is so indeed. And yet this truly I do not take to be any matter of
great difficulty, as I think it will also soon appear unto you. And first
we will speak of the North part, for that the same is of more weight and
importance. So soon as it shall appear that the Enemy is brought down, and
the stout Rebel either cut off, or driven to that wretchedness, that he is
no longer able to hold up his head, but will come in to any conditions, which
I assure my self will be before the end of the second Winter, I wish that
there be a general Proclamation made, that whatsoever Out-lawes will freely
come in, and submit themselves to her Majesty's mercy, shall have liberty so to
do, where they shall either find that grace they desire, or have leave to
return again in safety, upon which it is likely that so many as survive, will
come in to sue for grace, of which, who so are thought meet for subjection, and
fit to be brought to good, may be received, or else all of them; (for I think
that all will be but a very few) upon condition and assurance that they will
submit themselves absolutely to her Majesty's ordinance for them, by which they
shall be assured of life and liberty, and be only tied to such conditions as
shall be thought by her meet for containing them ever after in due obedience.
To the which conditions I nothing doubt, but that they will all most readily,
and upon their knees submit themselves, by the proof of that which I have
seen in Mounster. For upon the like Proclamation there, they all came in both
tagg and ragg, and when as afterward many of them were denied to be received,
they bade them do with them what they would, for they would not by any means
return again, nor go forth. For in that case who will not accept almost of
any conditions, rather then dye of hunger and misery.


Eudox. It is very likely so. But what then is the Ordinance, and what be the
conditions which you will propose unto them, which shall reserve unto them an
assurance of life and liberty.


Iren. So soon then as they have given the best assurance of themselves which
may be required, which must be (I suppose) some of their principal men to
remain in hostage one for another, and some other for the rest, for other
surety I reckon of none that may bind them, neither of wife, nor of children,
since then perhaps they would gladly be rid of both from the famine, I
would have them first unarmed utterly, and stripped quite of all their
warrelike weapons, and then these conditions set down, and made known unto
them, that they shall be placed in Leinster, and have land given them to
occupy and to live upon, in such sort as shall become good subjects, to labor
thenceforth for their living, and to apply themselves to honest trades of
civility, as they shall every one be found meet and able for.


Eudox. Where then a gods name will you place them in Leinster? or will you
find out any new land there for them that is yet unknown?


Iren. No, I will place them all in the Country of the Birnes and Tools,
which Pheagh mac Hugh has, and in all the lands of the Cavanaghes, which are
now in rebellion, and all the lands which will fall to her Majesty
there-abouts, which I know to be very spacious and large enough to contain
them, being very This carries no fit proportion for the transplantation
intended by the Author, considering the large extent of Vlster, and the narrow
bounds here limited.
near twenty or thirty miles wide.


Eudox. But then what will you do with all the Birnes, the Tools, and the
Cavanaghes, and all those that now are joined with them.


Iren. At the same very time, and in the same very manner that I make that
Proclamation to them of Vlster, will I have it also made to these, and upon
their submission thereunto, I will take like assurance of them as of the other.
After which I will translate all that remain of them, unto the places of the
other in Vlster, with all their Creete, and what else they have left them, the
which I will cause to be divided amongst them in some meet sort, as each may
thereby have somewhat to sustain himself a while withal, until by his
further travail and labor of the Earth, he shall be able to provide himself
better.


Eudox. But will you give the land then freely unto them, and make them heirs
of the former Rebels? so may you perhaps make them also heirs of all their
former villainies and disorders, or how else will you dispose of them?


Iren. Not so: But all the lands will I give unto Englishmen, whom I will have
drawn thither, who shall have the same with such estates as shall be thought
meet, and for such Rent, as shall eftsoons be rated; under every of those
Englishmen will I place some of those Irish to be Tennants, for a certain
Rent according to the quantity of such Land, as every man shall have allotted
unto him, and shall be found able to wield, wherein this special regard shall be
had, that in no place under any Landlord, there shall be many of them placed
together, but dispersed wide from their acquaintance, and scattered far
abroad thorough all the Country: For that is the evil which now I find in all
Ireland, that the Irish dwell altogether by their septs, and several nations,
so as they may practice or conspire what they will, whereas if there were
English well placed among them, they should not be able once to stir or to
murmr, but that it should be known, and they shortened according to their
demerites.


Eudox. You have good reason, but what rating of rents mean you, to what end
do you purpose the same?


Iren. My purpose is to rate the rent of all those lands of her Majesty's, in
such sort unto those Englishmen which shall take them, as they shall be well
able to live thereupon, to yield her Majesty reasonable Chiefrie, and also give
a competent maintenance unto the garrisons, which shall be there left amongst
them; for those Soldiers (as I told you) remaining of the former garrisons,
I cast to maintain upon the rent of those lands, which shall be escheated,
and to have them divided thorough all Ireland, in such places, as shall be
thought most convenient, and occasion may require. And this was the course
which the Romans observed in the Conquest of England, for they planted some of
their Legions in all places convenient, the which they caused the Country to
maintain, cutting upon every portion of land a reasonable rent, which they
called Romescot, the which might not surcharge the Tennant or Freeholder, and
might defray the pay of the Garrison: and this has been always observed by
all Princes in all Countries to them newly subdued, to set Garrisons amongst
them, to contain them in duty, whose burden they made them to bear, and the
want of this ordinance in the first conquest of Ireland by Henry the Second,
was the cause of the so short decay of that government, and the quick recovery
again of the Irish. Therefore by all means it is to be provided for. And
this is that I would blame, if it should not misbecome me, in the late
planting of Mounster, that no care was had of this Ordinance, nor any strength
of garrison provided for, by a certain allowance out of all the said Lands,
but only the present profit looked into, and the safe continuance thereof for
ever hereafter neglected.


Eudox. But there is a Band of Soldiers laid in Mounster, to the maintenance
of which, what odds is there whether the Queen receiving the rent of the
Country, do give pay at her pleasure, or that there be a settled allowance
appointed unto them out of her lands there?


Iren. There is great odds: For now that said rent of the Country is not
appointed to the pay of the Soldiers, but it is by every other occasion
coming between, converted to other uses, and the Soldiers in time of peace
discharged and neglected as unnecessary, whereas if the said rent were
appointed and ordained by an establishment to this end only, it should not be
turned to any other, nor in troublous times upon every occasion, her Majesty,
be so troubled with sending over new Soldiers as she is now, nor the
Country ever should dare to mutiny, having still the Soldier in their
neck, nor any foreign enemy dare to invade knowing there so strong and great
a Garrison, always ready to receive them.


Eudox. Since then you think that this Romescot of the pay of the Soldiers
upon the land, to be both the readiest way to the Soldiers, and least
troublesome to her Majesty; tell us (I pray you) how would you have the said
lands rated, that both a rent may rise thereout unto the Queen, and also the
Soldiers receive pay, which (me thinks) will be hard.


Iren. First we are to consider, how much land there is in all Vlster, that
according to the quantity thereof we may cesse the said rent and allowa^ce
issuing therout. Vlster (as the ancient records of that Realm do testify)
does contain 9000. Plow-lands, every of which Plow-lands contains 120.
Acres, after the rate of 21. foot to every perch of the Acre, every of which
Plow-lands I will rate at 40s. by the year, the which yearly rent amounts
in the whole to 18000l. besides 6s.8d. chiefrie out of every Plow-land. But
because the county of Louth, being a part of Vlster, and containing in it 712.
Plow-lands is not wholly to escheate to her Majesty, as the rest, they having
in all their wars continued for the most part dutiful, though otherwise a
great part thereof is now under the Rebels, there is an abatement to be made
thereout of 400. or 500. Plow-lands, as I estimat the same, the which are not
to pay the whole yearly rent of 40s. out of every Plow-land, like as the
escheated lands do, but yet shall pay for their composition of cesse toward
the keeping of Soldiers, 20s. out of every Plow-land, so as there is to be
deducted out of the former sum 200. or 300l. yearly, the which may
nevertheless be suppliby the rent of the Fishings, which are exceeding great
in Vlster, and also by an increase of rent in the best lands, and those that
lie in the best places near the Seacoast. The which eighteen thousand pounds
will defray the entertainment of 1500. Soldiers, with some overplus toward
the pay of the victuallers, which are to be employed in the victualling of
these garrisons.


Eudox. So then belike you mean to leave 1500. Soldiers in garrison for
Vlster, to be paid principally out of the rent of those lands, which shall be
there escheated unto her Majesty. The which, where (I pray you) will you have
them garrisoned?


Iren. I will have them divided into three parts, that is, 500. in every
garrison, the which I will have to remain in three of the same places, where
they were before appointed, to wit, 500. at Strabane, and about Longhfoile, so
as they may hold all the passages of that part of the Country, and some of
them be put in wards, upon all the straights thereabouts, which I know to be
such, as may stop all passages into the Country on that side, and some of
them also upon the Ban, up toward Lough-Sidney, as I formerly directed. Also
other 500. at the Fort upon Lough-Earne, and wards taken out of them, which
shall be laid at Fermannagh, at Bealick, at Ballyshannon, and all the
streightes toward Connaght, the which I know do so strongly command all the
passages that way, as that none can pass from Vlster into Connaght, without
their leave. The last 500. shall also remain in their Fort at Monoghan, and
some of them be drawn into wards, to keep the Kaies of all that Country,
both downwards, and also toward O Relies Country, and the Pale, and some at
Eniskillin, some at Belturbut, some at the black Fort, and so along that
River, as I formerly showed in the first planting of them. And moreover at
every of these Forts, I would have the seat of a Town laid forth and
encompassed, in the which I would wish that there should inhabitants of all
sorts, as Merchants, Artificers, and Husbandmen, be placed, to whom there
should Charters, and Fraunchises be granted to imcorporate them. The which as
it will be no matter of difficulty to draw out of England, persons which would
very gladly be so placed, so would it in short space turn those parts to great
commodity, and bring ere long to her Majesty much profit, for those places are
so fit for trade and traffic, having most convenient out-gates by diverse
rivers to the Sea, and In-gates to the richest parts of the land, that they
would soon be enriched, and mightily enlarged, for the very seating of the
garrisons by them, besides the safety and assurance which they shall work
unto them, will also draw thither store of people and trade, as I have seen
ensample at Mariborogh and Philipstowne in Leinster, where by reason of those
two Fortes, though there were but small wards left in them, there are two good
Towns now grown, which are the greatest stay of both those two Countries.


Eudox. Indeed (me thinks) three such Towns as you say, would do very well
in those places with the Garrisons, and in short space would be so augmented,
as they would be able with little to in-wall themselves strongly, but for the
planting of all the rest of the Country, what order would you take?


Iren. What other then (as I said) to bring people out of England, which should
inhabit the same, whereunto though I doubt not but great troops would be
ready to run, yet for that in such cases, the worst and most decayed men are
most ready to remove, I would wish them rather to be chosen out of all parts
of this Realm, either by discretion of wise men thereunto appointed, or by
lot, or by the drum, as was the old use in sending forth of Colonies, or
such other good means as shall in their wisdom be thought meetest. Amongst
the chief of which, I would have the land set into Seigniories, in such sort
as it is now in Mounster, and divided into Hundreds and Parishes, or Wards, as
it is in England, and laid out into Shires, as it was aunciently, viz. The
County of Down, the County of Antrim, the County of Louth, the County of
Armaghe, the County of Cavan, the County of This is now part of the County
of Londonderry.
Colerane, the County of Monoghan, the County of Tirone, the County of
Fermannagh, the County of Donnegall, being in all ten. Over all which I wish
a Lord President, and a Council to be placed, which may keep them afterward
in awe and obedience, and minister unto them Justice and equity.


Eudox. Thus I see the whole purpose of your plot for Vlster, and now I desire
to hear your like opinion for Connaght.


Iren. By that which I have already said of Vlster, you may gather my opinion
for Connaght, being very answereable to the former. But for that the lands
which shall therein escheat unto her Majesty, are not so entirely together, as
that they can be accounted in one sum, it needs that they be considered
severally. The Province of Connaght in the whole contains (as appears by
the records of Dublin) 7200 plow lands of the former measure, and is of late
divided into six Shires or Counties. The County of The County of Clare was
anciently accounted part of the Province of Mounster, whence it has the name
of Tuadmuan, or Thomond, which signifies north Mounster, and has at this day
its peculiar Governor, as being exempted from the Presidencies of Mounster and
Connaght.
Clare, the County of Leytrim, the County of Roscoman, the county of Galway,
the county of Maio, and the County of Sligo. Of the which all the County of
Sligo, all the County of Maio, the most part of the County of Roscoman, the
most part of the County of Letrim, a great part of the county of Galway, and
some of the county of Clare, is like to escheat to her Majesty for the
rebellion of their present possessors. The which two counties of Sligo and Maio
are supposed to contain almost 3000. plow-lands, the rent whereof rateably to
the former, I value almost at 6000l. per annum. The county of Roscoman, saving
that which pertains to the house of Roscoman, and some few other English
there lately seated, is all one, and therefore it is wholly likewise to
escheate to her Majesty, saving those portions of English inhabitants, and even
those English do (as I understand by them) pay as much rent to her Majesty, as
is set upon those in Vlster, counting their composition money therewithal, so
as it may all run into one reckoning with the former two counties: So that this
county of Roscoman containing 1200. Plow-lands, as it is accounted, amounts
to 2400li. by the year, which with the former two counties rent, makes about
8300l. for the former wanted somewhat. But what the escheated lands of the
county of Gallway and Letrim will rise unto, is yet uncertain to define, till
survey thereof be made, for that those lands are intermingled with the Earl of
Clanricardes, and others lands, but it is thought they be the one half of both
those counties, so as they may be counted to the value of one whole county,
which contains above 1000. plough-lands, for so many the least county of them
all comprehends, which makes 2000li. more, that is in all ten or eleven
thousand pounds. The other 2. counties must remain till their Escheates
appear, the which letting pass yet, as unknown, yet this much is known to
be accounted for certain, that the composition of these two counties, being
rated at 20. shil: every plowland, will amount to above 2000. pounds more, all
which being laid together to the former, may be reasonably estimated to rise
unto 13000 pounds, the which sum, together with the rent of the escheated
lands in the two last countyes, which cannot yet be valued (being as I doubt
not) no less then a thousand pounds more, will yield pay largely unto 1000.
men and their victuallers, and 1000. pounds over toward the Governor.


Eudox. You have (me thinks) made but an estimate of those lands of Connaght,
even at a very venture, so as it should be hard to build any certainty of
charge, to be raised upon the same.


Iren. Not altogether yet upon uncertainties, for this much may easily appear
unto you to be certain, as the composition money of every plowland amounts
unto, for this I would have you principally to understand, that my purpose is
to rate all the lands in Ireland at 20. shil: every plowland, for their
composition toward the Garrison. The which I know in regard of being freed
from all other charges whatsoever, will be readily and most gladly yielded
unto. So that there being in all Ireland (as appears by their old records)
43920. plowlands, the same shall amount to the sum likewise of 43920. pounds,
and the rest to be reared of the escheated lands which fall to her Majesty in
the said Provinces of Vlster, Connaght, and that part of Leinster under the
Rebels, for Mounster we deal not yet withal.


Eudox. But tell me this by the way, do you then lay composition upon the
escheated lands as you do upon the rest? for so (me thinks) you reckon
altogether. And that sure were too much to pay 7. Nobles out of every
plowland, and composition money besides, that is 20. shil: out of every
plowland.


Iren. No, you mistake me, I do put only 7. Nobles rent and composition both
upon every plowland escheated, that is 40. shil: for composition, and 6. shil:
8. pence for Cheiferie to her Majesty.


Eudox. I do now conceive you, proceed then (I pray you) to the appointing of
your Garrisons in Connaght, and show us both how many and where you would have
them placed?


Iren. I would have 1000. laid in Connaght, in 2. Garrisons, namely 500. in
the county of Mayo, about Clan Mac Costilagh, which shall keep all Mayo and
the Bourkes of Mac William Eighter: The other 500. in the county of Galway,
about Garrandough, that they may contain the Conhors and the Bourkes there,
the Kellies and Murries, with all them there-abouts, for that Garrison which I
formerly placed at Loughearne will serve for all occasions in the County of
Sligo, being near adjoining thereunto, so as in one nights march, they may be
almost in any place thereof, when need shall require them. And like as in the
former places of Garrisons in Vlster, I wished three corporate towns to be
planted, which under the safeguard of that strength should dwell and trade
safely with all the Country about them; so would I also wish to be in this of
Connaght: and that besides, there were another established at Athlone, with a
convenient ward in the Castle there for their defense.


Iren. What should that need, seeing the Governor of Connaght uses to lie
there always, whose presence will be a defense to all that Towneship?


Iren. I know he does so, but that is much to be disliked, that the Governor
should lie so far of, in the remotest place of all the province, whereas it
were meeter that he should be continually abiding in the midst of the charge,
that he might both look out alike, unto all places of his government, and also
be soon at hand in any place, where occasion shall demand him, for the
presence of the Governor is (as you said) a great stay and bridle unto those
that are ill disposed: like as I see it is well observed in Mounster, where the
daily good thereof is continually apparent: and for this cause also, do I
greatly mislike the Lord Deputies seating at Dublin, being the outest corner of
the Realm, and least needing the awe of his presence, whereas (me thinks) it
were fitter, since his proper care is of Leinster, though he have care of all
besides generally, that he should seat himself at Athie, or there-abouts,
upon the skirt of that unquiet country, so that he might sit as it were at the
very maine maste of his Ship, whence he might easily overlooke and sometimes
overreach the Moors, the Dempsies, the Connors, O-Carroll, O-Molloy, and all
that heap of Irish nations which there lie hudled together, without any to
overawe them, or contain them in duty. For the Irishman (I assure you)
fears the government no longer, then he is within sight or reach.


Eudox. Surely (me thinks) herein you observe a matter of much importance more
then I have heard ever noted, but sure that seems so expedient, as that I
wonder that heretofore it has been overseene or omitted, but I suppose the
instance of the Citizens of Dublin is the greatest let thereof.


Iren. Truly then it ought not so to be, for no cause have they to fear that
it will be any hinderance to them, for Dublin will be still as it is the key
of all passages and transportations out of England thitherto, no less profit
of those Citizens, then it now is, and besides other places will hereby
receive some benefit: But let us now (I pray you) come to Leinster, in the
which I would wish the same course to be observed, that was in Vlster.


Eudox. You mean for the leaving of the Garrisons in their forts, and for
planting of English in all those Countries, between the county of Dublin and
the county of Wexford, but those waste wild places I think when they are won
unto her Majesty, that there is none which will be hasty to seek to inhabit.


Iren: Yes enough, (I warrant you) for though the whole tracke of the Country
be mountainous and woody, yet there are many goodly valleys amongst them, fit
for fair habitations, to which those mountains adjoined will be a great
increase of pasturage, for that Country is a great soil of cattle, and very
fit for breed as for corn it is nothing natural, save only for Barley and
Oats, and some places for Rye, and therefore the larger penny-worthes may be
allowed to them, though otherwise the widenes of the mountain pasturage do
recompense the badnes of the soil, so as I doubt not, but it will find
inhabitants and undertakers enough.


Eudox. How much do you think that all those lands which Feagh Mac Hugh
houldeth under him, may amount unto, and what rent may be reared thereout, to
the maintenance of the Garrisons that shall be laid there?


Iren. Truly it is impossible by aim to tell it, and for experience and
knowledge thereof, I do not think that there was every any of the particulars
thereof, but yet I will (if it please you) guess thereat, upon ground only of
their judgment which have formerly divided all that country into 2. sheires or
countyes: Namely the county of Wicklow, and the county of This is part of the
county of Wexford.
Fernes, the which 2. I see no cause but that they should wholly escheate to
her Majesty, all save the Barony of Ar^l^ which is the Earl of Ormond's
ancient inheritance, and has ever been in his possession, for all the whole
land is the Queens, unless there be some grant of any part thereof, to be
showed from her Majesty* As I think there is only of New Castle to Sir Henry
Harrington, and of the Castle of Fernes to Sir Thomas Masterson, the rest being
almost 30. miles over, I do suppose, can contain no less rhen 2000.
plowlands, which I will estimate at 4000. pounds rent, by the year. The rest
of Leinster being 7. Counties, to wit, the County of Dublin, Kildare,
Catherlagh, Wexford, Kilkenny, the Kings and the Queens county, do contain
in them 7400. plowlands, which amounts to so many pounds for composition to
the Garrison, that makes in the whole 11400. pounds, which sum will yield pay
unto 1000. Soldiers, little wanting, which may be supplied out of other lands
of the Cavenaghes, which are to be escheated to her Majesty, for the Rebellion
of their possessors, though otherwise indeed they be of her own ancient
demeasne.


Eudox. It is great reason. But tell us now where you will wish those Garrisons
to be laid, whether altogether, or to be dispersed in sundry places of the
country?


Iren. Marry in sundry places, viz. in this sort, or much the like as may be
better advised, for 200. in a place, I do think to be enough, for the
safeguard of that country, and keeping under all sudden upstarts, that shall
seek to trouble the peace thereof, therefore I wish 200. to be laid at
Ballinecor, for the keeping of all bad persons from Glan-malo, and all the
fastnes there-abouts, and also to contain all that shall be planted in those
lands thenceforth. Another 200. at Knockelough in their former place of
Garrison, to keep the Bracknagh and all those mountains of the Cavenaghes,
200. more to lie at Fernes and upwards, inward upon the S^ane, 200. to be
placed at the fort of Leix, to restrain the Moors, vpper-Ossory, and
O-Carrol, other 200. at the fort of Ofaly, to curb the O-Connors, O-Molloyes,
Mac Coghlan, Mageoghegan, and all those Irish Nations bordering there-abouts.


Eudox. Thus I see all your men bestowed in Leinster, what say you then of
Mead?


Iren. Mead which contains both East Mead, and West Mead, and of late the
Annaly, now called the county of Longford, is counted thereunto: But Mead it
self according to the old records, contains 4320. plowlands, and the county
of Longford 947. which in the whole makes 5267. plowlands, of which the
composition money will amount likewise to 5267. pounds, to the maintenance of
the Garrison: But because all Mead lying in the bosom of that kingdom is
always quiet enough, it is needelesse to put any Garrison there, so as all
that charge may be spared. But in the county of Longford I wish 200. footmen
and 50. horsemen to be placed in some convenient seat between the Annaly and
the Breny, as about Lough Sillon, or some like place of that River, so as they
might keep both the O-Relies, and also the O-Ferrals, and all that out-skirt
of Mead in awe, the which use upon every light occasion to be stirring, and
having continual enmity amongst themselves, do thereby oftentimes trouble all
those parts, the charge whereof being 3400. and odd pounds is to be cut out of
that composition money for Mead and Longford, the overplus being almost 2000.
pounds by the year, will come in clearly to he Majesty.


Eudox. It is worth the hearkening unto: But now that you have done with Mead,
proceed (I pray you) to Mounster, that we may see how it will rise there for
the maintenance of the Garrison.


Iren. Mounster contains by record at Dublin 16000. plowlands, the
composition whereof, as the rest will make 16000. pounds by the year, out of
the which I would have 1000. Soldiers to be maintained for the defense of
that Province, the charge whereof with the victuallers wages, will amount to
12000. pounds by the year, the other 4000. pounds will defray the charge of
the Presidency and the Council of that Province.


Eudox. The reckoning is easy, but in this account, by your leave, (me
thinks) you are deceived, for in this sum of the composition money, you
account the lands of the undertakers of that Province, who are by their grant
from the Queen, to be free from all such impositions whatsoever, excepting
their only Rent, which is surely enough.


Iren. You say true, I did so, but the same 20. shil: for every plowland, I
meant to have deducted out of that rent due upon them to her Majesty, which is
no hinderance, nor charge at all more to her Majesty then it now is, for all
that rent which she receives of them, she puts forth again to the
maintenance of the Presidency there, the charge whereof, it does scarcely
defray, whereas in this account both that charge of the Presidency, and also of
a thousand Soldiers more, shall be maintained.


Eudox. It should be well if it could be brought to that: But now where will
you have your thousand men garrisond?


Iren. I would have a hundred of them placed at the Bantry where is a most fit
place, not only to defend all that side of the west part from foreign
invasion, but also to answer all occasions of troubles, to which that Country
being so remote is very subject: And surely there also would be planted a good
town, having both a good haven and a plentiful fishing, and the land being
already escheated to her Majesty, but being forcibly kept from her, by one that
proclaims himself the Bastard Son of the Earl of Clancar, being called
Donell Mac Carty, whom it is meet to foresee to. For whenever the Earl
shall die, all those lands (after him) are to come unto her Majesty, he is like
to make a foul stir there, though of himself no power, yet through
supportance of some others who lie in the wind, and look after the fall of
that inheritance. Another hundred I would have placed at Castle Main, which
should keep all Desmond and Kerry, for it answers them both most
conveniently: Also about Kilmore in the county of Cork would I have 2. hundred
placed, the which should break that nest of theives there, and answer equally
both to the county of Limericke, and also the county of Cork: Another hundred
would I have lie at Cork, as well to command the town, as also to be ready for
any foreign occasion: Likewise at Waterford, would I place 2. hundred, for the
same reasons, and also for other privy causes, that are no less important:
Moreover on this side of Arlo, near to Muskery quirke, which is the Country
of the Burkes, about Kill-Patricke, I would have two hundred more to be
garrisond, which should skoure both the white Knights country and Arlo, and
Muskery quirk, by which places all the passages of Theives do lie, which
convey their stealth from all Mounster downwards toward Tipperary, and the
English pale, and from the English pale also up unto Mounster, whereof they use
to make a common trade: Besides that, ere long I doubt that the county of
Tipperary it self, will need such a strength in it, which were good to be
there ready before the evil fall, that is daily of some expected: And thus you
see all your Garrisons placed.


Eudox. I see it right well, but let me (I pray you) by the way ask you the
reason, why in those Cities of Mounster, namely Waterford and Cork, you
rather placed Garrisons, then in all others in Ireland. For they may think
themselves to have great wrong to be so charged above all the rest?


Iren. I will tell you, those two Cities, above all the rest, do offer an
in-gate to the Spaniard most fitly: But yet because they shall not take
exceptions to this, that they are charged above all the rest, I will also lay a
charge upon the others likewise, for indeed it is no reason that the corporate
towns enjoying great franchizes and privileges from her Majesty, and living
thereby not only safe, but drawing to them the wealth of all the land, should
live so free, as not to be partakers of the burden of this Garrison, for their
own safety, specially in this time of trouble, and seeing all the rest
burdened (and therefore) I will thus charge them all ratably, according to
their abilities toward their maintenance, the which her Majesty may (if she
please) spare out of the charge of the rest, and reserve toward her other
costs, or else add to the charge of the presidency in the North. Waterford C.
Cork L. Limericke L. Galway L. Dinglecush X. Kinsale X. Yoghall X. Kilmallock
X. Clonmell X. Cashell X. Fedard X. Kilkenny XXV. Wexford XXV. Tredagh XXV.
Rosse XXV. Dundalke X. Mollingare X. Newrie X. Trim X. Ardee X. Kells X. Dublin
C.


In all 580.


Eudox. It is easy Irenaeus to lay a charge upon any town, but to foresee how
the same may be answered and defrayed, is the chief part of good advisement.


Iren. Surely this charge which I put upon them, I know to be so reasonable,
as that it will not much be felt, for the port Towns that have benefit of
shipping, may cut it easily off their trading, and in land towns of their
corn and cattle, neither do I see, but since to them especially the benefit
of peace does redound, that they especially should bear the burden of their
safeguard and defense, as we see all the towns of the Low-Countryes, do cut
upon themselves an excise of all things toward the maintenance of the war
that is made in their behalf, to which though these are not to be compared in
richesse, yet are they to be charged according to their poverty.


Eudox. But now that you have thus set up these forces of Soldiers, and
provided well (as you suppose) for their pay, yet there remains to forecast
how they may be victualled, and where purveyance thereof may be made, for in
Ireland it self, I cannot see almost how any thing is to be had for them,
being already so pitifully wasted, as it is with this short time of war.


Iren. For the first two years, it is needful indeed that they be
victualled out of England thoroughly, from half year to half year,
aforehand. All which time the English Pale shall not be burdened at all, but
shall have time to recover themselves, and Mounster also being reasonably well
stored, will by that time, (if God send seasonable weather) be thoroughly well
furnished to supply a great part of that charge, for I know there is great
plenty of Corn, sent over Sea from thence, the which, if they might have sale
for at home, they would be glad to have money so near hand, specially if they
were straightly restrained from transporting of it. Thereunto also there will
be a great help and furtherance given, in the putting forward of husbandry,
in all meet places, as hereafter shall in due place appear. But hereafter
when things shall grow unto a better strength, and the Country be
replenished with Corn, as in short space it will, if it be well followed, for
the Country people themselves are great plowers, and small spenders of Corn,
then would I wish that there should be good store of Houses and Magazins
erected in all those great places of garrison, and in all great towns, as well
for the victualling of Soldiers, and Ships, as for all Occasions of sudden
services, as also for preventing of all times of dearth and scarcity; and this
want is much to be complained of in England, above all other Countries, who
trusting too much to the usual blessing of the Earth, do never forecast any
such hard seasons, nor any such sudden occasions as these troublous times may
every day bring forth, when it will be too late to gather provision from
abroad, and to bring it perhaps from far, for the furnishing of Ships or
Soldiers, which peradventure may need to be presently employed, and whose
want may (which GOD forbid) hap to hazard a Kingdom.


Eudox. Indeed the want of those Magazins of victuals, I have oftentimes
complained of in England, and wondered at in other Countries, but that is
nothing now to our purpose; but as for these garrisons which you have now so
strongly planted throghout all Ireland, and every place swarming with
Soldiers, shall there be no end of them? For now thus being (me thinks) I
do see rather a Country of war, then of peace and quiet, which you erst
pretended to work in Ireland, for if you bring all things to that quietness
that you said, what then needs to maintain so great forces, as you have
charged upon it.


Iren. I will unto you Eudox. in privitie discover the drift of my purpose, I
mean (as I told you) and do well hope thereby both to settle an eternal
peace in that Country, and also to make it very profitable to her Majesty,
the which I see must be brought in with a strong hand, and so continued, till
it run in a steadfast course of government, which in this sort will neither
be difficult nor dangerous, for the Soldier being once brought in for the
service into Vlster, and having subdued it and Connaght, I will not have him to
lay down his Arms any more, till he have effected that which I purpose, that
is, first to have this general composition for maintenance of these
thoroughout all the Realm, in regard of the troublous times, and daily danger
which is threatened to this Realm by the King of Spain. And thereupon to
bestow all my Soldiers in such sort as I have done, that no part of all that
Realm shall be able to dare to quinch: Then will I eftsoons bring in my
reformation, and thereupon establish such a form of government, as I may
think meetest for the good of that Realm, which being once settled, and all
things put into a right way, I doubt not but they will run on fairly. And
though they would ever seek to swerve aside, yet shall they not be able
without foreign violence, once to remoove, as you your self shall soon (I
hope) in your own reason readily conceive, which if it shall ever appear, then
may her Majesty at pleasure withdraw some of the garrisons, and turn their
pay into her Purse, or if she will never please so to do (which I would
rather wish) then shall she have a number of brave old Soldiers always
ready for any occasion that she she will employ them unto, supplying their
garrisons with fresh ones in their steed. The maintenance of whom, shall be
no more charge to her Majesty, then now that Realm is, for all the revenue
thereof, and much more she spends, even in the most peaceable times, that
are there, as things now stand. And in time of war, which is now surely every
seventh year, she spends infinite treasure besides, to small purpose.


Eudox. I perceive your purpose, but now that you have thus strongly made way
unto your reformation, and that I see the people so humbled and prepared, that
they will and must yield to any Ordinance that shall be given them. I do much
desire to understand the same; for in the beginning you promised to show a
means how to redress all those inconveniences and abuses, which you showed to
be in that state of Government, which now stands there, as in the Laws,
Customs, and Religion, wherein I would gladly know first, whether in steed of
those Laws, you would have new laws made, for now for ought that I see, you
may do what you please.


Iren. I see Eudox. That you well remember our first purpose, and do rightly
continue the course thereof. First therefore to speak of laws, since we
first began with them, I do not think it now convenient, though it be in
the power of the Prince to change all the laws, and make new; for that should
breed a great trouble and confusion, as well in the English there dwelling, and
to be planted, as also in the Irish. For the English having been always
trained up in the English government, will hardly be inured to any other, and
the Irish will better be drawn to the English, then the English to the Irish
government. Therefore sithence we cannot now apply laws fit to the people,
as in the first institutions of commonwealths it ought to be, we will apply
the people, and fit them unto the Laws, as it most conveniently may be. The
Laws therefore we resolve shall abide in the same sort that they do, both
Common Law and Statutes, only such defects in the common law, and
inconveniences in the Statutes, as in the beginning we noted, and as men of
deeper insight shall advise, may be changed by some other new acts and
ordinances to be by a Parliament there confirmed. As those for trials of pleas
of the Crown, and private rights between parties, colorable conveyances and
accessaries.


Eudox. But how will those be redressed by Parliament, when as the Irish which
sway most in Parliament (as you said) shall oppose themselves against them?


Iren. That may well now be avoided: For now that so many Freeholders of
English shall be established, they together with Burgesses of Towns, and such
other loyal Irish-men, as may be preferred to be Knights of the Shire, and
such like, will be able to beard, and to counter-poise the rest, who also
being now more brought in awe, will the more easily submit to any such
ordinances as shall be for the good of themselves, and that Realm generally.


Eudox. You say well, for by the increase of Freeholders, for their numbers
hereby will be greatly augmented, but how shall it pass thorough the higher
house, which still must consiste all of Irish?


Iren. Marry that also may be redressed by ensample of that which I have heard
was done in the like case by King Edward the third (as I remember) who being
greatly bearded and crossed by the Lords of the Clergy, they being there by
reason of the Lords Abbots, and others, too many and too strong for him, so as
he could not for their frowardness, order and reform things as he desired,
was advised to direct out his Writts to certain Gentlemen of the best ability
and trust, entituling them therein Barons, to serve, and sit as Barons in the
next Parliament. By which means he had so many Barons in his Parliament, as
were able to weigh down the Clergy and their friends: The which Barons they
say, were not afterward Lords, but only Baronets, as sundry of them do yet
retain the name. And by the like device her Majesty may now likewise curb
and cut short those Irish and unruly Lords, that hinder all good proceedings.


Eudox. It seems no less then for reforming of all those inconvenient
Statutes that you noted in the beginning, and redressing of all those evil
customs: and lastly, for settling of sound Religion amongst them, me thinks
you shall not need any more to over-goe those particulars again, which you
mentioned, nor any other which might besides be remembered, but to leave all to
the reformation of such a Parliament, in which, by the good care of the Lord
Deputy and Council, they may all be amended. Therefore now you may come unto
that general reformation which you spoke of, and bringing in of that
establishment, by which you said all men should be contained in duty ever
after, without the terror of warlike forces, or violent wresting of things by
sharp punishments.


Iren. I will so at your pleasure, the which (me thinks) can by no means be
better plotted, then by ensample of such other Realms as have been annoyed
with like evils, that Ireland now is, and uses still to be. And first in
this our Realm of England, it is manifest by report of the Chronicles, and
ancient Writers, that it was greatly infested with Robbers and Out-lawes,
which lurking in Woods and fast places, used often to break forth into the
highways, and sometimes into small villages to rob and spoil. For redress
whereof it is written, that King Alured, or Aldred, did divide the Realm into
De bis qui plura scire avet, consulat D. Hen Spelmanni eq. aur. Archaeologum,
in Borsholder and Hundred.
Shires, and the Shires into Hundreds, and the Hundreds into Lathes or
Wapentackes, and the Wapentackes into Tythings* So that ten Tythings make an
Hundred, and five made a Lathe or Wapentake, of which ten, each one was bound
for another, and the eldest or best of them whom they called the Tythingman or
Borsolder, that is, the eldest pledge became surety for all the rest. So that
if any one of them did start into any undutifull action, the Borsolder was
bound to bring him forth, who joining eft-soones with all his Tything, would
follow that loose person thorough all places, till they brought him in. And if
all that Tything failed, then all that Lathe was charged for that Tything, and
if that Lathe failed, then all that Hundred was demanded for them; and if the
Hundred, theh the Shire, who joining eft-soones together, would not rest till
they had found out and delivered in that undutifull fellow, which was not
amesnable to Law. And herein it seems, that that good Saxon King followed the
counsel of Iethro to Moses, who advised him to divide the people into
Hundreds, and to set Captains and wise men of trust over them, who should take
the charge of them, and ease of that burden. And so did Romulus (as you may
read) divide the Romans into Livie speaking of Romulus has it thus, Populu^
in curias 30. divisit, etc. Eodem tempore and centuriae tres equitum
conscriptae sunt. And so we have it in Sextus Aurel. Victor's book, de viris
illustribus urbis Romae. Tres equitum centurias instituit (says he) Plebem in
triginta curias distribuit.
Tribes, and the Tribes into Centuries or Hundreths. By this ordinance, this
King brought this Realm of England, (which before was most troublesome) unto
that quiet State, that no one bad person could stir, but he was straight
taken hold of by those of his own Tything, and their Borsholder, who being
his neighbor or next kinsman were privy to all his ways, and looked narrowly
into his life. The which institution (if it were observed in Ireland) would
work that effect which it did in England, and keep all men within the compass
of duty and obedience.


Eudox. This is contrary to that you said before; for as I remember, you said,
that there was a great disproportion between England and Ireland, so as the
laws, which were fitting for one, would not fit the other. How comes it now
then, that you would transfferre a principal institution from England to
Ireland?


Iren. This law was not made by the Norman Conqueror, but by a Saxon King, at
what time England was very like to Ireland, as now it stands: for it was (as I
told you) annoyed greatly with Robbers and Out-lawes, which troubled the whole
state of the Realm, every corner having a Robin Hood in it, that kept the
woods, and spoiled all passengers and Inhabitants, as Ireland now has, so as
me thinks, this ordinance would fit very well, and bring them all into awe.


Eudox. Then when you have thus tythed the Communalty, as you say, and set
Borsolders over them all, what would you do, when you came to the Gentlemen,
would you hold the same course?


Iren. Yea marry, most especially; for this you must know, that all the Irish
almost boast themselves to be Gentlemen, no less then the Welsh; for if he can
derive himself from the head of any Sept, (as most of them can, they are so
expert by their Bardes) then he holds himself a Gentleman, and thereupon
scorneth to work, or use any hard labor, which he says, is the life of a
Peasant or Churl: But thenceforth becomes either an horse-boy, or a Stocah
to some Kerne, inuring himself to his weapon, and to the gentlemanly-trade-of
stealing (as they count it.) So that if a gentleman or any wealthy man Yeoman
of them, have any Children, the eldest of them perhaps shall be kept in some
order, but all the rest shall shift for themselves, and fall to this
occupation. And moreover it is a common use amongst some of their Gentlemen's
sons, that so soon as they are able to use their Weapons, they straight
gather to themselves three or four straglers, or Kearne, with whom wandering a
while up and down idly the Country, taking only meat, he at last falls
unto some bad occasion that shall be offered, which being once made known, he
is thenceforth counted a man of worth, in whom there is courage, whereupon
there draw to him many other like loose young men, which stirring him up with
encouragement, provoke him shortly to flat Rebellion, and this happens not
only sometimes in the sons of their Gentlemen, but also of their Noblemen,
specially of them who have base Sons. For they are not only not ashamed to
acknowledge them, but also boaste of them, and use them to such secret
services, as they themselves will not be seen in, as to plague their Enemies,
to spoil their Neighbors, to oppress and crush some of their own too
stubburne Freeholders, which are not tractable to their wills.


Eudox. Then it seems that this ordinance of tithing them by the pole, is not
only fit for the Gentlemen, but also for the Noblemen, whom I would have
thought to have been of so honorable a mind, as that they should not need
such a kind of being bound to their allegiance, who should rather have held
in, and stayde all the other from undutifulnesse, then need to be forced
thereunto themselves.


Iren. Yet so it is Eudoxus; but because that Noblemen cannot be tythed, there
being not many tythings of them, and also because a Borsolder over them, should
be not only a great indignity, but also a danger to add more power to them
then they have, or to make one the commander of ten, I hold it meeter that
there were only sureties taken of them, and one bound for another, whereby if
any shall swerve, his sureties shall for safeguard of their Bonds, either
bring him in, or seek to serve upon him; and besides this, I would wish them
all to be sworn to her Majesty, which they never yet were, but at the first
creation, and that Oath would sure contain them greatly, or the breach of it
bring them to shorter vengeance, for God uses to punish perjurie sharply: So
I read, that there was a corporal Oath taken in the reigns of Richard ^he 2.
Edward the Second, and of This service was performed by Sir Richard Edgecomb,
being appointed thereunto by a special commission from K. Henry the seventh.
There is yet extant an exact diary of all his proceedings therein, from his
first landing at Kinsale the 27th of June 1488. till his departure from Dublin
the 30th of July next.
Henry the Seventh, (when the times were very broken) of all the Lords and best
Gentlemen, of Fealty to the Kings, which now is no less needful, because
many of them are suspected to have taken an other Oath privily to some bad
purposes, and thereupon to have received the Sacrament, and been sworn to a
Priest, which they think binds them more, then their alleagiance to their
Prince, or love of their Country.


Eudox. This tything to the Common people, and taking sureties of Lords and
Gentlemen, I like very well, but that it will be very troublesome; should it not
be as well for to have them all booked, and the Lords and Gentlemen to take
all the meaner sort upon themselves, for they are best able to bring them in,
whenever any of them starteth out.


Iren. This indeed (Eudoxus) has been hitherto, and yet is a common order
amongst them, to have all the people booked by the Lords and Gentlemen: but yet
the worst order that ever was devised, for by this booking of men, all the
inferior sort are brought under the command of their Lords, and forced to
follow them into any action whatsoever. Now this you are to understand, that
all the Rebellions which you see from time to time happen in Ireland, are not
begun by the common people, but by the Lords and Captains of Countries, upon
pride or wilful obstinacy against the government, which whenever they will
enter into, they draw with them all their people and followers, which think
themselves bound to go with them, because they have booked them and undertaken
for them, and this is the reason that in England you have few such bad
occasions, by reason that the noble men, how ever they should happen to be
evil disposed, have no command at all over the Communalty, though dwelling
under them, because that every man stands upon himself, and builds his
fortunes upon his own faith and firm assurance: The which this manner of
tything the poles will work also in Ireland. For by this the people are broken
into many small parts like little streams, that they cannot easily come
together into one head, which is the principal regard that is to be had in
Ireland, to keep them from growing unto such a head, and adhering unto great
men.


Eudox. But yet I cannot see, how this can be well brought without doing great
wrong unto the noble men there, for at the first conquest of that Realm, those
great Seigniories and Lordships were given them by the king, that they should
be the stronger against the Irish, by the multitudes of followers and tennants
under them: All which hold their tenements of them by fealty, and such
services, whereby they are (by the first grant of the King) made bounden unto
them, and tied to rise out with them into all occasions of service. And this I
have often heard, that when the Lord Deputy has raised any general hostings,
the Noble men have claimed the leading of them, by grant from the Kings of
England, under the great Seal exhibited, so as the Deputies could not refuse
them to have the leading of them, or if they did, they would so work, as none
of their followers should rise forth to the hostage.


Iren. You say very true, but will you see the fruit of those grants, I have
known when those Lords have had the leading of their own followers under them
to the general hostings, that they have for the same cut upon every plowland
within their country 40. shil: or more, whereby some of them have gathered
above seven or eight hundred pounds, and others much more into their purse, in
lieu whereof they have gathered unto themselves a number of loose Kearne out of
all parts, which they have carried forth with them, to whom they never gave any
penny of entertainment, allowed by the Country or forced by them, but let
them feed upon the Countries, and extort upon all men where they come, for
that people will never ask better entertainment then to have a color of
service or employment given them, by which they will pole and spoil so
outragiously, as the very enemy cannot do much worse: And they also sometimes
turn to the enemy.


Eudox. It seems the first intent of those graunts was against the Irish,
which now some of them use against the Queen her self: But now what remedy is
there for this? or how can those graunts of the Kings be avoided, without
wronging of those Lords, which had those lands and Lordships given them.


Iren. Surely they may be well enough, for most of those Lords since their
first graunts, from the Kings by which those lands were given them, have
sithence bestowed the most part of them amongst their Kinsfolk, as every Lord
perhaps has given in his time one another of his principal Castles to his
younger Son, and other to others, as largely and as amply as they were given
to him, and others they have sold, and others they have bought, which were not
in their first grant, which now nevertheless they bring within the compass
thereof, and take and exact upon them, as upon their first demeasnes all those
kind of services, yea and the very wild exactions, Coignie, Livery, What
Coigny and Livery do signify, is formerly expressed see page 24. Sorehon was
a tax laid upon the Freeholders, for certain days in each quarter of a
year, to find victuals, and lodging, and ^o pay certain stipends, to the
Kerne, Galloglasses, and horsemen.
Sorehon, and such like, by which they pole and utterly undo the poor
Tennants and Free-houlders under them, which either thorough ignorance know not
their tenures, or through greatness of their new Lords dare not challenge them,
yea, and some Lords of countries also, as great ones as themselves, are now by
strong hand brought under them, and made their Vassalls. As for example
Arundell of the Stronde in the county of Cork, who was aunciently a great
Lord, and was able to spend 3500. pounds by the year, as appears by good
Records, is now become the Lord Barries man, and does to him all those
services, which are due unto her Majesty. For reformation of all which, I wish
that there were a commission granted forth under the great Seal, as I have
seen one recorded in the old Council Book of Mounster, that was sent forth
in the time of Sir William Drurie, unto persons of special trust and judgment
to inquire thoroughout all Ireland, beginning with one county first, and so
resting a while till the same were settled, by the verdict of a sound and
substantial Jury, how every man houldeth his land, of whom, and by what
tenure, so that every one should be admitted to show and exhibit what right he
has, and by what services he houldeth his land, whether in chief or in
soccage, or by Knights service, or how else soever. Thereupon would appear,
first how all those great English Lords do claim those great services, what
Seigniories they usurp, what wardships they take from the Queen, what lands
of hers they conceal: and then how those Irish Captains of Countries have
incroached upon the Queens Freeholders and Tennants, how they have translated
the tenures of them from English houlding, unto Irish Tanistry, and defeated
her Majesty of all her rights and duties, which are to acrew to her thereout,
as wardships, Liveries, marriages, fines of alienations, and many other
Commodities, which now are kept and concealed from her Majesty, to the value of
40000. pounds per annum, I dare undertake in all Ireland, by that which I know
in one county.


Eudox. This Irenaeus, would seem a dangerous commission, and ready to stir
up all the Irish in Rebellion, who knowing that they have nothing to show for
all those lands which they hold, but their Swords, would rather draw them,
then suffer the lands to be thus drawn away from them.


Iren. Neither should their lands be taken away from them, nor the utmost
advantages enforced against them: But this by discretion of the Commissioners
should be made known unto them, that it is not her Majesty's meaning to use
any such extremity, but only to reduce things into order of English Law, and
make them hold their lands of her, and to restore to her, her due services,
which they detain out of those lands, which were aunciently held of her. And
that they should not only, not be thrust out, but also have estates and grants
of their lands new made to them from her Majesty, so as they should
thence-forth hold them rightfully, which they now usurp wrongfully, and yet
withal I would wish, that in all those Irish countries, there were some land
reserved to her Majesty's free disposition for the better containing of the
rest, and intermingling them with English inhabitants and customs, that
knowledge might still be had of them, and of all their doings, so as no manner
of practice or conspiracy should be had in hand, amongst them, but notice
should be given thereof by one means or another, and their practices
prevented.


Eudox. Truly neither can the Irish, nor yet the English Lords, think
themselves wronged, nor hardly dealt withal herein, to have that which is
indeed none of their own at all, but her Majesty's absolutely given to them,
with such equal conditions, as that both they may be assured thereof, better
then they are, and also her Majesty not defrauded of her rightly utterly, for
it is a great grace in a Prince, to take that with conditions, which is
absolutely her own. Thus shall the Irish be well satisfied, and as for the
great men which had such graunts made to them at first, by the Kings of
England, it was in regard that they should keep forth the Irish, and defend
the Kings right, and his Subjects: but now seeing that in stead of defending
them, they rob and spoil them, and in stead of keeping out the Irish, they
do not only make the Irish their tennants in those lands, and thrust out the
English, but also some of themselves become mere Irish, with marrying with
them, with fostering with them, and combyning with them against the Queen:
What reason is there but that those graunts and privileges should be either
revoked, or at least reduced to the first intention for which they were
granted, for sure in mine opinion they are more sharply to be chastised and
reformed, then the rude Irish, which being very wild at the first, are now
become more civil, when as these from civillity are grown to be wild and
mere Irish.


Iren. Indeed as you say Eudoxus, these do need a sharper reformation then
the Irish, for they are more stubborn, and disobedient to law and government,
then the Irish be.


Eudox. In truth Irenaeus, this is more then ever I heard, that any English
there, should be worse then the Irish: Lord how quickly does that Country
alter men's natures? It is not for nothing (I perceive) which I have heard, that
the Council of England think it no good policy, to have that Realm
reformed, or planted with English least they should grow so undutifull as the
Irish, and become much more dangerous: As appears by the ensamples of the
Lacies in the time of Edward the Second, which you spoke of, that shook off
their allegiance to their natural Prince, and turned to Edward le Bruce, to
make him King of Ireland.


Iren. No times have been without bad men: but as for that purpose of the
Council of England which you spoke of, that they should keep that Realm from
reformation, I think they are most lewdly abused, for their great
carfulness, and earnest endeavors do witness the contrary. Neither is it
the nature of the Country to alter men's manners, but the bad minds of the
men, who having been brought up at home under a straight rule of duty and
obedience, being always restrained by sharp penalties from lewd behavior,
so soon as they come thither, where they see laws more slackely tended, and
the hard restraint which they were used unto now slacked, they grow more loose
and careless of their duty, and as it is the nature of all men to love
liberty, so they become flat libertines, and fall to all licentiousnes, more
boldly daring to disobey the Law, thorough the presumption of favor and
friendship, then any Irish dares.


Eudox. Then if that be so, (me thinks) your late advisement was very evil,
whereby you wished the Irish to be sowed and sprinkled with English, and in
all the Irish Countries to have English planted amongst them, for to bring them
to English fashions, since the English sooner draw to the Irish, then the
Irish to the English: for as you said before, if they must run with the
stream, the greater number will carry away the less: Therefore (me thinks)
by this reason it should be better to part the Irish and English, then to
mingle them together.


Iren. Not so Eudoxus, but where there is no good stay of Government, and
strong ordinances to hold them, there indeed the fewer will follow the more,
but where there is due order of discipline and good rule, there the better
shall go foremost, and the worst shall follow. And therefore now, since
Ireland is full of her own nation, that ought not to be rooted out, and
somewhat stored with English already, and more to be, I think it best by an
union of manners and conformity of minds, to bring them to be one people, and
to put away the dislikefull conceit both of the one, and the other, which will
be by no means better, then by this intermingling of them: For neither all the
Irish may dwell together, nor all the English, but by translating of them and
scattering them amongst the English, not only to bring them by daily
conversation, unto better liking of each other, but also to make both of them
less able to hurt. And therefore when I come to the tything of them, I will
tithe them one with another, and for the most part will make an Irish man, the
tythingman, whereby he shall take the less exception to partiality, and yet be
the more tied thereby. But when I come to the Head Borough, which is the head
of the Lathe, him will I make an English man, or an Irish man of special
assurance: As also when I come to appoint the Alderman, that is the head of the
Hundredth, him will I surely choose to be an English man of special regard,
that may be a stay and pillar of all the Borough under him.


Eudox. What do you mean by your hundred, and what by your Borough? by that,
that I have read in ancient records of England, an hundred did contain an
hundredth villages, or as some say an hundredth Plough-lands, being the same
which the Saxons called Cantred is a British word, answering to the Saxon
Hundred. How much land a Cantred contains, is variously delivered. Some hold
that it contains 100. towns. So Gir. Barry or Cambrensis, in his itinerary of
Wales, (lib. 2. cap. 7.) Dicitur autem Cantredu^ (says he) composito vocabulo
tam Britannica quam Hibernica lingua, tanta terrae portio, quanta 100. villas
contineta solet. The Author here ci^es a record which makes it contain but 30.
towne-lands: and John Clynn, (if my copy therein be not mistaken) has but 20.
But another more ancient MS. sometime belonging to the Friars Minors of
Multifernan, has 30. Qualibet cantreda (says Clinne) continet xx. (al. xxx.)
villatas terrae, quaelibet villata potest sustinere 300 vaccas in pascuis, it^
quod vaccae in x. (al. 1111.) parts divisae, nulla alteri appropinquabit,
quaelibet villata continet viii. carucatas. We find also there the Provinces
of Ireland thus divided into Cantreds. Vltonia continet 35. cantredas, Conacia
30. Lagenia 31. M^dia 18. and Momonia 70. See more concerning cantreds in Sir
Hen. Spelman's excellent Glossary. As cantreds are diversely estimated, so are
also carues or plowlands.
Cantred, the which Cantred, as I find it recorded in the Black Book of [the
Exchequer of] Ireland, did contain xxx. villatas terrae, which some call
quarters of land, and every villata can maintain 400. Cowes in pasture, and
the 400. cowes to be divided into 4. herds, so as none of them shall come
near other: every villata containing 18. Plowlands, as is there set down: and
by that which I have read of a Borough it signifies a free town, which had a
principal Officer called a Head-Borough, to become Ruler, and undertake for
all the dwellers under him, having for the same franchises and privileges
granted them by the King, whereof it was called a free Borough, and of the
Lawyers Franci plegium.


Iren. Both that which you said Eudoxus, is true, and yet that which I say not
untrue, for that which you spoke of deviding the Country into hundreds, was a
devision of the lands of the Realm, but this which I tell, was of the people,
which were thus divided by the pole: So that hundredth in this sense signifies
a 100. pledges, which were under the command and assurance of their Alderman,
the which (as I suppose) was also called a Wapentake, so named of touching the
weapon or spear of their Alderman, and swearing to follow him faithfully, and
serve their Prince truly: But others think that a Wapentake was 10. hundreds
or boroghs: Likewise a Borogh, as I here use it, and as the old laws still
use, is not a Borogh town, as they now call it, that is a franchised town:
But a maine pledge of 100. free persons, therefore called a free borough or (as
you say) Franci-plegium: For Borh in old Saxon signifies a pledge or surety,
and yet is so used with us in some speeches (as Chaucer says) St John to
Borroh, that is for assurance and warranty.


Eudox. I conceive the difference: But now that you have thus divided the
people into these Tythings and Hundreths, how will you have them so preserved
and continued, for people do often change their dwelling places, and some must
die, whilst other some do grow up into strength of years, and become men.


Iren. These Hundreds I would wish to assemble themselves once every year with
their pledges, and to present themselves before the Justices of the peace,
which shall be thereunto appointed, to be surveyed and numbered, to see what
change has happened since the year before, and the defects to supply, of
young plants late grown up, the which are diligently to be overlooked and
viewed of what condition and demeanor they be, so as pledges may be taken for
them, and they put into order of some Tything, of all which alterations notes
is to be taken, and Books made thereof accordingly.


Eudox. Now (me thinks) Irenaeus, you are to be warned to take heed lest
unawares you fall into that inconvenience which you formerly found fault with
in others: Namely, that by this booking of them, you do not gather them into a
new head, and having broken their former strength, do not unite them more
strongly again: For every Alderman having all these free pledges of his
Hundred under his command, may (me thinks) if he be evil disposed draw all
his Company into an evil action. And likewise by this assembling of them once
a year unto their Alderman by their Weapentakes, take heed lest you also give
them occasion and means to practice together in any conspiracyes.


Iren. Neither of both is to be doubted, for their Aldermen and Head Boroughes,
will not be such men of power and countenance of themselves, being to be chosen
thereunto, as need to be feared: Neither if he were, is his Hundred at his
command, further then his Princes service, and also every Tything man, may
control him in such a case. And as for the assembling of the Hundred, much
less is any danger thereof to be doubted, seeing it is before some Justice of
Peace, or some high Constable to be thereunto appointed: So as of these
Tythings there can no peril ensue, but a certain assurance of peace and great
good, for they are thereby withdrawn from their Lords, and subjected to the
Prince: Moreover for the better breaking of these heads and septs, which (I
told you) was one of the greatest strengthes of the Irish, me thinks it
should be very well to renew that old Statute, which was made in the An. 5.
Edw 4.
reign of Edward the fourth in Ireland, by which it was commanded, that
whereas The statute referres only to the Irish, dwelling among the English in
the counties of Dublin, Meth, Vriel, and Kildare* Vriel called also Ergallia,
did anciently comprehend all that country which is now divided into the
Counties of Louth and Monoghan although it may be conceived, that Louth was
only intend^d by the statute, because Monoghan was then (in a manner) wholly
possessed by the Irish.
all men then used to be called by the name of their septs, according to the
several Nations, and had no surnames at all, that from thenceforth each one
should take upon himself a several surname, either of his trade and faculty,
or of some quality of his body or mind, or of the place where he dwelt, so as
every one should be distinguished from the other, or from the most part, whereby
they shall not only, not depend upon the head of their sept, as now they do,
but also in time learn quite to forget his Irish Nation. And here withal
would I also wish all the O's and the Mac's, which the heads of septs have
taken to their names, to be utterly forbidden and extinguished. For that the
same being an ordinance (as some say) first made by The custom of prefixing
the vowell O to many of the chief Irish surnames, began soon after the year
M. in the reign of Brien boroma (the son of Kennethy) King of Ireland, As for
Mac in surnames, it bears no other signification, then Fitz does among the
French, and (from them) the English, and ap with the Welsh. And although it
were more anciently used then the other, yet it varied according to the fathers
name, and became not so soon fully settled in families.
O Brien for the strengthening of the Irish, the abrogating thereof will as much
infeeble them.


Eudox. I like this ordinance very well; but now that you have thus divided and
distinguished them, what other order will you take for their manner of life?


Iren. The next that I will do, shall be to appoint to every one that is not
able to live of his Free-holde, a certain Trade of life, to which he shall
find himself fittest, and shall be thought ablest, the which trade he shall be
bound to follow, and live only thereupon. All trades therefore are to be
understood to be of three kinds; Manual, Intellectual, and mixed. The first
containing all such as needs exercise of bodily labor, to the performance of
their profession. The second consisting only of the exercise of wit and reason.
The third sort, part of bodily labor, and part of the wit, but depending most
of industry and carefulnes. Of the first sort be all handy-crafts and
husbandry labor. Of the second be all Sciences, and those which be called the
liberal Arts. Of the third is Merchandise and Chafferie, that is, buying and
selling, and without all these three, there is no Commonwealth can almost
consist, or at the least be perfect. But the Realm of Ireland wants the most
principal of them, that is, the intellectual; therefore in seeking to reform
her state, it is specially to be looked unto. But because by husbandry, which
supplyeth unto us all things necessary for food, whereby we chiefly live.
Therefore it is first to be provided for. The first thing therefore that we
are to draw these new tythed men into, ought to be husbandry. First, because it
is the most easy to be learned, needing only the labor of the Body. Next,
because it is most general and most needful, then because it is most
natural; and lastly, because it is most enemy to war, and most hates
unquietnes: As the Poet says, -- bella execrata colonis. for husbandry being
the nurse of thrift, and the daughter of industry and labor, detesteth all
that may work her scathe, and destroy the travail of her hands, whose hope is
all her lives comfort unto the Plough, therefore are those Kearne, Stocaghes
and Horse-boyes to be driven and made to employ that ableness of Body which
they were wont to use to theft and villainy, henceforth to labor and
industry. In the which, by that time they have spent but a little pain, they
will find such sweetness and happy contentment, that they will afterward
hardly be haled away from it, or drawn to their wonted lewd life in
theeverie and roguerie. And being once thus inured thereunto, they are not
only to be countenanced and encouraged by all good means, but also provided
that their children after them may be brought up likewise in the same, and
succeed in the rooms of their Fathers. To which end there is a Anno 25o Hen.
6.
Statute in Ireland already well provided, which commands that all the
sons of husbandmen shall be trained up in their Fathers trades, but it is
(God wot) very slenderly executed.


Eudox. But do you not count in this trade of husbandry, pasturing of cattle,
and keeping of their Cowes, for that is reckoned as a part of husbandry.


Iren. I know it is, and needefully to be used, but I do not mean to allow
any of those able bodies, which are able to use bodily labor, to follow a few
Cowes grazeing. But such impotent persons, as being unable for strong travail,
are yet able to drive Cattle to and fro to their pasture, for this keeping of
Cowes, is of it self a very idle life, and a fit nurserie for a Thief. For
which cause (you remember) I disliked the Irish manner of keeping Boolies in
Summer upon the mountains, and living after that savage sort. But if they will
algates feed many Cattle, or keep them on the Mountains, let them make some
towns near to the Mountains side, where they may dwell together with
neighbors, and be conversant in the view of the world. And to say truth,
though Ireland be by nature counted a great soil of pasture, yet had I rather
have fewer Cowes kept, and men better mannered, then to have such huge increase
of Cattle, and no increase of good conditions. I would therefore wish that
there were some ordinances made amongst them, that whosoever keeps twenty
Kine, should keep a Plough going, for otherwise all men would fall to
pasturage, and none to husbandry, which is a great cause of this dearth now in
England, and a cause of the usual stealthes in Ireland: for look into all
Countries that live in such sort by keeping of Cattle, and you shall find
that they are both very barbarous and uncivil, and also greatly given to
war. The Tartarians, the Muscovites, the Norwegians, the Goths, the
Armenians, and many other do witness the same. And therefore since now we
purpose to draw the Irish from desire of war and tumults, to the love of
peace and civility, it is expedient to abridge their great custom of
hardening, and augment their trade of tillage and husbandry. As for other
occupations and trades, they need not be enforced to, but every man to be
bound only to follow one that he thinks himself aptest for. For other
trades of Artificers will be occupied for very necessity, and constrained use
of them, and so likewise will merchandise for the gain thereof, but learning
and bringing (...) in liberal Sciences, will not come of it self, but must
be drawn on with straight Laws and ordinances: And therefore it were meet
that such an act were ordained, that all the Sons of Lords, Gentlemen, and
such others as are able to bring them up in learning, should be trained up
therein from their Child-hoods. And for that end every Parish should be forced
to keep a petty Schoolmasters, adjoining unto the Parish Church, to be the
more in view, which should bring up their children in the first Elements of
Letters: And that in every Country or Baronie, they should keep an other able
Schoolmasters, which should instruct them in Grammar, and in How requisite
also an Universitie is for the further growth in learning, the judicious well
know. This happiness we now enjoy, to the great benefit of this Land. And
although former attempts have been made for erecting and establishing
Universities in Ireland, yet through want of means, which should have been
allotted for their maintenance, they have soon faded. So happened it with that
Academy which Alexander de B^gnor Archbishop of Dublin erected (in S. Patricks
Church) in Dublin, and procured to be confirmed by Pope John the ^2th. And no
better succeeded that which was afterward erected at Tredagh by Act of
Parliament Anno 5. Edw. 4. (as appears in the roll of that year in the
Chauncery) whereby all the like Privileges, as the University of Oxford (in
England) enjoyed, were conferred upon it. Besides these we find mention of
others, far more ancient, as at Armagh, and Ross. Carbry, or Ross. atlithry,
as it is called in the life of S. Faghnan the Founder, who lived in the year
590. Ipse Sanctus (says the Author) in australi Hibernia plaga iuxta mare, in
suo Monasterio quod ipse fundavit, ibi crevit civitas, in qua semper manet
magnum studium scolarium, quod dicitur Rossailithry, habitabat. But a further
search were fit to be made touching those of the elder times.
the Principles of Sciences, to whom they should be compelled to send their
youth to be disciplined, whereby they will in short space grow up to that
civil conversation, that both the children will loath their former rudeness
in which they were bred, and also their Parents will even by the ensample of
their young Children, perceive the foulness of their own behavior, compared
to theirs; for Learning has that wonderful power in it self, that it can
soften and temper the most stern and savage nature.


Eudox. Surely I am of your mind, that nothing will bring them from their
uncivile life sooner, then learning and discipline next after the knowledge and
fear of GOD. And therefore I do still expect, that you should come thereunto,
and set some order for reformation of Religion, which is first to be
respected, according to the saying of CHRIST, Seek first the Kingdom of
Heaven, and the Righteousness thereof.


Iren: I have in mind so to do; but let me (I pray you) first finish that
which I had in hand, whereby all the ordinances which shall afterward be set
for Religion, may abide the more firmly, and be observed more diligently. Now
that this people is thus tythed and ordered, and every one bound unto some
honest trade of life, which shall be particularly entered and set down in the
tything Book, yet perhaps there will be some stragglers and runnagates,
which will not of themselves come in and yield themselves to this order, and
yet after the well finishing of the present war, and establishing of the
Garrisons in all strong places of the Country, where their wonted refuge was
most, I suppose there will few stand out, or if they do, they will shortly be
brought in by the Ears: But yet afterward, lest any one of them should
swerve, or any that is tied to a trade, should afterward not follow the same,
according to this institution, but should straggle up and down the Country,
or mich in Corners amongst their Friends idly, as Carrowes, Bardes, Iesters,
and such like, I would wish that a Provost Marshall should be appointed in
every Shire, which should continually walk about the Country, with half a
dozen, or half a score horsemen, to take up such loose persons as they should
find thus wandering, whom he should punish by his own authority, with such
pains as the person shall seem to deserve; for if he be but once so taken
idly roguing, he may punish him more lightly, as with stocks, or such like;
but if he be found again so loytering, he may scourge him with whippes, or
rodds, after which if he be again taken, let him have the bitterness of
Marshall law. Likewise if any relics of the old rebellion be found by any,
that either have not come in and submitted themselves to the Law, or that
having once come in, do break forth again, and walk disorderly, let them
taste of the same cup in Gods Name, for it was due to them for their first
guilt, and now being revived by their later looseness, let them have their
first desert, as now being found unfit to live in the Commonwealth.


Eudox. This were a good ordinance: but me thinks it is an unnecessary
charge, and also unfit to continue the name or form of any Marshall-Law, when
as there is a proper Officer already appointed for these turns, to wit the
Sheriff of the Shire, whose peculiar Office it is to walk up and down his
Bayli-wicke, as you would have a Marshall to snatch up all those Runnagates and
unprofitable members, and to bring them to his Jail to be punished for the
same. Therefore this may well be spared.


Iren. Not so (me thinks) for though the Sheriff have this authority of
himself to take up all such stragglers, and imprison them, yet shall he not
do so much good, nor work that terror in the hearts of them, that a Marshall
will, whom they shall know to have power of life and death in such cases, and
specially to be appointed for them: Neither does it hinder that, but that
though it pertain to the Sheriff, the Sheriff may do therein what he can,
and yet the Marshall may walk his course besides, for both of them may do the
more good, and more terrify the idle Rogue, knowing that though he have a
watch upon the one, yet he may light upon the other: But this proviso is
needful to be had in this case, that the Sheriff may not have the like
power of life, as the Marshall has, and as heretofore they have been
accustomed; for it is dangerous to give power of life into the hands of him
which may have benefit by the parties death, as if the said loose liver have
any goods of own, the Sheriff is to seize thereupon, whereby it has come to
pass, that some who have not deserved judgment of death, though otherwise
perhaps offending, have been for their goods sake caught up, and carried
straight to the bough, a thing indeed very pitiful and horrible. Therefore by
no means I would have the Sheriff have such authority, nor yet to imprison
that Lozell, till the Sessions, for so all Gaoles might soon be filled; but to
send him to the Marshall, who eftsoons finding him faulty, shall give him
meet correction, and ridd him away forthwith.


Eudox. I do now perceive your reason well: but come we now to that whereof
we erst spoke, I mean, to Religion and religious men, what order will you
set amongst them?


Iren. For Religion little have I to say, my self being (as I said) not
professed therein, and it self being but one, so as there is but one way
therein, for that which is true only is, and the rest is not at all, yet in
planting of Religion, thus much is needful to be observed, that it be not
sought forcibly to be impressed into them with terror and sharp penalties,
as now is the manner, but rather delivered and intimated with mildness and
gentleness, so as it may not be hated before it be understood, and their
professors despised and rejected. And therefore it is expedient that some
discreet Ministers of their own Contrymen, be first sent over amongst
them, which by their meek persuasions and instructions, as also by their sober
lives and conversations, may draw them first to understand, and afterward to
embrace the doctrine of their salvation; for if that the ancient godly
Fathers, which first converted them, when they were Infidells, to the Faith,
were able to pull them from Idolatry and Paganism, to the true Belief in
CHRIST, as S. Patricke, and S. Columb, how much more easily shall godly
teachers bring them to the true understanding of that which they already
professed, wherein it is great wonder to see the odds which is between the
zeal of Popish Priests, and the Ministers of the Gospel, for they spare not
to come out of Spain, from Rome, and from Remes, by long toil and dangerous
travayling hither, where they know peril of death awayteth them, and no reward
or richesse is to be found, only to draw the people unto the Church of Rome,
whereas some of our idle Ministers, having a way for credit and estimation
thereby opened unto them, and having the livings of the Country offered unto
them, without pains, and without peril, will neither for the same, nor any
love of God, nor zeal of Religion, nor for all the good they may do, by
winning Souls to God, be drawn forth from their warm neastes, to look out
into Gods harvest, which is even ready for the sickle, and all the Fields
yellow long ago, doubtless those good old godly Fathers, will (I fear me)
rise up in the day of judgment to condemn them.


Eudox. Surely, it is great pity Iren. that there are none chosen out of the
Ministers of England, good, sober, and discreet men, which might be sent over
thither to teach and instruct them, and that there is not as much care had of
their souls, as of their Bodies, for the care of both lies upon the Prince.


Iren. Were there never so many sent over, they should do small good till one
enormity be taken from them, that is, that both they be restrained from
sending their young men abroad to other Universities beyond the Sea, as Remes,
Doway, Lovaine, and the like, and others from abroad be restrained for coming
into them* for they lurking secretly in their houses, and in corners of the
Country, do more hurt and hinderance to Religion with their private
persuasions, then all the others can do good with their public instructions,
and though for these latter there be a good Statute there ordained, yet the
same is not executed; and as for the former there is no law, nor order for
their restraint at all.


Eudox. I marvel it is no better looked unto, and not only this, but that
also which I remember you mentioned in your abuses concerning the profits and
revenewes of the Lands of Fugitives in Ireland, which by pretense of certain
colorable conveyances are sent continually over unto them, to the comforting
of them and others against her Majesty, for which here in England there is
good order taken, and why not then as well in Ireland? For though there be no
Statute there yet enacted therefore, yet might her Majesty by her only
prerogative, seize the fruits and profits of those Fugitives Lands into her
hands, till they come over to testify their true alleagiance.


Iren. Indeed she might so do, but the comberous times do perhaps hinder
the regard thereof, and of many other good intentions.


Eudox. But why then did they not mend it in peaceable times?


Iren. Leave we that to their grave considerations; but proceed we forward.
Next care in Religion is to build up and repair all the ruined Churches,
whereof the most part lie even with the ground, and some that have bin lately
repaired, are so unhandsomely patched, and thatched, that men do even shun
the places for the uncomelinesse thereof; therefore I would wish that there
were order taken to have them built in some better form, according to the
Churches of England; for the outward show (assure your self) does greatly
draw the rude people to the reverencing and frequenting thereof. What ever
some of our late too nice fools say, there is nothing in the seemly form,
and comely order of the Church. And for the keeping and continuing them, there
should likewise Churchwardens of the gravest men in the parish be appointed,
as they be here in England, which should take the yearly charge both hereof,
and also of the Schoole-houses which I wish to be built near the said
Churches, for maintenance of both which, it were meet that some small portion
of lands were allotted, since no more Mortmaines are to be looked for.


Eudox. Indeed (me thinks) it would be so convenient, but when all is done,
how will you have your Churches served, and your Ministers maintained* since
the livings (as you say) are not sufficient scarce to make them gowns, much
less to yield meet maintenance according to the dignity of their degree.


Iren. There is no way to help that, but to lay 2. or 3. of them together,
until such time as the Country grow more rich and better inhabited, at which
time the Tithes, and other obventions will also be more augmented and better
valued: But now that we have thus gone through all the 3. sorts of trades, and
set a course for their good establishment: let us (if it please you) go next
to some other needful points of other public matters no less concerning
the good of the Commonwealth, though but accidentally depending on the former.
And first I wish that order were taken, for the cutting and opening of all
places through woods, so that a wide way of the space of 100. yards might be
laid open in every of them, for the safety of travelers, which use often in
such perilous places to be robbed, and sometimes murdered. Next that Bridges
were built upon the Rivers, and all the fordes marred and spilt, so as none
might pass any other way but by those Bridges, and every Bridge to have a gate
and a gate house set thereon, whereof this good will come that no night
stealths which are commonly driven in by-ways, and by blind fordes unused of
any, but such like shall not be conveyed out of one country into another, as
they use, but they must pass by those Bridges, where they may either be happily
encountered, or easily tracked, or not suffered to pass at all, by means of
those gate-houses thereon: Also that in all straights and narrow passages, as
between 2. boggs, or through any deep foord, or under any mountain side,
there should be some little Fortilage, or wooden Castle set, which should keep
and command that straight, whereby any Rebels that should come into the
country, might be stopped that way, or pass with great peril. Moreover that
all High ways should be fenced and shut up on both sides, leaving only 40.
foot breadth for passage, so as none should be able to pass but through the
high ways, whereby thieves and night Robbers might be the more easily pursued
and encountered, when there shall be no other way to drive their stolen cattle,
but therein, as I formerly declared. Further that there should be in sundry
convenient places, by the high ways, towns appointed to be built, the which
should be free Burgesses, and incorporate under Bayliffes, to be by their
inhabitants well and strongly entrenched, or otherwise fenced, with gates on
each side thereof, to be shut nightly, like as there is in many places in the
English pale, and all the ways about it to be strongly shut up, so as none
should pass but through those towns: To some of which it were good that the
privilege of a market were given, the rather to strengthen and enable them to
their defense, for there is nothing does sooner cause civility in any country
then many Market towns, by reason that people repairing often thither for
their needs, will daily see and learn civil manners of the better sort:
Besides, there is nothing does more stay and strenghthen the Country, then such
corporate towns, as by proof in many Rebellious has appeared, in which when
all the countries have swerved, the towns have stood fast, and yielded good
releife to the Soldiers in all occasions of services. And lastly there is
nothing does more enrich any country or Realm, then many towns, for to them
will all the people draw and bring the fruits of their trades, as well to make
money of them, as to supply their needful uses, and the Countrymen will also
be more industrious in tillage, and rearing of all husbandry commodities,
knowing that they shall have ready sale for them at those towns, and in all
those towns should there be convenient Innes, erected for the lodging and
harboring of Travelers, which are now oftentimes spoiled by lodging abroad in
weak thatched houses, for want of such safe places to shroude them in.


Eudox. But what profit shall your market towns reap of their market? when as
each one may sell their corn and cattle abroad in the country, and make their
secret bargains amongst themselves as now I understand they use.


Iren. Indeed Eudoxus, they do so, and thereby no small inconvenience does
rise to the Commonwealth, for now when any one has stolen a Cow or a Garron,
he may secretly sell it in the country without privity of any, whereas if he
brought it to a market town it would perhaps be known, and the theife
discovered. Therefore it were good that a straight ordinance were made, that
none should buy or sell any cattle, but in some open market, (there being now
market towns every where at hand,) upon a great penalty, neither should they
likewise buy any corn to sell the same again, unless it were to make malt
thereof, for by such ingrosing and regrating we see the dearth that now
commonly reigns here in England, to have been caused. Hereunto also is to
be added that good ordinance, which I remember was once proclaimed throughout
all Ireland. That all men should mark their cattle with an open several mark
upon their flanckes or Buttockes, so as if they happened to be stolen, they
might appear whose they were, and they which should buy them, might thereby
suspect the Owner, and be warned to abstain from buying them of a suspected
person, with such an unknown mark.


Eudox. Surely these ordinances seem very expedient, but specially that of
free towns, of which I wonder there is so small store in Ireland, and that in
the first peopling and planting thereof, they were neglected and omitted.


Iren. They were not omitted, for there were through all places of the Country
convenient, many good towns seated, which thorough that inundation of the
Irish, which I first told you of, were utterly wasted and defaced, of which the
ruins are yet in many places to be seen, and of some no sign at all
remaining, save only their bare names, but their seats are not to be found.


Eudox. But how then comes it to pass, that they have never since been
recovered, nor their habitations reedified, as of the rest, which have been no
less spoiled and wasted.


Iren. The cause thereof was, for that after their desolation, they were begged
by Gentlemen, of the Kings, under color to repair them, and gather the poor
relics of the people again together, of whom having obtained them, they were
so far from reedifying of them, as that by all means they have endeavored
to keep them waste, least that being repaired, their Charters might be
renewed, and their Burgesses restored to their lands, which they had now in
their possession, much like as in those old monuments of Abbeyes, and religious
houses, we see them likewise use to do: For which cause it is judged that King
Henry the eight, bestowed them upon them, conceiving that thereby they should
never be able to rise again. And even so do these Lords, in these poor old
corporate towns, of which I could name diverse, but for kindling of
displeasure. Therefore as I wished many corporate towns to be erected, so
would I again wish them to be free, not depending upon the service, nor under
the command of any but the Governor. And being so, they will both strengthen
all the Country round about them, which by their means will be the better
replenished and enriched, and also be as continual houldes for her Majesty, if
the people should revolt or break out again, for without such it is easy to
forage and overrun the whole land. Let be for ensample all those
Free-boroughes, in the Low-Countryes, which are now all the strength thereof.
These and other like ordinances might be delivered for the good establishment
of the Realm, after it is once subdued and reformed, in which it might
afterward be very easily kept and maintained, with small ca^e of the
Governors and Council there appointed, so as it should in short space, yield
a plentiful revenue to the Crown of England: which now does but suck and
consume the treasure thereof, through those unsound plots and changefull
orders, which are daily devised for her good, yet never effectually prosecuted
or performed.


Eudox. But in all this your discourse I have not marked any thing by you
spoken touching the appointment of the principal Officer, to whom you wish the
charge and performance of all this to be committed: Only I observed some foul
abuses by you noted in some of the late Governors, the reformation whereof you
left of, for this present place.


Iren. I delight not to lay open the blames of great Magistrates to the rebuke
of the world, and therefore their reformation I will not meddle with, but leave
unto the wisdom of greater heads to be considered, only thus much I will
speak generally thereof, to satisfy your desire, that the government and
chief Magistracy, I wish to continue as it does, to wit, that it be ruled by a
Lord Deputy or Justice, for that it is a very safe kind of rule, but there
withal I wish that over him there were placed also a Lord Lieutenant, of some
of the greatest personages in England, such a one I could name, upon whom the
eye of all England is fixed, and our last hopes now rest, who being entitled
with that dignity, and being here always resident, may back and defend the
good course of that government against all maligners, which else will through
their cunning working under hand, deprave and pull back what ever thing shall
be begun or intended there, as we commonly see by experience at this day, to
the utter ruin and desolation of that poor Realm, and this Leiutenancie
should be no discountenancing of the Lord Deputy, but rather a strengthening of
all his doings, for now the chief evil in that government is, that no
Governor is suffered to go on with any one course, but upon the least
information here, of this or that, he is either stopped and crossed, or other
courses appointed him from hence which he shall run, which how inconvenient it
is, is at this hour too well felt: And therefore this should be one principal
in the appointing of the Lord Deputies authority, that it should be more ample
and absolute then it is, and that he should have uncontrouled power, to do any
thing, that he with the advisement of the Council should think meet to be
done: For it is not possible for the Council here, to direct a Governor
there, who shall be forced oftentimes to follow the necessity of present
actions, and to take the sudden advantage of time, which being once lost will
not be recovered, whilst through expecting direction from hence, the delays
whereof are oftentimes through other greater affairs most irksome, the
oportunityes there in the mean time pass away, and great danger often
grows, which by such timely prevention might easily be stopped: And this (I
remember) is worthily observed by Machiavel in his discourses upon Livie, where
he commends the manner of the Romans government, in giving absolute power to
all their Counselors and Governors, which if they abused, they should
afterward dearly answer: And the contrary thereof he reprehendeth in the
States of Venice, of Florence, and many other principalityes of Italy: who use
to limit their chief Officers so strictly, as that thereby they have
oftentimes lost such happy occasions, as they could never come unto again: The
like whereof, who so has been conversant in that government of Ireland, has
too often seen to their great hinderance and hurt. Therefore this I could wish
to be redressed, and yet not so but that in particular things he should be
restrained, though not in the general government, as namely in this that no
offices should be sold by the Lord Deputy for money, nor no pardons, nor no
protections bought for reward, nor no beoves taken for Captainries of
Countries, nor no shares of Bishoprics for nominating of Bishops, nor no
forfeytures, nor dispensations with poenall Statutes given to their servants or
friends, nor no selling of licenses for transportation of prohibited wares, and
specially of corn and flesh, with many the like, which need some manner of
restrainte, or else very great trust in the honorable disposition of the Lord
Deputy.

Thus I have Eudoxus, as briefly as I could, and as my memory would serve me,
run through the state of that whole Country, both to let you see, what it now
is, and also what it may be by good care and amendment: Not that I take upon
me to change the policy of so great a kingdom, or prescribe rules to such wise
men, as have the handling thereof, but only to show you the evils, which in
my small experience I have observed, to be the chief hinderance of the
reformation, and by way of conference to declare my simple opinion for the
redress thereof, and establishing a good course for government, which I do
not deliver as a perfect plot of mine own invention to be only followed, but
as I have learned and understood the same by the consultations and actions of
very wise Governors and Councillors, whom I have (sometimes) heard treat
hereof: So have I thought good to set down a remembrance of them for my own
good, and your satisfaction, that who so lift to overlooke them, although
perhaps much wiser then they which have thus advised of that State, yet at lest
by comparison hereof, may perhaps better his own judgment, and by the light of
others foregoing him, may follow after with more ease, and happily find a
fairer way thereunto, then they which have gone before.


Eudox. I thank you Irenaeus, for this your gentle pains, withal not
forgetting now in the shutting up, to put you in mind of that which you have
formerly half promised, that hereafter when we shall meet again, upon the
like good occasion, you will declare unto us, those your observations which you
have gathered of the antiquities of Ireland.


The end.
Faults escaped.
Page* 25. lin. 45. for and he, read he is. page 27. lin, 28. in some copies,
for Albany, read either Albion or England. page 32. lin. 22. for admiral read
admirable. page 33. lin. 38. for after, read before, page 48* lin. 14. for
Term^ssa, read Tecmessa. page 54. lin. 34. and 46 for Talkmot^^, read
Folkmo^es, and in the Margent add, vid. D. Hen. Sp^lmanni Glossarium, page 74*
lin. 44* for Sinerwicke, read Swerwicke.

ANNOTATIONS.
Upon review of that part which was printed, before I began to inserte any
notes, these few animadversions are added.

Page 6. lin. 39.

-- the first original of this word Tanist and Tanistry came. See whether it
may not be more fitly derived from Thane, which word was commonly used among
the Danes, and also among the Saxons in England, for a noble man, and a
principal officer.

Page 11. lin. 14.

-- duke of Clarence, who having married the heir of the Earl of Vlster, etc.
It was not George Duke of Clarence here spoken of by the author, but De hac re
vid^ Camd. Britan. page 336. and annal. Hib. ab to edi^. ad an. 136^
Lionell Duke of Clarence, third son of King Edw. the 3. who married the
Earl of Vlsters daughter, and by her had the Earldom of Vlster. and although
Edw. the 4. made his brother the Duke of Clarence, Lo. Lieutenant of Ireland,
yet the place was still executed by his Deputyes (which were at several times)
Thomas Earl of Desmond, John Earl of Worcester, Tho. Earl of Kildare, and
William Shirwood Bishop of Meth, the Duke himself never coming into Ireland
to govern there in person.

Page 26. lin. 26.

-- Kin is English, and Congish affinity in Irish. I conceive the word to be
rather altogether Irish. Kin signifying in Irish, the heads or chief of any
septs.

Page 27.

The discourse from the word Scythians in the 11. line, unto the end of the
parenthesis in the 30. line, is wholly to be crossed out, as being then
agreeable to the best MS. Copy, only after Scythians, add, which.

Touching the Scythians A regione quadam qua dicitur Scythia: dicitur Scita,
Sciticus, Scoticus, Scotus, Scotia. Tho. Walsingham. i^ Hypodigmat^ Ne^ striae,
ad an. 1185.
or Scotts arrival in Ireland, see Nennius an ancient British author (who
lived in the year of Christ 858.) where among other things we have the time of
their arrival. Brittones (says he) venerunt in 3. aetate mundi in Britanniam,
Scythae autem in 4. obtinuerunt Hiberniam.

Page 28. lin. 35.

-- remembrances of Bards. Of the ancient Bards or Poets, Lucan makes this
mention in the first book of his Pharsalia. Vos quoque qui fortes animas,
belloque peremptas,
Lauaibus in longum vates dimit^itis aevum,
Plurima securi fudistis carmina Bardi.
Concerning the Irish Bardes see page 51. The word signified among the Gauls a
singer, as it is noted by Mr Camden, and Mr Seldom, out of Festus Pompeius, and
it had the same signification among the British. Sr John Price in the
description of Wales, expounds it to be one that had knowledge of things to
come, and so (says he) it signifies at this day. taking his ground (amiss)
out of Lucan's verses. Doctor Powell in his notes upon Caradoc of Lhancarvan
says, that in Wales they preserved Gentlemen's arms and pedegrees. At this
time in Ireland the Bard by common acceptance, is counted a railing Rimer, and
distinguished from the Poet.

Page 29. lin. 10.

-- an Irish Scot or Pict by nation. Bid tells us that the Picts were a colony
of Scythians, who first coming into Ireland, and being denied residence there
by the Scots, were persuaded by them to inhabit the North parts of Britain.
But Mr Camden, out of Dio, Herodian, Tacitus, etc. and upon consideration of
the customs, name and language of the Picts, conceives not improbably, that
they were natural Britons, although distinguished by name.

Page 29. lin. 28.

Those Bardes indeed Caesar writes -- Concerning them I find no mention in
Caesar's commentaryes, but much touching the Druides, which were the Priests
and Philosophers, (or Magi as Hist. not lib. 16. cap* 44.
Pliny calls them) of the Gauls and British. Illi rebus divinis intersunt, (
De b^llo Galli. ^o ^ib. 2.
says he) sacrificia publica ac privata procurant, religiones interpretantur.
Ad hos magnus adolescentium numerus disciplinae caussa concurrit, magnoque ij
sunt apud eos honor. etc. The word Dr^oi had anciently the same signification
(as I am informed) among the Irish.

Page 30. lin. 30.

-- and Cornelius Tacitus does also strongly affirm the same. Cornelius
Tacitus in the life of Julius Agricola says thus. Silurum colorati vultus, and
torti plerumque crines, and positus contra Hispaniam, Iberos veteres
trajecisse, easque seeds occupasse fidem faciunt. This he speaks touching the
Silures which inhabited that part of South Wales, which now we call
Herefordshire, Radnorshire, Brecknockshire, Monmouth shire, and Glamorganshire.
And although the like reason may be given for that part of Ireland which lies
next unto Spain, yet in Tacitus we find no such inference. Rer. Scot. lib. 2.
Buchanan indeed upon the conjecture of Tacitus has these words. Verisimile a.
non est Hispanos relicta a tergo Hiberni^, terra propiore, and coeli and soli
mitioris, in Albium primum descendisse, sed primum in Hiberniam appulisse,
atque inde in Britannia^ colonos missos. Which was observed unto me by the most
learned Bishop of Meth, Dr Anth. Martin, upon conference with his Lordship
about this point. One passage in Tacitus touching Ireland (in the same book) I
may not here omit, although it be extra oleas. Quinto expeditionum anno (
says he) nave prima transgressus, ignotas ad tempus gentes, crebris simul ac
prosperis praelijs domuit, eamque partem Britanniae quae Hiberniam aspicit,
copijs instruxit, in spem magis quam ob formidinem. Siquidem Hibernia medio
inter Britanniam atque Hispaniam sita, and Gallico quoque mari opportuna
valentissimam imperij partem magnis invicem usibus miscuerit. Spatium ejus si
Britanniae comparetur, angustius, nostri maris insulas superat. Solum coelumque
and ingenia, cultusque hominum haut multum a Britannia differunt, melius aditus
portusque per commercia and negotiatores cogniti. Agricola expulsum seditione
domestica unum ex regulis gentis exceperat, ac specie amicitiae in occasionem
retinebat. Saepe ex eo audivi Legione una and modicis auxilijs debellari,
obtinerique Hiberniam posse. idque adversus Britanniam profuturum, si Romana
ubique arma, and velut e conspectu libertas tolleretur.

Page 31. lin. 4.

-- Slanius, in the end made himself Monarch. The Irish stories have a
continued succession of the Kings of Ireland from this Slanius, until the
conquest by King Henry the second, but very uncertain, especially until the
planting of Religion by S. Patrick, at which time Loegarius, or Lagirius was
Monarch.

Page 33. lin. 35.

Ireland is by Diodorus Siculus and by Strabo called Britannia. Iris is by
Diodorus called a part of Britain: but Ireland by neither of them Britannia.

Page 33. lin. 38.

-- King Arthur, and before him Gurgunt. Concerning King Arthur's conquest of
Ireland, see Geffry of Monmuth, and Matthew of Westminster, at the year 525.
where he is said to have landed in Ireland with a great army, and in a battle
to have taken King Gilla-mury prisoner, and forced the other Princes to
subjection. In our Annals it appears that Moriertach (the son of Erca) was
at that time King of Ireland, of which name some relics seem to be in
Gilla-Mury, Gilla being but an addition used with many names, as Gilla-Patrick,
etc. But in the Country writers (which I have seen) I find not the least touch
of this conquest.

Page 34. lin. 23.

-- amongst whom he distributed the land. King Henry the 2. gave to Gir. Camb.
Hib. expugn. lib. I. cap. 2^.
Richard Strong-bow Earl of Striguil or Penbroke, all Leinster, excepting the
city of Dublin, and the Cantreds adjoining with the maritime towns and
castles. Unto Vid. Rog. de Hoveden page 567, edit. Franc. and Camd. Brit. page
739.
Robert fitz Stephen, and Miles de Cogan he granted the Kingdom of Cork,
excepting the City of Cork, and the Ostmans Cantred. And unto Rog. de Hoveden
ibid.
Philip de Bruise the Kingdom of Limericke. But in a confirmation of King John
to William de Bruise ( or Braos) Nephew to this Philip, we find that he gave
to him only Chart. an. 2. Io. in arce Land.
honorem de Limerick, retentis in dominico nostro ( as the words of the Charter
are) civitate de Limerick and donationibus episcopatuum and abbatiarum, and
retentis in manu nostra cantredo Ostmannorum and S. insula. Among other large
graunts (remembered by Hoveden) which this King Henry gave to the first
adventurers, that of Meth to Sr Hugh de Lacy is of special note. The grant was
in these words.

HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, and Dux Normanniae and Aquitaniae, and Comes
Andegauiae. Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Comitibus, Baronibus,
Iustitiarijs, and omnibus ministris and fidelibus suis Francis, Anglis and
Hiberniensibus totius terrae suae, Salutem. Sciatis me dedisse and concessisse,
and praesenti charta mea confirmasse Hugoni de Lacy pro servitio suo, terram de
Midia cum omnibus pertinentijs suis per servitium quinquaginta militum sibi and
haeredibus suis, tenendu^ and habendu^ a me and haeredibus meis, sicut
Murchardus Hu-melathlin eam tenuit, vel aliquis alius ante illum vel postea. Et
de incremento illi dono omnia feoda quae praebuit, vel quae praebebit circa
D^veliniam, dum Balivus meus est, ad faciendum mihi servitium apud civitatem
meam Duveliniae. Quare volo and firmiter praecipio, ut ipse Hugo and haeredes
sui post eum praedictam terram habeant, and teneant omnes libertates and
liberas consuetudines qu sibi habeo vel habere possum per praenominatum
servitium, a me and haeredibus meis, been and in pace, libere, and quiet, and
honorifice, in bosco and plano, in pratis and pascuis, in aquis and mole^dinis,
in vivarijs and stagnis, and piscationibus and venationibus, in vijs, and
semitis, and portubus maris, and in omnibus alijs locis, and alijs rebus ad eam
pertinentibus cum omnibus libertatibus, quas ibi habeo, vel illi dare possum,
and hac mea charta confirmare. Test. comite Richardo filio Gilberti, VVillielmo
de Braosa, etc. Apud VVeisford. But above all other graunts made by K. Henry
the 2. that to his son John is most memorable. Deinde ( says In Henr. 2.
page 566^.
Hoveden) venit rex Oxenford, and in generali concilio ibidem celebrato
constituit Iohannem filium suum Regem in Hibernia, concessione and
confirmatione Alexandri summi Pontificis. By virtue of this grant both in the
life time of his father, and in the reign of his brother king Richard, he was
styled in all his charters Dominus Hiberniae, and directed them thus, Ioannes
Dominus Hiberniae, and comes Morton. Archiepiscopis, episcopis, comitibus,
baronibus, Iustitiarijs, vicecomitibus, constabularijs, and omnibus ballivis
and ministris suis totius Hiberniae, salutem. Thus we have it frequently
(although sometimes with a little variation) in the Registers of Saint Mary
Abbey, and Thomascourt by Dublin. How the Earl in Leinster, and Lacy in Meth,
distributed their lands, (besides what they retained in their own hands,) is
delivered by Maurice Regan, ( interpreter to Dermot Mac Murrough King of
Leinster) who wrote the History of those times in French verse. The book was
translated into English by Sir George Carew Lo. President of Mounster,
afterward earl of Totnes, and communicated to me, by our most reverend and
excellently learned Primate. There we find that the Earl gave to Reymond le
Gross in Consul. Gir. Camb. Hib. expugn. lib. 2. cap. 4*
marriage with his sister, Fotherd, Odrone, and Glascarrig, unto Hervy de
Mount-marish, he gave Obarthy, unto Maurice de Prindergast, Fernegenall, which
was afterward conferred upon Robert fitz Godobert but by what means he
obtained it ( says Regan) I know not. Unto Meiler Fitz Henry he gave Carbry,
unto This Maurice soon after deceasing at Wexford, king John then earl of
Moreton confirmed to his son William Fitz Maurice cantredum terrae quem
Makelanus tenuit, illum sc^in quo villa de N^as sita est, quam comes Richardus
dedit Mauritio patri ipsius Willielmi. Thus the charter* habetu^ in ro^. com.
placis an. 10. Hen. 6. in iurri Birminghamiano*
Maurice Fitz Gerald the Naas Ofelin (which had been possessed by Mackelan)
and Wickloe, unto Walter de Ridelesford he gave the lands of Omorthy, unto John
de Clahul the marshalship of Leinster, and the land between Aghabo and
Leghlin, unto Robert de Birmingham Ofaly, and unto Adam de Hereford large
possessions. What these possessions were, are thus noted in the Register of
Thomascourt abbey, where speaking of the Earl, Postea Lagenia perquisita, erat
quidam juvenis cum eo quem multum dilexit, and dedit eidem pro servitio suo
terras and tenementa subscripta, viz. tenementum de saltu Salmonis, Cloncoury,
Kill, Houterard, and tenementum de Donning cum omnibus suis pertinentijs. Thus
the Register. This Adam de Hereford was founder of Saint Wulstan's Priory near
Leixlip in the county of Kildare. But we proceed with Regan. Unto Miles Fitz
David who was one of his chief favorites, he gave Overk in Ossory, to Thomas
le Flemming, Arde, to Gilbert de Borard, Ofelmith, to a knight called Reinand
he gave 15. knights fees adjoining to the sea, and to one Robert (who was
afterward slain in Connaght) the Norragh. What partition Lacy made in Meth,
he thus delivers. Unto his special friend Hugh Tirrell he gave Castleknock:
and unto William Petit Castlebreck. I have seen an ancient deed made by Sir
Hugh de Lacy to this William Petit wherein among other things he graunts unto
him Matherethirnan cum omnibus pertinentijs suis, exceptis Lacu and villa quae
dicitur Dissert, etc. Unto the valiant Meiler fitz Henry ( says Regan) he gave
Magherneran the lands of Rathkenin, and the cantred of Athnorker. Unto Gilbert
de Nangle all Magherigallen, unto Iocelin the son of Gilbert de Nangle, the
Navan and the land of Ardbraccan: unto Richard de Tuite he gave fair
possessions, unto Robert de Lacy Rathwer, unto Richard de la Chapel he gave
much land, unto Geffry de Constantine Kilbisky and Rathmarthy: Unto Adam de
Feipo, Gilbert de Nugent, William de Misset, and Hugh de Hose, he gave large
inheritances. In Lacyes grant to Feipo, we find that he gave him Skrine, et
praeterea ( says the Magn. regest. mon. B. Mariae iu^^a Dublin. fol* 76.
deed) feodum unius militis circa Duvelinam, scil. Clantorht and Santref. etc.
In his grant to Gilbert de Nugent, (the original whereof I have seen, with
an impression upon the seal, of a knight armed and mounted,) he gave to him
Delvin, quam in tempore Hebernicorum tenuerunt O-Finelans, cum omnibus
pertinentijs and villis, quae infra praedictam Delvin continentur, excepta
quadam villa Abbatis Fourae nomine Torrochelasch pro servitio 5. militum. Thus
the Charter. To Misset he gave Luin, and to Hussy or Hose Galtrim. Regan
proceeds. Unto Adam Dullard he gave the lands of Dullenvarthy, unto one Thomas
he gave Cramly, Timlath-began northeast from Kenlis, Lathrachalim, and
Sendevonath, and unto Richard le Flemming he gave Crandon at 20. Knights fees.

Page 36. l. 26.

-- they changed the form thereof into their cloakes called Pallia. As the
Romans had their gown called toga, so the ancient outward vestiment of the
Grecians was called Pallium, by some translated a Mantle, although it be now
commonly taken for a Cloak, which does indeed somewhat resemble a Mantle. By
these different kinds of habit, the one was so certainly distinguished from the
other, that the word Togatus was often used to signify a Roman, and Palliatus
a Grecian, as it is observed by Romanae histor. antholog. lib. 2. sect. 3. cap.
7.
Mr Tho. Godwin out of De iud* l. 3. cap. 19.
Sigonius. Togati says he) pro Romany dicti, ut Palliati pro Graecis. But
that the ancient Latins and Romans used it, as the Author alleges, (out of I
know not what place in Virgil) appears no way unto me. That the Gown was
their usual outward garment, is most certain, and that commonly of wool,
finer or courser, according to the dignity of the person that wore it. Whence
Horace: -- Sit mihi mensa tripes, et
Satyr. 3. lib. 1.
Concha salis puri, et toga quae defendere frigus
Quamvis crassa, queat --
And from this difference between the ancient Roman and Grecian habit, grew
the proverbs, modo palliatus, modo togatus, and de toga ad pallium, to denote
an unconstant person.

Page 36. lin. 32.

-- Humi mantilia sternunt. Euanders entertainment of Aeneas, is set out in the
8. book of Virgils Aeneis, but there we have no such word as mantile. In his
entertainment by Dido we have it, but in another sense.

Iam pater Aeneas, and jam Troiana iuventus
Convenient, stratoque super discumbitur ostro, AEneid. lib. 1*

Dant famuli manibus lymphas Cereremque canistri^
Expediunt, tonsisque ferunt mantilia villis.
Page 38. lin. 44.

-- as in that battle of Thomyris against Cyrus. Herodotus in the description
of that battle has no such thing.

Page 41. lin. 30.

-- by the sword and by the fire. Lucian has it, by the sword and by the wind.
Somewhat may be gathered to this purpose out of the An 45^*
Vlster Annals, where Laegarius (or Lagerius) a heathen King of Ireland, being
taken prisoner by the Leinster men, is said to have bin released upon an oath,
which was per solemn and ventum.

Out of the fourth Book of the Faerie Queen, Canto XI. concerning the rivers
of Ireland.
NEthence the Irish Rivers absent were,
Since no less famous then the rest they be,
And join in neighborhood of kingdom near,
Why should they not likewise in love agree,
And joy likewise this solemn day to see?
They saw it all, and present were in place;
Though I them all according their degree,
Cannot recount, nor tell their hidden race,
Nor read the salvage countries, thorough which they pase.
There was the Liffie, rolling down the lea,
The sandy Slane, the stony Aubrian,
The spacious Shenan spreading like a sea,
The pleasant Boyne, the fishy fruitful Ban,
Swift Awniduffe, which of the English man
Is called Black water, and the Liffar deep,
Sad Trowis, that once his people overran,
Strong Allo tombling from Slewlogher steep,
And Mulla mine, whose waves I whilom taught to weep.
And there the three renowned brethren were,
Which that great Giant Blomius begot
Of the fair Nymph Rheusa wandering there,
One day, as she to shun the season hot,
Under Slewbloome in shady grove was got,
This Giant found her, and by force deflowered:
Whereof conceiving, she in time forth brought
These three fair sons, which being thence forth powrd
In three great rivers ran, and many countries scowrd.
The first, the gentle Shure, that making way
By sweet Clonmell adornes rich Waterford;
The next the stubburne Newre, whose waters gray
By fair Kilkenny, and Rosseponte board;
The third, the goodly Barow, which does hoord
Great heaps of Salmons in his deep bosom:
All which long sundred, do at last accord
To join in one, ere to the sea they come,
So flowing all from one, all one at last become,
There also was the wide embayed Mayre,
The pleasant Bandon crowned with many a wood,
The spreading Lee, that like an Island fair
Encloseth Cork with his divided flood;
And balefull Our, late staynd with English blood:
With many more, whose names no tongue can tell.
All which that day in order seemly good
Did on the Thamis attend, and waited well
To do their duefull service, as to them befell.
Out of the seventh Book of the Faerie Queen. Cant. VI.
Eftsoons the time and place appointed were,
Where all both heavenly Powers, and earthly wights,
Before great Natures presence should appear,
For trial of their Titles and best Rights,
That was, to weet, upon the highest hights
Of Arlo-hill (Who knows not Arlo-hill?)
That is the highest head (in all men's sights)
Of my old father Mole, whom Shepherds quill
Renowned has with hymns fit for a rural skill.
And were it not ill fitting for this file,
To sing of hills and woods, among wars and Knights,
I would abate the sternenesse of my style,
Among these stern stounds to mingle soft delights;
And tell how Arlo through Dianaes spights
(Being of old the best and fairest Hill
That was in all this holy Islands hights)
Was made the most unpleasant, and most ill.
Mean while, O Clio, lend Calliope thy quill.
Whylome, when IRELAND flourished in fame
Of wealth and goodness, far above the rest
Of all that bear the British Islands name,
The Gods then used (for pleasure and for rest)
Often to resort there-to, when seemed them best:
But none of all there-in more pleasure found,
Then Cynthia; that is sovereign Queen professed
Of woods and forests which therein abound,
Sprinkled with wholesome waters, more then most on ground.
But among them all, as fittest for her game,
Either for chase of beasts with hound or bow,
Or for to shrowde in shade from Phoebus flame,
Or bathe in fountains that do freshly flow,
Or from high hills, or from the dales below,
She chose this Arlo; where she did resort
With all her Nymphs enranged on a row,
With whom the woody gods did often consort:
For, with the Nymphs, the Satyrs love to play and sport.
Amongst the which, there was a Nymph that hight
Molanna; daughter of old father Mole,
And sister unto Mulla fair and bright:
Unto whose bed false Bregog whylome stole,
That Shepherd Colin dearly did condole,
And made her lucklesse loves well known to be.
But this Molanna, were she not so shole,
Were no less fair and beautiful then she:
Yet as she is, a fairer flood may no man see.
For first she springs out of two marble Rocks,
On which, a grove of Oaks high mounted grows;
That as a girlond seems to deck the locks
Of some fair Bride, brought forth with pompous shows
Out of her bower, that many flowers strowes:
So, through the flowery Dales she tumbling down,
Through many woods, and shady coverts flows,
(That on each side her silver channel crown)
Till to the Plain she come, whose Valleys she does drown.
In her sweet streams, Diana used often
(After her sweaty chase and toylesome play)
To bathe her self; and after, on the soft
And downy grass, her dainty limbs to lay
In covert shade, where none behold her may:
For, much she hated sight of living eye.
Foolish God Faunus, though full many a day
He saw her clad, yet longed foolishly
To see her naked among her Nymphs in privity.
No way he found to compass his desire,
But to corrupt Molanna, this her maid,
Her to discover for some secret hire:
So, her with flattering words he first assaid,
And after, pleasing gifts for her purvaid,
Queene-apples, and red Cherries from the tree,
With which he her allured and betrayed,
To tell what time he might her Lady see
When she her self did bathe, that he might secret be.
There-to he promised, if she would him pleasure
With this small boon, to quit her with a better;
To weet, that where-as she had out of measure
Long loved the Fanchin, who by naught did set her,
That he would undertake, for this to get her
To be his Love, and of him liked well:
Besides all which, he vowed to be her debtor
For many more good turns then he would tell;
The least of which, this little pleasure should excel.
The simple maid did yield to him anon;
And eft him placed where he close might view
That never any saw, save only one;
Who, for his hire to so foole-hardy dew,
Was of his hounds devoured in Hunters hew.
Tho, as her manner was on sunny day,
Diana, with her Nymphs about her drew
To this sweet spring; where, doffing her array,
She bathed her lovely limbs, for Jove a likely pray.
There Faunus saw that pleased much his eye,
And made his heart to tickle in his breast,
That for great joy of somewhat he did spy,
He could him not contain in silent rest;
But, breaking forth in laughter, loud professed
His foolish thought. A foolish Faune indeed,
That could not hold thy self so hidden blessed,
But would needs thine own conceit areed.
Babblers unworthy been of so divine a meed.
The Goddess, all abashed with that noise,
In haste forth started from the guilty brook;
And running straight where-as she heard his voice,
Enclosed the bush about, and there him took,
Like dared Lark; nor daring up to look
On her whose sight before so much he sought.
Thence, forth they drew him by the horns, and shook
Nigh all to pieces, that they left him naught;
And then into the open light they forth him brought.
Like as an huswife that with busy care
Thinks of her Dairy to make wondrous gain,
Finding where-as some wicked beast unware
That breaks into her Dayr'house, there does draine
Her creaming pannes, and frustrate all her pain;
Has in some snare or gin set close behind,
Entrapped him, and caught into her train,
Then thinks what punishment were best assigned,
And thousand deaths devises in her vengefull mind:
So did Diana and her maidens all
Use silly Faunus, now within their bail:
They mock and scorn him, and him foul miscall;
Some by the nose him plucked, some by the tail,
And by his goatish beard some did him hail:
Yet he (poor soul) with patience all did bear:
For, naught against their wills might countervaile:
Ne ought he said whatever he did hear;
But hanging down his head, did like a Mouse appear.
At length, when they had flouted him their fill,
They began to cast what penance him to give.
Some would have gelt him, but that same would spill
The Wood-gods breed, which must for ever live:
Others would through the river him have drive,
And ducked deep: but that seemed penance light;
But most agreed and did this sentence give,
Him in Deeres skin to clad; and in that plight,
To hunt him with their hounds, him self save how he might.
But Cynthia's self more angry then the rest,
Thought not enough, to punish him in sport.
And of her shame to make a gamesome jest;
But began examine him in straighter sort,
Which of her Nymphs, or other close consort,
Him thither brought, and her to him betrayed.
He, much affeard, to her confessed short,
That't was Molanna which her so bewrayd,
Then all at once their hands upon Molanna laid.
But him (according as they had decreed)
With a Deeres skin they covered, and then chaste
With all their hounds, that after him did speed;
But he more speedy, from them fled more fast
Then any Dear: so sore him dread aghast.
They after followed all with shrill outcry,
Shouting as they the heavens would have brast,
That all the woods and dales where he did fly,
Did ring again, and loud reecho to the sky.
So they him followed till they weary were;
When, back returning to Molann' again,
They, by command'ment of Diana, there
Her whelmed with stones. Yet Faunus (for her pain)
Of her beloved Fanchin did obtain,
That her he would receive unto his bed.
So now her waves pass through a pleasant Plain,
Till with the Fanchin she her self do wed,
And (both combined) themselves in one fair river spread.
Nath'lesse, Diana, full of indignation,
Thence-forth abandond her delicious brook;
In whose sweet stream, before that bad occasion,
So much delight to bathe her limbs she took:
Ne only her, but also quite forsook
All those fair forests about Arlo hid,
And all that Mountain, which does over-looke
The richest champain that may else be rid,
And the fair Shure, in which are thousand Salmons bred.
Them all, and all that she so dear did way,
Thence-forth she left; and parting from the place,
Thereon an heavy hapless curse did lay
To weet, that Wolves, where she was wont to space,
Should harbored be, and all those Woods deface,
And Thieves should rob and spoil that Coast around,
Since which, those Woods, and all that goodly Chase,
Does to this day with Wolves and Thieves abound:
Which too-too true that lands in-dwellers since have found.
To the right honorable Thomas Earl of Ormond and Ossory. Lord Treasurer of
Ireland.

REceive most noble Lord a simple taste,
Of the wild fruit, which savage soil has bred,
Which being through long wars left almost waste,
With brutish barbarism is overspred:
And in so fair a Land, as may be red,
Not one Parnassus, nor one Helicon
Left for sweet Muses to be harbored,
But where thy self have thy brave mansion;
There indeed dwell fair Graces many one,
And gentle Nymphs, delights of learned wits,
And in thy person without Paragone
All goodly bounty and true honor sits.
Such therefore, as that wasted soil does yield,
Receive dear Lord in worth, the fruit of barren field.
E. S.

To the most renowned and valiant Lord, Lord Deputy of Ireland.
Arthur Lord Gray of Wilton, Knight of the noble order of the Garter etc.
MOst noble Lord, the pillor of my life,
And Patron of my Muses pupillage,
Through whose large bounty poured on me rife,
In the first season of my feeble age,
I now do live, bound yours by vassalage,
Since nothing ever may redeem, or reave
Out of your endless debt so sure a gage,
Vouchsafe in worth this small gift to receive,
Which in your noble hands for pledge I leave
Of all the rest, that I am tide t'account:
Rude rimes, the which a rustic Muse did weave
In savage soil, far from Parnasso mount,
And roughly wrought in an unlearned Loome:
The which vouchsafe dear Lord, your favorable doom.
E. S.

To the right noble Lord and most valiant Captain, Sir John Norris, Knight,
Lord President of Mounster.
Who ever gave more honorable prize
To the sweet Muse, then did the Martial crew;
That their brave deeds she might immortalize
In her shrill tromp, and sound their praises dew?
Who then ought more to favor her, then you
Most noble Lord, the honor of this age,
And Precedent of all that Arms ensue?
Whose warlike prowess, and manly courage,
Tempred with reason and advizement sage,
Has filld sad Belgic with victorious spoil,
In France and Ireland left a famous gage,
And lately shook the Lusitanian soil.
Since then each where thou have disspred thy fame,
Love him, that has eternized your name.
E. S.

A translation made ex tempore by Mr Edm. Spenser upon this distich, written on
a Book belonging to the right honorable Richard Earl of Cork, etc.
NVlla dies pereat, pereat pars nulla die^,
Ne tu sic pereas, ut periere dies.
LEt no day pass, pass no part of the day,
Lest thou do pass, as days do pass away.
Verses upon the said Earls Lute.
Whilst vital sapp did make me spring,
And leaf and bough did flourish brave,
I then was dumb and could not sing,
Ne had the voice which now I have:
But when the axe my life did end,
The Muses nine this voice did send.
E. S.


