Nevves from Sea, Of two notorious Pirates Ward the Englishman and Danseker the
Dutchman.

With a true relation of all or the most piraces by them committed unto the
sixth of April. 1609.



Printed at London for N. Butter and are to be sold at his shop, at the Sign
of the pide Bull. (...)

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful and most worthy gent M. William Cockin.
SIr, if the greatness of your worth can extend it self to the lownes of this
discourse, or the dignity of your courtesy (in accepting my love) prove a
counterscale to my presumption and bouldnes, you shall engraue in men's minds
the nobility of your humblenes, and fortify my endeavors to inheighten your
name and memory. To be a Patron (although but to a beggar) is the office of a
King, and to be a protector of the meanest, I doubt not (...) well become the
Magistrate. (...) that induced me to select you from (...) of the worthy, whose
wisdoms like firm bases are the vphoulders of our peace, is not only that
your merit stands transparent with the highest, but that you being as it were
e^tring into the Temple, where Justice has her sacrifices, and your self
advancing your self up those degrees of dignity, at the foot of which, ofe^ses
shall be corrected and the offenders cut off, you may but in looking over this
little body, be remembered, how ugly vice looks, how deformed she seems
without, and how loathsome she is within: so that when the edge of authority
shall be put into your hand, you may give this corruption such a blow, that her
power shallsinke, like the name of the wicked, not worthy to be remembered, and
her sinews be so infeebled, that she shall never renew her strength to have
foot again, wherein if I played the bad workman, and that this picture be not
drawn out to the life, I beseech, you le^ your countinance be as a curtain to
shade it from the contempt of the world (...) painter is studying how to lay
(...), the glory of which, shall (...) understanding, and be of you received,
as thought worthy of your eyes.

To him that desires nevves; whosoever h^ be, Or,
TO the Reader, which is as much as to say, I care not what he be, so he be not
a Turk: thou have heard much talk of one captain Ward, and I know thou
desire to understand what he is? then not to belly him (since it is a sin to
belly the devil) he is a notable thief, he has undone many of your country men,
by which he gives you warning to have care of your selves: he has made slaves
of many poo^e Christians, and I ^old him no good Christian, that will bless him
for it, To content thee, I have here in (white and black inckle) hung him out
to thee at Sea, who could better have wished to have seen him hanged to death
(in hemp) a shore. If thou have a mind to hear more of him, spend thy time on
a few foul papers following, an^ thou shall know as much as I know.

Farewell.
Wards Skiffe when he was a Fisherman.


Wards first Fight going forth from Plymouth in a man of War, and of his
practices and proceedings in the Streights, and of his coming to Argier.
Chapter 1.
THis Ward, as base ^n Birth as bad in condition, in the last year of her late
Majesty's reign, gave the first onset to his wicked intendments: his parentage
was but mean^, his estate low, and his hope ^esse. His profession was a
fisherman of (...) in Kent, though (...) would be confinde to no limits, nor
any thing ^ould ser^e him but the wide O^ean to walk in. In this wicked
resolution, he set forth from ^euersham in a small Ca^ch towa^ds Plymouth.

He stayed not long there, but he be^ooke himself to the Streights, where
lying off and on the (...) Cape, called Saint Vincent* he took a small (...)
of some four score Tun: with her m^king a continuance of his course, and
setting forward his ^icked purposes, to the trial of their fortunes, he took
also another small vessel called a Setty: and her he brought out of the
Streights into A^gier, even at that time (...) as the Turks Galleys should
have been burnt. Howbeit the practice took not effect upon the Turks, but
that the Tu^kes ga^e the overthrow to that assault* (...) as thirteen of the
English were put to death for that, attempt, that were under the command of
Captain Gifford an English Pirate, and some (...) Wards company at that time
imprisoned also for the same fact.

But Ward having gotten much money at Sea, and greatly inricht himself with
unlawful purchase by his Setty, ioynes with certain Ianisaries, promises a
sum of money, and so procures the peace and inla^gement of his followers.
This is the first of Wards proceedings in the Streights, till he came into the
Turkish Dominions.

Of Wards setting forth from Argier into the Streights, and his taking a man
of War of Ma^^a.
Chap. 2.
THis Ward had (...) and (...) custom of his wicked (...), had clean taken
away the feeling of his wickedness. All his felicity was placed in the
prosecuting of mischief, he neither (...) present death, nor fears
dangerous endurance; or (...) of torments: so the Bark of his (...) but ride
at Anchor, that is wasted in streams of spoil and r^ine. Every perrill
undertaken in his vnn^turall actions, seem a pleasant to him, every reproac^
honorable, every doubt delig^^^ome, yea the very wounds that come by occasions
of others harms, seem void of smart unto him. His life is nothing but a
continual bat^aile and defiance with Christians, with whom he ought to make
his best peace. His senc^s are as so many swords that f^ght against him, his
words so many blows, his deeds so many wounds.

He stayed not long in Argier but his heart was on fire, till he had made
proof of the fortunes of his Setty, for he had now left the Catch he came
forth in, and made the Setty (which he took) his man of Warr^: with her he
went from Argier toward the bottom of the Streights, or about Scicillia or
Malta* where understanding there was a man of War of Malta set forth on
purpose to take him, he began to bestirre himself, for his desires admitted no
limtiation, nor could he persuade his mind to submit his neck to any seru^^e
yoke. The law of nature (quoth he) allows every man to defend himself being
ass^ild, and to withstand force by force, and in that resolution opposes
himself against the force of his enemy. Many assaults were made, and several
showers of shot sent forth on both sides, yet the forces of Ward, did so
far disanimate the Maltan, as the edge of his courage was clean taken away,
and forct to submit himself to the mercy of his enemy. Ward that in all his
intentio^s aymd at nothing more then to strengthen himself with men, munition
and money, to gain success to his attempts having gotten the upper hand in
this encounter, made purcha^e of what (...) found, and left it to the choice of
such as were taken in her, either to be resolved to subject themselue^ to his
se^uice, or (...) their necks to the stroke of death. Of the two they rather
chose the first as hoping after a long time of enforced (...), to obtain an
vne^pected freedom and releasement. Ward by this purchase (the ship of Malta
being welmand) did add much ^ower to his former strength, and therefore ^ayling
from thence he bended his course to Tunis, where he intended to (...) his ship,
and to provide himself to the like wicked employments.

Ward having stayed a while at Tunis and victualed himself, sets forth
again to Ciprus, and takes his first Argosie of Venice.
CHAP. 3.
DV^ing the time of his stay at Tunis, his march was still under the mask of
vanitye, and folly at^ended upon all his actions. He never thought on the
service of God, but as Traian numbered not that day among^t the date of his life
wherein he had not done something worthy of memory, So he held that Nefanda
dies, wherein he did not triumph in the doing of some notable villainy. Thus as
the Sea might by experience relate his spoils and cruelty, so the Land was ^n
eye-witnes of his drunkenness and idle prodigallity.

He made no long abode there, before he put on the habit of his former
resolutions, and having v^ctualled the said Malta man of War, he set forth
from Tunis to Cyprus: here he lay ho^ering up and down for purchase, but
initium malorum haec: These are but smokes in respect of the ansuing fires,
wherewith he burnt and consumed the goods of many Christians, for every day he
had new inventions for effecting his villainous attempts: every day new proiects
to obtain purchase: and as often as fashions alter, so often does he alter
his Stra^agems, and has new plots to make prey of other men's goods and labors.

Here he met with his first Argosey of Venice, which after he had subdued,
being a ship of nin^ hundredth tun and very rich, and that he had seized upon
her, and sworn her men to that subjection which he did them of Malta: he
brought her to Tunis and made sale of all her goods, Having by great gifts and
large promises made the great Turk so much his friend, as that he had free
recourse and liberty, to make marcha^dize of what purchas^ soever he got and
brought into the country. And by this also the Turks much enriching
themselves, are not a little pleased with Wards continual concourse into those
parts. This was the first Argofey he took, and now being much stronger then he
was before, having left the Catch in which he came from Feuersham to Plymouth,
his Pincke also, his Setty, and the Malta man of war: he makes his Argosey his
vessel of war, and in her he performs his other spoils and exploits.

Wards being in Tunis with this Argosey, and his travail with her toward
Candy, where he took another Argosey also of Venice.
Chap. 4.
AT this time Ward made his continuance and ab^ad in Tunis for 5. months,
where he spent his time in his accustomed riotous and lascivious manner. His
licentious liberty so ouer-maistered his reason, and conquered the good that
should remain in the mind and inclination of a Christian, that the strength
and power of all virtuous or good thoughts, were taken from him, so as he was
diuerted and abased to most vile actions, clothing his mind with the most ugly
abiliments that either Pride, Luru^ie, or Cruelty can produce from the blindness
of unruly desires: his chief of trust in his practices, was one Bishop, whom
he employed as his vice Admiral, giving him his full authority to go forth,
and bring in prizes at his pleasure: with him one John Brian of Lyme in the
west Country was master.

Under Ward, James Procter of Southampton, and John Frith of Plymouth were his
chief Gunners. These were his true and trusty associates in all his false and
wicked proceedinges: with these and with his other fellows, making that
Argosie his man of war, he went again to the souther most part of Candy,
betwixt which and the Southermost part of Cipr^s, he took his other great
Argosie, being likewise of Venice, and a vessel also of nine hundredth tun, or
thereabouts. This Argosie came in like manner to surprise Ward, and to repel
his forces, having another of lesser burden in her company: which he
perceiving, added a further desire to his aspiring* mind, and set his thoughts
on work upon such other attempts as he soon gave discouragement to his
aduer^ary, and brought her to subjection.

The lesser Argosie seeing her to be vanquished and overcome, and to rest at the
command of C^ptain Ward and his company* gave way to necessity, and made a
speedy and sudden flight away, which the Venetians took in such disgratious
manner, as that the Master was adjudged to death for the same: no other
infliction was thought a sufficient punishment for forsaking his company, and
lea^ing them to the spoil of a merciles enemy. This great A^gosie he likewise
brought to Tunis, making hauock of what she had, and selling her goods, which
were thought if they had been sold to their value, had been worth (...) score
or an hundred thousand pounds.

His going in on this course: His lying about the Gulf of Venice, where many
were cast away by foul weather
Chap. 5.
AFter the flight of these Venetians* and the sale of their goods before said,
and that Ward in his consultations had aduisd him self what his next course
should be, it was thought best that he should go forth in course, and at
randon, and make pray and spoil of whom soever they met. Having the last
great Argosie of Venice his admiral, and a fly boat of three hundred Tun, his
vice Admiral. In this resolve lying off and on, (as he did then) (...) the
gulf of Venice, an accident be^el worthy note, for example, and may be a
warning in the like head strong and irregular enterprise^. The^e happened a great
storm, and tempest, and the ship being ouer-charged with ordnance, and cutting
away her timber to make more (...) to place ordnance, he so w^akned his ship,
that meeting the same foul weather, the rage of wind and Sea was so great as
his Argosey was filled with waves, her tacklings, sails, and Anchor^ lo^t* and
the violent storm so dashed her bulks and bruised her bottom, as she was made
altogether unfit, and unable for resistance, and so was sunk, and cast away.
His master was one Master Grafton: in her there were some four score English
men and three hundred Turks, all drowned and that lost theirliues. Some four
days before this tempest this Ward with his liestenant ^ne William Graves a
tru^peter ^orsooke the great Argosey by reason that the Turks being so many in
number, took upon them to bear too great a sway, and grew too peremptory and
insolent, which the haughtines of wards mind could not any way brook or
digest, and went into the vice admiral, and so saved his life, and seapte
that danger.

This loss was so great, that it was accounted the first of aduersse fortunes
that happened unto him in all his proceedings, and it was observed by some in his
company that were a little better minded then the rest, and adjudged an
efficient that breathed hope and life into them if they would leave the
pursuit of their unlawful li^ing, and forsake their ^mpions and detestable
courses, in which they had been so graceless and general offenders, and
trespass^rs against the princes and subjects of most nations, as France,
Spain, Italy, Germany, Barbary etc.

But ward soon changd^ their minds from these good motions, for he that was
so obdurat to all goodness himself, could not endure to perceive any relenting
spirits, in others.

Graves, (his lieftena^t) was very inward with him, and one that among the rest
might do most with him, yet in their contentions, and falling out at their
feastinges. and Bachanals, would often revile ward, calling hi^ Boore, and
Oister-catcher, and vpbra^de him with the mean baseness of his beginning, and
would often tell him that if it should one day be his fortune to kill him (as he
thought it would) he doubted not but God would presently send an Angel from
heaven so carry him imediately thither for depriving the earth of such a (...)
creature.

Sir Anthony Sherley hearing of this Ward, sent letters unto him to dissuade
him from this detestable life.
Chap. 6.
SIr Anthony sherley in July 1607. came from Genoa to Naples, being in
employment from the King of Spain, and made his admiral for all his shipping
of the Leuant Seas, was royally feasted, and entertaynd by the Neopolitans.
From thence Sir Anthony sent his letter to Ward, directed to Tunis (where
Ward was then resident) to dissuade him from that wicked and villainous manner
of living, and the rath^r (he told him) he was persuaded to urge him to it for
that he was his Country man; or (which is most of al) for that he was a
Christian: alleging the incumbent pain in the world to come for every Senses
pleasure in this life, and pro^^ising to do the utmost of his power, to effect
his peace with all people if he might but prevail to call him in, or be the
happy means to entice him, rather to serve and bear Arms with the christians
against the Turk, then to do the Turk service, or by the robbing or spoiling
of Christians to enrich him or his dominions: But what boots words to deaf
ears, or aleadgme^t of reason to such as are wilfully bent to follow
mischief? what though he be able to triumph in his chains of gold, in his
Iuels of pearl and pretions stone, or his other riches won and got by rapine
and Theft and the spoil of others? What though he be able as yet to boast of
freedom, when every thread about him, is a manifest mark of his captivity
like to happen? and when his sense, body and mind, is servile to his own
sensuality? It is with him, as with those who one the one side, by their
bravery seem great and mighty* when if you consider on the other side them
^^auish actions, their base and villanaus filthiness, and their daily dr^dgery
in ^^^n^ful enterprises, you cannot but ^eeme them extremely miserable that are
in thralled in so h^uie a bondage of con^cience. Well* no (...) would take effect
with Ward to ^duce him from those courses, or to draw him to a lawful, and
reguler kind of li^e* but that continuing his first resolutions, he made
answer that he would give no credit to any fair promises, or hazard his life
on the hope of words, but would rather venture himself amongst the Turks, then
in to the hands of Christians.

Dansker at this time assotiated Ward, who having taken a Spanish caruiil, and
understanding of Sir Anthonyes letter sent to Ward, reprehending the life he
lead, and persuading him to surcea^e the same, ^elease^ this caruill unto the
merchant and master, and sets it free again, but upon this Condi^ion and
charge delivered unto them by oath of the holy Sacrament: that is, that they
should tell Sir Anthony he meant to lie about the mouth of the streights, some
2. or 3. days if he dared to come to remove him. This was the pride of his
mind, this was (as he thought) a revenge for the letter, and in manner of a
challenge upon the same.

At this time also that Dancker was Wards companion, there lived with him one
Robert Roupe, Tiball Susbridge, and one Long castle, very resolute fellows,
and far more sit for better employments: they were very strong, and when
they met together, were able to put to flight a great fleet, and to make (as
they did) much spoil and havoc.

Dansker lives now of himself, and is apart and separate from ward and his
company: the one keeps continually at Tunis, the other at Argier: the one
robbes the Dutch, French, Spanish, etc. and all but the English: the other
robbes the English, French, Spanish, etc. and all but the Dutch: The cause of
their separation, is reported to be, a breach and contention had between them,
about the sha^ing and dividing of some spoils and booties that they had gotten.

How Ward served one Fisher of Redriffe Master and owner of a ship, by whom
he sent money to his wife.
Chap. 7.
THere have been diverse and various reports of Wards inritching his friends,
especially his wife by sending gifts unto her: the truth whereof is not
known, howbeit it may well be perceived and coniectured by the estate she
bears, (which is very poor) that those reports are untrue* and that he sent
nothing to his wife, or if any thing that then it ^aild in the carriage, as
this did which is credibly related for truth. That Ward and Fisher meeting
together in the Streights, about September last, after many conferrences and
speeches past between them. Amongst which Ward perceived that Fisher was bound
for England, Ward delivered unto him the value of one hundredth pounds, to be
given to his wife, and others likewise of the company (according to their
abilities) delivered Fisher money for their wives and friends upon his
faithful promises to see the same performed.

Fisher possessed of these several sommes of money, was better fraught homewards
then he made account he should have been. howbeit he neglected that office and
duty that he was put in trust to do: Ward by some meaues or other had notice
of this false measure, which he meant he should neither carry to hell nor to
heaven at their next meeting, which was not long after. For Fisher being
implo^ed in a Merchants ship, Ward hales him to him in the streights, and at
his coming questions with him about his wife, and whether he had delivered the
hundredth pounds he sent by him? Fisher affirmd that he had, but he knowing the
contrary, and charging him with it, Fisher could not greatly deny it. Ward
thought to pay himself for his loss before they parted, and made no more ado
but entered his ship, and dispossessed him of all such goods as he was fraught
with, leaving him to take what order, and to make what reckoning he could with
the Merchant, and giving peaceable departure to him and his company.

This struck Fisher into a deep quanbary, yet he knew not how so mend
himself: but after the ships were clear, he began to revile and rail
against Ward and to give him bad and discontented speeches, which stood not
with Wards mind and resolution to brook, or put up, so as he presently
fitted himself and boorded him again: this encounter was worsse then the
first, for it was deadly. He was no sooner possessed of him, but full of fury and
impatience, he causd him to be very vildly handled, and after he had duc^t him
at his yard arm, he took his life also from him. The rest of Fishers company,
he gave liberty to choose whether they would serve him, or follow the way their
Master went before them. The fellows in this case of extremity, knew not
well which part to take, ^or that in them both they found doubt and danger, yet
at last resolved upon the first, and so being sworn to be true unto him, he
gave them admittance and entectainement.

How Ward made laws for the government of his shipp, and was the first breaker
of them, upon which arose a mutiny.
Chap. 8
HIs laws were, that in several places in his ships, there should be wine
sold, as familiarly as there is in Tauerns on land: but with this law (which
himself made) that if any one in his Drunkenness, or otherwise falling out,
should kill or stab any man in that disorder, he should presently be bound to
the dead man's back, and both cast into the Sea. The lawmakers was here the
law breaker for in the fury of his heat, in drincking he suddenly stabd one
West a masters mate in the ship: upon which some thee score of his other men
knowing the danger of their own estates, if they should pass that abuse
without exception, began a daungerousmutinie against him: and plainly told
him, yt they would be no longer under his command, and did absolut^^ly refuse
to follow those head strong cources and detestable plotts which he had
practiced, respecting nothing, but to satisfy his longing hopes, and cruel
condition Perfas, aut nefas, by any wayes^ o means whatsoever.

Ward was much perplexed with the contemptuous and unruly behavior of his men
in his own shipp^, and first used threats and menaces befitting his place and
command: but the mutiny being amongst so many, he thought he did but add
fuel to that fire, that raged so ^reiu the minds and tongues of his mutinous
company, so that he was inforct at last to leave all extent of the authority of
a commander, and as a common and private person with continuance unanswerable
to his minds, in mild terms to entreat them to desist, and surce^se their
impatience: vowing amendment and satisfaction, for what his over sight had
committed rashly: which appeased them all for that time, howbeit it was like to
have proved very dangerous to their general estate, had not good words so
easily pacified it.

How he rejected Longcastle that called him to prayers in a time of tempest.
Chap. 9
WArd and his company being thus again incorporated, and as it were mixed
together in one opinion of r^ot and disorder, pampering and fatting themselves
with the poison of their souls, began to put on another resolution of
purchase, and spoil, in any Coast, or by any preposterous course whatsoever.
And ryding to that purpose in the streights under Saracota, there fell a great
storm of lightning, and thunder, by which foul weather, he was put from all
Cables, and anchors but one: notwithstanding which extremity of Tempest, he
was deeply drinking in his accustomed manner. They al perc^iued they were in
imm^nent danger, and there upon one Longcastle a then follower of his, and
some others likewise of his company called him to go to prayers, as nessessity
of the time required but such were his distempered passions, and the frantic
errors of his own will, bent all to mischie^e, that the heat thereof in
flames, with burning ordor, and ^ete the soul on fire to pursue all things
that are farth^st from God and goodness, and nearest unto those thing that
ar^opposit and contrary unto reason: he bad them pray that would, for his own
part he neither feared God nor the devil.

Thus was his heart hardened with sin, neither willing nor able to embrace any
godly or wholesome advice or counsel.

Of his strength of ships at Sea, the manner of his guard, and how he came to
Tunis.
Chap. 10.
HE having grown very rich by the spoil of many Nations, crept into their
favors by his often coming to Tunis to make sale of such goods as he made
wrongful purchase of at Sea, which liberty he had by all fol^eration, and
allowance from the Turk, so as he might go and come at his pleasure, for they
had them at such prises, as they made great profit of them, in so much as the
Vice roy of Tunis gave him a large piece of ground, that sometimes before was an
old Castle, and all the stone that belonged unto it: upon which it is reported
he has built a very stately house, far more fit for a Prince, then a pirate:
By Sea he is said so be of the strength of three or four and twenty sail of
ships: he is guarded at Sea in a Cabin with a doubleguard of 12. Turks,
always standing at his cabin door, in the name of his Court a guard: His
respect and regard is reported to be such with the Turk, as he is made equal
in estimation with the Bashaw.

But these honors are like letters written in the sand, which are blown away
with every gust of wind, and in the end shall prove sorwes to his heart, being
paynd with a thousand passions, and ^tung with a continual gnawing of
conscience, for committing so may impieties, and doing such open wrongs and
injuries, to many thousands of men, women and children, whom he has brought
to unrecoverable distress, by his rapines, spoils, and robberyes.

NEVVES FROM SEA, OF WARD THE PIRATE. OR A Letter sent from the Masters of
certain Ships, to their worshipful Owners the Merchants of London: of what
has happened by him, and his Confederates, since the sixth of April. 1609.
BEING by you employed (our right worshipful Masters) in your several
ships, called the Charity, and the Pearl of London, for your several
ventures beyond the St^eights, wherein we were bound, as well to offer our
bodies and lives, to enlarge our own fortunes, as to increase your
possessions; and having found for a reasonable season our V^yage to sueceed so
prosper^usly, that it gave us encouragement to go on, even to the utmost of
our Commission: we now your more careful (although at that time your most
cheerful) servants, at Grand Malliga, had laid our Paper ready, and with our
Pens full of that Iuce, to have registered Letters, at the reading of which your
heart should have tickled wi^h joy: so inconstant is Fortune, so transitory is
the state of man, so mutable are the seasons, and so lamentable are the travels
of poor Sea-^aring m^n, That Tempora m^tan^ur, and nos mutamur cum illis. And
from L^sborne we are now enforced to write, and we must entreat you with
patience to read, of nothing but of the worlds Period makers, Death and
Destiny: of sorrow instead of prosperons success: of our lamentation at Sea,
instead of bringing profit to shore: and of dire^^ing tears to the eyes of
our wines, who were ordained as fathers for the feeding of our children.

Yet least I should to much discomfort you in the beginning, that it should
prove burdensome unto you to read he acci^ents of the end; we will in this,
play the Physicians with you, who give a mild preparatiue, before a sower
potion: wherein we promise unto you, that although our fortunes have happened
to be m^st wretched, yet are they not in the half degree so miserable as our
neighbors. For whereas of English, French, Dutch, Spanish, Italian, nay, even
of all Christian nations, they have lost all that ever they were Owners of, and
their bodies condemned to perpetual slaueris: Yet happe^s (...) not so
desperate with us, notwithstanding we were held in chase th^ice, and taken
twice, whereby we lost all we might eall our own: since we are by the grace and
leave of God to us, bringing home our selves, and part of that we had in charge
of yours. The truth and manner how, I pray you, thus understand.

The 15. of March last past, we put out of the Ro^e of Aucona, and according to
our English Proverb, transported our selves from forth a safe ^ay, to an
unfortunate Sea; so that having a fair and prosperous wind, in (...) days we
cleared out of the mouth of the Gulf, when presently (although it proved
otherwise) we thought it hapines, to meet M. Jews of Lime-house, in the Pearl
(which was M. Patisons) withwhom (as rejoicing one at another company) for the
safety of all, we desired to be conforted; so that both consenting, with this
flattering wind, that never forsook us until we anchored sa^e, as high as
Caithagenia, near adjoining to Cape Paul, and by the advantage of which, we
had run in 15 dates almost 500 leagues with a Leuant, which is as much as to
express to him that understands not the word is, when the wind is Northeast;
and as they call it a Penent, when it blows Southeast: a thing in these seaes
chansing, is by all and the best Mariners accounted very rare and wonderful,
which prosperous and hopeful promising passage, was by all of us accounted to
be of great advantage, since that nothing could happen (although with much
industry desired) that might stand mor available to the furtherance of our
Veiage to good effect.

But it is a saying no less common, then commonly proved true, that many
things happen between the cup and the lip, man purposes and God disposes:
that who trus^s himself upon the pinacles of fortune, is most readiest to fall
under the tempest of ruin: that when good hap and hope, health and wealth are
at the highest, and like the glorious morning Sun is up early to awake us,
with the promise of a delightful day, yet even then immediately, by the
ouercharging of the clouds, the day is ouercast and our expectation frustrate,
the Sun has forsook his promise to lend us his beams; calmness is turned to
tempests, and the fairnes we had but hope on, is turned to fearfulnes we had
proof once, even such was our hopeful estate, and so sudden was our
alteration. For having gotten with this fair wind so high as Cape Paul, the
wind presently began to be more duller and calm, and shortly after to chop up
westerly (which was against us) when neither hands nor minds being idle we
plied it off on the Cape, as the wind would give us leave for our best
advantage. In which pains having spent some time, and being that day the third
of April, at length we discried three sail of ships, whom we after proved to
be confederates of Wards; and within 2. hours after, perceived without any
amazement (as yet having no cause to mistrust them, that they had us in chase,
but in the effect they being clean vessels, by which it appeared they were
newly come out of harbor, and which helped them to be of better speed, then our
consort the Pearl: they came first up to him, and in conclusion made him strike
sail, but we being of better swiftnes (and having seen what they had offered,
it was no boot to bid us make haste) so that we gave our Vessel all the sail
we could, but to a bootles purpose, for alter long chase, they came up also to
us; and being each within the understanding of the other, they called aloud to
us, and bad us amain for the great Turk, their Master: to who^ we an swered,
that we were Englishmen and Christians, who whilst we had either power or
ability to resist, would not pesantly yield up our freedom to any Pagan
breahing. But what of all things we least doubted (seeing they who hayled us
were Turks) it was that Christians and our Countrymen, should do services
amongst Infidels.

Yet for certain it proved contrary, namely, that all the Sailors and Sea
faring men within these three ships; to wit, of the Admiral, Vizeadmirall and
Rear-Admirall, were all of them Englishmen, and all are most of them known to
our Master M. Daniel Banister, or to diverse of our Company.

Namely, one Linckes Master of the Admiral.

One Powell, of their Vize-admirall.

And one Foxeley, an ancient man of their Rear-admirall.

The last of which, most sternely looking up, as sternly told us, that if we
would not presently strike our topsaile, thereby to show our yielding was
immediate, they would ley us directly aboard with their ships and as readily
sin^ke us.

When we as resolute to repel, as our enemies were ready to offer, boldly
answered them, that if they were as constant as their speech to lay us aboard,
we willed them come on, for we were fitted to bid them welcome. But such a hot
intertainment should they find, as all the water that bare them, should hardly
bring them into a cool temper again, being then indeed purposely minded
(finding little comfort by resistance, and no assurance to escape) to burn our
selves and them together.

When they understanding our intent, by the boldness of our answer, compassed
us about on every side, with preparation to fight, and at length to sink us
with their ordinance, being so well enabled for such a deadly purpose, as
Turkish Pirates (before this our calamity) have, bin never heard to be so
strongly furnished.

But to our purpose, we seeing them so ready for the encounter, neglected
nothing of the strength we had, to fortify us for our defense, some of us
managing all things fitly veneath, whilst that others mand al things readily
above: every man of us having made his soul fit for heaven, and consenting his
body to a watery grave. So that we bes^ch you now to conceive, that we had
fitted our netting, ^ung out drablers, and that you see us ready for a Sea
fight, we having little but faithfulness and courage to withstand them, and
they like a violent Sea ready to beat against an unfortified shore, where the
weakest must of force be overthrown.

So that as they were ready to call upon us in fire, and we as furnishe^ to
make answer in flame there were diverse Englishmen among them (whom they had
taken before) imprisoned in chains like slaves, and condemned to perpetual
slavery in pity of us belike, finding it unprofitable (it should seem) to
complain for themselves, with tears in their eyes, which showed they had
sorrow in their hearts, who cried and called aloude unto us (and specially to
our Master, M. Banister, by name) that as we were men, as we tendered our own
safeties: if we had a desire to see our Country again: if we had parents to
mourn for their sons; wives to lament for their husbands, or children to cry
out for their fathers, not to shoot so much as the voice of one small shot
against them: for if we did, such as was their sentence, such should be our
ends, continual thraldom. For this was a decree amongst them (which they had
established should stand irreu^cable) that what Christian soever they met, (be
he of what Country soever) if he submitted it not upon the first sommons, or
durst be so hardy, as to outdare them with the least of breath betokening
death: if he were taken he should die a slave, if not taken, they would s^^ke
them in the sea. For our parts (quoth they) we have had our sentence, we do
^eele the affliction, we can hope for no releasment, and therefore are
compelled to be content.

Far quam sor^em patiuntur omnes nemo recusat. What all suffers no man
refuses to suffer. You are our Contrymen, yet we desire not your company,
although it be a comfort to think: Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris.

But we admonish you as brothers, and desire you to remember.

Felex quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. We have withstood them (as you may
do) which has brought us into slavery as you shall be. O be advised then,
before you fall, and seek to save your selves before you perish.

But if you think it not necessary to be advised by our admonition: or your
resolution be such, to prefer an honorable death before a dishonorable
peace, then fight it out bravely, while you have any refuge of life, or that
your ship has any saf^tie wherwithall to swim, since that death is the eas^est
task, the which you now have in hand.

With which words of theirs, even the Infidels themselves being moved to
compassion, by which you may judge (seeing no other safety but destruction)
that woe had reason to be driven into consideration of our states, so that after
a second summo^s we had parl^y with these our desperate enemies, for the space
of an hour, the end and purpose was, Wether we would yield for our liberties,
or give our bodies to ye Sea: when we considering how unequally we were
matched, being encompassed round about and assaulted with three ships, the
Admiral carrying 30. pieces of Ordinance, and the other two wherewith they were
consorted, having 28. a piece: beside six hundredth* Turks with small shot,
who are held the best shot in the world, we being but 20. men, and our ship
bearing but a 11. pieces of Ordinances, we struck our sails and yielded,
holding it more discretion to stand to their mercy for our liberties whom we
had no ability to confound, then desperately and wilfully to destroy our
selves, and the estate we had of yours, foreseeing that by fighting we could
not purchase our safety, and the best of our resistance must determine with
perpetual slavery.

Thus after our yielding, Sir; they presently b^arded us, and commanded that
our Master, and eleven of our Company were carried aboard their Admiral, where
after consultation had amongst them, and we severally dispersed into their
ships, and diverse appointed to go aboard of ours, it being almost dark
when we were taken, we were for that night guarded, and every man having his
Centinell to watch him.

The next Mo^ning, the Captains of the men of War consulted, how to dispose
of us and our ships, where in this misfortune it fortunately fell out, that
our Master having in former Voyages, much used the Trade of transporting of
Passengers, from Argier, and Tunis, to Alexandria, and Constantinople, he
seemed well to be remembered by many of these Pirates (whom more then we
expected lamenting our case) inforni^^ their Captain, what service heretofore
our Master had done to their Nation, as also what (...) both themselves, and
^iuers of their friends had received at his hands, that our ship was not a
stranger unto them, for our Master had brought in her the ^ast Voyage, the
great ^ashaw of Tunis, from Constantinople to Tunis.

Which fortunate accident, was one and the chief cause, that you shall see
your Vessel again, or, we our Country and Families: and another, that our
ship was layden with corn, which they utterly neglected, as a commodity
unworthy of them. In brief, the ^nde of their consultation was, that our
ship should be restored: which understood by the soldiers (I beseech you,
let it not grieve you to read, what with terror we did behold) how they
presently came aboard us, fell violently to ransake: pilliging our Traffic,
cutting down our Cabbens, and stanin^ our chefts to pieces, leaving us nothing
to call our own, but what we had on our backs, they took away all the
powder we had, saving what our Ordina^te was laden withal, leaving us not so
much beside, (...) would preyne one Piece. They bereft us of most of our great
shot, all our muskets, all our small shot, of our match, pikes, ladles,
spunges, rapiers, swords, daggers of al necessary munition for defense
whatsoever: leaving nothing with us (what necessity so ever should succeed)
but the vaste sea, and the unconstant winds to defend us.

Neither seemed this cruelty to them sufficient, but as they were about to
lea^e us, having as it were bethought the^ of some new encounter* they
violently (...) back, at whose return^ (building no great confident^ in the
promises of Tu^kes and Pira^es) we expected (either slaughter or ^^auery*) But
contrary to our expectation (although (...)) better was their purpose, namely
so ^eare from us part of our Sails and Ta^klings; to take from us our Bee^e,
Porke, Cables, all our Butter, and Ch^ese-Rise, and Oil so that although they
gave us (...)* they would not leave us without languishment, although they
could find in their hearts to ^id us farewell, yet they would do the best in
them consisted, to (...) us ea^e we could come home. In brief we were left
nothing to defend us, little or nonothing to feed us, (...) enough to torment
us, so that to your charitable considerations we submit our lamentabl^ cause by
your selves, but to be adjudged in what distress they left us.

But ear I shall proceed to drive you into wonder, by relating all our
succeeding accidents: I beseech you let me with your patience to deliver at
full what has happened in this.

First, you cannot forget (I am certain) that I related unto you, that upon
our first yielding, diverse of us were (...) aboorde of their ships, and many
of them (as well Turks as English) shifted unto ours, every man of us having
for the first night his sentinel appointed to guarde him: where having little
mind to sleep, who were in ^oubt every minute to have our throats cut. Our
purpose is to deliver what with waking eyes we were witnesses of in this
nights imprisonment. The Englishmen being the first that boorded us* they (...)
of us with what was our lading to whom we answered, that the whole for the
Merchant was Corn, besides we had every one some little particular venture for
our selves, or our friends: The which being matters of no ^alew, we desired
and hoped they would not make prey of, to which they answered it was no way
their intents, neither was it their Captain Captain Wards pleasure, that any
private Seafaring man's venture should be any ways hindered by him or his
confederates. Wherefore (...) they, least these Turks whom I doubt not but
you have heard to be cruel enough, and as the affairs with you now stand,
have as much command or more than our selves? Wherefore if you have any thing
that you would have defended from their gripe, deliver it in trust to us, and
as we are your Countrymen, while we continue together we will see it
faithfully reserved, and upon your free discharge re^^ored to you at full,
with this pit-fall poor birds were we caught: so yt partly with fear not to
dare to distrust them* and partly with hope to reserve some what, who were
certain we had lost all, every man distributed unto them what he had, namely
of our needful shift^ of appar^ll, to wit, (...) and woollen, and our
Master M. Banister, who was to go aboorde of them, even his whole provision,
to the stluer whistle and Chain about his neck, so that all that every man
had, he might say it was on his back. Still hoping that thieves might prove
to be men of their words, and that there might be found some co^sci^nce in
the^, because they were our countrymen. In short this was the success of it,
when we found ourselves to be discharged, every man began to enquire for him
to whom he had delivered, but non est Inuentus they were stolen away in the
night, and our own Countrymen had made us their Cosens. So that being thus
^heated of all our shift whatsoever, the incurrence of which at Sea. I know
you need not he remembered off, we began to complain us of our wrong, to the
Turks, and implored their assistance, who straight made us this answer, since
our own nation had served us so vneristi^nly, what conscience were it in them
to be courteons unto us? at which cold comfort Sir, every man began to
shrincke already, for want of shift he knew he should be lousy before he
got home, but Necessitas non habet legem, and when there is no remedy to be
had, it is but bootles to make resistance.

By this time our master and his company (I beseech you understand) are
discharged and sent back again and our Consorts men put in to us, so that
when they saw they could take no more, they heaued up their hands and bad us
be gone, only in our sight directing our Consorts ship the pearl for Tunes.

If any man shall further ask of you what entertainment our own Countrymen
gave us since you had before to understand, that Master Masters make cosens,
nay all their Seafaring men were Englishmen, truly I must report to you they
used us well, I and so well that the devil in the habbit of a Turk, would not
have used us worse, for having had that which they expected, they could by no
means afford us good words, and with much a (...) allow us bread and water.
Now if this were not courtesy from our own Countrymen, I hope there is no man
will erpect further ^uidence.

But by the way, I beseech you to understand, that when we had proved it fer
certain, Necessitas non habet legem, when we saw there was no remedy, but for
safety we must submit every one of us so far as the occasion of time would
permit, end auoured to make the best shift as he could for himself, which was
to convey in secret the particular commodities and adventures both of our own
and others of our especial freindes at home, and which purpose of ours (before
they had boorded us) with much industry we had purchased* some of their deep
amongst the Corn, and ordering some in one place, some in another, where we
thought it might ^e the most guarded from their search.

But the devil, having broad eyes and quick sighted they look far, and
little is done that can be concealed from him, and I hope you will not deny but
these are of his near acquaintance, so that be we as charie as ere we could
(these golla^^of^y of ro^gues, I dar^ now call them so, being indeed more
renegad^ than Turks, for what conference we had we received from them in
Italion) they did such ro^ige in every corner, that they were ouerlookers of
all and what they did find which they thought not unworthy to be contemned for
the taking, they held it discourte^^e to leave it aboard, it was unnecessary to
bewail unto them, this is the Merchants, this is our own, or this is our
friend^, for whatsoever they liked and laid hands on (being all (...)) they
cried one to another, this is for us, (...) posse non est esse, their will is a
law, they are free men of the Sea, and their liberty must have no resistance.

In brief, we beseech you to conceiu^, that you see us parted, and whereas, it
is continued as a comm^ndable custom, for every man to be sorry for his
particular losses, it is now contrary with us, for we were glad even to our
souls when we had lost them, our eyes had bid them heartily farewell* yet had
we not the heart to shake hands together, we were not a little glad when we
looked back, and saw them as far a stearne as we could descry them* but we
were glad indeed, when we beheld for certain that we discerned them not at
all, so that for that night we were out of ^en the one of the other.

But the morning after by break of the day (although to o^r cold comfort) we
might espy they were come up within a mil^ of us again, in which nearenes we
might perceive (as they formerly had had us,) so there was a frenchma^ had now
found they had him in chase, who first using the best wings he had for his
escape, but to a fruitles purpose, and after resisting them by an honorable
fight, yet to as bootles an end, for that as we were formerly forwarned, he
would not veil his topsaile, and submit at their first shot: but trusting to
their own ablenes, stood out till they were surprised: our eyes were made
witnesses that they took the Merchant and the master, and hanged the^ up at
their yard arms, and as before they had sent away one of ours so they
commanded away his ship to Tunes, and made slaves of all the rest of the
company, being fourscore and four men in her: the pittifulnes of which
spectacle, we being in the view of beholding, would have compelled any but
such sated villains, even with tears for to have lamented.

Here might you have seen the poor captives kneeling for pity, while the
Conquerours triumphing over them, bound them back to back. Here might you
have beheld the eyes of the one full of sorrow, entreating for compassion,
whilst the other even in their faces did ^^eere at their calamity, this we
viewd (and not without much pity) had happened unto them: this we knew, had
we not yielded, must have befallen unto us. Theeuing is their living, blood is
their exercise, tiranie is their practice: Christians are turned Turks, and
Turks are the sons of devils, then what good can be expected from them? O what
a lamentation is this, that in one minute by ye cruelty of villains fourscore
and four Fathers shall be b^rest of their sons, so many wives be bereft of
their husbands, and no doubt so many Children be dispoild of their parents: a
calamity so exceeding, that me thinks, even but at the report thereof, all
christendom should be made up into one hand for the revenge theirof.

But well a day* this Tragedy is acted, death and slavery usurped upon these
Innocents, well might we pity them, but we knew we could no way prevail to
their help, so they neither making to us, nor w^^^strous to have more
a^qua^ntance with them, away steard we for the shore, and joyful men we were
you must think, having now nothing to loose but our lives where we were clear
of them the second time.

But who is desirous to shun Scillas does commonly fall upon Caribdis, who
carefully strives to avoid a dangerous rock, does often fall upon more
devouring sa^ds: one mischance does seldom or never come, but there succeedes
another as his inheritor, or according to our English proverb, we strive out
of Gods blessing into the warm sun; even so it fared with us, for the very
next day after we had discharged our selves of bad, we were subject to fall
into the jaws of worse, being now most eagerly pursued by a bloody French man
of war, and a Pirate like the other, of whose cruelty we had heard of so many
before, that we accounted our selves compassed even in the arms and gripe of
death, being but come within his sight, for when the other does use but to kill
some, and make slaves of the rest, this uphold it as custom to make murder of
all that ere he takes: this is not glutted with the hanging of one, two, three,
nay twenty, but if he happen to be at the taking of a hundred, he binds them
back to back, and buries the^ together.

For two days and a night this French Pirate had us in chase, and the wind
beginning to grow duller and calm (although our ship was of indifferent
speed) he was come within a mile of us, so that the nearer we percei^ed him,
the nearer we judged our selves to our sudden destruction; it was in vain to
strive to make shift for our bodies; for we had nothing to any purpose
wherewith to make shift withal Wherefore every one having betaken himself to
his prayers for the good of his soul, we were ready to offer our selves up
into the hands of him from whom it was in vain to expect any mercy.

So that being all armed with this determination, and void of all fear, since
we had no hope whereon to anchor our trust, yet it p^eased God who is the
defense of his servants, when we least thought of help, when all expectation
of res^ue was frustrate, and when we had given our lives over to the ruin of
their hands, and our bodies to ye seas, to send in sight of us five ships under
sail, when we (although we knew not what they were) chose rather to fall into
the hands of them, whose pursuit made no attempt against us, than to submit our
selves under the cruelty of him, who so long had held us in chase, which to
effect we made all the speed we could to get up to them, and which intent of
ours this Frenchman mistrusting* he on the contrary strove as much as in him
lay to cut us off from our purpose: but spite of his practice, we being come
within their ken, and that we gest they might discern our inward mystery by
our outward signs, we expressed the lively motions of distressed men, as by
kneeling on our knees, and holding up our hands, which they perceiving,
although not knowing what we were, they in charity made up to us, and in short
time we were come within their command, which this Frenchman considering, and
gessing it would not prove much for his ease to make up any nearer, he sprang
aloof, and left us.

These Ships proved to be four Englishmen, and one Fleming. But by your
patience, I must give you to understand, that until we had truly tasted their
(...), we were as ^^^lous of them as of any of the rest, making a doubtful
question, whether it were possible that truth or honesty might be met at sea.

Of these Ships English, one was Master S^anley, another was Master Humfrey;
the other two Ships, the one was of Yarmouth, and the other of Linne, at the
m^^ting of whom, I pray you understand there was no little joy on both sides,
in them, that they had been a means to res^ue their contrymen; in us, that
they had preserved our lives, and what was left of yours.

But nothing is there in this world, but is transitory like our selves, our
life is not permanent, no more is our fortunes; we have joy in this m^nute, and
sorrow in the next; we came crying into the world, and we must go weeping out,
all which is verified in us, for as I began with sorrow, so far as I can see
yet, I must make my period in sadness: for sca^ce had our joy felt an hour of
embracement, or our comfort given a hearty sal^tation the one to the other, when
presently they might perceive our selves the third time to be had in chase by a
man of war, and his Pinnesse, who drawing near up to us, we perceived it was
Captain Danseker of A^gier, which Ship of his is so potent in show, that (...)
seemed to us any way res^stlesse, for he carried 55. pieces of Ordinance,
besides 400. Turks with small shot.

Room, comes he amongst the thickest of our fleet, as if he had had power to
sweep us away with his breath, but when he came near to us, he caused his
followers to wafte us amain with their glistering swords, threatening tos^nke us
the one after the other, if at his command we did not immediately strike, so
that we thought we were now falling a ^aloa^peius.

The first Ship they came up into was Master Startop, who seeing the^ so
strongly furnished, so laden with Ordnance, and so powerful in shot, he
forthwith yielded himself unto him.

Master Humfrey and the other two Ships of Y^rmouth and Lin, by this having got
the wind of Danseker, they steared back again to Master Startop, intending
their utmost endeavor to rescue him.

and calling aloude to him, they bid him hoyse up his sa^les again, vowing to
him by the faith they ought to their Country and love to their Contrymen,
they would never forsake him, they would fight for him, ^eskue him, or die with
him.

But whether it were that M. Startop misliking of their resolution, fore seeing
the ouerstreng^^ of the Dansker, or whether he was conquered with the
Dutch-mans oath and promise, which was, that he would neither ransacke nor
pillage any thing from him, he refused to h^yst his sails and consented to the
yielding.

Which M. Humfrey and the rest perceiving, and not willing further to danger
their own ships, every man shifted for them selves, and so escaped. Our
ship, and the Flemming were the Lee ward of the whole Fleet, so that when he
was poessed of M. Startop, then comes he up to us poor v^nquished men, but it
is a bootelesse mention to remember you how casily it was for him to deal with
us, who had neither powder nor other munition to offend him.

The first he spoke when he came up to us, was, I command you to strike sail
and follow me, and we seeing it were a bootlesse resistance and that there was
no remedy obeyed him, only we entreated him to be good unto us, and told him
that we had been robbed by the Tunis men of wa^re, Confederates with Ward, not
fix days before. Captain Danseker demanded of Master Startop, whether the
relation of our suprisall was true or no? who constantly in our behalf
affirmed it to be true, when he like a proud (yet we may call him an honest)
Pirate told us, that since the men of Tunis, had had us in hand, he scorned to
rob an hospital: to afflict where was misery before, or to make pray of them
who had nothing left. Only by a Messenger commanded us, to shoot off three
pieces of Ordinance as a thanks to him or ransom for our liberty and depart:
but we certifying him, that such was the cruelty of our enemies, that we had
not so much left whereby to gratify his courtesy, and answer his command, he
forthwith gave order we should be dismissed, but kept the Flemming and M. Startop.

The Flemming was laden with Corn, and upon it lay diverse trusses and bales of
rich stuffes to the value of twenty thousand pound, the which Stuffes he
took away from them, being the Merchants goods, but not any particular
adventure that was due to any private man: so that this is the difference
between these two Pirates, (Ward of Tunis, and Danseker of Argier:) Ward makes
prey of all and Danseker has compassion of some: the one contemning to be
charitable to any, the other holding it hateful to take any thing from them,
who labor in continnall danger to maintain their lives. And we have heard
that the like cause as this, was the falling out betwixt these two Pirates: for
certain they are now at difference.

This ^lemming (who before we have spoken of) though at the first he commanded
him with him, the next day he dismissed him and sent him after us: but M.
Startop and his whole company he carried away directly for Argier, where what
will succeed unto them it is yet uncertain.

But I must be bold to remember you, what in this discourse I have omitted,
that before he left us, some of our confederates, men, who upon our first
taking were discharged out of their ship, into ours of the Chari^ie seeing how
uncertain was their hope, and how continual was their danger (since every
ship we saw, we must fear to be a Pirate) they entreated of the Danseker,
that he would be pleased to set them a shoars: when he not only condiscended
to their request, but also gave them four shillings a piece, to help to carry
them up into the Country of Spain.

Thus to our sorrow, having seen our good friend Master Startop, and his
whole Company hoysted toward Argier, our selves (conforted with the Dutchma^)
put in at Almanika in Spain, where we intended to repair us, of what
necessaries we lacked that might furnish us for our better safety home ward.
The Governor of which (having at large understood what had happened unto us)
commanded that we should have all things that we thought needful for us, and
offered us a hundred men for a safeguard every night, while we stayed there to
repair our wants, least they should come back, or any other of their Crew to
do us injury.

But while we remained in this Harbor, repairing our ships and ^^rnishing our
wa^ts, there was News brought to the Governor: the tenure whereof were spread
thus: That the Cr^simo, who at the first was but a Ianizarie, and since
advanced by his consederacie with Ward, is now the prime Governor of Tunis,
That Ward has a while retired him from Sea, and sendes forth his Colleagues,
as he did the fleet which surprised us, not minding to put himself to hazard
again upon the maine, till they can take a ship for him, shall be Owner of
threescore pieces of Ordinance, in emulation that Danskers bears 55. That
whatsoever his consederates bring in to him, they transport it for sail to
Sophe, and Sancta Cruce, 2. Port Towns, that lead up to Morocco and Fesse, and
that while he continues in Tunis he is not idle, but practices the casting of
ordna^ce, and in training up those Turks which he has purchased leave to
leauy (as it is reported of the Grand Signior) in Military Discipline.

Thus have I truly del^^ered unto you what has happened to us at sea, by which
you may judge what difference there is betwixt our states and yours a shea^e: I
have given the merchant cause to (...), and have given him heart to strengthen
himself for desence: Which if he (...) not do, and not leave till these
Pirates be deprest, they may hang up their ships and bid farewell with their
Traffic to the Straights.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of all such Ships, as have been taken by these two Pirates,
Captain Ward, and Captain Danseker, or their Confederates, to the sixth of
April. 1609.
THe York bonauenter of Hull, of the burden of 180. tons, of whom Andrew
Barker was Master: this ship had 15. pieces of ordnance.

The Trojan of London, of burden 106. tuns, Leonard Johnson Master, who for
shooting off one shot, all the company were made slaves.

The Pearl of London, of burden 80. tuns, William Jews Master.

The Charity of London, taken the Owner M. William Megges.

The Elizabeth of London of 70. tuns, laden with oil, from Tallon in France,
Tho. Hills, M.

One Master Long, in a ship of Bristol.

By Danseker.
Master John Reekes, in a great ship of London, of burden 200. tunes, and 17.
pieces of ordnance. M. Bennet, of Tower wharffe in a ship of 80. tuns. M. Read
of Lime-house in a Flieboat of 70. tuns.

The Charity, the second time taken.

M. Startop, in the Prosperous of London, of 150. tuns, laden with Muskadine.

A Flemming in his company; in burden 150. tuns laden with Corn, and other
goods.

Besides, there are many more ships have been taken by these Pirates: the
names of whose Masters and the names of which ships are not yet collected to
be known: as for certain, few or no parts in our Land has escaped free.

As 2. from Bristole, 2. of Foy, 1. of Saltash, 2. of Plimoth, one great ship
of Dartmoth, one of Saleren, one of Dover, 3. ships of the North-countrey, and
many more there are yet abroad, which before they can compass our Harbor,
must if they do escape, yet not escape without great danger.

FINIS.
The charity of M. Megs of London, taken twice



