A COAL FROM THE ALTAR, TO KINDLE THE holy fire of Zeal.

In a Sermon preached at a general Visitation at Ipswich.

By SAMVELL WARD, Bach. of Divinity.

(...).



AT LONDON, Printed by H. L. for Samuel Macham; and are to be sold at his
Shop in Pauls-church-yard, at the sign of the Bulhead. 1615.

To my Reverend friend, Mr. Samuel Ward.
Sir,
your Sermon which I copied partly from your mouth, and partly from your notes,
I have adventured into the light; encouraged by the approbation, and earnest
entreaty of such, whose judgments you reverence, and whose love you embrace:
who also have made bold here and there to vary somethings, not of any great
consequence, if I can judge. I was loath to smoother such fire in my breast; but
to vent it, to inflame others. If you shall blame me, I know others will
thank me. What I have done is out of zeal, to God, and his Church.

Your affectionate friend, Ambrose Wood.

A necessary Advertisement from the Printer.
CVrteous Reader, I thought meet to give thee notice, that one of the written
sheets of this Sermon, coming to our hands, both misplac't, and without any
directory either word, or Folio, to the next ensuing; the Compositor could not
but set it in the same order (or rather, manner) wherein he received it:
whereas we understand since, it was meant, that all the matter between the
sixteenth line of the 51. page and the second line of the 61. page, should have
followed in the beginning of the 43. page, immediately after these words, will
not so move as the meanest Orator. Which I wish thee to note with thy pen.

To amend the Faults of the Press, read thus;
In the Title page, (...). p. 9. l. 12. dung. p. 41. l. 11 and 12. derision. p.
68. l. 16. vein.

Revel. 3. 19. Be zealous.
THis watchword of Christ, Zachary Mat. 24. 12
mentions chapter 1; Could they return any other observation of their
travails then theirs; The whole world lies in lukewarmnesse? which makes me
often in my thoughts proportion these ends of time, 1 King. 1. 1
to the like period of David's age when no clothes were enough to keep heat in
him. Faith I grant is a more radical, vital, and necessary grace; but yet not
so wholly out of Grace with the times, as poor Zeal; which yet if by any
means it might once again be reduced into favor, and practice, before Time
sets, and be no more; I doubt not but Christ would also yet once again in
this evening of the world, come and Sup with us; A favor including all other
in it.

I say not.) Learned Fulke maruells if it were not by a Prophetical spirit
penned for us: others (in their ^eare) more resolutely have made it a singular
type of purpose for us. Their warrant I know not; especially if it be true
which all travelers tell you, That they find more zeal at home then abroad.
We are I grant in sundry respects equal to Laodicea: Even the very names
thereof, as well the first and oldest in regard of the blessings of God, (...)
Gods Darling, as the latter in regard of good Laws and Ciuility, Laodicea, How
well do they become us? As rich as they, and that in the very same commodity of
woolles; Abounding as they with many learned Zenoes, and bountiful Hieroes:
Parallel in all regards; I would I could say lukewarmenesse excepted. But I
must be a faithful and true witness, and yet this is all I have to say; It
was, as I conceive, Laodiceas complexion and not her constitution, her practice
not her orders, personal lukewarmenesse not legal, which Christ strikes at.
That fault I find in my text, the same I find in our common Christians, whose
spiritual condition and state is too like the external situation of our
Country, between the Torrid, and the Frigid Zones; neither hot nor cold: and so
like Laodicea, that if we take not warning, or warming, we may I fear in time
come to be spued out of Gods mouth.



Paul bids Titus preach zeal with all authority, though in mine own name I
crave your patience, and audience, yet in his name that is the first of the
creatures, and Amen, I counsel him that has an ear, to hear what the Spirit
says to the Churches; (...) Be zealous.

A Coal from the Altar.
Revel. 3. 19. (...): Be zealous.
Zeal has been little practiced less studied: this heavenly fire has ever
been a stranger upon earth. Few in all ages that have felt the heat of it,
fewer that have known the nature of it. A description will rake it out of the
embers of obscurity: and it may be that many when they shall know it better,
will better affect it.

2 Zeal has many counterfeits and allies. There are many strange fires which
having sought to carry away the credit of it, have brought an ill name upon it:
from these it would be distinguished.

3 Zeal is every where spoken against, it has many enemies and few friends:
the world can no more abide it, then beasts can the elementary fire, the
rebukes of many have fallen upon it, the devil weaues cunning lies to bring
down the honor of it. Oh that we could raise and maintain it, by setting
forth the deserved praises of it; and challenge it from the false imputations
of such as hate it without a cause.

4 Zeal has in this our earthly molde, little fuel, much quench-cole; is
hardly fired, soon cooled. A good Christian therefore would be glad to know
the Incentiues and preservatives of it, which might enkindle it, inflame it,
feed it, and revive it when it is going out.

5 Zeal in the worlds opinion, is as common as fire on every man's hearth, no
man's heart without zeal, if every man might be his own judge: If most might
be heard there is too much of it; but the contrary will appear if the right
marks be taken, and the true rules of trial and conviction be observed, and
the heart thereby examined.

6 Zeal generally handled will break as lightning in the air and seize upon
no subject: Application must set it on men's hearts, and exhortation warm this
old and cold age of the world, chiefly this temperate climate of our nation.

First part.
It was said of old, that zeal was an Intention of love: of late, that it is a
compound of love and anger, or indignation.

The Ancients aimed right, and shot near, if not somewhat with the shortest.
The modern well discovered the use and exercise of more affections, then love,
within the fadome and compass of zeal; but in helping that default, went
themselves somewhat wide, and came not close to the mark: which I ascribe not
to any defect of eyesight in those sharp sighted Eagles; but only to the
want of fixed contemplation. And to speak truth, I have often wondered why poor
Zeal, a virtue so high in Gods books, could never be so much beholding to men's
writings as to obtain a just treatise, which has been the lot of many
particular virtues of inferior worth; a plain sign of too much undervalue
and neglect.

He that shall steadfastly view it, shall find it not to be a degree or
Intension of love, or any single affection (as the Schools rather confined the^
defined zeal) neither yet any mixed affection (as the ^^ter, rather compounded
then comprehended the nature of it) but an hot temper, higher degree or
intension of them all. As varnish is no one color, but that which gives gloss
and luster to all; So the opposites of zeal, keye-coldnes and luke-warmenesse,
which by the law of contraries must be of the same nature, are no affections,
but several tempers of them all.

Paul warrants this description where he speaks of the twelve Tribes. Act 26. 7
They served God with intension or vehemence.

The root shows the nature of the branch. Zeal comes of (...), a word framed
of the very sound and hissing noise which hot coals, or burning iron make when
they meet with their contrary. In plain English, zeal is nothing but heat,
from whence it is that zealous men are often in Scripture said to burn in the
spirit. (...).

He that does moderately or remisly affect any thing, may be styled Philemon a
lover: He that ernestly or extremely, Zelotes a zelot: who to all the objects
of his affections, is excessiuely and passionately disposed, his love is ever
fervent, his desires eager, his delights rauishing, his hopes longing, his
hatred deadly, his anger fierce, his grief deep, his fear terrible. The
Hebrews express these Intensions by doubling the word.

This being the nature of zeal in general, Christian zeal of which we
desire only to speak, differs from carnal and worldly, chiefly in the causes
and objects.

It is a spiritual heat wrought in the heart of man by the holy Ghost,
improouing the good affections of love, joy, hope, etc. for the best service
and furtherance of Gods glory, with all the appurtenances thereof, his word,
his house, his Saints and salvation of souls: using the contrary of hatred,
anger, grief, etc. as so many mastiues to fly upon the throat of Gods enemies,
the devil, his Angels, sin, the world with the lusts thereof. By the virtue
whereof a Zealot may run through all his affections, and with David, breath
zeal out of every pipe, after this manner for a taste;

How do I love thy law (O Lord) more then the honey or the honey comb, Psalm.
more then thousands of silver and gold! Love.


Thine enemies I hate with a perfect Hatred.
hatred.

Thy testimonies are my delight, Joy.
I rejoice more in them, then they that find great spoils, more then in my
appointed food.

Mine eyes gush out rivers of tears. Grief.
O that my head were a fountain of tears, because they destroy thy law.

Mine eyes are dim with waiting: Hope.
how do I long for thy salvation?

Thy judgments are terrible, Fear.
I tremble and quake, etc.

Look what pitch of affection the natural man bestows upon his dearest
darling, what insatiable thirst the covetous worlding upon his Mammon, the
ambitious upon his honor, the voluptuous upon his pleasure; the same the
Christian strives in equal, yea, (if possible) far exceeding terms to
convert and confer upon God and his worship.

In brief, to open a little creuise of further light, and to give a little
glimpse of heat: Zeal is to the soul, that which the spirits are to the body;
wine to the spirits, putting vigor and agility into them. Whence comes that
elegant Antithesis in the Scripture. Be not drunk with wine wherein is
excess, but be filled with the spirit.

Christ is said to lead his Spouse into the wine cellar: which Simily Bernard
delighting often to repeat, Ser. 41. in Cant. 49
in two or three Sermons interprets of a special measure of zeal inspired
into his Church. Thus (says he) Christ led his Disciples into the wine cellar
on the day of Pentecost; and filled them, and the house with such zeal as they
came forth like Giants refreshed with wine, and seemed to the people as men
drunk with Act. 2
new wine.

It is to the soul as wings to the foul: this also is a Scripture emblem to
picture the Angels with wings, as in the ha^gings of the Temple, and in the
visions of the revelation, in token of their ardent and zealous execution of
Gods will: whence also they have their name Seraphim; he makes his ministers a
flame of fire. Heb. 1. 7.


To this fire and these wings, which we in the Lords prayer desire to imitate,
there is nothing in us answerable but our zeal; As wheels to the chariot:
which makes us not go, but run the ways of Gods commandments, and so run
that we may obtain. As sails to the ship, and wind to the sails, to which
alludes the phrase so frequent in Scripture, Plerophorie.

As courage to the soldier, metal to the horse, dust to the ground which
makes it bring forth much fruit, ye an hundred fold: viuacity to all
creatures. To conclude this, this is that celestial fire which was shaddowed
out unto us by that poor element in comparison and beggarly rudiment, the fire
(I mean) of such necessary use in the law, which rather then it should be
wanting, the Lord caused it to descend from heaven, that it might cause the
Sacrifices to ascend thither again as a sweet incense unto the Lord without
which no burnt offering was acceptable.

The second part.
But now, as then, there are certain false fires, abominable to God, odious
to men, dangerous to the Nadabs and Abihues that meddle with them, bringing
thereby coals upon their own heads, an ill savor upon all their services;
and not only so, but that which is worse, an ill report and surmise even on
those that offer the right fire, and serve the Lord in spirit and truth: yet
for their sakes is the name of zeal blasphemed all the day long.

Against these, as then, so now severe caueats and clear distinctions must be
laid, lest such as have not their senses exercised to put a difference, mistake
poisonfull weeds for wholesome herbs, to their own destruction; and for the
sake of the one, revile the other to the wrong of God and his Saints.

It fares not otherwise with the soul the^ with the body: besides the native
and radical heat, the principal instrument of life, there are aguish and
distempered heats, the causes of sickness and death.

To discern of those, requires some skill and judgment: yet a good Empirick,
a Christian of experience, will give a shrewd guess at them, the easier and the
better if he mark these following signs and symptoms, common to all the
kinds of false zeal, here also following.

First they are deeply sick of the pharisaicall Oftentatio^.
they love to be seen of men, and say with Iehu, Come and see how zealous I am
for the Lord of hosts: they proclaim their alms with a trumpet, paint their
good deeds upon Church windows, engraue their legacies upon tombs, have
their acts upon record: Thus, Comets blaze more then fixed Stars. Aguish
heates breed flushings, and are more seen in the face, then natural warmeth at
the heart. Scholars count hiding of Art the best Art: the godly man studies by
all means how to conceal the one hand from the other, in doing well; hiding of
zeal is the best zeal.

Ahabs disease exceeding in external humiliation, affected gestures,
passionate sighs, loudness of voice, odd attires and such like: These know
how to rend the garment, hang the head with the bulrush, to whip and lance
their skins with Baals Priests; and yet strangers to a wounded spirit: not
but that true and hearty zeal does lift up the eyes, knock the breast, dance
before the Arc. Therefore this character may deceive the unwary; Let Ely take
heed of judging Hannaes spirit rashly by the moving of her lips: yet
hypocrites so usually strain nature and without a cause exceed, and that in
public, and upon the stage, that for the most part, their actions and
affections are palpable: as Jesuits, Cappuchines, etc. yea in many
histrionicall Protestants: Horse-coursers iades will bound, curuet and show show
more tricks, then a hose well mettled for the rode or cart.

Complementall.
you may know them by their diligence and curiosity in lighter matters joined
with omission and neglect of greater, wise in circumstance, and careless in
substance, tithing mint, straining at gnats, etc. In all cheap and easy
duties, prodigal: niggardly and slothful in the weighty things of the Law:
these have at command good words, countenance, yea tears from their eyes,
sooner then a farthing from their purse, having this worlds goods, and see
their brother want; these stick up feathers for the carcass, beguiling the
simple, coozening the world, but chiefly themselves.

Fourthly, these fires cannot keep themselves within their own hearths,
Pragmaticall.
Censorious.
they sparkle and spet at others, or like ill couched fireworks let fly on all
sides: only out of their wisdom they know how to spare Agag and the great
ones, and be sure they anger not their great Masters, and meddle with their
matches: whereas it is the property of fire that comes from above to spare the
yielding sheath, and melt the resisting metal, to pass by the lower roofes,
and strike the towred pinnacle, as Nathan, David, Elias, Ahab, John, Herod,
Jonas, Niniuie, etc. Note also in all their proceeding with others, in steed
of Cruel.
and not without compassion of the offender, weeping with Moses and Samuel over
the people, being sorry with the Emperor, that they know how to write
sentences of condemnation) These delight in cruelty, the brand of the Malignant
Church; feed their eyes with Massacres as the Queen mother. No diet so
pleasing to these ravening wolves, as the warm blood of the sheep. They are
they that cry fire and faggot, away with them, not worthy to live, their very
mercies are cruelty: especially in their own cause, they heat the furnace
seven times hotter then in Gods.

Lastly, these Meteors and vapors Variable and inconstant.
or continued heat (as the fixed stars ever like themselves) but have only
their aguish fits, and lunatic moods; sometimes in adversity they are good
under the rod as Pharaoh, again in prosperity like the fat kine of Bashan,
ungrateful and forgetful: sometimes in prosperity when the sun of peace
shines on them, and the favorable influence of great ones, they shoot forth
their blade with the corn on the house top, running with the stream, and
sailing with the wind; sometimes their zeal depends upon the life of Iehoiada;
sometimes on the company of the Prophets: commonly in the beginning they blaze
like straw fires, but in the end go out in smoke and smother; whereas in
their entrance into profession, they galloped into shows, and made some girds
at hand, they tire, give in, and end in the flesh, whereas all natural motions
are swiftest toward their end.

The vestall fires were perpetual, and the fire of the Altar never went out.
Spices and wefts of these evils may be found in the sincerest Christians: but
they suffer not these dead flies to ly and putrefie in the precious boxes of
true zeal; Be not over just has 7. expositions. here. 2. or 3. more hereafter.
of all these the preachers caveat may be construed, Be not over just, though it
may also admit other interpretations, as after shall appear.

These are the special notes and symtomes of strange fires: the kinds also are
many, and might be distributed into many heads; but I will reduce them into
three which are known by their names. (...), counterfeit zeal, false fire.
(...), blind zeal, smoakie fire, or fools fire, ignis fatuus.

(...), turbulent zeal, wild fire.

The first, wanting truth and sincerity, propounds sinister ends:

The second, knowledge and discretion, takes wrong ways.

The third, love and humility, exceeds measure.

The first abounds amongst subtle and crafty professors, and is to be abhorred
and detected.

The second amongst simple and devout, is to be pitied and directed.

The third amongst passionate and affectionate, and is to be moderated and
corrected.

The first is the mere vizor of zeal, looking asquint one way and tending
another; pretending God and his glory, intending some private and sinister end;
first, either of honor and promotion, as Iehu who marched furiously, and his
word was the Lord of hosts, but his project was the kingdom.

Secondly, at filthy lucre: as Demetrius, and his followers, who cried great is
Diana of Ephesus; but meant her little silver shrines. It cannot be denied,
but many such there were who helped to pull down the Abbeys; not out of any
hatred to those unclean cages, but to rear their own houses out of the
ruins, and spoiled copes to make cushions. Judas complained of superfluity,
but grieved it fell besides his bag; many, temporalities tithes and glebes,
unlawful, because they are loath to forgo them: If Iezabel proclaim a Fast, let
Naboth look to his vineyard; If the Usurer and tradesman frequent sermons, let
the buyer and borrower look to themselves. It is too common a thing to make
zeal a lure and state, to draw customers; a bait of fraud, a net to entrap;
with malicious Doegs, to make it a stalking horse for revenge against the
Priest, thereby to discharge their gall at Ministers and other Christians, for
the omission and commission of such things, as them selves care not for; with
the Strumpet in the Proverbs, to wipe their mouths, and frequent the
Sacrifices, that they may be free from suspicion.

All these evils, have I seen under the sunshine of the Gospel: but by
how much, zeal is more glorious then common profession, by so much is
dissembled feruency more detestable then usual hypocrisy; yea, no better then
devilish villainy and double iniquity: such painted walls and whited sepulchers,
the Lord will break down. Let all Timothies and Nathanaels learn to discry
them, and discard them: The cure of this was deeply forelaid by Christ; I
counsel thee to buy gold tried in the fire: all is not gold that glistereth,
an image of faith breeds but a show of zeal; many seemed to trust in Christ,
but Christ would not trust them: but such faith as will abide the fire, brings
forth zeal that will abide the touchstone.

The second, is erroneous or blind zeal, not according to knowledge Romans 10.
I bear many devout Papists witness (though I fear the learned of them be
self condemned) that they have this zeal persuading themselves, they do God
best service, when they please the devil most in their will worship. The same
witness I bear many Separatists (though I fear most of them be sick of
self conceit ednesse, new fanglenesse, and desire of mastership:) who would
not suspect such zeal, which condemns all reformed Churches, and refuses
communion with such as they themselves confess to be Christians, and
consequently such as have communion with Christ. It would grieve a man indeed,
to see zeal misplaced, like metal in a blind horse; to see men take such
pains, and yet fall into the pit. This made Paul to wish himself Anathema,
for the sake of such; and yet the multitude and common people, often thus; Is
it possible but these men have the right? But alas, how should it be otherwise
when a blind company will follow a blind sect-master; This being one property
of blind zeal, a fond admiration, and apish imitation of some person, for
some excellency they see in him, which so dazles their eyes, that they cannot
discern their errors and infirmi^ties, (...)
which they oftener inherit then their virtues; as appears in the Lutherans,
and the Jews, that would sacrifice their children to Molech, in imitation of
Abraham: In these the devil becomes an Angel of light, and plaieth that
Dragon, Revel. 12. pouring out floudes of persecution against the Church,
causing devour men and women, to raise tragedies, breath out thretnings, and
persecute without measure; then these the devil has no better soldiers: but
when their scales fall from their eyes, and they come into Gods tents; God has
none like unto them. The cure of this divinely is forelaid by Christ also, to
buy eye-saule of him; Angels have eyes as well as wings to guide their flight:
when the ship is under sail, and has the freshest way; it has most need
to look to the sterage, keep the watch, have an eye to the Compass, and land
marks.

The third kind, is turbulent zeal, called by James bitter zeal, a kind of
wildfire transporting men beyond all bounds, and compass of moderation;
proceeding sometimes of a weakness of nature in men, that have no stay of
their passion, like to Clockes whose springs are broken, and Cities whose walls
are down. Zeal is a good servant, but an ill master: metal is dangerous in a
headstrong horse. And so the Poets (which were the Heathens Prophets) shadowed
out the cure of this, in Mineruas golden bridle, where with she menaged her
winged Pegasus. There is too much of this bitter zeal, of this Hierapicra, in
all our books of controversies: but especially there has been too much in our
domestical wars; some sons of Bichri have blown the trumpet of contention,
trumpets of anger; the Churches of God should have no such custom: Oh that our
Churches understood that saying.

In quarrels of this nature Paul spends his zeal, not in partaking but in
parting the tray, beating down the weapons on both sides: Who art thou that
iudgest? who art thou that condemnest thy brother? Romans 14. 10
as if he should say, The matters are not Tanti, we have made the devil too
much sport already; who threw in these bones to set us together by the ears,
whilst he lets-in the common Enemy upon us. Charity, Charity, is the builder
of Churches: Strife about trifles, has wasted many famous ones, and placed the
temples of Mahomet, where the golden candlestick was wont to stand. We pity
the former ages, contending about leauened and unleavened bread: keeping of
Easter, fasting on Sundays, etc. The future ages, will do the like for us. Oh
that the Lord would put into the hearts both of the governors and parties to
these quarells, once to make an end of these Midianitish wars; that we might
jointly pour out the vials of our zeal, upon the throne of the beast.

Thus have you heard the errors and counterfeits of zeal, through whose sides,
and upon the back of which, diverse of the malicious world use to beat those
whom it hates, because their works are better then their own; injuriously
concluding, that all Zealots are alike. Thus I have heard our Merchants
complain, that the set up blewes have made strangers loath the rich oaded
blewes, only in request: this is an old sophisme. True judgment would teach
us to conclude, that the best drugs have their adulterates; the most current
coins their slippes; and that virtue which so many hypocrites put on, to grace
themselves withal; is surely some rare and excellent jewel.

The third part.
The true Zealote, whose feruency is in the spirit, not in show; in substance
not in circumstance; for God, not himself; guided by the word, not with
humors; tempered with charity, not with bitterness: such a man's praise is of
God though not of men: such a man's worth cannot be set forth with the tongues
of men and Angels.

Oh that I had so much zeal, as to steep it in it own liquor; Arguments of
commendation.
to set it forth in it own colors, that the Lord would touch my tongue with a
coal from his Altar, that I might regaine the decayed credit of it, with the
sons of men.

It is good to be zealous in a good From Gods excellency whom zeal only
becomes, unworthily placed elsewhere.
and is it not best, in the best? or is there any better then God, or the
kingdom of heaven? Is it comely what ever we do, to do it with all our might?
only uncomely when we serve God? Is mean and mediocrity, in all excellent
Arts excluded, and only to be admitted in religion? Were it not better to
forbear Poetry or Painting, then to rhyme or daube? and were it not better, to
be of no religion then to be cold, or lukewarm in any? Is it good to be
earnest for a friend, and cold for the Lord of hosts? For whom do thou
reserve the top of thy affections? for thy gold? for thy Herodias, etc. O ye
adulterers and adulteresses, can ye offer God a baser indignity? What ayleth
the world? Is it afraid think we, that God can have too much love; who in
regard of his own infinite beauty, and the beams he vouchsafes to cast upon
us, deserves the best, yea all, and a thousand times more then all? Ought not
all the springs and brooks of our affection, to run into this maine? may not
he justly disdain, that the least Riueret should be drained another way? that
anything in the world should be respected before him, equalled with him, or
loved out of him, of whom, for whom, and through whom are all things? who, or
what can be sufficient for him our Maker and Savior? In other objects fear
exceeds: here no ecstasy is high enough.

From his spiritual nature.
if thou be of any spirit thy self? is not a slothful messenger as vinegar
to thy teeth, and as smoke to thine eyes? Have thou any sharpness of wit, is
not dullness tedious unto thee? And shall he that is all spirit (for whom the
Angels are slow and cold enough) take pleasure in thy drowzie and heavy
service? Do men choose the forwardest Dear in the heard, and the liueliest
Colt in the drove? And is the backwardest man fittest for God? Is not all his
delight in the quickest and cheerfullest giuers and seruitors? Even to Judas he
says, That thou do do quickly; so odious is dullness unto him: what else
moved him to ordain that the neck of the consecrated Ass should be broken,
rather then offered up in sacrifice; does God hate the Ass? or is it not for
the sake of the quality of the creature; which has ever among the heathens
been an Hierogliphick of heaviness and tarditie?

Thirdly, this zeal is so gracious a favorite Effects of zeal.
that it graces with him all the rest of his graces; Revel. 12
Prayer if it be fervent, prevails much: the zealous witnesses had power to
shut and open heaven: by this, Israel wrastled with God, overcame, and was
called a Prince with God: this strengthened the heart of Moses (as Aaron and Hur
supported his hands) till the Lord said, Let me alone: this made Cornelius his
prayer to come into heaven; whither our cold suits can no more ascend, then
vapors from the Still, unless there be fire under it: Repentance, a needful
and Primary grace, which the Baptist so urged: but then we must be zealous and
repent (as my text ioynes them) or else no repentance pleases God; nor are
there fruits worthy repentance. Alms and good deeds are sacrifices pleasing
to God; but without zeal, the widows mites are no better then the rest; It is
the cheerful loose, that doubleth the gift. Generally, as some man's mark and
name, furthereth the sale of his commodity; so zeal inhanceth all the graces
of God. It pitties me for Laodicea that lost so much cost; had as many virtues,
did as many duties as other Churches: but for want of this, Christ could not
sup with them. Furnish a Table with the principallest fare, and daintiest
dishes that may be had; let them be roasted and boiled to the halues, or stand
on the Table till they be lukewarm; what will the guests say? All that we can
do is but the deed done, Opus operatu^
unless zeal confer grace.

Fourthly, zeal is the richest evidence Baptismus Plaminis and Pluminis.
The Baptism of water, is but a cold proof of a man's Christendom; being
common to all comers: but if any be baptized with fire, the same is sealed up
to the day of Redemption. If any shall say, friend, what do thou profess a
religion without it; how can he choose but be struck dumb? Can we suppose
wormwood without bitterness, a man without reason? then may we imagine a
religion, and a Christian, without spirit and zeal. The Jesuit says, I am
zealous; the Separatist, I am zealous; their plea is more probable, then the
lukewarm worldlings, that serve God without life. If the color be pale and
wan, and the motion insensible, the party is dead or in a swoune; if good and
swift, we make no question. The zealous Christian is never to seek for a
proof of his salvation: what makes one Christian differ from another in grace,
as stars do in glory; but zeal? All believers have a like precious faith:
All true Christians have all graces in their seeds; but the degrees of them
are no way better discerned then by zeal: Men of place distinguish themselves,
by glistering pearls: A Christian of degrees shines above other in zeal.
Comparisons I know are odious to the world, that feign would have all alike:
but the righteous is better then his neighbor: All Christians are the
excellent of the earth, the Zelot surmounteth them all, as Saul the people by
the head and shoulders; he is ever striving to excel, and exceed others and
himself.

One of these is worth a thousand others, one does the work of many: which
made him speak of Elisha in the plural number, The horsemen and Chariots of
Israel; besides his own work, he winnes and procures others, makes
Proselytes. It is the nature of fire to multiply, one coal kindles another:
his work so shines that others come in and glorify God; maruelling and
enquiring what such forwardness should mean, concluding with Nebuchadnezzar,
Surely the servants of the most high God.

These are good Factors and Agents, doing God as good service as Boutefewes do
the Devil, and Jesuits the Pope, sparing no cost, nor labor; and what they
cannot do themselves, they do by their friends, Who is on my side, who? etc.

As for lets and impediments, they ouer-looke and ouer-leape them, as fire
passes from one house to another; neither is there any standing for any Gods
enemies before the^: they make hauock of their own and others corruptions. If
you will rightly conceive of Peter's zeal in converting and confounding, you
must imagine (says Chrysostom) a man made all of fire walking in stubble. All
difficulties are but whetstones of their fortitude. The sluggard says, There
is a Lion in the way; tell Samson and David so, they will the rather go out to
meet them. Tell Nehemiah of Samballat, he answers, Shall such a man as I
fear? Tell Caleb there are Anakims, and he will say, Let us go up at once,
etc. Let Agabus put off his girdle and bind Paul, let him be told in every
City, that bonds await him, he is not only ready for bonds, but for death;
tell Iubentius, he must lay down his life, he is as willing as to lay off his
clothes: tell Luther of enemies in Worms, he will go if all the tiles of the
houses were devils. The Horse neighs at the trumpet; the Leuiathan laughes at
the spear. They that mean to take the kingdom of God by violence, provide
themselves to go through fire and water, carry their lives in their hands,
embrace faggots; they say to father and mother, I know you not to carnal
Counselors and friendly enemies, Get you behind me Satan. Zeal is as strong
as death, hot as the coals of Juniper; floods of many waters cannot quench it.
Agar, Pro. 30. speaks of four things, stately in their kind; I will make
bold to add a fifth, comprehending and excelling them all; namely, the zealous
Christian, strong and bold as the Lion; not turning his head for any; as swift
as the greihound in the ways of Gods commandments; in the race to heaven, as
nimble as the Goat climbing the steep and craggy mountains of piety and
virtue; A victorious King, ouercoming the world and his lusts: Solomon in all
his royalty, is not clothed like one of these in his fiery Chariot.

To cut off the infinite praises of zeal, let us hear what honorable
testimonies and glorious rewards, it pleases God to confer upon it; David's
ruddie complexion and his skill in music, made him amiable in the eyes of
men: but the zeal of his heart, styled him a man after Gods own heart; and
the sweet singer of Israel. Abraham, that could find in his heart to
sacrifice his Isaac, was called the friend of God. The same virtue denominated
Jacob a Prince with God. Elisha, The Chariots and horsemen. Paul, A chosen
vessel, etc.

Neither does God put them off, with names and empty favors, but upon these he
bestows his graces: David dedicateth his Psalms to him that excelled: God in
dispensing of favors observes the same rule, To him that overcomes will I
give, etc. To him that has, shall be given. Husbandmen cast their seed upon
the fertilest ground, which returns it with the greatest interest: God gives
most talents to those that improoue them in the best bank. Joseph shall have a
party colored coat, of all kind of graces and blessings: And because he
knows this will purchase them hatred and envy, he takes them into special
tuition; if any will hurt his zealous witnesses, there goes out a fire out of
their mouths, Revel. 12
to devour their enemies. A man were better anger all the witches in the world
then one of these. If God bring any common judgments, he sets his Seal and
Thau on their foreheads, Revel. 7. 3
and sprinkles their posts; Eze. 9.
snatcheth Lot out of the fire (who burned in zeal, Exodus 12
as Sodom in lust) as men do their plate whiles they let the baser stuff
burn. In fine, he takes Enoch and Eliah in triumphant Chariots up to heaven,
and after their labors and toils, sets them in special Thrones, to rest
in glory; The Apostles in their twelve, the rest in their order, according to
their zeal. And though he may well reckon the best of these, unprofitable
servants; yet such congruity (not of merits, but of favor) it pleases him to
observe in crowning his graces, that the most zealous here, are the most
glorious there.

Who would not now wonder how ever this royal virtue should have lost it grace
with the world; how ever any should admit a low thought of it? But what? shall
all the indignity which hell can cast upon it, make it vile in our eyes? or
rather shall we not reason from the opposition as Tertullian did of Nero: That
religion which Nero so persecutes, must needs be excellent.

If zeal were not some admirable good, the devil and world would not so hate
it; yet lest silence should be thought to baulke some unanswerable reasons, let
us see how they labor to be mad with reason: 1 Object.
Let Festus be the speaker for the rest, Zeal is mad, and makes men mad.
for he speaks what all the rest think; you know his mad objection, Act. 26.
24
and Paul's sober answer in that place, 1 Cor.
and the like, 2. Cor. 5. 13. whether he be mad or sober it is for God and
you.

This text bids us be zealous and repent; the word signifies be wise again, or
return to your wits. The prodigal is said to come to himself, when he was
first heat with this fire. We may well answer the world as old men do young: You
think us Christians to be mad that follow heaven so eagerly; but we know
you to be mad, that run a-madding so after vanity.

A Christian indeed is never right, till he seem to the world to be beside
himself; Christ's own kindred were afraid of him. Act. 2
The Apostles are said to be full of new wine; besides, with these the world
is mad: Act. 7
they run upon Stephan like mad men; Nichodemus and such as he, never offends
them.

You know also what Ahab laid to the charge of Eliah; 2 Object.
with the Apology he made for himself. This is a stale imputation in all
ages. Haman accused Mordechaie and the Jews of it. A makebate.
The Apostles are said to be troublers of the whole earth. In the Primitive
Church, all mutinies and contentions were laid to the Martyrs. Tenterden
steeple.
True it is, where zeal is, there is opposition, and so consequently troubles:
Christ sets this fire on earth, not as an author, but by accident: The thief
is the author of the fray, though the true man strike never so many blows: but
the Ahabs of the world, trouble Israel; then, complain of Eliah: The Papists
will blow up the state, then, father it upon the Puritanes. It is not for
any wise man, to believe the tithe of the tales and slanders, which fly abroad
of the zealous: Lewd men would fain strike at al goodness through their sides.

You may remember also, 3 Object.
Eliabs uncharitable censure of David, Proud.
I know the pride of thine heart. So do all worldlings measure others by their
own length; if they see any forwardness in the peaceablest spirit, they
ascribe it either to vain glory, or covetousness; the only springs that set
their wheels on going: but of this the knower of the hearts must judge
between us.

When slaundering will not serve, 4 Object. They keep no mean.
then fall they to glauering, cunningly glancing at zeal, whiles they commend
the golden mean wherein virtue consists. But Christians, take heed none spoil
you through such Philosophy; or rather Sophistry: for true Philosophy will tell
you that the mean wherein virtue is placed, is the middle betwixt two kinds,
and not degrees: And it is but mean virtue that loves the mean in their sense.

Oh say they, 5 Object. Indiscreet.
but some discretion would do well; It is true, but take withal Caluins
caveat to Melanchton: That he affect not so the name of a moderate man, and
listen to such Sirens songs, till he lose his zeal.

I have observed, that which the world miscalls discretion, to eat up zeal,
as that which they call policy, does wisdom. As Ioab stabbed Abner, under a
color of friendship: Antichrist undermines Christ, by pretending to be his
vicar. The fear of ouerdoing makes most come too short; of the two
extremities, we should most fear lukewarmenesse: rather let your milk boil
over then be raw.

From glauering, they fall to scoffing; young Saints, will prove but old Devils;
these hot-spurs will soon run themselves out of breath. But we say, such
were never right bred; such as prove falling stars, never were ought but
meteors; the other never loose light or motion: spiritual motions may be
violent and perpetual.

When none of these will take, they fall to right down railing; these Puritans,
these singular fellows, etc. unfit for all honest company. I hope the states
Puritan, and the common Puritan be two creatures. For with that staff the
multitude beats all that are better then selves, and lets fly at all that have
any show of goodness. But with that which most call Puritanisme, I desire to
worship God. For singularity, Christ calls for it, and presses and urges it;
What singular thing do you, or what odd thing do you? Shall Gods peculiar
people, do nothing peculiar? The world thinks it strange, we run not with
them into excesses, and do not as most do, that we might escape derisino.
Judge you which of these men shall please: I believe none shall ever please
Christ, till they appear odd, strange, and precise men, to the common sort;
and yet need not be over just neither. Let them that have tender ears, stop
them against the charms of the world, and scorns of Michol, unless they were
wiser: let him that has a right ear, hear what Christ says to the Churches,
Be zealous.

The fourth part.
Yea, Incentiues.
but by what means shall a Christian attain this fire, and maintain it when
he has gotten it.

Say not in thine heart, What Prometheus shall ascend into heaven and fetch it
thence; thou may fetch it thence by thine own prayer: as did Elias, and the
Apostles, men of infirmities as well as thy self; pray continually, and
instantly: the Lord that breathed first thy soul into thee, will also breath
on thy soul: I speak not of miraculous (which was but a type) but of ordinary
inspiration. Prayer and zeal are as water and ice: mutually producing each
other: when it is once comne down upon thine altar; though no water can quench
it, yet must it be preserved fresh, by ordinary fuel; especially, the Priests
lips must keep it alive.

Sermons are bellows ordained for this purpose. The word read is of divine
use, but does not with that motion stir these coals.

Experience shows the best oration will not so move as the meanest Orator.

The fifth part.
But here me think I hear the lukewarm worldling of our times, 1 Object.
fume and chafe, and ask what needs all this ado for zeal, as if all Gods
people were not zealous enough.

Such as think they are, or can be zealous enough, Answer.
need no other conviction to be poor, blind, naked, wretched, and pitiful
Laodiceans: Fire is ever climing, and aspiring higher; zeal is ever aiming at
that which is before; carried toward perfection; thinking meanly of that
which is past, and already attained, condemning his unprofitable service, as
Calvin in his last Will: this rule, tries full conceited Christians.

What would you have us do? 2 Object
we profess, keep our Church, hear Sermons as Christians ought to do.

Affectionate friendship and service, Answer.
is not only for public show, and pomp, upon festival days, in Chambers
of Presence; but for domestical, ordinary, and private use; to such holyday
and Church retainers, God may well say, let us have some of this zeal at home
and apart.

All affections are most passionate, without a witness. Such as whose families,
closets, fields, beds, walks, do testify of their worship, as well as temples
and synagogues, are right seruitors: God much respects their devotions; and
they have strong proof of the power of godliness.

We would you should know, 3 Object.
that we are such as have prayer said or read, in our families and
houshoulds; or or else we say some to our selves at our lying down, and
vprising; and more then that, say you what you will, we hold more then needs.

First, know, Answer.
that zeal knows no such unmannerly courses, as to slubber over a few
prayers, whiles you are dressing and vndressing your selves, as most do, half
a sleep, half awake; know further that such, as hold only a certain stint
of daily duties, as malt horses their pase, or mill horses their round, out of
custom or form, are far from that metal which is ever putting forward,
growing from strength to strength, and instant in duties, in season, out of
season: and this says hard to lazy Christians.

May not we go too far on the right hand? 4 Object.


It is true: but liberality baulkes, Answer.
and fears covetousness and niggardize, more a great deal then prodigality;
so does zeal lukewarmenes and coldness, more then too much heat and
forwardness; the defect is more opposite and dangerous to some virtues, then
the excess.

Why? 5 Object.
are not some think you, too straight laced, that dare not use their Christian
liberty in some recreations? swear by small oaths, or lend money for
reasonable use? has not God left many things indifferent, wherein some show
themselves more nice, then wise?

Zeal will cut off the right hand, Answer.
if it cause to offend, much more to pare the nails and superfluities; it
consumes the strongest, dearest, corruptions; much more will it singe off such
hair and dross as these: If ought be praise worthy, it embraces such things;
if any be doubtful, carrying show of evil, of ill report, it dares not meddle
with them; it fears that some of these are as indifferent, as fornication was
among the heathen.

There are but few such, 6 Object.
no not of the better sort, as you speak of.

Grant there be any, Answer.
and zealous emulation culleth the highest examples. Such as mean to excel in
any Art, travel to find out the rarest workmen, purchase the choycest
copies; he that has true zeal, will strive to purge himself, as Christ is
pure.

Will you have us run before our neighbors, 7. Object.
or live without example, or company?

Cowards, and crauens, Answer.
stand and look who goes first: soldiers of courage will cast lots for the
onset and fore-ranke, for desperate services, and single combats. Iades will
not go without the way be led.

So we may soon come to trouble, 8 Object.
and danger enough.

What danger can there be, of an honest, peaceable, religious forwardness?
Answer.


The slug or snaile, puts out the tender horn to feel for lets in the way,
and pulls them in when there is no cause; so do the fearful that shall be
without: but zeal either finds no dangers, or makes them none; it neither
fears to do well, or to reprove ill doers, let whosoever will be displeased.

Some indeed care not whom they offend, 9 Object.
they are so harsh and fiery, they can bear with nothing.

Will true christianity allow us to bear with any sin? Answer.


Can tin, or hot iron choose but hiss again, if cold water be cast on it?
can a righteous soul choose but vex it self at open evil? Such Ostriches as
can digest oaths, profane and filthy speeches, show what metal they have for
the Lord of hosts; who yet will be ready enough to offer the challenge, or
stab, for the least disgrace to themselves, or their mistress: Phineas had
rather, if it were lawful, fight in Gods quarrels then his own.

All are not by nature of so hot dispositions, 10 Object.
or so fiery-spirited, as others.

If there be such a dull flegmaticke creature as has no life nor spirit in
Answer.
any thing he goes about, or whom nothing will move; he may plead complexion,
and yet grace is above nature: but the best way is; See every man compare his
devotion in matters of God, with his spirits and metal in other affairs,
wherein his element or delight lies, if the one equal not the other, the fault
is not in nature: the oldest man has memory enough for his gold, and the
coldest constitution heat enough where it likes.

Well, 11 Object.
our hearts may be as good as the best though we cannot show it.

Fire cannot be long smothered, Answer.
it will either find a vent, or go out; zeal will either find word, or
deed, to express it self withal.

All have not the gift of utterance. 12 Object.


Violent affections have made the dumb to find a tongue; Answer.
If it be low water the mill may stand, but abundance of heart will set the
wheels on going. What earnest discourses will unlearned mariners make of their
voiages? huntsmen of their game, etc.

All have not ability and means: 13 Object.
many have great charges.

Love and zeal are munificent, Answer.
make money their servant, not their master; wheresoever the heart is enlarged,
the hand cannot be straightened; where the bowels are open, the purse is not
shut. Herod for his pleasure, cares not for half his kingdom; what will not
some gentlemen give for hawks and hounds? not only the poor woman that spent
the rich ointment on Christ, the widow that gave all her substance, the
conuerts that sold all, and threw all at the feet of the Apostles, but even
the bounty of the superstitious Papists shall rise in judgment against such as
profess a religion, will give it good words, and countenance, but be at no cost
with it, and know a cheaper way to save charge withal.

Al have not so much leisure, 14 Object.
to spend so much time and study, about matters of religion, they have somewhat
else to do.

There are indeed many vanities, Answer.
which distract and divide the mind of worldlings; but zeal counts one thing
needful, to which it makes all other veil and stand by. Is there any so good
an husband of his time, that will not steal some hour for his pleasure; that
cannot spare his God and his soul half an hour, morning and evening; that
bestows not idly, as much time as a Sermon or two would take up in the week?
The soul I confess has his satiety, as well as the body; but why should we
sit on thorns, more at a Sermon then at a Play; think the Sabbaths longer
then holidaies; but for want of zeal? If thou be not a vain and willing
deceiuer of thy self, and others; deal honestly and plainly with thy soul,
try thy self by these few rules; and if thou iudgest thy self to come short
of them, amend and be zealous.

After the sparkles once by these means kindled, cherish and feed them by
reading the word: Let it dwell richly in thy heart, excite thy dullness by
spiritual Hymns. Loue-songs inflame not lust, more, then the Song of Songs
does zeal: Read or sing the 119. Psalm; and if thou be not zealous, every
verse will check thee in thy throat: Meditation is another help, approved by
Isaacks, and David's practice: Doct. Hall.
An Art lately so taught, as I shall need only, to point at the choice
theames, suiting and furthering this argument. I need not go far to fetch this
fire: I may strike it out of every word of this Epistle to Laodicea. Behold the
Lord God, especially thy Lord Christ in his glorious titles, and Majesty; for
so he begins his visions to John; and his Epistles to the Churches, exciting
their dull hearts. By such apparitions did he set on fire the heart of Moses
in the burning bush; and enflamed Stephan, his first Martyr: answerable and
proportionable to which, are our serious contemplations. Behold him as one that
sees thee, and knows thy works; the rowsing preface of all these letters.
Caesar's eye made his soldiers prodigal of their blood. The Atheist thinks God
takes as much notice of him and his prayers, as he does of the humming of flies
and bees; and therefore, no marvel if his service be formal and fashionable.
The faithful Christian by faiths prospectiue sees him at home, and hears him
saying, Well done thou good servant; which makes him to work out his heart.
Behold him as the beginning of creatures, especially of the new creature. Oh!
what love has he showed thee in thy redemption? out of what misery, into what
happiness, by what a price, to what end; but that thou should be zealous of
good works? Behold him as the faithful witness, that witnessed himself for
thee a good witness, and here faithfully counsels thee to follow his pattern.
Behold him as a speedy and royal rewarder of his followers. Take thy self
into paradise, represent to thy self thy crown, thy throne, thy white robes;
look not on the things that are seen, but on the far most excellent weight
of glory, look upon these, and faint if thou can. Behold also he is a
consuming fire, a zealous God, hating lukewarmenesse; not only destroying
Sodom with fire and brimstone, and providing Tophet for his enemies; but
awaking also his drowzie servants, by judgments (as Absolon Ioah by firing his
corn) his Israelites by fiery serpents: whom he loves, he chasteneth, and
keeps them in the furnace of fiery trials, till they come to their right
temper. He stands and knocks: if nothing will arouze us, a time will come,
when heaven and earth shall burn with fire, and Christ shall come in flaming
fire, to render vengeance with fire unquenchable. We therefore, that know the
terror of that day, what manner of persons ought we to be?

From God turn thine eyes unto man: set before thee the pillar, and cloud of
fiery examples, that have led us the way into Canaan. He is but a dull Jade,
that will not follow: The stories of the scriptures, the lives of the fathers,
the acts and monuments of the Church, have a special virtue for this effect.
The very pictures of the fires, and Martyrs, cannot but warm thee. If thou
can meet with any living examples, follow them, as they follow Christ,
frequent their company: even Saul amongst the Prophets, will Prophecy. No
bangling hawk, but with a high flier will mend her pitch: the poorest good
companion, will do thee some good; when Silas, came Paul burnt in the spirit:
a lesser stick may fire a billet; If thou find none, let the coldness of
the times heat thee, as frostes do the fire; Let every indignation make thee
zealous, as the dunstery of the Monks, made Erasmus studious: one way to be
rich in times of dearth, is to engrosse a rare commodity, such as zeal is:
now, if every, they have destroyed thy law; It is now hie time to be zealous.

Consider and emulate the children of this generation, to see how eager every
Demas is for worldy promotion. How did that worthy Bishop, disdain to see an
harlot, more curiously to adorn her body unto sin and death, then he could
his soul unto life everlasting. It angered Demosthenes to see a Smith earelier
at his Anuile, then he was at his Deske.

When thou have thus heat thy self, take heed of catching cold again, as
many have done, and brought their zeal to deaths door.

This fire may go out diverse ways: Zeales extinguishers.
first by substraction of fuel; if a man forbear his accustomed meals, will
not his natural heat decay? The Levites that kept Gods watch in the Temple,
were charged expressly, morning and evening, if not oftener, to look to the
lights and the fire. He that shall forget (at the least) with the Curfeau-bell
in the evening to rake up his zeal by prayer, and with the day-bell in the
morning to stir up and kindle the same, if not oftener with Daniel; I cannot
conceive how he can possibly keep fire in his heart. Will God bless such, as
bid him not so much as good morrow and good-euen?

He that shall despise or neglect prophecy, must he not needs quench the
spirit? have I not marked glorious professors, who for some farm sake, or
other commodities, have flitted from Jerusalem to Jericho; where the situation
was good, but the waters naught; and their zeal has perished, because vision
has failed.

Such as read the Bible by fits upon rainy days, not eating the book with
John, but tasting only with the tippe of the tongue: Such as meditate by
inatches, never chewing the cud and digesting their meat, they may happily get
a smackering for discourse and table-talke; but not enough to keep soul and
life together, much less for strength and vigor. Such as forsake the best
fellowship, and wax strange to holy assemblies, (as now the manner of many is)
how can they but take cold? Can one coal alone keep it self glowing?

Though it go not out for want of matter, yet may it be put out by sundry
accidents; when it is newly kindled it may be put out with scoffs and
reproaches, if Peter take not heed, and fence himself well against them; but
if once thoroughly grown, such breath will but spread and increase it.

It is possible fire may be oppressed with too much wood, and heat suffocated
with too much nourishment: overmuch prayer, reading, and study, may be a
weariness both to flesh and spirit: but it so rarely happens that I need
not mention it; and yet the soul has it satiety. There be some such
perchance, ouer-nice men in this sense also, who have not learned that God will
have them merciful to themselves: It is oftener smoothered for want of vent and
exercise. Let such as use not, and express not their zeal, brag of their
good hearts; surely they have none such, or not like to have them such. If
Nichodemus had not buried Christ by day, we might have feared his zeal had
gone out, for all his coming by night.

Yet this is not so ordinary, as to extinguish it by the quench-coale of sin;
gross sin every man knows will waste the conscience, and make shippewracke
of zeal: but I say, the least known evil unrepented of, is as a thief in the
candle, or an obstruction in the liver. I fear David served God but
reasonably, till he published his repentance; he that steals his meat,
though poverty tempt him, yet gives thanks but coldly: zeal and sin, will
soon expel the one, or the other, out of their subject; can you imagine in
the same roof, God and Beliall, the Arc and Dagon? Lastly, and most commonly,
foraine hear will extract the inward, and aduemicious heat consume the
natural.

The Sun will put out the fire; and so will the love of the world, the love
of the Father, they cannot stand together in intense degrees, one cannot serve
both these masters, with such affection as both would have. Seldom see thou
a man make haste to be rich, and thrive in religion. Christ's message to John
holds true, The poor are most forward in receiving and following the Gospel:
as thou love thy zeal, beware of resolving to be rich, lest gain prove thy
godliness; take heed of ambitious aspiring, least Courts and great places,
prove ill aires for zeal, whither it is as easy to go zealous, as to return
wise: Peter whiles he warmed his hands, cooled his heart; Not that greatness
and zeal cannot agree, but for that our weakness many times seuers them. If
thou be willing to die poor in estate, thou may the more easily live rich
in grace. Smyrna, the poorest of the seven Candlestickes, has the richest
price upon it.

The diligent practice of these courses will make easy the practice of this
counsel, Be zealous, etc.

The sixth part.
Which little round fire-ball coming to hand, as David's small stone, by
ordinary lot, knowing the insufficiency of my own; I pray, that God with his
arm, would scatter it far and wide into those wide parts of the world
without the pale of Christendom, which lie so frozen and benumbed in their
Paganism, that they feel not the coldness of their religions; as also in
those regions, that being within the Tropickes of the Church, have just so
much, and so little heat, as to think they have enough, and need no more:
Chiefly mine affections burn within me for the good of mine own nation, for
which I would I had but so much zeal as truly to wish my self Anathema, upon
condition it had heat suitable to the light. For I must bear it record, it
has knowledge, I would I could say, according to zeal. But the spirit knowing
that which is spoken to all, to be in effect as spoken to none, directs me
what I would speak to Churches, to speak to particular Angels. Now the
principal in our Church, under that Archangel of the covenant, I most
willingly acknowledge to be my Lord the King, as an Angel of light. And why
not that very Angel, who by his writing has begun to pour out the fifth
vial upon the throne of the beast, darkened his kingdom, caused them to gnaw
their tongues for grief, and blaspheme for the smart of their wounds; though
as yet they will not repent of their errors. The Lord anoint him more and
more, with this oil above all the Princes of the earth, that from his head, it
may run down upon our skirts; make him shine in zeal above all other stars,
to the warming and enlightening of this whole Horizon; set him up as a standard
for his people; cloth him with zeal, as with a cloak, to recompense the fury
of the adversaries, that he may strike the Aramites, not three but five times
till they be consumed; that he may put the Ammonites under the iron sawes,
harrowes, axes, which have provoked him as much, as ever they did David, 2.
Sam. 12. But yet as in the time of the old Testament the custody of the fire
and light was the charge of the Priests; so here I observe Christ to lay it
upon his Ministers, interpreting his rule by his practice, Tell the Church,
Tell the Angel of the Church; honoring that despised office, with that stately
style; intimating the union between people and Minister, that they should be
as one: what is spoken to the one, is spoken to the other; not as some, that
ever make Clergy and Layty two members, in division and opposition; neither
yet as some spirits that lay all level, but implying a propriety, especially
in grace and zeal in the Ministers, whom the preacher calls the Master of the
assemblies; that they should exceed as far the people, as Angels do men, and
that he will reckon with them for the religion of the people, because cold
Priests make bold sinners; zealous Iehoiada may make Iehoash the King zealous,
so long as he lives with him. We therefore men and brethren, or rather men and
Angels, upon whom it lies to keep life and heat in the devotion of the world,
to consume the dross of vices and heresies, that have fallen into the sink of
our times; we that are to make ready our people for the second coming of
Christ, is the spirit of Ely think we sufficient for us? what manner of
persons ought we to be, burning in spirit, fervent in prayer, thundering in
preaching, shining in life and conversation? why is it then my brethren (oh let
my plainest rebukes, be the fruits and signs of my best love to mine own
Tribe; let them not be as breakings of the head, but as precious balm to those
whose honor with the people, I prefer to my life) why is it that some of us
pray so rarely and so coldely in private (the evils of our times will not out
but by frequent fasting and fervent prayer) in public so briefly, so
perfunctorily, and feebly, that we scarce have any witnesses of what we say?
why are there yet remaining any Mutes amongst us? why are there any tongues
that dare speak against often or zealous preaching? Does not Paul adjure us
before him that shall judge the elect Angels, that we preach instantly, in
season, and out of season? Read we the commentaries of that text, or let the
practice of Ancients expound it; and tell me if ever old or new interpreted
that charge, of bare reading, of quarterly, or monthly, yea, or of once on the
Saboath preaching only, as if that were fully sufficient, without endeavoring
or desiring any more? If always often preaching be prating, what meant the
practice I say, not only of Calvin, and Beza, but of Chrysostom, Basil,
Ambrose, with other of the Fathers, preaching every day in the week, some of
them twice in the week, none of them so seldom, as such would bear the world
in hand. What meant sundry ancient Counsels, (the eleventh of Tolet in Spain)
yea even of Trent it self, to excite the torpor of the Bishops of their
times, as their Canons speak, enioyning frequent preaching, calling for more
then almost any man is to perform.

But here I may turn reproouing into rejoicing, that preaching is grown in
any better fashion and grace with our times, by royal and reverend, both
examples and countenance: only I wish that every Archippus may fulfill his
Ministry, be instant and constant in preaching. Solomon the older, and wiser
he grew, the more he taught the people, sharpened his goads, and fastened his
nails; whereas many amongst us are so wise in their youth, as to affect the
foolishnes of preaching; but in their dotage, Ease slayes the fool; when the
door is oyled, it leaves creaking; they must then fall to make much of
themselves, till contrary with the Prophet they cry out, My fatness, my
fatness, my belly, my belly; so favoring their lungs, that they will be sure
never to die of David's consumption of zeal; let such preach, say they, that
want living: and if for shame they preach at all, it must be rarely and easily,
for breaking of their wind, (my meaning is not to tax such, whom God
dismables by weakness of body) or such as recompense their rarity with
industry, as Perkins, etc. and yet forsooth these think they may justly
challenge, and wear the double honor of countenance and maintenance; I marvel
with what right, or with what face, so long as there remains express Canon of
Scripture, bequeathing it to those, that toil in word and doctrine. Neither
will zeal set us on work only to preach, or to preach often to avoid the
infamy of bare readers; but it will teach us to preach painfully, and that in
the evidence and demonstration, not so much of art, or nature, as of the spirit
and grace; regarding only, that the people know Christ and him crucified; not
caring whether they know what we have read, how many quotations our memory
will carry level, how roundly we can utter our mind, in new minted words,
in like sounding, idle, vain, and offensive Paranomasies; I blush to fall into
the least touch of that kind: yet at once to show and reprove that childish
folly, It is a view of vain preaching, turning sound preaching into a sound of
preaching, tickling men's ears, like a tinkling cymbal, feeding them (...),
spoiling the plain song, with descant and division: what is this but to show
our own leuitie and want of true art; indeed affecting such a dancing,
piperly and effeminate eloquence (as Tully, Demosthenes, or any Masculine
Orator would scorn) instead of that divine powerful delivery, which becomes
him, that speaks the Oracles of God. If ever we mean to do any good, we must
exhort and reprove, with all vehemence and authority; lifting up our voice
as a trumpet, as the sons of thunder; pearcing their cares, witnessing,
striving and contending, according to our gift whatsoever it be, to manifest
our affections, that we may work upon the people; which all the art in the
world will not teach us to do: only zeal at the heart will naturally produce
it, without straining or affecting. If God require the heart as well as the
head; why should we not labor to move the affections, as well as inform the
judgment? there is a doctrinall, and as some term it, a Doctorly kind of
preaching, which is admired of some that understand it not; of others that
could be content with the Mass again, because it was gentle, and had no teeth
in it. And such Sermons I have sometimes heard, for matter void of exception,
but so delivered as if one were acting a Part, or saying a lesson by heart. It
has called to mind a song which sometimes I have met withal, excellently
composed, full of sweet air, surely and truly sung; but with flat and dead
voices without spirit, which has marred the music: Of such a Sermon and
preacher, the country man's verdit did well, that said, this man may be a great
scholar, but he wants beetle and wedges to heaw our knotted timber withal,
our green wood will not burn unless it be better blown: you shall sometimes
see an excellent horse of shape and color, having many of those marks Du
Bartas describes in Cains supposed horse; which yet wanting metal has been
of little worth, and less use. If there were no other preachers then these,
which hold themselves the only profound and learned preachers, I muse what
should become of conversion of souls, which they that covet, must come with
the spirit of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to their children. I
may in truth, and I hope with modesty speak with the Preacher, that in
observing I have observed, and have found that diverse great Clerks have had
but little fruit of their ministry; but hardly any truly zealous man of God
(though of lesser gifts) but have had much comfort of their labors, in their
own and bordering parishes, being in this likened by Gregory, to the iron on
the Smiths anvile sparkling round about. And if for this any bordering
neighbors, whose cold labors work not the like success, shall accuse them of
some kind (I know not what) of policy in bewitching the people; they may well
reply, Behold our zealous affections are our charms, and zeal all our
witchcraft, as Latimer well answered one that accused the people of partiality,
for not affecting him that preached one of his printed sermons, that he had
indeed his Stick, but wanted his Rosen; meaning his zealous manner of preaching
and living, without which last, all the former will do but little good, if a
good ensample of life accompany not their doctrine, as lightening does thunder.
For there are some (I speak it with sorrow of heart) that seem to have fire in
their preaching, but carry water in their life; being notoriously proud,
covetous, or debauched, stained with odious vices. Let us hear the sum of
all. Do we love Christ more then ordinary? would we give proof of our
trebble love to him? Let us then feed his flock with a trebble zeal,
expressed in our prayer, preaching and living: Let us make it appear to the
consciences of all, that the top of our ambition is Gods glory: and that we
prefer the winning of souls, to the winning of the world.

This title of Angels why may it not also be extended to Magistrates, as well
as that higher style, of Gods? Sure I am that the scarlet robe of zeal would
exceeding well become them. Iethro makes it their prime and essential
character; God and Moses, their only and sole, in the charge and commission to
Iehoshua so often repeated; Only be of good courage. And if David were now to
repen his Psalm; I think he might alter the form of his counsel, and say,
Be zealous ye Rulers and Judges of the world, and not wise and politic: or
rather under the terms of wisdom, he co^prehends indeed the zeal we call
for, the most now adays being Gallioes, wise only for the matters of the
common wealth; not having a spark of that spirit which was in Phineas, Daniel,
and Nehemias etc. for the Lord of hosts, or to his laws and commandments; as
if God had made Magistrates keepers only of the second table, governors of
men, and not of Christians; guardians only of civil societies, and not of his
Church, and shepherds also of his flock. Are Idolatries, blasphemies,
profaning of Sabaoths, no sins? Why then either have not the laws force and
strength enough in them (as sometime we are answered when we co^plain) or why
are they not executed for the suppressing of these reigning sins? are not all
they punished with death in the Scriptures, as well as breaches of the second
table. Blood I leave to the malignant. Church, and admire clemency in rulers,
as much as any; but yet I know the profane dissoluteness of the times,
requires a three stringed whip of severity to purge our Augean stable of the
foul abuses, whipped often with pens and tongues, but spared by them that
bear the sword (a man may say of many governors) altogether in vain for
matters of religion. Are not kings of the earth charged to render double to the
bloody strumpet of Rome? Why then does the hurtful pity of our times
imbolden and increase their numbers? Laodicea it self, I doubt not, for
matters of mine and thine, had (as their name imports) good civil justice and
iusticers; but what was God the nearer for it? does he not threaten for all
that to spue them out of his mouth? shall he not curse those that do his work
negligently, fearfully and partially? Our times complain of two special
canker-worms of justice, which eat up zeal in Magistrates. The first, is
covetousness, which makes men of place to transgress for a morsel of bread;
the zeal of their own houses, consumes the zeal of Gods house: The building
of great houses, keeping of great houses, and matching with great houses,
raising and leaving of great houses behind them; makes them so ravenous, that
they devour so much, as choakes all their zeal; which would teach them to
shake their laps of bribes, and scorn to accept gifts, though men would augment
them for the perverting of judgment. The other is cowardice and fearfulnes:
which how unfit, and base a quality did Nehemiah think it for a man of his
place? no better then shynesse in a fore-horse, whose eyes men fense on both
sides, that they may lead the way, and go without starting; unto which, zeal
is answerable in Magistrates, causing them only to see him that is invisible,
without casting a squint eye at men; to sing to God only of judgment and
mercy, without running their songs to man's ear; to walk in the perfect way
without turning, either to the right or left hand for fear or favor. Oh that
there were such an heart in our leaders; how easily would our people follow!
what a springtide of zeal should we have, if the Sun and Moon would cast
out a benign aspect upon them! Does it not flourish in all those shires and
towns, where the word and sword do jointly cherish it? In others which are
the greatest number, how does it languish and wane away, and hang down the
head? where is it in diverse places of the land to be seen? I had almost said
in my haste and heat, there is none that has zeal, no not one, there is no
courage for the truth; but that I remember that Eliah was checked for
ouershooting himself in his too short and quick computation. I hope the Lord
has his fifties amongst us, though but thin sown in comparison of the
swarms of professed recusants, and Church-Papists, of profane Atheists,
key-cold worldlings, and luke warm professors. The bodies of our many several
congregations, yea even of the better sort, whereunto have they been likened
by our separated adversaries; but unto the Prophet Hosea his cake, half baked
upon the hearth, having one side, that is the one side to the world-ward in
public service, scorched a little and browned over; but the inside to Godward,
in private, and family duties, no better then dough; many of them making
indeed some show, as the outlandish fruits that are plashed upon our walls,
but wanting heat never come to maturitie. If we should make good their
resemblances, how then should we please the stomach of God? who has indeed
brooked and borne us a long time, I doubt but wamblingly. How near were we
going in 88. and in the powder treason? Do we think he will ever digest us, in
the temper we are in? which (to confess the truth of the fashionable
Christian) what is it but a state of neutrality, indifferency, or such a
mediocrity, as will just serve the time, satisfy law, or stand with reputation
of neighbors? beyond which, if any step a little forward, do not the rest hunt
upon the stop? If there hap to break out a sparkle of zeal in any one house
in a parish; is not the whole town in an uproar, as when the bells ring awke
every man brings his bucket to the quenching of this fire? If hell be in an
alehouse, who cries out of it? and as for our Sundays Church service, which is
all that God gets at our hands; how perfunctorily, and fashionably is it
slubbered over; how are his Sabaoths made the voider and dunghill for all
refuse business, divided between the Church and the alehouse, the may pole
commonly beguiling the pulpit; what man would not spue to see God thus
worshipped? This want of devotion makes the foul mouthed Papists to spet at
us: this want of reformation, makes the queasie stomacked Brownists cast them
selves out of our Church; and shall God always suffer the land to bear us?
But behold, he stands at the door and knocks, by treasons, by plagues, by the
hammer of dearths, discontents, fires, inundations, especially by the word; his
locks are wet with waiting. Oh before he shake off the dust of his feet
against us, and turn to some other nation more worthy, let us open the door,
that he may come in and sup with us; if he love us, he will purge us, and
scourevs, by one chastisement or other; if he have no pleasure in us, he
cannot but unburden his stomach of us; If all the land besides should turn
the deaf ear, yet let me entreat and charge you of my flock to hear his
voice, and be zealous. Since my coming amongst you, I have handled some books
of the old Testament, the Epistles to the Romans, to the Hebrews, of Saint
James, Peter, and John, out of them taught the doctrine of the Law, of faith,
love, and good works: now in the choice of this Epistle of Christ to Laodicea,
my desire was to boil up the former to their just temper: in which work I can
willingly be content to spend my strength, and days, if God see it fit. I
cannot be a better sacrifice then to God, and for you, if I waste my self, so
you may have light and heat; what else is the end of my life? God has given
you a name, your zeal is gone abroad, and I hope you have many names among
you; the Lord increase their number and zeal. If but one of us this day, shall
open this door of his heart with Iehoshua, let others choose, I and my house
will serve the Lord more zealously then heretofore; neither I nor he shall have
lost our labors. A lively picture casts the eye upon every one that comes near
it: such is the word with whom, and with which we have to do; Let him that is
now cold, grow colder and colder; but let him that has an ear, hear what
has been said to the Churches; And be zealous and amend.

The Lord give us not only understanding, but zeal in all things: he Baptize
us with fire: he breath on us, and inspire into us the spirit of life and
power, etc. So shall we run the ways of his commandments.

FINIS.

