Certain godly Homelies or Sermons upon the Prophets Abdias and Jonas:

Containing a most fruitful exposition of the same.

Made by the excellent learned man, RODOLPH GVALTER of Tigure. And translated
into English,

By ROBERT NORTON. Minister of the word in Suffolk.

Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, for Rafe Newberie, dwelling in
Fletestrete a little above the Conduite. ANNO 1573.

To the worshipful my good friend master William Blenerhaiset esquire, John
Walker Doctor in divinity wishes perpetual felicity in Christ.
IT is no less benefit that we have knowledge of our creation, redemption,
preservation, eternal salvation, how to believe, love, worship, honor, and
show our selves thankful unto our creator, redemer, preserver, etc. than
that he has bestowed these great and inestimable gifts upon us, of his mercy
and free goodness. Neither avails it us to be borne and made men and not
brute beasts, and that Christ has died, risen again, and ascended into
heaven, if we know not the end of our creation and redemption, to be to
glorify god, to set forth his praise, and to tell of his wonderful works.
This is eternal life, says Christ, to know thee the only and true God, and
him whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. We had never known God, we had never
known Christ, except he had inspired his holy ones with his spirit, and
enforced them to write the holy scriptures, wherein he has reveled himself,
and manifested his will in all things necessary toward us. Wherefore we
ought first of all to be most thankful to God, and in all things to bless
his name, both for his fatherly favor, which he bears toward us, and also
for reueling the same by his word. Secondly, they be also worthy of their due
co^mendatio^, which as Gods instruments and workmen of God, have labored with
him to set forth the same word of the knowledge of salvation.

There are great and weighty causes which have moved God to utter himself in
his word. First, that he might set forth his love, wisdom, omnipotency,
goodness and fidelity to the world, which we had never known without his
word. God who is faithful (says August. Psa. 110.) has made him self our
debtor, not in taking any thing of us, but in promising us so great things. It
seemed but a small thing to promise, but he has also bound himself with
scripture as it were making with us a handwriting of his promises. He has not
only made a writing with men that they might believe, but he has further
appointed his only son to be a mediator of his fidelity and truth.
Wherefore all the world is of duty bound to give most hearty and immortal
thanks to God the only author and reueler of so great benefits, howsoever
otherwise the world do contemn, neglect and abuse this knowledge. Secondly,
that the remembrance of this most holy covenant between God and his church,
might be more durable, and the promise might be more certainly set forth to
all posterity. And therefore he has charged the things to be written, taught,
and learned of them that were present at the promulgation of his word, and of
them that should come after. etc. Psalm. 102. Let these things be written in
another generation, that the people which shall be borne hereafter may praise
the Lord. Adam (as Josephus testifies in the first book of his antiquities)
set up two tables or pillars of stone, and wrote in them the beginning of the
creation, the fall of man, and the promise of Messiah. After the flood wrote
Moses, and the rest of the Prophets inspired and led by the spirit of God.
After the Apostles and Evangelists by the same spirit, whose books the devil
and all his angels (though they greatly despited and impugned them) were never
able either utterly to destroy or cast them out of the hands of the people of
God, because God would have his covenant to remain in his Church, and so will
have them to the worlds end, Rumpantur ilia Codro, though the devil do
burste his guts. etc. Thirdly, that God will have his Church which is the
pillar and stay of the truth 1. Tim. 3. as in many other things to differ from
sects, factions, vain opinions and superstitious of other Gentiles, so in
this point chiefly to be a keeper and as it were a library of the books of
his Prophets and Apostles, wherein he has declared himself to the world.
Wherefore all men are bound that will be of the true Church of God, to keep,
read and exercise them selves in the true understanding and practicing of
these books. Fourthly, that the keeping and profession of these books, may be
a notable and certain testimony of the truth, and of the will of God, in all
matters of Religion, and a strong fortress both against all superstitious,
man's feigninges and devises, and also against al vain and fantastical
spirits preferring their own dreams and fond imaginations before the
certainty of Gods scriptures. Our gracious God therefore knowing the
necessity, and the inestimable profit of the scriptures, will have them set
forth, kept and exercised of his Church for ever. The scripture is the word of
truth, of life, the gospel of health, the power of God to salvation. etc. the
food of the soul, the light to our feet, the sword of the spirit, the
breath of Gods mouth, which who so wants runs into error, into death, and
destruction, is without all comfort of help, perishes for food, wandreth in
darkness, stands naked against his armed adversaries, destitute of Gods
grace and spirit, which who so wants, is none of Gods people. Romans 8.

The holy me^ of god ought to have their just commendation which were the just
instruments of gods spirit, in writing these scripturs, not to take any glory
from God and ascribe it unto men (which were mere Jdolatrie, and would make
men arrogant and glory in them selves) but to encourage men to labor with
the Lord, and to know that their labor in him is, to set forth his glory,
to profit his Church, and that they them selves shall be pertakers of eternal
felicity. Dani. 12. They that be learned shall shine as the sun and, they
that have instructed many in wisdom shall be as the stars for evermore: these
have not spoken of them selves nor the wisdom of man, but of God, He. 1. God
has spoken in alder time many and sundry ways to our fathers by his
Prophets. etc. He says not they spoke of them selves, but God by the^, they
came not with their own word, nor their own authority, but ever they said,
Haec dicit dominus, Thus says the Lord. Paul says (...) all the scripture is
inspired by the holy ghost. etc. and 2. Pet. 1. We have a sure and certain
word of the Prophets which (says he) was not brought in by the will of man,
but the holy men of God have spoken being compelled by the spirit of God.
Therefore for their obedience to Gods spirit, for their diligence in travel
and pains, for their fidelity in true handling and uttering their Embassage,
they be well to be thought of and worthy of their just commendation, by whose
means we have received the will of God, the word of eternal life. But some
think the Prophets and the Books of the old Testament pertayned to the Jews
only, and are now abolished and permine nothing to us, to what purpose should
we keep the^, or labor to understand them? Concerning the ceremonies of the
old Law, we know that literally they be fulfilled by Christ, and in him
finished and utterly abolyshed, yet spiritually we are bound to observe them
still, as the spiritual circumcision, spiritual sacrifices, spiritual
sabbath or rest from sin and such like: the Moral law is the law of nature
and the eternal law of God, and therefore for ever to be kept of us under the
new Testament: the Prophecy of Christ and his Church, etc. as they were
promised in the old Testament, so are they truly performed in the new.
Therefore the old Testament and the new contain both one thing, the times
are changed, he shall come, and he is come, the matter is one in this word
come: as the old Testament is the fountain where out of the new does issue as
the same lively water of the spring: so is the new Testament the light and
brighte shine of the old. What is the new Testament but a plain exposition
of the old? we may not so expound the new scripture that we take away the
old whereon the new is grounded. If the old scriptures are abolished, why do
the Apostles apply them to the Gentiles, whom they labor by the scriptures to
make the people of God? why are the noble men of Thessalonica commended. Act.
17. for searching the old scriptures, and thereby proved Paul's doctrine to be
true? If the old scripture be abrogate, why did Paul affirm before king
Agrippa. Act. 26. that he preached to serve their own devises, and would
seem to see something that never man saw before them. Concerning them that
cavil the scriptures to be hard and obscure and therefore not to be studied,
the plain contrary is true. For if a thing necessary be difficult, the more
pain is to be taken for the obtaining of the same. The scriptures are like
unto the sea which has a shallowe shore, where the lamb may drink and
refreshe him self: and a bottomless depth, where the Elephant and other great
beasts may swim and feel no bottom: so has the scriptures plain lessons
to nourish all men though they be but babes, and deeper mysteries wherein
greater learned men may be occupied still, and yet not in this life come to
the fullness of knowledge: but every one according to the measure that God has
given. Every art and science is hard to him that never studied for it. No man
is borne an artificer, but by study he comes to knowledge of arts, some
difficulty there is in scriptures to the^ which be not conuersaunt therein,
by reason of strange phrases, figures, tropes, and vnacquaintance with the
tongue wherein they were written. And as Gregory says, the obscurity of
scripures bring utility, that a man's wit may be exercised, and being weried
with labor may be enlarged. And he that so is exercised may perceive and
understand that which an idle man cannot understand. Yea and this difficulty
has yet a greater thing. For if the understanding of the scriptures in all
things were plain, it would wax vile and of no estimation, but when the
sense is found in certain obscure places, it so much delights more with a
greater sweetness, as the seeking thereof did wearye the mind with paynefull
labor.

Christ therefore wills (as well for the knowledge of the word as other
necessaries) ask and ye shall receive, seek and ye shall find, knock. etc. Ask
by prayer, seek by reding and study, knock by perseverance and it shall be
opened. Psalm. 119. Marvelous are thy testimonies O Lord, and therefore my
soul searches them exceedingly. Again, blessed are they that search his
testimonies and seek him with their whole heart. John. 5. Search the
scriptures for in them. etc. He says not read them, or say them, with lip
labor, or for a custom, or negligently, but search and seek out the true
understanding of them. Christ opened the scriptures to the two disciples which
went to Emaus, because they were talking, conferring and searching the
scripture. Phillip was commanded to teach the Chamberlain by the spirit, the
true meaning of the Prophet Esaias, because he was dilligent in reading and
searching that which as yet then he understood not: wherefore the scriptures
are not difficulte to the Children of God, which pray, labor, seek and
knock to God for the opening of them, but to the wicked, as Peter writes that
in Paul's epistles some things are hard to be understand, but he shows to
whom they be so, for he adds, which they that be unlearned and vnsteadfast
do wreast as the other Scriptures to their own destruction, so that, to the
unlearned, the unexercised, the malicious, the corrupted, the slothful and
sluggish, they be only hard and difficult, and to such as love not the truth,
for he that does evil hates the light, and this is condemnation, that light
is come into the world and men loved darkness more tha^ light 2. Corinthians. 1.
Jf our Gospel be hid yet. etc. look the place, the scriptures are not
darkness but light. Psalm. 119. 2. Peter. 1. therefore they are not to be
lightened of darkness, but to lighten the darkness. Therefore the holy ghost
that gave the scriptures, has his working in his Church to open and make
plain the same to his, that in sincerity search them. But (to come to the
second sort) although the scriptures be plain unto the elect, yet are they so
by labor and study and not by idleness and negligence. Gregory compares
them to a stone in which there lies fire hid, for the stone being holden in
the hand is cold, but being stricken with iron it glistereth with fire which
will burn the hand: so the scriptures carried only in the hands or in the tongue,
are but cold, but beaten with exercise, they kindle the heart and set it on
fire with true love. Luke. 24. did not our heart burn within us while he talked
with us? said the two disciples. They are also like a treasure hid in the
field, as one said to his sons on his death bed, my children there is a great
treasure hid in this little close, if ye ca^ find it. After his death they did
plough up the ground, thinking there to find gold, but when they found none,
they sewe the ground with wheat, it yielded great increase, and so continued
from year to year till in deed they had thereout of great treasure. So the
scriptures being trimmed, bring great fruit, which being neglected, they will
not do. There is fine flower in the corn, but it must be thresht and ground
before we come to the meal. There is a sweet cornell in the nutte, but we
must break the shell before we come to the meat. Men are not now called and
taught immediately from God as the old prophets were, but by means of praying,
reading, meditating, and conferring with others: every man is not a divine,
which can say the letter without the book and rehearse the words of the text:
let every man measure him self with his own foot, and be not ashamed to
confess his ignorance, confer with others, and learn that he knew not
before, and give God thanks for revealing his word, and think well of them by
whose means he is made better learned. When Moses had given a law from God
to the Jsraelites, he made a commentary or exposition of the same called
Deutronomie, for their easier understanding. Were not the writings and sermons
of the prophets, expositions and applications of Moses law unto the times and
persons, as occasion served, and to reprove wicked men to their faces for
disobedience to the same? Although some to flatter their feygned friends, do
lay pillowes under men's elbowes and as false prophets do, dare undertake that
it is not lawful to reprove openly evil men, the word of God and examples of
true ambassadors of God is to the contrary. Did not Esdras read the law,
and the Levites expound it? did not Christ expound many places of the old
testament which else we had not rightly understand, as in the.12. of Matthew
concerning Jonas. Jn the.4. of Luke the place of Esaias, and in the.24. of Luke.
Who could have gathered out of this place of Math. 22. the resurrection, J am
the God of Abraham, Jsaac etc. if Christ had not expounded it? did not Peter
Acts. 2. expound the.16. Psalm, and the Psalm. 110. of Christ's resurrection,
and made a large and a learned sermon? Did not Philippe preach and make
exposition of the place of Esaias to the chamberlayne Acts. 8. be not Paul's
epistles full of expositions and openings of the old prophets? It may be
objected that all these are scripture, and now it is made so plain one with
another, that there needs no further opening. God has left in his Church
prophets, such as do expound the old prophets. 1 Cor. 14. pastors, builders,
and such like, therefore the old bishops and fathers of the Church have
always taught and defended the Church by interpreting these scriptures: some
have written Apologies and defenses of Christ's religion, some exhortations to
constancy and martyrdom, some have confuted heresies which always do grow
when men are asleep, some wrote homelies for the people, some made
commentaries and expositions of one or more of the books of the old or new
testament. I speak not of Papists and schole men which were all corruptours
of the text, and that thorough ignorance, but of the ancient fathers within
four or five hundredth years after Christ's ascension, though J must leave
unto them their faults, gold is to be dug out of rotten earth. As
Tertullian, Jeremy, Justinius martyr, Origene, Hilarious, Hipolitus, Arnobius,
Lactantius, Didimus, Ciprian, Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine, Basil, Gregory
Nazianzene, and Gregory Nycen. etc. all these and such like were learned men,
and such as defended the Church of God, and refelled false and erronius
opinions by declaring and expounding the word of God. How naked and bare were
many places of the old testament if some further sense were not rightly
gathered of them than the bare letter? J do not mean to bring all the
scriptures to Allegories, for that were to destroy the text and to open a
window for every wandering spirit to fly out at, and to range where he list
without ground, as some of old have done, and popish friars with their
dreams have followed after, that neither they nor any man else wist whether.
But J mean, beside the history, there may be other sense well gathered, as of
old fathers have been. If a man did ask of him that does superficially read,
what is the meaning in the.10. of Ezechiel, of this saying, that one whele did
roll and move within an other, the literal sense is bare. Gregory says that
the new testamente rolleth in the old, for that which the old did signify,
the new does exhibit. As for example, out of Adam sleeping Eve was formed: so
out of Christ dying the Church was formed. As Isaac carried wood to the altar
where he should be sacrifised and yet escaped: so Christ carried the wood of the
cross to be crucified in body, and yet remained immortal in divinity. What
means it that the murderer after the death of the high priest should be
absolved and let go home? but that after the death of our high priest Christ,
mankind should be losed from their sins, and sent into paradise again. What
means it that in the tabernacle was made a mercy stole, over which were two
cherubins of gold. etc. The mercy seat, to be short, is Christ, the two
cherubines be the two testamentes: of gold, for their pureness: they have
wings for that they fly swiftly: they look each toward the other, for that
they set forth both one thing: with their faces toward the mercy seat, for
they both have respect to Christ. A great number of such mysteries may be
gathered without absurdity or superstition out of the old testament, and
referred to the new. Wherefore let us be thankful to God for his word, and
for those that have set it forth or by any means opened the true sense unto
us. Amongst others for this sound exposition of these two Prophets Abdias and
Jonas, let us comme^d that worthy and learned man and chief writer of these
days one of the chief preachers at Zurich or Tigury, master Gualter, who both
by his continual preaching and daily writing, has much profited Christ's
Church. It was translated by master To. Norton, a godly and learned preaching
minister in Suff. not to be published in print as you know best, but only a
thing of private exercise, and given to you as a token of that good will which
I have herd him often testify that he bare you, not without your great desert
toward him. But coming to the hands of one my good friend, and whom you seem
to love well enough, he desired me very earnestly and urged me with most
friendly request to set some Preface to it, lest coming barefaced, it might
seem somewhat defaced, which yet it needs not, considering the good face it
has of it self, the which he shall see and delight in, who beholds it more
nerely and narrowly. But I could not deny his request, because it was
reasonable, I would not for that it was friendly: Nay I did it most gladly,
taking no small pleasure by this occasion in the sweet remembrance of the
godly and reformed households of good master Drue Druries and yours, wherein
your selves and your rightly and truly worshipful Ladies, do by your own
godly lives, and framing your children and families to live according to the
word of God, show your selves to be no vain hearers of sermons and lectures
at Norwich and elsewhere, neither to have been lovers of learning and learned
men, for any other cause, but only for that you would conform your deeds to
that they said. Rare examples must have rare praise, which yet I will take up
in time, lest through my true good will toward you, and your religious
honesty, which is the greatest dignity and best worship, I forget how ill you
love to hear your own praises. The Lord God increase us with his true
knowledge, that we may day by day amend our lives and grow to more perfection
in knowledge and doing. So shall we glorifye our God, and stop the mouths of
the devil, Papists, Atheists, and whosoever be ennimies to God, and us, for
Gods cause. This he grant, who only does all that is good, and to whom only
the glory thereof is due. So be it. From Laighton.

Yours ever in Christ, JOHN WALKER.

The Homilies of Rodolphe Gualter, a Tigurine, upon the Prophet Abdias.
The first Homily.
THe vision of Abdias. Thus says the lord God unto Edom We have herd a rumor
from the Lord, and an Ambassadoure is sent to the Heathen. Up, let us arise,
and fight against it. Behold, I have made thee a little one among the Heathen:
thou art of very small reputation. The pride of thine heart has deceived
thee, because thou dvvellest in the cleftes of the rocks, and have made thy
dwelling place aloft. Thou say in thine heart: Who shall pull me down to
the ground? Though thou exaltest thy self like an Eagle, and made thy nest
among the Stars, yet will I pluck thee down from thence, says the
Lord. If thieves had come upon thee, or robbers in the night, how had thou
ben spoiled? Would they not have stolen, till they had had enough? If Grape
gatherers had come upon thee, would they not have left thee some grapes? But
how are the things belonging to Esau searched out? How are the things found
out that he had hidden up?

AFter we have expounded the Sermons of the three Prophets, Osee, Ioell, and
Amos, which were called to the office of Preaching among the Israelites and
Jews, the elect people of God, there follow two in order to be entreated of,
namely Abdias, and Jonas, which denounced to the Heathen, being but
strangers, the will of God, and plagues now imminente over their heads: The
use of those Prophets which preached unto the Gentiles.
to whom shall afterward the third even Nahum also be added in his place. By
whose Sermons it shall appear, that God although in times past he selected the
Jews to be his peculiar people, yet neglected not the other Gentiles, but that
even upon them also he gave out open examples both of his goodness and
justice, and that verily in every nation (as Peter Act. 10. makes mention) all
those are accepted with God, that fear him and work righteousness: and on
the other side, that he punishes the heinous offenses of the ungodly,
according to their demerites. The first of these three is Abdias, whose
prophecy before we take in hand, we must first declare, who he was, what
time he prophesied, and what is the argument of his Prophecy.

As touching Abdias his person and time, some think that it is he, Abdias, who
he was, and when he prophesied. 1. Re. 18.
which being a captain under King Achab, hid an hundredth Prophettes in
caves, that they might not be slain of Iezabell. Whose opinion many of the
Jews embrace, who also according to their boldness, tell us a tale, that he
was an Edomite, and being afterward become a Proselite, was at length called
to the function of Prophesying. But (to omit many other things) even the very
order of his Sermon is against this opinion: for it makes report of the City
taken, and the people carried away into captivity, which we are sure was
brought to pass afterward in the time of Iechenias, and Zedechias. Neither is
it credible, that the holy Ghost would pass over in silence, the calling of
so notable a man, since he does for the most part describe the callings of ye
rest of the Prophets. Their judgment therefore seems to lean upon more
probability, which suppose yt Hieremy and he were both at one time. Which same
thing both many of his words taken out of Hieremie seem to declare, and also
the argument of his Prophecy, which in all points accords with those times.

The argument of Abdias.
For he preaches against the Edomites who had their beginning of Esau, (called
also Edom) as upon the Prophet Amos it has been declared. So then they were
brethren to the Jews, but yet retained as it were by inheritance, the hatred
to that nation which their father began.

They have declared the same in times past by many tokens, but most notable
of all other was, that Treason and Cruelty, which they practiced at the time
of the Captivity of Babylon. For although they had conspired with king
Zedechias against Nabuchodonosor (as may be gathered out of Jeremy his
Sermons, Ieremi. 27.
who makes mention of the king of Edom his Ambassadors sent to Jerusalem)
yet when as the battle grew hot, they aided the enemies of their side, and
by their instigation came it to pass, that the whole city was utterly pulled
up by the roots, as in the Psalms it is manifestly expressed with these
words: Psalm. 137.
Remember the children of Edom, O Lord, in the day of Jerusalem, how they
said: Down with it, down with it, even to the ground. And this their
cruelty and falshoode was not only grievous unto the Jews, for the
dishonestie thereof, but it was also joined with great offense, for it seemed,
as though God had utterly forgotten his promises, and the adoption of the
Jews, when as the posterity of Jacob, having lost both their kingdom and
temple, were also carried away captive, they in the mean season being in good
estate, which fette their original from Esau, and had never ceased to
persequute the injury of stealing the birthrighte and blessing away: thereby
also then the oracle of God was laid open to be mocked at, who had said to
Rebecca being great with child: Two nations are in thy womb, and two
people shall come of thee: Genesis 25.
the one shall be stronger than the other, and the elder shall serve the
younger. Neither is it to be doubted, but that the Edomites took very great
occasion hereby to glory and wax insolente: on the other side, among the Jews
the faith of many was sore tempted. God therefore coveting to remedy this
offense, stirred up Abdias to frame this sermon against the Edomites, which
consists of two principal parts. In the first he threatens their
destruction, and takes away from them all those things, wherein before they
did put any confidence, showing also causes, why they deserved such
subversion. In the other part he prophecieth of the kingdom of Christ, that
should be restored among the Jews, and from thence should be spread among al
nations, thoroughout the whole world. So then this prophecy serves to great
and very necessary use, even at these days, when as we hear every where of
the like temptations: whilst the wicked become insolente by means of their
happy success, and the godly thorough their adversities and continual
afflictions do in a manner give over. For we are taught by Abdias, that God in
deed afflicts such as are his, their sins so deserving: but yet, if they
convert unto him, 1. Cor. 9.
he receives them to favor again, never tempting them above their power.
Far otherwise is the estate of the ungodly, who abusing the transitory
felicity of this world to the maintenance of their superstition, and
abominable life, never in adversity acknowledging the just reuengement of
God, but obstinately murmuring against him, at length perish for ever. Yea,
even in this world also does God oftentimes show forth examples of his
Justice, whereby we are taught to the full, that neither he himself sleeps
continually, nor yet the felicity of the ungodly, wherewith they are wont to
glory and ware proud, can be durable or perpetual.

The title of the work.
Having made this Preface, let us come now to the words of this Prophet, (who
as it is the manner also of the rest) prefireth a title before his work in
this sort: The vision of Abdias. Now what he means by this word Vision,
he himself expounds afterward, adding: Thus says the Lord God unto Edom. So
then this word Vision, signifies no other thing, save a Prophecy or word
revealed from God. And sufficiently are we taught by the history of Samuel,
that the Prophets were in times paste called by the name of Seers, namely for
God revealed unto them his will, by Dreams and Visions, which in spirit they
did see. Very gladly also do the Prophets use this word Vision, thereby to
give notice, that they bring not their fantasies, but the Oracles received from
God above, which only in christian assemblies ought to take place, as
heretofore has been oftentimes said.

There follows now a very warlyke beginning, The exordium.
exceedyng fit for men trained up in war and bloodshed. It is their manner
to be delited with rumoures of war, for that, occasion of war being once
offered, either with hostility they run upon their next borderers, or else
let out to hire their own travail to forain Princes: and being waged for
Money, make invasions upon those which never hurt them, or did them any wrong.

As touching the Edomites, that they were such kind of men, we may easily
gather, both by this Abdias, and also by the Sermons of other Prophets. So
then to frame his talk to their manners, thus does he begin: We have heard a
rumor from the Lord, and an ambassador is sent to the Heathen: Up, let us
arise, and fight against it. As though he should say: Hitherto there could
come nothing unto you more pleasant to hear, than that wars were
proclaimed to this Country men, or that.

But now hear the rumor which I have heard, and is begoonne not of an
uncertain Authoure, but signified unto me from the Lord GOD.

Namely, that he has now sent his ambassadoure to the Gentiles, that they
may take in hand war against you. Neither is this embassage in vain, for
there are already heard every where the voices of men, exhorting one an other
to fight against you. And in plain words the Prophet gives it out, that God
himself is the author of this tumulte: thereby to make answer to their
reasons, wherwithall they were deceived, supposing that it could never come to
pass, that any nation should set upon them in war: especially, since they
were on the Assyrians side, under whose dominion the whole empire of the world
was at that season. He declares therefore that this shall be the work of God,
even that the Gentiles shall (beside all the expectation of the Edomites)
become their enimyes, and suddenly set upon them. For notwithstanding that
warlike stirs are for the most part raised up by men delyghted in blood,
whose desire is to wax rich, thy care not whether by right or wrong: or else
to satisfy that longyng after reuengemente, which they have already
conceived in their mind: Yet does GOD, who by the bridle of his Providence,
governs the dooyngs of mortal men, use their cruelty to the executyng of
his Judgments. Of which matter we have also spoken in an other place.

As pertaining to this that we have in hand, let us learn what they have
to look for, that are accustomed with war, and take pleasure in bloudshead
and oppression of other men. God uses to play quittance with them, and this in
a manner is brought about, that even their deaths also he makes either a
joyful occasion of rumor, or else a pleasant spectacle for other men to
beeholde. For the same which here the Prophets thretneth to the Edomites, does
the Lord also threate^ unto all those that are such as these were. With what
measure ye meat (says he) with the same shall other men meat unto you again.
Math. 7. Again, He that kills with the svvord, shall be killed with the
svvorde, and he that leads into captivity, shall be led captive himself.
Apoc. 13. And again, Esaie. 33. VVo be unto thee that robbest, and yet art not
robbed of others: to thee that layest wait, and yet there is no way laid
for thee. When thou leauest robbing, thou shall be robbed: when thou leauest
laying in wait, men shall also lay in wait for thee. Such like examples
are every where to be found: and some proffers of Gods dealing this way,
Germany a fruteful mother of mercenarie Soldiers, has felt now these
certain years, whereby would to God with other nations it might be brought
to amendment, least some worsse thing happen afterward.

Howbeit, the Edomites set light by these threattes, as having many things,
He takes away the confidence in outward aides.
wherein they arrogantly and insolentely set their affiance. Amongst which the
situation of their Countreye was not the least, which being on every side
besette with mountains and rocks, men could Abdias declare, that all these
things shall nothing avail them. Against the confidence in place and wealth.
And even at this present, he beats down the confidence, that they reposed
in the situation and wealth of the country, plainly in the mean season,
taunting their insolency, whereby even without deserte, they preferred
themselves before other people. Behold (says he) I have made thee a little
one among the Heathen, thou art of very small reputation. The meaning is this:
What occasion have you (in good soothe) to pleasure in arrogancy and pride,
seeing I have given you no cause so to do? For although thorough my
bountifulness ye have such things as might be sufficient for you: yet
notwithstanding if ye be compared with other nations, your glory shall be very
small. The land in deed wherein ye inhabit, is but unpleasant, and included
within very strait limits. As for your riches that ye possess, your own
country breeds them not, but they are brought in from other places, and in
a manner gotten with ill deceits. Neither did I suffer your nation so to
multiply, to the end ye might go beyond other in number of soldiers.
Finally, this was mine intent, that by being mindful of your own original
and estate, ye might learn humbly and modestly to behave your selves, and
stand in reverence and awe of my will. But far otherwise is the matter
fallen out. For the pride of thine has deceived thee, even to be proud whether
I will or no. For in as much as thou have thy dwelling among the clefts of
rocks, and in exceeding high towers, thou dare adventure to challenge any, as
though none were hable to conquer and subdue thee. But hear O thou proud
land, what I have determined as touching thee. Though thou passedst the Eagles
in flying, and placedst thy fortresses and strong holds even among the
stars, yet shalt thou not escape my hands. For I will pluck thee down
from thence, and having first despoiled thee of all aid, set thee out
afterward to be robbed, and made desolate of thine enemies. And this is
greatly to be observed, that he so dilligently admonished them of their poor
estate. For there is no other thing that may make thee arrogante spirits of
men more to humble themselves, than if men consider who they are, and how many
things they are destitute of, wherewith others do abound. For so has God
disposed the doings of mortal men, that there is none which has not need of
the help and aid of other men, and even they which suppose that in some
things they excel all, shall yet in some other things, if they thoroughly
examine their whole estate, find themselves of all men living the most
miserable. These things duly considered, will make, that both we shall be the
less puffed up with present prosperity, and also we shall have the greater
respect unto Christian Charity, without the which nation and realms cannot
possibly stand.

A strange destruction threatened.
But because the Lord knew, that this suffised not for the repressing of those
arrogant minds, he goes on in describing of their destruction, and shows
that the same shall not be after the common sort. If thieves had come upon
thee (says he) if robbers had rushed upon thee in the night (that is to say,
unawares) how had thou bin spoiled? By a comparison he amplifieth their
destruction and spoiling. As though he should say: It might be thought a
miserable thing, if either thieves or violent robbers should come in the night
time, and spoil your palaces. Yet is this a small thing in respect of the
other. For such kind of men list not to make curious search of all things:
But when they have sacked up so much as they think inoughe, they provide for
themselves by fleeing away. So if the Grape gatherers rob any Vine of her
clusters, they would at the least leave some Grapes behind them. But when as
the time of my judgment shall come upon you, all things shall atonce be taken
from you, and ye all without exception together, with all the goods that ye
have, shall utterly be rooted out. And the rather to move them, he brings
them as it were to the beeholding of a present thing, and with admiration
adds. How are the things belonging to Esau searched out? That is to wit,
his goods or treasure. How are those things found out, which they had hidden
and reserved in very secret places. By this place we are taught what for the
most part happens unto such, as heap together wealth by violence, and ill
means. They light at length upon such as are like to themselves, who by ye
same guileful means rob the^ also. Thus they have hoorded up riches
together, but they could not tell for whom. Neither does it avail, to seek
against the Lord either blind couertes, or other kinds of aid, whereby to
preserve such as they have. For no man is able to bleare Gods eyes, or escape
his hand, as not long since ye prophet Amos has declared. Let us rather learn
to follow righteousness, and judge lowly of our selves, placing all our hope in
Christ alone, who by ye merit of his death has purchased for us those true
and permanent treasures, which in time to come we shall have given us to
enjoy. To him belongs thanks giving, honor, glory, and dominion for ever.
Amen.

The second Homely.
ALl the men that were thy confederates have sent to thee, even unto thy
borders. They have deceived thee, thy men of peace have prevailed over thee,
yea even the men that did eat thy bread, shall lay a wound under thee. He
has no understanding in him. Will it not come to pass in that day, says the
Lord, that I shall destroy the wise me^ out of Edom, and understanding from
the mount of Esau? Thy captains O Theman, shall fail, that a man may be cut
of from the mount of Esau to be destroyed. Because thou have oppressed thy
brother Jacob, thou shall be covered thy self with shame, and perish for
evermore.

STill goes Abdias on to set against ye vain confidence in outward aides,
The argument and use of this present place.
whereunto while the Edomites leaned, they contemned the threatenings of God. And
here at this present he reasons as touching their leagues, wherewithal they
had linked unto them ye nations, that were their next borderers, and perhaps
together with them the Babylonians also. Then passes he over to speak of
their boasting in wisdom, and warlike strength, and proves, that all these
things shall nothing avail them, seeing that contrary to the laws of nature,
they leave not of to persecute their brethren. This use are we to take of this
place, never to arm our selves with any outward means of defense, against
the judgments of God: but rather submitting our selves under his hand, let us
convert unto him, who, if we be truly penitent, will receive us into his favor
again.

He co^futeth the confidence in leagues.
First of all, after the Prophet has taken away the confidence in strong
holds, and abundance in wealth, he talks now of their leagues or
confederacies: and says, that the trust which they put therein, shall be so
vain and frustrate, that they shall bring them no help, but rather
destruction. And the rather to move the minds of his auditors, he sets out
ye same with many words. First, all the men that were thy confederates have
sent unto thee, even unto thy borders. They have deceived thee. These words
of many are red after another sort, which suppose, that this word Schalach
here signifies to drive or to cast out: as though this were the meaning. Thy
confederates shall drive thee out. But because in this first part he
entreats of the guiles and evil subtilties of their confederates,
wherwithall they should deceive the Edomites, I had rather stick to the more
simple and usual meaning of the Hebrew word. He uses the time past for the
time to come, and so speaks of things that were yet to be done, as though
they were already done, which manner the Prophets in denouncing of plagues
are well acquainted with, thereby the rather to express the infallible truth
of God his threats. So that this is the meaning: I know, that you set very
great affiaunce in leagues, and look for help of your fellows, whereby to put
to flighte your enemies force, if any such should come upon you. Howbeit, ye
shall be much deceived. In deed they make you very large promises, but when
the matter shall come to the trial, they shall most shamefullie beguile you.
For although they give a show, that they are your friends, and shall also send
the helps that they have promised, yet shall they come no nerer unto thee, than
to thy borders and outmost bounds: for there shall they be frayed with ye
force of thine enemies, and return home again, forsaking thee in thine
extreme danger: thus shall they deceive thee, for yt thou leaning upon their
promises, dare by doing wrong provoke thine enemies to battle, by who^ at
length thou shall be oppressed thy self, in as much as thy fellows can give
thee no aid, who now are ye causers of thine arrogancy and pride. Moreover,
Thy me^ of peace shall prevail over thee. So are they called, which are our
greatest familiers, and from who^ we hope for continual quiet, and all duties
of friendship. These (says he) shall prevail over thee. Which may be expounded
two manner of ways: first, yt by their authority they shall draw the Edomites
into noisome and hurtful devises, wherein they may afterward forsake them, as
not long since was declared. And this does commonly happen to such, as enter in
league with their betters, that being persuaded with their counsels, they
wrap themselves in exceeding great danger. Otherwise also it may be
interpreted of open violence or oppression, as if this were the meaning: that
the Babilonians under pretense of a league, should utterly oppress them, and
bring them under their dominion: as for the most part it is the manner of
mighty kings, if at any time they may allure their inferiors to take part
with them. He adds hereunto: The men of thy bread shall lay a vvound under
thee. By these whom he calls men of bread, he means either their
domesticals and familiars, or else their waged soldiers: and these (says he)
shall lay a wound under thee, that is, guilefully and traitorously shall they
lie in wait for thy destruction, eue^ at such time, as thou lokest for no such
thing at their hands. And these are ye things that Abdias preaches to the
Edomites as touching their vain confidence in leagues. Wherein we must of
necessity note ye causes, wherewith God was offended, and thought good to lay
this kind of punishment upon them. Namely, for that with like breach of trust
they also had oftentimes deceived others, having no conscience at al for the
true keeping of their confederacies. For, first and foremost, as concerning the
duty of brotherly league, which by right of consanguinitie was between them
and the Jews, they had violated the same with deadly and continual hatred.
After the same sort profaned they also the covenant of God, in ye seal
whereof, namely Circumcision, they much gloried, when as yet they hated them,
with whom God had made that covenant. Besides this, they measured the leagues
and frendships of men only by their private lucre: and for this cause never
continued faithful to any, so sone as there appeared either any hope of
greater gain, or contrariwise fear of danger. By the just judgment of God
therefore came it to pass, that they also found them untrusty, of who^ by
means of leagues they hoped for aid and succor. And the same that happened
unto these, undoubtedly all other have experience of, which make but a pastime
of violating of couenauntes, and breaking of troth being plighted before. But
because it is our hap here to speak of leagues or couenauntes, in making or
breaking whereof great offense is committed now a days, it shall not be from
the purpose, if we bestow some diligence about the considering thereof.

This word Foedus (signifying a league or covenant) some derive of Fides
(faith) other some of Ferio (to strike or beat) for that in old time, in
confirming of leagues, it was the manner to have a sow, which at that very
season should with a solemn kind of cursing be beaten, these words being added:
So like this sow moughte he filthely fall, that shall break couenantes.
Whereby some suppose that it is called Foedus, a foede cadendo, of filthelie
falling. The Germans derived their name for a covenant, of the word Binding,
having respect rather to the thing it self, than to the ceremonies or rites
that me^ are wont to use in making of couena^ts. What a league is.
For a covenant or league (to make proper definition thereof) is a mutual
co^pact, whereby two or three, by reason of some common peace or commodity,
bind themselves one to another with certain conditions, which (with a solemn
inuocating of the name of God they testify(the will keep inuiolably. That
leagues are law full.
Now, that such kind of compactes are lawful enough (no other blemish coming
between) may manifestly appear by the example of the holy fathers, who (we
read) both made couenaunts, and also religiously kept them. Genesis 14. and 21.
and 26.
For with Abraham were confederated Escol and Aner, and in like manner
Abimelech, who afterward renewed the couenaunte with Isaac. David also was in
confederacy with Hiram the king of Tire, 1. Kings. 5.
which, that God was not displeased withal, is evident by the building of the
temple, whereunto Hiram did not a little help. But what need we examples, when
as all me^ know, that neither the public quiet, nor the mutual intercourse
of one nation with another, nor common liberties can in any wise stand, without
ye laws of truce and peace: seeing also in histories we read of so many
examples of the judgments of God, whrby he has punished such as have bin
trucebreakers. Yea and the Apostle Paul, amongst the plagues that should
happen about the end of the world, reckneth up the^ also that traitorously
break couenaunts and bargains. 2. Ti. 3. Now, How offense may be avoided in
making of leagues.
to keep us from offending in this so good and necessary a matter, we must with
great diligence observe three things. First, that we make no couenaunts with
me^ that are manifestly wicked, and aliants from the true religion. For the
same did good in times past prohibit, when as, in his law, he forbad the
making of any covenants with the Chananites. Exo. 34. Deute. 7. And the example
of Iosaphat is well know, who was greatly rebuked of the Prophet, even in
this respect, for that he was joined in society with Achab being wicked, and
an enemy to the sincere religion: his ships also were broken, which he had
prepared to go forth with the ships of Ochosias. Neither did god without good
cause forbid the same, since that the familiar societies of the ungodly are
enemies to the studey of godliness and good life: neither can their fidelity
be sure to trust unto, who both in other things, and also in couenantes,
seek only their own private lucre, and do therefore shamefully break
promise, if any thing happens unto them contrary to their expectation.
whatsoever apperteyneth to the conditions of holy couenauntes, or leagues.
Thirdly, when as they are religiously and Edomits, but also the unfortunate
ends of many other bear record, and in this our age many have proved by
experience. For, put the case, that men be very desirous to stand to their
covenants, yet are they not always hable to do as they would: and many things
also do happen, which of a sode^ make frustrate all their devises, that they
had taken before. It was not for naught then, that Jeremy long since said:
Cursed is he that puts his confidence in man, and takes flesh for his arm.
Jere. 17.
They therefore, that in their covenants making, observe such things as I have
here noted, shall reap no small commodity therout of; on the other side, they
that neglecte them, being carried with the policy of man, and desire of private
gain, shall at length be punished of the Lord, as ye Edomits were.

He takes away the confidence in wisdom
But let us return to the Prophet, who after he has beaten down the vain
confidence in leagues, takes also away from these Edomites the glorying in
their wisdom, wherewith they thought them selves so well appointed, that they
supposed it an impossible thing to have any man found, which might go beyond
them in skilfulnesse of war, and subtle devises. And first he propounds in
general, saying, He has no understanding in him. As though he should say:
What vauntes make ye to me of their wisdom, which in very deed is none? And
though there remain any as yet, shall not I be hable in the day when I bring my
judgments upon them, to root out all the wise men out of Edom, and take
away all understanding from the mount of Esau? He calls that the mount of
Esau, which by another name is called Seir, Genesis 32.33.36. etc.
and belongs to the stony Arabia. And this is the meaning, that he will so
infatuate them, that when they shall have most need of counsel, then shall
they be utterly destitute of all wisdom. That these were not vain threts,
may even hereby appear, for that, when as for the space of certain hundred
years they had by their own fighting egged on all their next borderers to
raise up war against them, yet thought they themselves in safety by means
of their confederacies. So also they reposed great hope in the society of ye
Chaldees, who yet laid in wait to subdue al nations. And the same that happened
to these Edomites, we read has happened to many others also.

Esaias in very deed threatens the same to the Egyptians: so does he likewise
to the Babylonians, who had the chief commendation of wisdom thoroughout the
whole East. And if we list to turn over profane histories, what was there
ever that carried a greater fame of wisdom and sharpness of wit, than did
the City of Athens? Yet how often has it through more than doting devises,
brought mischief upon it self? The like report may be made of many other: and
even at this day, not without some reason, is it used in a common proverb,
that the greatest tokens of folly are showed in a manner of those that are
wisest. For by the just judgment of God comes it to pass, that they are
intrapped in their own counsels, that would be wise without God. By these
things we are admonished, not to abuse the gift of wisdom, neither yet so to
trust to the ripeness of our own wit, that we arrogantly contemn others
in respect of our selves. For the fear of the Lord is the beginning of
wisdom, and the chief top thereof is the true knowledge of God with a
faithful obedience. This whosoever have they both judge lowly of themselves,
and also refer all their endeavors to the glory of God, seking for no
wisdom without his word: which causes that their intents are allotted an
happy end: yea even then also, when as God tries them under the cross.

These Edomites put not the least part of their confidence in their Soldiers
which they had being very valiant, He takes away the confidence in soldiers.
and thoroughly exercised by long use of wars. This the prophet confuteth,
saying: Thy Capitaines O Theman shall fail, that a man (or every man, for in
this sense also is the name of a man used amongst the Hebrews) may be cut
off from the mount of Esau to be destroyed. He names here Theman, who (Moses
writes) came of Eliphas, and was Nephewe to Esau Gene. 36. And he threatens,
that even the greatest of courage, by means of terror and fear, shall be
fainte hearted: so that for very anguishe they shall be hable to succor neither
themselves, nor others. Which thing in Jeremy God painteth out with a
parable saying: The hearts of the worthies in Edom shall be as the heart of
a woman travailing with child. Neither does he only threaten terroure and
fear, but also such destruction, as whereby all should be plucked up by the
roots, while there remained any one. By this place we are taught, that God is
not only hable to bring men's devises to naught, but that therewithal he is of
power to weaken the whole strength both of mind and body: whose doing also it
is, that they sometime become swifter than a Do in flying away, whose ma^hoode
before has been to their great commendatio^ assai^, even in extreme dangers.
Most fond are they therefore, that laying the fear of God aside, trust to
such kind of aides, since that in deed they may not defend. Let us rather
learn to lay up our hope in God, who (as David confesses) both strengthens
the minds with heroical courage, and addresseth the hands to war, and the
fingers to fight. Look Psalm. 18:27. and.144.

The oppression of their brethren, the cause of their destruction.
After he has now taken away all trust in outward aids, he adioyneth a cause
of their so great destruction. Because thou have oppressed thy brother Jacob,
thou shalt be covered thy self with shame, and perish for evermore. He
might have rehearsed many other, but he rather made mention of this, as most
agreeing with the argument of this prophecy: namely that the Jews, who were
afflicted, might take consolation thereby, understanding that God would be the
revenger and punisher of such Injuries as they suffered. And he uses such a
word, as amongst the Hebrews signifies not every kind of oppression, but
such a one as is very violente, and joined with great wrong, as whereby a
man is enforced to leave his own place and go his way. For he puts in the
name of Jacob, thereby to show, that this hatred is of antie^t time, and long
continuance: which being begone a great while since by Esau, is not yet
satisfied with so many Injuries, as have followed these many hundredth years:
And that therefore it is now high time for them to undergo such Plagues as
they have deserved.

And these plagues he declares shall not be after the common sort: but he
threatens them perpetual confusion and bannishemente, whereout they shall
never be restored again.

By this example let us learn, how detestable an offense it is to oppress
our neighbors and afflicte those whom God has joined unto us by a
brotherlye league. And truly such is the condition of al Christians, who are
not brethren in one only respect: since they have one and the self same father
in heaven, seeing they look for the same inheritance in heaven, and moreover
through unity of faith and one Baptism are members of the same body. Look
Ephe. 4. and. 1. Cor. 12. An horrible trespass therefore will it be to persecute
them that are such, and for tryfling injuries to forgette so near a knitting
together, as is between Christ and us. Wherefore laying aparte our own
affections, let us love one another, that Christ Jesus acknowledging us for
his own, may in time to come receive us to be partakers of his Kingdom. To
whom belongs thanksgiving, honor, glory, and dominion for ever. Amen.

The third Homely.
IN the day when thou stoodest over against, even in that day when the
alientes carried away his substance, and strangers came in at his ports, and
cast lottes upon Jerusalem, thou also thy self vvast as one of them. Look not
upon the day of thy brother, upon the day of his alienation: neither rejoice
over the children of Judah in the day of their destruction, and open not thy
mouth vvide in the day of their tribulation. Enter not within the gates of my
people in the day of their destruction, behold them not in their affliction,
in the day of their destruction, and stretch not thy hand to their goods in
the day of their fall. And stand not in the parting of the vvayes to murder
such of the^ as are escaped, nor take the^ prisoners, that remain in the day
of their truble. For the day of the Lord is hard at hand over all Heathen as
thou have done to others so shall it be done to thee: thy reward shall be
revvarded thee even upon thine head. For likewise as ye have drunk upon my
holy hill, so shall all Heathen drink continually: yea drink shall they and
svvalovve up, so that they shall be, as though they had never ben.

The argument and use ^f this present place.
AS god being a righteous judge, is wont to punish none without weighty
causes: so does he for the most part, reveal unto men, by his word, the
causes of his plagues, partly, that they which be punished, may understand
that they are worthyly punished: partly also that by their examples, others
may be taught, what they must do, if they have a desire to keep themselves
from partakyng of the like. And to this end ought the prophecy of Abdias, to
be referred: who after he has threatened the Edomites with the destruction of
their whole nation, and spoil of all their goods, having therewithal
confuted the whole confidence in outward aids, incontinently declares also
the principal cause of all ^^ese evils, namely the deadlye and irreconcilable
hatred, wherwithal contrary to the commen laws of Nature, they had persecuted
the Nation of the Jews, being their brethren, from the first beginning
thereof till now, a thousand, an hundred, and threescore years: and last of
all, when as the Babylonians besieged them, were the chief causers of their
destruction and misery. In deed the Edomites had many things that they
might pretend, for the excuse of their fact: Namely that the Jews peryshed
not by their means, but thoroughe their own defaulte, and that them selves
did nothing, but that they were enforced to do of Necessity, seeing they
could not otherwise provide for their own safety.

Or else they might allege, that those Edomites which aided the Babilonians,
were not sent unto them by any authority, but ran out unto them of their own
accord: as among nations accustomed to warfare is no seldom seen thing. By
which reason also many at this day take in hand to excuse themselves: and yet
in the mean season greatly set by such kind of men, and are content eue^ for
small rewards to be patrons of their cause. To all these things therefore does
God at this present make answer to the full: and in such sort makes
rehersall what they have done, and what punishment they have deserved, yt any
man may easily gather hereby, what all such may look for, as at these days
imitate the manners of these men.

He proves, that the Edomites were ^he authors ^f the destru^tion of the
^ewes.
First of all he confuteth their excuse, and manifestly proves, that it was the
Edomites, ye oppressed ye people of ye Jews. In ye day (says he) When thou
stodest over against, eue^ in that day when the alients carried away his
substance, and strangers came in at his ports, and cast lottes upon
Jerusalem, thou also thy self vvast as one of them.

The meaning of these words is this: What avails it to deny that which I
saw with mine own eyes, and for yt which there may be brought forth so many
witnesses? For, put the case, that thou wast no party in the destruction of
the City and temple, yet what reason moved thee to stand over against, like an
idle loker on, when it was beaten down of the Babylonians? Yea rather, when as
they violently entered in into the City, why wast thou seen under their
banners? Why also, when as they divided by lotte those that were taken captive,
and the residue of the pray, why wast thou as one of them? Neither wants it
an Emphasis, in that he says, Thou also thy self. As though he should say:
It could be no great marvel, that the Babylonians should bear deadly enmity
toward the people of the Jews: who as they have employed their care for the
space of certain hundredth years to enlarge the borders of their empire, so
also being stirred by the rebellion of the Jews, and conspiracy of Zedechias,
Iere. 27.
(wherein ye likewise were partners) took that war in hand. But forasmuch as
you the Edomites, (who in respect both of near neyghbourhood and
consanguinitie, ought to have relieved them in their extremity, or at the
least, to have used compassion, and by some signification of a ready mind to
have assuaged their sorrow) have contrarywyse with no less cruelty than the
other, run upon them being in misery: this surely has happened beside all
expectation of man, and may be adjudged in manner of a wonder, contrary to
Nature. Neither can ye make allegation, that some of your country folks made
invasions, not as sent there about by public authority of the whole
Nation, but rashely of their own private brain: For I know your dealings, and
am sure, that they were honorably entertained of you, and that by the pray
that came thereof, you your selves were enriched. Ye shall all therefore
undergo one kind of punishment. etc. So now by this place, we are admonished,
that God will admit no such kind of excuses, but that whole Nations are
inwrapped in like guilte with such bloudsuckers, if they mainteyn their
wantonness, and allow their bloody endeavors. And very meet is it, that
they become partners in punishment, which (though it were but in favoring
affection) were diuiders of the gain and pray. Let no man then with these
kind of devises deceive himself. For that God which searches the hearts and
the reins, cannot be ignorant with what minds we take any thing in hand: and
if so be at al times he does not openly convince us by his word, yet at the
least with secret enspiring of his holy Ghost, he so teachech our
consciences, that we can in no wise deny, but that we are worthy of plagues.
To the aforesaid things the Lord now adioyneth certain precepts, He
prescribes precepts of charity, whereby both he reproves them of wickedness,
and excuses his own rigor.
whereby he teaches them what to do afterward.

In which precepts is included a manifest kind of taunting, whereby he both
vpbraydeth them for the duties of mutual Charity on their parts omitted,
and also excuses the rigor of his own judgment, that they should not
think themselves over hardly dealt withal, seeing they had with no less
cruelty oppressed their own brethren. In making rehearsal whereof, he uses
very many words, thereby to minister ocasion unto them, to think upon their
abominable factes, and therewithal to declare, that he is ignorant of none of
those things, which we commit against the laws of brotherly love. So the^
this vpbrayding of detestable acts is with diligence to be weighed, that we may
learn thereby, how grievous sentence God pronounces over those things, which
amongst men for the most part are thought scarce worthy of blame. First (says
he) Look not upon the day of thy brother: or, as some other interpret it:
Be not seen in the day of thy brother. For both these expositions fall to one
sense, which is (as he himself afterward expounds it) that they should take
no pleasure or delight in the calamities of their brethren the Jews. And he
terms it the day of alienation: when as God in such sort gives over those
that are his, to the lewd lust of the ungodly that they seem now not to be
his children, or of his own household, but altogether alients from his family.
He adds also: Open not thy mouth vvide in the day of their tribulation. That
is, take no occasion by their afflictions to glory and vaunt of thy self, and
thy superstitions. And thus does he gaily paint out the behauioure of the
wicked, who persecuting the godly with such an hatred as will not be
reconciled, and in manner comes by inheritance from their forelders, are
wonderfully glad at their calamities, and hearing that they are in affliction,
immediately run out, not to help them with any aid, but with this miserable
spectacle to feed their own cruel minds. And this they do, both for that
they wish them evil, and also for that they think, they have just cause
thereby to glory in their own superstitions. For then are heard such manner of
speeches, as whereby they are accustomed to give open testimony of their
hatred, and to show forth weighty and just causes thereof (if the Gods be so
content) and arrogantly also to commend their own innocence: yea they then
give it out, that God is a witness and revenger of their wrongs: as though he
in correcting his children, were wont (in manner of an executioner) to satisfy
and gratify the rancours of the ungodly.

And this is a detestable abomination, which Jeremy also and Daniell found
fault withal in the Babylonians, Lamen. 3. Daniel. 5.
with the which it is very convenient, that christian men have no acquaintance.
And truly it apperteyneth nothing to the ungodly to judge of religion, (as they
are wont) by the success: since they are destitute of the word of God, which he
himself has appointed to be the rule, whereby he will be worshipped. Again,
the law of charity enioyneth us to weep with the^ that weep, and to be sorry
with them that are sorry. Romans 12. Which thing who so refuse to do, most
commonly they are constrained to be wail their own calamities, and even at
that time also offer themselves as a pleasant spectacle for their enemies to
behold.

Secondly, The people of God may not with enmity be rushed upon.
Enter not within the gates of my people, in the day of their destruction. He
speaks this of their envious coming, or rather rushing in, and forbids
them to use any such ado afterward. Whereas also this is full of
consolation, that he vouchsafes to call them by the name of his people, whom
for their offenses he so punished, as they might seem alientes from him: And
so by this so honorable a title, he confuteth the malicious detractions of the
ungodly, who for that they saw the Jews carried away captive, condemned the
faith and religion comprehended in their law. And straightway he repeateth
it, that before he has spoken of the wicked men's rejoicing, that they took by
the affliction of his people, Behold them not in their affliction, in the day
of their destruction.

Neither is this repetition in vain, seeing it is a matter of very great
difficulty so to bridle in the affections of the flesh, that we hunte not
after some delectation, in the calamities of our enemies. But chiefly
appertains to this second part, that which follows: And stretch not thy
hand to his goods, in the day of his fall. For in these words he expresses
the principal cause, that moved the Edomites like enemies to make invasions
into the City: namely, for that they being men acquainted with war and
raueny, were set on fire with greediness of the pray, which they saw laid
open before them, both rich and very precious. Neither does he without good
reason so often make mention of the affliction and destruction of the Jews:
admonishing thereby, that they commit no such thing against others, whom they
see both undone in goods, and their life also to stand in great hazard. By
these words therefore are confuted their reasons, who if they epsy any men's
substance laid forth to the spoil, immediately they also are snatching at the
same. Why (say they) should not I also get somewhat for my self: when as,
although I withold my hands, yet some other will fall to catching of the same,
who peradventure has not so much right thereunto, as we have.

And this is it, that God lays to the charge of those Edomites. For although
it be his pleasure to punish the offenses of some by war and spoiling, yet
gives he not every man leave violentlye to rushe upon them: as neither the
father makes his child subject to the leude ordering and malapertnesse of all
his servants, although he be minded somewhat sharply to correct him. And
continually shall that saying of God remayn ratified: VVo be unto thee that
robbest others, and art not robbed thy self. etc. Look Esaye. 33.

Thirdly he adds, To him that is in misery, must not more misery be added.
Stand not in the parting of the vvays, or in the high ways, to murder such
of them as are escaped, nor take them prisoners that remain, that is, such of
the Jews as are left, in the day of their trouble. In which place he
reprehendeth the cruelty more than barbarous of the Edomites, who not being
satisfied with the destruction of the City and nation of the Jews, did yet
carefully take heed that none should escape the hands of their enemies: and
being well acquainted with the outpassages and situations of the places, had a
manner (...) to entrap, and take up by the way, such as were fled, and either
deliver them ever to their enemies, or else to shut them up, and make them
their slaves.

The like cruelty did the Prophets Amos blame the Philistines and Tyrians for:
and at this day no doubt, al they shall to gether with them be punished, that
imitate their manners: as for example they do, which with too too much
ignominy entreat such as are driven out, and banished men from their own
country: they also, that having repulsed such kind of men from their selves,
offer them into the hands of their enemies: they again, who in time of common
dearth practice usury, and all manner of legier demain, so abusing the public
calamity of the needy, to fill the gorge of their own greedy lusts. And
what shall we say of those kind of men, that compel such as an escaped from
the tyranny of Antichrist, to return to wicked superstitions, not suffering
them to enjoy Christian liberty? These are plain shows of the Edomitish
cruelty, which the Lord will not suffer unrevenged: who accompteth it as done
to himself, whatsoever is done against those that are his: according to that
saying: Who so touches you, touches the apple of mine eye And again, Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? Look Zacha. 2. and 12. and Act. 9.

Hereunto now serve those things which now he adds of Plagues that
should surely follow: He returns to the denouncing of their punishment.
thereby to declare by what means he himself will bring to pass, that
afterward they shall not be able, though they would, to commit any such thing
again. For the day of the Lord (says he) is hard at hand over all Heathen.

By this day of the Lord is meant the time of reuengement, when as he
reuengeth the wickedness of the ungodly. And hereof is often mention made in
the Scriptures, to teach us, that mortal men's matters are not carried at all
adventures, neither that God is ignorant of the insolent dealings of the
ungodly, but that he has already a time appointed, wherein both in this
world, he will punish the sins of every nation and sort of men, and
hereafter also in that great day, draw out the rigor of his judgment over
al ye ungodly together. At this present the Prophet seems to reason (as the
Logitians call it) ab exemplo, or a comparatis, as though he should say: God
will shortly punish all the Heathen, Ergo he will also punish you, seeing ye
live all after one sort. Or thus: Sith God has determined to punish all the
Heathen, much more will he punish you, which in impiety and iniquity
excel all other. And incontinentlye he sets out the manner of their
punishment, saying: As thou haste done to others, so shall it be done to thee:
thy reward or hyre shall be revvarded thee even upon thy head. For as of all
other, the law of like for like is most equal, so is God wont chiefly to
observe the same, in revenging the injuries done to his people.

Now what he menaceth the Edomites withal in this place, it shall streightways
appear, if we consider what things he vpbraydeth them for. For he affirms,
that they shall suffer the same things, which the Jewish people suffered of
them not long before.

And that this threat might the better be believed, he confirms it with an
other argument, fet ab exe^plo, whereas he adds, For likevvyse as ye have
drunk upon my holy hill, so shall all Heathen drink continually: yea drink
shall they, and svvalovve up, so that they shall be as though they had never
been. In which place by the word Drink, many Interpreters suppose, that there
is noted the immoderate rejoicing and wantonness of the Edomites, who because
Jerusalem was taken, so hopped for joy, as drunken men are woonte to do in a
riottous banquet, so that this may be the meaning: As you wa^tonly leaped for
joy upon my holy Mount Sion, when my people was led away into captivity, so
shall you your selves also cause other nations in like manner to rejoice, when
as the same Babylonians shall lay wast your country also, and swallow up all
your substance, so that there shall scarcely remain any print, or token of
your nation. But because this sense, if it should be examined word by word,
has many things to far fet, I am of the mind, that this place might more
simply and plainly be expounded, if we say, that there is used in this place,
a turning of task from the Edomites to the Jews, whom the Prophet in this
whole Sermon is about to give consolation unto: if also by this word drink, we
say, there are signified the affliction and punishements, which God will lay
upon the ungodly Heathen. As though he might say: Even as you which are my
people, and upon Sion have observed the rytes and ceremonies which I delivered,
for other your offenses have drunk of the cup of mine iudignation, that I
reached out unto you by the Babylonians: so shall also the rest of the Heathen
be constreyned to drink of the same cup, yea to suppe it off even to the
dregs, when as I am purposed to pull them out by the roots. This sense
agrees with many other places of the Scripture. And that the metaphor of the
cup, and of drinking, is understood after this sort, it is more manifest,
than that it needs demonstration with many words: seeing we are assured that
Christ also in the Gospel often used the same. Matthew. 20.
And in the self same cause the like words are used by other Prophets, whom
Abdias no doubt was a follower of, as is euidente by the whole course of his
Sermon.

Certainly in Esaias. 51. Chapter, the Lord cries out: Awake, awake, stand
up Jerusalem, thou that from the Lords hand have drunken the cup of his
indignation: which have drunken and supped of the slumbring cup, dregs and
all. etc. And in Hiereme it is written: Ierem. 15.
Babylon was a Golden cup in the hand of the Lord, making drunken the whole
earth etc. And in another place, namely in the 25. Chap. the Prophet is
commanded to reach out this cup unto all nations, whereas amongst other words
the Lords says thus: If so be they refuse to take this cup of thy hand to
drink thereof, tell them, Thus says the Lord of hosts, Ye shall not fail
but drink thereof. For behold, I begin to plague the city that is called
after my name, and should you escape altogether unpunished?

Hereto therefore had Abdias also respect in saying these words, namely, that
the Jews should take no offense at the wanton felicity of the Edomites* since
that within short space they should suffer the greeuouser punishment.
Afflictions of the Church are sh^wetokens of public calamities. 1. Pet. 4.
Now, from hence may be fet a general doctrine, and very necessary to be
marked, namely, that the afflictions of Gods church are shewetokens of such
Plagues, as the wicked world must needs be overwhelmed withal. For judgment
begins at the house of God, as not long since upon the Prophet Amos has
been admonished. And continually ought that saying of Christ to be before our
eyes: If this be done on the grene tree, what shall become of the dry? And
surely, great difference is there between the Judgments of God over the
godly, and the ungodly. For the godly drink the cup of affliction from the
Lords hand, but being drunken therewith, God rayseth them up again (as
before upon Esaye we have declared) least they should utterly perish.
Contrariwise, the ungodly, for that they acknowledge not the judgments of
God, but become worse and worse thereby, are utterly lost both in body and
soul.

Let us then be myndefull of these things, and patiently abide what soever
he lays upon us, and use the same to the amendment of our lives, that in
time to come we may in Heaven drink of that abundaunt cup of Eternal
felicity, which Christ Jesus our Lord has promised to them that remain
with him: To whom belongs Thanksgiving, honor, glory, and dominion for
ever. Amen.

The fourth Homely.
But upon the mount Sion shall be a safeguard, and it shall be holy, and the house
of Jacob shall again enjoy her old possessions. And the house of Jacob shall be
a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau shall be the
straw, which they shall kindle and consume, so that there shall be nothing
left of the house of Esau, for the Lord himself has said it. And they shall
possess the South, namely the mount of Esau, and the plain country of the
Philistines. They shall also possess the fields of Ephraim, and the field of
Samaria: and Benjamin shall possess Gilead. And the army of the children of
Israel that shall return, shall have all that belongs to the Chananites, even
unto Zarphat: and Jerusalem that shall return, shall possess what soever
is in Sepharad, even the cities of the South. And there shall go up saviors
unto the mount Sion, to Judge the mount of Esau: and the kingdom shall be
the Lords.

HItherto Abdias in the first part of his Sermon has threatened to the
Edomites ye horrible judgment of God, The argument and use of this present
place
thereby to salve that offense, which was objected to Captives in Babylon, when
the Babylonians saw them cast out of their native country, and many ways
subject to misery: the posterity of Esau contrariwise flourishing in
prosperous estate, and over insolently bragging against the people of God. But
because men are not always in the better case, although their enemies be
put to due punishemente for their unjust dealing and cruelty, therefore
ensues now the other part wherein he promyseth, that the Jews shall be
restored again: thereby to let them understand, that GOD will not only
revenge the Injuries done unto them, but that he will also be mindful of his
promises, and set up again that kingdom amongst them, whch he so often had
promised to their fathers. And from hence we also are to fet consolation: that
God is not in manner of a furious man carried with a blind rage against his
ennimies, but that the revenge which he takes upon them, is joined also with
their deliverance to succeed. But before we take in hand the words of
Abdias, that which lately was spoken in the conclusion of Amos his prophecy,
must here also be marked: namely, that those things which the Prophets speak
of the restoring again of Israel, have their full perfection none otherwise
but in Christ, who alone has reedified that eternal and blessed kingdom of
God amongst me^. Wherefore with the historical sense we must also ioyn
together the mysteries of Christ and his Church: and forth with shall we
perceive, that al stay of salvation is comprehended in the same.

He shows, that in Sion, that is, in the Church, is the sanctuary of
salvation and safety.
First of all, by a general promise he teaches, that they all shall have
peace in Gods Church, as many as hold themselves within the lap thereof. In
the mount Sion shall be (says he) a safeguard, and it shall be holy. etc. He
seems to set these words against all the other that he had spoken before, of
the cruel layings in wait of the Edomites, and even of all the ennemies of the
Church: as if this were the sense: Although now ye are carried away into
Babylon, and there sustain all kind of miseries: again, although the Edomites
busy themselves about intercepting of such as do yet remain, and having
intercepted them, either send them over to the Babylonians, or else by force
take them away to become their slaves: yet shall they never bring it to pass,
but that upon mount Sion God will set up his Church, which may be a sanctuary
of safety for all that fly thereunto: and that the same mount may remain
consecrate unto my honor, in such sort, that I will not suffer it to be
continually profaned of the Gentiles. And hereout shall it come to pass, that
the house of Jacob shall again enjoy her old possessions: that is to wit, The
land, which of old time I promised unto Abraham: or (as others interpret it)
they shall possess such, as at this present have the rule over them. And this
thing, in the words that follow, by a more plentyfull reckoning up of the
parts he will express.

These things were partly fulfilled, when as the Jews returned out of
Babylon, inhabited their own land again, builded up the City and the Temple,
and erected a kind of kingdom and common wealth. How be it, because they
were afterward sundry ways afflicted, and lasie of all by the war like
force of the Romans, set beside their own land, and utterly pulled up by
the roots, we are enforced of necessity to look up higher, namely to
Christ, who suffering at Jerusalem, upon the mount Sion, has purchased unto
us eternal Salvation, and there first of all founded his Church, which from
thence is spread abroad over the whole world.

And here we have to mark, that we have Salvation set out for us no other
where, than in Sion, which elsewhere. I have declared, is a figure of the
Church. So then thorough it alone does Salvation happen unto men, even for that
it depends upon Christ only, and therefore can no others be partakers
thereof, but such as are graft in through true faith, and so become members of
the Church, whereof he is the only head. As therefore long since in the time of
the flood, thorough the Ark of Noah alone, the remna^t of mankind were saved:
so also in all ages shall they find salvation in the church only, as many as
flee thereunto. Let these things serve us to this end, that both we may
constantly maintein the unity of the Church, and also manfully stand among
the myd sourges of this world, since it can not be, that Christ should forsake
his church, which to this end has he consecrate to himself, that therein the
pure worship of his Name may here be continued, and in time to come it may
reign with him in heaven.

Howbeit it seemed an impossible thing that the Jews should at any time recover
again their possessions, The force of the ennemies does nothing derogate from
the promises of God.
seeing that while they kept in Babylon, the Edomites flourished very greatly,
and swelled with pride, partly for that they were enriched with the spoils of
the Jews, partly also, for that they so much trusted upon the friendship of the
Babylonians.

But that all this should derogate nothing from the promise of God, the Prophet
teaches by a comparison. And the house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the
house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau shall be the straw, which
they shall kindle and consume, so that there shall be nothing left of the house
of Esau. He calls the kingdom of Judah the house of Jacob, and the Israelites
the house of Joseph, amongst whom yt Ephraimits fetching their original from
Joseph, did in a manner obtain the chief sovereignty. And all these he
compares to a burning fire, and most fervent flame: whereunto the Edomites
might make no more resistance, than as if a man should put straw or stubble, to
the feruencie of the fire. For they shall boil in heat against the Edomites,
and being armed with power from God, shall so consume them, that that arrogant
and insolent house of Esau shall not have so much as a small remnant, whereby to
be hable to rise up again.

This was fulfilled as touching the history, when as the nation of the
Edomites, for the injuries done against the people of God, was utterly
destroyed, and others enjoyed their land.

And this manner of speaking deserves especially to be noted, wherein all this
is attributed to the Jews and the Israelites, as though they should consume
the Edomites, like as the fire co^sumeth the stubble. Yet do we not read any
where that they did so. Notwithstanding, the Prophet truly affirms the same,
for that being moved with his peoples misery, (the chief causers whereof,
the Edomites were) was himself kindled against them, and revenged the injuries
of his people with their destruction.

Wherout we have to fetch a general doctrine, The godly at a destruction to
the wicked.
namely that the godly shall ever be the destruction of the wicked, yea although
they lay no hand upon them. For God always fyndeth out some such as may
persecute the injuries done to those that are his. So Loath being taken captive
in war destroyed the kings which were conquerours, for that by means of him,
Abraham followed upon them. So the Israelites brought utter ruin upon Pharao,
the Chananites and many others. So did Gods Church also bring utter subversion
to the Romain empire, when as the Lord required thereof the blood of his
martyrs. And in this respect is it compared to a stone, whom no man, that is
minded thereby to assay the strength of his arm, can take up without harm.
Zach. 12. And in the mean season this may by a mystical sense be referred to
the word of God, which sounds in his Church, and whereby it is begotten a
new, and kept in good order. For this word in no seldom places of the
Scripture is compared to fire. The word of God is a fire. Jer. 32. and. 5.
Is not my word like fire (says the Lord) and as a hammer beating the rock
in sunder? And again, Behold, I will make my words a fire in thy mouth, and
this people shall be vvood, and it shall devour them. In like manner Christ
speaking of his Gospel, how it should be spread over the whole world, says: I am
come to send fire upon the earth, and what is my desire, but that it were
kindled? Luc. 12. And surely if a man list to make comparison of the nature of
fire with the word of God, he shall soon epsy a marvelous resembla^ce
between them both. For the fire with his brightness lightneth all places near
unto it: So does the word of God enlighten men's minds, and drives away the
darkness of errors and ignorance: in consideration whereof, it is termed in the
Scriptures, a light and a candle. The fire with his heat burns: So does the
word of God inflame men's minds with a love of heavenly things, and an holy
desire to godliness. By fire, gold and silver are purged, where as it
consumes all other things: So by the word of God ar the elect wont to be
purged from the corruption of the flesh, the ungodly in the mean season
growing thereby worse and worse, for that they being impacie^t of discipline,
conceive thereby an anger and an hatred, which at length brings them to
desperation and destruction. For they are confounded even in their own
consciences: and because neither by that means they will give place, at length
they horribly perish. And hereto serves it, which in the Apocalipse the.2.
chap. is mentioned of the two witnesses, out of whose mouth there came a fire,
whereby they avenged them of their enemies. And of Christ it is reported, that
he should smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his
mouth should kill Antichrist. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Thus comes it to pass, that Esau
shall have no remnant left. For whatsoever the godly have in them that is
earthly, and sauoureth of the nature of the world, that is wholly by means of
this heavenly fire by little and little wasted away, that they may be wholly
renewed in every part. Contrariwise, the ungodly perish both in soul and body,
howesoeuer for a while they rouse up themselves against the Lord and his
Church. Now although it seems almost an impossible thing, yet proves he
that it must needs be true and ratified, because The Lord himself has said
it, whose power is unconquerable, and therefore his will must also be
established.

Now returns he to that, He describes the bounds of the Church or kingdom
of Christ.
which before he had said of the enjoying again of their possessions, and
describes how far and how wide their bounds should extend. Howbeit, he
names such bounds, as at that season were well known unto al, and do rightly
agree with the situation of Iewrie. For I can not away with ye trifling toys
of ye Jews, who (such is their boldness and folly) dare fable what they list,
and mingling Asia and Europa together, affirm, that here in this place is
mente Germany, France and Spayn, and beside the authority of their Rabbines,
bring forth nothing, whereby to prove their most unsavory forgings. Abdias
speaks to the men that lived in his time, and makes report of such things as
might serve for their Instruction, describing unto them therwithal the
enlarging of Christ's kingdom. They shall possess (says he) the South,
namely the mount of Esau, or Idumea, which is extended toward the south into
stony Arabia: Moreover, The plain or field country of the Philistines: who
even until the time of David, remained unsubdued or wild, and after his death
rebelled again. They shall also possess the fields of Ephraim, and the
fields of Samaria: that is: Whatsoever dominions perteyned at any time, either
to the Ephraimites, or to the kingdom of Samaria. Howbeit, Benjamin shall
possess Gilead. By which place he foresheweth, that the puissance of the
Israelites shall be very great: yea even in such sort, that the least
Tribe shall have that Land in possession, which in times paste, all the
Tribes bending their force together, could not be subdued with out much
labor.

Moreover, The army of the children of Israel that shall return, that is to
wit, the Jews, which out of Babylon shall come again to their own
Country, shall possess whatsoever belongs to the Chananites, even unto
Zarphat, which is a town near unto Sidon, as by the history of Helias does
appear. 1. Reg. 17.


And Jerusalem that shall return, that is to say, the men of Jerusalem,
shall possess wha, soever is in Zepharad, even the cities of the southe.

Now that Sepharad in the Babylonian tongue signifies a Border or bound,
Hierome himself has left it in writing. Which if it be true, either there
is noted hereby some place of the Babylonian kingdom, or else the meaning is,
that from the borders of the Babylonians, toward the Southe, they should have
all in possession, both long and broad.

But that these things also appertain to the Kingdom of Christ, the matter
it self does declare. For the Jews after their return out of Babylon,
never stretched out so far the borders of their kingdom. But the Apostles
according as they were commanded of Christ, began to preach in Sion, or
Jerusalem, where as when persecution did arise, they as it were, divided
their armies, first possessed whole Jury, and straightwaye entering into
Samaria, brought it also unto Christ. After that invaded they the parties of
Sidon, and so great was the force of the preaching of the Gospel, that it
could not be kept in, no not with the sea, but it pierced also into the Isles,
and into al parts of the whole world. And Paul being of the tribe of
Benjamin, Romans 15.
within the space of a few years, from Jerusalem, even unto Jllyricum, filled
all places with the preaching of the Gospel.

Out of these things shines forth the exceeding mighty power of God, who by
so few, and those but base me^, was hable so sodeinly to change the whole
face of the world: and therwithal also is reproved the miserable
blockishenesse of this world, which when as it daily beholds plain tokens of
this mighty puissance, does nevertheless not acknowledge the hand of God, and
as yet is not afearde to stand up in defense against the same. But great will
be the price, that it shall pay for this boldness: As in the words following
it shall be declared.

For Abdias goes on, The manner of the enlarging of Christ's kingdom, and the
gouernemente of the same.
and in few words comprehending both the manner of the enlarging of Christ's
kingdom, and the government of the same, says: There shall go up sauiors unto
the mount Sion to judge the mount of Esau: and the kingdom shall be the
Lords. He shows, that God will raise up some, who being armed with his
power, shall restore the people into liberty again, and defend them against
the deceytfull entrappings of their enemies. These were (as touching the
history of the Iewishe people) Zorobabel, Ezras, Nehemias, and such like,
which were captains to the people in their return, which also having builded
up the City, erected a new common wealth. Howbeit, as concerning the kingdom
of Christ, this is truly also applied to the Apostles: who as elsewhere they
are called the light of the world, for that they preached Christ (which is
the true and only light of souls) so here they are adorned with the title of
Saviors, because they have declared that Salvation, which thorough Christ lay
hold of. In which respect the man of Macedonia that appeared to Paul in a
vision, said, Come and help us. Act. 16. And truly went the Apostles up into
the mount Sion, and judged the mount of Esau, when as at Jerusalem they
received the holy ghost, who reproves the world of sin: John. 16.
and from that time have diuulged the Gospel thorough out the whole world,
wherein Christ the true judge of the world is made manifest, and according
to whose sentence in time to come, Math. 19.
the whole world shall be judged. Yea the Apostles also shall hereafter sit
with christ, to judge the twelve tribes of Israel. By means of the gospel the
kingdom of Christ is enlarged and me^ are called to the fellowship of salvation,
yea they are saved in deed: which thing the words also of ye angel do testify,
whereas he says to Cornelius: Call for Simon, whose syrname is Peter, who
shall speak unto thee words, vvherby both thou and thy whole house shall be
saved. Act. 11. These things well considered, ought to excite us to a love and
study of Gods word: least while we contemptuously disdain and reject it, we
despoile our selves of eternal salvation.

But lest any man should take occasion hereby, Christ the only king.
to attribute too much unto the Apostles, in ye end he adds: And the kingdom
shall be the Lords, or shall belong to Jehovah. And thus does he place them in
the order of ministers, who^ even now he had called Sauiors: and constituteth
God himself the head of this kingdom. Howbeit, ye Christ is the head of the
Church, all the scripture bears record. Then must it needs follow, that he is
God. So yt now we have an infallible and certain argument of the divinity of
Christ, whereupon we may stay our selves against the Jews. For they
themselves can confess, yt this whole place must of necessity be expounded of
the kingdom of Messiah: and yet like blind bussards, can not mark, that that
king is renoumed with the title of Jehovah. Now, if ye kingdom be the Lords,
necessarily must al resort as disciples thereunto: and so in deed shall the
Church be lawfully appointed, if Christ alone may have the preeminence, and
al other be placed in an inferior roomth, even as ministers of the same.
Which thing is then done, when as unto Christ alone, are attributed all such
things as concern our salvation, in such sort as that he may be acknowledged
the only teacher and master of the Church, the only authoure of man's
salvation, the only mediator and advocate, and finally the only sacrifice and
satisfaction for our sins: again that all men may submit themselves unto
him, through the obedience of faith, which (as Paul in many places does
declare) is the end of the preaching of the gospel. And hereto tends it,
that Christ said unto his disciples: Go your vvayes, and make disciples
((...)) all nations, Matthew. 28.
baptising them in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy
ghost, teaching them to observe whatsoever I have commanded you. Which
commandment the Apostles had so great regard unto, that they brought such as
were the auditors of their preaching to none other, but God alone, through
Christ: they also with very great diligence took heed least any man through
occasion of miracles that they wrought, should attribute unto them more than
was due: as in the examples of Peter and John, Act. 3. and. 24
Paul and Barnabas is to be seen. So the^ they offend against the chief
Principles of faith, and the kingdom of Christ, as many as either bring in
sects, whereby the unity of the Church is torn in sunder: or else having
shaken off the yoke of christian Discipline, are carried with a blind rage of
affections, and give them selves over to the guiding of the devil.

Let these things suffice that are spoken upon the Prophecy of Abdias, which
sets out before our eyes a notable documente, how dearly God loves his
Church: since that with so great severity he reuengeth the Injuries done to
the same. But above all, this is full of consolation, that he forgets not
his promises, although now and then he suffers his Church to be exercised,
and tried with all kind of afflictions. He repaireth therefore ye kingdom of
his Christ, least it should utterly fall to the ground: and augmenteth the same
daily with new increasings. Wherefore staying our selves upon this hope, let
us wrestle out through all adversities with a constant Faith, that in time to
come we may have the fruition of the eternal joy of his heavenly kingdom,
which Christ Jesus our Lord has prepared for those that believe in him: To
whom belongs thanksgiving honor, glory, and domynion for ever. AMEN.

The Homilies of Rodolph Gualter, a Tigurine, upon the Prophet Jonas. The first
Chapter.
The first Homely.
AND the word of the Lord came unto Jonas, the son of Amithay, saying:
Arise, and get thee to Niniue, to that great City, and cry out against it,
for their vvyckednesse is come up into my syghte.

ALthough there be not very many things mentioned of Jonas in the scriptures,
Of Jonas, and what time he prophesied.
yet is it euidente by the sacred history, that he was a Prophet of no small
account, as by whom God would forshewe unto the Israelites that felicity,
which in the time of Jeroboam the second, they did enjoy. For so is it
written of Jeroboam: He restored the coasts of Israel from the entering of
Hemath, unto the sea in the vvyld fields according to the word of the Lord,
which he spoke by his servant Jonas the son of Amithay; which was of Cath
Hepher. By which place it may be gathered, that he prophesied in the time of
the said king Jeroboam, or at the least not much before while Ioas his father
reigned, when as the estate of the Israelites was many ways grievously
afflicted, and had need therefore greatly to be comforted. Nevertheless, of
his Sermons that he made among the Israelites, there is now none extant. The
reason is, for that they were not so needful for the Church, seeing that the
things contained in them, may easily be set other where out of the writing
of other Prophets, which taught in the same times, or very like. But by the
singular providence of God, is this book of such things as he did among the
Ninevites reserved for all those that come after: the authority whereof, how
great it ought to be among the godly, partly we learn even of Christ his own
record, who confesses, Math. 12.
that his Death and Resurrection were foreshadowed by Jonas, partly also also
it may appear by the matter entreated of therein, as wherein al things co^curre
together which may serve to the perfect institution of Godliness, and
Salvation of man.

For when among the Ninevites, The argument and use of this history.
Sardanapalus being dead, (who of the more ancient authors is called
Tonosconcoleros) there was made some alteration of the estate of the kingdom,
but no order taken for the reformation of manners, many (as they had accustomed
while Sardanapalus reigned) running still headlo^g into all kind of
ungraciousness, even to their own destruction: God of his singular grace
sends forth Jonas, whose service he had before used among the Israelites now
unto Niniue, that he might denounce unto this most corrupt city such
punishment, as now for the sins thereof, was ready to fall on the same. But
Jonas misdoubting some peril to himself, deuyseth to flee away, and having
taken shipping, makes haste to an other place. As he is fleeing, god attacheth
him by the way, by whose providence it comes to pass, ye to still the tempest
he is feign to be cast into the sea, and being there swalowed up of a fish of
a monstrous bigness, is three days after restored to dry land again. And
being then become more obediente unto God, he goes through with that
commandment, which he was charged withal concerning ye Ninevites. They having
once heard the determination of God, fall to repentance, and so escape the
punishment, that hoong over their heads.

Now whereas Jonas complained upon God for altering his former judgment or
sentence, God renders him a reason why he so did. This is the sum of this
whole history, which if we search to the bottom, it shall well appear, that
what soever may serve to the knowledge of God and of man's salvation, is
contained therein. For as touching God, here shyneth forth his Fatherly
goodness, which is extended even to al nations, seeing that he had a desire to
have the Ninevites called from destruction, even at such time, as he
aknowledged the Jews. alone, as it were for his own possession. There is
also no less token of Gods Justice, in that he so sharply punished his
servant Jonas, for the breach of his commandment. It declares moreover his
puissant power, whereby he has the sovereign power over all the elements, yea
eue^ over the whales living in the depth of the sea. As concerning our
salvation, how far our whole force is from being any thing at all, to the
deseruyng of the same, it is apparent enough by Jonas, who plunged himself so
far, that he could not be haled out again, but by the myghtie hand of God.
Which same thing also (it is most certain) has happened to many other very
holy men. Nevertheless, to those also that are dismayed with the guyltinesse
of their own corruption, is Christ here offered, whose death and Resurrection
(being such, as wherein the Scriptures do every where testify al stay of our
salvation to be reposed) was declared before to be shadowed in this most
evident figure.

In like sort, what ways we must use for the embracing of this salvation, we
are taught by the example of these Ninevites. They believe Jonas, preaching the
word of GOD: and that they do believe him, their speedy and earnest
repentance bear sufficient record. So find they God forthwith favorable unto
the^. As many therefore as lay hold upon Gods word with a true Faith, and
express this their faith with amendment of life and conversation, shall in
like sort as these did, make God at peace with them selves. For, that it is a
general thing which happened unto these Ninevites, eue^ the Lord himself in
the eightenth chapter of Hieremie teaches by these words: Sodeinly will I
speak against a nation, and against a kingdom that I will waste away, root
out, and destroy it. And if that people, against whom I have thus devised,
turn from their wickedness, I will also repent of the plague that I had
devised to bring upon them. And in an other place, If the ungodly will turn
away from all his sins that he has done, and keep all my
commandments, and do the thing that is equal and right: doubtless he
shall live and not die etc. Ezech. 18. Now seeing that this book of Jonas
teaches the same, and does not only confirm the promyses of God with a most
pleasant example, but also in the same sets forth the true way of
repentance, most profitable, yea and exceeding necessary shall the knowledge
thereof be unto us at this day, when as in this last corruption of the world,
being now in a manner past al hope of recovery, very manifest tokens of
Gods indignation against us are to be seen.

This being spoken by way of a Preface, let us now come to the exposition of
this book: The book of Jonas wants a title.
whose beginning herein differs from the rest of the Prophets, for that it
wants a title, wherwithal they do as it were, mark and seal their Sermons.
To say the truth, as for this it neded none such, seeing that it is not
occupied about prophetical sayings, but rather about an history. And
peradventure it is not much awrye, which some do judge, being of the opinion,
that this little book was taken out of some greater historical work, and so
placed in here. For this copulative conjunction And, set in the first front
thereof, seems to import some such matter. And (says it) The word of the
Lord came unto Jonas, The calling of Jonas to go to the Ninevites.
the son of Amithay, saying: Arise, and get thee to Niniue, to that great
City, and cry out against it. etc.

In which words he touches two things. First, he declares, that by the
singular or peculiar commandment of God, he was sent to Niniue, to preach
there. Secondly, he reherseth the commandment word by word.

As touching the first, it may not lightly be passed over, that although he
had before time used the office of teaching among the Israelites, yet now he
receives an especial precepte, whereby he is charged to get him to Niniue. For
we are admonished by this example, that those which are laufully called to the
ministry of Gods word, may not therefore at their own pleasure gadde
abroad every whither, and preach at all adventures, where as they think good
themselves, in this or that place. For it is certain that among the ministers
of the word there are certain degrees, and that all have not received the
dignity to be as Apostles, preaching every where. Look the fourth chapter so
the Ephesians: yea neither the Apostles themselves unadvisedly wandered where
they listed, but having Gods spirit for their guide, him they followed, who
sometime would not suffer the^ to go, whereas else they were minded: Act. 13. and.
16
as in the history of Paul and Barnabas we may read. These things serve to
confute such as violently dare rush into all co^gregations without respect, and
whiles they challenge to themselves authority over al, they do with their
frowardness and sauciness, set all very near in disquet. Herein in times past
offended ye heretics, when as either in secret privately, or otherwise openly
they disturbed the co^gregations: whose footsteps at this day the Anabaptists
tread in: which when as with good right they cannot be ministers of any one
Church, neither yet have any lawful calling, do nevertheless take upon them
to preach in all places, and do usurp authority to speak, yea although the
ordinary ministers be present themselves.

And in this behalf we can not excuse the immoderate dissoluteness of the
Romish prelates, who when as they are not so much as teachers of the Church
of Rome, yet presumptuously title themselves Shepheardes of the whole Christian
flock: and at their own lust, ordeyne laws, which all other Bishops must be
enforced to obey. Yet did Chrysostom long since blame Epiphanius, Look
Socrates in his.6. book, and Chapter. 14.
for that, him unwitting, and his advice not being demanded, he had called a
Synod at Constantinople, there to condemn the books of Origin: he also
foreshewed unto him ye punishment that he should undergo, for so disquieting ye
Church, namely, that he should never come home again alive unto his own
Bishoprike. But what would Chrysostom do at this day, if he saw what
turmoyle the whole world is in, and how all congregations are in manner torn
asunder, by the rash headiness of Prelates? Moreover, by this example is
reproved their untrusty dealing, which send out the trusty Ministers of the
Church unto Popish Councels, and assemblies of tyrants, under a pretense of
defending Religion, and that they themselves may be rid of them, do as it were,
lay them open to be rent in pieces of wolves, whiles that they enjoin them to
show a reason of their Faith and of their doctrine, in such places, where as
they know well enough that truth can take no place. As for any such thing as
this is, we can not read, that ever the Godly kings did it. For neither when
Esaias preached against diverse nations, did Ezechias send him forth to them:
neither yet by the commandment of the kings of Israel, but by the authority
of Gods own mouth became Jonas a messanger unto the Ninevites. And if it be not
lauful for the minister to bid the Congregation farewell, which is committed
unto his charge, much more may no man compel such a one to depart, where as
there is no urgent cause, both laufull, and also from God above.

The co^mandemente of God to Jonas.
But let us hear how God commands the Prophet: Arise (says he) get thee to
Niniue, to that great city, and cry out against it: for their wickedness is
come up into my sight. This commandment has three parts. He is commanded to
go unto Niniue.
The first tells whyther he must go: namely to Niniue, that great City. It
was the regal seat of the kings of Assyria, first founded of Assure (as Moses
makes mention) in the fields of Aturia. For ye profane writers are deceived,
which leaning too much to ye likeness of the word, would ground thereupon that
it was builded of Ninus, when as rather it is named after the Hebrewe tongue
Niniue, which (being expounded) signifies as much as Beautiful or pleasant.
And not only this book bears record of the greatness thereof, but also the
Historiographers of the Heathen: who write, that it contained in circuit four
hundredth furlongs, and that it was compassed or fensed with towers, to the
number of a thousand and five hundredth. How it exceeded in wealth, glory,
and strength, we need not to speak: sith that the whole space of more than
a thousand and three hundredth years it was the seat of the kings of Assyria,
whose endeavor wanted not for the beautifying thereof all that while, with the
spoils of the whole East. And to that end would God call it great, when
he gave Jonas a commandment to preach there, for that after a sort, by a
kind of preuentyng, he would rid this Prophet out of all fear. As
though he should say: I know how great, how mighty, and how famous
Niniue is, yet will I have thee go thither, and be my preacher there: and as
for the majesty thereof, suffer not thy self to be dismayed therewith etc. And
surely this devise of God deserves not a little to be marvelled at, who
ieopardeth to so notable a City, yea in deed to the whole monarchy of the
Assirians, Jonas being but one: whose authority although it were of some value
in Israel, yet among alients and strangers from the religion of the
Israelites, could be of no force at all. Howbeeit, the same which god here
does, was done oftentimes otherwhere also. Exodus 3. etc.
So did he set Moses being taken but from the flock, and now also a
banished man, against Pharao, and all the enchaunters of the Egiptians. And
Hieremie, even in his childhoode, is called to fight with the word of God
against kings, Princes, priests, and the whole people of the land. Of like
sort was the estate of the Apostles, who being but obscure themselves, and
unskillful of things before, were made able to match not only with men of
their own nation, but also with the Heathen Philosophers, and with the
majesty of the Roman empire it self. And it is the manner of God for the most
part, to set forth his word to the world, by base and weak ministers, both
to confound the hautynesse of the world, and also to teach us, all respect of
persons being laid aside, to depend upon his authority alone.

Although there was in deed an especial cause of this embassage, which
Hierome did well espy, who writes, that Jonas was sent to the Heathen, to the
condemnation of the people of Israel. For when as Prophets many in number had
nothing auailed among the Israelites by the space of many years, God would
now set forth an example of easy belief and obedience amongst the Heathen:
whereby both the majesty of his word, and also the obstinacy of the Jews
now paste hope of reclaiming, might openly show themselves. And that this is
the use of this example, Matthew. 32.
Christ does declare where as he affirms, that in time to come, the
Ninevites shall arise, and condemn the Jews. Moreover, as these things
comprehend in them a manifest figure of the calling of the Gentiles, so serve
they also to instruct us, that God shall never want such, as amongst whom his
word may bring forth fruit, and by whose examples they may be condemned,
which were wont to have it in contempt and derision.

The goodness of God toward sinners
But chiefly the Fatherly goodness of God is here worthy the considering, a
certain example whereof, is here set before our eyes to behold. For (as it
shall be declared by and by) the horrible enormities of the Ninevites were now
grown up to the full, and had of long since deserved to be cut of by the
roots. God might also have executed punishemente upon them, so that no man
could have taken occasion to complain of his rigor, sith they had so
filthily, even against the laws of Nature, abused the victories gotten in so
many ages. Yet does the merciful Lord moderate his fierceness, and in
appoynting Jonas as an ambassadoure unto them, gives out this as a plain
doctrine, that he was desirous rather to correct and amend them, than utterly
to destroy them. Neither did any other thing move him thereunto, (if we
consider the Ninevites,) save his own natural compassion and mercy, wherewith
as we read in the hundredth and third Psalm) as a father has pity upon his
own children, even so is the Lord merciful unto us, and is not always chyding
with us, seeing he knows our estate perfectly enough. And the same that he
wroughte among the Ninevites, we our selves have in experience, both
universally to all, and privately to every one: for that it sufficiently
appears, how that God lays his rod upon none, whom he has not first
called unto repentance, by sundry warnings going before. But so peeuishe and
froward are we naturally, that we in a manner, either neglecte, or else hate
all Admonitions, till the truth of them is in deed confyrmed before our eyes,
not without our great smart adjoined to the same.

In the second part of his commandemente, He commands him to cry out
against Niniue.
GOD tells what he will have the Prophet to dee in Niniue, Cry out
(says he) against it. By this word, Cry, he does not charge him to
bestow amongst them words of disturbaunce, as it is the manner of
drunkardes, and raylers to do: but he commytteth unto him the preaching of his
word, whereby freely, plainly, and without all color of flattery, to
denou^ce, what God has determined to do with them. So is Esaias in his.58.
chapter commanded to open his throat wide, and to lift up his voice like a
trumpet, that he might show the people their offenses, and the house of Jacob
their sins. Ezechiel also is willed plainly to admonish the ungodly, least
the blood of them which perish in their own sins, be required at his hands.

And that this may truly be put in bre, partly the nature of Gods word gives
warning thereunto, which being it self the light and the truth, can away with
no gloses of falshoode: partly the corruption of man's inclination enforces
the same, as whereby it comes to pass, that either we contemn this word,
or at the least, we think it touches not us at all, until in very deed it
strikes our minds and consciences within.

Here therefore are all ministers taught their duty, namely, that freely, and
with open mouth (as they term it) they proclaim forth the same word, which
they have received of God, and that they care nothing at all for their reasons,
which think, that either we must somewhat bear with the wealthy estate of
the hearers, or else forecast with our selves what peril is like to ensue. For
Jonas might have laid for his excuse either of these two at this present, and
so much the rather, for that being a stranger, he is sent from such a people
as was hated of all men, to those, which as they were of very great force, so
did they stiffely mainteyne old enmities with the people of God. He is sent
also, not as in times past Moses was, furnished with miracles, whereby he might
win himself credit among profane men, but having the bare word of God for
his armure. Neither is he charged simply to utter the same, but as it were an
enemy or an ambassador, bringing with him tidings of war, to cry out
against Niniue, and to proclaim unto delicate ears, and as yet unacquainted
with the word of God, that heavy and intolerable decreed sentence: Within
forty days shall Niniue be destroyed. No doubt, this was a painful and a
sore charge. For put the case, that some one of Germany should be called of
God himself at this day to go to Rome, and there in the audience of the
Bishops, Cardinals, Kings ambassadors, yea and the Pope himself, to make
open denouncing of the same, how much (I beseech you) should his preaching
avail? or what credit would be given to his talk among those men, which with
such hatred as can not be pacified, have already for the space of these
forty years, persecuted Germany, and as yet do persecute it, for no other
cause, saving only the light of the Truth now sprung up therein.

But as touching our Jonas, his case might seem so much the more wrapte in
danger, for that the force of Niniue was greter at that time, than is the
force of the city of Rome at this day, which, besides the dignity of the
name, and the decayed monuments of ancient buyldings has nothing else left
of her former renoume. And as for Jonas, he was not so dull headed, but yt he
might understand all these things: as in the next Homily it shall he declared:
yet nevertheless does he hear God saying unto him: Arise, get thee to Niniue,
to that great city, and cry out against it. So now let all reasons be set a
part, which some at this present dare use, in commanding the preachers to
silence. The cause of this commandment is expressed.


But let us hear ye cause of this commandment, which in this third part he
expresses, saying: For their wickedness is come up into my sight. Therefore is
ye Prophet commanded to cry out against Niniue, because the sins thereof did
cry out unto god, and did now with their stink, as it were, reach up to heaven.
This is meant of their outrageous abhominatio^s: As for example, their sheading
of innocent blood, oppressing of the poor, detestable lusts, and such like.
So is it said, that Abels blood cried out against Cain, to God for vengeance:
and the horrible wickednesses of the Sodomites came up to the sight of God. So
does the hire of the laborers by fraud kept back, cry unto ye lord. Deu. 24.
The sins of the Ninevites.
Al which sins were to be found among the Ninevites. For they had enlarged
the bounds of their Empire, by much bloodshed, they had oppressed innumerable
nations and people, and being enriched with the welthie spoils of others, they
waxed proud, gave themselves to voluptuousness, and ruled al things according
to their wicked lust. They had besides all this, stained themselves with
vsuries, deceytes, false iugglings, superstitions, and worshippings of Idols,
moreover with curious and Magical arts: wherewith, that the inhabiters of the
East parts were thoroughly acquaynted, it appears by histories. But this
was it, which filled up the measure of their sins, that being made drunken
with fortune, and famous by reason of victories, they also thought the
immortal Gods were delited with these their vain fancies. Yea, scarcely would
they acknowledge themselves polluted with any sin at all.

Hitherto God had borne with these their vices, not because he had lyking in
them, but for that he would use their tyranny as a mean, whereby to correct
the iniquities of others (in which respect, God calls the king of Assyria,
Esaias. 10.
the rod of his wrath) and because he was minded by them to show forth
unto the whole world a most evident example, both of his goodness, and also of
his justice. But now when as things grew daily woorsse and worsse, he
declares, that their wickedness is come up before him, and therefore commands
Jonas to proclaim open war against them, yea to denounce that very
destruction, which by their so great offenses, they had deserved.

Howbeit, The miserable estate of the sinful.
here does offer it self to our consideration, the miserable and unhappy
condition of wicked men. The Ninevites live now in security, and please
themselves, by reason of such victories as they have obtained: and in so great
abundance of wealth they apply their minds to iolitie and voluptuousness:
neither can they be persuaded, that any such peril might happen, as whereby
their felicity might be disturbed, yea though it were but for a season. And
certainly, there was no nation, which durst be so bold as to attempt any
hostility against that City, being the lady of the whole East. Yet is
their estate laid open to greater danger, than if all the people of the East
parts had conspired together against them.

But whereof aryseth this danger? even for that their sins were ascended up
into Gods sight, and did now with their cry crave for his vengeance. For
whiles they take their pleasure, and rouse up themselves for pride, other
nations innumerable byte on the bridle for want, and being oppressed with
their intolerable yoke, make their complaint unto the Lord. The widows
lamente for their husbands that the Ninevites have slain, the fatherless
children mourn for their parents that are lost, the strangers that are
scattered here and there, bewail their miserable estate, being now by them
driven out from their native country, and possessions: So many also, as
being either beguyled with the crafty wyles of the Usurers, or being undone
by the wrongful sentences of the Judges, have lost their goods, make piteous
outcries of their hard chance.

To these complayntes the Ninevites give deaf ears, and so the world may go
well with them, little regard they, what calamities other sustain. But in the
mean season, there lives and reigns a just God, who (as he had often
promised) had of long since heard these complaynts of the widows, orphans,
strangers, and all others that were afflicted: and had now decreed to revenge
the injuries done unto them, with the destruction of the whole city, and that
within forty days. And now judge you, whether they could have been in more
miserable case, than even at such time, when as of all men living they thought
themselves the happiest.

The same that is here mentioned of the Ninevites, let every one apply to him
self, both privately and generally, and men shall streightway understand,
that they have no just cause to be voluptuous in them selves, or cruel to
others: although they seem never so fortunate, by reason of their huge wealth,
victories, or peace, that has continued many years. Yea let them rather
deeply ransacke their own consciences, and weigh, whether any cries, either
of them, or against them, go up unto the Lord: and if they espy any such
thing, let them turn unto God, calling for his mercy, submitting themselves
to his governance, and with true faith embracing salvation, which he offreth in
his son Christ Jesus, to whom belongs thanksgiving, honor, glory, and
dominion for ever. Amen.

The second Homely.
AND Jonas arose to flee unto Tharsis from the presence of the Lord, and gat
him down to Ioppa, where he found a ship ready to go unto Tharsis. So he
paid his fare, and went aboorde, that he might go with them unto Tharsis,
from the presence of the Lord. But the Lord hurled a great vvinde into the
sea, and there was a mighty tempest in the sea, so that the ship seemed, as
though it had gone in pieces. Then the mariners were afraid, and cried every
man to his god: and the goods, that were in the ship, they cast into the
sea, to lighten it of them. But Jonas gat him under the hatches, where he laid
him down and slept. So the master of the ship came to him, and said unto
him: What do thou thou sluggarde? Up, call upon thy God, if God (happily)
vvil think upon us, that we perish not.

THe Prophet Amos says, that the Lord God does no manner of thing, but he
tells his secret before, unto his servants the Prophets. And to this end
reuealeth he it, not that they should reserve unto themselves the same, which
they have learned by revelation from him, or that they should be idle, and
nourish their curiosity with a vain knowledge of things to come: but that by
threatening of plagues, they might wake them up to repentance: which have
already before provoked the indignation of God, by mean of their sins. And
many places of the Scripture are to be seen, which do menace Gods grievous
Judgment unto the Ministers of his word, if either for the love of the
world, or fear of peril, or any other affections, they be drawn away, to
neglecte their duty. For it is said to Ezechiel: If thou give not the
ungodly warning, he shall perish: but his blood will I require at thy hand.
Ezech. 3. And Paul spoke thus of himself: VVoe unto me, if I preach not. 1.
Cor. 9. An evident example of this matter is presently set before us, The
argument and use of this present place.
to behold. For god sends forth Jonas to threaten ye Ninevites with the
destruction now ready to light upon them, and he refusing his charge, takes
in hand to flee: but so little does it avail him, that thereby he brings
both himself, and many other to present danger of death.

Now although this example chiefly appertains to the minysters of Gods
word, yet does it therwithall instruct all men, of whatsoever place or degree,
to learn, how grievous an offense it is, to forsake the vocation, whereunto
they are called of God. Which, that we may the better understand, we will view
every portion of this place in order as it stands.

The first part conteyneth in it a description of the deed of Jonas, Jonas
flees from the presence of God.
who having heard the commandment of God, arises immediately to flee unto
Tharsis from the presence of the Lord. Howebeit Jonas was not so dull headed,
as to think, that he could be hidden from the syghte of GOD, whom even out
of the Psalm. 139. he might have learned to be present every where, where
as it is written: VVhyther shall I go from thy Spirit? or vvhyther shall I
go from thy presence? If I clymbe up into Heaven, thou art there: And if I
shall make my bed in the Hell, thou art there also. etc.

Deute. 10.
But as the Levites, and other that serve the Lord, are said to stand before
him: so are they also named to flee from the presence of God, which have a
mind to withdraw themselves from his obedience. This was also (as it may
euidentely appear) the same which Jonas went about: lith that to the end he
might be altogether rid of his Prophetical office, he prepares to depart
out of the bounds of the land of Israel, which God had appointed to be the
place, whereas he would be worshipped. By this means lived he in hope, yt now
since he abode in an other place, God would make no great inquiry after him: he
is minded to flee into Tharsis, of the which word there are diverse opinions
among interpreters. For some thereby do simply mean the sea: which seems to
have been so named of Tharsis, the son of Iauan, whom, with his brethren, Genesis
10. Psalm. 45 72. Esaias. 2 and 23. etc.
Moses writes to have inhabited the Isles of the sea: in which sense, the
kings of Tharsis are taken for those that belong unto the Isles: and the
ships of Tharsis for those that pertain to the seas. But because the letter,
He, is added in the end, which is a token used in signifying moving, or going
forth to some special place: and because it has no lykelyhoode, that Jonas
being a grave man, and otherwise circumspecte in his dealings, would so commit
himself to the sea, as not knowing where to become: I lean rather to their
judgment, which think, that here is meant some certain place. Some take it
to be Carthage or Tunise. some other Cilicia, with whom I also agree, both by
reason of the often meetings between the Jews and the Cilicians, by means of
their near neighborhood, and also for that Tharsis is numbered among the chief
cities of Cilicia, and is commended of profane writers for the famousnesse of
the school, and is accounted in the holy Scripture notable, for Paul's sake,
who took his beginning thereoute. And it is certain, that Jonas directed his
journey clean contrary Westward, being bidden to go unto Niniue, which has
her situation in the East. But leaving these things, let us rather discuss
Jonas his fact, and what causes drove him to take it in hand.

Jonas by fleeing offended very grievously.
As touching his fact, some there be that would excuse it, and to that
effect cloak it straungely with certain allegories. But what need therefore
any such excuse to be made, seeing that both God himself pursues after him,
being a fugitive, and Jonas also, for his own part confesses that he has
offended. And truly, if we will somewhat narowly weighe the matter, it shall
easyly appear, that this trespass of his has many branches.

For first of all, he denies obedience unto God, and so offends against the
chief principle of true godliness, which straightlye commands all the
senses of the flesh, yea and reason also it self, to become subject unto the
word of God, thorough obedience of Faith, and from the said word to bend,
neither to the right hand, nor to the left. Deutero. 28. Moreover, least he
should be enforced to get him to Niniue, he shamefully shakes of his
function, which he before had exercised in ye land of Israel. Besides this, he
has too too fond an opinion of God, supposing that the fulfilling of his
commandments, or the punishments due to the transgressors thereof, may be
avoided by fleeing away. He does also sin against charity, since he minds
not to call them back from destruction, whom God by mean of his preaching,
was desirous to bring to repentance. Even as though he played the part of an
untrusty ambassadoure, that gives them no warning, over whom present danger
is imminent, and that from their king, unless they make him satisfaction.

And here is apparently set forth how great the corruption of man's wisdom is:
seeing these, which are no mean or small faults, could find restyng place in
him ye was so holy a servant of God. The like examples also we have experience
of in Noe, Loath, Moses, Aaron, David, Peter the Apostle, and infinite others,
which in the midst of diverse notable feats ye they had wrought, yea even
after many trauayles that they had manfully overcome, at length either were
vanquished by impacience, and so gave over, or finally stained their names with
most horrible offenses. This commodity let us take by them, that we despair
not, if any thing shall in like sort happen unto us, after the fashion of men:
And let us yet in the mean season, watch continually against the deceytfull
baytes of the flesh, and the devil: having the trust, and hope of our
Salvation, reposed in the grace of God only, who has appointed Christ Jesus,
to be our satisfaction and righteousness. 1. Cor. 1.

The causes which enforced Jonas to flee.
As concerning the causes that drove Jonas to this attempt, there is no doubt
but they were both many and diverse: sith that, in such commandments as God
gives, which are more subject to danger, many things meet together that
pluck us away from the duty of obedidience.

First of all, it seems a new and unwonted thing, that a Prophet should be
sent forth out of the land of Israel, to go to the Gentiles, yea it seemed
altogether disagreeing from that prerogative whereby God had granted the
plentyfuller knowledge of the law, and of his will, unto the Jews alone. The
places are not unknown: Truly God is known in Ievvrie, his name is great in
Israel. Psalm. 76. and 147.
And again, He shows his word unto Jacob: his statutes and ordinances
unto Israel. And that of Moses: Deuteronomy. 4.
Only is this great nation a wise and understanding people. We know
moreover, that the Jews greatly aduauncing themselves upon this their
prerogative, did so much disdain all other nations, that even after they had
received the holy Ghost, the very Apostles stood in doubt, whether the Gospel
should be preached unto them, and therefore was it requisite, that Peter should by
a peculiar vision be instructed of this matter. Act. 10.11. No marvel was it
then, if it seemed strange unto Jonas hearing himself alone to be sent in
message to the Gentiles. Furthermore it is certain, that fear and mistrust
were stops unto him: which same also might grow of diverse causes. He
perceived that he had done little or no good at all hitherto, among the
Israelites, for, how great the corruption was, while Jeroboam reigned, the
sermons of Hoseas and Amos bear sufficient record. What hope could he then
conceive of profane people? Again, let the matter fall out howsoever it
should, he seemed even laid open to danger. For if the Ninevites believe not
his preching, undoubtedly he must either be slain, or else with ignominy and
reproach, universally of them all, be driven out of the country: If they
believe and amend, God will undoubtedly spare them being once turned unto
him: so should Jonas be accounted a lying Prophet, and perhaps, lose much of
his authority among the Israelites. And truly, that this thought came into his
mind, his own testimony will afterward declare.

By this example we are admonished how hurtful a thing it is to admit into
counsel the reasons of the flesh, against the commandments of God. For these
being almost contrary to the affections of the flesh, easyly will it find
out occasions whereby to cast of the government of God. For that which here
happened to Jonas, it is evident, that it happened also to Moses and Jeremy,
when they were first called of the Lord. And at this day, this one thing in a
manner makes both the ministers of Gods congregatio^s, grave Senators, and
also mighty Princes unmindful of their office, and negligente in executing
thereof, for that they measure the commandments of God, by their own reason,
having respect, rather how the world is inclined, than how god has willed. Let
us therefore being taught by the examples of so great men, learn to do our
duty: and as for the success, leave it unto God, who will never fail those,
that employ their travail in such vocation as he has called them unto.

In the second part is declared, God stops Jonas as he is fleeing.
how god meets him by the way as he is fleeing. He hurled a great vvinde into
the sea, and there was a mighty tempeste, so that the ship was in ieopardie
of going in pieces. So then god is ye author of tempests, who rules both the
sea and ye winds. Which thing the Gentiles partly acknowledged, when as they
imagined Eolus to be lord over the winds, and Neptune over the sea. But more
fitly do the Scriptures put all these things under the dominion of one God,
who governs all things, without any petie gods to come and aid him. Such
was the violence of this tempeste, that it enforced the maryners to make
inquisition for the cause thereof, and to cast Jonas into the sea, as in
convenient place it shall be declared.

Let us now take forth this lesson: how vain ye counsels of men be, whereby
they would devise with themselves to escape the hand of God. In good soothe,
Jonas flees without the borders of his country, and having bidden the dry
land farewell, he is carried thorough the open sea: yet can he not, for all
this, rid him self out of Gods hands, who governs both the sea, the
winds, and also the fishes (as afterward it shall appear) and pulls him
back again, whether he will or no. Yea while Jonas flees one peril, he
plungeth himself into many other, that are more grievous. The like also have
we experience of in our selves: neither is there any thing more common, than
that they are in great ieopardie for their sins, which would feign shake of
all labors and perils, that of right they should undergo for the name of God.
But how great fools and wretches are we, that take no regard to mark these
things, or else soon forgette them?

This now is worthy especially to be noted, that for Jonas sake being but
one, For Jonas sake alone many are in danger.
God wrappeth in so great a danger the rest also of the passingers and
mariners, and besides that, other ships also, whereof it is like, there were
greater store in the same sea. For whereas the Jews say, that the other
safely passed over, I do utterly reject it, Objection.
as a thing being impudently forged. Some man will say peradventure, that they
were unjustly punished, who were altogether ignorant of the wicked fact that
Jonas had committed, and had received him into their company for nothing else,
but either for humanities sake or else to make their gain greater (which gain
also swarued not from the listes of honesty. Solution.
) Howbeit God does no man injury, as whose Judgments are righteousness and
truth. Now although at this present, in causing of this tempeste, God had
regard especially to this end, thereby to punish the disobedience of Jonas,
and by a mean of calling back, to hinder this fugitive of his journey, yet
might the mariners and other passengers apply no small fruit therout to
themselves: amongst whom some ^owed with vices; which ought thus to be
corrected, some others faith was this way to be exercised and tried: and
finally, this example was a notable encouragement unto godliness to them all.
Moreover, the knowledge of God, which by this occasion shined unto them more
clearly, than it did before, made bountiful recompense for all the loss that
they suffered of their goods and merchandise. And if is a plain case, that in
like examples the same reason is thoroughly to be marked, least we (...) over
boldly against God. Besides that, we are taught by this experiment, how
dangerous a thing it is, to keep company with them that strive against the
will of God: and how heinously they sin, which are ayders to such as
enterprise any thing against Gods mind. Ios. 7.
For the sacrilegious and rash attempt of Achan being but one, all the
Israelites were in danger. So here for Jonas cause alone, are they also in
ieopardy, which knew nothing at all of the trespass that he had committed.
What shall then become of such, as give their assent to the devises of the
wicked, or (which is more) shoulder the same forth with their authority? What
shall they also look to be rewarded with, who, when as they might depart
from ungodly and superstitious men, do notwythstandyng disobey. Gods
commandment herein, and all for this cause, least they should either incur
the envy of others, or else sustain some loss of their own substance?

But let us pass over to the third part of this place, wherein is set out, what
both Jonas and also the Mariners, Jonas being in danger sleeps.
together with the rest of the passengers did in this so great peril. Whereas
first we have to speak of Jonas. He had gotten him down under the hatches,
and there being heavy as it were with a dead sleep, gave himself to rest. It
may be thought a thing worthy the wondering at, that neither the giltinesse of
his sin, as yet fresh in memory, nor the weariness of sailing whereunto he
was not accustomed, nor yet the roughness of the tempest now already risen,
could shake of his sleep. Howbeit, such is the nature of sin, that it
makes us careless, and unmindful of all danger, if we have once passed over
the first fear, wherewithal we were troubled for a while. Jonas feared
nothing but Niniue, and having forsaken his native country, he judges
himself now in safety: as for Gods seeking after him, it is the furthest
end of his thought: and therefore as though the matter were very well brought
to pass, he frames himself to sleep. The very like thing may we epsy in
David, who hearing that Bethsabe was great with child by means of his
accompanying with her, by and by is stricken with a fear to run in infamy,
and deuiseth how to cloak it: And when as Vrias being first slain, he had
fetched her home big with child, forthwith, al fear being laid apart,
carelessly he sluggeth, and snorteth in unlawful lusts, utterly unmindful both
of God, and Gods vengeance, till that he is waked up by Nathan, and together
with the filthiness of his horrible fact, espyeth also the danger, which by
reason thereof was ready to fall upon him. And such like shall they find
themselves, as many as will thoroughly view their consciences within.

Here therefore may we behold, how deadly a thing it is to be in bondage unto
sin, which breeds such a security, as wherein we have no choice but to
perish, unless we be raised up by the myghtie hand of God. Therwithall also
brightly shines forth his care over us, who when as we are a sleep, is waking,
and stretches out his hand by his word, or else by some secret inspyrings of
his Spirit, whereby he may shake of this deadly sleep from us. It shall be
our parts to acknowledge the same care of his, and not to take it grievously,
if at any time he seems to call, or speak unto us more roughly, tha^ we
think meet: as here it happened to Jonas, whom the mariner waketh, not
without giving him a taunte for his sleeping. Let us rather remember our own
slothfulness, and judge our selves to have deserved such reproof, and
shaking of the old man, let us turn our selves to the true works of
godliness.

The mariners call upon diverse Gods.
But what do the mariners? It is said first, that they were in great fear. So
then it was no common and usual tempest, but such a one, as wherein they
acknowledged a certain singular work of God. Afterward they unlade the ship.
At length when as, by assaying all these means, they could nothing prevail,
the governor of the ship, whose chief care was then occupied about the ankor
or topsaile rayseth up Jonas with a check, and wysheth him to cry aloud unto
his God also.

A man may see here all things full of tumulte and hurly burly, wherein this
one thing yet deserves some commendation, that all the sparks of Gods
knowledge are not utterly quenched, but they call for his aid, and so
confess, that there is some God, in whose hands is the dominion not only of
land and sea, but also of life and death* And by this their example we are
very well taught, what manner of religion they have, which being destitute of
the word of God, are led by carnal reason. For even by the laws of nature,
and by common sense, there is some knowledge of the majesty of God graffed in
the understandings of men, whereby it comes to pass, that when any extreme
danger of life happens, even they also, who before had all religion in
contempt, do now make haste to call upon God. But because that natural man, 1.
Cor. 2.
which is directed by the only light of reason engendered in him, perceyueth
not those things which belong to the spirit of God, and for that the flesh
being bent only to outward things, seeks unto it self such a God as is
also visyble and corporally at hand. Hereof aryseth it, that every one
according unto his own choice, doothe feygne unto himself many gods: and
because it seems a thing impossible to the flesh, that one should be
sufficient for all things which are done in the world, they do (as much as in
them lies) divide the essence of God into a multitude of gods, assigning
every one their proper offices, even as they perceive the world to consist of
diverse parts, and men to be ruled by sundry chances. Hereof sprung up among
the Gentiles that multitude of gods, which in these later ages grew in force
also among the Christians, while they fondely imagined, that the Saints had
the governance of the sea, of the sire, of the land, of tempests, diseases,
arts, and handycraftes, yea and besides all this, Patrones and reuengers of
men, Howbeeit such kind of men, how egregiously they bewraye themselves even
by their own doings, we may take a present view. These here mentioned make
their suit to many gods, and every one thinks his own God of greater force
than the rest. But there is never a one, that is able to succoure them in this
their dangerous estate: yet continue they of this mind, that there is a God,
to whose authority all things are obediente: and because they stand in
doubt, whether it be Jonas GOD or no, they will him to come forth, and assay
what his God can do. Arise (say they) call upon thy God, if happily he will
shine upon us, that is, show himself gladsome and fortunate and merciful unto
us, that we perish not. We can easily mark, how foolishly this was spoken of
an Heathen man: and saving only, that the names are changed, there is no
difference in the dealinges of the Papacy: whilst in one and the same
distress, one calls upon the virgin Marie, another upon Barbara, the third
upon Christopher, the fourth upon Nicholas: Many also, if they do but epsy a
Church a far off, make their petition to the Saint of the same, whose name
they themselves cannot tell what it is.

There is also an other sort, who when as there is no danger, for the which
they should be troubled, as they are about to dispose themselves to prayer,
stand in a mammering, to which of the Saints they should dedicate their
Prayers and vows: or whom they may first call upon: being afraid, least if
any Saint were neglected or not placed in so good a roomth as were meet, he
would be angry, and take the matter grievously against them: as the Poets do
fable of Diana, and the residue of their Gods.

But this is a sound argument, that there is a true and one only God, for as
much as we see, how that men are never at rest (although they make invocation
to infinite Gods or Saints,) till they have laid hold upon that only
God, who has revealed himself unto us in his son Jesus Christ.

Let us then be myndefull of these things, and reverence him alone, applying
our selves to that vocation, whereunto he has called us, least while we
practice to avoid it, we purchase plagues upon our own heads. Yet if at
any time it so happens, let us at the least take warning, by the
inconveniences and perilles to return unto him, calling upon him alone,
thoroughe Jesus Christ our Savior: to whom belongs thanksgiving, honor,
glory, and dominion for ever. Amen.

The third Homely.
AND every one said unto his fellow: Come on, let us cast lots, that we
may know for whose cause we are thus troubled. And so they cast lotts, and
the lot fell upon Jonas. Then said they unto him: Tell us, how come we by this
trouble? what is thine occupatio^? from whence co^mest thou? what cou^tryma^
art thou? and of what nation? He ansvvered them: I am an Hebrew, and I fear
the Lord God of heaven, which made both the sea and dry land. Then were the
men excedingly afraid, and said unto him: Why did thou so? (for they
knevve that he was fled from the presence of the Lord, because he had
told them) and said moreover unto him: What might we do unto thee, that the
Sea may cease from troublyng us? (for the sea vvroughte, and was troublous)
He ansvvered them: Take me, and cast me into the sea: so shall it let you
be in rest: for I vvote, it is for my sake, that this great tempest is come
upon you.

The argument and use of this present place.
AS God showed forth a singular token of his goodness in sending Jonas to the
Ninevites, that by his preaching they might be called back from destruction,
so have we in Jonas, a notable show of man's corruption. For as he
perceiving the commandment of God joined with some danger, takes in hand
to flee, being neither touched with a reverence of God, nor with the misery of
this City now like to perish: Even so also many, because they would provide
for their own private commodity and estimation, carelessly neglect both the
calling of God, and the salvation of others. And truly, what unfortunate
success follows such devises, the example of Jonas may sufficiently
instruct us. It is not long since we saw, how that he could not escape the
hands of God, who pursued after him, both with a wind, and also with a
tempest, which as it was sudden, so it was not after the common sort. Now
follow greeuouser things than the former were, namely, how he is found out
of the mariners, and compelled not only to confess his horrible fact, but
also to give sentence of death against himself.

The fruit that we (as otherwhere I have admonished) must gather hereof, is
this: to submit our selves wholly to God, when he calls, The mariners seek
after the authoure of the tempest by lottes.
least otherwise we heap mischieues upon our own heads.

First of all, here are brought forth the mariners, who when as now they
understood, that this tempest came not of ordinary causes, but beside all
expectation of man, perceiving also, that they could nothing prevail by
calling upon any God, they easily gather, that God is offended, and therefore
causes the same: they are desirous also to know who it is, whom God chaseth
thus in his displeasure. And here is an evident proof of the presumption and
wanhope of man. There are many which in general punishments can acknowledge,
that God is displeased, and sends them for sins: but very few are there,
that account themselves in the number of those, which have deserved the same
by their heinous offenses. For men are wont to flatter themselves in their
own defaultes: neither can they be persuaded, that they are so odious in Gods
sight, as that he will send any universal Plagues for the same. Whereby it
comes to pass, that whylest they fall to inquiring after the causes of these
evils, in the life and manners of other men, they neglect their own evil
doings, supposing themselves altogether without fault.

And this very same error drove these men thereto, that they could easyly
give their consentes, for the searching out of him that was the author of this
so great distress, because every one amongst them persuaded himself, that he
for his own part was giltlesse in the matter. They purpose now to have the
trial made by lottes, whereof we know, there was both great and manyfolde
use among the men of old time.

Homere shows, that he was chosen by a lotte, which should keep the
conflicte with Hector. Among the Romans it was a custom, to have the
government of the provinces granted out by lottes. And this manner of dealing
by lottes, (as it is mente in this place,) is such an action, as wherein
matters are sought out by a kind of divine token: and the use thereof
concern the things not only paste, but also present, and to come. The
kinds and ways are sundry, of the which, this place serves not to
entreat. This rather let us mark, that of lots some are lauful, other some
are unlawful. Those are laufull, which in a cause necessary to be known
are used religiously, with a desire to have peace preserved. Prour. 16. and.18.
And this use does Solomon commend, whereas he says, that the lottes pacify
variances, and appease the stubborn. He witnesses also, that their success
hangs upon God. This kind of lottes did Joshua put in ure, when he distributed
the land. And by the same did Samuel draw forth Saul to the kingdom, 1. Sam.
10.
who^ he alredie knew to be elected thereunto of God. In like manner the Apostles
committed all the matter by lots unto the Judgment of God, Acts. 1.
when they were minded to appoynte another unto Judas roomthe. Neither deserve
they to be condemned, which at this day in ye division of inheritances, and
election of magistrates, or ministers, practice this kind of lots. Howbeit then
is the using of them more dangerous, when as trial is had for offenders, that
they may receive condign punishment: and then in very deed must they not be
used at all adventures, unless it so be, that God commands: as at whose
bidding Joshua was stirred up by lottes to attache Achan, that had committed
sacrilege. Unlawful lottes are such, as whereby curious men take in hand to
search out things that they have nothing to do withal, by unlawful arts.
Such manner of men do greatly offend, and shall in time to come pay the price
for their rash fool hardiness.

As touching this history that we have in hand, it is credible, that these
Heathen men, who a little before called upon sundry gods, did now also
interlace some Superstition in the using of their lottes, which
notwithstanding, God did nevertheless direct, because it was expediente, that
Jonas should be taken tardie.

And here yet may we take this warning by the way, that superstitious crafts
can not be excused, although now and then the truth of a matter may be known
by their means. For as God by dreams admonyshed Pharao, Nabuchodonosor, and
many other of things afterward to come, so applying himself to their weak
capacity, and yet expressly forbids his faithful to believe dreams: so
does he also somtymes by his just judgment, give leave to soothsayers, and
workers by lottes, truly to declare the events of things, and other matters
whereof they are demanded: partly, for that it is profitable, yet at the
least, to have them known by some means: partly, that as it were with a
bayte, they may be fed with strong illusion, which have already determined in
their minds, rather to give credit to wicked spirits, than to his own
word. So does God at this present, moderate and order these men's lottes, by
this occasion both to bring Jonas forth into light, and also by authority of
this punishment executed upon him to rid the other of Superstition, who now
already tasted of some principles of godliness.

And by this example are we in the mean while advertised, Offenders aganst
God cannot always be hidden.
that they can no long time be hidden that have offended against the laws of
God, and run on still in wickedness. For as God is just, and a severe revenger
of vagracious deeds, so has he infinite means, whereby, besides all
expectation, to pull out into the open sun light, such as are gyltie. For
(to say nothing of the strength of the word of God, Hebr. 4.
which like a two edged sword pierces thorough the heart and the marowe,
and reproves the secret misdemeanors of men) there are to be found in
histories every where examples of such, as have had their vices by marvelous
means detected. Some have been bewrayed by the songs and flyings of birds,
amongst whom the Cranes of Jb^a now grown famous by the usual proverb, must
needs be placed. Some have been discovered by blood, suddenly issuing out of
dead carcases.

We may read also, that there have been a great sort fearfully dismayde at
the only beholding of weapons, whereby they have come, and of their own accord
confessed their wicked acts committed with the same.

Neither need we to stand long about examples, since that many things come
daily to pass, which may instruct us, and raise us up from security.

Let us then being warned, both with them and also with this present example,
endeavor our selves after innocence, lest being deceived with hope to escape
unpunished, we provoke Gods wrath, with the outragiousnesse of our sins, who
can at his pleasure both reprove them, when as we least look for it, and
also lay upon us those plagues, which we have worthily deserved.

The courteous humanity of the mariners toward Jonas.
But let us go on, and take a further view of these mariners, who when they
perceive, that Jonas is the occasion of all this tempest, entreat him with
marvelous humanity, leaving off that rigor, which they might justly have
used toward him. For we heard not long since, how that thorough his cause, they
were feign to lighten the ship: and now seeing the sea raged more and more,
they stood as yet in ieopardie of their lives. Howbeit, although he were
attached by lots, which was to them in manner of an oracle, yet think they not
good to attribute (...) muce credit unto them, as without more diligente
inquisition to deal any thing the more extremely, or cruelly against him. For
very carefully and friendly, not without signifying also of some sorrow for him,
they question with him, as touching all his estate, saying after this manner:
Tell us in good soothe, for whose cause are we thus troubled? what is thine
occupation? that is to say, what is thy estate of life? from whence come
thou? what countreyman art thou? or of what nation? What could have been done
(I pray you) more gently and lovingly toward him, whom they were assured to
be the only worker of their so great danger, and loss of all their
substance, being of so great value as it was? Compare with these mariners, who
were mere alientes from true religion, the me^ of this our age, which although
there go no just cause before, whereby they might be provoked, yet fall to
hating of strangers, and if they sustain but the least damage in the world,
streightway think, that they may do what they lust to them, of whom they have
received their small hurt: and it will immediately appear, how great the
corruption of this world is now growing to age, and ruinously falling to
destruction.

But chiefly let this example be noted of those, that are called to be
magistrates, and that have power of life and death, over such as they govern.
For (as even now was declared) by lotts, and as it were God himself, poynting
him out with the finger, was Jonas espied out: yet for all that do not the
mariners headyly give judgment against him, but first they inquire severally
of every thing, lest perhaps they might determine any thing not sounding with
right and equity. How much less credit the^ ought there to be attributed to
conjectures, suspicions, or witnesses, when the matter lies upon ones life and
estimation? For notwithstanding conjectures sound many times like unto a
truth, yet do we certainly know, that very often they deceive. Again, that
nothing is less indifferent, and more deceytfull than suspicion, Argwon is it
ein schalcke.
the Germans can tell by a common proverb, which is tossed in every man's
mouth. Whereunto also accords that Greek verse, testifying, that greater
misdeemings and unjust accusations grow of suspicions, than of deeds. (...).
As concerning witnesses, what needs any speaking, since that we are assured,
how many men either are carried away by froward affections, or not so greatly
holden with the conscience of an oath, or else not of so bold a spirit, and
so wittye, as to be able to couche all the Circumstaunces together, which
might serve to the full understanding of any cause in controuersye.

An excellent thing is it in deed to collect all things diligently into one
heap, but then is needeful especially a ripe and advised judgment: least
while we go about to punish vices, we become supporters either of the lying
conjectures, or else of the malicious accusations impudently forged by other
men.

And if no other reason will serve, yet at the lest let the example of God
admonish the Magistrates, who knowing even at his fingers ends the impiety of
the Sodomites, Gene. 18.
yet says unto Abraham: I will go down now, and see, whether it be so,
as by the report of the country it is come up to mine ears. etc. God would
thus speak of himself after the manner of men, that we might ponder thereby,
how circumspectly magistrates ought to proceed, in punishing the offenders.
Neither does the scripture without great consideration, give commendation of
those kings, in whose sightes the blood of their subjects was esteemed of
much price. Psalm. 72.

But it is time, that we return to Jonas, who now at the length being called
back again into the right way, by the manifest judgment of God, does
stoutly and courageously accomplish such things, as tended to the salvation
both of himself and others. For first of all he professes his faith, Jonas
professes his faith and fact.
and is not ashamed of his God, even amongst those, whom before he had heard
calling upon strange gods.

I am an Hebrew (says he) and I fear the Lord God of Heaven, which made the
sea, and the dry land.

In this word fear, he comprehends the whole nature of true worship,
which (in very deed) is reckened for none at all, unless we be touched
with an incorrupt and earnest reverence of the majesty of God. This
confession that Jonas makes, he lays against the rest, in manner of a
confutation: as though he should say: You reverence and call upon diverse gods,
of whom one is lord over the heaven, an other over the land, an other over
the sea: but the God whom I reverence is one God, who as alone he has made
all things, even so shyning bright in his majesty in the heavens has all
things at his beck: which same also has chosen to his own possession, the
nation of the Hebrews, to whom in like sort he has prescribed a true manner
and order, how he will be worshipped. Howbeit, these words of his are not
directed to that scope, as that thereby he might excuse himself, and advance
his own godly zeal, but in reporting thus much, he first aggrauateth his
horrible fact committed, in making him his enemy by vnshamefull disodedience
and backslyding, who was a God well known unto him from his chyldhoode, and in
whose lore and law he had been continually brought up. For, as by those
things which follow, it shall appear, he uttered all the faults at once,
which hitherto we have heard, he had done. Again, by this confession, he
establishes himself with fure confidence to have his sins remitted, which
in repentyng is chiefly requisite, least otherwise it degenerate into
desperation, as we are assured, it happened to Cain, and Judas, and such like.

The fruit that comes by gods correction.
And here does show forth it self an excellent fruit of Gods correction.

Before this, Jonas had professed God with his mouth, and preached his word:
but being now of him called to a charge more dangerous in his own judgment,
he deuiseth to flee from the presence of God, as though there lay little
safety in playing his ambassador amongst profane people. And having now had
experience of Gods chastising hand, he returns home again to him, he
sets his mind on a fire with the true fear of him, he professes him even
among the Gentiles, and causes them to embrace sincere Religion. This effect
of Gods scourging do all the elect feel, who for the same commend the
goodness of God in adversity, and say with David: It is good for me, that
thou have brought me low, that I may learn thy statutes. Happy is the man
whom thou chastenest, O Lord. Look the Psalm. 110. and. 94. Let us also
therefore be myndfull of these things, and bear it the more patiently, if at
any time we be tried, either by sicknesses, or wars, or banishemente, or
other kind of calamities. For such is the ouerthwartnesse of our nature, that
it does even crave for the same, least with this world that can not repent,
The mariners are afraid, and ask counsel of Jonas.
we should perish for ever.

But what did ^hese mariners, when they heard Jonas make this confession? first
of all, They were exceedingly afraid.

And what cause could there come so suddenly, of so great fear? Even this,
that there shyned now to their minds, a knowledge more sincere of the true
God whose mighty power they perceived, by this unaccustomed tempest. They
heard also, that Jonas fled from the sight of him, and that in his service he
was become a fugitive, such a one, as God with good reason might pursue. They
cannot therefore warrant themselves any thing luckie and fortunate, unless they
restore Gods servant again. And undoubtedly they weigh there withal, what
plagues they have deserved, that have always hitherto neglected this God. And
this also is the very matter, why they frette not now with Jonas, but rather
pitying his case, whom alone they saw punishment waited for, they demand of
him friendly, what is best to be done, whereby they might avoid the rage of the
seaswelling every moment more than other?

This example is worthy of great consideration. For first it reproves the
frowardness, and unbridled dissoluteness of our age. These men are put in
fear with the beholding of an other man's offense, and so learn both to give
judgment arighte of their own outrageous deeds and also to fear God. But we
at this day walowe carelessly in our own sins, yea although they be such, as
it is evident, God has punished in all ages. And now notwithstanding, he daily
shows forth many proofs of his judgments, against the contemners of his
word, and infinite tokens of his wrath are seen euerywhere, yet do we still
give our selves unto voluptuousness, we drink, we take our pastime, and go
on to provoke his anger by our wickednesses, that we commit daily afreshe.
Who sees not then, that these mariners in a few hours space, have more
profited in true piety, tha^ a great sort at this day, which have heard the
Gospel purely taught continually certain years.

Besides that, this example puts us in remembrance, not to withholde the
duties of compassion, even from those, whom we are assured to be worthily
punished, yea and from them also, which be causers of our own miseries. For
God lays not his rod upon others, to give us occasion thereby to rejoice on
our own behalf, and scorn other men: but because he would stir up both
them and us to repentance. Neither should the sins of other men turn us at
any time to displeasure, except we our selves had deserved plagues before hand,
or the consideration of our own safegarde did so require. And although to our
own knowledge we are not guilty of any heinous offense, yet ought we so to be
affected in a common misery, that having quenched all desire of reuengement,
we make diligent inquiry, what ways safety may again be restored. etc.

Jonas wills himself to be cast in to the Sea.
As for Jonas he shows himself no less studious of godliness, so that a
man would think, that he and the maryners kept a conflict among themselves,
whether of them should the rather atchieue thereunto. For although he
perceyueth, that there remained but only advise to be given for their safety,
and the same also was joined with the present peril of his own life, yet does
he freely and faithfully tell it out, saying: Take me, and cast me into the
sea: so shall the sea let you be in rest. And forthwith, he re^dreth a cause why
he gave such counsel. For I vvote it is for my sake, that this great tempeste
is come upon you.

Which his words may not be taken as a token of a desperate mind; paste all
hope, and wishyng death by reason of despair: but they proceed of faith,
whereby he willingly resigneth himself to GOD now determined to punish him:
insomuche that Jonas is even ready to dye the death, who before was afraid
at a very light danger of his own imaginyng, and so defrauded GOD of his
due obedience.

And this thing in Repentance is very necessary, for that temporal Plagues
cease not at all times, although that God receives us into his favor: as
in David, and the examples of many others is to be seen.

But they that patiently undergo them, to such all things work for the best.
Moreover, his words give testimony of his love (which cannot be disseuered
from faith) sith he had rather dye himself, than be a causer of other men's
destruction. So that now begins Jonas to be a figure of Christ, while he
coueteth to bestow his own life, to have others preserved in safegarde.

And here let us gather in a brief sum, those things that hitherto have
been spoken of Jonas, and we shall behold a notable president of true
repentance. First we have heard, that he which was weary of God, made now an
open confession of his faith toward him. Having confessed his faith, he adds
also thereto a confession of his sin, whereof no man can doubt, but he was
sorry from the very heart. And now he willingly takes to himself the
punishment due for his offense, submitting him wholly to the pleasure of God
alone. Truly therefore was he converted from his sins unto God: and that this
is the true repentance, the Scripture in other places declares, and the
examples of David, and many other make proof.

Let us at this day follow him, and we shall also feel God merciful unto us,
through Christ Jesus: To whom be thanks giving, honor, glory, and dominion
fore ever. Amen.

The fourth Homely.
Nevertheless, the men assayed with rovving to bring the ship to land, but
they could not, because the sea wrought so, and was so troublous against
them. Wherefore they cried unto the Lord, and said: O Lord, let us not
perish for this man's death, neither lay thou innocente blood to our
charge: For thou, O Lord, haste done, even as thy pleasure was: So they
took Jonas, and cast him into the Sea, and the Sea left raging. And the
men feared the Lord exceedingly, doing Sacrifices, and making vows unto
the Lord. But the Lord prepared a great Fish to svvalovv up Jonas. So was
Jonas in the bellye of the Fish, three days and three nights.

The argument and use of this present place.
AS Jonas when he fled from the presence of God, least he should be
enforced to preach to the Ninevites, was an example of the corruption and
disobedience of Man: So by him does the holy Ghost give forth also an
example of repentance, and true conversion unto GOD: By the which we are
taught, how conueniente it is for us also to return unto God, if we be
willing to escape his wrath.

The chief thing herein is, that both he freely confesses his offense, and
also submittingly yeldeth himself unto Gods will, that without any grudgyng,
he is content to undergo the punishment, which he saw was prepared for
him. For he gives the Maryners warning to cast him into the Sea, if they
mean to take order for their safety.

It follows now, what they did, after they had heard this his counsel; and
then how singular and manyfold commodity, as well they as Jonas reaped, after
they were on either side loyal to God.

And this place must so be considered of us, that we may be inflamed with a
desire to Godliness, and after the same manner resign our selves wholly unto
God: who as he commands nothing, that is unjust or hurtful for us, so he
also gives ability to work it, and in extreme distresses defends them,
that obey his commandments. Now let us go thorough every part, in
order as it stands.

As concerning the Mariners, The courteous behauioure of the mariners toward
Jonas.
here are many things spoken, worthy of remembrance. The first is, that
although they have found out Jonas by lot, and do also understand, even by his
own mouth, that he is the causer of their so great danger, and that God
himself desires to have him punished: yet deal they as yet nothing the more
rigorously with him, but direct all their doings to this end that they may
set him again on land safe and sound. Marvelous humanity was this, and
such as would not have been looked for of this kind of men, seeing that it
both made them forgetful of the damage, which they had already sustained,
and also moved them (their own danger which presentlye they were in, being
little esteemed) to employ their care about the preservation of an other. Many
at this day are of the opinion that they may lawfully either revenge, even with
most extremity, such injuries as they have sustained, or being placed in
any ieopardie, carelessly neglect all others, yea or to provide for themselves,
though it were with the smarte of other men. Howebeit, it was God that so
turned the minds of these men, and planted in them a reverend fear of his
servant: as of the same thing there are set forth in the Scriptures examples
not a few. For the same God made Joseph in favor with the keeper of the
prison, and so advanced him also afterward in the sight of Pharao, that he
was content to commit unto him the charge of his whole realm. And it was God,
that made David in favor with the Philistians, and Daniel with Nabuchodonosor
and Darius, and Paul the Apostle with the captains and soldiers, that they
found them favorable and gentle. Yea, it is Gods doing, that at this day, of
a sudden, they become our friends, whom before, we knew not so much as by name.

To this end ought these examples to be considered, that we may not take it
grievously to follow such vocation as God calls us unto, who, as we hear,
has the hearts of men in his hand, and bends them according to his own
pleasure. Neither shall they be able to allege any excuse, who for fear of
men strive against God, whose force is sufficient for the defense of his,
euerywhere, and against whomesoeuer.

Moreover, they must imitate these Maryners, as many as have taken any into
their tuition, least they either unadvisedly be wraye them, or being provoked
by some light injury, show them selves in deadlye displeasure against them:
For it is a double wrong to forsake, or (which is more) like enemies to set
our selves against him, who warranteth himself to find a salfe haven and
Sanctuary among us, whom also either by reason of some Couenaunte made, or
else by common right of hospitality, we were bound to defend. etc.

The mariners desire, that the offense of murder may not be laid to their
charge.
Now, when these Mariners perceive all their endeavors bestowed in vain, and
that even by the myghtie hand of GOD, they are enforced to hurl Jonas into
the Sea, they turn themselves to most feruente prayer, craving that no
offense may be taken with their doings. O Lord, we beseech thee, let
us not perish for this man's death, neither lay thou innocente blood to our
charge. That is, Impute not unto us the crime of sheading innocent blood. The
reason is, For thou, O Lord, haste done, even as thy pleasure was. This is
thy doing, thou haste decreed that thus it should be, whose determination
we must of necessity obey. And having thus spoken, They cast him into the sea.

This truly deserves greatly to be considered, Murder accounted horrible
even among prophant men.
that it seems so heinous a matter, even to barbarous men, and such as had
been brought up in heathenisme, to slay him, whose death they understood even
by the just judgment of GOD to be sought for. It was no doubt graffed in
them by the laws of Nature, whereby men are taught to abhor from
bloudshead and manquelling. And if we turn over the histories, it will
manyfestly appear, that the abomination of manquelling, has been judged a
most horrible thing among all nations, as which could no otherwise be
purged, but with new and strange satisfactions.

This is evident by Pausanias, in the history of Theseus, who, because he had
killed Pallas sons, made a viage to Peloponesus, for his purgation: and as
we read in Herodotus, Adrastus departed to king Cresus, upon the like
occasion. Hereunto also deserves the same to be referred, which Luke in the
28. of the Acts mencioneth of the men of Miletum: who when they saw the hand of
Paul, which had but lately escaped shipwreck, sodeinly assailed with a
viper, incontinently they judged him to be a murderer, whom though he had
escaped the sea, yet the vengeance of God pursued, and would no longer suffer
to live.

Offenses incurred by murder.
And surely, if we will deeply weigh the matter it self, it shall soon be
seen, that God did not without great skill imprinte this sense of Nature in
men, so greatly to detest murders. For, first of all, by Murder men offend
against the very laws of Nature, which as by a common bond of necessity, it
has bound us to the mutual ayding one of an other, so has it also created us
naked without weapon, lest we should once think, that we have reuengement in
our own hands. Secondly, he sins against the mysteries of christian
Religion that slays his neighbor; with whom he is a member of the same
body, under Christ the head: whose mind is to have us joined together in the
unity of spirit: and by this means do manquellers exclude them selves from
the fellowship of the congregation. Besides that, this mischief redoundeth
even to God, who framed man after his own likeness, and therefore will not
suffer it to be violated without punishment. In the mean season, I say
nothing, how that when murders are in force, neither common peace, neither
private safety of men can have any sure ground. Not without good cause was it
therefore, that even from the very beginning of Gods creatures, God appointed
laws, wherein he forbad bloudsheading and murders, with wonderful severity.
For streightwaye after the flood, when the world was newly growing again, he
prescribed a law, with these words. He that sheadeth man's blood, Genesis 9.
shall have his blood shead by man again: For God made man after his own
likeness. And in the law it is written: Ye shall take none amends for the life
of the murderer, Nume. 35.
but he shall in any wise be put to death. Also ye shall take none atonement
for him that is fled to a free city, that he should come again, and dvvell
in the land, before the death of the high Priest. And see ye defyle not the
land, which ye are in: for blood defyleth the land. And the land can none
otherwise be cleansed of the blood that is shead therein, but by the blood of
him that shead it. Add here unto the words which Christ uses in the
Gospel, All that take the svvorde, shall perish with the svvoorde. Math. 26.
And those also: Nume. 35.
He that kills with the svvorde, must himself be killed with the svvorde.
etc. Apoc. 13. And least God should omit any thing in this matter, he
appointed cities of refuge, whether they might flee, which had done a murder,
but not of set purpose, least otherwise, under a color of reuengemente, they
might be slain themselves by his kinsefolkes, that was already killed. De.
19. and. 2^
And as for that murder that was happened, the author whereof was not known,
he also ordained a kind of pacifying of God, which must have been done
openly and solemnly, least the guiltynesse thereof, should be imputed to
that city, within the bounds whereof it was committed.

Not without good reason therefore, do we bewail the wretched cruelty of
this our age, which so far is set on fire, that with many it is thought
but a play and a pastyme to cut a man's throat: For they will for money be
hired to run out a warrefaryng, even contrary to the Laws of the
Countreye, and will herein hunte after the greatest commendation of
valyantnesse, if they have slain the greattest number of men: of whom
notwithstanding, they never sustained any damage at all.

Howbeit, very grievous sentence does God pronounce against them, by Moses
Deuteronomy. 27. Cursed is he that takes any reward to slay innocent blood: and
all the people shall say, Amen.

Now, how great the force of Gods curse is, appears plainly hereby, for
that suddenly almost with all their substance they perish, and become infamous
as many as give themselves to this bloody kind of vice.

Only the will of God excuses murder.
Here again, note the excuse that these mariners do use: For thou O Lord, have
done even as thy pleasure was. Even by this reason hope they to become
innocente, because in casting Jonas into the sea, they are obedient unto God,
who will have it so done. And in very deed this reason is of very great
effect, as whereby we may excuse both our sayings and doings, seeing it is
certain by the Scriptures, that the will of God must be our rule for them all.
The same does also keep magistrates blameless, when they pronounce sentence
of death over murderers, adulterers, incestuous persons, blasphemers,
inchaunters, and false prophets, and such like: whom God in his law has
commanded either to be stoned, or brent with fire, or hanged on the galows, or
by some other punishment taken away. For it is not in vayn, Romans 13.
that the magistrate bears a sword, neither ought he to be taken among the
number of them that usurp the swoorde, forasmuch as God has given it unto
Magistrates, to ye end they may be executers of his judgments. They may not
therefore be dismayed by the perverse opinions of such as say: It is a
detestable thing that any man should be put to death, for any kind of
misdemeanour: and do so highly advance mercy, that in the mean season they
take all justice away. Salomons opinion was much better, when as he said:
Proverb. 16.
The Lord hates as well him that justifies the ungodly, as him that
condemns the innocent. And as for the histories of Saul and Achab, which
most of all provoked God by their preposterous pity, they are well known.
Achab, for yt he had let go Benhadad, the king of Syris, and Saul, because he
had spared Agag the Amalechite, both the which God had commanded to be
slain. Look. 1. Samu. 15. and.1. Kings. 20.

Jonas being cast out, the sea left raging.
Now let us pass over to the other part of this place, wherein is set out,
how manyfolde commodity redounded to them all, after they had showed
themselves obediente unto God. As touching the Mariners, first the sea gave
over his vehemency, or rather rage, if we will lean to the true Exposition
of the Hebrew word. And in this sense is danger or rage ascribed to the sea
and other things without life, for that they are also instruments of vengeance
to them, which by their sinning provoke the wrath of God. By this example we
are admonished, that it is a most sure and ready way for the pacifying and
turning away of all tumultes and dangers, if such offenders be removed from
amongst us, as God being angry withal, does with his judgments pursue.
Ios. 7. and. 8
Thus, after Achan, who had committed sacrilege, was slain, the children of
Israel found God merciful unto them. 2. Sam, 21.
The posterity of Saul being once rid out of the way, the hunger ceased,
which God had sent in by reason of the Gabaonites, whom Saul had afflicted. 1.
Kings. 18
In like manner Baals priests and the false prophets, that lived in the time of
Helias, being destroyed, both rain and the blessing of God was restored to
the land of Israel. These things ought they to have remembered, who at this
day sit in consultation for the pacifying of vprores, and turning away of
common dangers. They make their complaint in deed, that the whole world is in
disquiet, and that the wrath of God does every where show forth it self:
but in the mean while they suffer such to iette up and down unpunished, as by
whose detestable acts the wrath of God is alredie set on fire. Yea some there
be, that dare ascribe the cause of al these evils unto the doctrine of the
truth: affirming, yt it is not possible otherwise to have things in good stay,
unless it be utterly rooted out. What marvel is it the^, if those ships be
continually in trouble and hazard, from whence good men are thrown out,
wicked men, and such as God hates, being appointed to govern the stern?

The mariners go forward in true Religion.
Moreover, not only from ieopardie were the mariners delivered, but also
wonderfully profited they in religion: so that a man may see that the word of
god, which Jonas had sown in their minds, brought forth such increase as
Christ does attribute thereunto, in the Gospel. For they, who a little before
being amazed with fear, called upon false and feyned Godds, now stand in awe
of Jehovah himself the true God, whose just and mighty hand, they had
already experience of. And thus obteyn they at this present, the first
principle or chief point of true wisdom: Prouer.
which Solomon does testify to consist in the fear of the Lord. Yea they not
only stand in fear of God, but this fear and true religion they also profess
with outward tokens of holiness. For they offered a sacrifice unto the lord: but
what manner of one it was, it is uncertain. Hierome understands thereby a
sacrifice of praise, which Hoseas termed, Hose. 14.
the calves of our lips. Yet seems it, that there is some other thing mente:
neither shall it be inconvenient, if so be we shall understand this place of
some fyred sacrifice, or (if you had rather) of some such as might be eaten
of. And in that they sacrifice to the true God, which among the Jews was
worshipped by the name of Iehoua, with a long farewell renounce they their
false gods. Here is also mention made of a vow, which in like sort they
vowed unto God. And this, I suppose, was no other thing, but that they made
faithful promise, that they would persevere in the service of this known God,
and at all seasons be thankful unto him. Such duties as these be, are they
detters of, that are delivered out of perils, and have felt the aid of God.

First, they may not be proud, What thing men must do being delivered from
dangers.
or fierce minded, but conceive in themselves an awe of God, whose rods they
have tasted on: and the same awe not servile, but free, and such as beseems
children: which being joined together with a love of God, may retain them
still in a careful study to obey. Then let them testify this religion with
outward deeds, and offer those sacrifices continually unto him, which he
evermore requires at their hands, namely Prayers, and themselves also,
(which Paul called a quick sacrifice, and a reasonable serving of God, Romans
12.
) together with bountifulness toward all, but chiefly the poor, whom God
has made his substitutes, that we should bestow upon them such things, as we
would upon himself, if he were now conversant upon the earth corporally, as in
times past he was. And because new vows are not needful of them, who already
owe all that they have unto God, to whom also in Baptism they have wholly bound
them selves, herein let them show all careful endeavor, that the same, which
there they vowed, they may faithfully perform, and without any intermission
show them selves thankful unto God their redeemer. And this is the very same,
that we hear David in his psalms many times make promise of. So that neither
this, nor any like places, can in any wise maintein the vows of the Papists
and monks, which superstitious men, without the warrant of Gods word, and
having not first tried their own ability, dare take upon them and that not
without confidence to merit thereby: which presu^ption alone, with the leaven
thereof being very pharisaical, makes all the other worship unacceptable to
God. But of the mariners let this suffice, that we have alredie spoken,

Let us now look upon Jonas, which himself also is allotted an happy end,
Jonas is swalowed up quick of the fish.
of so great a danger. For he who a little before could not be safe in the
ship, but that both wind and water thirsted for his punishment, is now in the
midst of ye sea between billows and storms kept safe and sound: and being
restored to his office, he who earwhile deserved not so much as ye name of a
Prophet, becomes also a figure of Christ our Savior. For mention is here made
ye god prepared a great fish, which might restore to la^d in good safety this
Prophet, after he had been first with gaping mouth received into the fish, and
then put over into the bellye, and lastly enclosed there three whole days long.

Wonderful great was this miracle, the like whereof is scarsly to be found:
whether ye consider the Fish that was so obediente to God, or Jonas, who
notwithstanding, the fierce ranks of teethe standing in manner of a saw, the
fearful passage through the jaws and the throat that stonke by reason of
clammie filthynesse and sniuell, was yet able to go down unhurt into the
bealy, and live there for the space of three days, having neither any meat to
be sustained with, nor yet enjoying the common use of the light and the air,
without the which it is impossible for man to keep life. Whereunto is this
also to be added, that God for so long time restrained the power digestive of
the stomach, least it should consume Jonas, who was sent down thither. Howbeit
let us leave off these things for this present, and search after the mysteries
of the holy ghost, and the use of this history, that there may redounde the
greater commodity unto us thereof. The punishments of the^ that obey not God.


And here first of all we are admonished by this example, how many mischeues
are to fall on them, that refuse obedience unto god. As for Jonas, that he
might be placed among the number of such, we have heard before. And what thing
more terrible could have happened unto him, if all the tirantes of the world
should have conspired together, to rob him of his life? He was tossed with a
tempest: which being occasion of such terror to the mariners, no doubt it
made Jonas in manner beside himself for fear. Afterward, he hears the
mariners taking counsel about lots, whereby they might search out him, who
was the causer of this so great tempest that was raised. How fared he in mind
(think you) certainly knowing, that he alone was sought for? And shall we not
say, yt he was much terrified by means of those lots, as guilty persons are
wont to be, when they see the executioners hatchet ready to part their head
from their shoulders? Being found out, he confesses his horrible fact, and
accuses himself, as one that avoided his coming to Niniue, chiefly in this
respect, because he would have his authority nothing diminished. At length he
is cast into the sea, and among the midde billows, whose force he was not able
before to abide, no not in ye ship. What other thing was this, than as if he
had been cast into a grave quick, and immediately smoothered with earth? After all this, yet does not the judgment of God (who pursues him) stay there, but
straightwaye he meets with an huge Fish, which with the wide gaping that it
makes, and having ranks of teeth so terrible, receives him, and swaloweth him
up: which one thing alone, to a man of the greatest courage in the world,
would not only have stricken him in fear, but also have made his mind wholly
amazed, yea rather full of despair. Moreover, in this so huge a gulf
continues he three days space, and all this while is he washed with the waters
of the billows, that are swalowed up: sometime he is plunged down into the
low bottomless places, sometime fleeteth he alofte: one while he is tossed to
this side, an other while to that: and in that vaste goulfe every moment sees
he a thousand deaths before his eyes. What tentations (I beseech you) shall
we think he was tormented withal? perfectly knowing, that all this ado
happened unto him thorough Gods displeasure? Surely these things are so
outrageous to be borne, that ten deaths were easier, than the abiding of all
these together. And like plighte are all they in, who to eschew lighter perils,
and such as their own brains do fancy, set themselves against God.
Examples are every where to be found, but most amongst such, as when
persecutions assault, deny Christ, least they should put both goods and
life in hazard. For oftentimes it comes to pass, that they wander up and
down infamous, and without renoume: they can take no pleasure of their riches:
and besides that they feel horrible stinges of conscience, whereby they are
brought even to utter despair. It was not for naught therefore, that the
Apostle said: It is an horrible thing to fall into the hands of the living
God. Hebr. 10. In the consyderyng hereof, this is the fruit that we must
gather, even to learn obedience unto God, who best knows both to turn
all dangers away, and those that walk after his calling, to preserve them,
yea though it were in the myddest of a thousand perilles.

The power of God in saving them that are his.
Consequently here comes the power of God to be marked, whereby he is able to
keep in safegarde those that are his, even in the thickest of such
ieopardies, where as there seems no hope of deliverance to remain. For that
which at this present happened, is such a matter, as can in no wise be credited
among profane men, which measure all things by carnal reason. Howbeit, this
remedieth all doubt that might be made, seeing that it is said, how GOD
prepared this Fish, and so made a prouisyon, that it should be ready at time
convenient, to swalow Jonas up through the ranks of his teeth, without doing
him any harm, and also keep him safe whole three days space. Moreover Christ
Jesus by his testimony, adds credit to this history, who affirms, that by
Jonas was exhibited a figure, both of his death, and also of his resurrection.
We can not therefore deny the truth of this thing accomplished in deed,
except we be minded therwithall to call in doubt the mysteries of our
redemption. And that it is not impossible for God to bring such things to
pass, is set out by infinite other examples. For it has great resemblance
hereto, that when as the flood was ready to come, he made all the beasts so
tame, that they came unto Noe, entered into the Arc, and laid aside their
wonted wildness. And again, that he so long while preserved Noe in safety,
even in the midst of so horrible flows of waters as then were.

The very like things were also in times paste wrought in Egypt, when as God
brought Frogs, Locustes, Flies, and Worms of all sorts, for the subduing of
Pharaos cruel mind. What? did he not also lead the people of Israel through
the bottomless depthes of the red sea, the waters rising on height like a wall
on either side? What shall we say of Daniel, who is preserved in the midst
Lions, and his fellows saved among the flames of an hot burning oven, by the
miraculous protection of God? Or, is it not more to be wondered at, that
sodeinly there swoomme a fish to Peter's hook, which brought the tribute money
in his mouth? But if there be any that list to skorn at al these things,
acompting them for fables, what (I beseech you,) are they able to answer to the
miracle of the imperfect birthe, lying hid in the mothers womb? Does it not
far pass the capacity of man's understanding, that a child about the
space of five months should in those straightes not only live, but also
increase in greater strength, till such time as it be borne into the world?
And seeing that is daily brought to pass, shall we stand in doubt, but that
God is hable to work some singular thing, if the necessity of the case shall
so require? Why do we not then acknowledge the puissaunce of GOD, and with
deep weyghing thereof arm our selves in all dangers and perplexities, with
patience and constancy of faith? For he that in times past was of might to
do these things, the same at this day in sickness, in need, in
prisonmentes, in temptations of the conscience, yea even in death it self is
of ability to defend and preserve us. With David therefore we may reason,
by those things that are gone before: Thou art he, Psalm. 21.
O God, that drevvest me out of my mothers womb: I have been left unto thee,
ever since I was borne: thou art my God, even from my mothers womb. And
again: Thou leadest us thorough fire and water, Psalm. 26.
but thou bring us out into a place of comfort.

Nevertheless, we shall not much need examples fette from other men, if
every one will narowly look upon themselves. For they shall find in themselves
many things whereby they may be admonished of Gods power and goodness
therewithal.

Lastly, Jonas a figure of Christ.
the figure of Christ must be considered in this place, which he showed us
him self, where as to the Jews requiring a token, he said: This froward and
adulterous nation seeks a sign and there shall no sign be given it but the
sign of Jonas the prophet. For as Jonas was in the whales belly three days
and three nights, so shall the son of man be three days and three nights in
the heart of the earth. Howebeit Jonas did not only shadow the history of the
Lords death and resurrection, but therewithal also the fruit, that sprung
unto us thereout. For as Jonas being cast into the Sea, and devoured of the
fish, brought the Sea to be calm, and stilled the tempests of wind: Even so
Christ by his death has pacified God the Fathers wrath, tamed the madness of
the world and the Prince thereof, and clean taken away the horroure of
eternal death. Moreover, as Jonas being drowned, was causer of the mariners
conversion unto God, so do we read, that Christ after his resurrection
converted many, which were authoures of his own death. Besides this, as
Jonas, like a conqueroure of the Sea, from the wide gaping of the fish, escaped
safe to ye shore: so Christ having overcome death and the devil was restored
again to life. As hereunto, yt as Jonas being restored, brought the Niniuite
salvation by preaching of ye word: So Christ raised from death to life, sent
out his Apostles among the Gentiles, who by their preaching were drawn to be
fellow partners of salvation. You see then how in this history are contained
al things, that may tend to the institution of life and faith. So that Satan
did not without great skill labor to have obscured the same, seeking to have
made folks believe, that it was but the fable of Arion, the name of a famous
harper, whom (as it is said) the mariners would have cast into the sea, to
have his money: but he desiring them to let him play a song ere he died
afterward leapt into the water. But a Delphine received him on his back, and
brought him to land again alive.
Arion.

Let us for our parts be mindful of these things, and fear God: so that
turning from our sins, we may have all our hope of salvation reposed in
Christ Jesus alone, who by the merits of his death, and by his glorious
Resurrection, has vanquished death and hell, and set us at liberty from the
jaws of Leuiathan, that he might make us partakers of his kingdom. To him
belongs thanks giving, honor, glory and dominion for ever Amen.

The second Chapter.
The fyfth Homely.
ANd Jonas prayed unto the Lord his God, out of the bowels of the fish, and
said: In my trouble I called unto the Lord and he answered me: out of the
belly of the grave I cried, and thou heardest my voice. Thou had cast me
down, into the heart of the seas, and the flood compassed me about: yea all
thy waves, and rolls of water went over me. And I said, I am cast away
out of thy sight, but I will yet again look toward thy holy temple.

The argument and use of this Chapter.
FOr as much as God had appointed Jonas, by especial privilege, to be a
Prophet to the Gentiles by whose preaching they might be stirred up to
repentance: not without good consideration is it, that in him he sets forth
such an absolute example of repentance, worthy to be imitated in all ages, of as
many, as covet to come in favor again with himself. This is the scope,
whereunto all things tend, that as yet we have herd, namely, of his frank
confession of his sin, and also of his faith in God, of his submitting
himself to Gods will altogether, and finally of his counsel that he gave
unto ye mariners for their safeguard, though it were with the peril of his own
life. But because, in all these things hitherto, there is no mention made of
prayer, which in repentance is chiefly requisite, now is somewhat also
entreated thereof. For in this chapter he sets out an himne, or Psalm, that
he made being restored to land: in the which also he expresses diligently,
what he did, lying hid in the whales belly. The argument of the orison is,
that he gives thanks unto God, for the benefit of his deliverance. And it
observes this order. First, he tells what he did him self, and in what
sort God dealt with him. Secondly, by a description of his own danger, he
enlarges the benefit of God done unto him self. Thirdely, he does teach
the use of this miracle: which is, that leauyng all Superstitions, we place
all hope of salvation in God alone.

Last of all, he voweth thanks giving. Many fruits therefore may he
gathered out of this Prison. For it teaches us, what mind we should be of,
being assaulted with any kind of peril: and even how we ought also to
prepare our selves to the death.

Consequently, it delivers unto us a perfect Method, how to talk with
GOD, or to pray, which is not the least point of Celestial wisdom.
Besides this, it confirms our Faith, least we should faynte, and give ever
in adversity. Moreover, it instructs us, which is the true and health some
use of the benefits of God. But of all these, shall be spoken in their place.

Now therefore first of all, to this declaration that is already begone,
Jonas praide in the whales belly.
he knitteth this verse, saying: And Jonas prayed unto the Lord his GOD, and
said. etc.

Which may not so be understood, as though he had composed this Hymn,
lying hid himself within the bowels of the Whale. For it conteyneth many
things, that could not be spoken before he was set on land again: But it
opens unto us, how even at that time he was very mindeful of God, and
called for his healpe with incessant Prayers. And least that being delivered
from this distress, he should seem to have forgotten God, he adds this
Hymn, thereby to advance Gods benefits that he had received.

And herein (as has been said a little before) even in his foremost entry
thereof, he does in a sum set forth what was done between him and God: In
my trouble I called, and he gave me answer: out of the belly of the grave I
cried, and thou heardest my voice.

These words are plain and easy enough: but because in them the whole form of
praying aright is comprehended, it may not seem tedious unto us, although we
make some tarying about the same.

God alone is to be called upon.
First, let us see whom Jonas prayed unto. And hereof he gives us
advertisement once and again, in that he says, He prays unto the Lord his
God, and even in the beginning of his orison has these words: In my trouble
I called unto the Lord: Who that Lord is, appeared euidentely before by his
confession, whereas he said, that he feared the Lord God of heaven, which made
the sea and the dry land. So then he made his supplication, neither to
Neptune, nor any other among the number of the feigned Gods, neither of the
Angelical creatures or Saints living in heaven, to take upon them the
regard of him being now in ieopardie, as (peradventure it might have been
thought) to Noe, who being in times past wonderfully delivered from the
floudde, restored mankind again: or to Moses, who as he escaped himself
miraculously out of the waters, so afterward he led the Israelites thorough
the bottom of the red Sea dry shod: or Elias, which divided the waters in
sunder with his mantell: but as in one God he had all the hope of his recovery
reposed, so him* alone he thought worthy to be called upon, at such time, as
he perceived his deliverance to lie in great doubt. Now from hence let a
general doctrine be set, that we must call upon none other, but God only. For
the same that Jonas did, has also ben practiced of al others, whose faith is
commended in the scriptures. Neither do there want precepts, whereby God
requires it at our hands. For in the covenant that he made with Abraham, he
professes himself to be El Schadai, that is to say, a GOD of all
sufficiency, who will be unto us in manner of The latin word here is Copiae
cornu: signifying (as the Poets do feygne) the horn of a Goat, with whose
milk Jupiter was nourished in Creta, of two maidens, Adrastea, and Ida,
daughters of Melisleus. Which horn Jupiter gave to his said nourses, in
reward, having therewith this commodity: That whatsoever thing they wished
for, it should abundantly come out of that horn. It signifies also an horn
that Hercules plucked from Achelous: which horn the Nymphs or immortal Ladies
filled with swear flowers and fruits. Such a thing does the author mean
here, that God will be unto us.
a treasure heap, and most ample reward: and requires again on our parts,
that we walk perfectly in his sight. But how shall this be accomplished, if
in dangers, or any other necessity we seek for help any other where?

Hereof we are admonished also by the first precept of the two Tables, wherein
we are forbidden to have any strange Gods. Howbeit strange Gods have so
many, as beside one only God, set up to themselves whatsoever, either saviors
or reuengers. Again, God speking of the incense or perfume which was to be
used about the holy things, Exodus 30.
(whereby it is most certain, that prayers are meant) ordained punishment of
death to as many as should convert it to any other use. Hereunto also apply
the same, that the godly were commaunnded to offer up their sacrifices to one
God alone; whereby a man may most firmly conclude that to him both one and
only all prayers do of duty appertain, which of all sacrifices are
accounted the chief. And here upon comes it, that when as in the fiftieth
Psalm he had rejected the vain ceremonies of the hypocrites, together with
their complayntes, immediately he adds: Offer unto God thanks giving, and pay
thy vows unto the most highest. And call upon me in time of trouble, so
will I hear thee. etc.

But put the case, that there could no place of Scripture be found, which
expressly should command the same, yet surely common sense gives us
sufficient warning to invoke upon God alone. For, to have our prayers heard
and ratified, this is requisite, that he, whom we call upon, be always
present with us, wheresoever we be: and that he have perfect knowledge, not
only of the manyfeste dangers that we are wrapped in, but also of the very
inward smarts of our heart, and careful thoughts of our mind: and besides
this, that in every necessity he both can and will help us. Now God only
is every where present, he alone beholds all things, he only knows our
minds and thoughts, he only is Almighty, and Lord over al creatures, and he
it is, who of long since, has given out testimonies of his more then fatherly
good will, and at this time has exhibited them most manifestly in his son
Jesus Christ: and openly declares the same good mind that he bears toward
us, by daily benefits. So that he must needs be blind, or rather a
monster of ingratitude, that will not see them. What remains then, but that we
be suppliant unto him alone?

These things may suffice to confute them, which now a days offer up their
prayers to Saints, and make vows to them: whereas themselves, while they
lived, taught men to call upon one God alone, and maynteyned the reuerencing
of him, even with the sheding out of their own blood.

Every where does God hear them, that call upon him.
Next follows to be considered where Jonas prayed, In the bowels of the fish.
Why? God had in times past assigned a Temple, where he would be worshipped, and
had promised, that he would there hear the prayers of such as cried unto him.
It is truth in deed: yet had he never forbidden, but ye in other places also
prayers might be offered unto him. But as we every where have need of his
help, so has he given us free liberty to cry unto him every where. Examples
are extant, which testify how holy men that reverenced God, prayed in all
places, whenever occasion was offered. The Israelites cried between the
brick and the claye, and were heard of God. Moses made his supplication at
the red sea shore, and forthewith hears God saying unto him: Moses
wherefore cryest thou? And it appears evidently enough out of the Psalms,
and holy history, that David made his petitions in woods, in dens, and upon
his couche. We read also, that Daniels companions, which were in the furnace,
and Daniel himself being environed with Lions, were perfectely heard. What
needs it to speak here of Christ? who as in his own person he often prayed
in the mountains, so he also says unto us: Matthew. 6.
Thou when thou prayest, enter into thy chamber. etc.

This is exceedingly to our consolation, that we are sure of Gods ears always
open to them that cry unto him: and therwithal it reproves them, that would
bind both Praying and Gods grace to certain places. This has been an old
error, and Christ himself confuteth it, when as to the woman of Samaria,
John. 4.
moving a question as touching this matter, he answers: Woman, believe me,
the hour comes, when as neither, in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem ye
shall worship the father. But the hour comes, and now is, when the true
worshippers shall worship the father, in spirit and truth. And Paul
commands men to pray in all places, and lift up pure hands unto God. 1.
Tim. 2. I know in deed, that God in times past adorned his temple with
exceeding ample promises, and that Gods Church has their oratories, wherein
prayers may be made: but those old promises had respect unto Christ, whom all that service of the temple did shadow: and at this day, for the continuing of
holy assemblies and public prayers it is requisite to have some certain
place, which it is conueniente to keep holy, and sundred from all profane
uses. Yet in the mean season, we must constantly retain that liberty, which
God has granted to every one, whereby to call upon him privately at home and
abroad, as often as necessite heautly oppressing us, or the holy spirit
secretly inspiring us, does stir us up to pray.

Thirdly, is expressed very diligently, The time of praying.
at what time Jonas prayed: In my trouble (says he) I cried unto the Lord. And
again: Out of the belly of the grave, or, of hell (for the Hebrew word which
he uses here, signifies both) did I cry. This sets out the most grievous
streightes and afflictions, wherewith the Prophet was assailed at that season,
whereof at this time we need not to speak, for that he himself will
afterward with more words set out at large, what thoughts he had in his mind.
This one thing let us diligently note, that the distresses which he felt both
of body and mind, were so much the heuter, because that he knew, God had
laid them upon him, as being offended with his sin. But he cried unto the
Lord, and was heard. We see then, that afflictions are no let, but that we
may call upon God: yea that then also is it lawful for us, even when we
suffer punishemente, as our heinous sins have deserved. For as GOD in laying
his rod upon us, goes not about our destruction, but amendment, and as
it is not the least token of our amendment, if we turn unto him when he
strikes us, craving help at his hand: So does God also never cast them off,
who in this manner behave themselves. And because prayer appertains to the
confession of our faith, which faith shines out so much the cleerer, as the
troubles, wherout we covet to be delivered, are the greeuouser, it follows,
that God can not but very well accept such kind of prayers.

Let this then be our consolation, and stay us up, when so ever the weighing
either of our punishments, or of our sins, shall go about to withstand
our prayers, and accuse us, as unworthy to be heard of God. For even then is
it laufull time to pray, yea then most of all is it convenient to lift up our
minds wholly and instantely to weary the ears of God: neither must we doubt
at all of the fatherly goodness of God, which then chiefly extends it
self, when he perceyueth, that his own children are in dangerous estate of
miscarying.

Fourthly, The manner of praying.
let us also mark the manner of Jonas prayer. Hereunto belongs it, that is
me^cioned of Jonas how he prayed unto God, whom afterward also he names his
God. This is an exceeding argument of Faith, since that, although he knew he
had grievously offended, yet even in the midst of his punishments, he
acknowledges GOD for his own: which thing fleshely reason will never be
hable to do, unless it be lyghtened with the light of faith. Again he says,
that he not only prayed, but also cried, yea that he brayed out, or rather
began a tumult in himself. For he uses such a word here, as does not
signify simply to cry, but to be troublesome to one with crying and yelling.
It expresses therefore his feruente and incessant prayers, as wherwithall (if
any such thing might truly be applied unto God) he even tired God himself.
Notable was this change, and full of admiration, which happened in Jonas. For he,
who not long before fled from the presence of God, and slepte in careless
security, now being found out in his ungraciousness, cries and yelleth out
unto him.

And by this example we are admonished, that in praying, before al other
things faith is required, without the which it is impossible for us to draw
near unto God. How shall they call upon him (says Paul) on whom they have
not believed? Romans 10. And James in his first chapter testifies, that they
shall obtain nothing which pray without faith. It will therefore greatly be
auaylable for us, diligently to be conversant in the consideration of Gods
promises and benefits done of old time, thereby to confirm our selves in
faith. But for that God sometime deferreth his aid, when as he sees it
needful either to have us longer corrected, or our faith still exercised:
together with this confidence in praying, there is also a constant and
invincible perseverance required. Thereof does Christ put us in remembrance,
whereas he wills us not only to pray, but also to knock and seek. Luke. 18.
And hereto chiefly tends the parable of the widow, who by her importune and
continual cry, at length overcame the ears even of the wicked judge. Heinous
therefore, and very hurtful is their error, which will prescribe God certain
limits, and if they be not favorably heard incontinently, dare call in doubt
the goodness and power of God, and utterly surceasse from praying for that
time. Let us imitate Jonas, and the examples of others, whose faith in times
past has pleased God: who also will hear us, and seeing he is Truth it self,
can never fail to perform his promises. And at this present, let those things
which we have spoken suffice, as concerning Invocation and prayers.

Now pass we over to the second part of this Canticle, He enlarges Gods
benefit, by describing the danger wherein he was.
wherein he paynteth out the greatenesse of his peril, that the benefits of
God may appear the more excellent. First, Thou had cast me (says he)
down into the deep. etc. He complayneth, that he was cast down of the
Lord, yet was he not ignorant, that the Mariners did it at his own
commandment. Howbeit he has respect unto God, who by his judgment had
brought the matter to that pass, that both he was enforced to confess his
own offense, and the mariners, yea though it were against their wills, to
cast him out. By this example of the Prophet, we may learn in dangers and
adversities not to bend our eyes toward men alonely, who in some part may be
causers unto us thereof, but to fire our mynds upon the determinatio^s of God,
without whose good pleasure there can no adversity happen unto us. This being
well weighed, moves us greatly to repentance, for that it compels us to
think upon our sins, whereby we have provoked the wrath of God: it armeth us
also with patience, lest without cause, we should rashly strive against God.
Jonas is diligent also in setting forth, whether God did cast him away. Into
the depth, into the heart of the Seas: That is to say, into the innermoste
parloure of the Sea, or the very bottomless place it self. And the floudde,
that is, as many flouddes as run into the sea, compassed me about: yea all
thy dashing waves, that is to say, the brustlyng none of the waters beating
one an other, And all thy rolls of water went over me. For this cause
calls he them the waves and billows of God, for that he is the creator of
the sea, and author of all winds and tempests.

And this lot must they look for, which think scorn to obey God: that while
they couete to eschew some one peril, which they have conceived in their
mynds, they do nothing else but plunge themselves into many, that both are
more, and also greeuouser.

Yet in this manner of speaking, wherein he says: All thy rolls of water
went over me, is contained a Consolation not to be contemned. For although
many be the tribulations of the righteous, as David witnesses, yet do they in
a manner pass over their heads, neither does God suffer those that are his to
be tempted above their power. The Prophet furthermore makes report, what he
thought being enclosed in these straightes. I said, I am cast out of the
sight of thine eyes. In these words he expresses of all temptations the
greeuousest: as wherein he supposed, that there was no hope of further health
left unto him to lean unto. And surely this alteration of the Prophet ought
diligently to be observed. For not long since, this was his whole drifte to get
him away from the presence of God, and rid himself of his service: But now
being terrifyed with the feeling of Gods indignation, this only thing is a
corsey to his heart, that Gods countenance is hidden from him, and that he
feels himself excluded therfrom by his own deserte. Such a like thing does
Christ shadow in the parable of the prodigal son. Luke. 15.
For he also first of all, would needs depart from his father: but when he
was brought to such need, as that he began to get his living amongst
swyne, then wished he to have a roomthe, yea though it were amongst his fathers
hired servants, so he might but enjoy the syghte of him. The very same thing
also do they feel, how many soever having shaken of Gods yoke, do alienate
themselves from him. Yet ought not the godly to despair, if there shall any
like thing chance unto them: seeing we read that Christ was tempted in
such sort, that hanging upon the cross, he cried: My God, my God, why haste
thou forsaken me? Now as he does yet acknowledge him to be his own God, of
whom he complayneth himself to be forsaken: So also is it convenient for us,
constantly to retain this principle of Salvation, that we judge not God
estraunged from us, but always recognyse it to be his Fatherly hand, which
does correct us. So does Jonas, when as by way of redressing his former
thought, he adds: Correction.
But I will yet again look tovvarde thy holy temple. In this word Temple,
he comprehends all the outward worship, together with the promyses, whereupon
he stayed himself. For to the Temple assembled together as many as appertayned
to the covenant of God, as were circumcised, as professed the reuerencing of
the true God: And that God would accept their prayers, which they offered up
there, they had learned before by his promises given unto Solomon. Thus
therefore seems the Prophet to say in effect: Although all things seemed to
threaten me a mischief, and as it should appear, thou had utterly cast me
away, yet could it never slip out of my mind, but that I belonged to the
society of thy covenant and people: And thence grounded I my hope, that a time
would once come, wherein I should again appear before thee, and be present at
thy holy solemnities. And surely great is this force of Faith, which after
this sort wrastleth with the flesh, between hope and fear. Yea rather, this
is a true proof of faith, when as by considering the promises of God, and the
Sacraments wherewith they are sealed, it susteyneth it self up against al
temptations. Neither is this the least commodity, that we may reap by the
Sacraments and outward profession. For after the same manner, had both David
and Ionathas regard unto circumcision, which was a seal of the covenant of
God, when as they called their enemies, Uncircumcised. But now in the mean
season, there appears perfectely in this place, what is the disposition of
the godly: who covet to be delivered from distresses, and restored to their
former estate, chiefly to this end, that they may serve God. Hereof entreats
David in his Psalms very often: and Ezechias lying sick upon his bed, made
his complaint especially for this cause, Esai. 38.
for that by his death he saw, how the worship of God stood in some
hazard. Far otherwise is ye condition of the ungodly, whose thoughts wait
only upon carnal things: and therefore when they pray, are the less accepted.
Howbeit let us continue in the steps of Jonas, and other holy men: So shall
God when we cry, favorably hear us thorough Jesus Christ, as he has
promised. To him belongs thanksgiving, honor, glory, and dominion for
ever. Amen.

The syxth Homely.
THe waters compassed me, even to the very soul, the deep closed me in on
every side, and the weeds were vvrapped about mine head. I went down to
the bottom of the hills, and was barred in with earth for ever. But thou, O
Lord my God, have brought up my life again, out of corruption. When my soul
fainted within me, I thought upon the Lord: and my prayer came in unto thee,
even unto thy holy temple. They that hold of lying vanities, will forsake his
mercy. But I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving, and
will pay such things, as I have vowed: for why? salvation comes of the
Lord. And the Lord spoke unto the fish, and it cast out Jonas again, upon
the dry Land.

ALthough men being led even by the common sense of nature, The argument and
use of this present place.
do flee unto God in their distresses, and call for his help by prayer: yet
many there be, who, when they see that they are delivered, become unmindful of
Gods benefit, attributing all that they have received, to their own industry,
and returning to the same sins, which before were the cause of their own
mischiefs. Very much avails it therefore often to meditate, what dangers we
have been in, and therewithal also to weigh, how feeble or rather none at al
our force has been in avoiding the same, and how necessary it was, that we
should be delivered by the mighty hand of God. For this meditation will bring
to pass, that both we shall be thankful unto god, and also with great
diligence we shall take heed lest we fall in the like danger again
afterward. This does Jonas thoroughly observe, who in the second part of
this his song sets out with many words, the great peril which he was in,
thereby to make the benefit of God more notable, and also, by the consideration
thereof, to stir up him self, to perpetual thankfulness of mind. And truly
not long since, he comprehended the same in a sum, setting forth the most
grievous temptacions, wherewith his fault was assaulted. Now follow the residue
tending to the same scope: which being finished, he annexeth also the two last
parts of this canticle or song.

He compares his own danger with Gods help.
After he has made declaration of the temptations which he sustained, he now
conferreth together his own danger, and Gods gracious help for his
deliverance. And because the description of his said danger serves to the
amplifying of Gods benefit (as we have oftentimes admonished) he is very
diligente, and plentiful therein. First, The waters (says he) compassed me
even to the very soul. That which David spoke by a metaphore or figure, the
same happened to Jonas indeed, when as he was first cast into the midst of
the waves, and afterward as it were overwhelmed with waters in the fishes
belly. Then it follows: The deep closed me in on every side. By this deep,
Interpreters understand the bottomless and impenetrable depth. This therefore,
he says, was in manner of a prison unto him. He adds: The vvedes were
vvrapte about mine head. He meneth it of weeds that grow in deep pooles or
places of the Sea, which gather about the feet and arms of such as do
swymme, and so strangle them, that they are not able to escape. And these he
says his head was wrapped in: as when the whale hid it self in some sedgie
shallow. Finally, I went down to the bottom of the hills, and was barred
in with earth for ever.

The bars of earth he calls such Sea banks, and high mountains, as the
ships are not hable to arrive at. Of all the words that here are uttered
this is the sum, that he was debarred of all means and hope to escape. And
straighte ways he sets opposite the benefit of GOD against them all,
saying: But thou haste brought up my life again from corruption, O Lord my
God. He uses but a few words, thereby to make manifest, how easy a thing it
was for God to deliver him out of all these calamites, which otherwise could
have been overcome, by no might or travail of man. Neither does he only
advance the omnipotency of God, but also he has in remembrance his fatherly
goodness, when as, not without signifying of a most vehemente affection, he
says: O Lord my God. As though he should say: Albeit thou semedst not only to
have laid aside all care for me, but also to have cast me even utterly away,
and that I must needs have fallen to despair: yet notwithstanding thou, oh my
most merciful father, did manifestly show forth, both thy good will, and
also thy power, and haste made my life to come up again from very corruption,
that is, from out of the stomach of the whale, where nothing else could he
looked for, but that it should have corrupted, and utterly come to nothing. And
these words does he also utter in the person of Christ, who before by David had
said: Thou vvilte not leave my soul in Hell neither vvilt thou suffer thine
holy one to see corruption. Psalm. 16. Act. 2 and. 13.
Which place the Apostles Peter and Paul expound of the resurrection of
Christ. Wherefore this same also confirms the faith of our resurrection, as
afterward in the end of the chapter shall be declared. Now as touching this that
we have in hand, let us learn, that although our perils be very many, yet may
we not despair of Gods help, yea albeit they exceed all the capacity of
man's wit. For first of all, With God nothing is impossible, as Gabriel
said to the Virgin Marie. The^, Luke. 1.
it is his property at such times to help, as all things being past
recovery, there is no hope let for men to work by: and in this behalf is
he called in the scripturs the auenger, and restorer again of such as be
oppressed. This did Philo that most wise Hebrew well perceive, when as being
ambassadoure to Caius the emperor and having not without some cruel injury
suffered repulse at his hand, to the other Jews standing amassed, he said, We
must needs be of a good cheer, whom Caius is angry withal: for of necessity
it follows, that Gods help will be present, when as man's help does fail.
Examples will meet us every where, wherein we are taught, that God does of a
sodeine joyfully appear unto them, that can see nothing but destruction laid
open before their eyes. Of that which has been spoken, let us then take this
use: In whatsoever kind of perils we be set, yet still to keep our faith sure
and vnshake^ toward God. For why should we despair? seeing that God is able to
save, yea eue^ in death.

He sets out the use of this benefit.
And hereunto tends the third part of this Canticle, as wherein he painteth
out the use of this benefit, very diligently by a comparison. Jonas here
compares himself with the superstitious and idolatrers, by this means the
rather to declare, what he him self did to his great commodity: and how
miserably on the other side they are deceived, which direct their doings
after another sort. And first speaking of himself he faith: When my soul
faynted within me, I thought upon the Lord. The Hebrew words signify not so
much a fainting or melting away of the Soul as rather a perplexity. For
Ataph is as much to say, as to cover and to hide, or to wrappe in. And by
translation it is applied to the Soul, for that it, when as dangers are
imminent on every side, seems so to be wrapped, and solde^ in with an huge
heap of ears, and intricate thoughts, that a man can appointe no certeintie,
how to deal even in his own matters. Hereof does David complain, when as in
the Psalms he says: How long shall I toss thoughts in my soul, Psa. 12.
et. 42
and sorrow in my heart all the day long? And again: Psa. 43. etc.
Why art thou troubled O my soul? and why art thou so disquieted within
me?

Neither is it to be doubted, but that Jonas being in the whales belly, was
tossed with his thoughts, as it had been with terrible byllowes, and could
not certaynely determine with himself what were best to be done. But when as
(says he) my soul was thus wrapped in, and now being overcome with sundry
cares, was cothing away, I thought upon the Lord. This was not a vain or
flitting remembrance, such as now and then springs up in the minds even of
the ungodly: but such a one as meditated, both upon the promises of God, and
also on the covenant it self, together with his old benefits: the
considering whereof, does wonderfully increase faith, exciting them to ardent
prayers, and full of confidence, who before time gave over in temptations.
Therefore adds he: And my prayer came in unto thee, even into thy holy
Temple. Whereas, although by the word Temple, he means the Heaven, which is
called the palace and throne of God, for that therein his majesty and
puissaunce does chiefly appear, yet nevertheless doubt I not, but
therewithal he has respect to the promises made, concerning the Temple, and
the outward sacrifices, whereby he confirmed his faith, as lately has been
said. This then is his meaning: Although in the depth of the sea, I had my
abiding within the bowels of the Whale, yet had I in mind both thee, and thy
covenant: the seals whereof, all that worship of the Temple ordained by thy
appointment does contain. And for this cause did I cry unto thee, neither
were my prayers in vayn, but they pierced thorough the very heaven, and came
up even into thy sight.

And here may we see, how Jonas was occupied chiefly about two things. For
both he had in remembrance, God and his promises, and also being established
in faith, he poured out his prayers unto the Lord, whereby he craved for his
aid. Neither did he it only at that present, but therwithall he learned that
he must also do the same afterward, and gives out his own example to be
followed of all men, which out of adversity covet to escape safe. For this is
the property of the godly, that although they be very grievously tempted, yet
do they never shake off all myndfulnesse of God, but by the remembrance of
his promyses, do they stay up their faith: and being instructed of Gods
good will, by his benefits done of old time, they use also for ever after,
to put their whole hope of salvation in him alone. And this truly is the
principal use of all the benefits of God, which he bestows, either upon
other men, or upon our selves: Neither shall they at any time be frustrate of
their hope, who soever will imitate Jonas example. For, Blessed is the man
(says the Prophet) which trusts in the Lord, and whose hope is the Lord.
Again, Blessed is he, that has the God of Jacob for his help, and whose hope
is the Lord his God. Psa. 17. Psa. 146.

He reproves the vain confidence, of such as be superistitious.
Howebeit, that Jonas might yet the more commend the doctrine which may be
gathered by his example, in the other part of this comparison he brings forth
the mainteiners of superstitions, and compares by a contrariety their brickle
and deceytfull estate, with the felicity of the godly. They that hold (says
he) of lying vanities, will forsake his mercy. Lying vanities, that is to
wit, most fond and deceiptfull vanities, he terms all that which men
fancy unto themselves of their own brain, to put any hope of salvation
therein. Under this title therefore may be accounted strange gods, idols,
superstitious worshippings, men's aid, men's imaginations, good works or
merits, and whatsoever else of this kind may be devised. For if we will
somewhat narowly view these things, we shall find them to be such, as that
with Solomon we may worthily exclame: Vanity of vanities, Ecclesia. 1
and all is but plain vanity. For as touching strange gods, it is manifest,
that besides a vain name, they have nothing at all: sith that in the nature of
things they have not so much as a being And because there be no gods at all,
it follows of necessity, that the images which are set up for them, be
likewise nothing. This very thing the Apostle also noted. 1. Cor. 8. As for
the other, that are reared up to represent the true God, what are they but mere
lies? seeing it is a plain case, yt God can not by any image be represented.
Esaias. 40.
Whom vvil ye make me like, (cries he himself by the Prophet) and whom
shall I be like? Al caruers of images are vanity: Esaias. 44.
and the things that they so covet, profit nothing at al. They must bear
record themselves, that seeing they can neither see nor under stand, they shall be
confounded. Who dare then make a god, or fashion an image that can do no good?
Many like places might here be brought in, which for shortness sake we omit,
seeing that such as read the scriptures, may be acquainted with the^
euerywhere. And as for superstitious worshippings, it is evident, that God
cannot be so worshipped with outward things, but since he is a spirit, he will
be worshipped in spirit and truth. John. 4.
Most fond therefore is all that confidence which is placed in outward
ceremonies. And what need we to make any mention of men's helps and counsels?
Esaias. 40.
when as Al flesh is grass, and all the glory thereof, as the flower of the
field. Yea and Hieremie pronounces all them accurssed, which take flesh for
their arm. And David's voice is this: Put not your trust in Princes, Psalm. 146.
being children of men: for there is no help in them. Of like value also be all
our works and merits. For what may they merit, who of themselves, are not
able so much, as to think a good thought? and whose righteousness, being
like a filthy shroude patched of sundry rags, can not therefore stand in the
presence of Gods judgment. For this reason does the prophet rightly term them
lying vanities, adding this therwithall, They that hold of them, will forsake
his mercy. By this word Mercy, he understands even God himself: who, how
great soever he be, is altogether mercy, and in very deed the mercy for
men: for that he offers him self to us, neither departs from us, unless
we first forsake him: as they do which hold of vanities, that is, which
place not all hope of salvation in him alone, but of their own brayns feign
unto themselves strange gods. And these kind of men endamage themselves two
manner of ways: both for that they find no help in those things which they
have forged, and also for that thereby they forsake God, who alone was able to
help them. And this is it which God by Hieremie co^playneth of, in these
words: Two evils has my people committed: They have forsaken me the well of
the water of life and dug them pittes, yea vile and broken pittes, that can
hold no water. Ier. 2. And this at this present, the Prophet thought good to
have in remembrance, thereby to commend unto us the use of his own example,
namely that in adversity we should be myndfull of God and his promises: and so
neither despair, nor yet settle that confidence, which is due to him alone,
upon other vain things.

And here have we thoroughly to mark that he calls them forsakers of God,
which lay hold of vanities. For seeing that God is a jealous God, he may not
away with any copartners in the faith, and worship due to himself. He also
cries by Esaias, Esaias. 42.
that he will not give his glory and honor to any other. It follows then that
superstitions, and the true worship of God, can not both stand together: but
necessary is it, that they wholly depend upon GOD, as many as would be
accounted his true woorshippers.

And hereto serves that which Helias said unto the Israelites: 1. Kings. 18
How long will ye halte on both sides? If the Lord be God, follow him: If
Baal be God, go after him. By these words therefore are taken away all
services and superstitions, which me^ fondly devise to them selves at their
own choice: for that they pluck away from God, who as alone he is able to
save, so alone he will be reverenced, honored, and called upon. A vow of
thanksgiving.


There remains now the fourth part of this Canticle, wherein the Prophet
voweth thankfulness to God. But I vvil sacrifice unto thee with the voice of
praise and vvil pay the things that I have vowed. etc. By the voice of praise
he understands thanksgiving, and an open preaching abroad of the benefit
that he had received of God. And this he calls a sacrifice, namely having
respect hereto, for that God in the fiftieth psalm prefers the inuocatyng
of his name, and thankesgiuyng far above all sacrifices. As though Jonas
should say: I know in deed, that thou haste no need of sacrifices, and that
thou requirest none, as though thou were delited therewith: wherefore omitting
them, I will do that, which both thou allowest before al other things, and may
also most serve, as well to the instruction of others, as also to the
spreading abroad of thy renoume. For I will offer the sacrifice of praise: and
look, what goodness and might thou haste declared in my deliverance, that
same will I openly preach out unto al me^. Neither do I vow it only, but I
will also perform that, which I have vowed: least at any time I might seem
to have forgotten either thy benefit or mine own promise. And these in very
deed are the vows of the godly, far differing from the monastical: which
are occupied, either insolently about such things as are not in our
possibility to perform, or else foolishly about such superstitious
observations, as are of no moment at all For the same that the Prophet voweth
in this place, is also to be found in the examples of others. In Hoseas the
godly promise the calves of their lips unto god. Hose. 14.
And David says I will declare thy name unto my brethren: Psalm. 2^.
in the midst of the congregation vvil I praise thee. Psalm. 69,
And again, I will praise the name of god with a song, and magnify him with
tha^ksgiuing. And it shall please the Lord better tha^ an ox or a bullock, that
has horns and hofes In this place also the Prophet shows a reason of his
vow making, in that he adds: For why? salvation comes of the Lord. As if
he should say: Therefore will I sacrifice praise unto thee, and celebrate thy
name, because thou only art the savior, neither can salvation be found any
other where, than with thee. So that this place reproves their superstitions,
who being delivered out of perils hang up their accursed offerings, namely
their vowed tables, or Images of wax, and also their chains, fetters, figures
of ships, or any such like, to the honor of Saints, before Idols. Let us
give over all the glory of our salvation to God alone, and to him let us
continually sacrifice praise and thanks giving. But therewithal let us call
this to remembrance, In what things tha^kfulnesse consists.
that it consists not in bare words, which privately some babble out, but
that there is required a public commemoration of Gods benefits, which may be
in manner of a confession of our faith, yea even before them also, which as
yet are not come to the knowledge of God. Then in such sort must we frame
our whole life, as that thereby the name of God may be glorified, lest by
our means he be evil spoken of, the faith toward whom, with mouth and lips
we do outwardly boast. These things, as in every one of Gods benefits they
ought to be observed, so especially in the work of our redemption, whereof we
have Christ the only authoure: who, as he requires of us a free and frank
confession of his name, so also in the mystical supper has he insti^uted a
solemn commemoration of that his benefit, and claims us wholly to himself:
that they, which by his merit are redeemed, may offer up them selves to
appear before him, as a quick sacrifice, and keep them selves also unspotted
of the world. Look Romans 12. Ephesians. 1. etc.

Jonas is restored again to land.
Now follows, what effect ensued after Jonas prayers, and godly meditatio^s.
And the Lord spoke unto the fish, and it cast out Jonas upon the dry land. In
a few words he comprehends a very great matter, and such a one as
contains in it a manifold miracle: seeing that both Jonas is restored again
without any harm, out of the whales chawes, through the sharp ranks o^ teeth:
seeing also, that this fish of so huge a greatness, yet found out such a place
as from whence he might cast him even unto the land. For we are taught by
experience, that fishes of such bigness very seldom come nere y^ shore: or if
they so do, that they are not able to recover again the maine sea, without
much danger. The whole report therefore of this matter is eue^ stuffed with
miracles, which if they should be called to ye account of ma^s capacity, would
scarcely be worthy of any credit at al. For ye cause is god me^cioned to be y^
author of al these things: and as before it was said, yt he prepared this fish
to swalow up Jonas even so does the Lord now co^mau^d ye same fish to restore
him unto la^d safe again. Neither must it seem incredible, that, at Gods
commandemente, the fish incontinently did so: seeing his word has an
effectual working joined therewith, whereunto all creatures obey. An example
hereof is extant even in the creation of the world, which, it is certain, by
the power of God alone, through his word, was brought forth of nothing:
Which thing David also in his Psalms does teach, whereas he says: By the
word of the Lord were the heavens made, Psalm. 33.
and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth. For he spoke the word,
and it was made: He commanded, and it had his being. And seeing he of long
time before was able to bring upon Egypt Frogs, locusts, and all manner of
flies, but upon the tents of the Israelites bread from Heaven, and quails
from the Sea: it was also no matter of difficulty for him, to guide this fish
unto some shore, whereunto he might cast out Jonas safe, and unhurt. This
then is an evident argument of the divine omnipotency, whereby we ought to
comfort our selves in adversity, lest our faith should be vanquished by
the greatness of any dangers. For why? That God has the same dominion over
the Sea, over the winds, over diseases, yea even over the ungodly, and their
prince the devil, y^ miracles of our Lord Jesus Christ give sufficient
testimony: who by the might of his word, stilled the winds and the sea, healed
sicknesses, cast out devils, and overthrew those that were sent to take him:
Yea with one word brought to pass that they durst do nothing against his
disciples.

But chiefly this must be referred to the resurrection of the dead: which, The
faith of the resurrection, proved.
that it was here foreshadowed, was said above, when we entreated of the figure
of christ: For it seems an impossible thing to the flesh, that those bodies
should arise again, whereof some are buried in the earth and so corrupted,
some by fire are resolved into ashes, some rotte in the waters: some are dried
in the air and so wither away, many also are torn in pieces of wild beasts,
and so become their food. Howbeit we are not here to look, what fleshly
reason will judge possible, Luke. 1.
but what God will have done, to whom nothing is impossible: as we are taught
not only by ye scriptures, but also by daily experience. And he has made a
promise, yt the very self same bodies, which now we carry about, shall arise
again. For in the 26. Chapter of Esaias he says: Thy dead shall live: they
that are my body shall arise again. Awake, and sing ye that dvvell in the
dust For thy deavv is even as the deavv of green herbs, and the earth shall
cast out her dead. And in Daniel it is written: The multitude of them that
sleep in the dust of the earth, shall rise again: some to everlasting life,
some to perpetual shame and reprofe. Dan. 12. Whereunto in like manner those
things altogether agree, which in the Gospel Christ utters in these
words: The hour shall come, John. 5.
in which all they that are in the graves, shall hear the voice of the son
of God, and shall come forth: they which have done well, unto the
resurrection of life and they that have don evil, unto the resurrection of
damnation. And in the Apocalipse it is read, Apocal. 20.
that both the sea, and death, and hell, delivered up their dead. But the time
would fail me, if I should go about to rehearse all the places of the
scripture, as touching ye resurrection of ye dead. Therefore omitting y^
residue, this one thing I add, that the resurrection is not only grounded upon
the authority of ye scriptures, but also upon ye justice of God, which without
it can in no wise stand. For it is the property of justice to give unto every
one ye which is his own, and with co^digne rewards to reco^pe^ce virtues, and
on ye other side vices with duly deserved punishments. Howbeit it is manifest,
yt in this present life there is reco^pe^sing either none at al, or else very
sle^der: for yt the godly oftentimes mourn under the cross, the ungodly
triumphing with happy success. This rewarding therefore must needs be in the
life to come, unless we be minded altogether to deny the justice of God.
Neither can we restrain it to the soul alone For seeing yt the body is not ye
least part both in things well don, and in things done amiss: seeing also that
ye godly are afflicted in body, and again in body ye ungodly become sensual
and cruel, therefore must both rewards and punishments be repaired in the body
it self: as Paul has noted to the Corinthia^s. 2. Cor. 5.
But why should it seem so impossible a thing for the dead to arise again,
when as so many examples of that matter are every where at hand? Is there not
in the seed that is sown, and in the springing up of the same, an evident
figure of burial and resurrection offered unto us? whereof eue^ Christ also in
the Gospel, John. 12. 1. Cor. 15.
and the Apostle in his first epistle to the Corinthia^s diligently made
mention. Do we not see in the winter time the whole cheerful countenance of
the world as it were to die, and at the coming on of the new spring to begin
to revive again? Or, what shall we say of the imperfect birth? which, when it
grows to perfection, comes forth into light out of the mothers womb, as
it were out of the grave. Surely, these and such other like if we co^ferre with
the promises of God, we shall the less stand in doubt of the resurrection,
wherein the chief ground of our salvation does consist. Wherefore being
stirred up by the example of Jonas, let us in adversities call upon God alone,
and overcome them all by the hope of resurrection in Jesus Christ our Lord: to
whom belongs thanksgiving, honor, glory and dominion for ever. Amen.

The third Chapter.
The seventh Homely.
THen came the word of the lord unto Jonas the second time, saying: Up, and
get thee to Niniue into that great city, and cry out against it the preaching
that I bid thee. So Jonas arose, and vve^t to Niniue, according to the word
of the Lord. Niniue was a great city to god, namely of three days journey.
And Jonas went to, and entered into the city, eue^ a dais journey, and cried,
saying: There are yet forty days, and then shall Niniue be overthrown. And
the people of Niniue believed God, and proclaimed a fasting, and araied
themselves in sack cloth as well the great, as the small of them.

The argume^te and use of the third Chapter.
THe whole book of Jonas is occupied about repentance, and making manifest by
examples, which is the true form thereof. Hitherto we have seen two: of the
which the one is set out in the mariners, the other in Jonas him self* either
of them teaching, what each one privately did, when he perceived the wrath of
God to hang over his head. Now follows an example of public repentance,
that the Ninevites used: in whose jurisdiction the government in a manner of
the whole world was at that time. And surely this doing of theirs deserves
very diligently to be considered: both for that the history testifies their
repentance was effectual, and also for that Christ propounds this example
for us to follow? showing moreover that the Ninevites shall in time to come be
their judges, as many as believe not the preaching of the gospel. But chiefly,
the due considering thereof apperteyneth unto magistrates, and the^ that have
the oversight of whole congregations: who here are taught, that it is their
duties also to train up men to public repentance, if they be desirous to
provide for the safety of such, as are committed to their charge. Which that
it may the better appear, we will view every portion of this history, as it
falls in order.

The Prophet begins this declaration, with a new calling, Jonas is restored
to his function again.
whereby GOD restored him to his function again. Whereas also there shyneth
forth a singular example of the goodness of God.

For seeing that Jonas was become disobedient to the commandment of God, and
had willingly given over his vocation, he deserved now to be utterly neglected
of god, or at ye least, to be judged unworthy of ye office of preaching any
longer, having by his rebellion brought God in no small infamy. Which thing
eue^ Jonas himself (as I suppose) did well perceive: for being now set on
land again, he yet attempteth nothing after his own pleasure, or private
judgment. Nevertheless God does here call him the second time, and so
receives him being penitent into favor again, that he casts him in the
teeth with none of those things, which not long before he had committed. The
like example does the evangelical history set forth unto us by Peter the
Apostle, who, although by his denying of Christ, he had cut off himself from
the dignity Apostolical, yet is restored to his office again, when as with
earnest repentance he returned unto him. These things serve to our consolation,
as often as our consciences are tempted: for they certify us, that Gods promise
shall always remain true and ratified, which by Ezechiell he has published,
saying: I will not the death of a sinner, but that he turn and live. And
again: If the ungodly turn from his sins I will put all his wickedness
out of my remembrance: All his sins that he did before, shall not be thought
upon. And in Esaias the.43. chap. I, even I am he only, that for mine own
selfs sake do away thine offenses so that I will never think upon them.
Moreover these kind of examples admonish us of our duty, namely, that we in
like sort pardon the weakness of our brethren, if at any time after their
fall, they arise up again: and never desire with our severity and rigor to
exceed even God himself. Jonas is sent again unto Niniue.


But first of all it is mete, that we diligently mark this commandment of
God, which in all points is the same with it that went before: whereby we may
see, that men with all their endeuoures can nothing prevail against God, but
that of necessity it must be brought to pass, which he has once decreed
to be done. Arise (says he) and get thee to Niniue, into that great city.
etc. Again he makes mention of greatness, to show, that he ought not to be
afraid by consideration thereof, but rather to arm himself to constancy,
lest he should commit any thing unseemly for his office. And here might
some man marvel, why God does so enforce Jonas to preach unto the Ninevites,
seeing he might have wroughte their conversion, either by some other prophet,
or else by other infinite means best known to him self. Howbeit, in so doing
he commends unto us the ministry of his word, whereby, as by an ordinary
mean, he is wont to convert men. We know in deed, that the Gentiles were
often admonished by wondrous and strange tokens, but amongst his people God
would have the preaching of his word to sound forth: and because in the
Ninevites he would display a singular show of his free benevolence, for all men
to behold, wherein also was shadowed the calling of the Ge^tils, therefore did
he also send a Prophet unto them, by whom they might be instructed. And
notwithstanding the promise be peculiarly made to the faithful of the new
testamente, Esaias. 54.
that they shall all be taught of God, who will write his laws in their hearts,
Jerem. 31.
yet does he not perform the fame without preaching: which both Christ him
self began, and by whose spirit the Apostles also were guided to publishe, by
preaching the Gospel thorough out all the world. Hereto serves the example
of Cornelius, whom God admonished by an Angel to send for Peter, and by him
to hear words of salvation. Farewell then all fantastical heads, that dream
of a certain unwritten word, and gase after new revelations. For while they
contemn Gods ordinary means, they do nothing else, but proffer themselves to
be mocked of the devil.

Here is also to be marked, Jonas is assigned, what he must preach.
that God tells Jonas in flat words, what he must preach among the
Ninevites. Cry out (says he) the preaching, which I bid thee.

Yet was Jonas authority very great. For he had, before ye time used ye office
of preaching in ye la^d of Israel, and God had confirmed his doctrine by most
noble victories in ye time of Ieroboa^s reign: He had also declared his
favor toward him by a late miracle. All this notwithstanding, God leaves
him not at his own liberty, to speak what he thinks good, but binds him
to a determinate commandemente. The same order was taken also with other
Prophets, and afterward, even with the Apostles, as otherwhere has been
said. Great then is their presumption, who dare rashly thrust in, either their
own or other men's traditions into the Church: but greater is their impudency,
who being stirred by no revelation of the holy Ghost, but carried away by a
blind carnal affection, take upon them to denounce unto cities cruel and
horrible destructions, prescribing also a time for the same: as of this sort we
have seen Anabaptists in our age, who were not ashamed to abuse these words of
Jonas, thereby to strike the more terroure into the heads of the simple people.

Jonas is obedient to God
But let us now look upon Jonas, who immediately obeys the commandment of
GOD. For it follows: So Jonas arose and went to Niniue, according to the
word of the Lord. This declaration is but short, yet such a one as
sufficiently teaches, how much he had profited in his wrestlyng under the
Cross, whereby God had chastened him before. For he, who not long since had
asked counsel of flesh, was terrified by the resons thereof, had made himself
yare to flee, and as he was fleeing slept in security, now having heard the
commandment of God, moves no disputations about the matter, shakes of al
fear, thinks never a whit of fleeing, neither yet carelessly settleth himself
to rest and ease: but streightwaye arises, takes his journey in hand, and
orders all his doings according to the prescripte of Gods appointment. Which
very thing the holy Ghost does mean, when as not without an express
signification, he says, That he went to Niniue, according to the word of the
Lord. So that Jonas might have said with David: It is good for me, O God,
that thou haste brought me low. But, that his obedience might appear the
more excellent, here is interlaced a description of the City of Niniue, with
hese words: Niniue was a great city unto God, namely of three days journey.
Report is made of it, that it was great to God, which some writers suppose
to be the Hebrew phrase, as those others be, wherein the Ceders of God, and the
mountains of God, are taken for great and piked Ceders and mountains. And of
set purpose does the holy Ghost use such manner of speakings, to give us
instruction, that it must be ascribed to God alone, whatsoever in this world
is excelling or surmounting the residue.

But because this addition great, is here set to with this parcel or letter
Lamed, which oftentimes is a sign of the dative case, I consent rather unto
their judgment, which interpret that Niniue was great, not only by the
estimation of men, but also by the estimation of God. And surely it must needs
be great unto God, seeing that therein he had appointed the chief seat of the
monarchy, which in no place else endured so many ages: seeing also yt therein he
thought good to shewforth a singular proof, both of repentance, and also of his
own goodness. As touching that, which is reported of three days journey or
circuit, it accords with the profane writers, which tell, that it was in
mesure four hundredth furlongs, which make up the sum of fifty miles. We
have here to behold the noble courage of Jonas, who, when as before time he had
felt Gods just and mighty hand, yet now without any gaynsaying, he shows
himself obedient.

Let us imitate this Prophet, and by no kind of impediment be pulled back
from performing that duty, whereby we are bound unto God. Jonas enters into
that city, which had conquered so many Nations, and was lady over the whole
East: and having walked therinto a days journey (peradventure standing in the
midst thereof) he cries out: There are yet forty days, and then shall Niniue
be overthrown. And here thou may not think, that like a mad or
braynsicke fellow, with confused and fond clamoures, he thundered out these
only words: but as in describing of the sermons of John the Baptist, and
Christ, the Evangelists do only note the sumni^ of that, which with many
words they dilated: so does Jonas here touch the chief and principal point of
his own sermon, in expressing whereof, he has used a very exact declaration of
all the circumstances. And as much as may be gathered by the order of the
history, first of all he fette forth his own vocation, that the Ninevites
might understand how he was sent unto them from God: then afterward accused
he their sins, and showed them that they had deserved within forty days
utterly to perish, with their City and nation.

We have here in this place to observe how great the outragiousnesse of sins
and wickedness is, in Gods sight. For seeing that there is nothing derer unto
God than man, whom of his free grace he created at the beginning, and being
lost, redeemed him afterward again by the blood of his son, horrible of
necessity must that guilte be, whereby he is moved to turn vpsetdowne whole
nations together. Now that this guilt is none other than our sins, wherewith
naturally we are delited, and of many men are scarsly thought blame worthy, it
is more manifest, than that it need with many words to be declared.

And as touching the Ninevites, that they deserved this terrible sentence, only
in respect of their sins, even God himself testified in the beginning of
this book, when as he willed Jonas therefore to cry out against them, because
their consent in wickedness was come up into his sight. So then hereout let
us learn, to judge of the manners of this our age.

At this day reign the self same wickednesses, which (as before was said in
the first Homely) reigned among the Ninevites. But so much the worser plighte
are we in, for that in them we are become so obdurate, as that we can not
abide to have our selves called into the right path again, neither by gentle
admonitions, nor by sharp threatenings, yea I may say truly, neither by
manifest tokens of God now being angry, nor yet by his plagues that he lays
upon us.

And such is the perverseness of a great sort, that they dare blame, of too
much rigor and cruelty, the preachers of gods word, if at any time they
take in hand, somewhat severely to rebuke vices.

Howbeit, I am greatly afraid, least a great sort of us, being more soft
than is meet, sow pillowes (for so the Prophet terms it) under the arms,
Ezech. 13.
both of our selves, and also of those that are committed to our charge, which
in time to come, will be the cause of a common destruction unto all. For were it
our pleasure to confess a truth, we can not deny, but that this our age
craves both for Ionasses and John's, which might as it were, point out with
the finger, the destruction now near at hand, and the axe already put unto
the root of the trees for us that can not repent: lest God require the blood
of as many as perish, at our own hands. Look Ezech. 3. and.33.

The Ninevites believe, and are converted.
But to return again to our Jonas, his preaching was not without efficacy:
For the people of Niniue believed God, and proclaimed a fasting, and arrayed
themselves in sackcloath, as well the great as the small of them. In a few
words he comprehends that notable change of this so great a city, which in
the words following he will declare, and set forth more to the full. First he
says, They believed God. Yet was it Jonas that preached unto them, who (as we
are assured) was but a man. Howebeit they believe God, and not men, as many as
with faith embrace the word that is preached by men. For that word of Christ
is well enough known, whereas he says: Luke. 10.
He that hears you hears me. And the Apostle commends the Thessalonians
in this respect, that they received his doctrine, 1. These. 2.
not as the word of man, but as the word of God. And because the Ninevites
believed Jonas, when he preached the word of God, therefore not without good
reason, is it said, that they believed GOD himself. And this truly is the
beginning of true Repentance and salvation. For as many as believe God, they
both acknowledge their syns to be such, as they are esteemed in gods judgment,
and also from them they convert unto God, as whom they perceive to be full of
clemency and mercy. And certainly, of this incurable conspiryng in
wickedness, which reigns now adays, and whereby all men run into ruin,
there is no other cause to be alleged than this, that there are very few,
which give unto the word of GOD that credit, that of right it deserves to
have. Secondely, these Niniuite do also testify their faith by outward works.
For straight way they proclaim a common fast, and array themselves in
sackcloath.

These were in old time the badges of outward repentance: and were now most
convenient for the Ninevites, who (without all doubt) sinned chiefly in
superfluity, in intemperancie, and in hautynesse of mind. For it may
evidently appear, that they took unto them an earneste purpose to have these
faults redressed, seeing they begin now with them selves altogether a new
trade of life. Of these things we have spoken more in our commentaries upon
Ioell, and shall have occasion offered, to speak more of them, in the next
homely: wherefore these few words for this time may suffice.

In this their example we shall have to observe, The mighty force of the word
of God.
how great the force and efficacy of the word of God is. These Ninevites
whether ye have respect unto them, or unto Jonas, had al things heaped
together, which might be any hindrance to their says, and repentance. For
their parents, of whom they were borne, were Idolatrers, they themselves were
nursed up in superstitions, and even to that day had utterly wanted the
perfecter light of the knowledge of God. Besides all this, they were become
proud, by reason of their wealth and conquests: yea they were eue^ puffed up
with a vain trust in their monarchy, which now had flourished, for the
space of a thousand and three hundred years. Neither were there wanting in this
so superstitious a nation, the crafty illusions of the devil, wherewith he
had hitherto bewitched them, to persuade the^ selves, that all things should
remain in estate good enough. To these men came Jonas, being a man that was a
stranger borne of a people both hated and counted envious, having
acquaintance with none of them, neither yet set out with any outward glory:
and he brings a message, which, as it was exceeding sour to delicate ears,
so (if we will harken to carnal judgment) rather was the messanger to be
pitied, tha^ his message to be believed. For who could possibly persuade him
self, that this most flourishing city, where against no ennimie at all was
ready to make battle, might in so short space be destroyed, and overthrown?
Yet were all these difficulties overcome by says, which now shined in their
minds, by a serete working of the holy ghost: by the which as soon as they are
stirred up, forthwith they examine their own lives, they look upon the nature
of God, they call to mind the former examples of his old judgments: and
because they epsy, that many other nations have sodeinly come to ruin for the
same causes, they rightly gather, that their own end will be after the like
sort, unless with speedy and unfeigned repentance they appease Gods wrath. In
the example of these men we see, which is our way to walk in at this present.
The word of God is preached, which both reproves our wickednesses, and
stirs us up to repent. Let us hear it attentively, examine our manners and
whole conversation of life thereby, amend those things which hitherto we have
don amiss, turn with our whole herts unto God, and call for his grace: so
shall he mercifully receive us thorough Christ Jesus: to whom belongs
thanksgiving, honor, glory, and dominion for ever. Amen.

The eight Homely.
ANd the tidings came unto the king of Niniue, which arose out of his seat,
and did his apparel off, and sat him down in ashes. And it was cried, and
commanded in Niniue, by the authority of the King, and his Lords, saying: See
that neither man, nor beast, ox or sheep taste ought at al: and that they
neither feed, nor drink water, but put on sack cloth both man, and beast,
and cry mightily unto God: Yea see, that every man turn from his evil way,
and from the ravenous extorcion that he has in hand. Who can tell, whether
God will turn and repent, and cease from his fierce wrath, that we perish
not? And God savve their works, how they turned from their wicked ways,
and he repented on the evil, which he said he would do unto them, and did it
not.

The garument and use of this present place
WHereas our Lord Jesus Christ makes declaration unto the Jews of the
repentance of the Ninevites, he does not only reprove the Jews for their
contumacie, but also thereby exciteth all men, if they be desirous to provide
for their own safety, to follow the example of this city. So then this
history is very worthy to be considered, that by it we may learn, what is
required of us, both privately, and publicly to be done. In those things,
which in the former homely were expressed, Jonas propounded the sum of the
whole matter now in hand: namely that the Noniuite believed God, and turned
unto him, testifying their repentance with outward signs, that is to say,
with public fasting and murning. In this he sets out more at large, how
and after what sort they performed it: for he makes mention both of the
example that the king him self gave, and also of the open proclamacion: which
being done, he describes the fruits of this their repentance.

First he says, Jonas preaching came to the king
that the tidings came to the king of Niniue, that is to wit, the report of
Jonas preaching, wherwithal he had even filled the greater part of the city.
For it is the manner of kings to have many ears, many eyes, and many hands,
namely officers, by whom they know, and administer all things. And such of
necessity they must have, for that themselves without further help neither
ca^ be present every where, nor suffice for the good ordering of all matters
And here even at the first is to be seen a token of a realm well governed, in
that the counselors and other officers of the court without any further
delay make relacio^ to ye king of this matter being of so great weighte,
although otherwise not so pleasant to the ear, and then, that although they
judge the matter to be such, as it is meet the king should have knowledge
of, yet do they not lay hold upon Jonas, nor accuse him as a disturber of the
common wealth, before the thing be thoroughly consulted of: but plainly, and
without any frande make they report, what is a doing in the city. Far
otherwise is the manner in many Princes courts at this day, when as in a manner
the whole devise of them that are to give counsel, is, to make kings
effeminate, and to draw them a way from cares touching the common estate, that
they may themselves rule al at their own pleasure. Hose. 7.
This fault Hose as also complained of, in the kings that lived in his time.
Such kind of counselors have evermore an eye, that Princes may understand of
nothing that might seem grievous and unpleasant unto them: but that even in
common dangers they may give themselves carelessly to bankettyng and pastime.
They are therefore ever tickling their kings in the ears, if there be offered
any occasion to follow voluptuousness: as did in time paste they that were
toward Pharaos court, who bewraied unto him the beauty of the woman Sara, Genesis
12.
being but a stranger. Howbeit if any shall in good soth utter such a thing, as
may te^d to a common safety, that either scoffingly they jest at, or else
dishonestly reiecte and with hearts full of enmity reprochfully rail at. Thus
comes it to pass, that such as give faithful warnings, are thrown in
prison before there be had any co^sultacion for redressing of matters, and are
constreined to plead their own cause in cheines, which in very deed took
greatest care for the common wealths preservation. They that thus behave
themselves, are nothing else but plagues in commonweals: as co^trarywise
those aforesaid counselors of Niniue, by their faithful report making, saved
both them selves, and their king, with the whole realm besides. This then
ought magistrates chiefly to be vigilant unto, namely to have about the^ trusty
officers: who, all desire of falsely accusing laid aparte, would diligently
mark all things, and freely give notice of such, as threate^ Gods wrath, and
utter destruction to common wealths, by reason of sin. Let them also take
diligente head, least inconsiderately they listen to such, as are wont to
accuse the ministers of Gods truth and word, to be the authors of seditions.
For seeing the world cannot abide the light of Gods word, there shall never
want some, who would wish to have it clean put out. And for this cause did
Paul give warning aforehande, that there should no accusation against an elder
unadvisedly be admitted. 1. Timo. 5.

The king is stirred up by the preaching of Jonas.
But what does the king? Is he full of indignation and fury, for that a man,
which is but a stranger, takes upon him so much authority in that City,
where was appointed his own royal seat? Does he send forth his sergeants,
and command him to be carried to prison, least by his talk, the people be
stirred to raise a commotion? No. But immediately he aryseth up from his royal
seat, he puts off his kingly attire, he sets him down in the duste, and
besides all this, by an open proclamation, he stirs up all his subiect^s to
repentance.

Wonderful was this change, and such as scarsly deserves to be credited, if
a man behold the manners and disposition of kings, with whom nothing is more
disagreeing, than the study of humility: in somuche that they themselves are
not afraid to be causers of horrible wars, rather than any thing should be
diminished from their regal authority For seeing that they are deceived by
the pleasant lures of flatterers, and so account themselves as half Gods,
exempting their own estate from the common sort of men, they judge it an
unseemly thing, that eue^ in most extreme dangers they should commit any
thing at all, which might be thought to give some resembla^ce of faint courage
and fear. Whereby it comes to pass, that they dare set themselves not only
against men, but also even against God. The example therefore of this king is
worthy of great admiration But such is the majesty of the word of God, that
being once admitted to take place within the hearts of men, streightway the
holy Ghost working therewith, it renueth, and altreth the whole man. And even at
this present, by an evident example, is that saying of Paul proved true,
whereas he affirms, 2. Cor. 10.
that by the spiritual weapons every high thing is cast down, which
exalts it self against God. Now if any refuse to give place unto this word,
and will stubburnly struggle against it, Psalm. ^.
such at length by the iron scepter of Christ are brought under, and become
examples for other men to take heed by.

Here therefore, let us diligently observe, what plagues men of our time are
worthy to undergo, who being from their chyldehoode trained up in the
Christian religion, and hearing both Christ and his Apostles, still preaching
unto them daily, yet with no admonitions or examples, can be brought to amend.

But above al, the example of this king is worthy of remembrance, The duty
of magistrates.
as by the which all Princes are put in mind of their duty. They are
ordained of God, both to uphold his worship, and also to maintain common
peace: which that they may the better bring to pass, God has committed unto
them his own statutes, least either by ignorance being deceived, or by
blind affections carried away, they should tread out of the right path. First
of al therefore, they must suffer gods word to have a roomth amongst them,
and not think them selves exempte from that duty of obedience, whereby all
other degrees of men are bound thereunto. To this end would God have Kings
well acquainted with the book of the law: Deuteronomy. 17.
the precepts whereof they followed diligently, as many as the Scriptures make
mention were allowed of God. Secondly, they must also themselves show forth
example of godliness unto the people. For in as much as the most part of men
covet to please their kings, what other thing make they their chief practice,
than to imitate their manners? So that that saying of the Poet, is found true:
As Princes mind to change their way,
Th'vnconstant people use to sway.


Wherefore in two respects is honesty of life required in Magistrates: both
for that it is meet for themselves, and also for that they must take diligent
heed, least by their own example, they bring others in like manner to offend.
And this is the reason, why the Prophets travailed so much in reprehending the
manners of Princes, even for that they can not sin without giving of common
offense unto many. But because all men do not of their own accord perform
their duty, neither follow the examples of good Princes, the third thing
necessary to be had, is good laws and ordinances, whereby they may prick
forward such as are dull, and bring in subjection those that are rebellious.

Howbeit, then shall laws have greatest authority, if the people may
understand, that they agree with Gods word. If magistrates were bente thus to
deal now adays, we should see a notable and fruitful change, of all
degrees and sorts of men. Magistrates make their greatest complaint in a manner
of their disordered licentiousness among the people: Causes of disorder among
the people.
but in the mean while very few do rightely weigh the causes thereof: amongst
which these two are the chiefest, namely, the contempt of Gods word being
preached, and the evil example that is showed.

And either of these springs from the magistrates, as from the fountain, and
from thence is spread abroad among the common people. For let any one be named
among the whole number of Princes, which earnestly thinks in his mind, that
he ought to be subject to the word of God. Many in deed there be, that can be
content to admit it. But when? Even at such time, as it puts them in any
hope of carnal liberty, and not otherwise. And thus comes it to pass, that
they themselves show evil example: and as for laws, either they make none at
all, or if they make any, by their own naughty lives, they pull away al ye
authority, so being like vnhusbandly husbandmen, that break down the hedges,
which earewhyle they had set up.

The kings proclamation for repentance
But it shall be meet, that we thoroughly view the kings proclamation, which
consists of two principal parts. The first tells what must be done. The
second contains a cause thereof. As touching the first, he commands three
things. The first is a public confession of repentance, 1. There is
enjoined a public profession of repentance.
which (as lately we declared) consists chiefly in fastings, and modesty of
apparel. For as men do oftentimes bewray their wanto^nesse by banketting, and
riottous attiring of themselves, so if at any time they perceive, that God is
angry with them, they are bound to testify the same by abstinence and
temperance. This then is the kings commandment, yt as well men as beasts, and al
kind of cattle, abstain from meat and drink, and put on sackcloath. It might
seem a thing worthy of derision here, which is spoken as concerning beasts
and cattle. But we must think, that all living things are created for man's
behoof, and that therefore do appear by the^ tokens both of Gods wrath and
also of his favor. Again, seeing the ungodly by means of their beasts and
cattle, and unmeasurable hunting of wyld beasts, do make as it were open
bragges of their excess and pride: It is meet, that even by the same they
show proof afterward of their humility, whereby they submit themselves to
God, when he corrects.

Moreover, this is a matter of great moment, to move us to repentance, if
even in brute beasts we consider the tokens of Gods wrath, which by our own
sins we have provoked. Neither may it seem strange unto us, that this king
of Niniue could perceive these things, since the very Gentiles and Heathen
people had daily experiences hereof in their Sacrifices, which they offered for
the purging of their sins.

Howbeit, here by the way, let us thoroughly observe, that all these outward
things can nothing avail in Gods sight, except they be directed to their end
and meaning, which is, that we being wholly contrite in heart, offer up our
selves a quick sacrifice unto him. For if there lie hidden any counterfaite
dealing, we shall rather offend God, who being Truth it self, can away wc no
coloring or deceyt. So then these things do nothing help the Papists cause,
who would place repentance it self in these outward things, which
nevertheless for the most part deceive, except they be directed by a true
faith. Secondly, the king warns his subjects to fall to prayer, saying:
Let them cry myghtily unto god. He names but one God, so that even hence a
man may gather, that both he was loathed with feigned gods, and that Jonas
also in his sermons did often beat in, among other his sayings, the judgment
of the one and very God. His request is, for mighty cryings of the people
unto God, that is, feruente and incessant Prayers: and seeing that he gives
admonition of them, it may sufficiently appear, that he attributed not so much
to those external exercises, whereof lately was spoken, 3. He requires
amendment of life and manners.
as to believe that they were able to satisfy for sins. Thirdly he adds:
Yea, see that every man turn from his evil vvays, and from the extortion
that he has in hand. In these words he touches the chief point of
repentance, which consists in turning to God, and amendment of life. This
word, way, signifies the manner of life, that they embraced, being in all
degrees most corrupt. But above all other, he thought good to make mention of
their extortion, because therein they chiefly offended. For as by rauine and
oppression they were clymed up to so high a top of dignity, so also that their
wealth might suffice for their riot and intemperancie, they daily put in ure
strange oppressio^s, and invented new kinds of legierdemaine, as whereby they
might draw other men's substance to themselves. In his mention making therefore
of their evil way and extortion, his meaning is to enioyn them to abstein from
al such kind of rauenies. etc.

Now in this second part, he adioyneth to the former sentence these words, in
manner of a reason: Who can tell whether God vvil turn, and repent, and cease
from his fierce wrath, that we perish not? These are not the words of a
man that stands in doubt, though they seem so to be, but rather of an
earnest faith, wrestling between hope and fear, and are to be restrained to
the temporal punishments, which Jonas had denounced unto the Ninevites. For
although the faithful do nothing waver, as touching the grace of God, and
remission of their sins, yet when they consider, that God is just, and
themselves are sinners, they are not so sure to be released of the plagues,
which God now and then brings upon them to correct them withal, as in the
example of David we do see. Moreover, the acknowledging of their sin
causes them to be modest, so that as much as appertains to the punishments
in this world, they will not arroga^tly limite God what he should do, but rather
submit themselves wholly to his pleasure. Look the sixth Homily upon the
second Chapter of the Prophet Joel.

By this example we are admonished, An excellent way to avoid punishments.
which is the best way to avoid punishments even now hanging over our heads.
And that the same consists in repentance, we are taught out of the
Scriptures: which being proprely a conversion unto God, above all things
requires faith: for except it be present, we shall never be converted unto
him, but faint and quayle, being overcome with the terrors of his justice and
majesty. Now this faith by diverse outward tokens shows it self forth,
while as men abstain from sin, become humble, and pacientely submit
themselves unto God at such time, as he does correct. These things would have been consulted of now at this day, when as we are with so many dangers on every
side beset. But, O the frowardness of this our age, both incurable and past
all hope of recovery. This king of Niniue although he had taken in hand so
holy a purpose, yet can not be careless, neither dare he promise his subjects
that al shall be safe: but now a days when as by reason of idolatry,
abominable superstitions, extortions, deceits, oppressio^s, riot,
intemperancie, whoordomes, adulteries, bloodshed, and all kind of wickedness,
all is brought out of order, yet play we the wantons in security: thinking
our selves to suffer intolerable injury, if any one somewhat freely
reprehendeth these vices. And yet in the mean season so doltish are we, as to
think, yt Gods plagues may be avoided by the policies of man: which
notwithstanding will nothing avail, unless this way of repentance be it, that
we mind to walk in.

The effects of true repentance.
Now follows the effect of the Kings proclamation and public repentance of
the Ninevites, God savve their works, how they turned from their wicked
vvayes, and he repented. etc. It is said, how that God saw their works. What
were they? Namely that they turned from their wicked ways. So then the prophets
meaning is of their conversion to God, which (as before was said) sprung of
faith, and not of outward ceremonies: therefore this place can nothing help
their cause, which would ground justification upon works and merits. And God
repented on the evil, that is to wit, on the punishment which he had
determined to bring upon them. But how may repentance be ascribed unto God?
since yt as he is eternal, so also he knows all things, and is always the
self same one, without changing. Even after the manner of men is God said in
the Scriptures to repent: for that when as men are changed, he also alters
the sentence, which before he had pronounced. Neither may we account this to be
inconstancy, forasmuch as his promises and threatenings, are for the most part
conditional, though the condition be not always expressed. Howebeit, this
example being considered, ought to stir us up to repentance. God will as well
see it in us, as he did in the Ninevites, neither will he neglect us being
converted unto him: Yea, this same God will undoubtedly healpe our afflicted
estate, although al things might seem far beyond all hope of recovery. Such
like examples as this is, are every where to be found both in holy and
profane histories.

Let us learn to follow these Ninevites, and forthwith we shall find God
mercifully inclined unto us, through Christ Jesus our Lord: To whom belongs
thanksgiving, honor, glory, and dominion for ever. Amen.

The fourth Chapter.
The ninth Homely.
Therefore Jonas was sore discontent and angry within himself. And he prayed
unto the Lord, and said: O Lord, was not this my saying (I pray thee) when I
was yet in my country? therefore I hasted rather to flee unto Tharsis. For I
knevve well enough that thou art a GOD of great goodness, merciful, long
suffering, and of much kindness, and repentest when thou should punish.
And now O lord, take my life from me (I beseech thee) for it is better for me
to dye tha^ to live. Then said the Lord: Do thou well in being so angry
within thy self? Hovvebeit Jonas gate him out of the city, and satte down on
the East side thereof: and there made him a boothe, and sat under it in the
shadow, till he might see what should chance unto the city.

We have already heard, The argument and use of this fourth chapter.
how at the preaching of Jonas, the Ninevites were converted, and so eschued
the indignation and plagues of God now being ready to have fallen upon them.
We learned in that example, how great the goodness of God is: and that he will in
like sort be merciful unto all that turn unto him.

Now follows the last part of this history, which conteyneth in it two
things. First what mind Jonas was of, when he saw that God spared the
Ninevites, and in how grievous manner he took this goodness of God. The other
is how he was reprehended by God: who therwithal gives open testimony of his
fatherly good affection toward mankind. And this part also belongs to the
doctrine of repentance, which is the whole scope of this book. For it
teaches, how the Saints and holy men sometimes after they are converted from
their sins, and have tasted of the grace of God, yet fall again, and
nevertheless feel God very gracious unto them. From whence there may also be
fetched a most effectual consolation against those that deny repentance, and
gods grace unto such, as after their first conversion, slide again into sin:
and by this means, violently hurl men into desperation, whom of duty they
ought rather to lift up, and confirm with the promises of grace. This error
has been of ancient time, ye author whereof was one Nouatus, a priest of the
Church of Rome, about the year after Christ's incarnation two hundredth and
fifty, and was in times past occasion of no little disquiet in the Church. Now
a days it is renewed again by the Anabaptists, who make in a manner the whole
drifte of all their endeavors, to bring confusion into co^gregations, and by
wonderful terroures of conscience to draw away simple men unawares, from the
communion and fellowship of such Christian assemblies. Wherefore the
considering of this chapter may not be negligently passed over in any wise.

The first thing here described, is Jonas offense. He was sore discontente,
and angry in him self. Here are expressed two affections, namely grief and
anger, which spring of our natural corruption, and cause men to commit
heinous offenses. How far awrie these affections were in Jonas, it may
manifestly appear, by the occasion whereof they sprung. He was discontente for
that God spared the Ninevites, unto whom, at his own bidding, he had
denounced destruction. So then Jonas contenciously fights against the will of
God, and by that means sins very grievously. But so much the more heinous
is this offense, for that he is not only discontent with the determinacion of
God, but so is he discontent that he also sorroweth in his mind: yea and that
again in such sort, that he is angry also, because the matter falls out
otherwise, than he before had said it should do. And seeing every jot thereof
depended upon Gods pleasure, we must needs gather, that he was angry even
with God him self. But what thing can be more shameful, more arrogante, and
more detestable, than that man, which is mortal, foolish, and a sinner, should
with blind and rash fury, storm against God, who is eternal, who knows all
things, and is most just? Surely this horrible trespass is so great, as that
there can be brought or imagined no causes so honest, so just, or so
necessary, as may excuse the same. But let us see, what moved Jonas to be so
much displeased at Gods doing. First, he perceived, that the fame and honor
of his name stood now in some hazard, and that it wanted not much, but that
thenceforth he should be accounted a lying prophet, and very vain. Besides
this, he judges it an unworthy thing, that the grace of God should be extended
also unto the Gentiles, which the Jews thought peculiarly to belong to
themselves and none other: peradventure also he stood in some doubt of his
own country men, because he had conveyed over the word of God eue^ to
heathen people, and was the causer, both that they converted, and also that
they were partakers of so great grace. For it is not unknown unto us, how
arroga^tly the Jews looked alofte, by reason of their prerogative, and how
cruelly they had al other nations in despite: since even in the Apostles times
they that believed were angry with Peter, because he went in, Acts. 11.
and preached to the Gentiles: and Paul also had this objected unto him, as an
offense worthy of death, Acts. 21.
that he had brought in me^ uncircumcised into the temple. Neither do I doubt,
but that Jonas cloked this private affection of anger, wherewithal he was so
much moved, with this plausible pretense. By the which place we are put in
mind, how greatly the affections of the flesh can prevail in us, but
especially, if they put on a show of religion: for then they forcibly draw
man away past all bounds of seemelynesse and honesty, yea rather of godliness
it self. So did the Apostles by a preposterous zeal, following their
affection, desire, that fire might be sent down from heaven, thus coveting to
make Christ the minister of their reuengemente, who to this end was come into
the world, that he might save men. Luke. 9. A diligente regard therefore must
be had, lest we mix our zeal to religion with the affections of the flesh:
which same thing has often times deceived men, both good and very holy.

Jonas falls to quarelling with God.
For Jonas is not only angry, but so much feeds he the humor of his
sorrow and anger, that he frames a grievous complainte against God, wherein
he goes about to accuse him, and to excuse his own flying away, yea for the
which not long before he had suffered so sore punishment. O Lord (says he)
was not this my saying (I pray thee) when I was yet in mine own country?
etc. He fashioneth his talk in manner of a prayer: howebeit very bitterly
does he prefer his own judgment, before the ordinance of God For so deals
he, as though he should say: Thou thoughtest, that I did unseemly and
disloially, when as, because I would not come to Niniue, I sought to resign
over thy service, and made ready to flee unto Tharsis. But they were weighty
causes, that drove me to take this voyage in hand. For even then did I see,
what would come to pass. I knew well enough, that thou art gentle and
merciful: whereby I easily coniectured, what would be the sequel: namely,
that the Ninevites being once converted unto thee, thou would draw back thy
hand, yea though it were ready and stretched out to smite, and by that means set
forth not only mine own authority, but also the certeinty and truth of thy
word, to be laughed to scorn of the ungodly. Therefore thought I it wisdom to
flee, lest any such thing should happen. etc. Let us now (in good sooth) take a
view, how many and how great sins meet here together. First of al, that
offense of fleing, whereof he had before repented, he now begins a fresh to
commit, whiles that so presumptuously he defe^deth it, and by defending
thereof, accuses God of wro^gfull dealing, because, as he was a fleing, he had
laid so sore a punishment upon him. Besides this he prefers his own wisdom
before God, laying to his charge unadvised rashness, for that he sent him ever
to the Ninevites, having not first perfectly proved, what the end of this
matter would be. Again, he blames God for those his most commendable virtues,
gentleness, mercy, bountifulness, and long suffering Moreover, so yt his own
estimacion might be advanced, he could be content to have the most excellent
city of the whole world quite ourthrowen. Neither does he here stay himself,
but that he also wishes for death, seeing there remains no other way whereby
to remedy so great a displeasure. Take my life from me (I beseech thee) for it
is better for me to die, than to live. Now, in so speaking he sins very
greatly. For in as much as the life which we have, we have it not of our
selves, but by the gift of God, it is not conueniente, that we should take in
hand, to leave it off at our own private pleasure: but rather it becomes us
to be ready, therewith to do God service, as long as he will have us in this
stage play to play our part. The same affection did God long since reprove in
Helias, when as he upon like occasion desired to die, that he might be
dispatched of those troubles, cares, and dangers, that he saw himself
co^tinualy molested with all. And this is a great argument of our frowardness,
in yt our life being ye gift of god, yet we in manner disdain to use it to Gods
glory. For as soon as any thing is to be adventured, or don for gods cause, by
and by we be weery of our life, and had rather die: but when as god would have
us to die for maintenance of his glory, strait way we redeem the use of this
present life with filthy denial of Christ's name, and faith: neither do we
covet for any other respect to prolong our life, than that we may satisfy our
abominable pleasures. This error springs from this fountain, namely, that
we weigh neither life, ne death, in a just balaunce. These things have I
entreated of Jonas somewhat the more at large, not because I have a delighte to
blemishe the fame of the Saints, or holy men, but for that in their falls
there shine forth notable tokens of the grace of God, and the considering of
them serves much for our instruction.

Men naturally are corrupt and sinful.
For first of all those kind of people, learn to acknowledge themselves, who
swelling with the confidence in their own strength, seek for salvation in
themselves, and being to much careless neglecte their own duties. And that
the knowing of a ma^s own self is not the least point of true wisdom, the
Heathen people in old time did well understand, when as they judged that
saying of Chilo, know thy self, worthy to be engraven in Apollos temple, at
Delphos. And truly, seeing that by natural instincte me^ are given to please
themselves, scarcely is there any thing of greater difficulty, tha^ that we
should acknowledge this corruption, so nere of kindred unto us. And this
corruption appears most evidently, in the examples of the Saints For when as
we see, that they have sinned, whom God of his singular grace chose to be
vessels of his glory: who will not confess, that Adam has begotten his
posterity after his own image, and that all the works of man are naught even
from his cradle, Ge. 5. and. 8
and that we have not power of our selves so much as to think any thing that
good is. 2. Cor. 3.
Very profitable is it therefore, often and diligently to consider the sins of
holy men: for by that means, both we shall have our own flesh in suspicion,
not suffering our selves to be carried headlong, by the reasons thereof: and we
shall also ascribe all the glory of our salvation and redemption, to God
alone, not vaunting our selves against him, by a vain trust in our own
merits. Hereto serves it, that ye Lord God by Esaias in his.43. Chapter with
great majesty pronounces, against such as bost in the righteousness of man:
I, eue^ I am he only, that for mine own selfs sake do away thine offenses,
and forget thy sins, so that I will never think upon them. Put me now in
remembrance (for we vvil reason together) and show, what thou have for thy
self, to make thee righteous. Thy first father offended sore, and thy teachers
have sinned against me. etc. These things also did ye saints well observe, when
as they praid, that God would not enter into judgment with them, nor yet mark
their iniquities. Look the Psalms. 143. and 130.

The opinion of the Nouatia^s is confuted.
Besides all this, as we gave warning in ye beginning, hereby is confuted that
opinion full of desperation, which the Nouatians, both of auncienter time, and
of later continuance, would bring in, who deny repentance and remission to such
as have once fallen, if they fall again, and if (as it is prouerbially spoken)
they stumble at ye same stone, whereat they stu^bled before. They abuse certain
places of ye scripture, but especially that which is contained in the epistle
to the Hebrews, whereas the Apostle writes thus: It cannot be, that they which
were once lightened, The place of the sixth to the Hebrews expounded.
and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were become partakers of the holy
Ghost, and have tasted of the good word of God, and of the power of the
world to come, if they fall away, should be renewed again by repentance as
concerning themselves crucifying the son of God a fresh, and making a mock
of him. For the earth which drinks in the rain that comes often upon it,
and brings forth herbs meet for the^ that dress it, receives blessing of
God. But that ground which bears thorns and briers, is reproved, and nigh
unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. These words in some part maintain
their assertion: but to those yt rightly look upon the matter, ye error will
steightway appear. For first of al ye Apostle speaks not of every kind of
sin, nor of every denying of the faith, but of the sin against the holy
Ghost, which they commit, who, after they have been lightened by the word of
God and holy spirit, and so have laid hold upon Christ, and thorough him
true salvation, yet of purposed malicious mind cast him off, because they
prefer the world and the love thereof before eternal life. To such as these
are, even Christ himself denies, that their sin shall be remitted: and of
the same is it that John speaks, saying: There is a sin, 1. John. 5.
for which say I not, that a man should pray. And that this is it, whereof
the Apostle to the Hebrews does mean, we are taught by that diligent rehersall
which he makes of the enlightening, of the heavenly gift, and of the powers
of the world to come: all which things are allotted unto us by the holy ghost,
whom also he expressly names. So then without good aduisemente do they extend
that to every fall, which the Apostle speaks of this only kind of sin.
Again, his words are not simply of repentance, but of renewing or
regeneration: the efficie^t cause whereof is the holy Ghost, and the end
repentance: which new birth co^prehendeth the whole life of man, and orders
it according to the prescripte of Gods will. And such as sin against the holy
ghost, he denies, that they ca^ be renewed to this repentance: so does he both
show that the cause of this incurable mischief is in the^ selves, and also
acquiteth God of all blemishe of cruelty. In proving whereof, he uses two
arguments. The first is, that they which of purposed impiety have shaken
Christ off, have no remedy left, whereby to recover salvation again, except
God should afresh give his son to be crucified, and made a mocking stock.
But because God will never do so, neither stands it with equity, that he
should appointe a new merit of salvation unto such, as have rejected the
former: therefore is it impossible, that the same men should be renewed, and
received into favor again. The other argument he fetches from their
disposition and nature: declaring, yt these kind of men are of their number,
from whom we can hope for nothing that good is. And here he uses a fine
parable. As the nature of the soil is known by the fruits that come thereof,
and most certainly that is blessed of god, which being watered with shoures
becomes fruteful: but contrariwise it is a manifest toke^ of cursed and
desperate barennesse, if neither by shoures it can be softened, nor yet by
labor tilled, to yield increase: So, if any be of such wilful obstinacy, as
that there can be no good done amongst the^ by those means of the holy ghost,
whereby God is wont to enlighten his children, to draw them, and make them
partakers of salvation, what further hope may be conceived of the^? by what
means can they be repaired and won again? For since the holy ghost alone
has the jurisdiction, and authority over our minds, past all hope (of
necessity) must their malice be, which either refuse to give him place that he
may enter, or wickedly cast him off again, having been once admitted in.
Howbeit far otherwise is the condition of the elect, to whom the same
happens, which by experience we see in ye good soil. For as in it sometime
through carelesnes of ye husbandmen, there grow up nettles and briers, yet
abides it tilling, and these being once rooted out, it receives good seed: So
also the godly and elect, being overcome with the fantasies of the flesh,
neglecte ye travail about their own minds, and by this occasion there spring
up of al sorts of vices in them: yet, when as afterward they are tilled a new
by the word of god, and made fruitful by the seed thereof, they bring forth
fruits worthy of their calling. And to this effect serve ye examples which are
every where set forth in the scripturs. David being restored after his
adultery that he had committed, yet falls again, and being become proud by
nu^bering of ye people, provoke gods wrath against himself: yet being
penitent, God receives him into his favor. We reed also yt the Apostle
Peter, Gala. 2.
when as after his denying of Christ, he was restored again to his function
Apostolical, yet fell afterward into another error, and went not the right
way after the truth of ye Gospel: all this notwithstanding, ye Lord did not
cast him away, for that he was co^te^t to hear wholesome admonitians, whereby he
was called into the right way again. What? does not Jonas at this present
stumble at his old stone, while as now he excuses his former evil done
deed, and heapeth upon it both more and grieuouser offenses? But does God (I
pray you) deprive him of all hope of pardon? No. He does rather, after he has
friendly reproved him, teach him to be of a better judgment. Neither do we
speak thus much to that end, that there might be a window opened for
wickedness, and as though we would make a law to have sin unpunished: but
to stay and hold up weak consciences, which, being amazed with the outrageous
disputacions of certain fantastical men, incline even to desperacion.

A description of God, out of Exodus 34.
And this our judgment is not a little confirmed to be true by this present
description of God, which Jonas here unawares brings out of the law,
against himself, and which alone might have been able to have confuted his
error. For if he knew God to be such a one, what folly was it to blame him
for ye, which he is accustomed to do by his own disposition and nature? Who
being well in his wits would be angry with the fire, for yt it is hot: or
with ye water, because it is moist? Howebeit it will not be unprofitable for
us, to look upon the properties here ascribed unto God, that the considering
of them may kindle a love of him in our hearts, and minister consolation unto
us in our temptations. 1. He is a God of great goodness.
First he calls him a God of great goodness, meaning that he is such a
one, as that he is moved by a natural favor (for so I may term it,) to
wish us well. Of which favor this is an euidente argument, for that of his
free grace he has created us: and truly to this end has he created us,
that he might have some, whom he might make partakers of his own goodness.
Secondly, God is merciful, yea rather, 2. Merciful.
if we behold the lively signification of the Hebrew word, he has in him the
bowels of pity, so that he can not but be greatly moved with our miseries,
and raise up himself to come and help us. For seeing he is a Father, he is
led with a fatherly affection toward us, yea rather with a motherly
inclination, than the which nothing can be more tender or fervent: as is
declared by the history of the two women, striving before Solomon for the
living child. And this motherly love he professes of himself in the.49.
chap. of Esaias with these words: Will a woman forget the child of her own
womb, and not pity the son whom she has borne? And though she do
forgette, yet will I not forget thee. etc. And David in like sort commending
the same mercy of God, in his.27. Psalm, says thus: When my father and my
mother forsake me, the Lord gathers me up. Thirdly, Jonas mencioneth, that
God is Long suffering* 3. Long suffering.
as not carried with hasty anger and fury to revenge, but grau^ting space of
repentance, even to such, as alredie deserved to be punished. Examples hereof
are extant in those men that lived in the first age of the world, in the
Chananites, in the Egyptians, in the Israelites: and at this day have we good
experience of Gods long suffering, both in common for all, and privately every
man in himself. Fourthly, Jonas testifies him to be Of much kindness, 4. Of
much kindness.
that is to say, A most bou^tiful benefactor, such a one as ouerslippeth no
occasion, whereby to do us good, and pour out daily upon us those his treasures
of goodness, which never can be consumed. For who is able to number al his
benefits, which every day he bestows both on the body and on the soul. By
his bountifulness comes it to pass, that all creatures are occupied about
our service: not only the terrestrial, but also the celestial, yea the very
angels, whom the Apostle calls ministering spirits, Heb. 1.
sent forth to minister for their sakes, which shall be heirs of salvation. 5.
He repents when he should take punishment.
Fyfthly he says, that God repents when he should punish, signifying thereby
that he is not rigorous, and such a one as will not be entreated: but that
rather he turns away those plagues which alredie he has thretned, if we
turn unto him, and call for his mercy. This might be made evident by many
examples, but because to them ye are conversant in the scriptures, they do
euerywhere offer themselves, there is little need, why we should tarry any
longer in rehersing of the same. Let us observe these properties of God
diligently, not that following Jonas example, we may find fault with them,
but that we may stay our selves upon his goodness, love him, and never suffer
our selves to be drawn away from the service of this so loving a Father.

God rebukes the envying zeal, and indignation of Jonas
Now must we see, what answer God made to Jonas. Do thou well (says he) in
being so angry within thy self? He uses such an interrogatio^, as whereby he
does both greatly reprove him, and also very strongly confute him. As though
he should say: Thou seem in thine own judgment to have just and weighty
causes why thou should be angry and fumishe. But examine straightly (I
pray thee) how well thou do so. For if I be of such nature, as thou haste
said I am, wherefore should the Ninevites feel me after an other sort? Or
what is thy desert, that I should have greater respect to thy honor, than to
mine own Nature and glory? Shall I become cruel, least thou should seem
a liar? Or think thou that I want means whereby to work thine indemnitie,
though Niniue remain still safe. etc. These and such like infinite matters
does this short admonition conteyne: and therwithall also here shines forth
the wonderful goodness of God, whereby he so patiently bears with our
complaints and murmurings, that he thinks no scorn to render a reason of his
doings, even to such as were rather worthy of punishment themselves. Yea, in
good sooth, what man are you hable to show, that with so great myldnesse, can
suffer his intents and doings so to be checked, as God is wont to bear our
foolehardinesse in taunting him? Daily do we gaynsay his judgments, daily
do we move questions, whereby either his goodness is accused, or else his
righteousness called in doubt. Yet does God bear it, and in the Scriptures
makes most friendly answers unto all these things. Howbeit very profitable
will it be, if that which here is spoken to Jonas, every man will think spoken
to himself: and as often as he brusteth out into such outcries, to consider
upon this question: Do thou well in being so angry within thy self? What art
thou that openest thy mouth against God? Says the clay to the potter, why
have thou made me on this fashion. etc. They that in this manner behave
themselves, shall eftsoons perceive rising up in their minds a greater light
of the divine knowledge: which will easily put to flight these bragging mistes
of carnal confidence and trust.

But what does Jonas? For all that he had heard thus much, The contumacie of
Jonas.
yet can he not be at rest, but gets him out of the city, and on the East
side thereof, makes him a boothe that he might thence see, what should
betide thereof at ye length. No dout he cast in his mind no other thing, than
the utter ruin and overthrow of the city. So far does carnal affection
carry him clean away, that he longs to be a minister rather of death than of
life, to them, whom God before had appointed him a preacher unto. Worthy him
self to have perished for the City.

Horrible was this obstinacy: by example whereof, we are to be stirred up,
least headyly we give scope to our own affections: but let us fear God, and
put all our hope of Salvation in his mercy, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord:
To whom belongs thanksgiving, honor, glory, and dominion for ever. Amen.

The tenth Homely.
AND the Lord God prepared a vvylde Vine, and caused it to spryng over Jonas,
that he might have shadovv above his head, to deliver him out of his pain.
And Jonas was exceeding glad of the vvyld vine. But upon the morovv, against
the spryng of the day, the Lord ordained a vvoorme, which smote the vvylde
vine, so that it withered away. And when the sun was up, God prepared a
vehement vvind, and the Sun beat over the head of Jonas, that he faynted
again, and wished unto his soul, that he might dye, and said: It is better
for me to die than to live. And God said unto Jonas: Do thou well in
being so angry within thy self, for the vvyld vine? And he said: I do well
in being angry within my self, even unto the death. And the Lord said: Thou
desire, that the vvyld vine should be spared, whereon thou bestovvedst no
labor, nor made it grovve, which was a bud but of one night, and faded
away in an other. And should not I then spare Niniue that great city,
wherein there are above an hundredth and twenty thousand persons, that
know not their right hand from the left, beside much cattle?

The argument and use of this present place
AS Jonas, when he was sent to Niniue, offended by disobedience, and for the
same was grievously punished of god: So not long after, when he sees that God
is merciful unto the Ninevites because they are converted unto him, he sins
again, and surely more heinously, than he had done before. For first of all,
being forcibly carried away by means of grief and anger, that sin, whereof
before he had repented, afresh he renews. Secondly, he accuses the counsel
and judgment of God, rashly preferring his own wisdom before the wisdom of
God. Thirdly, although he were admonished, yet does he not give place, but
still breathing after murder and bloudshead, he fixes both his mind and eyes
toward the destruction of ye city. And all these things are so much the more
outrageous, for that so far is he blinded with ambicion, that he sets his
own honor before the salvation of me^, and would have God become eue^ a
minister of his private ambition. These things are very horrible, but they are
written to our behoof: that by them we may acknowledge first our own
corruption, and then Gods grace, which is always ready to pardon, as often as
we turn unto him. Now follows Gods apology, which may in some sort be
accounted in the number of those which be called * Chriae, because it
consists of a thing done, which afterward God him self expounds, and
even in such a sort, as that he conuinceth Jonas, by the very testimony of
his own mouth. The end and use of this whole place is, to let us understand,
that the judgments of God are both just, and good: and that they do greatly
err, as many as following their own blind affections speak against the same.

God by a thing done indeed overcomes Jonas.
First, let us behold the very deed of God, which he uses in confuting and
instructing of Jonas. He brings forth a vvilde vine, and not without a
miracle, in one nights space raises he it up to so great an height, that it
ouershadowed Jonas head.

Great disputation was kept in times past about this word, whilst some would
have it to be a gourd, other some called it Iuie: and as yet there are to be
seen Augustine and Hieroms epistles bearing record of this controversy,
although it were a matter unworthy to give cause of contention to so great
men, or to stir up such disquietnesse in the Church. Howebeit thence it may
well appear, that in all ages even the most excellent and picked out
ministers of congregations have in some points showed themselves to be men,
and that therefore we ought the less to be offended at this day, with such
contentions as now do arise.

But if any thing here may be spoken according to conjectures, they seem not
to judge much amiss, who suppose it to be The apothecaries call this Ricinus
by another name Cherua.
Ricinus: for as this plant does easily grow, and by the height thereof, and
broadenesse of the eaues, gives a very large shadow, so the Greek word,
sounds very near to Kikaion, which among the Latinistes signifies Ricinus.

And yet because it is said, that it grew up in one night, I suppose, that
either it was some new kind of shrub, or at the least such an one, as our
countries be not acquainted with, and is fittest to make barbers or bowers
withal. But to what purpose were it to dispute, or contend about the name,
seeing it skilleth not what it was, so that we consider the use and end thereof,
which God observed in bringing of it forth? For sith that Jonas boiled now in
a melancholy chase unseemly for him, sith also the bower which he had made
for him self, peradventure defended him not sufficiently from the heat of the
sun, God would cheer him up with some comfort, whereby he might the easier
assuage the smarting thoughts of his mind, if outwardly no painful thing came
near to his body. Although in the mean season he also had respect to
another thing, namely, that by the sodeine and unlooked for withering away of
the shrubbe, he might draw forth the impaciencie of Jonas, and so hunt out
an argument even of his own mouth, whereby to confute him. And this is the
cause, why God also immediately the next day prepares a worm, which by his
deadly biting of the root, or stock of the shrubbe, might make it to wither
away. Neither does he only rob Jonas of this most plesaunte shadow, but he
procures a loud or vehement wind also, which might more increase the heat
of the sun, such as the East is in manner wont to be, Eurus, ab vrendo.
which amongst the Hebrews (as also among the Heluetians) took his name of
burning, as other where we have said. So then the boiling heat of the sun
beat upon Jonas head, that he sounds away for sorrow, and desires to die:
which thing gave God occasion to deal with him, as afterward it shall
follow. Now before we wade any further, let us see, what there is, that
beside the state of this Chria ought to be marked.

First of all, God is greedy in getting occasions, whereby to amend us.
we have here to consider the goodness of God, who with so great desire,
watches an occasion, whereby to convince Jonas of his error, and to call him
to a better mind, that was now vanquished by the affections of the flesh, and
set on fire through impaciencie and grief of mind.

This is a common thing with God, that he takes upon him self the care of
us, when as we neglecte, both him, and our own salvation. So in old time
first sought he Adam up, and with the promises of a Messiah to come,
recreated him being sore astonished with the terrors of sin.

Likewise when as David was careless and ready to perish in his inordinate
lust, God sent in unto him Nathan, to stir him up with a very fine parable,
and marvelous fit for the purpose. And such like examples may every where be
found, yea we ourselves have daily experience of the like, when as he pulls
us by the ear, either by means of his word, or by the admonitions of our
friends, or by the reprochefull checks of our ennemies, or by other unwonted
chances, that we may be mindful both of our sins committed, and of our
duties, and so study to come in favor with him again.

Wherefore whatsoever such things shall happen, they must dilligently be
marked: least while we neglecte them, we also suffer loss of our own
salvation.

Moreover, we are admonished, All things increase and decrease at Gods
apointment.
that at Gods beck all things come and go. For as in the beginning he created
of nothing the whole frame of this world, and afterward cladde the earth
with all kind of plants and corns, and also by the power of his word
brought forth things having life, some living on the earth, some on the
water, and some other flying in the air, and all for man's use: So does he
alone daily by his divine power create, and preserve all things, that serve to
the susteining of man's life.

This thing are we taught by many places of the Scripture, amongst which
those are chiefly worthy of remembrance, which are contained in the Psalms:

Thou O God, (says David) sendest the springs which become rivers, that
they may run among the hills. All beasts of the field drink thereof: and
the vvilde asses quench their thirst. Beside them shall the fowls of the air
have their habitacio^, and sing among the branches. He vvatereth the hills
from above: the earth is filled with the fruit of thy works. He brings
forth grass for the cattle, and green herb for the service of men. That he
may bring food out of the earth, and wine that makes glad the heart of
man: and oil to make him a cheerful countenance, and bread to strength man's
heart. Psalm. 145. Thou openest thy hand, and satisfiest the desire of all
living creatures. And again in the 147. Which covers the heaven with
clouds, and prepares rain for the earth, and makes the grass to grovve
upon the mountains. Which gives fodder unto the cattle, and feeds the
young ravens when they call. Which gives snow like wool, and scattreth the
hoare frost like ashes. etc. But as he alone liberally gives all these things,
and that without any labor: so is he able also sodeinly to take the^ away,
and to leave us destitute of al things necessary, if so be, that either our
sins deserve it, or it be nedeful for us that way to be instructed. For the
same which here chanced to Jonas, namely to have his wild vine (than the
which at this instant he esteemed nothing deerer) taken away from him, by the
gnawing of one little worm, we also have often in experience: seeing that one
frost or hayle falling within the space of one hour, is of force enough to
take up the increase of an whole year: one lightning coming down from heaven,
or burning rising of some other causes despoyleth us of all our substance at
once: yea, we our selves in a manner not knowing how our great wealth and
abundance melts away, even within our hands. Neither has God the ordering
of these things alone, but also he stretches out his hand as far, as to
our bodies: and by him comes it to pass, that either to much heat, or
unmeasurable cold, Diseases are sent unto us from God above.
or corrupt humors breed diseases in us, wherwithall we are brought so low,
as that we see even death before our eyes. He himself bears witness hereof,
whereas Exodus 15. he says: If thou shall keep all mine ordinances, I will
put none of these diseases upon thee, which I brought upon the Egyptians.
Again Leuit. 26. I will visit you with terror, swelling and burning fevers,
that shall make your eyes dasell, and your hearts to pine away. And in an other
place: The Lord shall strike thee in the knees, and in the thighs, with a
mischeuous botche, which can not be healed, from the soale of thy foot unto
the croune of thy head. etc. And in this respect are sicknesses in the
scriptures called by the name of scourges, even for that they are not laid
upon us at all adventures, but by the singular determination of God, whose
custom is with them to threshe out the wantonness of our flesh, that he may
the easilier hold us in doing of our duty. Very profitable is it for us,
diligently to be conversant about the consideration of these things, that we
may understand, how that both prosperity and adversity are sent unto us from
God, as well the one as the other. For so shall it come to pass, that neither
we shall abuse the comfortable gifts of god, nor yet murmr in feeling of our
plagues, which we are assured to be laid upon us, by the just judgment of
God.

Howbeit let us pass over to Jonas, Jonas passes measure both in joy, and
also in sorrow.
and see what manner of man he showed himself: First, as soon as the wild vine
was spro^g up, he is glad, and that not after a competent sort, but so that he
is almost beside himself for joy. For that does the Hebrew phrase importe,
which makes mention that he rejoiced with great joy. But as soon as he
perceives it to be withered away, and that he himself is tormented with the
intolerable broyling of the sun, again he sorroweth, and retourning to his
former complaints, wishes to die. Neither stays he there, but being
demanded of God, most stoutely defends he that his rebellyon, and cries
out that he has both just and v^^yghtye causes, why he should be
offended. I do well (says thee) being very angry in my self, even unto
the death, that is to say: The causes of my wrath are so weighty, that I am
not without good skill weary of this my life, and ought to prefer death
before it.

The force of affections.
By which example we are taught, how great the force of affections is, since that
they are so much able to prevail, even in holy men and worshippers of God, as
that they are not afraid openly to set themselves against God, and do many
other things unseemly. For who will not account it a very chyldish thing, that
so great a Prophet is so joyful of a shrubbe, as that he does not once think,
for what use God made it. And his doing is not only childish, but also
foolish: for yt when he saw it withered away, he is as sore disquieted, as
though there were none other shrubbe left thoroughout the whole world, or that
the like chance never happened before. Now, where as he is angry for such a
things sake, as has no life, he deserves the name of a mad man: but where as
he quarelleth with God, his doing is joined with manyfeste impiety. The self
same things are at this day also put in practice very commonly. For if there
happen any thing unto us, according to our own desire, streightway we give our
selves to such an excessive rejoicing, as yt we neither acknowledge God to be
the bountiful giver of this good thing, nor yet ponder in our minds, what use
we ought to take thereof. But if it so fall out, that God plucketh away the
same from us again, forthwith we are in such sort swalowed up with sorrow and
heuinesse, that we run headlong into desperation, as though in the whole world
there could no way be devised, whereby to releue our necessity. Now, if any
man dare be so venturous, as to reprove and blame this our folly and
impaciencie, then are we not ashamed to defend our own cause, and to bring
our action against God, as though contrary to right and equity he had taken
from us somewhat, that was our own before. As for example sake, if any die,
with whom by being conversant, we have before time reaped much commodity,
or such as by nature are with a nearer blood of love linked unto us, namely
parents, children, wife, kinsfolks, and those also that have stand us in
stead of such. The like is to be seen also, if our goods be either burnt
with fire, or by tempests overwhelmed, and so perish, or if we feel any
other loss of our substance. And this verily is not only an unseemly point,
but also very far dissonant from the duty of a christian. In deed it is
lauful in adversity to lament, to be sorry, and to complain therefore: (for God
has not made us stones or stocks, as though we should be touched with no
feeling of grief, yea we read also, that even Christ him self wept, was
heavy unto the death, and made an heavy complainte upon the Cross) yet
such a christian moderation is therwithall to be used, as may lift up our
minds somewhat higher, to the contemplation of the judgments of God: so shall
we streightway not only understand that he has done all things, both with
Justice, and also in good order, but therwyth be driven to confess, that the
corruption of our Nature did enforce, that he should deal with us, as
already he has done, and no otherwise.

But what does GOD at this present? According to his own goodness, although
Jonas moan were far out of square, God overcomes Jonas, by the testimony
of his own mouth.
yet is he content to bear therewith: howbeit that is done in such sort, as
that eue^ by the testimony of his own mouth, he conuinceth him of sin and
error, that he was run into: and also sets forth unto him the true meaning
and use of this Chria. Thou (says he) desire that the vvylde vine should
be spared, whereon thou bestovvedst no labor nor made it grow, which was a
budde but of one night, and faded away in an other. And should not I then
spare Niniue that great City. etc. He uses a comparison, wherein both he
conferreth Jonas with himself, and also the wild Vine with Niniue, and the
rather to persuade, he makes many members of this comparison. First, thou
which art a man mortal, not in thine own power or liberty, would have
the wild vine spared, by the shadow whereof thou enioiedst some pleasure: and
should I, which am an Eternal God, and Lord of all things, not spare them
whom I allow, and whose repentance very greatly I delight in? Again, thou
would have the wild vine spared, which is but a shrub without sense: and
do thou account it as a fault in me, for that I spare a City, which
consists of men, for whose sake I created not only shrubs, but also heaven
and earth together, with all things contained therein? Thou did but headily
love this wild vine, which grew up without thy labor and travail: and shall
not I bear loving affection to the City Niniue, which through me is come up
to so great a renoume? Besides this, thou art sorry for a little plant, which
sprung up in one nights space, and withered again in one day: but in the
mean season would have Niniue overthrown, which attained unto that
majesty that now it has, scarsly in some hundredth years. Moreover, the wild
vine with the shadow thereof, was profitable to none besides thy self:
whereas Niniue is in manner of a shadowing harbor for many thousands of people,
living under the defense of it, and may also hereafter serve to set forth my
glory. Again, the wild vine was a shrubbe that bare no fruit: but in Niniue,
besides men and women that are come to full grouth, there are an hundredth and
twenty thousand infants, and an innumerable store of cattle also, which may be
applied to very great use. Finally, the wild vine perished alone without the
damage of any other thing: but Niniue by her ruin should draw to destruction
together with it self many other cities, and in a manner the whole empire of
the East. These and such like matters are contained in this comparison:
whereby Jonas is so convinced, as that he has nothing left him, whereby to
shape God an answer again. Howebeit there are in this place some things, that
deserve singularly to be considered.

First, The goodness of God toward such, as murmr against him self.
here shines forth the incredible goodness of God, who so patiently bears
with this Jonas, although he were a quareler, and rebellious. Neither does he
only bear with him, but also instructs him: yea he attempereth himself to
the stubbornness of his nature, and in such sort deals with him, as that
(whether he will or no) he wresteth out of him a confession of the truth, and
so calls him from his wandering home, into the right way again. Where (I
beseech you) is such a master to be found, that will with so great lenity
bear with his servant? yea although he were such a one, as whose service he
could not be without. The like goodness of God brightly showed it self in
time past toward David, whom by Nathan he brought to that pass, that after
the same sort he confessed his own detestable fact. And in the Gospel
Christ does likewise convince Simon of his error, Luke. 7.
and beats back the arrogante confidence in our own righteousness. Add
hereunto, that he so conformeth him self to our rudeness, as that although
most fondly we question, and sometime also very bitterly we scoff at those
things, which he speaks unto us, yet for all that can he not abide so to be
kept off at the staves end: but many times, either dissembling the matter, or
else friendly and covertly blaming this our peevishness, he continues still the
giving forth of such lessons, as the knowledge whereof is very necessary unto
us, for the obteining of salvation. Of this lenity many exampls are to be
found in the gospel: amongst which those especially are excellent, and very
comfortable, which are propounded in Nichodemus, and the woman of Samaria. Look
John the.3. and.4 Cha. Both these points before me^cioned we have at this day
commonly in good experience, since that either outwardly by examples, or
inwardly within our minds, by the inspiratio^s of ye holy ghost, he beats us
down, when we murmr against him. When as again we either malapertly contemn
ye doctrine of salvation, or shamefully seek to infame it, yet does he not so
give us over, but changes himself as it were into al forms, and leaves no
trade of teaching untaken in hand, whereby to make us apt scolers ready to
receive his instructions. But such is our own frowardness and the unhappy
estate of our age, that all this notwithstanding, many will not give place, who
in time to come shall suffer severe punishment, for such contumacie.

An example of the providence of God.
Then, is there again set forth an example of the divine providence, whereby
all things, as well little as great are so kept together, that it is impossible
for any thing to be without the limits thereof. For besides that manifest
arguments thereof were plainly to be seen in the winds, in the sea, in the
whale, and lastly in the wild vine suddenly sprung up, and as soon withered
away again: now at this present he testifies that he has not only a care
over the City, but also he brings in a certain number of infa^ts, and does
moreover make mention of cattle, as which he could not chose but have some
regard of. As touching infants, that God is careful for them, the Scripture
does every where teach, and especially Christ, who affirms, that certain
Angels are appointed unto them, and that the kingdom of God does belong unto
them. So then the madness of the Anabaptists is the rather to be hissed out,
who drive away children (as though God had nothing to deal with them) from the
congregation, which is the outward kingdom of God. Here also by the example
of God are condemned such, as take no care over the children, whom themselves
have begotten: and do either shamefully neglecte them, or as yet more, by their
ungracious bringing up, and evil example corrupt them. Let them (in Gods
name) call to mind what punishmente they are worthy of, by the judgment of
God, who is so far from having us to neglecte our children, that he has
ordained especial laws for beasts and cattle, yea even for the young birds.
Look Exodus 20. and.23. And Deute. 22. etc. In the mean season let there from
hence be fetched a consolation, both for parents, and also for common
wealths, which think the multitude of children or people to be such, as may
not well be borne with all: and do therefore stand in dread, least they should
become destitute of things necessary. God knows the certain number, how
many dwell in every family and City. He is not ignorant also, what things they
have need of. And the same God which feeds the birds of the air and
provides pasture for the cattle, will not be careless over such as depend
upon him. Math. 6. etc.

The justice of God, who moderateth the rigor of his judgments, with mercy.
Besides all this, let us thoroughly mark the justice of God, who does so
moderate the rigor of his judgments with his mercy, that no man can justly
utter any complainte against him. For if so be that he has regard to infants,
and cattle, yea even at such time, as he intends to cut off whole cities by
the roots, who can doubt, but that he has an especial respect unto all and
singular the Godly, who for the most part have wicked and ungodly mingled
amongst them? So in times past saved he Noe from the flood, and Loath from the
burning of Sodom. And when as he brought his plagues upon Egypt yet according
to his wisdom he knew, how to make a difference between his ennemies and his
own people, lest they should be wrapped in both the one and the other, in the
like calamities. Let this be marked of them, which (being offended with that
universal licenciousnesse in sinning, that now a days reigns every where)
stand in dread, that them selves do in vain study after godliness, seeing
they also of necessity must perish with the ungodly. The cause of this
erroneous doubt is, for that they measure God by their own brain: and because
themselves can see no way how to escape, therefore they suppose, that God also
wants means, how to save and deliver those that are his. Howbeit far
otherwise is the manner of Gods dealing, who calls those things that be not,
Romans 4.
as though they were, and suddenly out of darkness can bring forth light:
neither suffers his judgments at any time, to be carried with a blind and
inconsiderate violence. Which that we may the better understand, he has set
forth examples of this matter, even in those things which seem to be
wroughte, yea rather are wroughte in deed, by the lauful course of nature, and
ordinarily. For although the earth does unto the upper region of the air
euerywhere make deliverance of vapors, which be the matter whereupon the
rain is made: yet does not the rain water the earth every where at once, but
it is governed at Gods beck and pleasure, to rain upon one city, and not on
an other: As before we have heard declared in Amos chapter.4. So likewise
when the hayle falls down with terrible storm, so as it should seem to
lay all things waste, both far and wide, yet is it no seldom seen thing,
that in one and the self same coast of a country, some men's fields and
vineyardes are beaten flat with the ground, some other men's remaining unhurt
and untouched. But he that takes this heed in things without life, shall we
think, that he goth on with blind rage against men?

Hereto account, that even in the overthrows of Cities and nations, all are
not in the like hazard at all times. For it comes often to pass, that
whylest some myserably perish, other some find favor among their enemies, and
are advanced amongst them to great estimation and honor: as the examples of
Hieremie, Daniell, and his fellows, will sufficiently teach us.

And among the Turks many such things have happened: as they can make
report, who at any time have been conversant with them. Yea, notwithstanding
sometime Cities very populous are horribly destroyed, together with the
infantes, women, and old aged men thereof, yet does not this hinder the
matter. For God does not (for all this) pass the bounds of Justice and
mercy. For if after the rule of the law we examine all Adams posterity, of
what soever age or sex, we shall find that no one is without fault, and
therefore no one suffers any injury. Consequently, our own frowardness
does even crave thus much, that God would now and then by such outward
examples testify his wrath against sin, least otherwise we flatter our
selves in sin continually.

Last of all, if there be any more innocente than the residue, whether they be
young infants, or old men stouping downwarde for age, yet sustain they no
damage, though in these things they take like part with the ungodly. For out
of the wrestling place of this world, replenished with calamities, they are
translated up into heaven, and receive the everlasting reward.

Let no man therefore find fault with God in his judgments, who as he is
just so is he also accustomed with a fatherlye good will to embrace such as are
his, and to appoint their Salvation, as the shoteanchor and final end of all
his doings.

A brief sum of the history of Jonas.
Thus much, according to the quantity of the talent, wherewith I am put in
trust, have I entreated upon the history of Jonas, it sets forth
repentance, and does not only make manifest all the trade thereof by three
examples, but also assures us, that it is acceptable and effectual with God.
Moreover, it exhibiteth unto us a figure of Christ Jesus, whom God has given
unto us an author of repentance and remission of sins.

All these things which herein are spoken, let us apply to our selves. For
God straightly requires repentance at this day, no less than in times paste
he did of the Niniuits, and that it is greatly needful, both this outrageous
dissoluteness in sinning, and also many tokens of Gods indignation do plainly
testify. Let us then convert from our evil ways, and embracing Christ, daily
grow forward in him, that in time to come, we may with him live in heaven. To
whom be ascribed thanksgiving, honor, glory, and dominion for ever. AMEN.

Imprinted at London by H. Bynneman for Rafe Nevvberie, dwelling in
Fleetestrete, a little above the Conduit. ANNO. 1573.

OMNIA TEMPVS HABENT.

BE

printer's device of Henry Bynneman


