The Sermons of Master Ralfe Gualter upon the Prophet Zephaniah written in
Latin.

Translated into English by Moses Wilton.

Seen and allowed.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Dawson at the three Cranes in the Vintree for
Tobie Cook, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Tigers head.
1580.

To the right worshipful Sir Thomas Barrington Knight, Moses Wilton wishes
increase of that peace, which the world gives not.
AS God by that trial that he gives us of his mercy, knoweledge and
goodness does most forcibly hale us on in that obedienc which he so often
calls for in his word: so, right worshipful, there is no man that by any
means can sooner procure unto himself good liking and love of others, than by
courteous dealing, and showing him self godlily disposed in all things. For
though men's hearts in these days are become very like the stone of Sycilia, the
which the more it is beaten, the harder it waxes, yet we see many men's hearts
enforced to relent by gracious dealing, not unlike to the Diamond, which being
moystned in the warmeblood of a Goat, may be bruised, though otherwise it
cannot be hurt with any fire, be it never so hot, nor broken with any
violence, be it never so strong. We see the horse which erst while was
outragiously fierce, yet by gentle handling to be meekned to the saddle: the
dog in like manner whose nature is agreeable to his name, is by gentleness
brought too do that that is not incident too his nature: I my self have seen
a stout hearted child shed many salt tears, at the loving speech of him, that
with many sharp stripes could not wring out one. Many things else might be
said to show this matter, but these that are already set down being joined
with the practice of the wicked mentioned in the tenth Psalm, may suffize for
the proof thereof: for there it is written that he by crouching and bowing
himself brings that too pass against the poor, which by open defiance he
could never compass, and therefore in the same sense ver. 9. he is compared to
a fowler, etc. wherefore he must be more contrary then an enemy, more
churlishe then a dog, more untamed then a wild horse, more hardharted then
the Diamond whose mind cannot be mollified toward him, of whose courteous
dealing and godly disposition he has had sufficient trial. And as he cannot
but without great unthankfulness remember the one, so can he not without
great ungodliness but highly regard the other. With all which falts, I might
justly be charged, if after so good experience had of your worships so good
dealing toward me I should not, if by any means I could show some token of
my mind as well thankful for the same, as also reverently esteeming of those
blessings of God wherewith it has pleased his goodness to beautify you. Among
the which this especially deserves never to be forgotten, that he has
begotten in your mind a love of his truth, with an earnest desire to hear and
have the same preached, having left very many (I might say the most part of
like calling as yet either in utter hatred or careless contempt thereof. For
(leaving no small number, either by authority to be corrected, and that in
have, or else reserved (I fear me) for some notable purpose, which they groan
for, and wish instantly to live unto, because their souls are drunken as yet
with the cup of that whore of Rome, whose constant children they long to show
them selves: (leaving (I say) no small number of these, either to be seen unto
by the Magistrate, or to the accomplishing of that purpose, whereof they now
begin to be in good hope, by reason they have bin suffered so long: who is he
almost among those bigger ones, that thinks not that God is greatly bound
unto him, if after waiting for him an hour, and sometimes more, until he have
dressed himself in the English disguise, and will scarce at the length come to
the hearing of his word, where if he continue hearing the Lord speak above
one hour, he forthwith complayneth of tediousnes, and was before no more
careless to come, then he is now careful to be gone, yea oftentimes he
flingeth out as one weary of the Lord, and all his company, and therefore
leaves him to speak to whom he will, neither regarding the presence of God,
from whence he departs, nor yet making any reckoning of that injury, which
by his example he offers to many, whom he imbouldeneth to like careless
contempt of GOD his word. The hearing whereof is ever so much more burdenous
unto him, by how much less he perceives to agree with his accustomed vanity.
And yet for all this he bears himself in hand very mightily, that he is a
marvelous good protestant: yea and he will either kill him, or die on him that
shall affirm the contrary, thinking in deed that he has deserved well at the
hand of God, if now and then he give any of his Ministers the hearing of a
Sermon, though it be with great yrksomnes of mind, hungring in the mean time
after the world and the pleasures thereof, whereunto he is tied inseparably.
But let him, and all such know for a surety, that by this kind of dealing
they are so far from deserving well of the Gospel, that it sustaineth
reproof by this their so little love to hear it, so small purpose of heart
to consent unto it, and no bringing forth of the fruits thereof, yea let every
man know that although he bestow his time in the hearing, reading, or meditating
thereof, yea his goods and life it self in the defense of the same, yet can
he not challenge any well deserving of the truth, but the truth may justly of
him, because the goodness thereof (which is the work of Gods spirit) has so
ravished his mind, that nothing is now dear unto him, but it alone. For who
can recompense the word for begetting him to God? does wisdom cry unto us,
because she is imperfect without us? No, no, it is for our profit that she
would so lovingly imimbrace us: as for her self, though we al perish, she is
never the worse, if none perish, she is never the better. And shall we think
that our coming to hear her, does in any respect beautify or adorn her that
is perfect without us? some think so, I wot it well, yea I would the most
were not persuaded so: for then more should be adorned by her, for she lodges
not, but with the meek hearted ones. O good Lord, who has bewitched us with
this mind? Surely the very pride of our mind, that suffers us not to go to
the hearing of Gods word, with an humble and reverent purpose of heart calling
upon God to be profited thereby, but rather to furnish out the show of hearers,
thinking so to come within the preaching of the word, and to bring it within
the compass of our danger. Whereupon it comes often to pass, that more
thanks are given to some hearers, for being at a Sermon, by some, then there
are unto God for the benefit of his word taught therein: yea some Preachers also
(I fear me) can be contented now and then to join with their hearers to rob
God of his glory, I mean such as seek for credit by their auditorie. But
leaving these Pickthanke Hearers and Preachers, which carrye the praise from
God, unto that will of god whereunto he has foreordained them. I return. Seeing
therefore it pleased God, moreover and besides many other blessings bestowed
upon you, to enrich your heart with this precious pearl, of love to his word
(which is a true token of the new man put on: so that the heat thereof now
flameth out, to the benefit of many dwelling in Kings Hatfield and the places
thereabout in those parties of Essex, by reason of that godly exercise of
preaching, which it pleased god by your worships means to bring in thither,
that thereby many might be raised from their death in sin, unto the life
which is in Christ Jesus, others confirmed in the faith, and all dispisers left
without all excuse unto Judgment: seeing I say it has pleased God to make you
have such a love to his word, thereby declaring that ye are of God, and that he
has taken you not only from the number of Gods professed enemies: but also of
godless Gospellers, whose name is all that they have of christianity, I
thought my part (the premises considered) and having not only many ways when
I was in those parts, but since my departure also, experienced your worshippes
good dealing toward me to offer unto your godly protection these few days
travel in the alone. Englishinge of these M. Gualters Sermons upon the Prophet
Zephaniah, being persuaded that Sermons shall never miisse good intertainment
there, where such a love of Sermons is, whereby I was the rather imboldened, to
request your worships godly patronage against such as can pass by nothing,
without some wra^gling. Craving moreover that ye would allow and accept in
good part this my doing how small soever, as a token of my thankful mind,
which would not stay to do that that I ought if I cold do that that I cannot.
But this I have don, least I should be unto your worship as the Humble be is
unto the fair flower, which when she has sucked honny out thereof, leaves it
and departs: or like the Swallow, which having bred in a man's chimney,
gets her self thence, leaving nothing behind her, but her nest of clay. What
profit shall come thereof I know not, what I would should come, God knows:
only my hope is that it shall not be altogether unprofitable: for who dare but
go forward, when god threatens him for standing still? who can sleep when the
trumpet that foundeth out Gods Judgment cries so loud in his ears (awake?)
who can but look to the amendment of his, whether children and servants, seeing
the Lord threatens to visit those children and servants that are wicked, yea
though they belong to the king? Who will be holden back from reforming abuses
not only in himself, but also in those that be under him, when he hears the
Lord say that he will make a speedy riddance of all such as in meekness of
heart have not sought him, and wrought his Judgment. All which things with
many other are at large set out in this Prophecy, directed especially against
such which while they might, would not for some worldly respect reform them
selves from those gross enormities, and blind superstitions wherewith they were
enta^gled: notwithstanding they were often called therefroe by the Ministers of
God, the Prophets whom he sent unto them. The Lord grant that we may lay
these things to heart, and so apply them unto our selves, that the fearce
wrath of the Lord that hangs over our heads, and is already threatened to
fall upon us, may be turned away: or, if it must needs come, because no
warning will serve us, yet that all those whom the knowledge and appearing of
his grace has called from the lusts and ungodly vanities of the world unto
the working of his Judgments in lowliness of mind may be hidden in that
day. But that I breed not irkesomnes in sted of bringing profit, I cease to
speak of these things which are more at large and very truly, though plainly
laid open in these sermons, showing as well the meaning of this Prophecy, as
applying the doctrine therein contained to that use whereunto it was first
revealed, which in no age could more fitly be done, than in this grisly old
and down stouping age of the world, which by reason of blind and wilful
ignorance is made drunk with the pleasures of sin, whose end is death that
stays not. And as it may agree with other countries, yet with none better and
more fitly than with England, which is now ouerspread with the self same
abominations, which the Prophet Zephaniah reckneth up, as causes why the Lord
made a clean dispatch of Judah and Jerusalem, as it may appear to him that
shall compare our ouerflowing iniquities in England, with those that the
Prophet sets down in the first and third Chapters of his book, for the
which the fearce wrath of the Lord came upon them, and for the suffering of the
like we also are with patience to prepare our selves, for God is no partial
God, he is no accepter of persons, and therefore we must needs follow them in
punishment, whom we are not only like, but also do go before in sin. Only
the name of God be magnified for ever more, for that his working grace in the
hearts of his little flock, whom he promises to hide in the day of
vengeance and wrath, and grant that the same may take daily increase in your
heart, so reformed to allow of his truth, and that you have some attending
upon you, who not contented with a civil life, (wherewith many deceive them
selves) is inwardly reformed with a heart hungring and thirsting for the
appearing of the Lord Jesus, so the rest what soever they be not stasting of
the sweet mercies of God his love appearing in Jesus Christ (and therefore
attending not upon you, but that that is yours) may be brought as well to the
inward feeling, as outward profession of the same goodness, if it be his will
that ungodliness may be suppressed in them, or else that they maybe cut of from
you as rotten members, not meet for so sound an head, that the immortal
commendations of the heathen captain Cornelius, may always follow Sir Thomas
Barrington a true Christian Knight, which is, that he feared God, and all his
household. And thus committing the success of all things to him that is able
to do exceeding abundantly above that, that we can either speak or think,
and your Worship, to the protection of the same Almighty, I end, this 4. of
June. 1580.

Your Worships in the Lord, Moses Wilton.

The Argument according to the Geneua correction.
SEeing the great rebellion of the people, and that there was now no hope of
amendment, he denounces the great judgment of GOD, which was at hand,
showing that their country should be utterly destroyed, and they carried away
captives by the Babylonians. Yet for the comfort of the faithful, he prophesied
of Gods vengeance against their enimyes, as the Phylistines, Moabites,
Assyrians and others, to assure them that God had a continual care over them.
And as the wicked should be punished for their sins, and transgressions: so
he exhorts the godly to patience, and to trust to find mercy, by reason of
the free promise of God, made unto Abraham, and therefore quietly to abide till
God show them the effect of that grace, whereby in the end they should be
gathered unto him, and counted as his people and children.

IN the first Chapter is showed the kindred of the Prophet unto the fourth
generation, and the time of the Prophet. 1. Secondly the punishment is
denounced. 2. 3. Thirdly the place, personns, and sins are described, upon
whom, and for the which the punishment insued. 4. 5. 6. 8. 9. Fourthly the
manner of the punishment, and the time thereof is declared unto the end of the
Chapter.

The first Sermon upon the Prophet Zephaniah.
THe word of the Lord which came unto Zephaniah, the Son of Cushi, the Son
of Gedaliah, the Son of Amaria, the Son of Hizkiah in the days of Josiah,
the Son of Amon king of Judah. Reg. 22.1.


2 I will surely destroy al things from of the earth says the Lord, I will
destroy man and beast, I will destroy the fowls of the heaven, and the fish of
the sea, and ruins shall be to the wicked, and I will cut of man from of the
land, says the Lord. Reg. 21.1^.


BEcause God would have his word, which in time past, he has revealed by the
ministry of his servants the prophets, to be in use, or to serve not only
for those ancient times, but has covered the same word being committed to
writing, unto ye succeding posterities, yt out thereof, men of al times and
ages, might receive instruction and consolation: Of the titles of the Prophets.
we may not think that it was rashly done of the Prophets, in preadioyning to
their writings certain titles, or inscriptions, in the which, they do declare
the nature or kind of their doctrine, setting out also what they them selves
were, and what time they prophesied. For as by these things they procured unto
their doctrine credence, and authority: so they send the Readers to the
history of their times. The diligent consideration whereof does teach in what
steed their doctrine may stand us. And certainly these things offer them
selves of us to be considered in the inscription, or title, which the Prophet
Zephaniah uses, wherein these three things very manifestly are comprehended.

^re a^ ^word
For first he admonishes, how his doctrine ought to be regarded, when he
speaks thus, The word of the Lord which came to Zephaniah: therefore he
avouches that he brings the word of God, which he had learned of a peculiar,
or private revelation, least any man should think, that he thrust upon the
Church his own dreams or inventions. For we know that it is very diligently
forseene as well in the old testament, as in the new, that no voice but Gods
only should be heard in his Church: but thou must note that that is expressly
called the word of GOD, which not God him self published from heaven but that
which ye Prophets first without al doubt with lively voice, or word of mouth
preached: but afterward comprehended in writing. It might be thought a point
of arrogancy or pride in them, for intituling their books after such a sort,
2. Pet. 1.22.
except it were known that they did it by virtue of their office, that as the
Ambassadors of God him self, they should warrant the truth of their
doctrine. But the Apostle Peter in like manner renders a reason of that
matter, when he says, that the holy Ghost was with, or assisted the Prophets,
and in his latter Epistle chap 1. sending the godly to the doctrine of the
Prophets he writes thus: The prophecy in times past came not by the will of
man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy ghost, and the
matter it self declares that this thing was truly spoken by the Apostle. For
all the doctrine of the Prophets is occupied about the consideration of man's
salvation, then about faith and the worship of God, and conversation of life:
Lastly about the fortelling of things to come: but of all these things there
is no one, wherein there appears not manifest arguments of Gods spirit.
For, as much as belongs to the consideration of salvation, they teach no
other way then that which is comprehended in the first promises made by GOD,
whereof also Christ Jesus is the fulfiller and mediator for us, whom God the
father before all beginnings has appointed to be the Savior of mankind: but
if thou have regard unto faith, the worship of God, as also unto whatsoever
things apperteine to the conversation of life, they teach nothing which
agrees not, either with the law of nature, or the ten commandments,
containing the law of nature, approved or allowed of, by the consent of all
men: but in their prophecies, or foreshewinges there appears such knowledge
of things to come, that all men examining those prophecies, with the things
coming to pass accordingly, must needs confess that the same far passes
the reach of man's reason: For that we may let pass those things, which they
foretold to men of their time, or of their country, who will not affirm that
they received of the spirit of Christ those things, which they foretold of
his death, resurrection, enlarging of his kingdom, and of the end of the
world? these things ought considerately to be marked against those which do
call their writings either into question, or else with open mouth affirm, that
they belong nothing at all unto us. For what reason does enforce us to doubt
of those things which we see confirmed by so many, and those so certain
testimonies? Furthermore seeing in these prophecies, is contained the word of
God, whereunto all men must be subject, who will affirm that it belongs not
unto him self, except he which with professed ungodliness dare deny unto
God his obedience?

What this Prophet Zephaniah (...)
Moreover not only the name of Zephaniah is here set down, but his father
also, and his graundfather, his fathers graundfather and great graunfather are
named: touching whom although there is not else where in the Scriptures, any
thing extant, neither yet that doctrine of the Jews deserves much credence,
which affirm that so many of the Prophets fathers as are by name mentioned in
the scriptures, were Prophets: Notwithstanding, for mine own part, I doubt
not, but the ancesters of Zephaniah were men renoumed with authority, and
honor: Because it should be ridiculous to record the names of men unknown,
and of no fame, and yt unto the fourth degree. Neither yet do I affirm that it
is done to this end, that he would get any credence to his doctrine from the
renown of his foreelders. But I teach men to mark the counsel of God, who
out of all states of men, separeth ministers unto him self, whose travail he
may use in ye publishing of his word. Some report that Isaye the Prophet was
of the blood royal: as for Jeremy, we know that he was borne of the Priests
lineage. Amos confesses that from his youth he was a shepherd, from whose
condition of life Elyseus did not much disagree; whom Elyas by the
commandment of God, from the plow called to the office of a Prophet. There
be others, whose bare names are only specified, in so much that it is
altogether unknown what was their state, or condition of life. Furthermore
there is none, that is ignorant how in the new testament also men of diverse
states and conditions, were called to the function of teaching: which thing
doubtless was done by the singular counsel of God, that his word of us
should be less suspected, it being also taught by the way, that the same word
belongs to men of every place, and state of life, neither that any man is
barred, from that saving health, which is taught by the same word: but he which
shuts out him self through unbelief, of whom more shall be spoken else where.

The time of Zephaniah and this history.
Thirdly the time of Zephaniah is declared, in the days of Iosia the Son of
Amon, king of Judah, he was therefore of the last which prophesied before the
captivity, and of the same time with Jeremy, excepted that Jeremy being longer
occupied in this office, was one of them which remained still in the city: But
this our Prophet prophecified under Iosia only, but the argument of his sermon
may be gathered out of the history of those times, which is mentioned in the
second book of the kings, the 22. and 23. chapters, and 2. Paral. 34. and 35.
chapters. The use of this Prophecy.
That history declares, that after Manasses suceeded Amon his Son, which
followed the former wickedness of his father, but the example of repentance,
wherein his said father went before him, he would not follow: it came
therefore to pass by the just judgment of God, that he was slain by his own
household servants. He being dispatched, his Son Josias came to the
kingdom, being as yet but eight years old, yet showing by manifest arguments,
that he was of a godly and holy disposition. For out of hand he began to seek
the Lord, and as soon as he was of age and authority, in the 12. year of
his reign, he began a reformation, as well in Iudaea, as in the land of Israel,
where some remnaunt of unknown, and poor men aboade, when the Assirians had
translated into captivity the greater part of the people. Then every where he
pulled down the altars, Idolles, groves, and as it was prophesied of him 357.
years before he burned the bones of the wicked sacrificing Priests upon
their altars, the next year following, Jeremy began to prophecy, who by
teaching, admonishing, and exhorting, greatly furthered this begun work of
reformation: but in the 18. year of Iosia, when he had set his mind to
repair the Lords house, the book of the law was found, which hitherto
through the negligence and ungodliness of the kings, ano priests had layne
together unknown, and no whit regarded: which when Josias had heard read, being
admonished by the threatninges of the said book of the wrath of God, and
punishment that hanged over their heads, he cut his garments, and sending
messengers unto Hulda the prophets asked counsel as concerning the will of
God. And without delay, he taking the Lords cause in hand, with greater zeal
called together the nobles of his kingdom, with all the people, and when he
had caused the books of the law to be read openly unto them, he renewed the
covenant with the Lord, and by public authority he appointed a reformation
whereby was rooted out of the land of Judah and Israel, what abomination or
superstition so ever remained in the first reformation. Moreover while these
things were in this order accomplishing, some yielded their hearty obedience
unto the king, and with a sincere love of godliness, submitted them selves to
the reformation: but the greater part of the people, and noble men did in
huggermugger foster those superstitions, and ungodly worship, wherewith they
were accustomed in the days of the former kings; least they should have been
cut of altogether: as by this it may appear that after the death of Iosia,
they all returned suddenly unto wickedness, and brought in again those
superstitions, which erst while were abandoned. Here therefore it was, that
this our Prophet Zephaniah was sent to be a fellow companion with Jeremy in this
business, that he might call into the way those lovers of their own
superstition; but with threatened destruction to frighten those which were past
amendment. This thing he performs in three sermons, which are declared in
like number of chapiters. First he manaceth the plagues hanging over their
heads, the horriblenesse whereof, together with the causes he sets out very
diligently: secondly he teaches the repentance, and because he knew that the
nations near abordering would ungodly and malapertly triumph over the
perishing Jews, he also foretells that the judgment of God shall fiercely
invade them: yea he threatens punishment to the Assyrians them selves, that
the Saints should not be offended at their triumphings. The third thing he
bends against Jerusalem, and threatens destruction unto the same, that he
might shake from them their vain confidence of outward assistance. But in the
latter end of his prophecy, he promises restoring again to ye godly: and
according to the usual or common order of the prophets, he adioyneth a
prophecy of the blessed and health being the kingdom of Christ.

We have spoken these things concerning the history of the time of Zephaniah,
and the argument of his sermons, more largly, because they make not only for
the opening or understanding of the prophecies: but also serve very much for
our instruction. For we are admonished by this example, with what great faith
and godliness, the reformation of the Church ought to be taken in hand, and
how they may be deceived, which think that they have done sufficiently, if
they have removed out of the way, external abuses, leaving in the mean season
many other things, which serve either for lust or pleasure, or else do minister
occasion for new or old superstitions, for what care can be too much in this
matter, considering that it is well known, how little the most godly king Iosia
did profit in so many years with his zeal. Or what shall we promise unto our
selves from these lame, or wilyly begun reformations, seeing those things
fell so soon to ground, which Iosia not without the counsel of the most holy
prophets had set up? questionless (as Christ says) there will always be
some, which to the new wine of the gospel, will prefer the old wine of
superstitions, and for the most part, degenerating sons, do succeed in the
rooms of their godly fathers, unto whom it seems but a small matter to
decline to superstition, being ignorant with how much peril, and what great
pains their fathers took, in casting them out: of which thing the book of
Judges sets forth examples in them, that succeeded their fathers, which in
the wilderness saw the works of GOD, they being altogether ignorant, and
without knowledge of all those things.

Furthermore we are taught, how the godly Magistrates, and faithful Ministers
ought not to cease, though they perceive that they profit but a little, and
that the reformation which they desire to bring in, shall not abide. For both
these considerations might have reclaymed Iosia from his purpose, if he would
have been ordered by man's reason: for he was not so without understanding,
that he could not mark the self will frowardness of his nobles and the
people, which the prophets did every day reprove. He heard also that that
deadly time, by destiny appointed was not far of, wherein after his death,
first the worship of God, the^ the whole kingdom, with the city and temple
should be overthrown. Notwithstanding he does his duty, and the same with
him do Jeremy, and Zephaniah, whom God gave him as counselors, and helpers:
Let them follow this care whosoever are placed upon the same stage, or
condition of life: neither let them think that their labor shall be in vain.
Forgive, that all things fail, yet they shall deliver their own souls, as the
Lord says to Ezechiel his prophet.

We are furthermore admonished by the consideration of these things, what
remains for those, which set them selves against godly reformations. First
with GOD they are made without all excuse, for as much as they do wickedly
despise the liberty of true worship and pure religion being offered unto them.
The wickedness and tyranny of their Kings might in some part have excused the
Jews, if there had been none there which studied to bring again the law of
GOD, and way of holy worship delivered from him. But seeing ye Manasses as
yet was fresh in memory, who was an example of repentance, worthy to be
remembered, and had always before their eyes the care of Iosia; and did for the
space of 20. years, within a little more or les under him freely enjoy the
word or doctrine of truth, and yet would not forsake their superstitions, but
fell back unto them, by every first little occasion: it appears plainly,
that they were seduced by their own obstinat and froward malice, and that they
have nothing to hide their ungodliness withal: therefore the horrible
destruction and overthrow of their kingdom and city followed: and God with ye
babylonish fire took away those superstitious and wicked kinds of
worshipping, which with the healthful light of his word could not be removed. I
would to GOD they would be more diligent in consideration of this example, unto
whom at this time God has restored his word, and the free preaching thereof:
For there is never wanting among the^ those which with tooth and nail do hold
their old superstitions, and do either slouthfully neglect the liberty granted
of God, or do dishonestly offer it to be abused: that they may cury some favor
with christ's professed enemies.

The beginning of the first Sermon.
These things being thus before spoken of, let us come to the exposition of the
first sermon, the beginning whereof is very tragical or doleful, and contains
a dreadful threatening of a destruction of the whole land: but ye cause of so
great vehemency was, because he had to do with the indurate and open
contemners of Gods word, and first in general he cries out, saying: In
destroying, I will destroy all things from the face of the earth, says the
Lord: and he brings in the name of the Lord unto them which were accustomed
to scoff at, and despise the sermons of the Prophets; but by and by after he
adioyneth a division, and that which he had spoken generally, he declares by
their several kinds. I will destroy (says he) man and beast, I will destroy
the birds of the air, and the fishes of the sea, and ruins shall be to the
wicked, that is to say: I will take all things away which the wicked are busy
to keep, that they may minister occasion of sin to the ignorant, and
unskillful; and as much as may be gathered of those things yt follow he so
calls ye relics of superstition which he has showed to be kept with
great care, and that it may be surely known that God for the sins of men will
show forth his wrath, he repeateth it again: And I will cut of man from the
face of the earth etc. the meaning whereof is this, My servant Iosia removed
away many things. But because through your ungodliness, many things yet
remain, being contrary to my laws, verily I my self will bring forth broomes
much more rough, wherewith these abominable relics, with their Patrons or
defenders, shall be clean purged etc. But here we must mark that destruction is
also threatened unto beasts: which is not spoken hiperbolically as the Jews
imagine: but was performed in deed as histories do witness: for Hieronymus
upon these words writes thus: The cities lying waste, and men being slain,
there was made a scarcity and rarenes, of beasts, of flying foul, and of
fishes: Whereof the country called Illiricum is witness, Thracia also, and
the soil where I took my beginning, where all things are perished, except the
heaven and the earth, the growing brambles, and thick bushy places of woods
etc. We may in this acknowledge the Judgment of God, and his wonderful
providence when we see that in very populous countries, the mears and rivers
abound with fish, the woods with wild beasts and birds, so that they cannot
be rid or emptied by any hunting: and again on the other side, that those
rivers should be without fish, and that there should appear neither beast nor
bird in those woods where no man is, by any engine to take them: neither may
we think that these things come to pass rashly, and vncounselled of: for as
all these things are created for man's use, so there is no cause why they should
be spared, where men are taken away. Let us in these and such like examples
acknowledge the judgment of God, and all drowsinesse being shaken off, let us
return from our sins unto God, by Jesus Christ, who by the worthiness of his
own blood has pacified his fathers wrath, to him be thanks giving, honor and
glory and power for ever.

Amen.
The second Sermon upon the 4. 5. and 6. verses.
4 I will also stretch out my hand upon Judah, and upon all the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and I will cut of the remnaunt of Baal from this place, and the
names of Chemarims, with the Priests.

5 And them that worship the host of heaven upon the house tops, and them that
worship and swear by the Lord, and by Malcham.

6 And them that are turned back from the Lord, and those that have not
sought the Lord, nor enquired for him.

The argument and use of this present place.
ZEphaniah in the beginning of his sermon uses a most grievous thretning,
wherein he denounces to all men in general, the horrible judgment of God. For
with the obstinate and froward he must deal very sharply, if peradventure they
might be stirred up to a more diligent regard of their salvation. And how
necessary a more sharp, and frank manacing of punishments is, they do
quickly feel in themselves, which by the rule of God his law, do examine the
disposition of their own flesh: but when punishments are generally denounced,
two things for ye most part do always hinder, yt we cannot be amended; for
either we think that the matter belongs not unto us, or else we complain of
the ministers roughness, or sharpness: as though they should dispightfully
deal against us, being innocent, and having deserved no such thing. It shall
be needful therefore to deal plainly, yt every one may know, and in
themselves acknowledge the causes of Gods wrath. The Prophet Zephany in this
present place performs both these things. For first he bends these
threatninges against the kingdom of Judah and Jerusalem: the^ he shows the
wickednesses, which must with such plagues be purged: this place therefore
teaches us to judge of the calamities of our time, and what sins they must
eschew, which would that their affairs should be well seen unto. For the first
he speaks thus in the person of God. I will stretch my hand over Judah, and
over all the inhabitants of Jerusalem. He bends his threatening of the
punishment against Judah and Jerusalem. Gene. 19.
By the stretching out of the hand, he declares ye gesture of him that
strikes, and that because he has purposed to bring upon them no usual or
common plague. But Judah and Jerusalem are named of purpose, because under these
names they always promised them selves safety. For Jacob long before spoke of
Judah, saying: the scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor the Lawegiuer from
betwixt his feet. until Shilo come, and the nations flow unto him. Psalm. 132.
Iere. 7.
Moreover there were promises apparaunt, which before hand did signify, that
the kingdom should be established to David's posterity for ever: namely in
respect of Christ, who (as concerning the flesh) should be borne of that
stock: which promises they did expound of an earthly kingdom, and those that
were proud, were not a little encouraged by this: that when the Israelites were
carried away captive into Assiria, they with their kingdom remained still in
safety. But Jerusalem, besides that it was the kings seat, being famous by
reason of the temple and religion, vaunted in the promise of God, which had
said that this should be his resting place for ever. And we know by Jeremy
his sermons how proudly they were wont to object unto the Prophets, the
worthiness of their city, if at any time they were reproved of them. Therefore
Zephaniah tells them, that all that their confidence was vain, and to no
purpose, seeing that before all others, he threatens Judah and Jerusalem. But
from hence a general doctrine may be gathered: namely yt such as frowardly
strive against God, can be in safety by no outward prerogatives, or promises
made unto them. For all are joined with a condition, which whosoever
neglects, does in vain so violently pull unto them the promises, from the
which they have parted them selves, through their own fault. Moreover with
how much more honor God has vouchsafed to beautify us: so much more
detestable and grievous is the fault of our unthankfulness, whereunto we have
run, by reason of disobedience: These things may well be laid in the way of
those Romish ones, which object unto us their Rome: That that ought to be
acknowledged.
For what has God at any time said as concerning that city, whereby it may
be proved that that ought to be acknowledged ye chief seat and head of the
Church, but that we may grant that those things be true, which they falsely
auouche? what shall they perteine unto the^ which have no less fowly fallen
from the godliness of their forefathers then ye Jews, and inahbitants of
Jerusalem did? let those also think that the same thing is spoken unto them
which are accustomed to glory in the doings of their elders, when as they them
selves are infamous throrowe their own sins and wickedness etc.

He accuses the wickedness of the Jews.
But yt they should not think that they should be punished otherwise then they
had deserved, he makes a catalogue or scrowle of their sins, for the which
they deserved to be cut of; and yet he does not here name their usury, riot,
lust, incest, murders, and such like offenses, which wise men and of better
report commonly are wont to condemn. But those which in ye judgment of God are
more horrible, although men make small account of the^, as namely the corruption
of religion, and this, that they would not subject themselves to the
reformation established by Iosia: let us consider every thing in order. First I
will cut of (says he) the remnaunte of Baal from this place. The remnaunt of
Baal.
Baal was the God of the Sidonians, as Hieronymus has noted in his
comme^taries upon Hosea, being the same that Belus is, which by the
commandment of Simiramis, was worshipped of the Babylonians. Of whom it is
sufficiently known, out of the old Poets, and story writers, that the kings
of the Sidonians took their beginning. Virgil doubtless writes that Dido,
when she entertained Aeneas, drank wine in the same bowl, wherein Belus, and
al since him were wont to do etc. 1. Reg. 18.
Achab king of Israel was ye first that brought this Gods service into the holy
Land, when he had married Iesabel, the kings daughter of Sidon. From hence the
co^tagion came into the land of Judah, that there also temples and Altars were
every where erected unto Baal, and although Iosia (as we said before) had pulled
the^ down, yet there were not wanting, which had their pictures and images, in
their houses at home, which they worshipped superstitiously. And these were the
remnants of Baal, which God thretned to cut of. But let those think that this
is spoken unto them, whosoever are careful to keep the remnaunt of Baal,
whiles reformation of doctrine and religion is established. This do they which
privily do conueie out of Churches, Images, painted Tables, relikes of
Saints, and instruments of superstition, that they should not be destroyed
with the rest: as many also as cause new Images to be made, at their own cost,
whereunto they burn lights at home and pray before them, and worship them,
with whom also they especially do deserve to be reckoned, which carefully
keep in mind superstitious prayers, and do teach the same to their children;
so sowing the seeds of superstition into their tender minds. These men are
the most noisome plagues of the Church; for it comes to pass that by them
the doctrine of the word cannot have his profit with those which at home have
their teachers of errors: and the same do forthwith conceive great hatred
against the truth, if at any time their manners be somewhat more freely
rebuked by ye word of God. But there is no doubt but GOD has his broomes
wherewith he will purge, not without their great plague and punishment, those
relics of superstition.

Secondly he threatens that he will cut of the name of Chemarim with the
Priests: Kemarim. 2.
he speaks of the ministers of forbidden and unlawful worship, which were
many and diverse, against God his ordinance: For he had sanctified unto him
self the tribe of Leuy: out of that tribe ought to be taken the high Priest,
unto whom the authority of the word and holy rites apperteined: he had those
which together with him did minister about the word, and sacrifices, for that
salvation which was common to all, and if there were any other offices, those
did God distribute amongst the rest of the Leuiticall families, as in the
books of Moses it is set out at large. But they, being not contented with the
one and only true God, enterteined strange Gods, and therefore they stood in
need of new sacrificing Priests, to do service for those said false Gods:
hereupon it came, that priests were appointed unto Baal, of whom there is
often mention made in sacred history, neither is it to be doubted but that
other Gods also had their sacrifices, which took upon them these fore^
ceremonies, which before were never known. There were moreover besides these a
kind of several priests called Kemarim, 2. Reg. 23.
which (as we read, were appointed by the kings of Judah to burn Frankencense in
the high places, and in the citites of Judah, and all about Jerusalem: which (as
some suppose) took their names of their black apparel: some think they were
so called, because of their feruentnes: First because they were set on fire
with a wonderful zeal of religion, or rather superstition: as those
Seraphical doctors are, which of foolish and superstitious men, are called the
lights of the world. But because they were especially appointed to burn
Frankencense, I suppose they were rather so called by reason of that office.
For this word Kemar among the Hebrews signifies to ware hot, and also wax
black, and because the Prophet does coupple them with the Priests, it is
evident that they were a kind of men of inferior degree, skillful in those
mysteries, or that they were as it were clearks, or sexstons, or some under
minister to them which were in the highest rowme: as in popery the Mass
Priests, chapel Clarke, or under Curat always attending upon the Church, and
serving the turn of the rich and fat Canons, and Pastors; such are wont to be
greatly accounted of, because ye other fatlings taking their pleasure carelessly
these do thoroughly go through with, and do perform al holy rites, and
ceremonies belonging to the Church, and these I warrant you live, not only by
begging. And this was the cause that although those fatter Baalites, were taken
away, yet these fellows together with their Idolles, and certain Priests,
seeming more holy then others, were privily maintained of such as were
superstitious. But because this was done contrary to the Law, Deuteronomy. 13.
which appoynteth that the false Prophet, and seducer, must be put to death,
God himself draws out the sword of his judgment against them. But these
things agree meruellous fitly, unto these our times. For it is well known,
that Christ unto his Church has appointed teachers, which should gather it
together, and govern it with the doctrine of the Gospel, Ephe. 4. 1. Cor. 12.
and that he would not have it ouerburdened with an idle company of
superstitious men. For although Paul may seem to have appointed in the
Church, degrees of Ministers, saying that some were appointed Apostles, some
teachers, some Evangelists, and some prophets: yet all those were ordained unto
this end, that the doctrine of the Gospel might be retained, wherewith the
Church, can only, and alone, be gathered together, and preserved. But after
that the Gospel being neglected, Rome began to be mad for superstition, new
orders of Ministers also crept in, and seven general degrees were appointed.
First, dorekeepers, readers, exorcistes, or adiurours, attendentes, subdeacons,
deacons, priests, or sacrificers. But again among these, some were chapel
clerks, or vndercurats, upon whose backs, for the most part, was laid the
care and charge of the holy Church matters, other were pastors of parishes, or
Canons, who under pretense of religion, gave themselves to ease and pleasure:
and of these, some were wardens, or such as had the oversight of matters; some
were Deans, other some were gardians, others were chaunters, the under priests
in like manner according to the number of their Gods and offices, had their
several names, and unto these, the Monks, the Nuns, the Friars, ye Lolhards,
the Begutes, those of the elder sort, and of the younger, the heremits etc.
And surely thou shall find an innumerable company of idle persons, 2. Tim. 3.
or else very ill occupied, whereof some did fraudulently take their Church
goods to their own uses. Other some (as Paul says) crept into houses, and
abused the simplicity of the superstitions, and made trains also to get the
private goods of many men. And because those inferior orders do carry among the
unskillful multitude, the persuasion of poverty, and religion; they also found
many favorers, if at any time the reformation of the Church were begun. But
they did especially hurt the Church for this cause, that although they feigned
them selves to give place to the gospel: yet amongst their like they did
privily defend the superstitious worship, and did incense the minds of very
many against the truth, and Ministers thereof. Example may be brought every
where for this matter, and christian Princes and common wealths not a few have
tried, how much men of this kind of grist, can do. But let al these know that
God will defend his own cause, who also with deserved punishment will amearce
these Kemarims, and such as favor the^.

3. The Star worship.
Thirdly he threatens those that worship the host of heaven upon their house
tops. He means the star worshippers: for they are called the host of heaven,
as well for their moving, and order which they have kept ever since the
creation: as also because men being superstitiously led, have thought that the
same have a working power upon the earth; and have accustomed under them, as it
were under Gods to subject the affairs of men. This was a very old error,
especially amongst them of the East, which first of al others began to view
the moving of the stars, and according to the corruption of man's wit, took
from thence the occasion of superstition, from whence they ought to have
acknowledged the power of God, being the creator of all things. But it
appears by the history of Iosia, yt this superstition prevailed also, even
unto the Jews: for it is written that Iosia took away the horses which the
kings of Judah had appointed for the service of the Sun, and that he also
burned the chariots of the Sun. And there is also mention made of the altars
which Achaz had builded upon the roufe of his supping chamber. For they
imagined that this worship should be so much the more liked of and allowed, if
it were done in an open place, and as it were in the sight of the Sun, and we
know that in those countries their house tops were flat, that they might
serve for one to walk on, and many other purposes. But it is very like, that
after the reformation made by Iosia, they practiced their superstition more
privily, and only in night time. But God testifies that he is not ignorant
of their doings, and threatens that in short time he will cut them of. Let
them consider this in these days, that profess Judicial astrology, or that
they can determine or judge of matters by their star gazing. For questionless
they do worship the stars, no less then the Gentiles did in time past, and
do plainly bring again unto us, that heathenesse profaneness, while the
first do adorn the stars with the names of Gods, of whom there ought not
to be any mention among christians; then they make subject unto the same
stars all the events or falling out of matters: yea man himself, as pertains
to his manners, and such things as outwardly befall him: all which things are
known to depend upon the eternal providence of God alone, and that out of
the scriptures: This ungodliness is intolerable, wherewith we see in Michea
that the kingdom of Christ has no agreement: and therefore they shall not
escape the judgment of God whosoever they be that follow it.

The mixture of the true religi^ and false together.
Fourthly he accuses those that doubled in religion: for they would seem to
be forsakers of the true God, for as much as they boasted both of the GOD of
their Fathers, and kept the temple which Solomon builded. But for as much as
they joined therewith foreign Gods and strange worship, they made a certain
minglemangle, or rather co^fusio^ of true religion with superstitions. And (as
Elyas said) they haulted on both sides. He says therefore that the hand of
the Lord shall come unto them which worship and swear by the Lord, and by
Malchom: That is, which join the worship of the true God, and the worship
of Malchom together. By Malchom some understand the king or patron of any
man, or his GOD of whom he is guarded or defended. Other think that this was
spoken of the GOD of the Amonites, which is known in those days to have been
honored of the Jews. But what soever it is, it takes nothing from the sense
or meaning. For the Prophet accuses them, which being not content with the one
and only true GOD, added moreover unto them their own devices. This was done
contrary to the Law, whereby strange Gods were forbidden, which also
commands us to love, fear, and worship the one only true GOD, with all
our soul, and with all the strength, and power that we have, and so leaves
us nothing to give unto strange or false Gods. Here also no less then before
is condemned the superstition of the men in our age, which to GOD the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, do join other Saints, upon whom they do call in the
time of their adversity, unto whom they make vows, or else use them as
Mediators and intercessors unto GOD for them, contrary to that, that Christ
says in the 14. of Ihon, No man comes to the Father but by me. These
saints are these men's Malchomes, which thing they themselves cannot deny,
seeing they do not only call them their Patrons, and defendours, but also
celestial potentates. They therefore shall also feel the jealousy of the
Lord, who because he has espoused us unto him self alone in Christ Jesus
does not suffer any counterfeite to be admitted with him etc.

Calling upon and swearing be joined together
Furthermore it is worthy singular consideration, that with swearing the
Prophet joins invocation: the cause thereof is, that both of them belong unto
the worship of GOD, and (as it shall be declared by and by) an oath does
include in it invocation, and has the form of invocation or prayer. For it is
a solemn promise whereof we make GOD a witness and revenger. They therefore
that swear, give unto GOD his honor, in that they profess that he knows
all things, that he is true, just, and omnipotent; which both can, and will
defend those that speak a truth, and also be revenged upon those that abuse
his name by deceipte and lying: wherefore it is often used for the whole
worship of GOD, or true token thereof. For Esaias, Esaias. 19.45.
when he prophesied that Egypt should at some time be lightened with the
knowledge of the true God, amongst other things does say, and 5.6.
that they shall swear by the Lord of hosts. And the same Prophet in an
other place brings in the Lord speaking thus, Every knee shall bow unto me,
and every tongue shall swear unto me. Again he treating of the Church, and
of the studies and manners of the godly, says, He that shall bless him self
in the earth, shall bless him self in the true God, and he that shall swear,
shall swear by the true God. More places of like sort might be alleged.
Because therefore that an oath is a part of the worship of God, which we may
not translate from him unto his creatures, they ought to swear by his name
only which will use the same godly and lawfully, as they ought to do. There
be precepts for this matter, as namely those: Exodus 13.
Keep all things whatsoever I command you, and you shall not mention the
names of other Gods, neither let it be heard out of thy mouth. Also, Iosu. 22.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and thou shall worship him, and swear by
his name. And again, Fear the Lord, thy GOD, and serve him, cleave unto him,
and swear by his name. Yea Joshua lying upon his death bead, admonished the
Israelites that they should not swear by the names of the Gods of the
Gentiles. In which saying, we ought to remember that the same laws being
ratified, and not to be removed, are also to be kept among the Christians;
and that those do greatly offend against them, which when they swear, do
couple the names of saints, with the true God. For so, while they make them to
be privy, or to have the knowledge of their hidden secrets, and appoint them
reuengers of their promises, they give unto them that honor which is due unto
God only. Furthermore they do plainly invoke or call upon Saints when
they say, so God shall help me and all Saints. But that invocation is due
only unto God, it is better known, then that it needs to be showed in many
words the Martyrs saw these things long since, which had rather suffer most
cruel punishment, then they would swear by other Gods. A notable example
against swearing by that ought not.
Among the which, the godliness of Policarpus was singular, whom neither
threatenings, nor flattering entreaties could once move to swear by Caesar's
fortune, although he might readily have excused the matter, because fortune is
the God, which by his counsel does govern and direct men's behests. But he
rather regarded what the wicked enemies understood by the word [fortune], then
how the denial of his faith might by any means be covered before men. Let us
in these days follow the constancy of this man, least while we raught after
unprofitable escapings, we deserve to be numbered with them, unto whom the
Prophet Zephanie denounces this horrible judgment of God.

5. Backsliding
Fifthly he passes very plainly to the wicked, and such as were bakslyders.
I will cut them of also (says he) that have gone back from the Lord. He
compares them to untrusty soldiers, which fly from the battle, while
others encounter with their enemies: and by and by after he teaches what they
be, namely such, as do not seek the Lord, nor enquire after him. God is
sound in his word, wherein he makes him self, and his will known unto men.
They therefore seek him truly, that hear his word attentively, and do
diligently follow that way of worshippinge GOD, and trade of life, that is
taught therein. And again, they be faythlesse startbackes, as many as do
prolonge the time to hear the word of GOD: such for the most part pretend
ignorance: but for as much as they will not hear GOD, though he speak unto
them, this their ignorance is wilful, and gross, and therefore deserves not
any way to be excused. And we are taught so in this place, that the contempt
of GOD his word is the fountain, or head of all fallinges from GOD, and
superstitions. For they that forsake this word, do follow their own fancies,
and so go astray, and having knowledge, they cannot tell what to do. This may
be seen in the Jews, they had a worship or religion taught them of GOD,
they had the doctrine of the Law and the Prophets, whom God sent daily unto
them, as if they had been receivers. Notwithstanding all these being utterly
despised, they followed their own dreams, and therefore deserved to be
entangled with errors. The same thing at this time has befallen the Papists,
they have the scriptures, as well as we, wc they accustomed to read and singe
in their Churches. And many also do read the same at home privately. Besides
this they have the Lords Prayer, the Apostles Creed, or Articles of the
faith, the ten commandments, Baptism, and such like, all which things do
send us to GOD, and do teach us in him to seek the way of salvation. Yet
notwithstanding they are turned to the creatures: and so having knowledge, they
willingly forsake the true way of salvation. The degrees of superstition
But let us consider the degrees of superstition, which the Prophet in this
place makes mention of. The first is, when the remnaunt of superstitions is
kept, when GOD grants liberty to reform things, crafty dissemblers do
attend upon these superstitions, whereunto they bear great good will, and do
by little and little spread them aborad, by and by after follows open
Idolatry: but least we should seem to forsake GOD altogether, first there
is invented a certain mixture, but the same at the length degenerateth to a
plain defection or falling from God: and these things certainly, even at
this day are seen every where: and do we as yet marvel at the wrath of GOD
hanging over our heads? Let us learn therefore to attend and wait upon the
word of God, to fly all occasion of evil: but let us seek for all salvation
only in GOD, through the merit of his Son Jesus Christ, to whom be
thanks giving, honor, glory, and power for ever.

Amen
The third Sermon.
The Text.
7 BE still at the presence of the Lord God: for the day of the Lord is at
hand: for the Lord has prepared a sacrifice, and has sanctified his guests.

8 And it shall be in the day of the lords sacrifice, that I will visit the
Princes, and the Kings Children, and al such as are clothed with strange
apparel.

9 In the same day also will I visit al those that dance upon the thresholde
so proudly, which fill their masters houses by cruelty and deceit.

10 And in that day (says the Lord) there shall be a noise, and cry from the
fish gate, and an howling from the second gate, and a great destruction from
the hills.

11 Howl ye inhabitants of the low place: for the company of the marcha^ts is
destroyed: al they that bare silver are cut of.

The argument and use of the^ present place.
BEcause Zephaniah began with a grievous thretning of punishment, by and by
after he shows ye causes thereof, least he should seem to have spoken any
thing rashly, or of some wicked affection; but he has especially accused those
things that concern religion, which they had corrupted with many
superstitions, seeing that they favored those things secretly, which Iosia
would have had destroyed. But as the disposition of man, is naturally prone to
sin and error: so when punishment is denounced, either he murmureth against
God, as though he were more unjustly dealt with, then he deserved: or else he
fenceth himself about, with outward assistance, and thinks he is in
safety, either because of his dignity or wealth, or because of his might, or
power, and such like. Those therefore that are so disposed, must be answered
very flatly, least peradventure, they should continue either still to murmr
against God, or else being withholden by reason of their vain confidence, they
should neglect the care of repentance, by the which they might be brought into
favor with God. This thing does the. Prophet Zephaniah perform in this
place. For first he answeareth too their grudgings, and tells them that the
punishments which they have deserved, can be avoided by no means, neither yet
by any colorable pretense of excuse whatsoever. Then he does as it were by
name rehearse those, which thought themselves placed without all reach of
weapon, by reason of their dignity and great power. Afterward he passes to
describe the punishment: and this he does more at large continue unto the end
of the Chapter. We are taught in this place, that when GOD has to do with
us, by his threatenings, no persuasion of the flesh, wherewith it is wont to
fawn upon us, ought to be allowed of, but we must rather apply al our
diligence unto this, that we forsaking our sins, and embracing Christ, may
again be brought into favor with him.

He inforceth the answearers to silence.
First he meets with these aunsweares, and takes from them all hope of
escaping skotfree. Be still (says he) at the presence of the Lord GOD, as
though he should say, I hear what you are wont to counterchatte, as though
the things I threaten, should never be. But I wisse it becomes you not, too
reason with GOD, who forasmuch as he is just and omnipotent, cannot be
convinced of any unrighteousness. And he also does easily enforce such unto
silence, as dare gaynsay: or speak contrary unto him. Be still therefore in
his presence, that is to say, the persuasions of your flesh being repressed
and rejected, submit your selves wholly under his government and correction.
He gives a reason of this his saying: For the day of the Lord is at hand. So
he calls the time of revenge, or punishment, which GOD takes of his enemies
because then especially, he does the thing that belongs unto him, and does
indeed declare himself, too be such, as he is opened unto us in the
scripture. But he says that the time is at hand, because of those, which by
reason of the staying thereof promised themselves to escape unpunished: and
therefore (as we may read elsewhere, do refer ye day of ye Lord, unto the
time yet long to com, to ye end they may provoke unto themselves greater
delights in their ungodliness, but he shows that that day is very near
when he adds. The Lord has prepared his Sacrifice and sanctified his
guestes, he speaks according too the custom of that people which then was
well known unto them all. For they that would offer a sacrifice of
thankesgeuing, first they prepared the sacrifice, that is, some beast that
should be offered: then they called their friends to the holy feast, which
was furnished with the flesh slain for the sacrifice; whereunto none might
come, except he were purified or made holy, according to the law. The Lord
therefore fayneth, that he will make a sacrifice, and keep a holy day, and
that shortly, because the sacrifice is already prepared: and those are
sanctified that must eat thereof. But by the name of Sacrifice he
understands the Jews that must be slain by the Chaldians, and Babylonians,
which in this holy business must be unto God, as it were Priests. By which
name Nabucadnezar in Jeremy Iere. 25.
is called ye servant of the Lord: And Isay Isai. 13.
in the same sense calls the Meades and Persians, the sanctified of God,
because he had decreed by their Ministry, to cut of Babylon. But by the
guests which God has bidden, we may very fittingly understand the fowls and
beasts, whereunto he has determined to cast out the flesh of those his
enemies to be devoured. For in like manner in the revelation, where the battle
of Christ, with Antichrist is described, we read, Apoc. 19
that the Angel spoke with a loud voice to the Birds of the air, Come and
gather ye together unto the Supper of the great God, that ye may eat the
flesh of kings and the flesh of high Captains, and the flesh of mighty men,
and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of all
free men and bond men, and of small and great, etc. But in that that the
prophet uses the similitude of a Sacrifice, he seems also to vpbraide their
unlawful holy rytes, and those things that are wont to follow or always
to accompany them, as wantonness, lust, and careless confidence: as if he
should say, go to, seeing it is so permitted, Go forward, make sacrifices, and
in the same mock with God, you shall not long do thus, for very shortly God
will have his sacrifices of dedication and will keep holy day, wherein he
will content or satisfy himself with your flesh and blood, offered as it were
in Sacrifice.

The slaughter of the wicked compared unto a Sacrifice.
But it is worthy diligent consideration, that the slaughters of Gods wicked
enemies, are compared to sacrifices. The Spirit of GOD does this, not only
because of the bloodshed which is committed every where, but also because the
glory of GOD is advanced in the punishment of the wicked. For first the
Justice of GOD does evidently show it self, which sometime seems too be
asleep, when as they become saucy against GOD, and without punishment. Then
the truth of that word is made good, when they bear those punishments,
which were threatened in the same long before. In this also we see the
invincible power of GOD, which will they, nill they, enforce them that crammed
themselves with beastly pleasure, and could not be persuaded by any means,
to offer themselves unto him a lively sacrifice, to be a sacrifice themselves,
and to be devoured of wild beasts, whose insatiableness, and bloody cruelty
they followed. They ought diligently to mark these things, whose ministry the
Lord vouchsafes too use, in punishing the wicked: for if they being inflamed
with a godly zeal, do the Lords business diligently, and accomplish his
glory valiantly, in punishing the wicked. They offer unto God a most acceptable
Sacrifice: and shall in so doing, obtain immortal reward, and commendation. We
have an example of this matter in Phinees, the son of Eleazar, who, for
killing of Zambrie committing filthiness with his Madianatish Harlot, Number. 25.
is very highly commended, as one which by that deed, or rather most pleasing
Sacrifice turned the wrath of GOD from Israel. And of the selfsame God
pronou^ceth saying:

Behold I make my covenant and peace with him, as well he, as his seed after
him, shall have the covenant of the Priesthood for ever, because he was zealous
for his God, and put himself in danger for the children of Israel. 2. Reg. 10.
In like manner God commends Iehu, because he bestowed great diligence in
cutting up by the roots, the stock of wicked Achab, and Iezabel, and in
destroying the Priests of Baal. And for this cause does promise him a kingdom
unto the fourth generation. And we read that the wrath of God came upon Saul
and Achab: 1. Sam. 15. 1. Reg. 20.
because Achab kept Benhadad the king of Syria alive, and Saul kept Agag the
Amalekite, whom God had adjudged worthy of death. And the sentence of Jeremy is
well enough known, wherein, he threatening destruction to the nation of the
Moabites, stirs up their enemies, crying: Iere. 48.
Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently: And cursed is he
that keeps his sword from blood. For seeing as we have said before, that the
punishments of the wicked does make for the woorship of God, it becomes
those not to be slack and negligent in executing the same, which would be
counted the true woorshippers of GOD. Let therefore the Magistrates always
meditate upon these things, least while through foolish pity, they, sparing
the wicked, provoke the wrath of God against themselves. But they that are
punished for their wickedness, whether it be publicly or privately, let them
remember these men and neither murmr against God, neither yet conceive in
their minds, that there was either hatred or unjust desire of punishment: but
let them rather be still in the presence of the Lord, and with patience
submit themselves unto his correction, for so it will come to pass, that
those things will work together unto them for good, which otherwise would
bring destruction, the examples which make for this purpose, we have else where
alleged, He names those that be for all others ought to be finished.
as of David, Daniel, and the Emperor Mauritius, whereunto many others may be
added which they yt read histories do every where meet wtal. But let us
return again to our Prophet, who in order begins to name those, which
especially deserved to be punished, and surely he reckons those first which
in comparison of other thought themselves safe without all danger of hurting.
Where we may see how full of danger the condition of prophets and ministers of
the word, is, for that they are constrained too accuse, or reprove them, whom
most of al it behooved to have favorable, and assistent unto them, which also
were able to do them the greatest harm. But he reckons up three sorts of
men, unto whom afterward he adds the fourth. The first place he appoynteth
to the Princes and to king Iosia his sons. Of whom doubtless he therefore
begins because they were the chief Authors of wickedness, and offenses:
and the sacred hystory does sufficiently witness, that these threatninges
were not in vain. For Ioachas that came unto the kingdom after his Father
Iosia was slain, after he had reigned only three Months was led away
Captive into Egypt, and there was put too death. The king of Egypt appointed
Ioakim in his steed, which, when Nabucadnezar had conquered Egypt, became his
Tributary and Servant: and not long after for his rebellion, he was taken and
carried away captive by the same Nabucadnezar, and dying in the journey, lacked
the right of honorable Burial. For the Babylonians threw out his carkase too
be torn in pieces of the beasts and fowls of the air, as Jeremy had before
prophesied, Iere. 12.
saying: He should be buried as an Ass. After him succeeded Iechonias, who
also healde the kingdom but three Months, and as Jeremy persuaded him, he
went willingly into banishment, and was carried too Babylon with the costly
vessels of the Lords house. After him came Zedechias who as he passed all that
had been before him, in wickedness and treachery, so he was most grievously
punished. For after he had abidden the siege a long time, at length this City
being taken, and he caught in his flight, was carried to Nabuchadnezar in
Ribla. Who, when in his sight he had slain his sons, and the more noble men
that came out of Judah, and put out his eyes, he was bound in chains, and led
away to Babylon. The Lord therefore does most truly foreshewe this matter by
his Prophet Zephaniah, saying: And it shall be in the day of the Lords
Sacrifice, that I will visit the Princes, and the kings children, etc. But
we are admonished by these examples what things remain for those children,
that do degenerate from their fathers godliness: and how they are deceived
that by reason of the virtue of their foreelders, do promise to themselves
that all things shall be cock sure, and very joyful. For it is so far away
yt they for this cause should escape unpunished for their wickedness, that
being thereby made more without excuse, do sustain more grievous punishment:
for that that came to pass upon these, does also befall many others privately,
yea and lights upon whole nations publicly, which have degenerated from the
virtue of their Ancestors. Let Parents in like manner consider these things:
that first of all they may be diligent in bringing up their children, neither
let them think that any care therein is superfluous: then let them learn
patience, if they perceive that they have profited but a little by all their
care, and that their children do degenerate, for this commonly befalls the
children of God, that they seldomly have children that follow them in godliness
and virtue: and God suffers this thing to come so to pass, that it may be
known that the children of God are borne, not of flesh and blood, but of the
seed of his word, which being received by true faith, and quickened by the
power of the spirit, does regenerate or beget us anew. This must be marked of
us, when we read that Ismael Abraham's son was a mocker, that Esau was given
too gluttony and lust, and that the sons of Jacob were wicked both against
their father and brother, and that Absalom was incestuous and a manqueller.

2. They that did wear strange Apparel.
Secondly God threatens that he will visit those which wear strange attire.
This may be expounded two ways. For either he accuses their riot, and
lightness, wherein they became like other foreine and barbarous nations, in
apparel: or else he speaks of the superstitious, woorshippers of false
Gods, which by their strange and unaccustomed apparel, did profess their
Godliness and Religion. Neither shall we err as I think, if we, expound
the place of them both. For we know out of Jeremy, that the Jews at that
time did entreat Leagues with foren nations. Which doubtless was the cause,
that they would imitate their manners, and attire: and how much those that
be superstitious do attribute unto apparel, it may be gathered by the
Monks and Mass Priests, which think it a sin, that never can be purged,
if they should alter them never so little. Here that comes into my mind
which is reported of Pope Julius the third by those that be of credit: He (as
many men do know) was a very ungodly and malapert despiser of all religion. He
doubted not sometime among his acquaintance to speak those things, wherein he
both openly reprehended the boldness of the Bishops, and also the foolishness
of the people, that so woondred at them. It came to pass at a certain time,
as he walked up and down his chamber, his goune and coat for the great heat
being laid apart, yt two of his Cardinals that came too speak with him were
at his chamber door. These when they saw that he was not clad, as he was
wont to be, went back and durst not enter into his chamber. But he commanded
them to come in, and not to doubt any thing: and being come in, he caused them
to do off their attire, as he had done. For seeing (says he) that I being
in the shadow am so whot, how much more are your garments a burden unto you,
that have come so far too talk with me? do you therefore in like manner lay
aside your gounes and coats, and never stay at the matter. But they prolonging
the time because they were bashful, he compelled them so to do. And when
afterward he had walked a while betwixt them, what think you (says he) that
our Citizens of Rome would say, if they should see us walk thus through the
city. They made him answer saying, Now truly, holy Father, they would
think us some Iesters, neither would they suffer us to pass without some
reproach. Then he said unto them, you see therefore my brethren how greatly
we are bound to our apparel, that does save us from such injuries, and does
procure us so great opinion of holiness: Julius spoke very flatly as the
matter was: and I do not doubt, but many in their minds do say the selfsame
thing which would be counted religious with the foremost, and yet laugh
closely in their sleeves when they see the wide open sottishness of the
foolish common people, nay of Princes themselves, which because of these
Hobgoblins, and stagelike attire have them in reverence and reputation. But let
us (and that not neglige^tly consider, that this is reckoned amongst the causes
of destruction, which in man's judgment seems to be but a small thing: but to
him, that will more narowly weigh the matter, it shall by and by appear, that
by apparel sin is committed many ways. For as for riotousnesse and pride,
wherewith vain and light persons do vaunt themselves: who will affirm, that
they do acknowledge their faults, or repent them of them, which are proud of
their apparel? which (as the scripture says) began, because of sin, which
also ought to admonish us of our state and condition, as often as we put them
either on or of: and therefore these persons do as if some wicked fellow
should get him praise by the haulter, which for his wickedness he has
deserved.

Moreover, offense is committed against the Law of God, and nature, which
teach that the use of apparel is, that our bodies should be honestly covered
therewith, and so preserved from the rage of the weather: but they that become
riotous about it, do almost suffer the more unseemly parts of the body to be
either bare, or else they lay the^ out after a more beastly manner, the^ if they
should be seen altogether uncovered, and in others they stir up and provoke most
ungodly thoughts and concupiscence. And furthermore that pride makes us
unmindful of our condition: whereupon it comes that we also forget God,
and proudly despise our neighbor. Moreover we do unseemly abuse our wealth,
wherewith we ought to relieve the poverty of others. I speak nothing now of
ye lightness of ye mind, which is proved by no argument more manifestly, the^ if
we despising ye attire of our own nation being also received from our elders,
should dote upon strange and unaccustomed apparel. We may not think
therefore that it was done at a venture, that God made laws as concerning
apparel. Deuteronomy. 22. 1. Co 11. 2. Tim. 2. 1. Pet. 3.
And thereof also the Prophets and Apostles do very often admonish us. And
they are adjudged worthy of destruction, which with riot and pride do offend
about the same. And we see it come to pass very often, that they which are
delighted with foreign attire, do prove by experience those enemies that come
from far, unto whom they be made a pray, or are delivered as a booty: but as
for those superstitious fellows, they through their hypocrisy commit sin,
while they make boaste and vaunte them selves with a shadow of godliness. The^
they defile themselves with sacrilege, when ye honor which is due unto Christ,
they attribute unto rags, and in them they look to have the reward of
righteousness and salvation. Besides this with monstrous rashness they do invent
diverse forms of religion, and with an unprofitable and superstitious
difference of apparel, they cut in pieces the unity of the Church, sanctified
with the blood and spirit of Christ, and therefore they are worthy with their
apparel, to come to destruction.

Thirdly, And I will visit (says he) in that day, every one that daunceth
proudly upon the thresholde, which fill their masters houses with vilolence
and wrong. He speaks of the Ministers of noble men, which as in all things
they be accustomed to flatter their masters: so to pleasure them, they oppress
any man either with open violence, or with hidden subtlety. For they dance
upon the thresholde, that is with much mirth and impudency, they invade other
men's houses, that take violently away, and do al things as they list: yea these
things are done without controulement, so that part of the booty be brought
to their masters, whose houses in the mean season are filled with wealth
gotten by violence and wicked policy. In which place we see how many things
are unjustly and wickedly committed, and that under godly Kings and Princes,
while they them selves either see not all things, or else cannot repress their
untamed sauadgenesse. For it is out of doubt that Iosia restored in like manner
those laws and ordinances, whereby wrongful violence was forbidden.
Notwithstanding, this wickedness was wrought, he not knowing thereof, and they
that would have made complaint unto the King, could not have access unto him.
But let such remember, that the Lord does never leave the afflicted and
oppressed destitute: who in his appointed time does take away the tyrants, and
with them does punish al those that offered themselves to serve their cruelty.
Let them consider this, whosoever they be, that for hyre let out their help
unto kings that wage unnecessary and unjust wars, and being hired for wages
fill other men's countries with fire and slaughter, but their own houses with
bloody spoils.

The descripti^ of the punishment.
Furthermore let us come to the third part of this place, wherein the Prophet
does describe the punishment, and teaches how grievous the same shall be, and
how it shall invade or rush violently upon them all about, and every where.
There shall be in that day (says the Lord) the voice of crying, from the fish
gate, and howling from the second gate, and a great destruction from the hills,
etc. He names the uttermost bounds of the city, that he may show that the
calamity does hang over it all. I take it that the fish gate was in that
part of the City, by the which men went down to Ioppa, unto the sea, and
through the which, fish with other merchandise coming up, from the sea, were
brought in, and the former or first part of the city containing the market,
the counsel houses or courts and other more notable places adjoined unto it.
On the other side was Hamischene, that is, the second part of the city,
wherein Hulda the Prophetess dwelled, as the history of the Kings declares.
2. Reg. 22.
In the third place he names the hills, wherewith the city was compassed, as
out of the Psalms, and many other places of the Prophets it may appear. The
meaning is therefore, that the misery shall be so great, that in every part of
the city shall be heard ye noise and howling of them that be woefully afflicted:
and here he adds by the way of detestation, Howl ye inhabiters of the low
place, for the company of the marcha^ts is destroyed, al they that carry silver
are cut of. The word signifies either Clay or Mire, called mortar or else a
spice Mortar.
In these words he co^prehendeth the fourth kind of them, that before all other
must be punished, that is to say, the Merchants, whom he calls the
inhabiters of the place of mortar, either because they dwell in the lower or
nether part of the city, or else because all things among the^ was filled
with the tinkling of morters, as is wont to be among the sweet powder makers,
or those yt make sweet ointments, the Apothecaries, and men of like trade, that
minister prouocatio^s to delights and voluptuous pleasures: but he shows that
it will come to pass, that those which now swimmed in sensuality, should
smart for it, and should be pownded as it were in a mortar by their enemies.
And because the Merchants were in all parts of the city, partly by reason of
their aliances, wherwt they were linked together, and did partly trust in their
riches: ye prophet says. All the company of the Merchants is destroyed, and
all such as carried money are cut of. In which words he depriueth them of all
confidence, affirming, that they shall perish together with their mercha^ts.
But it is worth the consideration, that he threatens the marcha^ts with
peculiar plagues. For they while, they be altogether given to their own
pleasure, are the authors of many vices: for they bring in strange and foren
delights, and do wonderfully increase excessive pleasure; overthrowing all
good instruction, order, discipline, and example of manners: that we may here
speak nothing at all of those things, yt they commit, contrary to all equity,
and right, and against the care of charity, as else where is declared more at
large. But we are all without exception here taught, what remains for them,
which will not submit themselves to the laws of God, but cast of al order, and
godly institution. Those fellows are wont in the midst of their pleasure,
to singe, to sport, and make much ioly royoting, but in the end these things
be turned to mourning; that they do no less fill all places with howling and
lamentation, then they were troublesome before with their untimely singing and
pastime. Let us learn therefore to take heed unto our selves, that we follow
not the examples of such men: neither let us be offended with the unaccustomed
hautinesse of them, that commit such things. But let us lay up all hope of
everlasting felicity in God, through Jesus Christ, who shortly will come in
the clouds of the air to deliver his, and to beat down the loftines of these
men with deserved punishment: to him be thanks giving honor, glory, and power,
for ever.

Amen.
The fourth Sermon.
The text.
12 ANd at that time I will search Jerusalem with lights, and visit the men
that are frosen in their dregs, and say in their hearts, the Lord will
neither do good nor ill.

13 Therefore their goods shall be spoiled, and their houses waste, they shall
also build houses, but not inhabit them: and they shall plant Vineyardes, but
not drink the wine thereof.

14 The great day of the Lord is near, it is near and hastes greatly: even
the voice of the day of the Lord: the strong man shall cry there bitterly, that
is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and heaviness, a day of destruction and
desolation, a day of obscurity and darkness, a day of clouds and blackness,

15 A day of the trumpet and alarm against the strong Cities and against the
hye Towers.

16 And I will bring distress upon men: they shall walk like blind men,
because they have sinned against the Lord, and their blood shall be powered out
like dust, and their flesh as the doung.

17 Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the day
of the Lords wrath, but the whole la^d shall be devoured by the fire of his
gelousie: for he shall make even a speedy riddaunce of all them that dwell in
the Land.

The argument and use of this present place.
THe Prophet has hitherto revealed certain kind of sins, wherewith the Jews
under the reign of Iosia, provoked the wrath of God against themselves. Among
them this was chief, that they set them selves against the godly reformation,
and did privily mayntaine those superstitions that were condemned in the law.
Therefore he thretned very grievous plagues, which they especially should feel,
which thought themselves most of all in safety: as namely, the Princes, the
kings children, the marchantes, the courtiers and their officers, and as many
besides, as wallowed in wealth. But in this place he goes forward, and does
without exception reprove in general all hypocrites, and profane despisers of
God, and does in such wise threaten them with punishments and plagues, that he
takes from them al things wherein they might put any confidence against the
same threatninges. Hence we may learn that God is neither deceived with an
outward show, neither yet that he can be let with any force of man, but that
he may take execution upon them.

He threatens destruction to the careless hypocrites.
First he speaks unto the hypocrites and careless despisers of God, showing
what they are, and yt they can no way escape the judgment of God. And it shall
be in that time, (says he) that I will search Jerusalem with lights, etc.
As if he should say, you think that I cannot see you, and that you shall
escape the fierceness of my Judgment, but you are much deceived by this
persuasion. For even now my Lamps and Lanterns are ready, wherewith I will
make a search through out the city, and I will draw out those that lurk in
the most privy corners. Yea I will set the City on fire by the Babylonians,
that no one may be suffered to hide him self in the dark. Those therefore
shall then be laid open, and made manifest, which now very cunningly do
counterfeite a care of holiness, being in deed altogether wicked, and are
against the reformation which is done according to my Law. And by and by after
he shows in plain words of whom he speaks: I will visit (says he)
those men that are frosen in their dregs. Riches and wealth are sometime called
dregs: as Jeremy speaking of the Moabites, says, Ier. ^.
Moab was rich from his youth, and he took his ease in his dregs, or settled
upon his lees etc. this seems to be the reason of the word (Lees or Dregs)
that as dregs are the refuse of wine, and by reason of their own weightinesse
do go to the bottom: so the riches of this life are a certain superfluous
matter, or substance, which for as much as they do consist of the earth,
neither can they them selves be lifted up to heaven, neither yet do they
suffer those that set their minds upon them, to mount aloft to the
consideration of heavenly things, but all to be drench them in earthly cares.
Moreover, as the wine being troubled with the dregs, cannot be used, until
they settle them selves into their place, or else the wine be dreaned into an
other vessel: so the care of riches is wont to disturb ye whole race of man's
life, to hinder godliness, to make men unfit, and unworthy to receive the
kingdom of heaven: neither can any other order be taken for our safety, then
by making our wealth subject unto us; that it may serve for our necessary
uses, and not rule over us; but that we should set our minds free, and at
liberty from the care and disquietnesse thereof. Moreover dregs in an other
signification, are taken for extreme misery, or calamity, as where Isay
writes that the Jews shall drink the Cup of the Lord even to the dregs:
Isay. 15.
although the first signification does not unfitly agree to this present
place, for as much as he spoke before of the wealthy Merchants, and by and
by after threatens the taking away of their riches: yet ye prophet seems to
me to have considered a more deep and hidden matter, as namely the natural
corruption of the mind, which being taken or drawn from the sins of our
first parents, except it be corrected by the spirit and word of GOD, is
gathered together as it were a certain ulcer, or mass of filthy matter hydden
in the flesh, secretly increasing and creeping on, (...)
until at length it break out into open ungodliness, and manifest denying of
God. And unto this sense the Prophet himself agrees in adding, that (They say
in their hearts, the Lord will do neither good nor ill.) For in these words
he shows the thoughts of the wicked, which, as most filthy dregs, have
their abiding place in their hearts, wherewith they being deceived, imagine a
God unto them selves, who (as the Epicure says) walks too and fro by the
poles of heaven, and regards not the affairs of men, doing neither good to
them that worship him, nor harm to them that despise him: where we are taught
to what pass they come, which leaving the word of God, follow the dreams of
their own reason. The properties of hypocrites. And do profess the same very
greatly.
They dissemble in good earnest for a little space, a very fervent care of
godliness, and do profess the same very greatly: but having respect to their
minds, wherein there is some perseverance of the heavenly divine power, they
spend their whole time and travel about idle and those stark steruing
superstitions. But when they perceive that they cannot profit any thing at all
thereby, and that they can not in very deed attribute much to those things
which they know that they themselves and such like have invented: all fear of
the mighty power of God being at length shaken of, they deny GOD, and do
wickedly despise all kind of holiness: although not openly, yet in their
hearts, as the Prophet says, alluding to that saying of David, Psalm. 14.
The foolish man has said in his heart, there is no God) and by this it is
evident, without all nay, that these thoughts or rather persuasions abide in
their hearts, because they living most wickedly and wholly ouerrun with sin
do notwithstanding promise themselves that nothing shall miscary with them:
adding moreover as if it pleased them to mock with God whom erst while they
denied in their hearts, yt they are not afraid to thrust upon him their
superstitious and idle ceremonies, which they know to be manifestly against
his will revealed in his word. Such persons may bleare men's eyes, with their
vain show, but they can in no wise deceive God, who never wants lights, and
lamps, wherewith he pearceth to the finding out of the most hidden corners of
the heart, and does afterward reprove their ungodliness openly: and being
brought into light, he does worthily punish them, in the sight of the whole
world. Examples we have in those, which, when they have ouerlong despised God:
being at the length overcome by the testimony of their own conscience, fall
into despair, and being as yet alive in the flesh, do behold before their
faces, those furies of hell, which very often do offer unto them occasion and
cause of selfquelling. And although these things come not always to pass in
this life, yet the day will one day come, when they shall stand before the
Tribunal seat of Christ, where their ungodliness shall both be revealed, and
they worthily punished for ye same: but in the mean sea so^ this place must be
drawn to ye judgments, wherwt God in this life punishes sins: yt we may learn
yt the hand of God is present every where, and that they can be hidden in no
lurking place, though never so secret, whom he has ordained unto punishment.
For that we may stay upon the history of our own Prophet, we read that
Zedechia, and those heads of the people that were left, when they saw that
the City was taken of the Babylonians, fled away, by a certain by way, or
privy passage: Iere. 39.
but by Gods judgment which followed them, they were taken by the way, and
being brought again from their escape, and running away, were grievously
punished for their ungodliness: but in ye last winning of the city, which was
done by Titus, they were found in the very priuies, and there put to death.
that fled thither to hide them selves. We meet such examples in hystories
every where which might serve us to learn to fear and obey God.

But because he began to speak of the punishment, he does define it, that they
may know what it shall be: 2. Tim. 3.
Namely the winning of their city, and spoiling of their goods. In which two
kinds he comprehends all things that are wont to follow the sacking, or
rifling of a city, Their goods, says he, shall be spoiled, and their houses
lie wast. And so he teaches them, that in short time and without any great
ado they should be conquered, that were thought invincible: and that they
may acknowledge the judgment of God in these things, he boroweth threatenings
from the law, whereby he may more plainly express this matter. They shall
build houses (says he) and not inhabit them, they shall pla^t Vineiards, and
not drink wine thereof. We have spoken else where of these speeches, so that we
need not make any stay in them, yet it shall be profitable to note how miserably
they are deceived wc take great pains by hook and by crook to heap up
riches, and do not give unto GOD his honor, who only blesses our travels.
They imagine that man's blessedness consists in the abundance of riches, but
they being for the most part prevented by the suddayne, and unlooked for
judgment of God, do reap but small commodity from their wealth, which they
have gotten with such pains and travel. View the Parable which Christ in Luke
propounds of the foolish and sumptuous proud rich man, whereof we may see
very many examples every day, whereby ye frowardnes of men ought more to be
lamented: which can be moved by no examples or persuasions, to give over the
outrageous pains taking, to wax rich, and to seek the kingdom of God, and
to apply themselves too godliness, which has promises of this life and of the
life to come. 1. Tim. 4.

He threatens the winning and sacking of the City.
Furthermore because the wicked do on every side reach after ways to escape,
and do put their confidence in external assistance, he now describes more at
large that, which he had threatened before in general words, and he takes al
things away yt they were wont to object either in sport or good earnest. He
shewet that God is their enemy.
First they thought that there was no man that durst attempt any thing against
their nation fenced on every side with so many garrisons: therefore he says, The
day of the Lord is at hand. He sets before their eyes the day of the Lord,
that they may understand that this shall be the work of God, who can weaken their
force and strengthen any enemies against them whatsoever. In the mean season
he forewarneth the godly by this speech, that in the time of captivity they
may acknowledge the hand of God, and that they should not think that any
thing came to pass by chance or fortune. But from hence we may gather a
general doctrine, namely yt no man put his trust either in his own strength,
or contemn such enemies as are sent of God. For if the day of the lord, that
is to say the time of destiny, be at hand, wherein God has ordained to
punish any nation, our own strength cannot help us, and the counsel of the
most wise shall be to no purpose, as we may behold in the examples of many
nations even from the beginning of the world. Again, whosoever they be, that
are punished, let them think that they are punished of God, and let them
return unto him: which thing to do, is the only way of safety in the time
of adversity, as the scripture teaches, according to that saying, Be ye
turned unto me, and I will be turned unto you.

He shows that it is near at hand.
Secondly they refer this day of the Lord unto the time yet long to come,
that by prolonging the time, they might take their pleasure. (He says)
therefore, That it is at hand, and that by repeating the same, he adds, and
it makes have. By the which words he admonishes that ye judgments of God are
not to be wayed according to the present state of things, but after his word,
which is grounded and sure, howsoever it seems otherwise too flesh and blood.
For although he does at sometimes defer the punishment, yet he does it of his
just judgment, and determinate counsel, when either the faith of those that
be his, must be exercised, or the mesure of the wicked fulfilled. But in the
mean time, that judgment slacketh not, wherewith they must be punished:
neither does the destruction sleep which God appointed for them. For as we
wax old without any feeling, although gray hayres creep upon us and we
perceive it not: so upon them that be careless, and having nothing less in
their minds, that day comes on very fast, wherewith God will punish the
wickedness of all men. We see examples here every day, when those that be
richest of all others, are stripped out of their wealth, diseases comme upon
them unlooked for, while they take their pleasure in security: and those that
a little before might be thought to be no less then half Gods, are thrust
down from the highest step of renown into the lowest state of reproach,
ignominy and shame, and that, that comes to pass upon some of private
condition, we see also to befall whole kingdoms and nations publicly: what?
does not the Apostle say that that last day shall then come, when most men
being deceived with the pleasures and carelessness of the flesh, shall say,
peace, peace. O that we would often bethink us of these things, that in short
time we might profit greatly in godliness, etc.

He shows the greatness of the punishment.
Thirdly they thought that this punishment should be but light, which
peradventure should pass lightly over their country: and in Isay, cap. 28
these sayings of the wicked are well known, We have made a league with death,
and a couenaunte with hell, though a scourge run over and pass through, it
shall not come nigh us, etc. He meets them therefore, and calls it the
great day of the Lord, because he had appointed too punish them with a
peculiar and unwonted kind of severity. For he adds to expound himself
with all, The voice of the day of the Lord is bitter. He calls the howling
and cry of those that must then be punished, the voice of the day of the
Lord. They shall cry (says he) and bewail their calamity very bitterly,
which notwithstanding they cannot escape, but he seems to set these outcries
against the sermons of the Prophets, which called them daily to repentance
though in vain by offering unto them the word of God. Whether also that may
be referred, that is spoken by Zachary in his first Chapter, It shall come to
pass that as God has cried, and they have not heard, so they shall cry and I
will not hear them, says the Lord of hosts: This ought to be well marked, as
often as God seems to deal hardly with us, if at any time he do speedily deliver
us calling upon him, let us then think how often we have passed over his
voice with deaf ears, and then we shall perceive that he does us no wrong.
Furthermore, that wc he adds, belongs to the enlarging of the mischief,
saying, There the strong man shall cry, that is, the calamity shall be so
great, that it shall constrain the most valiant and strong men to howl very
miserably, and by and by after he does by a collection geather or heap up
together what soever may make for ye setting out of ye calamity of yt time.
That day is a day of wrath, that is, he has appointed this day for his wrath
and indignation which you have set on fire by your wickedness, A day of trouble
and affliction, a day of destruction and desolatio^, yt is, that time shall be
full of calamity, that wc way soever you turn you, al shall be a miserable and
huge wastnes, also a day of clouds and darkness a day of obscurity and
blacknes. By ye darkness he understands extreme evils and thretneth yt they
shall not know their own state, wc thing he shows afterward more plainly by ye
parable of the^ yt be blind. but this is ye end of this destruction, yt he
purposes to scare these froward Hypocrites, which so securely have flattered
them selves in their own wickedness, and unlawful pleasures. Iosa. 22.
And it is good to call often to our minds such examples, when we seem to be
most happy, that we may bethink us what has befallen others, and what may
come upon us, seeing no man is free from those things which are of the nature
of man. This consideration will make us to be less puffed up with present
happiness, and therefore the rather to stay upon Gods favorable goodness.

4. He thretneth their munition.
Fourthly they trusted in their strong Bulwarks and Fortresses, and therefore
he adioyneth, saying: A day of the Trumpet and Alarm over the fenced cities
and hye towers. as though he should say, You think that your country is
invincible, and that none can come unto it. But it shall come to pass, that
ye shall hear the Horns of your enemies, rushing upon you, and not only
abroad in the fields, but your enemies Trumpets shall sound their Tarra
Tantara, with a terrible noise in your best fenced cities, and highest towers
of your strong holds, and no fortresses can defend you, or put back the force
of the enemy. And surely it is well known, that it falls out very miserably
with them, that have any hope in fenced places. For it comes too pass for
the most part, that either their munition together with all their furniture
for their war, do come into their enemies hands, whilst they that have
prepared them, dare not for fear defend them: Or else they become unto them,
like a prison, whilst the time of their besieging they fall without upon the
enemies swoorde: But within are plagued, with hunger, sedition, noisome and
pestifferous stincke, and in the end perish in most horrible exile. This
came too pass under Zedechia when the Babylonians did besiege their city: and
then after also when it was besieged by the Romans, which when they had taken
it, made it eeuen with the ground. And in these days we are not without
examples which prove that vain is the confidedce of munition. Let us say with
Solomon, The name of the Lord is a most strong Tower, whether, when the just
man flees, he is clean without all gunshotte.

He takes away all confidence of wisdom and distress.
Fifthly, they trusting too their wisdom, did please themselves wonderful
well in their own counselles in taking great pains to bring their abordering
nations into league with them: and by seeking outward assistance round about:
as we may see in Jeremy, he says therefore, And I will bring distress upon
men, and they shall walk like blind men, that is, I will bring their
abundance into such a straight, that all their counselles being shuffled
together, they shall wander here and there, and dash upon every thing, as
the^ yt be blind. And least he should seem to be cruel and unjust in
threatening these things, he does again by the way insinuate the cause, which
is, They have sinned against the Lord. For so he both vpbraideth the^ with the
contempt of Gods word, and spoyleth them of all hope, because there can be no
safety unto them against whom God is angry. Therefore (says he) Their blood
shall be poured out like dust, that is, their enemies shall have no more regard
of their blood, then if they straw abroad dust or sand. And their flesh as
doung. The hebrewe word is Lechumaei, derived of the same radical that
Laechaem comes of, which signifies bread or meat: and therefore some, not
unfitly in my judgment, do expound it of the bodies of ye delicate fed
fellows, wc were accustomed to pa^per themselves with pleasures and dainty
fare: and God for the most part is wont in that sort to punish those
unclean swine of ye Epicures herd: that forasmuch as they make their belly and
those things that belong to it their God, they being slain like swine, should
be thrown away after a shameful manner, or else wanting the rite of burial,
should become food to the wild and cruel beasts. Or else being buried,
should feed so many more worms, by how much more foggie, fat, and gross,
their bellyes were. That we may speak nothing of them that being alive are
gnawn with worms, whereof Antiochus, Herod, Nero and many others are examples:
the consideration whereof, ought to move us to forsake the pleasures of the
filthy flesh, and to strive or contend to come to heavenly things.

He ^eth from them the trust of riches.
Lastly they trusted in their riches, as though they could with them redeem
their lives, and avoid every kind of danger, as rich men are wont to do,
and that sometime with betraying their common country: but the Prophet
answers, that their silver and gold cannot save them in the day of the wrath
of the Lord. For God cannot be pacified with gold, which so inflameth the
minds of the enemies, that before Gold they thirst for the blood of them
that be overcome, which self same thing, Isay in his 13. Chapter threatens
against the Babylonians, when he speaking of the cruelty of the Medes and
Persians, says: I will make a man more precious than fine gold, yea even a
man more worth than much gold of Ophir. But in this place he adds, All the
earth shall be deuowred in the fire of his gelosie. He compares the wrath of
God unto fire, that he may show that it should be such as cannot be pacified.
For he adds, because it shall make a riddance, And that a very swift one,
even with all the inhabitants of the earth. And this is the conclusion of the
first Sermon, which ought to serve us unto this use, that we may learn to be
subject to Gods word, to fear him and serve him in spirit and truth by
Jesus Christ, to whom belongs all thanks giving honor, glory, and power for
ever.

Amen.
The Contents of the second Chapter.
HE exhorts the wicked to repentance, that they may escape the punishment: 1.
2. The godly to be more zealous. 3. He comfort them by telling them of the
destruction of their enemies unto the end of the Chapter.

The fifth Sermon.
The text.
1 GAther your selves, even gather you, O nation not worthy to be loved.

2 Before the decree come forth, and ye be as chafe that passes in a day, and
before the fierce wrath of the Lord come upon you, and before the day of the
Lords anger come upon you.

3 Seek ye the Lord, all the meek of the earth, which have wrought his
judgments, seek righteousness, seek lowlynesse, if so be that ye may be
hid in the day of the Lords wrath.

4 For Azzah shall be forsaken, and Ashkelon desolat: they shall drive out Ashdod
at the noone day, and Elkron shall be rooted up.

The argument and use of the second sermon.
IN the first Sermon the Prophet Zephaniah, has unto those Jews that favored
Idolatry and superstition, denounced from God, punishment that eue^ now hanged
over their heads. The second Sermon follows, which being described in this
Chapter, contains an exhortation unto repentance; and it does consist wholly
of three parts. In the first part he deals with those Hypocrites, that
outwardly did allow of the reformation, but in the mean season did secretly
maintain superstition, and speaking more roughly to these, he urges them with
new threatenings, that they might be converted unto the Lord. In the second
part he comes unto the godly, which from their heart did consent unto the
word of God, and that reformation that was established, but notwithstanding,
they being deceived by the example, and familiarity of others, dealt over
negligently, and did from them every day receive some uncleanness. The Prophet
handles these more gently, and exhorts them to go about the Lords business
with great zeal, and that they should not suffer them selves once to be
removed from their duties. Last of all, for their behoof, he propounds a
consolation, whereby he remedieth that offense, which he perceived would grow
from the victories of their wicked enemies, and unmeasurable triumphings of the
nations next adjoining, which took meruellous great pleasure in the
destruction of Gods people. For he teaches that the Judgment of God shall
also come unto the^, that as soon as he has and used their labor and
ministry in punishing of his own, then they in like manner shall be punished for
their sins.

He teaches the hypocrites what they should do.
In the first part he speaks unto the Hypocrites in these words, Search and
gather your selves together, yea search I say, and gather your selves
together, ye nation, not worthy to be beloved. He calls them a nation not
worthy to be loved, which may be understood as well actiuely yt is, in
respect of their doing; or passiuely yt is, in respect of their suffering.
Actiuely, in this manner, that he may show that in them there was no love or
desire of celestial or heavenly things, neither that they did desire the
kingdom of God, whereunto every one ought to strive and contend: passiuely
thus, that they were not worthy of any love or mercy, and that they could not
any longer be approved of God: both these expositions do very well agree unto
Hypocrites. For as for those things that belong to heaven, they may easily
neglect them, neither do they seek for any thing in their religion, saving
their own praise, namely that they may be seen of men. And surely God cannot
accept nor away with those, that profane the profession of faith, with a lie,
and dissimulation, the which that most excellent divine power does greatly
abhor. But what is it, that he does command them? Search (says he) and
gather your selves together. In the Hebrewe there is but one word, which the
interpreters do expound two ways. For some do derive it out of that Hebrew
Radical, that signifies stubble. And they affirm that here is noted a very
diligent inquiry or search, such as men are wont to use in gathering together
stubble, or other very small things. Others affirm that it is derived simply,
and properly, of the Hebrew Radical, that signifies to gather and congregate
together: because the matter is doubtful, and yet both senses agree very well
with the purpose of the Prophet. I think that I shall not do amiss, if I
shall lay open both the senses, by translating that with two words, which in
the Hebrewe is spoken in one. For (having regard to the first) he admonishes
the Hypocrites that they content not them selves with a vain shadow, and
outward ceremonies of benumbed superstitions: but for that they should
descend more deeply into them selves, and by the rule of Gods word examine
whatsoever was in them, that so they might know their errors, and amend them
being known: but having respect to the other sense, he exhorts that they
which now were divided into many superstitions and sects, would agree in one
profession of faith and true religion: and that in the unity thereof, they
should be gathered unto one GOD, For he had accused them before, that they
worshipped GOD and the host of heaven, and that they did swear by GOD and
Malchom, and we know that this is proper to the Idolaters, that as soon as
they are departed from the true GOD, every one does invent unto him self new
Gods; and so are rent in sunder into very contrary sects. Therefore this
admonition of the Prophet was very necessary, that al men should know ye God
did not allow of their worship, except they should all be turned unto him
only.

What they must do that have offended God in their superstition.
But from hence we may gather a general doctrine, that we should think the
same to be spoken to all them, that have offended GOD with their superstition,
and unlawful serving of him, whatsoever they be. It is required of these
(that the judgment of flesh and the world being put of and rejected) they
should examine whatsoever they have, according to the rule of Gods word. For
seeing they did content themselves so well with their own fancies, they will
never suffer themselves to be brought again into the way, except some
sharper correction be ministered. But if they shall take the same out of Gods
word, who only can make laws for his worship, they shall quickly understand,
that with one sentence, shall be dampened, whatsoever things were invented by
them, that were superstitious: and received with authority and consent of all
men: for it is the word of GOD alone which Christ in the Gospel has allowed
of: In vain do they woorship me, teaching the precepts of men. And again,
Every plant which my heavenly father has not planted, shall be rooted out.
Furthermore they shall understand, that God cannot be pleased with outward
ceremonies, which will be woorshipped in spirit and truth: neither does he
hearken to their prayers, whose minds are either wandering or far away from
him, or whose hands are defiled with blood. Moreover when they come to
deliberate upon these matters, it is no less needful for them, their wicked
superstitions and persuasions being utterly abandoned, to be gathered together
unto God, and to the unity of his Church. This shall come to pass if they
acknowledge God only and alone: submitting themselves to be ordered by his
word, and shall give too Christ alone, the name and glory of a Mediator, and
under him being head, grow together, with all his chosen into one body of his
Church. This is the true and only way of salvation, which is taught in the
word of God, and figured in the Sacraments, namely Baptism and the Lords
Supper: the use whereof among other things is to gather the Church together
after a visible manner, and to preserve the unity of the members thereof.
Besides this, as Jesus Christ the only son of God, is unto us the author of
salvation, so he does not bestow salvation any where, but upon his Church which
is his body, and therefore they are without salvation whosoever they be, that
are without the fellowshippe of his Church. For they wander about unprofitable
superstitions, neither can they ever be remedied, except they be gathered unto
God in Christ, as our Prophet does admonish.

He prescribes the Godly their duties.
But because our nature is slow in these things he adds a reason wherein he
shows that it is needful to put that speedily in execution, which he
commands, Before (says he) decree come forth. So he calls the counsel
of God, or his sentence which erst while he has pronounced by his Prophets
as touching their punishments. For he adds a little after by the way of
exposition: Before the fierce wrath of the lord come upon you before: the day
of the lords anger com upon you. But he uses very finely the Metaphor or
translation of bring forth or bearing, as women do children. For so he
shows that the judgments or threatninges of GOD are not in vain, but (as a
woman with child) to be great with those punishments, which were shortly to
ensue without all doubt: but as the birth does not immeditately follow the
conception, but has a lawefull time limited by the Law of nature: so GOD,
although he had purposed to punish any, and has also pronounced the sentence
against them, yet he deferreth the execution of his Judgment, and gives
space of repentance, and receives into favor those that turn unto him. For
even thus he says by Jeremy. I will speak suddenly against a nation, and
against a kingdom to pluck it up to root it out and to destroy it. But if
this nation, against whom I have pronounced, turn from their wickedness, I will
repent of the plague that I thought to bring upon them. etc. But if we abuse
the long suffering of God, our sins will wax ripe unto punishment, and God
will bring forth his conceived birth of judgment threatened against us, in
chastising them with deserved plagues which would suffer themselves to be
reclaimed into the way by no means. It is profitable that we should be
occupied in the diligent consideration of these things, that we do not after
a slumbering manner, contemn the threatenings of God. For as the birth does
necessarily follow, when that yt is conceived is in a readiness thereto: So the
necessity of Gods judgment against those, that stubbornely wax froward
against him, cannot be avoided. And hereunto makes that that the Prophet
brings in: as stubble shall pas away in one day, that is, If that decree of
God do once come forth, and his fearce wrath wax hot against you: you shall be
no more able to resist him, then the chaff is able to withstand the fire or
wind. Nay this your kingdom obtained by so many years travel, and
established by the succession of so many kings, shall perish, falling to the
ground in one day, or as it were in one minute or moment of an hour. I am not
ignorant that others do read this sentence otherwise, but I stick unto the
letter, neither will I willingly put in any sentences of mine own to fill up
the matter for the helping of a feined or sense far fetched, seeing that of
those things which are in the Hebrew, a fit sense or meaning may be drawn or
gathered out. But we are admonished by this place, that none can be defended
against God either by man's force, or long continuance of a kingdom, if he
continue to be wicked still: nay let us rather think, that by how much longer
ungodliness has continued, it is come so much nearer his end And as a huge mas
of snow, is soon dissolved with the heat of the son and winds: so at the
burning heat of Gods Judgment, all things do melte, which seemed to be
eternal, and past ouercomming. The examples of most mighty kingdoms serve for
this purpose, which story writers have reported, after continual conquestes
of many years to have suddenly fallen to the ground.

He prescribes duties for the godly.
Now let us see the other part of this place, wherein he speaks unto the
godly after this manner. Seek ye the Lord al ye meek of the earth, which
have wrought his judgment, seek righteousness, seek lowlynes. etc. Most have
interpreted the word (Meek) which in the Hebrewe rather signifies them that
be afflicted or brought low. The seventy interpreters therefore have more
narrowly weyed the deriuall, (...)
and had turned it (humbly) or (lowely:) for the Prophet means those, that
were made afraid, and shaken as well with the former euilles, as new
threatninges of almighty GOD, and had submitted them selves unto his word, and
framed themselves to the reformation established by Iosia, unto the which
humbled in heart, the Prophet gives this commendation, that They had wrought
his Judgment: that is to say, they had done their duty, yet therwithal he
exhorts them to go forward in the same, and with their life and manners to
beautify the profession of their faith. This example teaches that the godly
have need of instruction, admonition, exhortation, yea and sometime of
reprehension: for the corruption of nature has place also in them, whereby it
comes to pass, that they go astray, being unmindful of their duties; as
we may see in many examples of the most devout worshippers of GOD. Their
proud boasting therefore is over gross and detestable, which as though they had
attained to the height of all perfection, cry out, that they need no teaching
or admonition and so not without injury and reproach reject such as admonish
them faithfully. Let us see moreover what the Prophet requires of these.

They must seek God.
First he comprehends the duty of true godliness in general, in that,
that he bids them seek the Lord. This precept is very often in the
scriptures, and seems to be superfluous: because it is well known that God
is present every where, and that he never departs from us, but the matter is
not whether he be present with us, and whether he show arguments of his
presence, but that we may understand that he is present with us, and that we
should conform our selves to his will, that we may apprehend or lay hold
upon him after a healthful manner. But having regard to this reason, he is
found in his word, wherein he makes himself and his will known unto us, as we
have spoken else where. They therefore seek him truly, which being bent upon
his word, do study to promote his honor and glory: which then at length
shall come to pass when we renounce and bid adieu to our fleshly affections,
and desires of the world, in so much that nothing may now seem pleasant or
joyful unto us, but that only that agrees with his will and that we see to
be joined with his glory.

By what token it may appear that we seek God.
But because the hypocrites also profess this care, and would seem altogether
to be such as seek the Lord, and desire to advance his glory, the Prophet
shows by what tokens the godly ought to declare this study and care. Namely
by the study of Justice, and of meekness, or rather lowliness and
humility. For he adds, seek Justice, seek Meekness. It is the property
of Justice too give to every one his own, and it reaches as well unto God, as
unto thy neighbor: but he comprehends in the first member those things that
belong to God, for as much as he commands us to seek him: but that Justice
yt belongs unto men, is twoe fold, to wit public and private: public
justice belongs unto Magistrates, whose duty is to preserve the common
peace, to minister the law holyly, to reward the good, and punish the wicked,
and what pleasure these things ought to be unto ungodly Magistrates, it is
known even by that, that they are so often brought in, in the law and
Prophets: and because it is manifest, that no nation has long abiden in
safety, wherein ye laws of the common wealth were either sold for money, or
neglected. Private Justice is that that belongs to every one particularly,
and commands us to perform duty to every man, respecting as well our own
calling as theirs. The effects of this Justice is, that we give due honor to
our parents, and al others, which are to us in steed of parents: That parents
have an honest regard to their children, as well touching their bodies, as
minds: that we be careful to profit our neighbor according to the rule of
charity, that we do him no injury, whereby either his body, or good name may
be endamaged. To conclud that we bridle our thoughts and lusts so, that we
commit nothing against the Law of charity and justice: and verily they that
seek GOD with all their heart, do never neglect those duties, which by his
commandment we owe unto others. But that men should not please them selves in
these things, or put the desert of salvation in them, the Prophet wills them
to study for humility, which causes us to be wholly subject unto GOD, and
teaches us to depend upon his grace and goodness, as Christ admonishes in
Luke, Chap. 17. When we have done al, let us say, we are unprofitable
servant. This may be seen in all the Saints of GOD, whose prayers are,
Psalm. 143. and 130. John. 15.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O God: for if thou be extreme to
mark what is done amiss, O Lord who may abide it? Neither do they at any
time forget that saying of Christ, 1. Cor. ^
Without me you can do nothing: And that which the Apostle does plainly
say, What have thou that thou have not received* but if thou haste received it,
why boastest thou as though thou had not received it. But seeing God
requires these things of them that be godly, it is evident enoughe, what
account they are to be made of, which professing a love of godliness, do
either not regard the duties of Justice, and live rather as an Epicure then a
Christian, or else they put reward in them, and do boaste that heaven is due
for them, which the Pharesies did in time past, and all at this time do, that
are puffed up with the leaven of papistrie.

Moreover the Prophet ministers the reasons to the godly, whereby they may be
stirred up. He gives hope of safety to the godly.
For first he gives them hope of salvation, least they should think, that
they labored in vain: and should therefore become more slack. For we know
that the godly do oftentimes begin to be troubled, because they fear, that
they themselves must be in the same danger, and perish with the wicked. The
Prophet Zephaniah therefore salueth this temptation, when he says, If at any
time ye may be hidden in the day of the Lords wrath. He promises them a
hyding, which they must have under the wings and protection of GOD, least they
should come to a wicked end with others: but he speaks modestly, or rather
as it were in doubt, not because he either doubted of the grace of God, or
would persuade others to doubt, but that they may admonish the^ again of
modesty, and lowliness, which he had commended even now. Least verily they
should think that GOD was necessarily tied unto them, or else that he were in
their debte. Moreover (as we have else where admonished) those promises ought
to be understood, not of remission of sins (the promises whereof are surely
established with the godly) but of the outward help of God, any deliverance
out of dangers, hanging over their heads, which sometime is put of more
longer, when need requires that we should have long exercise. But if the
Prophet speak so modestly of the godly: what is to be thought of the wicked,
which do despise the admonitions and threatenings of GOD? Peter saw this, when
he said, 1. Pet. 4.
If the righteous shall scarce be saved, where shall the wicked, and the
sinner appear? For although the City, and the Temple being overthrown, the
people was carried away unto Babylon, yet they were hidden, and found sure
assistance in God, as many as followed this counsel. For Jeremy had ye
Babylonians assistant, and very helpful unto him. Daniel and his fellows were
liberally appointed, and were afterward advanced to very high degrees.
Iechonias also, who being skarred with Ieremies talk, went into voluntary
exile, and was wonderfully preserved many years. 2. Reg. 25. Iere. 52.
And evil Merodach, had him in great regard, being brought out of prison, and
made him more excellent then all his Princes. And it is no doubt, but many
others also, that showed them selves obedient unto GOD, tried the truth of
this promise.

Secondly the Prophet shows the greatness of the danger: that by this
consideration he might stir up the godly to a constant trust of Gods promises,
and an earnest study of godlynes: Because Haza is forsaken, and Ashkalon is
made desolate, they shall drive out Ashdod at the noone day, and Ekron shall be
rooted up. The meaning is, that the hurly burly of the war, that was at hand,
should be so great, that it should come even to the near Cities of the
Philistines, which as yet were not overcome, although they were sometime
punished with great slaughters. Paronomasia
But the Prophet uses a very beautiful resemblaunce of words, where he
speaks of Gaza, and Ekron, which they that are skillful of the Hebrewe
tongue, may very well note, that they may easily see that ye Prophets were
neither unskillful of the art of Rhetorique, neither yet without their
eloquence. But, says he, They shall drive out Azotus at noone day, that he may
show that their enemies shall fall upon them without fear openly at noone
tide: but his mind was, before all others to name those cities, which we know
were most troublesome to the people of God: that by that occasion he might
pass to the third part of this sermon wherein he gives a remedy for that
offense, which sprange of ye untimely and unmeet rejoicing of ye heathen, when
ye people of GOD were led away captive. Let us apply these things to our
selves, and when we see tokens of Gods wrath every way appear, let us be
humbled under his hand, and seek him in righteousness and lowliness, and
we in like manner shall find sure help and safety for our selves in Christ
Jesus to whom is due al thanksgiving, all honor, glory and power for ever.

Amen.
The sixth Sermon.
The Text.
5 WOe to the inhabitants of the Sea coast: the nation of the Cherethims: the
word of the Lord is against you: O Canaan the land of the Philistines: I will
even destroy thee without an inhabitaunt.

6 And the sea coasts shall be dwellinges and cotages for shepherdes and
sheepefoldes.

7 And that cost shall be for the remnant of the house of Judah, and to feed
thereupon: in the houses of Ashkelon shall they lodge toward night: for the
Lord their God shall visit them and turn away their captivity.

8 I have heard the reproach of Moab and the rebukes of the Children of Ammon,
whereby they vpbraided my people, and magnified themselves against their
borders.

8 Therefore as I live, says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, surely
Moab shall be as Sodom, and the children of Amon. etc.

The argument and use of this place.
THe prophet having exhorted ye godly to constancy of faith, comes to the 3.
part of his sermon, wherein he thretneth destruction to the Gentiles, being
their enemies. These were the special causes of this discourse: the 1. is ye
corruption of nature, whereby it comes to pas, yt for ye most part we look
unto others, when we be afflicted, and do think yt we are worse dealt wtal, the^
we deserve, if so be ye any fear better then we our selves. Which may be seen
by Peter, John. 21.
when he was by christ Jesus admonished of suffering ye punishment of death for
ye doctrine of the truth, and sought not, as he ought, to prepare himself there
to, but what should beco^e of John, who^ he saw that christ loved more then ye
others. An other is, ye stumbling block, yt was laid in ye way of the godly, to
their great grief, when they saw the wicked malapertly triumph over the^, being
afflicted under the cross; and from thence to take occasion to speak evil of
faith and true religion, which thing was done when the people were led away to
Babylon: Abdia. Psalm. 137.
but the Prophet foreseeing this, teaches them yt God in deed will begin with
the Jews to punish, but will pass from them to the nations adjoining, which
must utterly be destroyed, and that to the profit of his own people, which at
the length being returned from their captivity, shall enjoy all this land of
the Heathen their enemies. And amongst these he names the Philistines, the
Moabits, etc, whom we know to be the ancient enemies of the Church, which
under the cloak of a league, had before very notoriously mocked Ezechia, and all the people of God. Isay. 20.
Lastly he adds unto these the Babylonians, which must also be punished of
God, so soon as they have finished their course. But this place contains a
general doctrine, and consolation. For first we are here taught, that God is
the God, not only of his people, but also of other nations, and that he does
bend the rygor of his Judgment against al men: secondly we see that it is no
new thing, if any time we perceive that the Church is very roughly dealte
withal, and that no man ought to be offended therewith, for then also has
God especially an eye unto it, who as he does refourme it with correction, so
in the end he turns his judgment against them that persecute it.

He threatens the Philistines.
But because in our sermon yesterday, he began to speak of the destruction of
the Philistines, that he might as it were with this example make the Jews
afraid, he does of them begin this discourse: and in the entrance he
describes the situation and manners of that nation: that thereby it may be
known of whom he speaks, and for what causes especially they must be
punished. Woe to the inhabitours of the sea coast: the nation of the
Cherethims: the word of the Lord is against you, O Canaan the land of the
Philistines. He calls the line or cost of the Sea, that country yt is
stretched eue^ unto the sea. For by a figure called Synecdoche or Metonimia, a
line is taken for a lot or share falling to any man, because men do use a line
in measuring or parting of ground. So does Moses call Jacob, Deuteronomy. 32.
that is to say, Israel the line of the Lords inheritance: and David says the
lines are fallen to me in a fair ground, Psalm. 18.
and, by and by after expounding the same, he says, that a goodly inheritance
befell him. But it is well known by them that have written of countries to
describe their situations, that all this coast bordering upon the Sea, was in
times past very famous by reason of five cities, whereof the Prophet has
already named four, as Amos also does, which a little before threatened them
with destruction. Gaza lay more toward the South, then any of the other: this
was famous by reason of a haue^ there, which Constantinus afterward after his
own name called Constantia. But Iulianus restored unto it again the old name,
perhaps because of the hatred he bare to Constantinus, and for that he was
delighted with the remnantes of Gentilitie or Heathennesse. Next unto this was
Geth, where Goliath the Giaunt was borne, and is here omitted, either because
it was utterly rased, or else was of less value then that it should come in
any reckoning: the third was Ashkelon, where Antipater the Father of Herod the
Great was afterward borne: in the fourth place was Azotus, which among all
the cities of Syria, as Herodotus writes, abode the longest siege, when
Psalmeticus was King of Egypt, whereby it may appear, that it was very well
furnished for the wars. Meta calls it the mart of the merchandise of all
Arabia, which was the cause that it was so corrupted with riot and delicatenes,
that the manners of Azotus grew into a byword. With these is Akron reckoned,
being builded upon the maine Land. Furthermore the Prophet terms all that
country by two names, whereby he shows forth their manners. First he
calls them the nation of the Cheretims, that is to say, of the^ that destroy
and pluck up by the roots. By which name one of David his legions was
called, being always next unto, or at the kings hand. We know that Warriors
are roughe and cruel, and it is too be beeleeued that they got them that
name as bloody and cruel men are woonte too do, which seek for praise by
murdering and overthrow of whole nations. Then he calls them the Canaanites,
partly because they came of the offspring of those that remained of ye
Canaanites, partly, that he might show, that howsoever they were outragiously
bent, GOD made no more account of them, then of the Canaanites, which
erastwhile has appointed them unto destruction, And he does not without an
earnest expressing of his intent or meaning, tell them by the way, that the
word of the Lord is against them. As though he should say, the people of
GOD must indeed be punished, and you shall see them led away into captivity
but the judgment of GOD will not stay there, but from thence it shall also
come unto you, which must no less be punished then they. By the example we
are admonished that the judgments of God are sometime deferred, but not
altogether taken away: these should have been destroyed with the other
Cananites aabout. 800. years before this, when the Israelites entered the land
promised their fathers, Joshua bieng their captain and guide. But they abode
still in their rooms, partly through the sloth of the Israelites, who being
amassed with the labors and dangers thereto belonging, sought for ease and
quietness: partly by the determinate counsel of God, which would have some to
remain, by whose ungodliness the virtue of the Israelites should be exercised,
least they flowing in ydlenes, should wax worse and worse and come to nothing.
But because they regarded not the counsel of God, but being puffed up with
pride, assaulted the church, shed innocent blood, spent their life defiled
with every kind of wickedness, the Lord forsook not his own cause, but
punished them being past mendment, with that overthrow which lately they had
deserved. There be in the histories many such examples, in the study whereof
they ought diligently to be occupied, which therefore promise them selves, that
they shall never be punished, because as well they, as their forefathers had
lived long in their beastly and corrupt manners, not tasting thereby any harm,
or discommoditie: for God has his certain causes, for the which he winketh
for a time, but he has also appointed the very hour unto every one, wherein
they must be plagued for their transgressions.

The punishment of the Philistine.
But let us see what the Prophet threatens against these Philistines. I will
root thee out, that there be none to inhabit thee. Therefore he threatens a
general destruction, and afterward describing the face of the earth,
discovered to the inhabitants thereof, he says, that the Sea cost shall be
dwellinges and cotages for the shepherds, and sheepfolds. He names ye line of
the Sea or sea coast: again, yt he may compare the present state of the
country with that destruction that followed not much after. The meaning is
this: that coast of the Philistines that lies next unto the Sea, which at this
time, by reason of the havens, and thronge of Merchants is famous. In the
furniture of Cities and Towers, in princely building of Palaces, most
pleasant store of orchardes and gardens, does far pass other nations, shall
in short time be destroyed, and become a receptacle for poor shepherds, which
shall drive their herds thither: and it shall come to pass that their
winecellers and their warehouses, made under the earth, filled with most
pleasant spices, shall be turned into sheepefoldes. And thus he shows the
just judgment of God, which will punish them with horrible destruction, which
have destroyed other countries, and have gotten themselves a name of their
destroying, in that they would be called Cherethim, which is (of destroyers.)
This is the lot of al them yt be such: and certainly the law of nature fails
not, which is confirmed by the authority of Christ himself, saying: With what
measure you mete unto others, with the same shall others mete unto you. Whereof
because we have spoken more at large in an other place, it may suffice to have
noted these things. But because the Prophet spoke these things for the comfort
of the godly: he teaches also that all this shall fall out for their good. For
he adds, The sea coast shall be for the remnaunt of the house of Judah: that
is, all this country shall fall to them, which by the singular goodwill of God,
shall be preserved out of Judah. They (I say) shall feed there, and shall rest
in the houses of Askalon in the night: where the circumstance of the time does
note the quietness, and does promise that the possession of the land shall be
safe, and without danger. He adds in the place of confirmation, Because the
Lord their God will visit them, and bring again their captivity: which was
necessarily adjoined, because it should have been a mockery to promise these
countries to the^, which he said should be carried unto Babylon) except they
were made very certain of their return. But he restrains this promise to
them that remain, (as other Prophets do also) because the number of the
wicked was the greatest, which must utterly be destroyed. But these things are
fulfilled two manner of ways: for first they that returned from Babylon, had
these countries in possession, and in the history of the Machabes, Macha.
10.11.13.
it is written of Jonathan and Simeon, that they brought Gaza and Askalon with
the places there about into the Jews subjection. Again we read in the Acts,
Acts. 8.9.
that the Apostles with the preching of the Gospel ouerwent these very same
cities with the whole country of the Philistines, so that they came under the
government of Christ, who being borne of Judah, as touching the flesh, of the
remnaunt whereof he spread his kingdom al about both far and near. And here
again does the worthiness of the Church appear, for whose cause God does
either preserve and keep in safety most mighty nations, or else does scatter
and cut them of, if they continue to molest or trouble the same: we have
brought exa^pls hereof in an other place, neither ought we to doubt thereof,
although it be sometime brought to a small number. For there will always be
some remnant, whereof as of a most fruiteful seed the Church does spring
again, and is wonderfully spread abroad, contrary to that that all men might
look for.

The Moabit^ and Amonites.
Furthermore the Prophet passes from the Philistines unto the Moabits and
Amonites, whom he coupleth together, because they were brethren, and did with
like rage at all times invade the people of GOD: they came of Lot, whom Moses
testifies to have been dronken, and to have lain with his daughters. And
although they were nigh of blood to the Jews; Amos. 1.^.
yet (as we have noted in Amos) they bare an enemies mind against them. But
they did then especially declare their hearts, when the Jews were led away
captives by the Babyloninians. For then they triumphed over them, being
overcome, and went about to stretch the bounds of their kingdom even unto
Judah, as we shall hear by and. This was a great and very bitter corsey,
wherewith the faith of very many was tried, when they saw the chosen people of
GOD to be overcome by the wicked; and the Gentiles borne of incest, safely to
enjoy their possessions: and should hear the reproaches of the same wherewith
they did girde at, and defame the true religion, or did hazard or bring into
danger the glory of God himself. The Prophet Zephaniah therefore deals
diligently against them. For first because GOD may seem unto many to be blind
and deaf, seeing that such things were committed and spoken by these, and
that without punishment: he brings in him self, saying: I have heard the
reproach of the Moabites, and the rebukes of the children of Ammon, whereby they
vpbrayded my people, and magnified them selves against their borders. In which
words he describes their wickedness, and teaches them, that he is not
ignorant of any of those things. As touching their sins, he accuses them
of two things. First, because they reproched the Jews, and spoke many things
co^tumeliously, not only against the Jews, but also against GOD and his true
religion, which these Jews professed. The other is: because they exalted
themselves: that is, they enterprised many things very proudly against their
broders, while they would have laid the country of the Jews unto their own
land. Amos in like manner rebukes this desire of enlarging their kingdom, in
the Amonites, which affirms that they absteined not from ripping up of women
great with child; insomuch that by that kind of cruelty they constrained the
Galaadites to yield them selves. And Jeremy speaks unto the same, Iere. 49.
Has Israel no child? have they none to inherit? why therefore does Malchom
possess Gad, and his people dwell in his cities. Both these sins were before
all others very detestable, and worthy of grievous punishment, for triumphing
over them that were brought low, they offended against the law of nature,
which teaches to bewail the^, and in ye calamities of others to acknowledge
that the common chance of all men is befraught with misery and wretchedness.
But for as much as they gave the rain to sausie speech both against god and his
service it appeared yt they had put of altast of religion. Again, forasmuch as
they invaded that land which God had promised to Abraham, and did give it, not
without many wonders, to be inhabited of his posterity, this injury reached
both unto God himself, neither yet did they show themselves thankful as
they ought unto Abraham, who in time past brought their progenitour into this
land, and being taken captive he delivered him from the hand of his enemies.
These things ought too be marked of those that are pricked with the like
desire of bearing rule. For we know that God in old time distributed to every
nation his land or country. They therefore offend against him who soever they be
that streatch out farther their bounds being by him appointed. And although
God uses their wodnes in punishing those that abused his gifts and benefits,
yet the self same shall not escape unpunished, as we have taught in an other
place by many examples. But in this place it is full of most sweet comfort,
that he says, he has heard their reproaches and rebukes. For hereby they
might learn, that God would never leave to care for the^, although he suffered
them some space to be afflicted, but that that is spoken of them ought to be
applied unto all: for God both hears and sees in every place of the earth
whatsoever is purposed against those that be his. And because his glory is
coupled with their safety, he never does neglect it. Let us therefore be
mindful of these things as often as we hear the reproaches and scoffs of the
wicked, neither let us think that either the glory of God, or our welfare is
any whitte impaired thereby.

The punishment of the Moabites and Ammonites.
But lest any man should think that God is but an idle beholder, he
denounces the punishment, which he has determined to plague the^ with, and
that with such an earnest auouching, that thereunto he adds an oathe, saying
(as I live) which is to say, as surely as I am God and live for ever, so surely
shall that come to pass that I now speak. And that the authority of this
protestation may be the greater, the Prophet makes a description of God,
calling him the God of Israel, the Lord of hosts comprehending therein the power
and goodness of God, that he might show that he is able to bring to pass
whatsoeeuer he threatens against his wicked enemies: and that he will do it
because he is bound to his people by a peculiar covenant. But what is it that
he thretneth? that Moab shall be as Sodom, and the Children of Ammon as Gomorha.
etc. He uses those examples which the Prophets allege for the most part
when they would declare any extreme miseries or calamities: but because they
were not utterly burned up with fire from heaven, he adds to expound
himself, their place shall be ouergrown with nettles, and shall be Saltpits, and a
perpetual desolation. The meaning therefore is, as the cities of the Sodomites
and of the^ of Gomorrha together with all their fields are turned into a
stinking lake, and (as Strabo writes) into a soil that fometh dust and ashes:
even so shall all the region of the Moabites and Amonites be made desolate and
barren, and shall so remain for ever. And surely it is well known, that those
nations were never restored again, and that with them their kingdoms also and
whole government of their commonwealth came to naught: saving that in these
latter ages a mixed multitude of vagabondes, out of all nations flocked thither,
which usurped to themselves ye ancient name of ye Arabie^s. And these, because
they never submited themselves to any lawful government, lived for the most
part by rapine. And Mahomet coming of their offspring, began superstition in
the Turks kingdom, But as he spoke of the Philistines: so also he speaks
of these: The remnnat of my people shall spoil them, and the remna^t of my
folk shall possess them. Which thing because it cannot be expounded of the
Jews returning from Babylon, it must be referred to the Apostles and their
disciples, which preached Christ in these countries also, and they ordained
Churches as the holy Scripture bears witness of Paul. And christian
Religion flourished in those quarters, ^allat. ^.
for certain years, until Mahomets outrage, as I said before, troubled all
Churches. But the example of these nations does teach what remains for them,
that never cease to vex or assault the Church of God. For seeing they would
not give place unto Christ, unto whom his father has given al nations, yea the
uttermost borders of the earth: they were worthy in the end to loose all
that they had: and there can no order other wise be taken for them and their
country, but by submitting themselves to be governed by Christ. Hereunto
serves the vehement conclusion of this place. This fell upon them for their
pride, because they were reproched and magnified the^ selves against the people
of ye Lord of hosts. He does principally name their pride, that the Jews
might be less grieved therewith when they should hear that they should be so
grievously punished for the same, and he calls them the people of the Lord,
that he might destroy the wickedness of the other nations more at large, and
might prove more assuredly that the injuries which they offered them, should
not be unpunished. But let us learn out of this place, that nothing is so
detestable and hateful unto God as pride: that principally wherewith men do
advance themselves agrinst God and his word, and do desire to oppress his
Church. This is the cause of many sins, which God suffers not to escape
vpunished, we need not to bring any examples, because they that read
histories, do meet with them every where, and many do fall out every day, both
private and publik, that may witness these things, therefore let not the pride
of the wicked, which continues not long, offend any man, but let us be humbled
under the mighty hand of the Lord, which shiltreth those, that are afflicted
under the cross, and will in the end make them inheritors of the heavenly
glory, with his Son Jesus Christ: to whom be thanks giving, glory, honor and
power, world without end.

Amen.
The seventh Sermon.
The Text.
11 The Lord will be terrible unto them: for he will consume all the goods of
the earth, and every man shall woorship him from his place, even all the Isles
of the heathen.

12 Ye Morians also shall be slain by my sword with them.

13 And he will stretch out his hand to the north, and destroy Ashur, and will
make Niniuie desolate and wast, like a a wilderness.

14 And flocks shall lie in the midst of her, and all the beasts of
nations, and the Pellicane, and the Owl shall abide in the upper posts of it,
the voice of the birds shall be in the windows, and desolations shall be upon
the posts: for the Ceders are uncovered.

15 This is the rejoicing city that dwelt careless, that said in her heart,
I am, and there is none besides me: how is she made wast, and the lodging of
the beasts? every one that passes by her, shall hiss, and wag his head.

The argument and use of this place.
THey that be godly, know that afflictions are sent from above, that they being
chastised therewith, might amend, and be made safe: yet the same are wont
greatly to be offended, if in the mean season while they be aflicted, they see
the wicked and open enemies of God to be in prosperity, and not without the
reproach of the name of God and his true worship to triumpe over them. This
befell the Jews when they were led away unto Babylon. For the Philistines
rejoiced in their misery, whom David before time had brought in subjection: the
Moabits and the Amonites being of their own blood, leaped for joy, and
together with their enemies scoffed at them. And in an other place we saw that
the Idumeans did the like: and before these things came to pass, the power of
the Egyptians, and Ethiopians, was great, who slew the most godly king Iosia,
being overcome in battle, and carried Ioacham his son into Egypt. Besides
this they saw the power of the Babylonians to increase very huge, which did
openly profess hatred against the true GOD and his true religion, and did
tauntingly hit the same in the teeth of the miserable captives. Here therefore
was need of diligent instruction, which the Prophet in this third part of
this sermon adioyneth. For he teaches that GOD begins with his people to
punish, but afterward he passes from them unto the other Gentiles, which now
took pleasure in the misery of his people. And a little before he spoke of the
destruction of the Philistines, and after of the Moabites, and Ammonites: and
in his prophecies has brought in certain things of the kingdom of Christ
upon earth, and of the spreding or dispersing thereof. Now it follows of the
rest.

He shows that the kingdom of God shall be spread every where.
In the beginning before he does by name reprehend any, he confirms that he
had spoken as touching the enjoying of the enemies Land, and aduauncing the
kingdom of Christ over the^, and he answered two things which seemed
especially to be against the matter, that is to say, the huge host of the
enemies, and the worship of their Gods, which was established by the
succession of so many years and victories. The Lord (says he) will be
terrible unto them: for he will consume all the Gods of the earth, and every
man shall worship him from his place: even all the Isles of the heathen. The
meaning is thus: The power of these Gentiles seem in deed to be such, as
cannot be overcome, neither that the matter shall ever come to that pass, that
these false Gods being rejected, the worship of the true GOD shall be placed
in their lands. But this matter must not be tried by man's wit, but we must
behold what GOD both can, and will do, but he which in his determinate
counsel has hitherto suffered these things to come to pass, as if either
he would not, or could not defend the glory of his own name; when that time
shall be expired, which he has before limited, he will show his power, not
without great terror against those his enemies: so that they shall not be able
to resist him, but that he will execute yt, that he has now promised.

But as touching those Gods of the Gentiles, whom the boldness of very
foolish men invented, and the foolishness of them that be superstitious has
brought into so great regard: the same God will bring it to pass, that they
being worn, wasted or weakened with a rotting consumption, shall wyther and
come to nothing, and dye out of ye remembrance of men. Then shall that golden
time begin, when every man shall worship the true God from his place. That
is, when true religion shall be spread through the whole world, and not as it
has been (hitherto) tied to one nation, yea all the Isles of the Gentyles shall
worship him alone: but it is to be noted, that the Hebrews call the region
lying beyond the seas, the Isles of the Gentiles, all which in times past, we
know to be drowned in yrkesome superstitions, and to have been clean separated
from the true worship of God. These things were in part fulfilled, when all
these nations together with their Gods and superstitions were by the horrible
judgment of God cut of, and clean wiped away. And then also when Nabucadnezar
(being chastised with the rod of GOD) by his kingly edictes proclaimed the true
worship of God, through all the East parts: which thing Cyrus also and Darius
did after him. Dani. 3.4.6.
But these things were fulfilled principally in Christ, which is this great
stone in deed, yt being rolled back without men's hands, made an end of those
old Monarchies: Daniel had foretole that it should so come to pass: at whose
coming also the Gods of the heathen were consumed, and came to nothing. For
first in those days the Jews were scattered almost over all the world,
among whom; Luke writes that many were religious: who although they wanted
the knowledge of Christ, yet they spread the seed of more pure religion, as
concerning the worshipping and praying unto one GOD, and from thence also they
proceeded afterward to those things that did concern the promised Savior of
mankind. Acts. 8.
Afterward followed the Apostles, which by the free preaching of the Gospel
stood against those their Gods and superstitions, and the Oracles ceased at
that time also (as the story writers of the heathen do testify,) whereof the
greatest authority of those Gods did depend. And so by little and little it
came to pass, that those Gods, with their superstitious serving of them, came
to nothing: and they being rooted out of men's remembraunces, the true knowledge
of GOD, shined over all nations, which then did invoke and worship him, not
only at Jerusalem, but over all the world, and that in spirit and truth as
Christ him self has taught. John. 4.
And that this thing was brought to pass neither by the counsel nor strength
of men, but by ye woonderful power of God it is thereby manifest, yt the
preaching of the Gospel prevailed over all the world, notwithstanding many
Roman Emperors, who then ruled over al nations, strove against it. Nay when
Iulianus the Apostata, bent all his force to restore again the superstitions
of the Gentiles, God by a most manifest and dreadful token declared that now
an appointed consummation was come, whereby those superstitions must wither and
be quite extinguished. The Temple of Delphos is destroyed.
For the temple of Delphos, then the which none was more renoumed, in the
world, by reason of the antiquity of the oracle, was swallowed up and
utterly destroyed with an Earthquake and fire powered down from heaven, and
that even then when Iulianus sent Ambassadors thither, to enquire what
should be the end of the Persian war. And seeing before this, it was four
times on a flaming fire, that is. First when the people of Thessalia called ye
Phlegians or Iapites burned it: secondly in the time of the Persian wars:
thirdely when the people of Phocis, did set it on fire: And lastly when the
army of Brennus, destroyed Greece, and was notwithstanding so oftentimes
restored again. But when God destroyed it without man's hand, it was never
again restored. Besides this it is known, that the names of these Gods were
forgotten amongst most men: and of so many thousands, as Varro plainly
reports that were worshypped in time past, scarce a certain few are
remembered by name, which the braynsicke, and ungodly Astrologers did thrust
upon those that be ignorant and unskillful. Zephaniah therefore has truly
foretold this thing, that he might comfort his people. And this Prophecy
ought to serve us, to the same purpose, that we suffer not our eyes to be
daseled with the power of superstitions of the wicked. For that God in very
deed is dreadful, even Jesus Christ, to whom every knee must bow, and every
tongue swear by, which as in times past he crashed in sunder the Gods of the
nations, so in this last old age of the world, he will abolish all
antichristian worship, and all men, that would that the same should be
preserved and kept, striving against him in vain. The description of the
kingdom of Christ.
But in the mean season, this description of the kingdom of Christ, must be
diligently marked, that we may learn to judge as well of our selves, as of
others that brag of that name. In it shall all false Gods be consumed,
because they cannot be matched with him, that gives his glory to none other.
Besides this every one does worship him in their place, neither do they tie him
to any certain place, who^ they know to be present every where, and whose glory
is spread over all. They therefore do in vain challenge to them selves the
name of Christ, which either join any copartners with him or any Gods to be
his vicegerents or vicars, and that with his true worship do myngle
unprofitable superstitions. As many also as bind his merit to certain places,
and do from hence so declare it, against that he himself has aduertized. But
these trifles and superstitions being let pass, let us embrace the goodness
of God, who as he has contained abundantly all the way of salvation in Christ,
so he offreth us his presence every where, that we need not run from place to
place, nor yet spend our time in trifling superstitions.

The Ethiopian^ Egiptians.
These things being before hand declared, the Prophet passes to the
Ethiopians, saying: Ye Ethiopians shall be slain by my sword with them. But we
must before all things note, that the Egyptians and the Ethiopians or Morians
were joined together under one king; namely because the Egyptians stretched the
bonds of their Empire unto these Morians. And again we read that the Morians
sometime ruled in Egypt of whom these are named by Eusebius. Sabacus (whom the
scriptures call, So or Sua) Sebicus Tharracus and Merres. 2. Reg. 17.
It was needeful yt he should make special mention of these, because there was
many both old and new injuries of them offered, against the people of God:
for in times past, the Israelites had served a hard bondage in Egypt. 2. Par.
12.
Sesakus also, in the reign of Roboam, wasted Judah and took away the
treasures of the Temple, 2. Par. 14.
and of the kings house, unto whom the Morians were now joined, as the
scriptures do declare. Also Sera the Morian made ware upon the King of Asia,
then the which we scarce read that any was waged with greater number of
soldiers. For it is reported that he had a thousand thousands of soldiers,
1000000.
which were all slain together. Esaias. 18.
But under Ezechia they made a crafty league: and in Isay are read the words
of the Morians, full of pride, wherewith they did despitefully rebuke the misery
of the Jews. Go ye swift messengers (say they) to a nation that is scattered
abroad and spoiled, unto a terrible people from their beginning, and hitherto:
a nation by little and little even trodden under foot, whose Land the floods
have spoiled, etc. Furthermore the very same afterward slew Iosia, that holy
and most well disposed king: which was the most principal cause, why the Jews
(the strength of their own kingdom being wasted) lay open to the invasion of
foreign enemies: least therefore any should be offended, at the suceedings of
this faythlesse and cruel nation, it was needful that the destruction thereof
should be threatened. Wherefore God adding this parcel to those that before
were declared, says by his Prophet: And ye Morians also shall be slain with
my sword with them. As though he should say: it is so far, yt the Ammonits,
and Moabites should escape those plagues yt they have deserved, yt those that be
farthest of shall not escape the^: and he did of purpose name the Morians rather
the^ ye Egyptians, yt thereby he might show the rigor of Gods judgment to be
past avoiding. Jeremy also after the same manner threatens the Egyptians,
that they must likewise be subject to ye Babylonians. But in Isay the Lord
says, that the Egyptians, the Morians, and Sabies shall be a ransom, wherewith
his people must be redeemed out of captivity. And yt these things were truly
foretold, histories do plainly show. For Jeremy threatening a most
lamentable destruction to those Jews, that would not obey the commandment of
the Lord; but fled intoo Egypt to king Aepryem, whom he calls Ophra, among
other things (he says) this shall be to you a sign (says the Lord) that I will
visit you in this place. etc. Behold I will deliver Pharao being Ophra the
king of Egypt into the hands of his enemies, and into their hands that lie in
wait for his life. As I have delivered Zedechia the king of Judah into the
hands of Nabucadnezar etc. But Josephus records that Nabucadnezar the fifth
year after Jerusalem was taken, conducted his army into the lower Syria, and
that after the Moabites and Ammonites were overcome, he went into Egypt: and
that having slain the king thereof, he appointed an other in his place. And
Herodotus writes that Apries was strangled by Amasis the captain, which
afterward succeeded him in the kingdom. But these two writers may easily be
reconciled. For Nabucadnezar was the Captain general of the war, unto whom
Amasis reuoulted, who afterward received for a reward of Nabucadnezar the
kingdom of Egypt, for his affairs that were faithfully handled in his
behalf. From that time therefore the kings of Egypt were benefactours to the
Babylonians, but after that the Monarchy of the East came to the Persians,
Cambysis put Psammenitus from the kingdom, and slew him afterward, for his
attempting of new matters: And from that time Egypt was without a King about
the space of an hundredth and twelve years, until the time of Darius Nothus,
in the sixth year of whose reygne Amyrtheus Saires reuoulted, and became a new
king of Egypt. By the which example we are admonished that the judgment of God
cannot be eschewed or avoided by any force of men. And it is principally to be
remembered, that God said, They should be slain by his swoorde, whom it is
well known to be slain by the Babylonians and Persians. All they therefore are
the sword of God, by whose ministry he does execute his judgment, although
they very seldomely understand this mystery. So in like manner Sennacherib is
called the rod of the Anger of the Lord. And it is profitable to note such kind
of speeches, that in those adversities, which befall us, we may acknowledge
the hand and judgment of GOD, and so become more patient in bearing those
things that are sent of him.

The destruction of the Assirians and of Niniuie.
But let us return to our Prophet, which in the last place foretells also of
the destruction of the Assyrians. For although their kingdom was translated to
the Babylonians, yet Niniuee stood still, being the kings seat or place
where the court lay, and the name of the Assyrians, was not as yet vanquished:
as it is manifest by the story of Manasses, whom the Princes of the army of
the king of Ashur are reported too have carried away bound unto Babylon. And no
doubt Niniuee as yet was in reputation and great price, as well for the old
and ancient renoume thereof, as also for that, not the woorst fortress of
their kingdom was from those parties. Therefore the Prophet says that it must
be destroyed, and that from thence the Lord will begin to punish them, which
had so long afflicted his people: and first he does breefly comprehend yt whole
matter in these words: And he will stretch his hand unto the North, and will
destroy Ashur, and he will make Niniuie wast, like the wastnes of the wilderness.
He makes mention of the north, because he regards the situation of Judah, in
respect whereof Assyria is reported to lie toward ye north: but he names
Niniuis before all others, because this city with her great show and goodly
memorial, of her ancient dignity did dasell the eyes of very many, and
seemed to be invincible: but he says, that it must be destroyed, which thing
many affirm to be done by Nabucadnezar Priscus, in the twenty year of the
reign of Iosia, when a little before Phaortes king of the Medes with all his
power was slain by the Assyrians, as Herodotus witnesses, which peradventure
was the cause, why the Babilonia^s thought that the city must be overthrown,
lest the Assyrians trusting as well upon the majesty, and furniture thereof,
as being also puffed up with their late victory, should enterprise a
reuoulting. Let us note principally that all this came to pass by the hand of
God. For the Prophet (speaking of him) says He will stretch his hand against
the north, and so forth. But how many among the Ninevites thought that this
thing should come to pass? Let not therefore the fair show of smiling fortune
deceive any man. For if the Poet has truly said, that kings have long arms:
Let us think ye lord has arms both much more longer, and more strong, which no
man can escape. Furthermore he being about to describe the manner of their
destruction, heapeth together all things, which are wont to set forth a
horrible desolation. All the flocks (says he) of the beasts of the nations,
shall ly in the mids of it. That is, al manner of wild and sauadge beasts,
from diverse countries and nations, shall come together unto that place. And he
adds, And the Pelican and the Owl shall abide all night in the uppermost
posts of it, the voice of birds shall sing in the windows, and desolation
shall be upon the posts, for the Ceders shall be uncovered. These things are
very notably set against the riot and pride, which the Ninevites practiced in
their palaces. Appes and Monkies, and Parrats or Popiniayes were seen there,
with other beasts and birds of like sort, where with vain and lose carped
knights, are accustomed to be delighted, in the mean time having no regard
of the poor and needy. Musical harmony was there heard, yea al houses and
streets range with the noise of those songs, which were devised for their
lust and pleasure, the gates and entries of great men were thronged with
clientes, guests, strangers, trencherslaues, scoffers, counterfeites, or
tumblers, and such like smellers out of wicked courts. But the Prophet says,
that this gear must be changed into a most doleful sight of things, so
that nothing could be found there, but sauadge and cruel beasts, and
direful and most noisome birds, and he shows the cause of this so great
alteration. Because (says he) Isay. 13.
the Ceder is uncovered. He speaks of the enemy that should pluck down the
finely wrought Ceder plankes, whereby this desolation must needs follow. Isay
has almost the like place, where he describes the ruin of Babylon. The holy
Ghost foresawe that these examples should be reserved for all ages to come,
that by them we might learn, what remains for them, which after they are
become rich through their rapine, craft, and bloodshed, are become high minded
by reason of their sumptuous buildinges, gorgeous apparel, and costly
household furniture. All things are in the end destroyed, wherein they
thought that not the least part of their blessedness did consist. Let us
therefore study to be temperat, and seeing we be but strangers in this
world, let us have our mind occupied about our heavenly country, and about
the tabernacles of everlasting life, rather then these earthly palaces, which
we must forgo when we do least bethink us thereof. But the Prophet not
being content with these things, does furthermore triumph against the city:
partly because it made for the glory of God, that the fall thereof should be
evidently known unto al men, partly yt he might show that the ruin thereof
should be full of shame and rebuke: and therefore yt no man needed to be offended
at the glory thereof. This (says he) is that rejoicing City, that sat
careless, and said in her heart, I am, and there is none but me. But so he
reproves the pride wherewith the Ninevites used to advance them selves above
all others, so that they esteemed of others, as scarce of men: and by and by
after, leading his hearers, as it were to behold the matter, he says by the
way of wondering, How is she made desolate, and a lodging for wild beasts! As
if he should say, who seeing at any time the great magnificencie thereof,
would have thought that this thing should ever have come to pass? And to the
end he may show, that it shall be spoiled without the comfort of any compassion
to be had toward it, he shows what others shall do, when he says,
Every one that passes by, shall hysse and wagge his hand at it. These be the
gestures of them that vpbrayde any man for his misery, together with a
detestation of that wickedness, which they committed. But it shall skyll very
much, if with greater diligence we consider the causes of this so sorrowful,
and most dreadful destruction. Niniuie reioiced in her conquests, and great
riches, and being made proud therewith, after a wicked sort, despised other
Cities, and nations: furthermore she being boulde hardy, and careless,
neglected also the judgment of God, which she provoked every day by her
transgressions. And that she might want no kind of sin, she persecuted the
Church also in most cruel wise. These therefore are the things, that make
Cities and kingdoms hateful unto God, and bring destructions upon them: we
meet with like examples every where. For we know that that which befell these,
came afterward in like manner upon the Babylonians. And John prophecieth
almost in the same words, that ye same thing shall fall upon Rome, and in our
time there be examples as well public as private, yt co^firm the truth of
these things, and provoke in us ye care of salvation, and ye comfort us against
the wicked enterprises of tyrants. And these things are thus spoken upon the
second sermon of Zephaniah, wherein he reproves the hypocrites, and
admonishes the godly of their duty, and gives them instructions against
offenses: let us think that the same things are spoken unto us; and following
the counsel of the Prophet, let us seek the Lord, and let us witness our
upright care of godliness by doing the thing that is right, and by meekness,
that among the hard and bitter chances of these latter times, we being
hidden under the wings of God, may preserve our souls, and in time to come
may live in the heavens, with Christ Jesus our only Savior, to whom all
thanks giving, honor, glory and power is due for ever.

Amen.
The Contents of the third Chapter.
HE threatens the governors of Jerusalem, showing how every one severally
offended. 4. He shows how the Lord dealt with them, and setting before them
the examples of other nations, declares how they did not profit thereby. 8. Of
the calling of the Gentiles. 13. He comfort the rest of the Jews, and so
ends.

The eight Sermon.
The text.
1 VVOe to her that is filthy, and polluted to the robbing City.

2 She heard not the voice: she received not correction: she trusted not in the
Lord: she drew not near her God.

3 Her Princes within her are as roaring Lions: her Judges are as wolves in the
evening, which leave not the bones till the morrow.

4 Her prophets are light and wicked persons: her Priests have polluted the
sanctuary: They have wrested the Law.

The argument and use of this third sermon.
THe Prophet in the former Sermons has hitherto very sharply reproved the
wickedness and superstition of the Jews, and has denounced those
punishments, which they had deserved: but as for the godly that remained, being
admonished of their duty, he comfort them, that they should take no
offense, either by the conquestes of their enemies, or yet at the reproves of
the nations that lay next unto them, showing that it shall come to pass, that
they shall be brought again out of captivity, and that they shall possess the
land of those nations, which thing we see truly fulfilled in Christ. But
because the Prophet did not profit them any whit: now he adds the third
Sermon, wherein he inueigheth very manifestly against Jerusalem, and does
altogether, as it were by name reprove them, that had the government of
things. And he does first of all rebuke their sins. Secondly he shows the
punishments for the same. Lastly because there was some godly yet remaining, to
the end he might comfort them, he promises them a restoring again, which was
fully accomplished in Christ: as concerning whose kingdom, he set down this
prophecy, which as it is most evident and plain, so is it also very full of
comfort; wherein likewise is contained the whole way of our salvation. But this
sermon sets forth an example worthy of remembrance, wherein the
ministers of the Church are taught with what frankenes, they ought to deal,
with that remediless company of men, that know not too repent, as also to
have consideration of the godly: least they also being vanquished with the
terror of their threatenings, should be made without hope of the fruit of
their labors. This present place belongs to the first part. And first he
does generally accuse the helpelesse corruption of the city. But afterward
he confirms his accusation, by reckoning up their sins, and by and by
after, least they should deny them, he deals by name with those, wherein
they did most offend.

He accuses the helpless corruption of Jerusalem.
The sum of his accusation is this: Woe to her that is filthy and polluted to
the robbing City. He sets these things against their vain bragging and
boldness, wherewith they were puffed up. For seeing the temple and place of
outward worship, was at Jerusalem, and the high court also of all the
kingdom, they challenged the chief praise of holiness and just dealing unto
them selves: but the cause of this persuasion was for that they thought, that
holiness and godliness consisted altogether in outward ceremonies, and that
the puryfyinges of the law did suffice to cleanse sin. He teaches therefore
that this their persuasion was both vain and hurtful, seeing that in the
judgment of God they were polluted and unclean, and therwtal violent robbers
and tyrants: yea they inhabited a city, that might rather be thought a most
filthy brothel house and de^ne of thieves, considering that among the^ nothing
was as it ought to be, neither in religion, nor yet in ye administration of
civil affairs. The prophet Isay in his 1. cap. inueigheth against the same
city almost in like manner; when he calls the princes Sodomits, and the
people to be of Gomorrha, and having rejected all their rites (he says) How is
the faithful city become a harlot? it was full of judgment, and justice did
abide in it, but now they are murderers. We shall afterward hear the causes
of so fore and grievous complaint. But now let us note, that that city, then
the which none in all the world was more famous, is burdened with such heinous
crimes: for we may let pass the common things that bring worthiness and renown
unto cities, as wealth, antiquity, and victories etc. Al which it wa^ted not,
and for the which it is of Pliny called the most renouned city in all the
world. First it was praise worthy that long since, namely 1000. and 300. year
before Zephaniah prophesied, Melchesedek, whom we know to be a figure of
Christ, was both king and priest thereof. Again David made it the kings seat,
from whose time unto Iosia, are reckoned seventeen kings, which in it reigned
continually one after an other: besides this, God vouchsafed to make it the
place for his Temple, and mystical woorship, who also beautified the same with
most liberal promises. For he had said of it in the 132. Psalm. This is my
resting place for ever: here will I dwell, because I have had a love unto it.
Moreover and besides all these things, it was a figure of the Church, which
after the ascension of Christ, began there too be gathered together, by which
name it is chiefly commended in the Psalms. But all these things profited
not. But that it is said to be filthily polluted, a robbing city, yea an
harlot, and as Sodom, when it did not agree to the dignity thereof. No
outward woorthines therefore can be prejudicial to the word of God, neither
yet any glory of titles ought to bleare the eyes of the ministers of the
word, that they should spare those yt they see worthy to be sharply
reprehended, the rash headiness of the Romish ones is here also reproved,
who because of the old excellency of Rome their city, and because of their
predecessors, that were so notable, by reason of their learning, godliness,
and crown of martyrdom, do challenge unto themselves a certain franchesse,
exemption or freenes from all things. But what have they, that may be compared
with the woorthines of Jerusalem, seeing it is well known, that those things
be lying fables, which they so without all shame and swinishly affirm of
Peter, and the Apostles, that they sat as Bishops in Rome. But that we may
give that all those things are true, what is it unto them, which now long
since have wanderingly forsaken the steps of their godly forefathers?

By reckoning up their sins he confirms his accusation
But that the Prophet be not thought a reuiler, he proves that Jerusalem is
even such, by making a diligent reckoning up of their sins, the first sin in
it, yt it heard not the voice of the lord, speaking unto the^ in the law and by
his prophets. The word of God in deed was preached, and Iosia had foreseen
that the book of the law was read openly, and many were the sermons of the
Prophets, among whom this our Zephaniah and Jeremy were chief. But the most
did disdain to hear them, either because they hated the word of God, wherewith
they heard their faults reproved: or else because they thought they stood in
no need of any teaching or instruction: and if any did hear, yet they obeyed
not, but suffered themselves to be carried away with their most filthy
delights. But the prophet not without consideration begins of this. For
seeing that God in his word has made his will known unto us, and does in the
same offer Christ unto us, by whose merit we are sanctified: there is no other
way for us to obtain sanctification, but by hearing of his word, and having
heard it, to embrace it with a true faith, which makes all the understanding and
wisdom of our flesh subject thereto: Christ in the 15. of John speaks of
this, when he says, his Disciples were clean through his word, which they
had believed. But again from thence it follows, they cannot be but filthy,
unclean and profane, yea as Christ says in the 8. of John, the very
children of the devil, which will not hear the word of God. For they both
retain their natural corruption, and do moreover defile them selves daily with
new sins, when they want that doctrine which is able to keep them in their
duties. 2. They wou^ not bear an^ correction.
Secondly he says, They received no correction. He shows that they were
remediless; and the Prophet has regard to the order that God as a most
faithful father uses in reforming those that be his: for first he teaches
them lovingly, and in plain precepts he co^pendiously sets down his will,
and what he would have us to do, but if he see us slack and drowsy, then he
adds admonitio^s, exhortatio^s, reprehensions, and more sharp corrections,
whereupon Isay said long ago, Esaias. 58.
Cry with thy throat, and cease not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, tell
my people their offenses, and the house of Jacob their sins. 1. Tim. 5. 2.
Tim. 4.
And the Apostle bids Timothy not only to teach and admonish, 1. Tim. 5. 2.
Tim. 4.
but also to reprove and rebuke, and that before al men, to the end that others
may be made afraid from sinning: but if God profit not by that means, then he
takes rods in hand, and sends either diseases, or else hunger and
famishment, or else he stirs up the terrors of war, or else he loadeth and
pincheth with other adversities, as it seems good unto himself. But if there
be any that do despise all these things, and will not be taught, nor
reproved, nor rebuked, and do moreover cast behind them his sharp
corrections, and do not therein acknowledge the hand of God, who with his
fatherly rods labors to bring them to a better mind: out of all doubt they
be remediless and past all hope. And that the Jews unto whom Zephaniah
speaks these things, were such, the history of those times does abundantly
declare. ^. Incredulity
Thirdly he adds: She trusted not in the Lord. This follows of the
former, and does also note al kind of ungodliness. For as they that trust in
God, do from yt their faith, reform the whole course of their life to the
service of God: so on the contrary part, they that trust not in God, are wont
to despise his word, and therefore order all things according to their own
will, and consequently do rush into every kind of forbidden wickedness. And
because they trust not in God, they turn to the creatures, and invent new
superstitions, whereby they promise them selves perfect safety. Morouer
forasmuch as in this life they have no hope in God, they are ouercom with
covetousness, and turn to naughty policies, and while they apply their minds
thereto, they break all the laws, as well of Justice, as of charity: besides
this when they trust not in God, they imagine that whatsoever things are
spoken of the rewards of everlasting life, and of the plagues to come, are
nothing but fantasies and dreams, which is the cause that they are so
swallowed up with delights, and love of pleasure, only caring for this one
thing, that it may go well with them in this life, being no more careful for
the life to come, then brute beasts are wont to be. Wilful reuoulting.
It follows in the fourth place, Neither do they draw near to their God.
This is the sequel of the former, for (as the Apostle says) Heb. 11.
He that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder
of them that seek him. But he vpbraydeth them, because they being not only
content to reuoult, abode still therein, neither do think at any time how they
might meet with him: but it makes for the setting out of their sin more at
large in that (he says) unto their God. For it is as though he should say,
GOD will be called and be their GOD, because he has adopted them unto him
self, and bound them by covenant, because he offers him self unto the^ in
his word, and does allure them by his daily blessings, because all the day
long, as it is to be seen in the Prophet Isay,) Esaias. 56.
He stretches forth his hands unto them, although they will not draw near
unto him, but turn away from him, as from a most cruel enemy: and these are
the arguments wherewith Zephaniah proves that Jerusalem is a defiled and a
polluted City. But if a man should seek for these things among them, that
profess the name of Christ, it will by and by appear what may be judged of
us. For doubtless the word of GOD is preached, and GOD has revealed the long
hidden knowledge thereof, that I doubt whether ever since the Apostles time it
has shined more clearly, or been more common: yet the most either hear it
not, or else they hear it sleepily, even as it were a song nothing belonging to
them, as GOD by his Prophet Ezechiel complains of his people the Jews.
Ezech. 33.
Many also hear it with laying in weight, that so they might get some occasion
of evil speaking. I speak nothing of them now, that accuse this doctrine of
falshoode, and persecute it with fire and sword. But if they be admonished, or
corrected somewhat sharply, thou shall see the^ staring mad, which before seemed
tolerable. God therefore punishes with diverse kinds of diseases, with
hunger, war; and by his wonderful tokens, he thretneth more grievous plagues:
but where is there any, that does in them acknowledge the hand of God, and
that does confess that these are the worthy punishments of our unthankfulness
and contempt of his word. Furthermore although God in his son Christ do
offer salvation to them that be unthankful and unworthy, and does promise his
assistaunce to them that embrace him; yet because no man believes him, the
whole world is rent asunder into a thousand superstitions: and as it comes
first to pass, that one must be in danger for the faith, the most do deny
it very dishonestly, that so they may get unto themselves, the favor and
friendship of the world. And forasmuch as God has no less bound him self
unto us, then in times past he did unto the Jews; nay has more fully showed
in Christ those things which before time were promised more darkly, and has
moreover in the Sacraments sealed unto us his grace yet thou shall see few draw
near unto him: yea although Christ cry and say, Come unto me al ye that
travail and be heavy laden, and I will ease you. Thou shall see
notwithstanding most men run after rotten Images, being become famous because
of some lying miracles, or else after an unclean company of massing Priests
and Monks, or else to wallow still, after a beastly manner in all kind of
filthy mire. We therefore are filthy, polluted, and unclean, howsoever we
boast in the name of Christ, except we will say, that Zephaniah did the Jews an
injury, whom for this cause he called polluted and unclean.

He accuses those by nam^ that did mo^ offend.
But when sins be punished, all men for the most part will confess the
grieuousnesse thereof. But few will acknowledge the same in them selves, nay
every one persuades himself, that he is faultlesse. Now therefore the Prophet
goes from the reckoning up of their sins unto the persons the^ selves, and
reckons them in order, which most of al offended in these things. The chief
among these, were those yt had the government of things as well in the Church
as in the common wealth: and he reprooueth these first, not because he would
excuse the base multitude from sin, but that it may more plainly appear that
in all the body there was nothing whole and sound, considering that such
loathsome diseases were found in the head. First the princes.
But beginning with the princes, he says, These are as the roaring Lions in the
midst of her. He compares them to Lions, and that to such as rore through
hunger and woodnes, that he might reprove their tyranny, and cruelty,
wherewith they were accustomed, in the time of Manasses and Ammon, and which
they exercised as yet under Iosia, for as much as he either knew not of it, or
else could not redres it. 2. Judges.
Then he says, That their Judges are as wolves in the night: that is, too too
hungry and ravenous, so that they leave no bones until the morning. But he
speaks of their devouring of gifts and taking rewards, which is the
greatest plague that judgment has. For if (as Cicero spoke for his friend
Plaucius) that Judge is ever unjust, that either inueieth, or sauoureth: what
shall we say of him, that in judgment hunteth after gain, then the which
nothing has greater force too move the minds of men. For the same Cicero, or
rather experience being witness says that abounding wealth, is wont to weaken
the religion and truth of judgments. Iethro saw this, that would have
Judges to be haters and enemies to covetousness. Exodus 18. In this present place
therefore the Prophet complains that wrongful dealing did by force come upon
them publicly, and that their court or townehouse for pleading causes, became
a spoiling place for robbers, in that that he compares the judges to hungry
wolves. But seeing they were such under Iosia, that most godly and well disposed
king, what shall we think they were under Manasses and Ammon, who were them
selves farthest of all, from Religion? therefore the order of that common
wealth, which hangs of one alone, is full of danger: because it is
impossible that one should either hear or see all things that are done among
the people. But let them which (trusting of this) do pervert Judgment,
remember that they have God a seeing witness of al yt they do, which is wont
always to be in the midst of the assemblies of Judges, according as it is
written Psalm, 82. God is in the company of Gods, he is Judge among Gods. 3.
Prophets.
Furthermore he passes from the Judges, to the teachers, saying: Her Prophets
are light and wicked men. He speaks of the false Prophets, of which sort it
is well known by Jeremy, that there were many, with whom he had much a do. He
calls them light as well for their learning, as also for the loose
conversation and corrupt manners of life. For as for their doctrine, they framed
it to the minds of their hearers, and spoke pleasant things, as the ungodly
in Isay do command the prophets. But this is an especial part of lightness,
under the cloak of the name of God, to seek for private commodity, and to
take part with sin, wherewith it is well known that God is angry. But that in
the course of their life, they were most dissolute, it appears by Isay, Isay.
56.
who accuses the seducers of his time, of drunkenness and love of gluttony:
and such as are wont to be had in reputation among the ungodly. First because
of the likeness of their manners, then because they willingly lay open their
authorite, neither can they withstand those whom they see to live very
licenciously. The Prophet therefore does not without good consideration had,
reckon them among the number of those, that were the authors of their common
destruction, which thing I would to God all ministers would in these days
consider, and whosoever are also delighted with such, whom Christ affirms to
be like unsavory salt, etc. 4. Priests.
Lastly he reproves the Priests, and these (says he) have defiled the
sanctuary, and broken the Law. By the name of sanctuary he understands all the outward woorship and whatsoever holy rites were then used, the priests did
defile them, partly because they did execute or minister the^ carelessly or
profanely, partly because they did pervert their use and made a cloak for
their wickedness by that, wherewith all men ought to have been stirred up to
the study of godliness and consideration of the promised Savior. For they
placing in these outward things the recompense of their sins and desert of
salvation, made the temple with all the holy exercises thereof, a den of thieves,
as Jeremy speaks of them. But because this could not be done without the
corruption of doctrine, he says, that they brake the law, that is, they
wrested it violently into a contrary meaning which was done then, when (as I
said even now) they placed desert or merit in those things, which did rather
argue the corruption of our nature, and which should have led them, as it were
a schoolemaister unto Christ. This corruption of woorshippe and doctrine
reigned also in Christ's time, who openly brings certain examples thereof,
and teaches that it must be amended. And I would to God that the same were
not found in many Churches in these our days. For what do those papal
fellows, that to the Pope and his horned Bishops do violently wring those
things which by the Apostles were spoken, as concerning the Church and
ministry of the word, and so by the word of Christ do establish their
outrageous tyranny: when also they do defend their more then unchaste single
life? The differences of meats, Images, the sacrifice of the mass, and other
ungodliness of like sort, by the testimonies of the scriptures, falsely
reported and wickedly wrested aside, and do therewithal live in such order,
that through them the whole ministry of the Church is evil spoken of. I will
not now speak of their selling of priests orders, their Simoniacall fair of
sacraments their works of supererogation, their indulgences, their fire of
purgatory, their holy Masses of Requiem, and dyriges for them that be dead,
and whatsoever other things else they have invented to the impayring of the
merit of Christ, and contrary to the doctrine of his truth: therefore the same
times, and the same manners do require the same punishments, whereof it shall
be spoken in their place. Now let us note the example of Zephaniah, who being
but one alone, took upon him the cause of the truth against the Prophets
and Priests, and does accuse them openly. For that we may let pass those
Prophets, whom we know by Jeremy to have run, and were not sent. Yet it is
well known that the Priests were appointed by GOD: and by lawefull succession
they did discende from Aaron: notwithstanding the Prophet Zephaniah blames
them, and does pronounce them worthy of punishment. From whence then has the
Pope obtained yt his privilege, who although he lead souls to hell, will yet
be reproved by no man? But we read that Peter was rebuked of Paul, and that
openly, when he went not right to the truth of the Gospel. Gala. 2.
Or who can bear them in these days, which say that manifest and open
abuses are not to be taken away, except it be by the authority of a general
council, whereof now there can be no hope, and whereunto, they that now have
some years been accused, will never submit them selves? But will godly
Princes and heads of the people hazard the life of so many thousands of
souls, while these deceauers get unto them selves, as it were a whot sering
iron? Let them rather by this one argument acknowledge the tyranny of these
men. But let them which have escaped their hands, show them selves thankful
unto GOD, let them follow his word, and receive his correction. But let them
have all hope of salvation only in his grace, and to him that calls, let him
draw near, by Christ Jesus, who is the way, the truth and the life: to whom
all thanks giving, honor, glory and power be due for ever.

Amen.
The nienth Sermon.
The text.
5 THe just lord is in the mids thereof: he will do none iniquity: every
morning does he bring his Judgment to light. He fails not, but the wicked
will not learn to be ashamed.

6 I have cut of the nations: their Towers are desolate: I have made their
streets waste, that no man shall pass by, their Cities are destroyed without
man, and without inhabitant.

7 I said surely thou will fear me: thou will receive instruction: so their
dwelling should not be destroyed, how soever I visited them: but they rose
early and corrupted all thy works.

8 Therefore wait you upon me (says the Lord) until the day that I rise up to
the pray: for I am determined to gather the nations: and that I will assemble
the kingdoms to power upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce wrath:
for all all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy.

The argument and use of the place.
THe ungodly are oftentimes so convinced of their wickedness, that they cannot
deny that, that they have done, yet they never scarce acknowledge, how grievous
their offenses be, but seek every where for starting holes, that they should
not be enforced to confess that they have deserved any punishment. Wherefore
the ministers must use great diligence and severity, that they may not only
reprove and accuse the deeds of the wicked, but also show of what sort they
be: and also lay before them, the judgment of God that cannot be escaped. This
does Zephaniah very diligently. For a little before he reproved those sins
that reigned in Jerusalem, and as it were by name rebuked those that sinned
principally. But because he knew they would make many shifts to cloak their
iniquity withal, and bring them selves into a fools paradise, he goes
forward now. And first he bereaueth them of their vain hope, wherewith they
flattered them selves by reason of the adoption, and promises of God. After
this he rebukes very sharply their remediless malice, wherewith they being
hardened, were not once moved with many examples, or admonitions whatsoever.
Lastly he denounces those punishements, which God would execute upon them. But
this place serves very well for our time, for it teaches how to judge of the
manners of our age, and does therwithall set out the use of admonitions and
examples, wherewith GOD would stir us up unto repentance.

He answers their boasting.
In the entrance he meets with their boasting, and vain confidence,
wherewith they replied against the prophets. For if at any time they reproved
their sin, and showed the punishment thereto belonging, they would object and
say, we are the peculiar people of God, whom it is well known to abide among
us. For these are his own words: Leuit. 26.
I will pitch my tabernacle in the mids of you, and my soul shall not abhor
you. I will walk in the mids of you, and will be your God, and you shall be my
people. And the same God speaking of the City of Jerusalem, says: This is
the place of my rest for ever. Furthermore as Jeremy writes: They cried, who
could cry most, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord. The Prophet
granting to these things, makes answer, saying, the just lord is among you,
he will do none iniquity, etc. As if he should say, I confess in deed, that
the just Lord is in the mids of you, and there is no need why ye should
obiecte these things, as though I knew them not. But you must therewithal
remember, what property that God is of, which you so cry out to be among you.
As namely he is just, and will do no iniquity: therefore although he have
bound him self unto you, and has among you appointed his dwelling place: yet
he will be just for ever more, neither will he change his nature for your causes,
yt he should either frame himself unto your sins, or wincke perpetually at
these your manners, no, but in the morning, yea betims in the morning he will
declare his Judgments. But the word Judgment is taken two ways, when in
the speech it is referred unto God. For first it signifies his word, wherein
he makes his judgments or statutes known unto us. And in this sense the
Prophet David said: My soul is brought low for the longing desire it has
unto thy Judgments, at al times. Again I have not erred from thy Judgments,
for thou have informed me. Secondly the execution of the sentence of God is
signified by the word Judgment. Both senses agree very well to this present
place: and as I think I shall not unfitly expound these words thus. God will
never fail to do as he should, for early in ye morning, yt is speedily, and as
often as occasion shall serve, he will declare his word, whereby he will admonish
us of our duty, and rebuk the^ yt err from him, but if he profit not them,
he bends more sharp judgment against them, and those whom he sees
remediless, he punishes as they do deserve, and by and by after he brings
in whereby he may more at large set abroad their stubborn frowardnes, and yet
the wicked will not learn to be ashamed, that is, although these things are
known to all men, although you have seen not a few and those no common
examples of judgments that testify, that he is a sharp revenger of
ungodliness: you boast also in his presence, yet such is your frowardnes, yt as
yet you know not to be ashamed: that is, that you should be abashed in the
presence of God himself. But you persevere without shame to do those things
before him, whereof ye would be ashamed in the eyes of men. It agrees hereunto
that God spoke by Jeremy almost about ye same time, Iere. 3.
Thou have the foreheade of an harlot, thou have refused to be ashamed. And in
Ezechiel they be called men of an hard and stiff forehead. Ezech. 3.


The use of the presence of God
But we are taught in this place, what use we should have of the presence of
God, whereof we make no less brag then the Jews did in times past, verily
not that we being proud thereof should promise too our selves safenes from
all punishment, as hypocrites use to do: but that by often me ditating
thereupon, we should be spurred to an earnest care of Godliness, and honesty.
Seneca long since admonished, to the end we might avoid secret offenses,
that we should always think that some sour fellow as Scipio, Lelius or
Cato were a present beholder, and a witness of our doings. But how much more
shall we be provoked thereunto, if it never be out of our mind, that
whatsoever we either speak or do, we do it in the sight of God and his
Angels: let this thought therefore be always in our mind, and as it were pull
us by the ear: vz. that God is present with us, and that we cannot deceive his
sight which searches ye heart and reins. Then let us call to mind of what
sort he is, and that is, he is just and holy, who (as David says) hates all
them that work iniquity, and falls upon the ungodly as it were a
consuming fire, according to that saying of the Apostle, Our God is a consuming
fire. They that bethink them of these things in good earnest, will by and by
(if they have any spark of godliness within them) begin in their hearts to
abhor sin, and shall perceive that a new and unaccustomed care of godliness
begins too spring, and will also be ashamed either to speak or do those
things before God, whereof they would be ashamed in the beholding of any honest
man. So the Apostle Paul in the 2. Cor. 6. teaches us to use this
consideration. For when he had brought the words of God which we alleged
before, by and by he adds out of Esaias, Esaias. 42.
wherefore depart out of the midst of them, and separat your selves, says
the Lord, and touch no unclean thing.

But here appears the desperate corruption of our nature, All men confess
that God is present every where, that he sees all things, that he hears all
things, that he knows all things. in the mean season, a man shall find
very few, that trust in him, that stay upon him, or that in his presence do
give themselves to christian godliness, and holiness of life, without the which,
(as ye Apostle witnesses) no man sees God. Who therefore sees not that the
most of them that confess him in their mouth do deny him in their deeds, and
that they be of ye number of those that say in their heart, there is no God,
the Lord sees not, neither does the God of Jacob understand. etc. Nay that we
may let pass these that be common, which being violently carried away with
beastly pleasures, do think very seldomely of God, or heavenly things, what
shall we say of the divines, which when they teach, not only that presence of
God, that is delivered in the Scriptures, but do also force a bodily presence
of Jesus Christ, and that with great a do, and yet in the mean time both
commit, and speak such things as do sufficiently bear witness, that they
believe nothing less then that thing which they do repeat so often. For if
they did either think that God saw these things, or did believe that Christ
Jesus were present with his Church unto whom we must hereafter give account
for every idle word: Surely they would never writhe the Scriptures so
wickedly, they would never speak so rakehellike of those holy mysteries, they
would never so disquiet ye church with these their proud conflictes and
brauling contentions, much less with such reproaches defame those faithful
ministers of Christ, that have well deserved of the Church: Or triumph for the
blodshed of the holy Martyrs. Or who would think they would speak such
foolish absurd, and things against the scriptures, if they believed there were
either heaven or hell? Now the authority of princes stands with them, but ye
age to come will be of an other mind, and surely Christ will look unto the
cause of those that be his, whose name they do so without all shame abuse.

He proves their helpelesse contumacie.
But let us return to our Prophet who does more at large lay abrod with this
argument also, the shameless and incureable frowardnes of his time, because as
yet they were not amended, neither by examples, nor yet by any admonitions or
warninges, but were rather become worse. And surely the force of examples is
very great, in so much that they which cannot be moved by any reasons, are
ofttimes made afraid from their sins by examples, when they see that those
their offenses had an evil end with others. And the Poet affirmed that he is
happy, whom other men's harms do make too beware. But they that reject them
together with all faithful admonitions are not only unhappy men, but also of
a desperate malice, and worthy to be punished any way. But God proves yt
these are such, when he says, I have destroyed the nations, their palaces are
laid wast, I have made their streets desolate, that there is none that passes
by. etc. He does not only allege simply the destruction of the nations, but
does withal heap together whatsoever lamentable and doleful things are wont
to fall out therein; that he may declare that those examples of his Justice,
which he showed, were not common, wherewith they might have bin freightned, if
they had had any feeling at al left in them: and hither may be referred
whatsoever things came to pass, from the time that he had brought their
Fathers out of Egypt, for then was Pharao destroyed with his horses, and
charets and the country of the Madianits myserably destroyed and made waste:
Then were the mighty kings Seon and Ogge punished for their ungodliness and
cruelty. After this there followed many such examples under the Judges, and
David against the Philistines, the Idumeans, Moabites, Amonites and Syrians,
all which God punished very grievously. Moreover those things, were fresh in
ye remembrance of them all, which Salmanazar and Senacherib had done very
cruelly in the land of Israel and Judah, and which they knew were executed upon
ye ten tribes, that for the same sins were lead away into Assiria, whereof
they were continually warned by the Prophets. I will not now speak of the
people of the East, yt were first oppressed by the armies of the Assyria^s, and
were afterward beaten down afresh by the tyranny of the Babylonians: neither
yet have I only done these things (says God) but that ye might understand
the use of them all, I have given you prophets, by whom I have spoken unto
you, and have said: surely thou shall fear me, and receive my correction. And
his dwelling shall not be destroyed, That is, thy dwelling, whatsoever I have
appointed as concerning the same (for in the prophets the change of persons
do oftentimes come.) In which words he testifies, that he has prescribed
them a very certain and short way of salvation, and has given them sure hope,
that he will spare their land, if they will but now at the last fear him, and
yield them selves to be ordered by him. But what did they? They rose erly in
the morning, and corrupted all their ways. He sets their selfwill and
disobedience against his faythfulnes and care for them. As if he should say,
as I arose early, and showed my judgments by saying, admonishing, exhorting
and reproving, and have also endeavored to make them afaide with the examples of
other nations: so they made no less speed to corrupt their own ways, and
are become worse and worse. Who would not therefore say, that they were
altogether remediless, and worthy of any punishment?

The use of examples.
But these words of God do teach what profit they should reap from those
examples which are showed upon others. Namely this, that we should think that
God does not only punish them, that for their wickedness have deserved
punishment, but also to admonish others, that they should call to mind what
they have deserved. And that by speedy turning unto the Lord, they might
escape those plagues, that are ready to fall upon them. Christ himself
teaches this use, when he reasons of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate
mingled with the sacrifice, and those other, on whom the Tower of Siloe fell
and pressed to death. For Luke says, Chap. 13. Do ye think that they were
sinners more then all others? I say unto you, nay: but except ye repent, ye
shall likewise perish. But the great goodness of God appears in this, that
when he may take sudden vengeance upon us, as often as we sin against
him; yet he uses these forewarnings, that he may provide for the safety of
those that be his. But I would to God we would mark this in these days: for
what nation is there in all the world, upon the which God has not showed
examples of his Justice, within these 50. or 60. years, what desolations,
destructions, and miseries have we not seen? neither does the course of God
his Judgments contain them selves within the bounds of that part of the
worle, that is known, but ways also of the unknown sea, have been opened unto
covetous and rashly disposed men, that they also, that from the beginning of
the world hitherto, have lived naked, and without armor, and having no
knowledge of this our part of the world, should also knew what belongs to
the force of wars. But how few there be that herein acknowledge the
Judgment of GOD the matter it self declares. For most men following the
example of the Jews, do either persecute the truth, and make war against
God himself, or else use the pretense thereof unto a headlong liberty of
offending. It is not therefore without good consideration, that certain prudent
and wise hearted men do think that some great mischief, and a certain
general destruction is ready to fall upon all the world: which cannot be
escaped by any other way, then if we follow the counsel of God, presently set
before our eyes: Thou shall fear me (says he) and receive my correction. In
two members he comprehends all the way of godliness: for the fear of God
cannot consist without his knowledge, and a true faith: nay that fear, that is
such as children bear to their parents comes hereof, which is adjoined with
ye love of god, which is the beginning of true wisdom, and brings lowlines,
which makes a man by the obedience of faith, wholly to submit himself unto
God and his word. But by the word (correction) is noted a mind that does
patiently bear chastisment, which is always accompanied with a godly and
honest life, and which in every point is agreeable to the faith and profession
of a christian man: whosoever does set these things before themselves to be
considered, do wax wise by other men's examples, and do easily escape the
Judgment of God, or at ye least being bettered thereby, do obtain everlasting
life.

He denounces the punishment
But GOD adds a most heavy thretning to their frowardnes, and his rebuke,
saying: Therefore wait you upon me until the day that I rise up unto the
pray, etc. The meaning is, I have hitherto done al things which might soften
you, and make you rele^t, but yt you are more hard the^ the stones. I have also
for a time wtheld mine indignation, yt there should not want space of
repe^ta^ce: but I looked for it in vain, seeing ye are become worse, and ye
think that I am like unto your selves. Now therefore wait you unto that day,
wherein I will arise to pray, and tearing in pieces as you have deserved, and
you shall not wait in vain, as I have done: for this now is my Judgment and
unchangeable decree, That I will gather together all nations and all kingdoms,
that I may power out mine indignation, and the furiousnes of my wrath upon
them, etc. But that that he speaks here in few words, is more at large set
out in Jeremy, where these things are to be found. Iere. 25.
for that ye have not hearkened to my words: therefore I will send for all
the families of the north (says the Lord) and for Nabuchadnezar the king of
Babylon, my servant, and I will bring them into this Land, and upon all these
nations which are round about, and will destroy them utterly, and cut them up
by the roots, etc. And by and by after he makes a catalogue or scrowle of
those kingdoms and kings that must be rooted up. And that none should promise
to themselves deliverance by their strength, he adds, Because in the fire of
my Jealousy all the earth shall be consumed. He attributes zeal unto him
self, as also in the ten commandments, least any man should imagine that
God is like an Epicure, or idle. And he compares him to fire, the force
whereof cannot be overcome. Moreover he threatens the whole world, least they
should think that they should escape: all the whole reason of God his
Judgment, is expressed in these words. The reason of Gods judgment.
For in that he bids them wait, and names the day also wherein he will
rise to the pray, he shows that he is not carried away with a blind outrage,
but that he does order all things by his just Judgment, and has his
appointed times, when he will render to every one as they have deserved.
Furthermore he testifies that all nations are subject to his judgment. For
whosoever sins without law (says Paul) Romans 2.
shall perish without law: and who soever sins in the law, shall be judged by
the law, Moreover we are taught yt they cannot be escaped of all those that
with their stubborn contempt of his word provoke his wrathful indignation,
and surely histories bear record that it was in deed fulfilled that he
threatened them by his prophets, which also does set before us many examples:
whereby we are taught that the Judgments of God cannot be escaped by any force
or counsel of man. Let us in these days be minedfull of these things, and for
as much as we want neither admonitions nor examples, wherewith GOD calls us
into the way, let us give heed unto them, and fear the Lord, and submit our
selves to the yoke of his correction, so it shall be given us to enjoy the
hoped for, and promised salvation in Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom all
thanks giving, honor, glory and power be due for ever.

Amen.
The tenth Sermon.
The text.
9 SVrely then I will turn to the people a pure language, that they may al call
upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent.

10 From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia the daughter of my dispersed, praying
unto me shall bring me an offering.

11 In that day shall thou not be ashamed for all thy works, wherein thou have
transgressed against me. For then I will take away out of the mids of thee them
that rejoice of thy pride, and thou shall no more be proud of my holy
mountain.

12 Then will I leave in the mids of thee an humble and poor people, and they
shall trust in the name of the Lord.

13 The remnant of Israel shall do none iniquity, nor speak lies: neither
shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth. For they shall be fed and lie
down, and none shall make them afraid.

The argument and use of this sermon.
THe Prophets do with great gravity reprove the wickedness of men and do
threaten also the wrath of God, and grievous plagues against them. But
therewithal they have a diligent regard of the godly, unto whom they bring in,
by the way, the promises of salvation, least they should with such threatninges
cast them into despair. The Prophet Zephaniah also uses the same order in
this sermon. For hitherto he has very sharply reproved the helpless
frowardnes of the Jews, and to them that know not how to repent, he has
threatened the dredful vengeance of God, who has decreed altogether to cut off
this nation, which thing doubtless began first to be done by the Babylonians,
but was afterward fully accomplished by the Romans, which brought utter
destruction upon that city and nation. But that no man should think that God
has abrogated his old promises as concerning the Messiah, and everlasting
continuance of his Church, and so should be brought into the danger of
despair: now he turns his talk to the godly, and teaches in many words,
that it shall be so far from having any thing diminished from the promises of
God, as concerning the restoring again of man's salvation, and of his Church,
that it shall rather be increased, and spread farther abroad. This last part
therefore of our Prophet conteyneth a description of the Church, withal the
way of our salvation; from whence we shall learn, what way we must keep what
is the condition of ye church upon earth, also what be the duties of them that
desire to be the members thereof and saved therein.

The spreading abroad of the church among the Gentiles is promised.
First least the overthrow of Iewrie might seem to bring any loss or damage
to the Church, he says that it shall rather be enlarged by the coming of those
thereunto, which hitherto have been separated from it. I will turn to the
people (says he) a pure language and they shall all call upon the name of the
Lord etc. A pure language he calls the preaching of the Gospel, which being
clean without al dregs of men's traditions, does work in men sanctification
and holiness of life. He says that he will turn, or rather reach this unto
all people, wherewith they being lightened, and cleared, or gathered unto the
church, which in the divorce of the nation of the Jews was thought yt it
should be extinguished. He shows the end of this preching, when he says that
al may call upon the name of the Lord and serve him with one shoulder, that is,
with one consent and agreeable care and diligence, and that they should not
worship a numberless company of gods, or be divided into diverse sects;
afterward he shows that the bounds or limits of the Church shall be
meruellous wide. when he adds, saying: Beyond the rivers of Ethyopia shall be
my supplia^ts: That is, they yt are humbled unto me, and the daughter of my
dispersed people (for he calls the congregation of gods children which before
she coming of Christ were dispersed not only in diverse places, but also
through sects, in error that was common, and are yet unto this day banished
among the mids of their enemies over all the world (shall bring me an
offering, yt is to say, that honor and worship which is due unto me. These
things were in part fulfilled when they being returned from Babylon ordained a
new form of their Church and common wealth, and in the provinces of Babylon
where they were scattered, they left some sparks or seeds of the more pure
knowledge of GOD, which was the cause yt in farthest countries there were some
that think more rightly of God, and his worship; yet these things were but
prohems or preambls or as it were entrances only of things whereunto christ
Jesus brought an end and full acco^plishment: John. ^.
whom John witnesses, to have come and died to this purpose, that he might
gather together in one the dispersed children of God. He, when the work of our
redemption was finished in earth, and had ascended into heaven, turned this
pure language unto his people, to wit, by sending his holy spirit that appeared
in the liknes of fiery tongues, which also being received, his Apostles went
out into all the world, and gathered all nations to the knowledge and true
woorship of God: so it came to pass that in all parts of the world there arose
some that called upon the name of the Lord, and offered those spiritual
sacrifices, which only are approved of God, and that thou may know the
truth of this oracle or prophecy, this that is here spoken of, began to be
fulfilled, according to the meaning of the letter when the Ethiopian eunuch of
Queen Candace by Phillips preaching being converted unto Christ, opened the
doctrine of faith afterward to his own countrymen. Nay, it is well known by
the example of the said eunuch, that the Ethiopians had even then some
knowledge of the Scriptures and of the true God, for woorshipping of whom, he
came to Jerusalem, and read the sermons of Esaias as Luke writes. Old Writers
also record, that Matthias the Apostle went into Ethiopia, and preached the
Gospel to that nation: and we are not without faithful record, at this time
that affirm, that Christian religion bears the sway among the Ethiopians,
and that in a few ceremonies only they differ from us. And it is also to be
believed, that the principles of the old and apostolical doctrine, was
preserved in that country both longer, and more without corruption: which
country because it is defended with the far distaunce of places and
immoderate heat of the sun, was less troubled with wars, which afterward
turned all the world in very horrible wise almost vpside down. Yea although in
our days the outrage of Mahomet, and frantike dotages of the Papists
superstitions, have corrupted religion every where, yet there are found in
every place, which call upon the Lord Jesus, and profess a true faith in him,
and that time seems to be even at hand, wherein the Gospel must be preached
to all the world, as Christ has foretold.

The disposing of the Church is the work of God.
But thou must mark by the way that God in this present place witnesses, that
all this is his work. For I (says he) will turn to this people a pure
language, etc. Therefore the enlarging of the Church is the work of God,
neither ought any thing to be attributed here unto the diligence or strength of
men. For it is gathered together by the preaching of the word, and grows
into an unity of the same body under Christ the head thereof, but both these
things do hang upon the only grace of GOD, that uses to send ministers to
them, whom he will have made the heirs of salvation, and does make clear the
minds of the same with faith, wherewith they lay hand on the salvation that is
offered unto them. For how shall they preach (says the Apostle) Romans 10.
except they be sent? And we read that Paul was sometime forbidden to preach
in Asia, and Bithinia, Acts. 16.
and was sent to the Macedonians, whom it was then necessary to be instructed
in the faith: and the same Apostle says, 1. Cor. 3. Ephe. 2. John. 6.
that Ministers in deed do plant and water, but that increase is given only by
God, and that faith is the gift of the same God, which makes us to be
partakers of righteousness and salvation. For he was acquainted with that saying
of Christ. No man comes to me, except my Father draw him. These things serve
well to confute them, that make such great brags of the strength of freewill,
and cry out that we offer injury unto God, in that we refer all things to his
beck, they are accustomed to hold up that saying of Paul, as if it were Ajax
his target, vz. That god would that all men should be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the truth, And they refuse all interpretation, which refers
those words to the elect of al places and degrees of men. Let them therefore
tell us, why God does not bestow upon al men indifferently the means of
salvation: why does he not lighten all men's minds with faith? why did he
suffer the whole world to be deceived so many hundred years? why does he not
in these days also open a door to the preching of the Gospel in many
nations: they trifle in deed very much about the Gospel long since preached
over all the world by the Apostles: but what does this appertain to the people
of our time, which are altogether ignorant what was done in their countries in
time past and gone. Let them say what they will, and into what shape soever
they turn them selves, they shall yet be enforced to confess, that the
outward calling is not universal nor common to all men. By what reason will
they then prove, that election is general, seeing this must needs follow
that, and that must needs follow this election or choice, according to the
saying of the Apostle: Romans 8.
Whom he has preordeined, those also he has called. We are therefore enforced
to acknowledge the hidden counsel of God in these mysteries, which it
becomes us to adjure with all humility, and most faithful proclaming of his
grace: and not after a proud and Phareseelike boldness of our strength, to
bring to the examination of our reason.

The duties of the faithful.
But let us see also what be the duties of them, unto whom God will turn this
pure language, that he may lighten them, with the knowledge of his son and
their salvation. The first duty is, that they should call upon the name of
the Lord. Under invocation or calling upon, he contains faith also. For
(says Paul) Romans 1^.
how shall they call upon him, whom they have not believed? Notwithstanding
he had rather use the term of calling upon, then of faith, that we might
know, that his meaning is, of that faith which consists in a vain and dead
opinion, but of that, that utters it self by open confession, and true
worship of God. But let us mark the prophets manner of speaking, that (for the
Lord) would rather say, the name of the Lord: Namely that he might put a
difference betwixt the invocation of them that believe indeed, and them that be
but hypocrites, and profane Gentiles. For all men are wont to boast of their
calling upon GOD, when as by common reason they are taught that there is a God,
that governs all the world, and that we ow unto him worship and invocation:
yet notwithstanding not all do call upon the name of the Lord. That is, they
do not acknowledge him to be such, as the scriptures declare him to be, and as
he has made him self manifest in his son. But they devise Gods unto them
selves of their own brain, which indeed are no Gods. But the godly being
taught by the scriptures, do call upon the true God, even the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore they only may be counted for the true
worshippers of God. The second duty is, yt they serve him with one shoulder.
This may be understood two ways. First thus: that they being without
hypocrisy, do worship the only one true God, and haulte not on both sides;
as Elyas spoke of the Israelites. 1. Reg. 18.
The German phrase of speaking is agreeable to the Hebrew phrase, wherein they
are said to carry on both shoulders, which doing any thing dissemblingly, reele
now this way, now that way. 2. Thus: to wit, here is noted an agreement because
they were not divided into diverse sects and opinions, whereby they might
overthrow the faith of many: but rather join their studies and labors in
one, that true religion may come unto many. The third is, they humble them
selves unto him and offer him a gift: namely that that he requires, and that
which is due unto him. But men ow them selves wholly unto God, they give the^
selves therefore wholly unto him by faith, they call upon him alone in all their
necessity, they acknowledge that all their welfare comes from him, and do
address their whole life, and all that they have, unto his appointment, and
make his glory the principal end thereof. But seeing these be exercises of
them that be godly indeed, it is evident enough what a man may judge of the
folk of our time, which neither call only upon GOD, neither lend their hand
to others that be godly, but submit themselves as slaves unto sin, and offer
them selves a Sacrifice to the devil, while they live in such order, that
through them Christian faith and Religion is evil spoken of.

The Church is purged by the Cross.
But let us return again unto God, speaking by his Prophet, which promises
that his church shall be made more holy, and better purged, when he shall have
executed this Judgment upon the nation of the Jews. For he adds, In that
day thou shall not be ashamed for all thy works, wherein thou have
transgressed against me. He speaks not of a godly bashfulnesse, which the
godly conceive of the remembrance of their sins, whereby also it comes to
pass, that they dare scarsly lift their eyes to heaven, as Christ speaks to
the Publican. Luke ^.
For this is not the smallest fruit of true repentance, while it causes that
we do not return again to our sins, out whereof we are escaped through the
grace of God. Which self same thing Paul noted, when he wrote, saying: Romans 6.
What fruit had you then in those things, whereof you are now ashamed? But
this must be referred partly to the effect of Justification, which is of
faith, wrereby it comes to pass that our sins are not imputed unto us, to
our everlasting confusion: Partly to the amendment of life and manners, which
should be so great and so worthy, that it should as it were put out the infamy
of the former life, and not suffer the same to be any more vpbraided unto us,
and hereunto makes that reason, which by and by after he adds. For then I
will take out of the mids of thee, those that rejoice in their pride. that is
to say, that dignity, which hitherto has made you so lofty and bold. But he
speaks of the hypocrites, which had always this in their mouths, that this
nation was Gods peculiar, and priestly kingdom, and the inheritance of God,
and boasted moreover lustely in the Temple, sacrifices, and other worship, and
in the mean time they profaned their profession with a wicked life, and
wonderful corrupt manners, and set abroad their religion to be derided of the
Gentiles. So does God himself expound this place, when he adds: And thou
shall not be proud any longer of my holy mountain. The meaning is, that there
should be none any more that should seek for praise by their idle titles of
holiness: but this rather shall be a common care unto all men, vz. to do that in
deed, that they profess in word. And these things he spoke for the comfort
of the godly, that they should not bear heavily the wretchedness of their
nation, or the forsaking thereof: for as much as GOD by this means would spread
his Church not only throughout al nations, but would also purg the same from
such reproves and blemishes, wherewith it was now vexed: seeing it is permitted
to al men, that under the pretense of the covenant and name of God, they should
give themselves to most wicked delights. But let us learn from these things,
that no man ought in these days to be offended at affliction, seeing thereby
the church is not ouerthrown but exalted, and being purged from their former
faults, proves more glorious. Nay, if we shall examine the matter rightly, it
will appear, that we have great need thereof. For as we are by nature sinners,
and ready unto mischief: so when we either flow in Idleness, or flourish with
many gifts, and seem to have al things well appointed, and fit for us, by and
by we are ouercom with self trust and carlesnes, and so offer our selves to be
ouertake^ of the devil and such as are deceauers: and such is the force of this
mischief, yt it cannot be cured, but by a more violent remedy. But this does
god put to by the cross, yt we being humbled therwt, should lay aside those
proud spirits, and al confidence of external assistance and gifts being laid
aparte, we should regard him alone, and should watch and pray thereunto, that
he suffer us not to be swallowed up of any temptation.

The description of the Church by works.
But the Lord goes forward, and teaches more diligently what they should be
after that chastisment. For he says, I will make the remnant in the mids of
thee a lowly people, afflicted, or poor. That is, bereaved of al worthiness,
and stripped out of al external helps, and which can make no boaste of any
outward thing; and soon after he declares what they shall do. First they
shall hope in the name of the Lord. This belongs only to the godly, which
for as much as they see nothing in any place, wherein they may safely shroud
them selves, this is their only stay, yt they fly unto God, who is called the
revenger of them that be oppressed, the defender of the poor, the patron of
the widows, the father of the fatherless, and the comfort of all them that be
broken hearted. They therefore put all their hope in his name, in this that they
stay upon his grace, righteousness, and truth, which he has revealed unto
us in Christ Jesus his Son. And then the remnant of Israel (says he) shall
do none iniquity. For they that be justified by Christ, work righteousness,
and because they be joined tegether by the bond of charity, they abstain from
every wickedness. Furthermore, Psalm. 34.
they shall not speak lies, neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in
their mouths. This is a sure token of an vncorrupt mind. For it is well known
that the speech is the declarer of the mind, wherefore we are commanded to set
a watch before our mouth. And James says that a man is then perfect, ^ac. 3.
when he slydeth not in his tongue. But these things contain a description
of the Church, by the deeds and manners thereof. For in very deed it is a very
poor and afflicted people, which hops in God alone, and does moreover apply
it self to righteousness and truth. It is said to be afflicted and poor, both
because the Christians are low in heart, and have nothing to do with the
trust of outward things, as we erst while admonished, as also because they
are exercised with daily afflictions, but in the mids of them they hope in the
Lord, whose promises they believe. But in respect of men they apply themselves
to righteousness and harmelesnes, least they should annoy any man by their
deeds, or deceive him wickedly in their words. Where again it appears, what
they are, that before GOD rejoice in the merit of their own righteousness,
and wax proud against men, by reason of their outward gifts and faculties;
who also if any adversity be at hand, do bewray that their hearts are far
from faith, but they live a wicked and profane life, and do neither hear the
truth of Gods word patiently, nor yet in their businesss and daily talk study
for the truth, but do unhonestly beguile whom they can, and by infinite means
deceive them.

The fruit of true godlynes.
Furthermore the Prophet adds a most notable commodity of a true faith, and
of godliness. And says, Because they shall be fed, and shall lie down, and there
shall be none to make the^ afraid. In which words he promises the protection
and sauegarde of God, which with his word feeds them that believe in him,
and does with his power defend the same, that none evil can come to them.
This is done both spiritually and corporally. For being justified by faith, we
have peace with God: and God does wonderfully defend his Church: so that
although most cruel enemies, beset it on every side, yet the profit nothing at
al against it, neither yet can they take any of Christ his sheep out of his
hands, there is no need of any longer declaration, seeing the matter it self
does show it, and we find examples thereof every where. This place therefore
teaches what is the most esie and sure way to obtain peace. This is in every
peoples mouth; and surely it is a most excellent gift, but very few there be
that seek for true peace: this is that that does quiet our minds with God, and
does make us be without care and fear against the terrors of the world. This
peace is not otherwise begone in us, then by the study of godliness and a
true faith. For they that want it, are ever disquieted both within and without,
that they seem to be prepared for every mischief. Hitherto does examples of
tyrants belong, the most whereof bearing rule both far and near, being
combred with fear and trembling, do use a most heedie and pikeout watch for
the safety of their bobies. The report is, that Alexander neneuer lay with
his wife Thebe, whom he loved most entirely, but he first csmmaunded a
Barbarian soldier to go before him to the chamber, and to search al his bed
very carefully. But Masinissa although his kingdom was al over Asia, and had
54. Sons, so thought, that none in all the world would be trusty enough unto
him, that he rather used a watch of dogs, then of men, to preserve his life.
What shall we say of Dionysius? who yt he might not dread the Barbers razars,
would needs have his daughters learn the Barbars craft, to whom being grown
to years of discretion, he fearing to commit any cutting instrument, caused
his beard to be burned of with walnut and other nut shales being set on fire.
But the nights were so troublesome unto him, that he fenced his chamber no
otherwise, then if it had been his tenies with ditches and trenches, which
were laid over with a hanging bridge. With whom also thou may recke^ the kings
of our time, which do rather commit ye safe custody of their bodies to foren
and barbarous guardes, then to their own country men; but from whence comes
this? because they having an evil conscience wtin themselves, cannot but fear
those, whom they know they have done great wrong unto. But they have no hope
in God, whom either they know not, or else do scoffingly despise, or perceive
that he is wrathful against them. The condition of the godly is far
otherwise, which say with the Apostle, If God be with us, who can be against
us. Being stirred up with the consideration of these things, let us hope in God,
let us call upon him, let us give up our selves unto him a living sacrifice, let
us diligently follow the study of righteousness, and truth, that we may
happily end the course of this life, and in time to come live always in
heaven with Jesus Christ our lord, to whom al thanks giving, honor, glory,
and power be due for ever.

Amen.
The eleventh Sermon.
The text.
14 Rejoice O daughter Syon, be ye joyful O Israel. Be glad and rejoice with all
thy heart, O daughter Jerusalem.

15 The Lord has taken away thy Judgments: He has cast out thine enemies.
The king of Israel, even the Lord is in the mids of thee, thou shall see no
more evil.

16 In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem, fear not thou, O Syon: let not
thine hands be faint.

17 The Lord thy God in the mids of thee is mighty, he will save, he will
rejoice over thee with joy, he will quiet himself in his love: he will rejoice
over thee with joy.

18 After a certain time will I gather the afflicted that were of thee, and
them that bear the reproach for it.

19 Behold at that day I will bruise all that afflict thee, and I will save her
that haulted, and gather her that was cast out: and I will get them praise and
fame in all the Lands of their shame.

20 At that time will I bring you again, and then I will gather you. For I
will give you a praise and a name among all the people of the earth, when I
turn back your captivity before your eyes (says the Lord.

The argument and use of this present place.
AS the Prophet has made afraid the hypocrites, and those that were
remediless, with a grievous threatening of punishment: so he comfort the
godly with a joyful promise of deliverance. And even now he taught, that they
must not be offended at their captivity, and at those reproaches, which then
they were to take upon them. For it is so far of, that God will suffer his
Church to perish, and come to decay, that by this captivity and exercise of
affliction, it shall be more increased, and made more pure. But because that
deliverance out of Babylon, was a figure of that common redemption, which we
have in Christ: the Prophet by that occasion describes the Church, and
kingdom of Christ; and brings many things, which cannot be otherwise
understood, then of Christ, as those things are, that he spoke a little
before of the calling of the Ethiopians, and other nations; of the peace of the
godly, and protection of God, which he promises unto them: but because the
Church should be exercised with many tribulations, which oftentimes cause the
truth of the promises to be doubted of, he adds a more full confirmation of
this place. And first he does generally describe the happy state of the Church,
being filled with gladness and rejoicing. Afterward he does with new promises
comfort them, which might doubt of the assistaunce of God: in the end he
returns to the promise of deliverance. And under the figure of the old
people, he sets out the Church of Christ, teaching of whom it must be
gathered; what shall become of the enemies thereof, what also of the godly,
whom he promises to change the shame of this life, with eternal glory.

He promises a joyful and glorious deliverance.
First he says, Rejoice, O daughter Syon, be ye joyful, O Israel, be glad and
rejoice with all thy heart, O daughter Jerusalem. These things he speaks to
the captives, or to them yt were to be led into captivity, yt they might
conceive not only a firm and sure hope of deliverance, but also may know that
it may be full of glory and rejoicing. As if one carry the messages of
deliverance to one which in prison looks every hour for the sentence of
death, should say, Rejoice and be glad, for now thou shall be delivered. Or as
if a Physician contrary to al hope should promise health to him that lies
deadly sick, and for confirmation sake, should bid him to be of good cheer,
and rejoice. But the Prophet speaks the self same matter in many words.
Because it is a very hard matter for them that are brought into affliction to
conceive sure hope of deliverance when they be on every side beset with the
terrors of death. And hitherto serves that reckoning up of causes, which by
and by after the Prophet adds, among the which this is first: The Lord has
taken away thy Judgments. That is, he has drawn every action, and stopped
the course of the law, (as we call it) which he had commenced against thee,
together with those punishments which ye had deserved for transgressing. This
agrees with that saying of Isay, who in like manner foreshewing of their
return from Babylon, does admonish the Priests and Prophets of their duty,
and says, Esaias. 40.
Comfort ye, yea comfort ye my people says your, God. Speak unto the heart of
Jerusalem, and cry unto her: for her warfar is finished, and her iniquity is
forgiven. For that, that our Prophet speaks here of the taking away of
Judgments, is there expounded by the forgiving of sins, for the course of
judgment cannot be broken of, except offenses be pardoned. Secondly it is
added, He turns away thine enemies namely those that have held the captivity
hitherto. Moreover the king of Israel, eue^ the lord is in the mids of thee.
God is said then to be present with us, when by manifest arguments he does
declare his goodness and grace toward us. And from hence he brings in this
saying: Thou shall see no evil any more. That is to say, there shall not
herafter be any thing, that can bring any trouble unto thee. And these things
verily were in part performed, when being dismissed by Cyrus, they came to their
own again. For the^ God took away their judgments and ceased to prosecute suit
against them. He turned also their enemies far from them, when by the Medes and
Persians he bereaved the Babylonians and Caldia^s of their kingdom, and all
their strength. Besides this, he showed in deed his presence and favor: when
to them being returned again, he restored their temple and outward worship,
which consisted altogether in the sacraments or outward signs of his heavenly
grace and goodness, and did wonderfully defend them against the crafty devises
of those nations that lay next unto them, and against the open force of foren
enemies.

Redemption of Christ is common.
But because these things, as we said before, were foreshewes and entraunces,
of that redemption which should be in Christ, in him also they have their
accomplishment, and do contain the whole matter of our salvation. For we were
all offenders, and most cruel enemies hunge on every side over our heads.
Satan accused us, and did overcome us, not only by the law, but by the
testimony of our own conscience. Death gaped for our souls, which entered in
by ye fall of our first parents, and the sentence was pronounced upon us
miserable sinners. Cursed is he that does not fulfill the words of this Law to
do them: and all the people shall say, Amen. And there remained no other thing,
but that the execution should follow this sentence, which would sink al men
in eternal destruction. But here Christ came between, who that he might take
our cause upon him, put on man of the Virgin Mary, and soon after took away,
and utterly abolished all that whole proceeding of Gods Judgment. For he
purged our sins by the worthiness of his death: he put away the hand writing
of the law, and our own conscience, and fasted it to the cross. Moreover, he
tied up our enemy the devil, and the head of the old serpent being altoo
bruised, spoiled him of his kingdom; Col. 1.
and overcame the world, yt it might not prevail any more against us, but as
for our flesh, he keeps it under by ye spirit of regeneration, and holds it
in duty, and that he might leave nothing undone, he has made death, which
was the punishment of sin, as it were the door of everlasting life. For by
it we pass out of this valley of tears, and wretchedness into the places of
the blessed. Al which things Paul thoroughly perceiving, wrote long since, Romans
8.
There is now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Wherewith those
words agree, which Christ himself spoke in Ihon: John. 5.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, he which hears my word, and believes him
that sent me, has eternal life, and shall not come into judgment, but has
escaped from death to life. And the son of God has not only performed these
things for us, but also is present with us, even in ye mids of us, as he has
promised: and although he has carried his body away up to heaven, that he
might be there as an interest or pledge to bear witness of that heavenly and
blessed life of our bodies, which in time to come they shall have, yet he never
forsakes his church: but is present with it with his word, his spirit, his
grace and desert, and with his protection and safegarde: whereupon it follows
very necessarily, that we can see none evil, namely such as can destroy us.
The cross verily must be borne, and (as David said) Psalm. 34.
Many are the troubles of the godly, but God delivers them out of all: who
also causes that all things for them work together unto God.

He promises the continual abod and comfort of the word
But the Prophet goes forward and adds new promises, whereby the godly may
be confirmed in the faith. Nay, he affirms that there shall never want
faithful Preachers of GOD, which may always offer and set before the^ those
promises. For in that day (says he) it shall be said to Jerusalem, fear
not: and to Syon, let not thine hands be let down. And so he repeateth that
Prophecy, which erstwhile we brought out of Isay: and the meaning is this.
That your king Messiah, which I said should always be amongst you, will at
all times stir up Prophets and teachers, which may comfort and encourage
thee being in danger: that you give not over for any temptations, etc. And
truly, as appertaining to their return from Babylon, there wanted not then
such as might cheer them being tied many ways, and with new exhortations
daily confirm them. Of ye number were Ezra, Nehemia, Haggey Zachary, and many
others. But this promise does principally belong to the kingdom of Christ, who
to his Church (as the Apostle witnesses) always gives some Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, some pastors, and some doctors, etc: insomuch yt he
will have the ministry of his word to remain for ever with his Church, whereby
it may be both gathered together, and preserved. And it is worth the diligent
marking, yt both here and in many other places the ministry of the word is
reckoned, among the arguments of co^solatio^, yt we may learn to judge of it
rightly, and regard it as we ought to do. But unto many it seems a matter
of small weight, and the godly themselves do not always acknowledge the great
goodness thereof, especially when they have peace and quietness at will. But
when either the dangers of persecution, or inward broylings do arise, by and
by with great and careful desire of the mind they ask after the word, which
before they despised and cared not for.

The sum of the doctrine of the Church.
But let us in like manner note the sum of that doctrine, which must
continually be retained in the church. The Prophet in these two points does
comprehend it: Luke. 24.
Fear thou not, let not thine hands be letten down. And they agree with that
parting, which Christ himself made, who divided the preaching of his Gospel,
into like many parts, when he commands to preach repentance, and
remission of sins in his name. For hereunto belongs which he says, Fear
you not. For as much as the tremblinges of the conscience can no other way be
pacified then by sure remission of sins, which we obtain in Christ alone. Of
that part the Angel begins, when to the shepheardes that were made afraid
with a shining from heaven, he says, Luke. 2.
Fear not, for I bring you tidings of great joy, etc. But it must be referred
unto repentance, that he says, And let not thy hands be letten down. Namely
in performing those things, which God requires of us. But it is his will that
we should not only forsake our sins, and live holyly and without blame, but
also that we should be constant in faith and true religion, and that we
should not suffer our selves to be removed from it by any means. These two
things must always be coupled together in the doctrine of the Church, least
any should despair being swallowed up of the conscience of their sins, or
should use the color of grace and prosperous trust in the forgiveness of sins
licenciously to offend. But this place does principally condemn their sloth,
which when they hear, that the restoring of the Church is the work of God, do
forthwith let down their hands, and do disorderly let slip all occasion of
doing well.

He meets with dangers and conscience.
But there are two things that do principally hinder these matters. That is
to say, dangers or difficulties, which the world obiecteth without number: And
the guiltines of our sins, for the which we perceive that God is angry with
us: therefore he makes answer unto them both. And for the first he says
thus: The Lord thy GOD in the mids of thee is strong, he will save thee. He
repeateth the sum that he had spoken before, and the meaning is this. Thou
must not now consider what thou art able to do, or what the world would not
that thou should do: but what God requires of himself. For he is in the
mids of thee, and he is mighty, and able to do all things: he therefore
shall see you contending with the world and the prince thereof, and will give
you strength, whereby ye may wrestle out of all difficulties, or hardness of
matters, and will in the mean season wonderfully preserve you in the mids of
dangers. Having regard to the other point, he says, He shall rejoice over
the in joy, etc. He preaches the goodness of God, when he says that he will
not cast us away for our sins, so that rather as a loving father he will
rejoice in the familiarity of his children, yea he will quiet himself (says
he) in his lore. That is, he will not fill all things with frantic and
horrible outcries (as men that be wrathful, and having no stay of them selves
are wont to do) if he see us offend at any time, but because he loves us, he
will with silence ouerpasse many things, and will even wink at our faults,
as the husband that does pardon his wife many faults, if so be he perceive
her faithful in the covenant of marriage.

I know that others do expound it otherwise, that is here spoken of the
silence of God. But this meaning, as it disagreeth not from the purpose of the
Prophet: so it is confirmed by the example of the scriptures, which in an other
place by the similitude of silence does express the goodness of god, wherewith
he pardons our sins. For Isay prophesying of the meekenes of Christ, says.
Esaias. 42.
He shall not contend nor cry, neither shall any man hear his voice in the
streets, etc. But in this present place he repeteth for confirmation sake
that, that he had spoken, of joy, and says: He shall rejoice over thee with
joy, etc. But all these things are to be considered of us unto that end,
whereunto the Prophet spoke them to ye people of that age, namely that they may
provoke us to do our duties, that we suffer not our selves to be affrighted
either with the hardness of dangers, or guiltiness of those sins which we
have committed. For seeing ye love of God is so great toward us, our sloth
shall be detestable, yea and without all excuse, if we become more faint hearted
in doing our duties, and do therewith all not regard the glory of God, and our
salvation.

Of whom the Church is gathered.
But that the Prophet omit nothing, he returns again to the promise of
deliverance, and teaches what kind of people the Lord will bring again; and
then what shall become of the enemies thereof, as also of all them that worship
God. He comprehe^deth the first in few words, saying: From that time I will
gather together thine afflicted, etc. He says that he will gather them
together, namely that they may return again to their own, yt were dispersed
throughout all the provinces of the East. And that after a certain time, that
is when the appointed or foreordained time shall come This word moved is, in the
Hebrewe, which does not signify any time, but that, yt of purpose is
appointed as it were upon agreement unto some thing. But forthwith he adds
the cause, saying: They were of them: the burden of reproach was upon her. That
is to say, I will deliver them, because they be members of my Church, which
hitherto have borne the burden of reproach, that is, banishment being filled
with reproach and shame. But least this promise should either be doubtful, or of
small weight, he adds furthermore, because of the houge power of the
Babylonians, and says, Behold I will bring all them that have afflicted thee
in that day. As though he should say, there is no cause why ye should think,
that the power of your enemies shall diminishe any thing at all of my promises:
for when that appointed time shall come, they must perish together also.
Neither shall he need to come from far yt shall have strength enough to beat
the^ down: for behold even I yt rule over al, and at whose beck al things are
either destroyed or preserved, will show my self an enemy unto them, and will
take vengeance upon them, And save her that halteth, and gather her that was
cast out. etc. So he terms the people of Judea, which because they halted
very abhominably in religion, were cast out, and led away into exile. Neither
will I only (says he) bring her again, but get her praise and a name: that
is, I will make them notable and famous in all the Land of their shame, that is,
in their enemies Land, where hitherto they have been laid abroad to reproaches
and scornings. And that they may be the more confirmed in the truth of their
promises, he does repeat it almost in ye same words. In that time I will bring
you away (says he) and then will I gather you, because I will give you a
praise and a name among all the people of the earth, when I turn back your
captivity before your eyes, says the Lord. He calls their captiuities,
speaking in the plural number, because (as we said eue^ now) the Jews were
banished into diverse provinces. So that so many prysons might seem to be
prepared for them, as there were provinces, wherein they were held captive.
And he says, that he will do these things before their eyes, that thereby
he may declare, that this their deliverance should be famous: but immediately
he makes mention of the appointed time, yt they might learn with greater
patience to bear the abod of 70. years, which must first pass ere they be
delivered, as also to prepare them to the exercise of the cross. For we know
the nature of the flesh: which either dispiseth the promises of God altogether,
or being carried hedlong away, does think that they should quickly be expired.
But he hangs to as it were a seal, that accustomed and usual clause,
(says the Lord) which only is sufficient to prouok credence to these words:
but the history bears record, yt these things were indeed performed unto
ye Jews: for after these 70. years were expired, the Monarchy of the
Babylonians was translated to the Medes, and Persians, and the Captives had not
only liberty to return again, but were also let go with co^mendatio^ and
praise. etc. But because these things in ye end had their full acco^plishment
in Christ, the same therefore ought to be translated unto his Church, that we
may understand what shall be ye condition thereof for ever. Those that be
afflicted and oppressed, are gathered unto it. That is to say, such as in ye
Judgment of the world, of all men seem to be the outcastes: The condition
of the Church.
Nay the church consists of the halting Synagogue of ye Jews, and multitud
of the nations, which in times past were forenners, and expelled from the
covenant of God, as we have taught at large in the Prophet Michea. Mich. 4.
Where the matter is full of comfort, yt God does not always neglect his
people. But in their appointed time does gather them together again, whom he
seemed to have rejected for a time because of their sins: Moreover, although
the power of the enemies of the church, be never so houge and their outrage
never so untamed, wherewith they endeavor to stay the restitution thereof: yet
GOD partly by the spirit of his mouth, partly by his manifest power brings
them to naught, yt their counsels may va^ish into smok, and they themselves in
the end perish with shame, that cease not to strive against it. But he makes
ye godly that embrace Christ, to have a praise, and a name in all the earth.
For God preserves their memorial, and makes them glorious, although for a
little time they be hated of all men; and in the end suffer most shameful
deaths. This may be seen in the Prophets and Apostles, whose memorial even
at this day is celebrated over all the world, though in times past they were
reckoned the ofscowring of the world. Such is the state also of al ye Martyrs,
neither does it come seldomly to pass, yt the wicked enemies of the godly, do
bear witness of their innocence. So did Plinius Secundus declare the manners
of the christians to Traianus. And Cornelius Tacitus defends their report
against the reprofes of Nero, who would have had them blamed for burning the
City. Moreover God does every day bring again the captiuities of his Church,
and does after a wonderful manner restore it, even then when al things seem to
be in desperate case. Eternal glory in the heavens will follow in time to
come, and the crown of righteousness, that never fades, which the Lord has
prepared for all them that love his coming. Let us be constant therefore (O my
brethren) not made afraid with the attempts of the world, it rages in deed
without government. But let us remember that this is the last conflict of
Antichrist, and that, that wished for day is not far of, wherein the whole
frame of ye world shall with us be freed from corruption, but we shall possess
the promised kingdom with Christ Jesus our Savior, to whom all thanks
giving, honor, glory and power be given for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

