Balm from Gilead TO Recover Conscience. In a Sermon Preached at Pauls-Crosse,
October. 20. 1616.

By SAMVEL WARD, Bach. of Divinity, and Preacher of IPSWICH.

Printed at London by T. S. for Roger Iackson, and William Bladen, and are to
be sold near the Conduit in Fleet Street, and at the sign of the Bible at the
great North-doore of Paul's. 1618.

To the READER.
VOuchsafe, good Reader, in a word or two to understand the occasion of
bringing this MEDITATION to the Press, that was purposed only for the Pulpit:
the rather for that it comes not from the Authors own hand, who would no
doubt more exactly have polished it, could he have been persuaded to publish
it himself. But he, out of his modesty (as he delivered it, not like a
Scholar his Lesson learned without Book, nor brought with him any intent to
have it further made publi^e, so) could not be induced (though instantly
labored both by my self and many others, desiring further fruit of so learned
and religious ^ Labor) either to publish it himself, or to have any hand at
all in the publishing of it.

Howbeit at length, upon extreme importunity (rather to prevent the wrong
that by imperfect Copies printed he might otherwise sustain, then to satisfy
such as were earnest suitors to him for the same) he was with much ado drawn
before his departure from the City, to deliver his Notes to a friend, (with
reference of the whole business, to the judgment and discretion of others, to
deal in, and dispose of as they should deem sit,) who being present at the
speaking of it, with the Authors Notes, and his own helps, has done his
endeavor to pen it as near as he could, to that which by the Author
himself was then delivered. Which though it be not altogether verbatim the
same, yet it is hoped that there is not any thing material wanting, that the
diligent hearer shall desire: besides that he shall find some things over and
above, that straits of Time, and default of Memory were then a means to keep
back.

If any ask, what needed such importunity in this business, there being
already so many Sermons abroad, that even Printers themselves complain, that
the Press is oppressed with them? I answer: True it is, that there are
Sermons indeed abroad by some more then enough; but yet not enough (I dare say
it) such as this is, that deal so pit^ily, so effectually, in points of
practice so necessary, so ordinary, as this does; wherein Learning and Piety,
delightful manner of handling, together with profitable and useful matter, so
concur, that if it please not any, they are those alone, whose profane
palates can relish nothing that sauoureth of grace, though never so delightful
otherwise: if it profit not any, it is to be feared they are such, whose
corrupt Consciences are grown wel-neare irrecouerable, if not wholly incurable.

But I am lo^th to be long, where the work it self is not. This little be
spoken rather in way of Apology for my self and such others as urged the
publishing of it, then in commendation of the Work, which in the very reading
of it, to any judicious, ingenious, and religious, will sufficiently commend it
self. For my self, considering the general approbation given it by all sorts
that heard it, together with the earnest suites of many others, so in^tantly
desiring it upon their reports, and finding upon view and serueigh the thing it
self fully to answer both the reports of the one, and the desires of the
other, I was right willing and ready (as he speaks in Plato) though one
barren hitherto in this kind my self, Socrates apud Plat. in Theaet.
to perform some Midwiue-like office to another, for the further enlargement
of so generally blessed, and so deservedly desired a birth. Wherein if thou
shall chance to find any defects, consider ^ut (I pray thee) how hard a thing
it is for another (though not unskillful) to perfect a work that some curious
Artist has left unfinished.

And so wishing only, that it may through Gods gracious assistance, either
work into, or increase in thee a good Conscience, and the comfort thereof; I
leave the Work to thy perusal, and it to his blessing, whose gift a good
Conscience is, and with whom, beside the present comfort of it here, is a
plentiful reward reserved for it elsewhere.

Thine in Christ, THOMAS GATA^RE.

Balm from Gilead, TO Recover Conscience.
HEBR. 13. 18. For we are assured, that we have a good Conscience, desiring
in all things to walk honestly.
I Will use no other Preface, but the short one before my Text; and that not as
a Preface, but in way of earnest suite, Pray for me: For I desire this day, in
treating of a GOOD CONSCIENCE, both so my self to keep and discharge one, and
so to speak home to yours, that the dead Consciences may hear the voice of
God in my Text, and be quickened, the secure ones awakened, the troubled ones
comforted, the tender confirmed, the good bettered, and all receive some light
and life: that we may all depart hence in the peace of a Good conscience,
assured (with our Apostle) that we have a good one, desiring in all things to
walk honestly.

This work, God witnessing to my Conscience, I much desire to do; and in so
doing, I know I desire a worthy work: A work so highly and peculiarly
needful for these times, that a sharp Seer of them, was often heard to pray,
that God would stir up some to write and preach of this Argument: and another
to Augustines wish, That he might hear Paul preach, adds his own; That the
Text and Theme might be CONSCIENCE: they both saw it gasping, drawing on, and
dying; and therefore desired that some life might be put into and kept in it,
before it should be utterly overwhelmed in death and darkness.

The time indeed was, in the beginning of Time, when Adam by his first Sin
brought death upon his Soul, and caused it to reign over all the powers of
it, that this Faculty had most life left in it, like Jobs Messengers, to tell
news of the great loss. Scintilla reliq. rect^ rat^^is. Lips.
This little spark was left fresh, to show what great light had been
extinguished; but now this also through affected blindness and wilful malice,
is so smoothered and suffocated, through a daily custom of sinning, the eyes
of it so pecked out, the mouth so stopped, the very heart of it so wounded and
quelled, that (as the world justly complaynes) it is dead long since; yea, long
since buried in the grave of habitual sinning, with the stone of hardness
rouled upon it; that, as Mary said of Lazarus, the very name of it is grown
unsavory, odious, and I fear ridiculous in the ears of many. Is it not then
high time for the Lord to work? and for us to see if by crying aloud (as Elias
said of the dead Idol) we may fetch life again into it, which is the very
life of our spiritual life, and soul of our soul?

good parts, as they call them, neglecting this which is the WHOLE of a Man;
and despising Paul's Exercise, and Paul's Policy, Acts 24. 16. and 33.
To have a good Conscience before God and Man: Wherein men love preaching
indeed and knowledge, but not wholesome doctrine; Preaching to the Conscience
and knowledge of themselves, which makes this Pulpit and Churchyard full of
Polemicall and Schoole-diuinitie; while the plain, practical, and asketicall
part lies untilled and unregarded: which makes City and Country full of
Craft and Cunning, but void and destitute, not only of the power but show of
Conscience. All which makes me to choose rather with the Apostle to speak five
words to the Heart, 1 Cor. 14.
then ten thousand to the Ear; yea, one to show you a good Conscience, then
ten thousand to show all the Science in the world. Sermon you hear upon
Sermon, till this Manna^comes out at your nostrils: but as o^e said of Laws;
one is yet wanting for the practicing of all the rest. Now Conscience is the
spring of Practice, and the Wheel that must set all the rest on going: Is it
not high time to speak to Conscience, that we be no longer hearers only, but
dooers also?

Noah, in which Christ is pouring out his Viols upon the earth: and shortly,
wherein the Books shall be opened, these clasped and sealed Books of our
Consciences, the Contents whereof are now like Letters written with the Juice
of Orrenges, that cannot be read till it come to that fire which shall make the
secrets of all hearts legible; yea, every the least Fraction, even the least
idle thought or speech: all which are faithfully registered in them? Is it not
then high time to look into these Books, to cast up these Books; yea, to be
well skilled and versed in them, for the sake and rectifying whereof all other
good Books are written, that we might be able to pro^e and examine our selves,
whether upon good ground we can say with our Apostle; We are assured we have a
good Conscience? etc.

Which Text when I read and pronounce, which I do that you may well
understand, me thinks (...) hear Paul's voice, and discern ^is Spirit, as
the Maid knew Pe^ers voice. I hear him use the ^ike appeal in the very like
case, when the Hebrews accused him, and Ananias bad smite him on the ^outh; I
have in all good Conscience served God to this day.

In the selfe-sam^ case, when they hired Tertullus to paint him (...) with his
Rhetoric for a pestilent fellow, a troubler and commotioner of the whole
world, he^ used the like provocation; I endeavor always to have a good
Conscience toward God and man. The^ very like protestation against the
surmises of the same Hebrews, (...) 9. Yea, so often, that 2 Cor. 1. 12. (...)
calls this, and claims it as his own glory: This is my boasting, a (...)
Conscience. So that as we discern Ships by their Flags; so may we Paul by
this flagge of comfort and defiance, which he hangs out almost in every
Epistle; and if we may guess at the whole cloth by the List, this Epistle,
as this Triumph, is his: And worthily indeed becomes it this chosen vessel, to
glory in this choice Jewel, with which the whole world compared and weighed in
the Balance, will be found as light as dross and vanity, and without this,
Loss, Dung, and vexation of Spirit. For mine own part, when I view this
triumph, and the Apostle so frequently and so confidently using it; I profess
my self deeply affected therewithal. The world has many stately sights,
glorious objects, as namely strong Towers, tall Ships under sail, Armies under
Banners, sumptuous Buildings, pleasant Orchards and Gro^^s: but when I
represent to my self, when I seriously conceive and consider Paul, riding in
this triumphant Chariot, advanced above the reach of men's thoughts and tongues,
yea above all sublunarie changes, all the forementioned are in mine eyes, but
stately bables, pompous fantasies, painted Pageants. Did Paul in the fruition
of this, envy Agrippa's golden chain? No: It was but for manners sake Paul
excepted his Chain. And he that has this good, needs not envy, I say, not
any greatness here present: No not Nebuchadnezzers stalking in his magnificent
Galleries, built for his honor: The great Turk guarded with his Ianizaries:
The triple-crowned man of pride riding upon men's shoulders, and treading upon
Emperors necke^ Much less the rich Fool in the Gospel, with his goods
increasing* and Barnes enlarged: or the rich Glutton, with his delicate fare
and purple raiment, or any other glistering apparences of happiness* which
dazzle the eyes of the doti^^ world. Let become of the rest wh^^ will, so that
this be my Lot an^ portion (which ever let be my wi^^ above all wishes) that
through^ Gods grace and Christ's blo^d, (...) may have a good Conscience, and b^
assured that I have one, desiring i^ all things to walk honestly.

In which Text or (...),
Woofe of Scripture, which I may call Paul's Triumph, I find these Threads: 1.
The excellent matter, A good CONSCIENCE. 2. The glorious manner, A certain
confidence.

The Trophies are not mean and base, Seges gloriae.
but the richest gift which Christ ascending on high, left us to rejoice in, a
good conscience.

The boasting is not vain: Serius triumphus.
it is no fantastical opinion, no fanaticall Revelation, but a true persuasion;
we are assured: It Is no audacious presumption, but a grounded assertion, built
upon these four pillars, as so many Characters of a good conscience, 1.
Desiring, 2. In all things, 3. To walk or converse, 4. Honestly.

Now that we may more distinctly apprehend the Contents of the Text, and that
which is best of all, attain the scope and subiectmatter thereof, which is the
end of all, a GOOD CONSCIENCE; because many talk of Conscience, few know it; I
will first discover the Nature of it, which has been darkened by School
definitions, and Rhetorical descriptions.

Secondly, because many slips and bad ones go for current and good ones: most
brag of a good one, and fewest have it, I will show you the goodness
thereof, wherein it consists, how it is made good, and how it is distinguished
from seeming good ones, and how by four infallible Characters it is certainly
approved and known to be good.

Because it is a dead commodity, a Grape of Canaan, the sweetness whereof few
have tasted, and they that have it cannot utter it; I will shadow out the
excellency of it, as my poor skill and experience will allow me.

Lastly, when I have taught Conscience to know it self and it own worth; I
will set it a work to do it office in the application of the points of this
and al other Sermons.

Briefly collect and remarke the heads.

1. What Conscience is. 2. What a good one is; how it may be discerned from bad
ones, and known to be good. 3. How good a thing it is. And 4. What is the use,
office and effect of a good one.
The first part.
For the Nature of it. Things that are nearest, and most nearly concern us,
are commonly farthest off our knowledge and respect. As God, that is in us and
near unto us; our own faces and visages are hardliest known, hardliest
remembered. Some fools doubt whether there be such a thing in them, yea or no.
Origin thought it a Spirit or Genius, associated to our souls, to guide and
tutour them: but this is like some of his other conceits. The carnal Atheist
thinks it a melancholy humor of the body, and so thinks all the checks
thereof to be effects of Humor. The School men somewhat acuter, thought it,
some, an habit, some, an act of the soul. The latter Divines, a faculty of
the intellectual part: but the truth is, it is no such In-mate, no such Guest
of the soul, but an inbred faculty of it: A noble and divine power, plante^
of God in the soul, working upon it self by reflection: (...)
Or thus. The soul of a man recoyling upon it self.

A faculty I call it, because it produces acts, Hugo and Bern^^^us.
and is not got and lost as habits are, but is inseparable from the soul,
immovable from the subject, as neither acts nor habits are, which is Thomas
his chief reason to prove Conscience an act, quia deponi potest; the clean
contrary whereof is true, though indeed one might think some had laid aside
and lost their Conscience.

A noble faculty I call it, because so admirably strange in the reciprocal
working of it. The eye of man sees not it self but by the help of a
looking-glass: neither has any creature in this world this privilege and
property besides the soul of man. I give it room, and place it in the whole
soul, and thrust it not, as some have done, like a Spider, into some corner of
it, as if it were a part of a part; whereas the operation and power of it is
circumscribed in no narrower bounds then the soul it self, and therefore the
Hebrews more aptly call it (...) Heart or Soul, and the Grecians (...). If
our heart condemn us, 1 Ioh. 3. 20.

It has indeed the understanding for the Throne and Palace thereof, where it
is chiefly resident, whereby it exercises the principal functions, from
whence commonly it has it name Conscience; as the Emperor of Russia from
Mosco his chief City: and look how the soul it self is chiefly seated in
the head, and there performs the chief actions of Reason, Discourse and
Sense, yet is in all and every part of the body, and in them performs, baser
and meaner offices of Nourishment and Motion: right so the Conscience keeps a
complete Court in the whole Soul, commonly called Forum Conscienciae.

In the Understanding part it is a Judge, determining and prescribing,
absoluing and condemning de iure. In the memory, it is a Register, a Recorder,
and witness, testifying de Facto. In the Will and Affections, a Iayler and
Executioner, punishing and rewarding. Say we not in common use of Speech,
which is the Emperor of Words, My Conscience tells me I did or did not such a
thing, which is an Action of the Memory? My Conscience bids me do, or forbids
me to do this or this, which is but an Action of the Will: It smites me, it
checkes me, it comforts, or it torments me: what are these but Actions of the
Affections recoyling upon the Soul? But if any list to contend about these
subtilties, Conscience tells them, it has no such custom. Conscience falsely
so called, delights to languish about Questions not tending to Edification;
Let us rather turn our eyes, to behold and wonder at the Divine royalties and
endowments of it, it being in man the principal part of GODS Image, and that
by which Man resembles most the Autarchie and selfe-sufficiencie of GOD, which
I grant is proper to his Infiniteness, to be content and complete within it
self: but under him, and with his leave and love, this Faculty makes man
selfe-sufficient and independent of other Creatures; like unto those
selfe-mouing Engines, which have their Principle of Motion within themselves.
Thus, Adam when he was alone, was not yet alone and desolate, but might
converse with this his Conscience, as well as with a thousand Companions and
Acquaintances.

Secondly, God has given it more force and power to work upon men, then all
other Agents whatsoever: It being internal and domestical, has the advantage
of all Foreign and Outward. Man in this respect being like to the Earth,
immovable of all the winds, though at once they should blow from all the
points of the Compass, yet easily shaken by a vapor from within: whence it is
that the Approofes and Reproves of it, are so powerful and terrible, the one
chearing more then any Cordial, the other gnawing more then any Chest-worme;
tormenting worse then hot Pincers, boiling Caldrons, Rackes, Strappadoes, or
what other the cruelty of Tyrants has invented. If one had Angels daily
ascending and descending, as Jacob had to comfort him, it were not so
comfortable, or if langold or coupled to Devils, no more terrible.

Thirdly, it being individual and inseparable, there is no putting of it to
flight, or flying from it: Lyp^. Pol.
Ne^ fugere, nec fugare poteris. It was bred and borne with us, it will live
and die with us. Agues a man may shake off, Tyrants and ill Masters a man may
fly from: but this says (as Ruth to Naomi,) I will go with thee whether so
ever thou go. It has more immediate deputation and authority from GOD (of
whom all principalities and powers receive theirs) then Angels, Kings,
Magistrates, Father, Mother, or any other Superior. It Is only inferior to
GOD: It is a certain middle thing between GOD and Man, and has the dignity
of Earls and Nobles, that are Comites Regum. And so Paul is bold, Romans 9.
to call his Conscience a Co-witnesse with GOD; whence it has the Name
Conscience, there being no other Creature with whom it can bear witness: none
knowing what is in Man, save God, and the Spirit, or Conscience which is man;
which makes Paul join them in one Appeal, Romans 9. It Is his Spy and
Intelligencer in our bosoms and Bed-chambers; a most exact Notarie of what
ever we think or do: It Is his Lieutenant, and under him the principal
Commander, and chief Controler of Man's life, yea, every man's GOD in that
sense that Moses was Aarons. It Is the surest Prognostication and Prae-indgement
of GODS last Judgment, Praei^dicium extremi Iudicij. Tertul.
and best Almanacke within a Man's own breast, foretelling him what will become
of him at that day.

Wonderful is the Greatness and Sovereignty of it: Oh men therefore, and oh
Consciences, know your selves, and in this sense love, respect, and reverence
your selves more then all other Creatures, Friends and Acquaintance: If they
could speak, they would say to man's Conscience, as the people to David, a
thousand of us are not equal to thee in worth. It fares with Conscience as
with simple Constables; Many an Officer, if he knew his place, would stand
more upon it, and take more upon him then he does. The Husbandman were happy,
if he knew his happiness: The Horse were strong, if he knew his strength.
Conscience, if it knew power and authority, would not suffer it self, so to
be silenced, abused, snibbed, and kept under, being under GOD, the Lord
Controuler of the Soul, and Super visour of our life.

The second Part.
Thus have we seen in part the greatness of Conscience: does it not concern
us now to see the goodness of it; the greatness of it making it, if good,
nothing better, if bad, nothing worse; the surest Friend and the seuerest Foe?
Whose heart burns not within him, to hear wherein that goodness consists,
and how he may come by it.

The goodness of it, is the peace of it; for stirring, accusing, and galling
Consciences, are consequents of Sin, and presuppose some evil.

They secondly prove good unto us only by accident, and Gods goodness, which
makes them as afflictions, gather Grapes of Thorns: yea, all things work to
the best of his beloved, as Physicians do Poisons in their Confections.

And thirdly, they do not always produce this effect. Sometimes, as
Sicknesses and Purgations, they are in order to health, as in the Jews, Act.
2. Oftentimes as in Cain, Judas, Achitophell, they destroy their owners.

Good Consciences therefore, properly to speak, are only quiet ones, excusing
and comforting; but here take heed the Devil, the great Imposter of our
Souls, put not upon our folly and simplicity, three sorts of quiet ones, as
he does to most. The Blind, the Secure, and the Seared.

B^inde and ignorant Consciences speak peace or hold their peace, because they
have not skill enough to accuse and fin^ fault: they swallow many a fly, and
digest all well enough. While the scales were upon Paul's eyes, he was alive
and quiet: he thought Concupiscence, the sincke and breeder of all sin, to be
no sin. Such Consciences discern ^innes as we do Stars in a dark night;
see only the great ones of the first magnitude, whereas a bright Evening
discouers milions: or as we see a few moates in dark houses, which
Sunne-light shows to be infinite. Such think good meaning will serve the
turn, that all Religions will save, or a Lord have mercy on us, at the last
gasp: and that which is worst of all, they love to live under blind Sir
John's, seek dark corners, say they are not Booke-learned nor indeed will
suffer their Consciences to prove good Lawyers in Gods Book, least they should
prove common Barrettors. The Law which nature has engraven they tread out with
sins, as men do the ingrauings of tombs they walk on, with foul shoes: they
dare not look in the Glass of Gods Law, which makes sin abound, least the
foulness of their Souls should affright them. A number of such sottish Souls
there be, whose Consciences if God opens as he did the eyes of the Prophets
Servant, they shall see Armies and Legions of Sins and Devils in them.

In as pitiful a plight as this, are secure, sleepy, and drousie Consciences,
who see, but will not see; with whom Sin, Satan, and their Conscience is not
at Peace, but at Truce for a time: safe they are not, only secure they be and
careless. These sleep and delight in sleeping; and two ways especially, the
Devil pipes and luls them a sleep, by Mirth, and by Business. Ease and
Prosperity slayes some fools, Wealth and Heartsease, like Dal^^ah, rocks
them asleep on her lap: Jesting and merry tales, eating and drinking casts
them into a spirit of slumber, and puts their Sin and Judgment far away,
and makes them say they shall never be moved. While they prosper and flourish
in the world, their Consciences deal as Creditors with their debtors: whiles
they are in trading and doing, say nothing to them, but if once down the
wind, in sickness, crosses and poverty, then Arrest upon Arrest, Action upon
Action, then come the Fowls of the Air and seize upon the sick Soul, as the
Ravens upon sick Sheep, write bitter things against them, and make them
possess the sin of their youth. Mark this you that dwell at ease, and
swim in wealth in London. Your Consciences that lie still like sleepy
Mastiues; in plague times and sweating sicknesses, they fly in the throat:
they flatter like Parasites in Prosperity, and like Sycophants accuse in
Adversity. Business also and Cares of this life choke the Conscience, and
the voice of manifold employments drown the voice of Conscience, as the
Drums in the Sacrifices to Moloch the cry of the Infants. And such
Consciences are quiet, not because they are at Peace, but because they are not
at Leisure. Mark then you that have Mils of business in your Heads, whole
West-Minster-Hals, Bursses, Exchanges and East Indies, (as I fear many of you
have whilst I am speaking to your Conscience) that making have to be rich,
ouerlay your brains with affairs, are so busy in your Counting House and
Books, and that upon this very Day, that you never have once in a week, or
year, an hours space to confer with your poor Consciences; yea, when did
you? Let your Consciences answer within you. No, but if at a Sermon you
appoint them a time, and say you will, you disappoint them and say as Agrippa
to Paul, We will hear thee another time: and for the most part do as he
did, that is, never hear them again.

All these sleepers have but a ^rensie man's sleep; this Tranquillity will be
sure to end in a Tempest.

Yet in a more horrible case, and step nearer Hell, are such as sear their
Consciences with an hot Iron, harden them of purpose, as men do Steel, by
quenching the motions of them; brand them with often sinning against their
checking; fleshing tender Nouices with this counsel, when their Consciences
trouble them for any thing, then to do it the rather, and so they shall hear
no more of them: and so it proves through Gods just judgment giving them over
to a reprobate sense, that their Consciences serve them as Moses did Pharaoh,
having received many repulses, and at last commanded to come no more in sight,
forbear to lose any more breath unto him, but complained to God, who swept him
and his Host away with a final destruction.

When Tutors and Paedagogues are weary with Pupils, they give them over to
their Parents fury: these are (...), and to these villains there is no peace,
says my God, and my Text. These men^ Consciences if ever they awake, (as
seldom they do) they awake as Jonas, in fearful astonishment; and if they
sleep out this life till their long sleep, yet their Condemnation sleeps
not. Think of this you monsters, scorners, and mock-Gods, that forget your
Consciences, least they awake and tear you in pieces. Be not my Brethren
deceived with any of these deceiving Consciences; Children of darkness: Though
Conscience be not usually mocked, yet many deceive their own heart, Iam. 1.
26. for want of examination. Many say and think in their Consciences, that
they have good Consciences, when GOD says, Oh that this people had such a good
Conscience: and so Paul speaks in my Text, as once to Agryppa, Oh that you
were as I am, assured that you have a good Conscience, desiring, etc.

What then is a good Conscience? That which speaks Peace with Gods allowance,
which is a Messenger of good things between God and us, that upon good grounds,
is in good terms with God: It lies in the lawful peace of it, and not in
integrity and freedom from sin. If my Conscience accuse me not, yet am I
not thereby iust^fied, God is greater then my Conscience. If any Conscience say
to any man, he has no sin, it lies in the throat, and is a Liar. Adam
only had such a Paradise, such a good Conscience, walking with God, without
sin, without fear, in the state of Innocence. There is but one way now to
come to it: our peace* is now to be had by Mediation and Reconciliation; being
justified by Christ's blood we have this peace. In stead of many, mark one
remarkable place of Scripture for this purpose. If you ask what makes a good
Conscience, there is but one thing in the world will make it, Hebr. 9. 14. The
blood of Christ once offered by his eternal Spirit, without fault, purges our
Consciences from dead works. Yea, so admirable is the force of this blood,
that it leaves no more conscience of Sin within it. Heb. 10. 2.
This Lamb takes them away, and carries them out of Gods remembrance into the
Wilderness of Oblivion. If thy Conscience rage as the Sea, Christ cast into
it, as Jonas, whists all the waves of it. If the Law make it as Mount Sinay,
covered with darkness, the Gospel calmes and lightens it presently. If tossed
as the Ship where the Disciples sailed in the night, he rebukes the Winds,
and they are still: if the Devils rend and rage in it, he casts them out
presently.

The Iaylor came in trembling, ready to fordoe himself, Believe in Christ,
sent him out leaping and rejoicing. It Is strange how freely, effectually, and
speedily he quiets all. Oh all ill Consciences, hear and believe; this is the
honor, royalty, and peculiar dignity of Christ's blood, to pacify and make
good our Consciences! I do not so much admire at all his miraculous healings
of Diseases, Lepries, Blindness, and Lamenesse, Daemoniackes of all sorts, as
I do at his gracious and sudden quietting of the Conscience of Mary Magdalen,
of Zacheus, of Paul; and so the like virtue this blood has still, to day and
yesterday the same. Nothing else in the world has this virtue save his blood:
all other merriments have no more power to quiet Conscience, then Holy Water
and Charms to conjure the Devil.

I find in a French Comedy one brought in as troubled in Conscience for
sin, and he runs up and down like a Heart with an Arrow in the side, for
remedy, he buys a Pardon, runs to Shrift, whips himself, goes on
Pilgrimages; and all this while, like an Aguish man that drinks water, or
leapes into a Poole, his disease increases; then falls he to seek merry
company, to see if he can play away his trouble; but like Saul's ill spirit, it
returns with greater violence, and brings seven worse with it to torment. In
the end he finds Christ, or rather is found of Christ, and so finds peace,
and this is the good Conscience we speak of, to which being in Christ, there
is no Condemnation, no Accusation. Would thou purchase a good conscience at
an easier rate? would thou have it for sleeping? When thou have tried al
conclusions, come hither and buy salve for thy Conscience without money. When
thou have spent all thy time and money about what will not quiet thy mind, as
Alchimists smoke out all in seeking the Philosophers-Stone, here is that which
will do it; believe and prove, and thou and thy Conscience shall be safe and
quiet: this is approved, thus Paul got his. Yea, but is this all? Is it so
cheap and easy athing? May we now sing a Requiem to our Souls, lay the
reins on our necks cast care away, and do what we list? I fear not such an
objection from a true believing Conscience. They that prattle thus, know not
Ingeniu^ fidei and bonae Conscientiae, the good nature of Faith and a good
Conscience.

Let me not daube your Consciences with untempered Mortar. Faith as it
pacifieth, so it purifieth Conscience. Christ purges our consciences to serve
the living God, and after all his cures, bids the healed go away and walk
after the Spirit, and sin no more. There are indeed a generation of Libertines
and hypocrites that serve Christ, as Jews the 11. is reported to have served
his leaden Crucifixe which he used to wear in his hat, and when he had
blasphemed or done any villainy, he would pull it off and kiss it, and so sin
over and over again; like our common Swearers, that cry God mercy, and ask
him leave to abuse his Name again, and that wittingly and willingly.

These and such like, let their Consciences speak peace to them, as the Friar
in Stephan* absolved a Gentleman, that would needs pay well, yet would not
promise to amend his fault, in stead of an Absolution he pronounced a Curse
upon him in Latin, which he took for pay; Christ absolve thee, which I
believe he will not; and bring thee to Heaven, which is impossible.

Many Sentencs has the Master of Sentences borrowed from Ambrose, Lib. 4.
Did. 14.
against such Consciences, which I omit to rehearse, least as Abners body, they
hinder the passing of the people by. A good Conscience stands not with a
purpose of sinning; no, not with an irresolution against sin. He is a fool and
a vain mocker, no true penitent, that mournes for sin past, and yet means at
the same time to sin for the time to come. With which Sophisme the most perish
at this day, with this in their mouths; They believe on Christ, and have as
good a Conscience as the best, and yet walk in sin. But oh thou vain
fellow, show me Paul's good Conscience by Paul's proof, by his Desire in all
things, etc. Is Christ able to save thee, and is he not able to sanctify thee?
Let me with Tertullian, tell thee, that the promises standing true, thy faith
is false, and the Gospel remaining safe, thou shall perish.

Titus, a Tradesman or Lawyer here present, happily is desirous to have peace
of Conscience, is sorry for his oaths and frudulent courses this week past,
but knows he shall fall to the like the week coming, hates them not, and
means not to strive against them, but to return to the mire, my Text says
not to him, Go in peace, to such loose and licentious Consciences that make
Christ a bawd of sinning, and Faith a cloak of liberty. I have heard that the
Pope has sold a Pardon for a Murder past, with a dispensation annexed for the
next.: but Christ my Lord and master (as bountiful and gracious as he is)
grants no such. If he forgive that which is past, he gives at least so much
Grace, as to deny ungodliness for the time to come. To conclude this point;
thou desire a good conscience, without indending or conditioning, I bid thee
believe in Christ, and thou have one; yet take this, not into the bargain, but
as an after prouiso: Art thou willing to have a good Conscience, and to be
assured thereof, here follow four infallible Characters and marks of a good
one, which I desire you to mark attentively, and by them to try your
Consciences thoroughly. Hitherto I have showed how you may get one: now how you
may prove one. Here are four Elements or humors, which well compounded and
mixed, make up a perfect health of Conscience: if any one be wanting, or fail
in a just measure or proportion, Conscience is accordingly defective and sick.

The first, (...).
is that which must be the first in every good action, that is, the Will, that
the bent and inclination of that be set right. I would the word had been
plainly translated as it is in other places, verbatim, willing: It implies
first; that he that has a good Conscience, does not only do well, but wills
to do well, does it voluntarily, not forcedly, or out of external and
si^i^ter motions, but from an internal principle, a sanctified and rectified
will, which God accepts for the deed, and above the deed. Secondly, that he
does not only wish and faintly desire, which Translation may flatter an
hypocrite that has some sluggish lusts and some sudden good pangs and moodes,
and such as for the time little differ in sickness and starts from a
regenerate will: but the word notes a strong and settled resolution, a constant
purpose, and such as produces endeavor. He that will be rich, pierces
himself through with many sorrows, where the same word is used; I grant it
is Carnificina, a rack to a good Conscience, to say, It must always do well;
and contrarily, it is a true ground of comfort, to say, that a will and purpose
is sufficient testimony and approofe of a good one: but then it must be meant,
not every languishing and lazy flash of every wisher and woulder, but of a
willer; and this word is equal with the other two, which are good Synonimaes
and Glosses upon this, used by Paul, Act. 23. 24. I labor, or exercise my
self, and (...), I lay my policy, or bend my wit and will to have a good
Conscience, and to serve God, etc.

It may be said of some, They would be good, but they have no will to it. There
is none so prodigal or sloathfull but would be rich; Yet we say not, such will
be rich, that is, set it down, determine it vltimata voluntate. There are none
so wicked, but at some times would be good, and leave sin; but these
dispositions breed imperfect Essays and profers, ripen not, hold not, discern
not the name of Will. Corrupt flesh has many such Propensities and Bubles, and
is very prodigal in momentanie purposes, and promises; but David says, he
will keep Gods Commandments: I have vowed, sworn, etc. when Michol mocked,
I will yet be more vile; as resolute Swaggerers, whose Will is set and sold to
sin: They sin and will sin, say Preachers what they can. Ahab will go,
cry Micaia^ what he please; so Iosuah will serve God, let others do what
they will. Sanctified Will may be crossed, and captiued, and hindered, but yet
it holds it own bent, and ouercomes the Law of Rebellion, is predominant, and
can never be forced to sin, or to will to sin, without a curb in the
mouth, the more stiff and steady this Will is, the better Symptom of a good
Conscience.

Secondly, (...).
this Will must extend it self to (...); Though in many things our deeds
fai^e: which extent ^et Paul expound with a distribution, toward GOD and Man,
Acts 2. In duties Divine, Humane, of Charity and Piety, whatsoever is done for
Gods sake and for Conscience sake, is done equally: No man makes a Conscience
of one, but he that does of all: he that delights in the breach of one
Commandment, hates all the rest. The rich and precious box of a good
Conscience, is polluted and made impure, if but one dead Fly be suffered, I
say not, if one Fly of Infirmity light in it, against the will
forementioned, but if with our will it lie, and dye, and putrify in it. When
Christ purges Mary's conscience, he casts out not six but seven Devils,
yea, he leaves not one of the Legion remaining, not one spot of Leprie in any
one member, but says, Faith has made thee whole. Here I see many fall short,
and I pity to see so many civil men and hypocrites to come so near the
Kingdom of heaven and a good Conscience, and yet one thing is wanting. Foolish
Herod, that do many things and stickest at one: Foolish Ananiah, that spilst
and losest all thy cost with a small reservation. Foolish hypocrite, why take
thou pains to climb so high on the hill of Piety, and yet for one step of
injustice to thy neighbor, ascends not into Gods Mountain, though thou
come often into Gods Tabernacle. Thou civil honest man, why give thou
Alms, live fairly with man, and forgettest the maine, art so far short of
this All things, that thou forgettest that which should be all in all, that is,
Piety to God? Universal and Catholic obedience, is the best distinguishing
Touchstone of truth and falsehood, of good and bad Consciences. This
Universality must also extend to great and small duties. I say Universality,
not equality: A good Conscience mainely desires to please God in the great
Commandments, as Christ calls them, and then in every complement, in every
hoof and nail, so near as he can, yet observing a due proportion. It most of
all strains at gross sins, yet swallows not Gnats. It trembles a^ Wounds
and Blood, fears Faith and Troth. It abhorres Adultery, hates Daliance: It
pays Tithe-sheaues carefully, it detaines not Tithe, Mint, and Anniseede: It
says not, an inch breaks no square, and small faults must be wincked at; and
in this sense may well be said to be scrupulous, because it being tender feels
scruples: only here I lay a Caveat, that it be not erroneous, or ignorantly
dubious and scrupulous, like the wall-eyed or bird-eyed Horse, that starts upon
every shadow without occasion or cause: makes Conscience where God and his
Word makes none, makes many questions for Conscience sake. Light and
information is as good as tenderness, both together make an excellent
Conscience, and obiter for the sake of scrupulous Consciences, that desire
unfeignedly in all things to walk honestly, I give them these solemn charges.

First, that they study the peace of the Church.

Secondly, that they study their liberties.

Thirdly, that they be humble toward God and their Superiors, and willing to
illuminate and regulate their Consciences by the Word, and be established in
what they are to do, not admitting every fear of the contrary without ground,
yet remembering Paul's rule, to follow the Dictate of Conscience, rather then of
Angel, Potentate or Prelate, yea of Apostle. For, after the Apostle had
determined that, in the 14. to the Romans, he yet requires in the Eater a
Plerophorie, and blesses him that does it with consent of Conscience, and
makes all other Sin a Sin against Conscience, being worse then a Sin
against Man, yea, next to the Sin against the Holy Ghost. An erroneous
Conscience holds the Wolf by the ears, binds to the Act, frees not from the
fault: Oh therefore labor to get a Salve, and think not your own eyesight
to be sharper then the Eagles. Endeavor to inform your Consciences aright,
and having so done, be careful in all things to keep a good Conscience, and
that throughout the whole tenor and course of your lives, which is required in
the next term of Conversation.

(...)
Constancy, and Equality: there are in the life of Man many turnings,
references, and diverse respects, in all these; at every turn to be the same
Man, requires the (...) of a good Conscience: to (...) well, a Child or a
(...) may, but to walk even (...) turn hither and th^^her (...), argues
^^rength. A (...) or ^ broken paced Horse, may rack^ or stri^e a stroke or two
right, but to maintain the thorough-pace, at every stop and turn to be at the
command of the Rider, argues metal and goodness. This term is expressed by
Paul, (...).
Acts 23. 1. I have always, or thoroughly, to this day; and 24. 16. (...).
(...).
That is, without tripping or stumbling, or without oftence to other, etc. A
weak Conscience falls at every turn; godly in one company, profane in
another: a good one, as a Square Cube, is the same which way soever you turn
him: Turn him to God, to his Neighbor, turn him to company, turn him alone,
turn him loose to all occurrences, he holds his own, and wa^kes honestly. For
example, one day is the brief of a Man's whole life, and is a little life,
bounded with the Night and the Morning, as with Birth and Death: wherein a
conscionable man first turns to God in Prayer alone, then with his Family,
then to his Calling, then to his Recreation, to Society, Eating and Drinking,
and at night returns to God and his rest; in all these walking god^y, soberly,
righteously, and is able to say trulier then the Epicure at night, (...).
I have lived this day: I have walked honestly; he is a good Dayes-man, or
Iourney-man, or Tasker, which is an excellent mystery of well living and
Redemption of time, a working up our Salvation in holiness and righteousness,
all the days of our life: he that lets slip one days watch and work, may
sleep at night in a whole skin, but not in a sound Conscience. Turbid^ and
Lucid^ int^rualla.
Such crazie Consciences have, as broken brains, their good and evil days.
Conscience as a vessel may easily be kept pure and clean if rinsed every day;
but if it go longer, it gathers soil, and asks harder scouring by more then
ordinary Repentance. Daily washing will keep it pure and fair, which is the
last thing which is yet wanting to perfection, such perfection as is to be
found in the way: and that being added, will s^t on the roof and pinnacle upon
this building.

(...), Hones^ly, I could wish Hones^^e in truth (as ironically as the world
uses it) being only truly honorable, forcing honor from the breasts of
men, which is the seat of honor, which bravery does but beg. The word is
comprehensiue, and compasses in the fadome of it, as much as any or all the
other Aduerbs in Scripture, (...).
worthily, decently, accurately, circumspectly, gravely, after the best
fashion, or comely, praiseworthy, lively, famously. It notes the luster and
grace of an action, which makes our conversation shine before men, and sets out
Gods glory. (...), A thing that Citizen and Courtier much standvpon in their
Actions, yea all men now a days build, feast, wear apparel, not for bare
necessity, but for their credit, so as they may get honesty by them.
Unconscionable men slubber over their work, and think any thing good enough
for God, as in Malachie: and content themselves with reasonable service, for so
they translate that, (...).
Romans 12. Whereas Paul often requires Christians should be excellent ringleaders
in fair works; (...).
and provide honest or honorable things before men, and to possess their
vessels, much more their Consciences in honor, that they may be fit Temples
for the Holy Ghost. As Theodoret most divinely upon Exodus, look how the
Temple was adorned with the finest Gold, Silver, Silk, (...), etc.
Purple, Scarlet, Jewels, etc. So must thy Conscience, of which Temples this
was but a Type.

There is in every duty, besides the deed done, an honorable decorum annexed,
as in hearing, to hear swiftly; in preaching, to labor and to be instant in
season, etc. in giving Alms, to do it cheerfully; in trading to be at a
word; in payments and promises to keep day and touch: and thus it becomes a
Christian to exceed the P^arisee, and the civil man, or else it is not for
his, and his Masters honor.

David did excellently when he would not offer a Sacrifice without cost: The
woman that spent her costly Spicknard on Christ, the smell whereof perfumed all
the house, and holds the scent to this day: The Widow that gave all her
substance. Our honorable personages, how mean are they in allowances to
Ministers, in Alms to the poor, or any expenses, that respect GOD and their
souls. A good Conscience for the sake of this honesty, auoides and flies, not
only scandalous blemishes and stains, but all the least blushes and
appearances of evil, all brackish tasted things his stomach goes against
them: If he knew never so well Cards, Dice, Usury, Nonresidencie, Plurality
to be never so lawful, yet because they stand not with this honor, he will
none of them. He asks not what he may do with a safe Conscience, but with an
excellent one; not what is lawful and expedient, but honorable.

Thus have we seen the Apostle riding in this triumphant Chariot, drawn as it
were with these four horses, the four evidences of Conscience.

The first proves it good; the second, true; the third, strong; the fourth,
excellent.

He that has the Will, has the seeds of Religion, and is a Christian, and no
Atheist.

He that wills in all things, is a sound Christian, and no hypocrite,

He that conuerseth or walks, is a grown Christian, no babe or weakling.

He that walks honorably, is an excellent Christian, no ordinary one.

He that has all these, may well say and glory with the Apostles confidence,
that he is assured.

He that has them not, as most have them not, may well conclude, We are
assured our Consciences are evil and impure, willing to sin, and walk after
the flesh.

The word is Paul's word, (...).
and yet he speaks it in the plural number by way of Syllepsis, changing the
number, because he would have it the word of every Christian. (...) is a word
of as good certainty as (...), it seconds and binds it, as the better word,
Romans 14. I know and am assured. Of it as of the root, springs (...), for all
Bellarmine would eleuate it. It imployes a grounded persuasion, not from
Inspiration or Revelation, but from Arguments and Experience. (...).
Faith is the subsistence and evidence; and the persuasion or assurance of a
Christian is as firm as is any worldlings for his estate; yea, a thousand
times surer. You rich men think your selves sure of estates here upon earth,
but we Christians know our selves sure of heaven. Conscience knows it self,
as well as Science any Principle, or Sense any Object. Without which
certainety, Christians were of all men most miserable. Popery and Nature, and
the old Leven of Pelagius newly worse sowred by Arminius, never having had
experience of this Plerophorie, serve Christians, when they boast of this their
confidence, as Ananias did Paul, strike them on the face with the term of
pride and presumption; yea, stick not to give them the lie; but such betray
themselves with their own noise. I would ask them but Paul's question, Do not
you know? If they answer as usually they do, No; nor they think any man
living on earth: I would pray them to mark what follows, Except you be
reprobate, reffuse, or reiectanij, as yet in the state of Reprobation, for
ought they know.

Indeed it becomes the strumpet and adultresse to doubt of her husband, and not
to call him Ishi, Hose^ 2.
but let him mark (says Bernard) the Spouses language; My beloved is mine and
I am his. See (says he) what a good Conscience dares do. Habet Ecclesia
spirituales suos qu^ fiducia^iter agunt cum Christo: The Church has her
spiritual ones that rely boldly on Christ, or confidently; the very term
that Bellarmine excepts against. And, Id audet vnus, quod audet vniuersit as;
Ego puluis and cinis etc. Yea, every particular person dares do as much as the
Catholic Church; I that am dust and ashes dare apply this to my self. And
Tompson upon that Text. These things (says he) are not written, (...)
for I know not what ayrie Notions or Idaea's, but for me and thee. Without
which, who would be a Christian? A man's Conscience is deep and deceitful, but
the spirit of man, especially helped by the Spirit of God, and upon examination
and trial, may and does know as well (says Augustine) his Charity wherewith he
loves, as his brother whom he loves; and if his Charity, then his Faith.

Three Scioes I find in the end of John's Epistle. The Major or Proposition is
Gods Word; The believer is saved. The Minor is assumed by Gods Spirit and the
Conscience, two sufficient witnesses, fortified and assisted by many pr^misses,
by the compass within, the landmarkes without, Faith, and the fruits of Faith.
Do thou believe, says Christ? I believe, says the man. And this is the
Restipulation of a good Conscience in Baptism, and in every true believer.
Credis? Credo, was the ancient form, which answer, all wauerers must reuerse
and innovate. Latitudes of assurance I grant in Babes and old men. David knew
when he came to Hebron, that God meant to establish the kingdom to him and
his, which he knew before, but now with a confirmed knowledge. The Ba^lances of
the Scoale shake and tremble at the first, after the weight is in a while it
settles and rests: and so our Souls. And even this Certainty is of the nature
of all precious Faith, though experienced Faith increases it. It Is this
Confidence that makes a good Conscience, this valor makes the value of it
invaluable and invtterable.

The third Part.
Look upon my Text, and see how valiantly by the right and interest of it,
Paul first challenges and commands prayers, even at the hands of the Jews.
Who waters a dry stake with any heart? what comfort has Peter to pray for
Simon Magus in the gall of Bitterness? but with what hope of audience might he
pray for Cornelius, and such as he was? So John for Gaius and the Elect Lady,
walking in the truth; not so for Diotrephes. Secondly, see how he begs, not
their good opinion and good words of him, though he knew they had strange
surmises and suggestions of him from the false Apostles; to be a very Proteus
and Polypus, the graund Cheater of the world, but in stead of Apologies and
Captation of good will, he relies to this Fort, passes not for man's day: he
is happy enough without them: he carries his comforter in his bosom and
breast, and has a selfe-sufficiency. A dependant and beholding happiness is
half a misery, like Mils that cannot grind without wind or water, Saul
cannot be merry without a Filder: Ahab without Naboths vineyard: ^aman without
Mordecayes courtesy. A good Cons^^^nce without Music, or Money, or Honor, is
happy and merry a^one, and is like the late Eng^n of the perpetual Motion.

As rich men stand upon terms, I can live by you, and without you: so says a
good Conscience to the world.

It lays claim not one^y to the prayers and communion of Saints, but to the
attendance of Angels. As Luther is said to have said, they are Cooks and
Butlers to this continual feast: they ascend and descend to them with messages
from Heaven. Christ, as Ahash^erosh with Hester, delights to suppe with such.
The holy Ghost takes up in them his aboade and temple. See in the Canticles how
Christ is inamoured with the beauty and familiarity of his Spouse, and they
often mutually inuit one another to walks and feasts.

Thirdly, which is more, in the fail of all other comforts; yea, in despite
of the greatest discomforts and disgraces that can be, in the greatest storms
and stresse, in the foulest weather, this Ship reigns and rides at Anchor,
as in a Harbor and Lee, hangs out the Flag of comfort and defiance. Let the
Jews think and speak what they will, it stirs not Paul: he soars like an
Eagle, not respecting the chitting of Sparrowes; is above the scourges and
razors of tongues.

I am much taken up with admiration, when I read Acts 27. How Paul in the
angry Adriaticall Sea, at midnight, when the tempestuous Euroclydon blew, after
fourteen days want of meat and light, when the Mariners despayred, how
courageous he was: but I wonder as much and more, to see his Conscience pass
with top-saile and banners displayed, through the Sea and waves of good report
and bad report; to see him singing and praying at midnight in the Dungeon, all
manacled and fettred, in a wounded skin, but whole and merry Conscience.

Censures and rumors, the world is full of: who escapes? Not Paul himself; yet
is above them, and gives a secret Item to all such as censure him, that they
wronged him in judging a good Conscience. The fashion is, to judge and c^nsure
all courses we reach not, or savor not; and so we smite many a good
Conscience. In this respect what need have we all of good Consciences, seeing
tongues spare none^

There be three days especially, the day of Sickness, of Death, of Judgment;
in which Comfort is worth a world, and then all worldly comforts and
comforters, like runaway Servants and drunken Seruing-men, are to seek when
one has most use and need of them, as Job complains of the Brooks of Teman
in the drought of Summer: which makes the triumph of the wicked ( Job 20.)
momentany, and as a ^^ght Vision, when as the Prophet said, One dreams of
bread, and wakes hungry. In these times you shall see the merry and jolly
worldling hang the head like a Bul-rush, and the Ruffians brags lagge like a
starcht Ruff in a storm. How do such droope, even in old age, and say, the
days are come, wherein there is no pleasure? The storm comes after the rain,
that which is worst, an ill Conscience like a Blood-hound hunts dry-foot, and
brings the scent of sins of his youth; whereas the Conscience of a well-passed
life is the staff of age, Pabulum senile, better then all the Sack and
Sugars, and such pitiful comforters. When the stomach fails, and the
grinders wax few, and appetite cease, this is a continual feast. In the
decay of sleep, this is a Downe-pillow. In all our tribulation, this Simon
helps us to bear our crosses. In all our evil days, it is at hand. It
sustaines the infirmities of the body. When Princes sat in counsel against
David, this was his Jonathan to solace him. When the Lion roares, the righteous
is bold as the Lion, and fears not what man can do unto him.

But if once Death begin to look us in the face, how does Naball dye like a
stone? How do Achitophel and Judas dye the death of cowardly Hearts and Hares,
pursued with the full cry of their sins, which makes them dead in the ne^
before they dye: then a kingdom for a good Conscience. Then send (as in the
Sweating sickness and the Plague) for Mr Minister, but alas he is come, he
can but speak to the ear, and all in vain, unless God open the Conscience
to hear and be quiet, to hear and embrace comfort. But when speech fails,
and all thy Senses shut up their doors and windows, then who or what can
avail but a good Conscience? When thy Wife and thy friends do augment thy
grief with parting and loath to depart, as Paul's friends broke his heart with
weeping; then this only and alone dies, or rather lives with thee, and seeing
Land approaching, bids thee be of good comfort. More cheerfully have I seen
it make some dye, then other wed.

All the Martyrs from Stephen the Proto martyr, down to the last that suffered,
are clouds of witnesses: it has enabled them to embrace their stakes, clap
their hands, leap, as Doctor Tailor did, within two styles of the stake, or
(as he said) of his home and Fathers house.

Lastly, at the Last day, and after the last day, when all these shadows shall
fly away, this substance shall abide. A good Wife is a good thing, but Sarah
must part with Abraham; and these relations shall cease in Heaven, but a good
Conscience, attended with good works, shall follow: and the better it has
been here, the better in degree it shall be there, the wider entrance and
entertainment it shall find there. When all Books shall perish, and Heaven
melt like a Parchment scrole, this Book shall be of use; when all Devils and
damned shall tremble, and wish the hills to cover them, this shall lift up thy
head, for thy redemption approaches: when neither friends, nor a full purse
shall plead, nor the wicked stand upright in judgment, then, then, welfare
a good Conscience; then shall conscience have it mouth opened, tongue untied,
and God will bid it speak. Happy he then that has an excusing one, miserable
he that has it an accusing adversary.

Yet still further: Faith and Hope are excellent things here in this valley;
these shall cease, but Conscience abides. A good one was a petty heaven upon
earth, a mount Tabor, a glimpse of glory here: a bad one was a Hell, a
Purgatory, or Limbo, at the least, tasting of the flashes and smoke of hell: but
hereafter how intolerable shall be the horror of the one, and how
inconcei^eable the joys of the other. Without this worm that dies not, hell
should not be hell; without this continual Feast, heaven should not be heaven.
Next the happy vision of God shall be the company of a good Conscience, and
next to that ^he Society of Saints and Angels.

The last part.
But oh Lord, who believes our ^eport? or to whom is the benefit and
excellency of this creature of (...) revealed? Oh Lord, to whom shall we
speak and apply what has ^een said? You the sons of men ^aue ^ost your
hearing, charm we ^euer so wisely, thunder we never (...) earnestly, you
despise us Mini^^ers. You think we come hither to play our prizes, to speak
out of form, and not of Conscience, or to speak out of choler and passion.

Besides, if you would hear us, we are Strangers to your secrets, to your
hearts and ways; we are confined to our Cells and Studies, and are not
acquainted with the Tithe of the worlds villainies: besides, when the
Houre-glasse is out, we can say no more to you, and perhaps shall never see
you again; but your Consciences know you, though happily you be strangers to
them, they compass your paths, your lying down, and accustomed ways.

I will therefore turn my speech (as the Prophet to the Earth and Heaven) to
your Consciences. Hearken oh Consciences, hear the word of the Lord. I call
you to record this day, that it is your office to preach over our Sermons
again, or else all our Sermons and labors are lost. You are the cuds of the
Soul, to chew over again, against your reproves, and against your secret and
faithful admonitions what exception can any take, your Balm is precious, your
smitings break not the head, nor bring any disgrace. GOD has given you a
faculty to work wonders in private and solitude. Follow them home therefore,
cry aloud in their ears, and bosoms, and apply what has now, and at other
times been delivered.

Conscience. If the house and owner where thou dwell be a Son of Peace,
let thy Peace, and thy Masters Peace, abide and rest on him: that Peace which
the world never knows, nor can give, nor take away. Be thou propitious, and
benign, speak good things, cherish the least sparks and smoke of Grace: if
thou find desire in truth, and in all things, bid them not fear and doubt
of their Election and Calling: With those that desire to walk honestly, walk
thou comfortably; handle the tender and fearful gently and sweetly: be not
rough and rigorous to them, bind up the brokenhearted, say unto them, Why art
thou so disquieted and sad? when thou see them Melancholy for losses and
crosses, say unto them in cheer, as Elkanah to Annah: What do thou want? am
not I a thousand Friends, Wives, and Children unto thee?

Clap them on the back, hearten them in well doing, spur them on to walk
forward, yea wind them up to the highest pitch of Excellency, and then
applaud them: delight in the Excellent of the earth.

Be a light to the blind and scrupulous.

Be a Goad in the sides of the dull ones.

Be an Alarm and Trumpet of Judgment to the Sleepers and Dreamers.

But as for the Hypocrite, gall him, and prick him at the heart; let him well
know, that thou art Gods Spy in his bosom, a secret Intelligencer, and wilt
be faithful to God.

Bid the Hypocrite walk in all things.

Bid the Civil, add Piety to Charity.

Bid the wavering, inconstant, and licentious, walk constantly.

Bid the lukewarm and common Protestant, for shame amend, be zealous, and
walk honestly.

But with the Sons of Belial, the profane Scorners, walk ^^^wardly with
them, haunt and molest them, give them no rest till they repent, be the gall of
bitterness unto them; when they are swilling and drinking, serve them as
Absolons servants did Amnon, stab him at the heart: yet remember so long as
there is any hope, that thine office is to be a Paedagogue to Christ, to wound
and kill; only to the end they may live in Christ, not so much to gaster and
affright, as to lead to him; and to that purpose, to be instant in season and
out of season, that they may believe and repent.

But if they refuse to hear, and sin against thee, and the Holy Ghost also:
then shake off the dust off they feet, and either fall to torment them before
their time, and drive them to despair; or if thou give them ease here, tell
them thou will fly in their throat at the day of hearing, when thou shall and
must speak, and they shall and must hear.

Conscience, thou have Commission to go into Princes Chambers and Counsel
Tables: be a faithful man of their Counsel. Oh that they would in all Courts
of Christendom set Policy beneath thee, and make thee President of their
Counsels, and hear thy voice, and not croaking Jesuits, Sycophants and Liars;
thou may speak to them; Subjects must pray for them, and be subject for thy
sake, to honor and obey them in the Lord.

Charge the Courtiers, not to trust in uncertain favors of Princes, but to be
trusty and faithful, as Nehemiah, Daniel, Joseph, whose Histories pray them to
read, imitate, and believe, above Machiauels Oracles.

Tell the Foxes and Politicians, that make the Maine the by, and the by the
Maine, that an ill Conscience hanged Achitophell, overthrew Haman, Shebna, etc.
Tell them it is the best policy, and Salomons, who knew the best, to get and
keep thy favor, to exalt thee, and thou shall exalt them, be a shield to them,
and make them as bold as the Lion in the day of trouble, not fearing the envy
of all the beasts of the Forest, no, nor the roaring of the Lion, in righteous
causes.

Conscience, Thou art the Judge of Judges, and shall one day judge them; in the
mean while, if they fear neither God nor man, be as the importunate Widow,
and urge them to do Justice, Oh that thou satest highest in all Courts,
especially in such Courts as are of the Jurisdiction, and receive their
Denomination from thee: su^^er not thy self to be exiled, make Foelix tremble,
discourse of Judgment to them.

To the just Judges, bid them please God and thee, and fear no other fear:
assure them for what ^u^r they do of partiality or popularitie thou will
leave them in the lurch; but what upon thy suite and command, thou will bear
them out in it, and be their exceeding great reward.

If thou meetest in those Courts, and find any such Pleaders as are of thine
acquaintance and followers, be their fee and their promoter, tell them if they
durst trust thee, and leave Sunday works, bribing on both sides, selling of
Silence, pleading in ill Causes, and making the Law a nose of wax, if they
durst plead all and only rightful Causes, thou have riches in one hand, and
Honor in the other to bestow on them.

As for the Tribe of Leui, there may thou be a little bolder, as being men
of God, and men of Conscience by profession. Be earnest with them to add Con
to their Science, as a number to Cyphars that will make it something worth.

Desire them to preach, not for filthy lucre or vainglory, but for thy sake;
wish them to keep thee pure, and in thee to keep the mystery of Faith:
assure them thou art the only Ship and Cabbinet of Orthodoxall Faith, of which
if they make shipwreck, by laziness and covetousness, they shall be given
over to Popery and Arminianisme, and lose the Faith, and then write books of
the Apostasy and Intercision of Faith, and a good Conscience, which they never
were acquainted withal, nor some Drunkards of them ever so much as seemed to
have.

And whereas thou know that many of all sorts are discouraged with the
taxation and slanders; some that confer, some that are fearful and
doubtful, if they do it to the Lord and thee (as who knows but God?) bid the
world as Paul does here, turn censuring into praying; and if they will not,
let them as they preach thee, so regard thee in all godly simplicity, (...).
and expect their reward at the hand of the great Shepherd.

For the City, get thou into the high places, into the Pulpits, into the
Entries and gates of the City; cry aloud, and utter thy words in the
streets: Oh that thou were free of it, and had freedom of speech and
audience in all their Courts and Companies, and that for thy sake they would
make and keep wholesome Constitutions for the Sabbath, and orderly keeping of
it, and see that well executed and observed, which is the Nurse of all Piety
and Conscience.

Charge them that are rich Citizens, and in their Thousands, that they lay no
weak Foundation, no three halfe-penny Foundation, but be bountiful to pious
uses, to the poor, and to the Ministry of the City, that they take away the
scandal of the times, and vpbrayding of the Romish Penninuah, against the Anna
of our times: Let the Hospital, Widows and Orphans, taste of their bounty;
with such Sacrifices (if they come from Faith and a good Conscience) God is
pleased. Bid them not trust in the shadow of silver and gold, which will
wither as Ionahs Gourd; but in thy shelter. Go home with them this day, I
inuit thee to their Table; if I had liberty (as they say it is a courtesy for
the Preacher to inuit a guest,) Conscience, thou should be my guest.
Defer not till to morrow, lest business hinder thee. This day reckon and
walk with them, and talk with them: Bid them lay aside all (...) Books, and
reckon (...) and often reckoning will make you friends.

Be at their elboes when they use false weights and Balances, and give them
privy nips: let the mutual profit of Buyer and Seller be the rule of buying
and selling, and not the gain of the one of them alone. Assure them that are
hourders by fraud, that they hatch as the Hen, the Partriges Egg, that has
wings and will fly away; and that they heap up wrath against the day of
wrath, and are in the mean time selfe-condemned; whereas thou would make
them rich, and add no sorrow, nor grauelly greet in their mouth, but such
gain as will stand with content and selfe-sufficiencie.

If thou meetest with Simonaicall Patrons, tell them, they and their money
shall perish: for selling thee and the Souls of the people.

I have not, as Ezechiel, a Map of the City, but thou know all the lurking
Dens, Stews, and infinite Books. I send thee to preach and cry unto them.

Roar and thunder in the ears of the roaring Boys, of all the swaggering
Crew, and tell them they must for all these come to Judgment.

To the Fashion-mongers, both the statelier sort, and the lightheaded
yellow-banded Fools, tell the one, that the richest lining and inside, is a
good Conscience: And for the other, if thou will vouchsafe, tell them, that
plain apparel and a good Conscience, will do them more honor, then all
these Apes-toyes.

As for the Players, and sesters, and Rimers, and all that rablement, tell
them, thou will one day be in earnest with them, and though thou suffer them to
personate thee upon their Stages, and show their wit, and break their Jests on
thee now, thou will owe it them, till they come upon the great Stage, before
God, and all the world: Where my sides, memory, and knowledge fail, add,
enlarge, and apply: Print it in the hearts of as many as thou can, and the
Lord grant thee Grace and Audience in their ears, that they may suffer the
words of Exhortation, and so I end with the Prayer after my Text, which is like
a rich garment, that has facing, gards, and seluage of it own.

The God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, the great
Sh^pheard of the Sheep, through the b^ood of the everlasting covenant, make you
perfect in all good works, to (...) his will, etc.

(...) O Lord, that have wonder (...) planted and formed our Con^ci^nces within
us, that only know stand searchest our Consciences, that have thy Chair in
the Heavens, and only art able to teach them, and purify them. Thou which
woundedst, and healedst 3000. at one Sermon, whose hand is not shortened:
stretch out thine arm, and do the like in these latter times.

Forgive the Sins against thee and our Consciences, and the frequent checkes
of it and thy Spirit.

Ouertbrow the man of Sin, that Tyrant and Usurper of Conscience.

Mollify and enlighten the obstinate Consciences of the Jews, Turks, and
Pagans.

Illuminate and sanctify all Christian Princes, especially our Sovereign, and
^ill the royal treasure of his Conscience full of excellent comfort: and that
he may as much excel in Conscience all other Kings of the Earth, as he does
in Science, without all comparison.

Comfort the aflicted, direct the doubtful and scrupulous, and remove all
snares and scandals of weak Consciences, which thou have not planted, and
which thou know are not for the peace of thy Sion.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God our Father, and the
comfortable fellowship of the Holy Ghost, and the peace of a good Conscience,
be with you all now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
IETHRO'S JUSTICE OF PEACE. A SERMON PREAched at a general Assizes held at
BVRY St. EDMVNDS, for the County of Suffolk.

By SAMVEL WARD Batchelour of Divinity.

LONDON, Printed by Augustine Mathewes, for John Marriot and John Grismand, and
are to be sold at their Shops in Saint Dunstones Churchyard, and in Paul's
Alley at the Sign of the Gunne. 1621.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sr. FRANCIS BACON Knight, Lord Chancellor of England,
etc.
WHen we see one go or do amiss, though his feet or hands be the next
actors and instruments of his error: yet we say not, Are you lame? but, Have
you no eyes? or Can you not see? What ever sweruings or stumblings any part of
the holy politic maks, the blame lights not upon the Gentry or Comminalty,
the immediate delinquents, but on the principal lights in Magistracy or
Ministry, which being as Guardiants and Tutors of the rest, should either
prevent or reform their aberrations. And herein miserable is the condition of
these two opticke pieces, that they are more subject, and that to more
distempers then other inferior parts: yet herein more, that being hurt, they
are more impatient of cure; not only of searching acrimonous waters (which yet
often are needful) but shie of the most soft and lawny touches: but most of all
in this, that being once extinct, they leave a void darkness to the whole
body, exposing it to the pits of destruction. As exceeding great on the other
hand, is the happiness, honor and use of them, if clear and single. For this
our National body, it will little boot either to applaude the one, or to
bewail the other: I rather wish and look about me for some eye-salue, which
may help to descry and redress, if any thing be amiss. And behold here
(Right Honorable) a confection promising something thereto: It was prescribed
first by Iethro, whom Moses calls the eyes of Israel, Number. 10. 31. And newly
compounded by an Oculist, of whom as I may not, so I need not say any thing at
all. Next under the sacred Fountain of light (the light of our Israel) I
worthily account your Lordship most sufficient in law to accept, to make use,
to judge, to patronize it. The subject of the book is the principal object of
your Office, to elect, direct and correct inferior Magistracy. To which
purposes, Nature, Literature and Grace have enabled you, that if you should
fail the worlds expectation, they will hardly trust any other in have. Many in
rising have followed the stirrup, pampered and letting honor not standing the
ground, but once seated have done renownedly. But your Lordship had never any
other graces them your birth and desert; to which, hereditary dignity has so
gently tendered it self, that you have not let fall your name of religion in
getting up. Therefore now you are in the top of honor, all that know you look
you will be exactly honorable. For my part, bounden to your Lordship for a
favor formerly received, greater then your Honor knows of, or I can
express: I shall leave Iethro to be your Montoir, and my self remain ever an
humble suitor to God, who has made you a Judge of conscience, that he would
make you continue a conscionable Judge, improouing your place and abilities to
the best advantage belonging to it, the furtherance of your reckoning at the
last day.

Your Honors daily Beadsman, NATH. WARD.

EXODUS 18. 21. 22. 23. Moreover, thou shall provide out of all the people able
men, such as fear God, men of truth, hs^ing covetousness, and place such over
them, to ^ee rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties,
and rulers of tens.

And let them judge the people at all seasons: and it shall be that every great
matter they shall bring unto thee, but every small matter they shall judge: so
shall it (...) easier for thy self, and they shall bear the burden with thee.

If thou do this thing, and God command thee so, then thou shall be able to
endure, and all this people shall also go to their place in peace.


IF Iethro were, as the fashion of those times, and the Nature of his style
will bear, and (as some conceit) both Prince and Priest; Cohen.
then was he beyond all exception, every way qualified; for skill, as a
Judicious Divine; and for experience, as an aged Governor, to give direction
in matters of Magistracy, and to cast Mo^ses a mold for a Policy in Israel.
Sure I am, a godly and religious man he was, for he begins with prayer and
ends with sacrifice. And such as himself, was his advise, sage and holy. And
howsoever it passed from him at the first under Gods correction, yet afterward
allowed by God and practiced by Moses, becomes of good policy, sound divinity;
of private counsel, a general oracle: ruling for the substance of it, all
ages and persons.

(...). ^gnat. ad M^^rian Cassob.
coins and Statues: who passes by a crystal fountain be^ring some ancient
name or date, and tastes not of it, though no thirst prouokes him? Such is
this, the clear head-spring of al ensueing brooks in Scripture and other
(...) concerning Magistracy. All those texts (which I wish were set as a
frontlet between the eyes and as a seal upon the hearts of al in authority
Iehosaphats charge, 2 Chro. 16. 5. Job his character, cha. 29. David's vow,
Psas. 101. The scattered Parables of Solomon, and passages of the Prophets,
chiefly that round and smart one Isai. 33. 14. are they not all branches of
this root? In which respect it must needs be of souaraigne use for the
discovering and reforming of whatsoever error time has soyled government
withal. How are defaced copies and disfigured pictures better amended, then by
reducing them to their original? if the pipe fail, go we not to the head?

Here is the Archetype or first Buc^r to press upon Edward the sixth, for the
purgation of his offices and Laws, from the dross and filth contracted under
the (...) confusion: which considering, that worthy Josiah of ours took in
such good part, and practiced with such good success. Yea, Moses himself
learned in all good litterature, trained up in Court, the greatest Law giver
that ever was, and father of all Law-giuers, of the thrice great Hermes,
Lycurgus, Solon. Plato, Justinian, and the rest. Yea, Gods familiar favorite,
faithful in his house, known by name and face, honored with miraculous
power, etc. And that at the hands of one (age and fatherhood excepted) his
inferior. I trust that none will dare to reject or slight it of, remembering
that Divinity, as the mistress takes upon her to direct her hand-mayd, and
that the Scripture is the best man of counsel for the greatest Statesman in
the world: This little portion thereof containing in it more then all Lipsius
his Bee-hiue, or Machiauels Spider-web. All which will best appear by the
opening of this rich cabinet, and viewing the several Jewels in it, which are
these.

The parts of the Text. Division.


It first gives order for the care and

Provide.

Secondly, it directs this choice by four essential characters of
Magistrates.

1. Men of ability. 2. Fearing God. 3. Men of truth. 4. Hating covetousness.
Thirdly, it applies these four to And place such over them to be rulers. 1.
of thousands. 2. of hundreds. 3. of fifties. 4. of tens.

Fourthly, it prescribes to the Magistrates, viz. to judge the people in the
smaller causes, etc. and their assiduity and industry therein. And let them
judge the people at all seasons, etc. And it shall be that they shall bring
every great matter to thee, but every small matter they shall judge.

Lastly, it propounds the blessed fruit and emolument that will necessarily
ensue thereupon. First to Moses himself, So shall it be easier for thy self,
and they shall bear the burden with thee, and thou shall be able to endure.
Secondly, to the people, And all this people shall go to their place in peace.

Techezeh, Provide, or look out. A word implying all exactness and curiosity
incident to elections, Circumspection.
as Inspection, circumspection, inquisition, suspicion, information,
deliberation, coming of Chozah, to see or contemplate, whence the Prophets
were called Chosi, Seers. It is in a manner translated by a word of the like
force in a business of the like nature* Acts 6. 5. (...), survey the whole
body of the people, and choose the best you can cull out. It were somewhat
strict and strange to say, that Prayer and fasting must be used: And yet this I
find practiced in such cases, Acts 1. and Numb. 27. 16. Let the Lord God of
the spirits of all flesh set a man over this Congregation. Yea, Iethro himself
sanctified this his advice with a prayer, verse 19. God be with thee. And good
reason he should be called to counsel whose the judgment is, and whose
providence is always very special in those elections, whether sought or no. 1
Samuel 19.
If God supravise not, Samuel the Seer shall take seven wrong before one
right. Some men's faults are palpable, and go before election, some are
cunningly concealed and break not out till after. First, therefore look up to
God, and then amongst the people, have thine eyes in thy head, all the care
that may be will be little enough. Say not there are no sufficient persons,
nor yet think every one that thinks himself so, or commonly goes for such, is
sufficient: seek out such, and such may be found. Look amongst the Olives,
Vines, and Flg-trees: such trees must be climbed. Brambles will lay hold on
the sleeue for preferment. Ne sit qui ambit. Let him never speed that sues. Lay
hands on none rashly. They that are fit and able, must and will be sought to;
yea, haled out of their ease and priuacy into the light of employment: the
charge and danger whereof they waighing, as well as the credit, or gain, and
knowing them to be callings, will not meddle with them, till they be called to
them. Which ambitious Inconsiderates not being able to ponder, much less to
sustain, thrust their shoulders under, and either by hook or crook come in,
or climb into the chair of honor, more tickle then the stool Eli brake his
neck off: whither when they have aspired with much travail and cost they fit
as in the top of a mast in fear and hazard, and often fall with shame and
confusion. Not unlike to some rash youth, that having gotten an horse as wild
as himself, with much a do backs him, sits him in a sweat, and comes down
with a mischief.

For the prevention of all which evils Iethro's counsel was and ever will be;
That such be provided, not as would have places, but as places should have.
Which care, as Iethro commits to Moses, so both the Scripture and reason
imposes upon the superior Magistrate, in whose power and place, it ^s either
to nominate or constitute inferior Authorities: and whose fault chiefly it is,
if they be otherwise then they ought, or the people injured in this kind. How
circumspect and religious ought such to be, in the performance of this greatest
and waightiest duty.

Iethro a simple meaning old man. A beaten Politician of our times, learned in
the wisdom of newer state, and acquainted with the mysteries of the market,
that knows how to improve things to the best, for his own time and turn, and
to let the common body shift for it self, would have proiected Moses a far
more commodious plot, after this or the like manner: Now you have offices to
bestow, a fair opportunity in your hand, to ma^e your self for ever, to raise
your house, to pleasure your friends, eie^h^r proclamime it openly or secretly,
set it abroach by some means or other, see who bids fairest, weigh the
sacrifices, choose the men of the best and greatest gifts.

Oh gall of bitterness! oh root of Tanqum sub^asta.
The partic^lar branches whereof, when I seriously consider, I wonder not that
Christ with such zealous severity brake down the banks, and whipped out the
chapmen ^ut of the Temple: nor that Peter with such fiery indignation banned
Simon and his money. For if such ^en and money perish not, Kingdoms and
Churches must perish, and both Civil and Ecclesiastical Courts will soon
prove dens of thieves.

Whose soul bleedes not to see often the sellers of them. I would the fault
rested only in benefices, and reached not into offices and civil dignities.
Indeed that kind of purchase we call not simony, it may from his other name be
fitlier styled magic, for by I know not what kind of witchcraft, men sin
by leave and law in these civil purchases. The laws and statutes provided for
the remedy of the evil in some cases, tolerating it in other, and the practice
by means of this allowance growing intolerable. Some of the^ (as the world
reports) offices for life and at pleasure, amounting to the rate of lands and
inheritances.



Does not Bucer deal faithfully Julius, ^ustinianus, or Theodosius their laws
give allowance to any? See then how prouide^tly Iethro prouides against this
Hemlock-root of Justice? out of whose prouiso I conclude that which Augustine
saw in his time, and dear experience confirms in others: Aug. lib. 10. de
(...). Dei. cap. 14.
That such as prouid themselves places, and are not provided for them; come
into them, and execute them, not with a mind of doing good, but domineering;
not of providing for others welfare, but for their own turns. Le^ us pray,
that if it be possible this fault may be forgiven and amended.

And not this only; but another Generality.
met withal in the very next clause of my text, Among all the People (Mical
Hagnam*) Where Iethro restraines not Moses to his own Family, to any
particular Tribe, or to the richer sort: but requires this freedom, as well as
the former circumspection. Generality and impartiality being requisite to the
good being of a choice: and limitation and restraint the very banes of
Election; yea, contradictions to it. As if one should say, you shall choose
amonst twenty, but you shall choose this or that on^: Does he not in effect say
you shall not have your choice? will a man when he goes to Market be confined
to any shop or stall, if he mean to provide the best? How grossly is the
country wronged and befooled, chiefly in the choice of such, as into whose
hands they put their lives and lands at Parliaments, by a kind of Conge
defliers, usually sent them by some of the Gentry of the shires, persuading (if
not prescribing) the very cople they must choose. Thus have we seen Naturalls
tied to a post with a straw, which they durst not break.

This text bids you know and stand

The second Part.
It teaches you how to order and

These four whosoever is compounded Candidati, and to be chosen: but also of
such as are invested and already in place to approve or reprove their
condition. And for this end and purpose, let us use them this day, as four
waights of the Sanctuary, whereunto whatsoever Officer here present, from the
Judges to the Bayliffes, shall not answer: This Text (as the handwriting on the
wall) shall say unto him from God; Thou art waighed in the balance, and found
too light, and thine Office (at least ought to be) taken from thee.

The first Character or weight Ability.
The first and prime mark is Ability (Anishi Chaijl). So our new translation
expresses it well in a comprehensiue word, and so I find it in Scripture
signifying and comprising all the seueralls that belong to faculty or
ability: whereof I number first three complementall for conveniencie;
secondly, three substantial and of necessity.

First Chaijl includes strength of body Strength.
such as inableth them for riding, going, sitting, watch^ng, and industrious
execution of their (...): Such as the scripture commends in Caleb at fourscore
and five, and stories in Vespatian, our Alfred, Hardicanutus, Ironsides, etc.

Which our straight buttoned, carpet Wealth.
wanting, cannot endure to hold out a forenoon (...) afternoon sitting without
a To^acco bait, or a game at Bowls, or ^ome such breathing to refresh their
bodies and minds, little acquainted with the tediousnes of wise and serious
business: Woe to the people (says Solomon) whose Princes are children and
eat in the morning; and blessed are ^he people whose Governors eat in time
and for strength. Eccles. 10.

Secondly, neither is wealth to be excluded: That Diana of the world, which it
only accounts Ability, and calls it opes and potentia, which yet is better
called value then valor, yet may it concur to make up that which our Law
term calls mieulx vailiant; and though at the beam of the Sanctuary money
makes not the man, yet it adds some metal to the man.

Ad populum phaleras, which taught Agrippa to come to the Judgment seat with
pomp, state, and attendance like that of our Sheriffs not to be neglected, as
that which procures some terror and awe in the people: which Alexander well
advised of, left his Gigantique armor behind him among the Indians, and used
more state then at Greece.

(...)(...)
the Sophistry of government, as one calls them: and as Zachary the Prophet
says, the instruments of a foolish Governor. And such as Jeremy derides in
Shallum the son of Iosia, Ierem, 22. 14.
Think thou to rule because of thy large building, Cedar seeling, painted
with vermilian, did not thy Father prosper when he did execute judgment and
Justice? which is indeed the truth and substance, the other but the flourish.

Thirdly, I exclude not birth and Birth.
which many times conveyes spirit and courage with it, Blessed is the Land
whose Princes are the sons of Nobles. Eccles. 10. 17.
Eagles produce Eagles, and Crows Crauens, yet regeneration and education
often corrects this rule: and experience tells us, That cottages and ploughs
have brought forth as able men for the gown and sword, as Palaces and
Scepters. Judge. 6. 19
Gideon came out of the poorest of the family of Manasse, and he the least in
his fathers house, a poor thresher. David was taken from the sheepefold etc.
yet both mighty men of valor, and special Saviors of their people: and the
wisdom of some of our neighbor Nations is much to be commended in this, that
if they discern an excellent spirit and faculty in any man, they respect not
his wealth, or birth, or profession, but choose him into their Magistracy and
weighty employments.

1 Wisdom and experience.
the three following of the maine and essential to Magistracy, all comprised
under the word Cha^l, as first wisdom and experience, which the Preacher tells
us is better then strength, ^ceies. 9. 16.
either of body or estate. And of this ability Moses expounds this word in his
practice, Deutr^. 1. 15. which is a good Commentary upon his fathers advice.

Monstrum cui lumen ademptum.
but a blind Polyphemus, or a monster without an eye. If he want either skill
in the laws, or observation of his own, must he not be tutored by his
Clarke, as it often falls out? or shall he not be misled by some Counselor,
crossed and contradicted by every stander by, that shall tell him this you
cannot do by Law, or I take it you are besides your book.

The second is strength of mind, to 2 Moderation of mind, or equanimity
which he that weilds at will, is stronger then he that subdues a city and
conquers a Kingdom, to bear and forbear, and to order the mutinous
perturbations of the mind, is that ability which the Grecians call (...).

Very requisite in a Judge, who must and homeliness of common people in giving
evidence after their plain fashion and faculty, in time, and multitude of
words, happily with some absurdities of phraise or gesture, nor impatient
toward their foolish affected eloquent terms, nor any thing else whereby the
truth of their tale may be ghessed at.

Geneua translation, Courage or Magnanimity.
that fortitude, valor and magnanimity, which we call courage and spirit;
typified in Judah the Law-giuing Tribe, whose emblem or scutchion was the Lion
Couchant, that sits or lies by the prey without fear of rescue, that turns
not his head at the sight of any other creature, Prou. 30. which Solomon
symbolized in the steps of his throne adorned with Lions: The Athenian Judges
by sitting in Mars-street. (...)
Some think that from this virtue Constantine was termed Reucl. 12. the
Churches male or manchild: others apply it to Luther: others to Christ, the
true Lion of Judah

And though I regard not the Salick because the God of spirits has often put
great spirits into that sex; yet I mislike not Theodorets observation upon that
in Leuiticus, (...) (...).
where the Ruler for his sin is enjoined to offer an he goat, the private man
a sheegoat. The male suits the Ruler best, and the female the ruled.

This ability is so requisite, that it is Moses charge to Joshua, and David's to
Solomon. And experience has taught, that where this one has abouuded, though
the other have been wanting in some Magistrates: they have done more good
service to their Country, then many others who have had some tolerable measure
of the rest, but have failed only in this.

Had not the principal posts of an rulers and standarts that regulate other
measures, to be made of soft wood or of lead, that will bend and bow^
pleasure? do men choose a startin^ horse to lead the teeme? had no the need
be of David's valor, and San^^sons courage^ that must take the (...) out of the
Lions mouth, and rescu^^ the oppressed from the man that (...) too mighty for
him? had not he nee^ to be of some spirit and resolution that must neglect the
displeasure and ^^ownes, reject the letters and suits o^ great men and
superiors?

the clamorous, rumors, and sometimes the flatteries of the vulgar, which
often intoxicate able men, and make them as weak as water, yielding and giving
as Pilate, when he heard but a buze that he was not Caesar's friend, and saw
that in dismissing Christ, he should displease the Jews.

What heroycal spirit had he need Hydra of sin, oppose the current of times,
and the torrent of vice, that must ^urne the wheel over the wicked; especially
such roaring monsters, and rebellious Chora's such lawless sons of Belial;
wherewith our times swarm, who stick not to oppose with crest and breast,
whosoever stand in the way of their humors and lusts? Surely, if lethro called
for courage in those modest primitive times, and among a people newly tamed
with Egyptian ^okes: what do our a^dacious and fore-headlesse Swaggerers
require? our lees and dregs of time; not unlike to those wherein God was feign
to raise up extraordinary Judges, to smi^ hip and thigh, etc. What Atlas shall
support the state of the ruinous and tottering world, in these perilous ends of
time?



Gedeon in the ears o^ all the faint-hearted. Whosoever i^ fearful and
timorous, let him depart from mount Gilead, and there departed twenty thousand;
Judge. 7. 3.
and yet God the second time, out of the remnant, viz. ten thousand, defaulks
all the lazy persons, and reduced that huge army to three hundred able persons.

It were excellent for the Commonwealth, Gedeon, with God and the Kings
offices.

On the contrary, it says to all men Gedeon, The Lord is with thee thou mighty
man of valor, go on in this thy might to save Israel, etc. What is our office
that are Ministers, but as Gods Trumpetters and Drummers to encourage, hearten
and put life in those that fight his battles and do his work. By the virtue
then of this my text, I say to every good-hearted Magistrate, proceed and go
on from strength to strength.

Job, Job 28.
Silver has his vein, and gold his mine where it is found, i^ (...) is taken
out of the earth, and brass moulte^ out of the stone, but the place of this
ability is not to be found in the land of the living. Nature says it is not to
be found in me, Wealth and Honor says not in me: It is false ly said of Cato
and Fabricius, that the Sun might sooner be stayed or altered in his race then
they in the course of Justice. The stou^est and the richest will yield. But
David t^lls his son Solomon on his deathbed, where he shall find it. Th^^e
O (...), is greatness and power, (...) the head of all riches; honor and (...)
hands, (...)
it is in thee to (...), etc. This God has taught David to break a bow of
steel with his hands: It is he that loses the collar of Princes, girdeth
their loins, and vngirdeth them again, befooles the Counselor, the Judge and
the spokesman: He it was that made the shoes of Joseph as strong as brass,
Jeremiah as a wall of brass, Calch as strong at fourscore and five as at
forty; if Sampsons hair be off, and God depar^ed from him, he is ^s other men,
and ^he can strengthen him again without his locks at his pleasure.

If any man want wisdom or

It is the fault of many Christian Magistrates, ever to be complaining and
groaning under the burden: as if ease and dilicacie were to be sought for in
government. What if there be a Lion in the way? the righteous is bolder then
the Lion: what if thou be weak? is not God strength? and does not he perfect
his strength in our weakness? what if there be many opposites in the way? true
courage is strong as death, Cant. ^
and will trample all under feet without resistance.



Eccles 7. 14.
that knew what he said, wisdom strengthens one man more then twenty mighty
Potentats that are in a city, he that fears God shall come forth of all
dangers. Whence by way of passage, note that the next point of the fear of
God, is that which gives life to the foregoing, and to the two following
also: and is placed in the text, as the heart in the body, for conueying life
to all the parts; or as a dram of musk, perfuming the whole box of ointment.

Fearing God.
Iethro must be understood not of the poor bastardly slavish fear, The second
Character.
which depraved nature has left in all: nor Foelix, Balshazzar and Caligula
were not void of, and yet never the better Magistrates: But such a filial
fear, as faith and the assurance of Gods love and salvation breeds; such as
awed Joseph, Cornelius, David, etc. This is the fear required by Iethro, (...)
quae parit (...), godliness which breeds an heedfulnesse in all our ways and
actions.

Without this fear of God, what is ability but the Devils anuile, whereon he
forgeth and hammereth mischief? what is wisdom but subtilty? what is courage
unsanctified, but injustice? wherein is such skill in the laws commonly
employed, but in coloring and covering bad causes and persons, and in making
the laws a nose of wax to private ends? other men have other bits and
restraints, but men in authority, if they fear not God, have nothing else to
fear. Wherefore Christ ioynes the^ well in the unrighteous Judge, that he
feared neither God nor man. If he be a simple coward, he fears all men, if a
man of ability, he fears none at all.

Sampsons cords, which he^ snapt asunder, as fast as they were offered him. The
common sort of our people count the oaths that men take when they take offices,
no other then formal: so they distinguish them (a strange distinction) from
other oaths of contract, and dally with them accordingly.

They discern God no more in Judas; and runs them headlong into all periurd
courses: which makes the land to mourn for the contempt of oaths, and neglect
of duties. What is the ground of all fidelity to King and Country, but
religion? welfare Constantinus his maxim, He cannot be faithful to me, that
is unfaithful to God. Why then, what are oaths for Athests and Papists, other
then collers for monkies necks, which ^lip the^ at their pleasure? such
neither are nor can be good subjects: muchlesse good Magistrates. (...).
Papists will keep no faith with Protestants, let Protestants give no trust to
papists though they swear upon all the books in the World. Nulla sides haben da
papistis (...)


Cato or a Gallio, who bears the sword in vain for God and his ends; who
never minds any thing but his own Cabinet, or the ship of the Commonwealth at
the best: for the other, sincke they swim they, all is one to him, he took no
charge, nor will he take notice of them.

Paul Gods Minister and sword bearer: Io^^ 3. Romans 13.
yea, the very form and soul of such an one: yea, it troubles me to make it,
but a part which Solomon calls the whole of a man, Eccles 12. 13.
especially such a man who is sent of God, 1 Pet. 2.
for the praise of the godly, and the punishment of evil doers. In which
respect being the maine of my Text, give me leave to give you a short character
of such a Magistrate, as this quality will make him, where ever it is found in
any good latitude.

He is one that came into his place by Gods door, and not by the Devils
Olanes upon the flead skin of his father Sylannes, nailed by Cambyses on the
Tribunal: or as a Russian Judge that fears the boiling caldron, or open
battocking: or the Turkish Senate, when they think the great Turk to stand
behind the Arras, at the dangerous door.

Deutro. (...). 18.) a copy of the law of his God before him, and reads it all
the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and to
keep the Commandment without turning aside, either to the right hand or left.

little ones, nor afford a good look to a varlet, nor yet so to respect their
persons, ^s to wrong their cause, for he knows all these to be abomination to
his Lord, into whose hands he dreads to fall as knowing him a consuming fire,
and one that has provided Tophet for Princes. When an unlawful suit is
commenced by power or by friendship, his heart answers (if not his tongue) with
Job: How shall I do this, and answer God when he comes to judgment.

As for bribes, he dares not look

When he comes in court, he fixes nor behind him for bribes, Summ^boni Iudicis
est ne^ respicere, neque circumspicere. sed su^picere. Ferus in Job. 5. 30.
but upward on God: generally considering that Christ is Lord Paramont of all
courts of justice, and that now his father has resigned all judgment into his
hands. He stewards all to his content, promotes his profits without wrong to
the Tennant. Looks so to the Church, that the Commonweal receive no
detriment: and so to the Commonwealth, as the Church shall surely flourish: so
countenancing the servants of God, that he wrong not the worst worldling:
maintains piety, and neglects not equity: keeps his house well, but his
Church better: in frequenting whereof, he with his family are presidents to all
the hundreds where he dwells: And in a word, does as much good by his example,
as by his authority.

This is the godly man, whom the Lord chooses and guides, whose praise and
reward is of God: which David having found true in his life, a little before
his death, records to al ages. 1 Samuel 23. 2. 3. 4.
The spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his word was in my tongue. The God of
Israel spoke to me, the strength of Israel said, thou shall bear rule over
men, being just, and ruling in the fear of God. Even as the morning light when
the sun rises, the morning, I say, without clouds, so shall mine house be,
and not as the grass of the earth is by the bright rain. For God has made
with me an everlasting covenant, perfect in all points and sure.

Let the Devil and the world storm they are but all as ciphers in Gods account



Deputies for him, Imps of his Kingdom, far better becoming an Ale-bench,
then a Shire-bench, and the bar, then ^ Judgment seat.

But what shall I say to such mock-god-like Esau's^ shall I take up the words
of Moses: if thou will not fear this glorious name, The Lord thy God, I will
make thy plagues wonderful, and of great continuance: Or those of David, which
perhaps will fit them better and these times of imminent changes, They know
not, and understand nothing, they walk in darkness, albeit the foundations of
the earth be moved: I have said ye are Gods, but ye shall die like men, and
fall like others. Or will they suffer the Prophets exhortation, Isa. 52. 8. 12.
13.
who art thou that dreadest a mortal man, whose breath is in his nostrils,
whom the moth shall eat like a garment, and the worm like wool: And
forgettest thy maker, that has spread the heavens, laid the foundations of the
earth, that gives the first and latter rain, that has set the bounds to the
sea, Ier. 5. 22. 24
etc. Or will they hear Salomons end of all? Fear God, that will bring every
secret to judgment: or a greater yet then Solomon, Fear him that is able when
he has killed the body, to destroy the soul also in hell fire for evermore.



Men of truth.
Without which, The third Character
show of religion audacity, or wicked impudency. And therefore this character
added to the former, ioynes those which are in the form of Iurates, and ought
to be in all Offices, good men and true.

This style, men of truth, admits two Israelite, a true Nathaniel void of
guile, as truth is opposed to hypocrisy, (...).
or else a lover of the truth, as truth is opposed unto falsehood. One that in
particular cases, suites, and controversies between man and man, counts it his
honor to sift out the truth, maintain the truth, stick to it, not suffering
himself to be misinformed by Tale bearers, Prompters and Sycophants: nor
misled and perverted by the false pleading and coloring of consciencelesse
Counselors: But brings judgment to the balance and rule of righteousness,
and delights (as the hound does naturally in senting out the hare) to search
and trace out the truth, out of all the thickets and dens of iuggling and
conueyance, laboring as much to boult it out by examination in Hypothesi, as
the philosophers by disputations in These: being of his temper that worthily
said, Plato is my friend, Socrates my friend, but the truth is my dearest
friend. Or like Job, Job 29. 26
who covered himself with Justice* and to whom Judgment was as a robe and
crown, who when he knew not the cause, sought it out diligently.

David, Psalm 101. 7.
abandons all liars out of his household: whereas of a Prince that harkneth to
lies, all his servants are Liers. And of such Justice, which is in truth and
for truth, I say (as of old it was said) neither the evening nor the morning
star equals it in brightness. (...)


and utterly perished from among men, Isa 54. 4.
Judgment fails and stands a far off, equity enters not. The common trade
of the times, being to weaue hes in all cases, esepecially against the true
servants of God. And the common weakness of the times, to receive the sla^ders
which are broa^hed and bruited by tongues set on fire from hell: so that he
that refraines from cunning, makes himself a prey, the Latin whereof was all
that Lewis the eleventh would have his son to learn: Qui nescit dissimulare
nescit ^i^ere.
and is al^ the policy that most ^udy and practice: Insomuch that the common by
words are, that when men swear by faith and truth, they swea^e by Idols that
are not, names they are and notions, things they are not, nor substances:
Jewels they are but such as use them 'die beggars: honorable Ladies and
Mestresses they are, but such as follow them close at the heels, may have
their teeth dashed out of their heads.

Well, let deceivers thus deceive Tiberius his Art, or the Devils rather, the
father of the Art, of dissimulation. In the end they shall prove it to be most
pernicious to the Students and Masters of it. Let the children of truth
justify their mother, which has the reward of honor in her right hand, and
of wealth in the left. And if it should be attended with hatred and crosses for
a time, yet he that is Amen, the true witness, yea truth it self, will
reward them in the end: when he shall shut out with the dogs, all such as love
and make lies; with whose exhortation I close up this lincke, and knit with the
following, Buy the truth and sell it not, which he that means to do must be

A true hater of covetousness,
The fourth Character. Prou. 17. 4
Else will Salomans several proverbs tongue. He takes the gift out of the
bosom to wrest judgment. Acceptatio ^^uneris est pr^^aricatio veritatis.
Acceptance of gifts prove commonly preuaricatio^ to the truth. It is
impossible to be a champion to Truth, and a slave to Mammon: but he must love
the one and hate the other. It is best therefore to hate the worst, yea the
worst of al vices incident to magistracy: the root of all evil, which if it be
not rootod out of the Magistrates heart, it alone will poison all the three
former qualities required in him. Neither strength, nor religion, nor love of
the truth, shall be able to preserve him from enchauntments of covetousness.

Which being an inordinate love of (...).
an evil concupiscence of having more then God has allotted, or a lawful
course affoordeth: is such a kind of Idolatry, as transformeth the worshippers
of this golden calfe into Idols themselves, Ex^d 27.
making them to have eyes that see not, ears that hear not: only leaving them
hands to handle that which peruerteth the eyes of the wise. Deuteronomy. ^6 19.
It bores out their eyes, and makes them as blind as ever was Sampson and
Zede^iah.

Eyes you know are tender things, Ezek^ 3 8.
And a drams weight iniected, incline the golden scales of Justice to win^^
side they please.

There is such a strange bewitching Bul^ams deceiptfull wages, that he that
will admit them for Justice, (...)
shall soon take them for injustice, if the right hand be full of bribs the
left hand must be full of mischief. The Devil as well as the Briber lays
his hooks in this sharp, whereof he that is greedy, and will needs be rich,
falls into his snare, and many other ^oysome lusts, 1 Timothy 6.
which sinck men into perdition, peirceth their souls with sorrow, their names
with reproach ^ cause them to swerue from the truth* and make shipwreck of a
good conscience: Eue^ the most precious things are vile and cheap in his eyes:
to whom money is dear, he will not stick with Ahab to sell even himself to
work wickedness for the compassing of that his soul loves and longs after.

But thou oh man of God fly these Ammon did Thamar, first thrust it out of thy
heart, and shut and lock the door after it. Secondly, Heb. 13. 5.
let thy behavior and conversation be auerse and strange from the love of
money. (...).
Let all sordid and ff^^hy^u^re he abominable: all ill gotten goods exeerable*
let them stincke in thy nostrils, as ill as Vespatians tribute of urine.

Shake thy lap of bribes with Nehe^^miah Bernard (...) Eugenius, Trees vt de
sub (...) cres^ ai^ neq^^ qum, sed vt ipsi de ^e.
How the people may grow rich under thee, and not thou by them. Remember the
end of B^b^ms wages, and of Judas his bag. And wish with Damianus rather to
have Gehazies lepry, then his curse intailed to thee and thy posterity, and
inheritance after thee: fretting thine estate as a canker and moth, consuming
your flesh as fire, and crying in the ears of the Lord of hosts for vengeance.

Pharisees laugh at Christ his w^es, because they were covetous: And so do
they serve all our cauears against covetousness, applauding themselves and
laughing in their sleeves, when they behold their bag^ in the chest, and their
lands from of their Turrets, saying to themselves, What is a man but his
wealth? What is an office but the fees?

Esaias, Esaias. 33. 14.
that if Paul had the preaching of it, he would make every groping and griping
Falix to tremble, I mean such as the Scripture terms roaring Lions, ranging
Bears, Horse-leeches, Wolves, devouring all in the evening, and leaving none
till the morning: as well Judges that judge for reward, and say with shame,
Bring you; such as the Country calls Capon-Iustices: as also such mercenary
Lawyers, as sell both their tongues and their silence, their clients causes and
their own consciences: who only keep life in the law, so long as there is
money in the purse; and when this golden stream cease, the mill stands
still, and the case is altered: such extorting Officers of Justice, as invent
pullies and winches for extraordinary fees, to the miserable undoing of poor
suitors: such false periurd Sheriffs, Stewards of liberties and their Deputies,
as for money falsify their charges: such corrupted Iurates and witnesses of
the post, which are as hammers and swords, and sharp arrows in their
bretherens hearts: such cheese-bayliffs and lamb-bayliffs, as vex the poor
Contrymen with vn^^ist summons to the Assizes and Sessions, with the rest of
that Rabble.

These Muck-wormes of the world, to have and to hold. Let such consult shame to
their houses: let such make their offices as easting nets for all fish that
come: till they get the Devil and all: Let them heap up treasures of
wickedness and treasures of wrath withal.

But where there is any fear of God John's counsel prevail with them, to be
content with their due wages: Let Paul persuade them, that godliness is ga^^e
with contentation: Solomon, that Gods blessing makes rich, and adds no sorrow
therewith: So shall they follow ^ethro's advice the better, and prove complete
Magistrates and Officers: Men of courage, men of religion, men of truth, hating
covetousness,

These are the four Cardinal virtues statues of the gods, the statues of men:
then would people become voluntary subjects, put the scepters into their hands,
and the law of commanding and obeying become easy, things thought irreparable
would easily be reformed.

The third part.
But before I come to make use of peace only, as I fear most have imagined in
hearing it: but to al from the highest and greatest, to the lowest and least
Instrument of Justice, from the Governor of the thousand, to the Centurion,
from him to the Tithing-man or Decinour. To the which ancient division of the
Jewish Commonwealth, our platform agrees in substance. Their Sanedrim or
Senate of seventy, to our Parliament, Counsell-Table, Starr-chamber,
Exchequer-chamber, etc. Our Justices of Assizes in their Circuit, and Justices
of peace in their general commission or dominion, and High Sheriffs in their
Shires, answering to the Rulers of thousa^ds.

Our Justices in their several divisions, Judges of hundred Courts and Turns
to their Rulers of hundreds, to whom I may add high Constables in their
places, our Court-leets, and Court-barons, to the rulers of fifties; to whom I
add ordinary Constables in their offices, our chief Pledges, Tything-men or
Deciners, to their rulers of tens. Now all these Iethro means, and speaks of
every one of them in their station and degree, conceiving the Commonwealth, as
an instrument not well in tune, ^but the lest of these strings be false or
naught.

Contrary to the common and dangerous Alas, alas, the more subject to tentation
and vice it is, the more needful it is that none other should have them.

Oh but (say they) a good Judge or highest, but of the Sun and Moon, and the
lowest and nearest Orbs that govern the world. It is the ground-wind, not the
rack-winde, that drives mills and ships. It is the Civil, as in the
Ecclesiastical body: if Bishops be never so learned, and the parishi^nall
Minister negligent, worldly, proud, or blind Sr. John's, the people perish for
want of vision.

What can the Superior do, if the Sergeant, or any other that should execute
Justice, be remiss and slack, then must the Dutch-mans proverb be veryfied,
(...)
Look what the bell is without the clapper, such are good laws and judgments
without d^e execution.

Thus we see in this curious clock-work of Justice, the lest pin or whee^e
amiss may distemper and disorder all: but if care were had to frame all ^hese
parts of the building according to the plat-forme of this skillful Architect,
what an absolute ^armony of the parts, what an exact perfection of the whole;
yea, what golden times should we live to see?

Hearken o ye mountains and little (...)
you Rulers of tens, you reverend Sages of the Laws, you worshipful Knights
and Gentlemen of the Country: ye listen to this charg of Iethro: ye of the
meanest place of the common-welth, weigh not things nor persons at the common
beam of custom and opinion, but as the golden standart of Gods Sanctuary,
with these Goldsmiths waights of my text: which if I shall persuade you to do,
I fear that we must say with the Psalmist, that sons of men Beni-Adam, yea
the cheifest men Beni-ish, Psalm 6^. 9.
to be laid upon the balance, will be found lies and lighter then vanity:
here money will not make the man, nor craft carry it away. Every Nabal of
mount Carmel, nor every Achitophel may not be admitted.

Samuel to Saul, God has rent thine office from thee: and bestowed it on thy
better: or as the Scripture of Judas, let another more worthily take his place:
if this order and rule of trial might take place, how many would be turned
out of commission? how many would be effici^ perdae? how would benches and
Shire-houses be ^hinned?

As for this present, to the which Dan^el, or picture in Horace, or table of
the Popes of Rome, which for memories sake I reduce to these two Disticks Ex
auro caput est, argentea brachia, ve^ter
Aeneus, admisto ferrea cruraluto
Diuino capiti, ceruix humana, ferinus
Assuitur truncus Daemonijque pedes.


The head of gold. And with such you to prove and weigh your selves by Iethro's
weights, and accordingly to have peace and approofe in your own consciences,
before the Judge of all Judges.

God be praised, religious and able Justices and so many, as I believe, few
other Benches are furnished withal, yet in this silver I fear some dross,
some whose skill and ability the Country doubts of, being conceived to be
either so simple or so timorous, that they dare meddle with none that dare
meddle with them: or else so popular they will displease none. The Devil
himself they say may keep an Alehouse under their nose. Others whose
religion they call into question, at lest for the truth, and for the power of
it: unless religion may stand with common swearing, with drinking, with
familiarity with Papists and Recusants, with ungoverned and ungodly families,
void of all exercises of religion, fraught with spirits of the buttery,
Ruffians, Alehouse hunters, and such as are the Sin-tutours and sin-leaders to
all the Country about them, I hope there be but few such, I could wish there
were none at all.

The breast and belly of brass, the

The legs and feet of iron and clay, Beelzebub wanted officers, he needed no
worse then some of these: what mysteries have they to vex the poor
Contrymen with false arrests? and by virtue of that Statute tying every Free
holder of forty shillings per annum, to attend the Assizes, but I list not to
stir this sediment of the country too unsavory to be taken up in a sermon.

Iehosophet would (...) and reform, or that you Judges in th^se your days of
visitations, would redress some part of these greeuances, and reduce all to
this Ideae of lethro's which indeed would make an Heaven upon earth amongst
us. An Vtopia I fear some will say, too good to be true, Ob.
obiecting to me as to Cat^, that he not discerning the times he lived in,
looked for Plato's Commonwealth in the dreggs of Romulus. And so that these
Magistrates thus limbed ou^, might be found in Moses golden age of the world,
but not in these lees of time.

Answ.
that if Iethr^ were now to give advice, he would double the force of it: If
David's r^a^son be true, it is now high time for God to work, for men have
destroyed his Law. Was there ever more (...) of courage then now, when sin
(...) audacious? of truth, when (...)? of religion, when hypocrisy and
i^iquity? of contentation, when the (...) of the world so abounds? The only
way to repair these ruins of the dying world is to renew government to the
primitive beauty of it: the f^ce whereof I have now showed in this excellent
Mirror or Looking-glass: so you go no^ away, and forget both the comeliness
and sports it has showed you, but wash and be clean, and such as it would
have you to be.

There being nothing else remaining Item following in my text, requiring
assiduity and diligence.

Let them judge the people at al times, The fourth part.
etc*

Iethro his discourse. How do you think it would have affected him, to have
seen six or seven I have heard sixteen sums set upon one suit. These our
English delays being (as Marnixius complained) worse then the Spanish
strapadoes.



neighbors causes: Let him (as the woman said to Philip) have no leisure to
bear office. Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently, and
withholdeth his hands there from.

You Gentlemen complain often factotum and fay't neant.

From this neglect comes that and judge of a courtesy made out of the path, or
a blow given upon the shoulder upon occasion of a wager* or such like
bawble-trespasses which I shame to mention. And to punish every petty larceny,
every small ryo^ or disorder, which lighter controversies and faults, if
particular Office^s would comprimize and redress in their Spheres, these
greater Orbs should not be troubled with them.

Iethro assures Moses of in the last part of my Text, The fifth part.
ver. 23 If thou do this thing (God so commanding thee) then shall thou and thy
people endure, and all this people shall go quietly to their place.

An admirable emolument of Magistracy blew and purple silk might shine and
glister within the Tabernacle, the out side was covered with red skins and
goats hair, such a shelter is Magistracy to Gods Church and Religion.
Nebuchadnezzar was a great tree, and every particular Magistrate a little one
under whose boughs people build and sing, and bring up their young ones in
religious nurture, even foster fathers ^s Joseph in Egypt Such were the rich
and religious ^imes under David and Solomon, and under such as are described,
Esa. 32. which whole chapter is worth the reading, as a just Comme^tary upon
this point, setting forth the felicity, quietness, plenty, virtue and piety
of just governors, as are hiding places from the wind, and refuges from the
tempest, rivers of waters to dry places, and as rain to the new mowen grass,
etc.

Such also were the times enjoyed Constantine, deciphered as I take it, Reu^la.
8. when there was silence in the heaven about half an hour, the golden vialls
filled with sweet odors, the prayers of the Saints ascending as a pillar of
smoke up to heaven.

Eusebius, Eusebius. lib. 10
which whole book is nothing but an Elogium of those peaceable days, wherein
the Church was edified and multiplied. The Commonwealth being to the Church,
as the Elm to the Vine, or as the garden to the Bees; the flourishing of the
one, the thriuing of the other; and the disturbance of the one; the disquiet of
the other.

London with suits. As I have known a Constable molested with five or six
actions, for an act o^ ^^stice, in punishing vice according to his office. With
what bitterness of spirit do men groa^e under delayed and perverted Justice,
when it is turned into Hemlocke, and turns them out of their wits, some of
them swouning at the sight of their orders, as I have heard from credible
eyewitnesses, others ready to destroy themselves, their adversaries, yea and
sometime their Judges.

Oh the benefit of good Magistrates, summum bonum, which the Philosophers so
much sought after, he now enjoying more sweetness of little, then of great
revenues in troublous times. Surely, we Christians ought to prize it as the
mean of our greatest good, of our peaceable frequenting of our Churches, and
our serving of God. Merchants make a higher use, and are more glad of a calm
then common passengers: so should we Christians the^ Heathens, by how much we
may and ought to improoue it for richer ends of Gods glory, and the salvation
of our souls.



Amos speaks) shall judgment flow as waters, and righteousness run down as
a mighty torrent; or as David, Then shall the earth increase, al people shall
praise God, and God even our God shall bless us, and all the ends of the earth
shall fear him. And so I make Iethro's preface my conclusion. I have given you
counsel this day: Hearken to my voice, and the Lord God be with you all. Amen.

FINIS.
To my loving Brother Mr. SAMVEL WARD.
BRother, if you meet with your Iethro's counsel returned from beyond the
seas, and as much (...) your expectation preserved alive, as his (...) in law
was against (...) Iniunction, mer^^ as much as you will, but be no more
offended (...) you have cause. Ioab (...) wider on the (...) hand in destroying
David's Absolon, contrary (...) be serious charge, yet Ioab was pardoned, and
(...) no brother. I have noted you hitherto inexora^^^ for your own publishing
of any thing of your (...)* whether out of judgment, modesty, curio^^* or
melancholy, ^ judge not: but when others (...) them with fruit and acceptance*
(...) the light, I have seen you rest content with (...) public good. The
like leave I have taken, (...) like success, assuring you and my self (...)
the general welcomnes and vsefullnes hereof to all whom it concerns, which
are the greatest number of the land, even so many as have any reference to
Sessions and A^^iles, if not all sorts of Christians. Only I fear that the
corruption of our times is grown so gross and Eglon-like, (...) it does not
E^ud-like enough sh^rpen the poy^^, and send them home to the (...), that they
(...) to the quick. I had my self added thereto a pro^ect and per^wasion for
the redress of many abuses crept into offices and officers^* having spent so
much time in the study of the law, and (...) of some offices, ^s made me weary
of the errors I ^aw, and heartily wi^h the reformation of them: but ^caring I
have learned too much bluntness and plumpne^se of speech among the Lutherans,
which is here as p^rme a quallitie, as smoothnes with you, as also loath to
meddle out of mine o^b, in my second thoughts I suppressed it. And so wishing
unto this, many diligent, conscionable and ingenuous Readers and Appliers* and
to them Gods blessing and the fruit intended, I take my leave. From (...) in
Prusia.

Your Brother in the ^lesh, in th^' Lord, and in the work of the minist^ry.
NATH. WARD.


